PVBL OVID. DE TRISTIBVS: OR MOVR NEFVLL ELEGIES, IN FIVE BOOKS: Composed in
his Banishment, part at Sea, and part at TOMOS, a City of PONTVS.

Translated into English Verse by Zachary Catlin. Mr. of Arts. Suffolk.

LONDON, Printed by T. Cotes, for John Bellamie, and are to be sold at his
shop, at the sign of the three golden Lions in Cornehill. 1639.

To the Courteous Reader.
GEntle Reader, I here present thee with a Translation. It is a Poem of
mellifluous Naso, and his last, and most doleful, In the seventh year.
Cantator Cyenus fune^is ips^sui.
composed after his banishment to Pontus, where he dyed. It is his Cy^ne^
cantio, his swan-like song, his Benjamin, the son of his age, and his Benoni,
the son of his sorrow. To commend the Author, were to hold up a Taper to the
Sun, Alb^ ^alli^^ fili^s.
for he is well known to have been the Muses Favorite and white Son, whose
sweet language, whither in mirth or mourning, smiles or tears, they ever
happily contrived into most fluent and ravishing streines of natural, rather
then arrificiall Poetry, and taught him still so aptly, lively, and feelingly
to express his inward passions, that he ever triumphed in the heart of his
Reader (if he were not a Cyclops or a Centaure) and commanded from him a
sympathy of suitable affection. T^m deni^^ saxa, non exacd^ti ruboetunt sarge^e
vatis.
So that me thinks either Augustus Casar never read this Poem, or through
self guiltiness of some fault to which Ovid was conscious, (as Acteon to
Diana's nakedness) he was constrained to harden his heart against his charms,
like those deaf stones that killed Orpheus.

As for the pains of the Translatour, as they are liable to much exception, so
are they not incapable of some just Apology. Lib. 4. (...)
whom I must remember, that the Poet himself when he composed it was above
fifty, and that it is an hard matter to expel nature, Difficle on als^^^ (...)
and to casheere and abandon in age the laudable propenfities and studies of
ones Youth. (...) l. 3.
Old Entellas takes up the Bats and Bucklers, against young Dares. And aged
Milo may assay how much he still retains of his former strength and vigor.
Thend. (...) Ge^ (...)
To whom I may oppose the better judgments, and frequent examples of learned
and geave Divines, Doctors, Prelates, and Princes themselves, both of our own
and former times, who thought it no disparagement to be the followers of the
Muses or rather, thought sacred Theology her self then best attended, when she
had in her train, not only Arts and Scienres, (...).
Tongues, and Languages, and other secul^r and humane learning, but even those
polite and elegant studies of Orators, and Poesy, the contempt and disdain
whereof was ever wont to be ascribed either to barbarous ignorance, English
Reader, lo ^ere Ovid is turned his own Countryman: to the raw Scholar, lo
here Ovid speaking by an Interpreter; (...)
To them that can swim without bladders, this translation will not only bring
delight, but if they please with the matter to observe the propriety of both
the tongues, (...)
it may Miscere utile dulci, bring them in delight and profit both. Ovids
lamentatio^; let them remember that in the most solemn music, the harmony is
most delightful, and that there is some pleasure even in tears. Estquedam
flere vol^ptas. (...)
If Ovid sing his own shipwreck, if they will not ^ondole him, they may yet
bear with delight what he suffered with grief, make some good use of his
witty inventions, and expressions, and learn of him to sing like Nightingales,
when their own dark night of sorrow shall come. Ne sutorultia ctepid am.
he must know it was the part of me a Translatour, not to soar beyond mine
Authors strain, who was not here a stately Horoicall Maro, or a Tragical
Sophocles, but a quick-spirited and nimble witted Naso. Lastly, if any think I
have undertaken a needless pains, in translating what was done before by
another, and so write an Iliad after Homer. The truth is, Iliad a post Ho^^^^m.
Mr. Wye Salto^stall
I had half done my work before I came to see the other, but after that,
(though I was sorry I should Actum agere) yet I thought better to perfect what I
had begun then to desist and give over in the, midst, (...)
hoping that the intelligent Reader upon aequall survey, will not think either
my labor or his own altogether fruitless. Let this suffice for my Apology,
Gentle Reader: and for thy self, read as many of few of these Elegies as thou
please, only read with so much candor as thou would be read, and if I
deserve not the Bays (who am indeed but an Arcadian sheepherd) yet (for my
good will to the Muses) let me not be beaten with the stock. Yet this I will
boldly sav, that if thou read it through, and compare it punctually with the
Author, it may bring thee in some small return, at least will keep thy
vacant hours from idleness, or worse employment, However I rest

Thine to be used if thou please, Zachary Catlin, phil^^^^sus.

Livor iners vitium mores non exit in altos, Carpere vel noli nostra, vel Ede
tu^.
The Author, of his Translation.
ERst Naso taug he my youth the Latian style,
I teach him English now another while.
If English Naso want the Latin feature,
Say it is not he, but such another creature.
Yet scarce one Egg is liker to another,
It Is Ovid sure, or else his younger Brother.
To his much honored Friend, The Author of this Translation.
NAso Poetarn^ Dux opti^ous: ille juv^^te
Te duce, qua^ subito est Anglicus Ovidius
Hoc opus Ovidii narrat de Tristibus: At ja^
Gratum opus ac laetum est hoc, Catelina, tuu^.
Optima qua^ meruit Catelina Poeta, probatur
Versibus hisce suis, Ingenio and Gonio.
Guiliel. Spring Armig^r.

To his Reverend Friend the Author of these Translations.
OVid weeps English now, nor do we know
From whither eye, the learn^der tear does flow.
The Roman or the Englsh: whither Rome,
Or your terse English more empearles his I ombe.
I Am sure, that when I read his last divorce
From his dear Wife; and of his living coarse,
Tossed in it is watery co^in (where each wave,
Rung him his passing Bell, and dig'd his grave)
Translated so by you, as you had been
His Muses Pilor, and had steered his pen:
I had lost Ovid, and in Ecstasy
Wept for your Exile, and thought you were he:
Or satisfied, in that your lively sense
Transported me to think him banished hence
Vnholily by us: thence began deplore,
Him as though exiled to Bermudas shore,
(For such I fancied Scythia) and forgate
Still as I read, you did but personate.
But when I had composed my thoughts, I saw
As he among the Getes preserved the Law
Of Roman elegance in force, so now,
^ound his Emphaticke sweetness kept by you.
Who are his milder Casar, and have sent
Him to a calmer place of banishment.
R. P.

I them in eundem.
Et Lwri, frontemque tuam Laurus tegat: Ardet
^am bat ut ima tuous dum mea Musa pedes.
V^l laudeat Hederae vappam Musam, Tibi Musa
Massica qua rutilat; non ego laudo, colo.
Robert Pa^^ent.

To his worthily esteemed friend Mr. Zachary Catlin the Author of this
Translation.
Praises pollute, the Comicke told me so,
Tell him from me, due praise is no man's foc,
No more then spurs to a mild-metled Horse,
For which he goes the better, not the worse.
Whilst worthless men do seek this on their hearse,
Thy worth does claim it justly for thy verse,
Your front's already decked with noble spring,
A silver pavement does thy worth out ring,
What Is left to me, if I must choose a part,
But this to praise the midst, thine honest heart.
Who knows how seldom I bound speech do use.
Might swear I honor Catlin and his Muse,
In choosing rather to express my shame,
Then to suppress thy wit, thy work, thy name.
Henry White, de Rougham.

In Pub. Ovid. NASONIS Elegias, eorumque interpretem Ovidianissimum ZA. CATELIN
amicum fibi conjunctissimum.
Faelix ingenium secundlore
Aura, and Caesare mitiore dignum.
Quanto mergere rore guttularum
Heu^vultus Elegi solent legentis!
Quis non Caesareas gemit, fremitque
Tanti non potuisse vota vatis
Iras flexanimo liquare cantu?
Ast tu Sceptrip^tens negare Romam,
O^bem melliloquo nequis Poetae!
Dignum laud virum obrui malignis,
Obaitens Vetat ipsa Musa fatis.
Qud Sol auricomas agit quadrigas,
Atque orbem radiis beat coruso^s,
Si quas excoluit benigna Pollas
Terras artibus, hospitas ubique,
P^^dunt laur^gero lares, and omne
Du^cipatria fit solum poetae.
Te n^nc altitonante Iberus ore
Cantat, Tentonicus flagransque Iacche,
Et qui mollisiuo placet palato
G^ilus, quique sapit modesta, magra
Parvo nomine proferens Britannus.
Quod Faelix Cateline sitque Faustum,
Tugest^ patrid dedisse lingua
Nasonem, aequi^aransmetris Britannis,
Sit gratus labor, otiumque fallat
Nostrum fallere quo tuum solebas.
O factum been! mutuo lahores
Nasonis decoras, tuosque Naso.
Iacobus Warwell.

To the Ingenious Translatour, and the Censorious Reader.
SWeet Friend, know thou, that sloth and envy sit
Indges of life and death, on active wit?
Thou know it well, and scorn'st it too: else why
W^lt thou the tickle edge of censure try?
But try: these recreations will make plain,
What nimble spirits move in thy aged brain.
Bark easily Critic Reader: be content
That learnings idler time's not idly spent.
What thou mislik'st amend: so we shall see
By the Author much well done, little by thee.
Ia, Warwell.

The Argument of the fourth Elegy, in Lib. 4, Fol. 66.
ORestes Son of Agamemnon, and King of My^enae, slew his Mother Clytemnest^a,
and (...) adulterer Aegystus, which two had mur^^red his Father Agamemnon,
Orestes was ve^^^ with Furies, till he had expiated his ^^me upon the Altar of
Diana in Taurica by sacrifi^e He had Pylades so faithful a friend, that when
he should ha^^ been slain on that Altar, Pylades would have dye^ for him, and
both would be thought Orestes, so that Thoas the Tyrant doub^ed which was he,
and pardone^ Orestes desiring their Friendship. Ip^^igenia was daughter of
Agamemnon, Sister to Orestes. The Oracle said her blood must appease Diana's
anger; D^am pitying her, sent a Dee^e in her stead for the sacrif^e, and sent
her being a Virgin to be her Priest in Tau^^^, to sacrifice with humane blood.
Orestes coming thither, should have been sacrificed, but that she knew him
by his talk with P^lades, He sto^e away his sister and Diana's Image, and went
into Italy.

An Index of the several fifty ELEGIES in these five Books.
The Elegies of the first Book.
1. TO his Book. p. 2 2. To the Gods to save him from the Tempest. p. 5 3. Of
his sad departure from Rome. p 8 4. To a faithful friend. p. 11 5. To his
wise, praising her. p. 14 6. To his Friends that wear his Image in a Ri^g. p.
15 7. To a false and faithless friend. p 16 8, That vulgar spirits follow
fortune in friendship. p. 17 9, He praises his Corinthian ship. p. 19 10. To
the Reader, that this first Book was written in his Sea-voyage. p. 20
The second Book.
One Entire learned Elegy, containing a complaint and suit to Augustus. from p.
22. to 37
The third Book.
1. The Book to the Reader, complaining that it was unkindly used at Rome. p.
37 2. Ovid complains of his Exile, wishing for death. 39 3. To his Wife,
complaining of sickness and (...) for burial at Rome. p. 4^ 4. To a Friend,
advising him to shun the acquainta^^^ of great men. p. 4^ 5. He prayseth Carus
a saithfull friend. p. 4^ 6. He commends his estate to a faithful friend. p.
4^ 7. To Perilla a Virgin Poet^sse (...) old companion. p. ^^ 8. He desires,
once more to see on Country and friend p. 4^ 9. Whence the C^ty Tomos took the
name. p 4^ 10. He describes the Country and people of Po^t^^ 50 11. An
invective against a malicu^as s^^^derer. p. 5^ 12. The difference between Rome
and Tomes for (...) and Exercises. p. 54 13. Of his Birthday, wishing^t would
return no more. p 55 14. To a learned friend, that he would defend his
writings. p. 56
The fourth Book.
1 He excus^s his bad Verses, written for Selace, (...) for Credit. p. 5^ 2.
He grieves that he might not see the triumph^^^ Ger^a^^y. p. 6^ 3. He w^oeth
the s^arres that his wise may con^^^ Loyal. p 6^ 4. To a Friend described, but
not named. p. 64 5. To a friend, w^^om be names not lest he should (...) ^in
harn^e. p 67 6 That Time weak^eth all things except ^^^griefe. ibid. 7. He
blames a ^^^end for not writing unto (...) two years. p. 69 8. (...)
complai^es that he was banished ^n his age. ibid. 9. An Inve^^^ ^against an
enemy, warning ^^m nett^ injury him further. p. 71 10 To Posterity, concerning
his birth, education, and his whole li^e. p. 72
The Fifth Book.
1. To his Friend, commending this fifth Book to his care. p. 75 2. To his
Wife, that she would petition Caesar for his milder banishment. p. 77 3. To
Caesar, suing to him for milder banishment, p. 78 4. He sues to Bacchus, to
incline Caesar's mind to mercy. p. 79 5. He praises his faithful Friend, and
bewailes his own miseries. p. 81 6. He solemniseth his Wives Birthday. p. 82
7. He persuades a Friend to constancy in friendship. p. 84 8. He describes the
attire and manners of the Getes. p. 85 9. An Invective against a Backbiter. p.
87 10. To a friend that would not be named. p. 88 11. A complaint that he had
been three years in Pontus. p. 89 12. To his Wife, comforting her against one
that called her an Exiles wife. p. 90 13. To a Friend, that wished him to mitigate
his grief with Verses. p. 91 14. He blames a true real friend, because he
wrote not to him. p. 93 15. To his Wife, comforting her, that she shall live
ever in his writings. p. 94
PVBLII OVID. Nasonis de Tristibus. LIB. 1.
ELEGIA. 1.
He speaks unto his Book: Rome.
Teaching it what to do when 'ts thither come.
Go little Book, without me visit Rome:
Woes me, thy Master must not thither come:
I spleen th^e not, yet see thou go undrest,
In Exiles habit, suiting t^^es unblest.
Clad not thy self in Berries purple juice,
For mournful times that colour's not in use.
Red not thy Title, nor thy Paper cedar.
White horns and forehead black, suite ill together.
With bri^tle Pumice polish not thy Brow,
But go uncom'd and jagg'd, thou car'st not how.
Let happy Books with such tools trim their beauty,
My Fortune to remember, it is thy duty.
Nor blush at blots and blurres: who them espies
Will judge them happened from my weeping eyes.
Go Book, from me those welcome places greet,
I Will touch them (as I may) with Paper feet.
If any one (sure all have not forgot me)
If any one (I say) enquire about me.
Say that I live, that I am well deny,
Yet that I live is Caesar's legacy:
If more they question, peace, and bid them read,
And see thou blab not more then shall be need.
The Reader warned, straigt calls my fault to mind,
And all men's censures will me guilty find.
But though reproached, do not thou defend thee,
Thy cause once bad excusing will not mend thee.
Some, thou shall find, will sigh that I am (...)
here,
And at my Verses cannot tears forbear.
Wishing in's heart (least some Informer know)
That Caesar would relent and ease my woe.
Who ere he be, from ill I wish him free,
That would appease the Gods to wretched me.
Oh! let his wish take place, that Caesar's ire
Being forgot, I may at hoem expire.
When thou have done mine arrands some will blame thee,
And say, thou art a dull book fit to shame me.
Who right will judge, must things with times compare,
And time considered, Book thou needst not care.
Verses proceed from minds at quiet rest,
My times are cloudy, and with ills oppressed.
Verses the writers private leisure ask,
Seas, winds and tempests hold me to my task.
Verses are free from fear: poor I, each hour,
Look when a sword should my best blood outpoure.
So that an equal judge will this my verse
Take in good part, and muse it is so Terse.
Give me great Homer, wrap him in like woe,
And all his wits will a woollgathering go.
And therefore Book, stand not upon thy Fame
If Readers slight thee, count it little shame.
To thee and me coy Fortune's not so kind,
That upon credit thou should set thy mind.
W^ilst I was happy, I for titles stood,
And fer my credit made my verses good;
But now I botch for th'nonce, and deadly hate
That Wit and Art, which causd my banished state.
Go thou for me that may, and view the City,
Were thou another, thou should find more pity.
And though thou come a stranger into Town,
Yet never think that thou can walk unknown.
For say thou want a name, and would conceal thee
As though not mine, thy color will reveal thee.
Yet enter closely lest my name do harm thee.
The worlds applause, not now, as erst does arm me.
If any think, it is dangerous to read thee,
Cause thou art mine, and as a Serpent dread thee:
Say, view my title, I am not Thr^^ Books of Love.
Loves Master,
That work has justly cost me this disaster.
Perhaps thou look, if I will bid thee clime
The stairs of Casars palace most sublime.
But let those places and the gods there spare me,
For from those Towers this thunderbolt did scare me.
I know indeed mild Deities dwell there,
But yet those gods that harmed me, still I fear.
The Dove once wounded with the Hawks sharp nail
At the least noise of flickring wing does quail.
The Lamb once bitten by her Wolvish foe,
Far from the fold dare never after go.
Were Phaeton now alive, he would avoid
Heavens Carre and Horses wherein once he joy'd.
So I once stricken, fear Jove's dreadful dart,
And when he thunders, think that I shall smart.
The Greek ships shattred at Caphareus hill.
Do steer their course far from Euboia still.
Even so my boat once weath^^ beaten sore.
The place of danger dares approach no more.
Therefore beware, and fearing to be shent,
So mean Pleb^ians read thee, rest content.
Whilst Icarus with weak wings too high does soar
He gave the name to the Icarian shore.
Yet whether best thy Ores or Savles to use
I know not: Time and place must teach thee choose,
If thou sind Caesar in a pleasant humor,
See all things mild, his anger lost her tumor;
If any one will h^^t thee drawing back,
And speak a good word for thee be not slack,
But in good time more happ^ then thy Master,
Draw near and pray him ease my sad disaster.
For he that made it must redress my wound
Achilles-like, or I shall never be sound.
But ware thou hurt not, whilst thou meanst me good,
(For stronger fears then hopes appale my blood.
Take heed lest thou his calmed Anger more,
And thou a second cause of danger prove.
But when unto my dwelling thou art come
And to thy closet, that same little room,
There shall thou see in ranked order set
Thy brethren all, whom the same brain did get.
Most of them Titles on their outsides bear,
And names upon their open fore heads we are.
Three in a corner thou shall lurking spy. Three Book^ of Love.

and these as all men know, teach venery,
Shun these, or if thine heart will serve thee, rather
Call them unnatural murd'rers of their Father. These slew their own Fathers
unawares.

Like Aedipus that Laus killed in fray,
Or Telegon that did Ulysses slay.
Love none of these three Books in any wise,
Though Love they teach, if thou thy Father prize.
There 15. Books or Metamorphosis
also be of changed shapes fifteen books,
Verses which Phoebus from my funerals took,
Tell them (I charge thee) that mong bodies changed
My fortunes visage may be fitly ranged.
For suddenly she is turned from what she was,
Joyful of late, but now at weeping pass.
If more in charge thou ask, I more would say,
But that I fear to cause thy longer stay.
And should thou carry with thee all my mind,
Thy bearer would an heavy burden find
Make haste; thy journi's long: poor I am hurled
To a far Country in another world.
ELEGY. 2.
He supplicates the Gods that they would deigne,
To yield him safe from ship wrackes imminent pain
YE gods of Sea and heaven (what is left but Prayer)
The shattered Limbs of my weak bark repair
O do not you subscribe to Caesar's anger.
When one God harms, another rids from danger.
Against Troy lame Vulcan stood, for Troy Apollo:
Fair Venus aids them, Pallas hates them hollow.
^^^o Aeneas spleen'd, and Turnus friended,
By Venus, yet Aeneas was desended.
Often raging Neptune would Ulysses kill,
As often Minerva crossed her Uncles will.
And may not now, (though I fall short of those)
Some God assist me, though one God oppose?
But bootlesse Prayers, poor wretch in vain I sprinckle,
Even whilst I speak the waters me bedrinkle,
And Southwinds raging so my prayers confound,
The gods I aim at cannot hear the sound.
The self same wind thus bringing double Or harm^^.
scar^s
Driving I know not whether, sails, and Prayers.
Ay me, poor wretch, what watery Mountains rise!
You Would think their lofty tops would touch the skies.
Straight lowly valleys stoop (when Sea does sunder)
You Would think their bottomes reached to hell or under.
Where ere I look, there is naught but sky and water,
This swelewth waves, and that with storms does clatter,
The winds between them roa^e with hideous noise,
And waves demurre Which wind
which has the mafter-voyce.
For now blows Eurus from the purple East,
Now rises Zephyrus from E^^^ing.
the setting West.
Now rages Boreas from the Northern Bear,
Now Notus wars with him from Southern spheart
The Pilot doubtful what to shun or choose,
Ambiguous mischiefs make his Art to muse.
Dead men we are: all hope of safeties gone.
Even whilst I speak, the waves orewhelme my moan.
They Will drown my soul, and while my mouth does pray,
Thereby the deadly water finds a way,
My loving wife, Q^^ly.
naught save mine exile wayles,
She neither grieves nor knows my other a^les.
She little thinks I Am tossed on vastest maine.
Hurried with winds; still ready to be slain.
It Was well I did not suffer her to go,
Then had I borne a double deadly blow:
Now, though I perish, yet (since she is safe)
I shall outlive my death at least one half.
Woes me, what flashing lights from heaven do spring
What ^rackes of thunder from the skies do ring?
And on our ship the floting billows falls
Like Canon bullets on besieged walls;
Each following wave the former still exceed,
As if it were a renth of greatest Meeds. (...)

I fear not death, but yet this kind is hateful,
Bate me but shipwreck, death shall be most grateful.
Whether on's fair death or o'th sword one dye,
Some comfort it is upon firm land to lie.
To make ones will, and look to be interred, To speak to his friends.

And not in fishes bowels to lie buried.
Yet say such death I merit, why should those
Innocent souls ith'shippe my fate enclose?
Ye Gods above, and you that rule the Seas,
Both stint your threats, which jointly me disease.
And since mild Caesa's wrath mylife has granted
Let me transport it to the place commanded.
For, if for mine offense my life you grudge me,
It did not death deserve, if Caesar judge me,
And had he meant to send me to my grave,
He needed not in this your help to crave:
My life's at his command, and when he will,
He that has sparde my blood may freely spill.
But you whose powers my crime has not offended,
O rest content and let my woes be ended.
And yet though all of you a wretch would save,
I Am past all hope, and safety cannot have.
Say you would spare, and winds should serve my will,
And Sea grow calm, I am an Exile still.
I do not plow the Seas and watery maine,
Hoping by traficke to make endless gain:
I Am not for learned ^e was a ^^^dent there.
Athens, at of yore,
Nor Asian Towns I never saw before.
Nor yet for A mart Tow^^ in ^^ypt.
Alexandria am I bound,
To view her dainties in swift Nilus found.
My suite is small, yet strange, I crave a gale
To the A barbarous rude place.
S^^matian land to drive my sail.
I Am bound to touch on Pontus cruel shore,
Yet that my flight from home My Country.
is slow, deplore.
And make my way to Exile by my prayers,
To A City of Pontu^ to which Ovid was banished.
Tomos soated under uncouth stars.
If then you love me gods, these tempests lay,
And let your Powers for my ship make way,
Or if you hate me, to that land me hye,
It Is plague enough in such a coast to dye.
What make I here? fierce winds dispatch my flight.
Why stays thus long Italy.
Auso^^^ in my sight?
Casar would have me gone; oh! do not hold me,
But let the barbarous Pon^cke land behold me.
It is his will, my merit: for 'twere small reason
I should defend what he does fault as treason.
Yet if the gods all Ham^^^.
mortals actions view,
My fault was crimelesse, and you know it is true.
This if you know, how 'twas my mere To see something at Court
mishap,
Mine harmless mind contrived no wicked trap,
But I though mean, that (...) sam.
Family favored still,
Obeying what I knew Augustus will.
Did blesle these times when such a Prince did live,
And often for him and his did incense give.
If thus I meant, O gods then do you spare me
If not, let now some swelling wave orebeare me.
But do I dream? or gin the clouds to vanish?
And does the calmed Sea her anger banish?
Sure it is no chance, but you to whom I prayed.
Knowing all Heart have ^^ne.
secrets send me present aid.
ELEGY. 3.
He tells how he from Rome did fare well take.
And's wife and Friends great lamentation make.
WHen I recall to mind that doleful night,
When I from Rome did take my final flight,
That night wherein I left what ever's dear,
Then from mine eye there slides a mournsull tear.
For now the day by Caesar set, drew night,
That I must (...)
bid adieu to Italy.
I had no mind nor time, things to prepare,
My heart was duld and overset with care.
I could not think of getting men or mates,
Or clothes or Coin to fit my banished state.
Like one with thunder struck, so was I crazed,
That lives, and knows it not, he is so amazed.
When grief had once this cloud of mind removed.
And at the length my senses stronger proved,
Ready to go, I took my last adieu
Of mourning f^iends, erst many, now but few.
My loving wise, me weeping did embrace
A shower of tears still povvring down her face.
M^ D^^ghter was far of, on In A ^ri^ke.
Libian shore
And could not my unheard of fate deplore.
Look where you would, there sounded plaints and groans
It seemed a doleful show of funeral mones.
Men, women, children too, my funer^ll kept,
In every corner of the house they wept.
If great examples may be like a toy,
Such, when 'twas taken, was the face of Troy,
The voice of dogs and men now silent were, Midnight.

The lofty Moon her nightly Carre did steer,
I viewing her, and the great Capitol Fa^^^^ Temple.
Fane
Adjoining to my house alas in vain,
Thus laid, ye Gods that in this Temple dwell, Ovids ptayer.

And thou fair Church which I must bid farewell,
And all ye gods of Rome, from whom I part,
I still adore you from a zealous heart.
And though a Am past remedy.
buckler after wounds I take
Disburden yet my flight from odious hate.
Oh tell that Caesar:
heavenly man, what me beguiled,
Left a mere error for a crime be styled,
"That what you know, my judge the same may see,
"Who once appeased I might most happy be.
With this short Prayer, I did the gods adore, His Wise.

My wife, each period sobbing, prayed more,
For lo before her household gods dejected,
She kissed the sacred fires, her hair neglected,
And powered out to them fnll many a prayer,
That could not ease her woeful husbands care.
But now the posting night for bad delay,
And on her Pole the Bear was turned away. Neete day.

What should I do? my Countries love retains me,
And Times last bound, this night to flee constraines
"How often one hast^ning, why dee urge said I,
"Ah think both whither, and from whence you fly me.
And often I fained, that by such an hour
I wou^d be ready to Go ^^t oth^ doo^^.
obey their power.
Thrice to the door I went, and thrice drew back,
My foot, even like my mind was very slack.
Often taking leave, I freshly fell a tall^ing,
And often I kissed, as one that had been walking.
Charging the same things often, my self forget,
Whilst on my pledges dear mine eyes were set.
"Then would I say what haste to Scythia vile,
"From happy Rome? good now let us stay a while.
"I and my wife both living, must part ever,
"From house, and faithful household I must sever,
"And friends in whom as Brethren I delighted.
"Oh my dear hearts with Thesean faith united,
"I Will hug you while I may, henceforth I fear
"I shall no more: I Will gain these minutes clear.
Forthwith, I break abruptly from my talk,
And what came next to mind my tongue does walk.
Thus while I speak and weep, the Motaing
morning star
Is gotten up, A ^othed.
unwelcome Lucifer,
For now I part, even as my limbs were torn,
And joint form joint were quite asunder Bo^^^.
shorn,
Grieving like Priamus when that treacherous steed,
Against his hopes hatched that revengefull Of armed Greeks.
breed.
And now my friends do shreike and sob outright,
And with their hands their naked bosoms smite.
My wife fast holding on my arm now going.
These doleful words mixed with my tears out flowing
"Thou shall not part, we will both go hence or neither,
"Sure man and wife shall bannisht be together:
"In Pontus land there is room for mine abode,
"And to thy ship I Will add but little lode.
"Thee Caesar's wrath bids from thy Country flee,
"Me duty: ^^^dnesse (...).
duty shall my Caesar be.
Thus she assaid, as she had ost before,
And reason hardly moved her to give ore.
Then forth I go, like one to's grave outborne,
My hair down hanging, nasty and sorlorne.
But then she waxing mad with grief, they say,
Grew blind, and falling, in a found she lay,
Till coming to her self, she did upreare
Her limbs from the earth, with her dust soyled hair.
Her self, and then her widdowed house deploring,
And often her robbed husbands name imploring.
Grieving no less, then she had seen exspire
Me or her child, or burn on Funeral fire.
Withing to dye, by death to ease her care,
Though for my sake content her life to spare.
Oh may she live, to help her absent mate,
Since thus to part it is our lucklesse fate.
The B^^tes or Arctophylax. Astorme.
keeper of the Beare's now steept ith'maine,
And with his star does the Sea waters stain.
Yet we against our wills in sunder cleave,
The Ionian Sea: but Of Caesar^ auger.
fear does courage give.
Woes me, how black the Seas with Tempests grow,
And sands wax hot fetched from their channels low!
The waves as high as mountains ore our ship,
Both Deck, and Stern, and painted gods, do skip.
The Cables crack, the Pinetree Plankes.
joints rebound,
The very Keele does to our woes resound.
The Pilot waxing pale does fear bewray,
Yields to the storm, and lets the vessel stray,
And as a Rider, striving long in vain,
With his stiffenecked Steed, yields up the reine,
So did our Pilot leave the ship to sail,
Not where he would, but as the winds prevail,
So that if Aeolus cause them not to change,
We sure to some forbidden coast shall range.
For leaving on our left the Illyrian lands,
Still in our gaze forbidden Italy stands.
Oh lets not still to coasts forbidden Tend.
wend,
But let the Sea, with me to Caesar i. Stoop or yield.
bend.
Yet while I speak, and wishing fear a nay,
How fiercely on our ship the billows play?
At least you Sea Good*
Azure Gods some pity show,
Let it suffice that Casar.
Jove's my cruel foe.
Save you a tired soul from cruel death,
If a lost man may beg a lingering breath.
ELEGY. 4.
He writes unto a friend,
Continued, though his fortune proved ill.
Dear friend whom I must mention after none,
Who tookst to heart my fortune as thine own:
If gentle Reader, thou shall not despise me.
And this Hexasticke take with thy good grace,
And on the Forefront of that volume place.
Who ever shall this Orphan writing find,
Within your City give it harbor kind. S^e verse^ to (...) ^et before the
M^^a^u.

The rather cause the Father did not vent it,
But from his sunerall friendly hands have rent it.
Had Fortun^ giv^n him time to see it ended
The saults of this rude Poem had been ^^ended.
ELEGY. 7
He sharply chides a friend who saithlesse proved,
Now ^n's assliction, when it least beboved.
RIvers shall backward to their fountains flow:
(...) with Horses turned, shall Eastward go.
(...) shall bear, the Heavens shall Plowshare seele
(...) burn, and fire shall waters yield,
(...) shall cross to natures order go.
(...) world his wonted course shall know.
(...) impossible we will easy deem,
(...) ab^^rd, most probable esteem.
(...) ^ince one has me deceived,
B^ whom I hoped now to have been releived.
(...) could thou so soon forget thy friend?
Not da^^^^ one poor visit to him lend?
(...) look or word of comfort send?
Not (...) hard hearted man, (...)
mine hearse attend?
(...) that sacred (...) of friendship slight
(...) and ba^e, and trample on it with spite?
What (...) been to have visited thy friend,
(...) with grief, and some kind speeches lend?
And, if (...) ^^^dst no tears for his distress,
Ye^ (...) words with fained grief express?
At lest, (...) ^^^^^gers did, ^is farewell give
An^ (...) with public note, he long might live. span^

And now ^^^ve viewed his drooping teerefull eyes,
(...) to be beheld in any wise?
And (...) kindly take and give
A fare, ^^lf, once for all while both do live.
I (...) much they did with whom no league I had,
Who by their tears declared their hearts were sad.
But thou and I in strictest bonds were tied,
of swee^e convers^ and ancient Love beside.
My sports and serious matters thou did know,
And unto me thy sports and cares did show:
This was enough that we acquainted were,
At Rome and called to merry meetings there.
But these are all dispersed, into the wind.
Drowned in Let^ean waters out of mind.
I think thou nere wast bred in Civil.
gentie Rome,
(The City where my foot must never come)
But in the craggy Rocks of Pontus rather:
And some rough cliffe of Scythia was thy Father.
Hard veins of flint about thy heartstrings grow,
And in the breast does seed of Iron flow.
And she that Suekled.
nursed first thy tender age,
Was sure some Tiger fierce of cruel rage.
Yet (like a strangers) had thou taken my woe,
Thou had not been impleaded as a foe.
But seeing this is added to my losses,
None of the least, of all my fatal crosses.
That our first friendship once so well begun,
Through thy default wants its perfection,
Repai^e this breach of Love, that in the end,
(Thy fault forgot) I may thy faith commend.
ELEGY. 8.
This Elegy does to his friend complain,
That vulgar spirits follow F^rtunes train.
WHo ere thou art that read as a friend
I wish thee happy fortune to thy end.
Oh that for thee my prayers might much prevail,
Which for my self cannot one jot avail.
Thy fortune good, of friends thou shall have plenty, A seate^^^.

If times prove cloudy, they will be very dainty,
Behold how Doves to whited houses fly,
But unto sordid turrets none does hye.
To empty garners Pismires never wend,
And broken states can seldom find a friend.
Who walks in the Sun, on him his shadow waits,
The Sun once clouded this does vanish strait.
So fickle vulgars follow Fortunes light,
Which once oreclouded, they soon take their slight.
I wish thou never find these sayings true, (...).

Though sad experience makes my bowels rue.
For while I stood my house had great resort
And was well known, though of no stately Port.
But when 'twas shaken once, all were afraid,
And hasting from the ruin no man staid.
Nor wonder I if men do lightning fear,
Whose fires are wont to catch what ever's near.
And yet a friend that firm in trouble proves,
Even in an hated foe mild Caesar loves.
And never blames (so is his nature kind)
One that to's woeful friend bears constant mind.
Thoas the Tyrant Pylades commended, (...)

That his Or^stes he had so befriended.
The constant friendship which Patroclus bare
To great Achilles, Hector judged rare.
They say the infernal god liked wondrous well,
That Theseus would attend his (...)
friend to hell.
Turnus (it is like) his cheeks with tears bedewed,
When once he heard what friendship Nisus To (...).
showed.
(...)
Sorrow craves pity, which even foes approve,
Woes me how few do these my sayings move!
Yet is the state of my misfortune such,
That in compassion none can weep too much.
However though my times are wondrous bad,
At thy preferment (friend) I am right glad
Which long ago, me thought, I did foreknow,
While on thy bark a smaller gale did blow.
For if sweet manners and a spotless life
Have any worth, they are in none more rife.
Or if the ingenuous Arts have any raised;
Thy skill in pleading causes is much praised.
I noting this, did thus to thee presage,
Thy dowries, friend, will claim A ^^g^^ of (...)
an ample stage.
Nor did sheep veins or left hand thunder show it,
Nor tongues or wings of birds did cause me know it.
Reason my A^g^ry was, and happy gues^e
Made me divine it, and proclaim no less.
Which proving true, I joy my self and thee,
That thy rare wit could not concealed be.
As for mine own, would it had lain obscure,
In darkest night, then had I lived secure.
But as severer Arts have thee preferred,
The Other unlike to them, have me interred.
And yet thou knew'st my life, and that my My Books of Love.
Art
Upon the Authors manners played no part.
Thou know I made those pastimes being young,
Which if blameworthy, but f^r jests were sung.
And though it is true, my pen I then abused
Yet do I think my faults may be excused.
Make then thy fair excuse, abet thy friend
So may good forture guide thee to the end.
ELEGY. 9
The praises of the Ship he does display
Which be took up at the Corinthian Bay.
Under M^ncrva's guard, my ship is blessed,
And takes its title from her helmets crest.
If Sails we use, it scuds with smallest wind,
Or if our Oa^es, 'twill never be be hind.
And not content her Comtades to outrunne,
She Will cote the ships that erst their course begun.
Assayling floods and billows she can bear,
Nor does she leake, or searching waters fear.
At Corinth land of her I first had sight,
True guide and partner of my fearful flight.
And still through Pallas favor safe abides,
Although through rough and stormy Seas she rides.
Oh may she safely shoot vast Pon^^^ haven.
And enter Getticke barbours, which we Or wish to go to Ovids vo^age described.
craven,
Me first unto the He^e^po^t she brought,
Where through the Streights a tedious course she
Then bending to the left where Astori^ (...)
Tr^y did stand,
We came to the Harbor of the I^^brian land.
Thence by Zerinthu^ shore, with slowest pace.
Our weary ship did touch on Th^^^^ (...)
Samot^^^^.
Hence to Stantirum one may quickly wend;
So far our ship her Master did attend.
But I on foot would through Bistonia travel,
And she now left the Hellesponticke gravel,
And to Dardania went of Dardan smiled,
And thence to Lampsac whereon (...) O^ (...) pasture
Pan has smiled.
So to the Fret surnamed from Hell drowned
Where Sestos from A^ydos is disjo^ned.
From thence ^o (...)
Cyzi^^s (nigh Propontis placed)
Watch by the Aemoni^n founders much is graced.
Then, where B^zantium joins to Pontus jaws,
And makes the ample Portall of two Seas.
These let her conquer and with Southwinds borne
Pass the Cy^nean Island-creckes untorne.
Then by the Enochian bays, and P^oebus town,
Under Anchialus walls (...)
may the ride sound.
Thence by Mesembriack Ports, pass she the Towers,
That take their name from Bacchas drunken powers.
And by the exiles at (...)
Alcathoe bred,
Who here are said to rest their weary head.
Thence, at Miletis let her safe arrive,
Whether th'off^nd^d (...)
god my course does drive.
This if Min^rua grant, a Lamb shall dye,
My wealth a greater offering cannot bu^.
And you (...)
Tindarian brethren (...)
here adored,
Your aid for both our ships is now implored.
For, the one through the high Sympl^gades is bound,
And the other ploweth the Bistonian sound.
Command (since we to several coasts do wend)
Each ship have wind to serve her to her end.
ELEGY. 10.
Here to the courteous Reader is diselosed,
That this First book in's Voyage was composed.
THis Book, yea every Verse thou read here,
Were made in travel, and the time of fear.
Some part I wrote on the Adriaticke water.
When cold December made my teeth to chatter.
And part when I had (...)
got my second ship,
And past the Isthmos that two Seas does split.
That I amid Sea-roarings verses pheased,
I think the Aegaean Cyclades were amazed.
My self admire, how I my wits could find
Amid such tempests both of sea and mind.
Whether this of Poetry.
study maze or madness be,
From other cares, I Am sure it set me free.
Often by the showry Hoedi.
kids my mind was beaten,
And often the Steropes sta^ four quarte (...) of heaven.
Pleiades made the Seas to threaten.
Now the Beares-keeper made the day light dark,
And the Hyades causd the watery Southwinds sharke,
Often part oth' Sea got in: yet still I draw,
With trembling band, these verses though but raw.
Even now our cables stretched with northwinds cracks
And seas do rise, like mountains swelling backs,
The Pilot lifting up his hands to th'skies,
Forgetting quite his Art, for succor cries.
Where ere I look, deaths Image does dismay,
Which makes me doubting fear, and fearing pray.
Yet should I gain the Port that would affray me,
For of the twain, the Land does more dismay me.
Dangers from Seas and men at once I bear,
Both sword and waters cause my double fear.
I fear, lest the one should catch his bloody pray,
And the other claim my last and fatal day.
On our left hand lo barbarous robbers dwell,
Who save in blood and wars are never well.
And though the seas through winters storms dowar
Yet are the others breasts more raging far,
The rather, gentle Reader, should thou bear,
If thou beneath thy hope find verses here.
They were not pend as erst, in gardens shade,
Where on my wonted Couch.
bed, my body laid.
But tossed on winter Seas I Am rudely dashed,
And with salt waters are my papers washed.
Cold winter stormeth disdayning I should dare
To Scribble verses, whilst he threatens fear.
Let winter conquer: yet, at once, I pray,
As I my Verse, let him his fury stay.
Here ends the first Book, containing 744. Verses.
LIB. 2.
ELEGY.
This Book one single Elegy contains,
Whirein to great Augustus he complains.
Avaunt from me my Books, unhappy care
Who for my wit, poor wretch, have paid full dear.
Why to my blamed Muse do I return me?
And touch again the fire, which once did burn me?
'Twas Poetry made men and women long
To know me, and this fame has done me wrong.
'Twas Verse made Caesar to suspect me still
And fear my manners, for this hateful skill.
Bate me my study, and my crimes are bated,
My Verses I may thank that I am (...).
hated,
Here Is the reward my toyling life has gained
That for my wit I smart and am disdained.
Had I been wise, I had the Muses hated,
As powers that make their Worshipper be rated.
But now so mad is my Poeticke vein.
I dash my foot at the same rock again.
Like foiled Fencer, still the stage (...).
re^nt^ing,
Or wracked ship on swelling Seas Reviewing.
still ventring.
Perhaps (as once befell T^l^ph^^ whom Achilles (...) hurt and ^^aled.
Teuthra^i^s King)
One thing to me may wound and med'cin bring.
My Muse that stirred, may calm his kindled rage,
Verses incensed gods do often assuage.
Caesar himself the Italian dames did charge,
To towred Ops their Verses to enlarge,
To Phoebus too, what time (...)
he brought oth'stage
The Plays which come once only in an age.
By these examples Caesar, I thee pray,
My wit the fury may in part allay.
Thine anger's just, I Will not my guilt deny,
My face has not so far lost modesty.
But had I never sinned, what could thou yield?
My guilt affords thy mercy fairest field.
Should Jove as often as men offend, let fall
His arrows, he long since had spent them all,
But when with thunders he the world does scare
He straight uncloudeth and makes clear the air.
Hence he is still the Gods both sire and King,
Nor can the world of Jove's coequall sing.
Now since Romes King and Father is thy name
As well as Jove's, for mercy be the same.
And so thou art; nere Prince of any Nation, Caesar's clemenc^

Did wield his Scepter with more moderation.
Often have thou spared the Parthians overcome,
Who conquering would have give^ thee harder doom.
With wealth and honor thou do some adorn,
Who against thy sacred head have weapons borne.
One day both war and peace in thee has wrought,
And to the gods both parts have presents brought.
And as to quell their Foes, thy men were glad:
Even so thy conquered enemies were not sad.
My cause is better far, being nere accused
Mine Arms against my Liege to have abused.
I swear by Sea and Land, by heaven above
By thee a present and conspicuous Jove.
This Soul.
heart has favored thee as most Divine
And to my power I was wholly thine.
I prayed that thou might late ascend the sky,
Still making one with one that thus did cry.
And for thine health, Incence devoutly spent
And to the Public votes my Prayers lent.
Those very Books which first procured me blame
In thousand places chaunt thy sacred name.
And read my greater work, not yet complete
Which does of bodies wondrous changes treat,
Large praises of thy name, there shall thou find,
And many pledges of my loyal mind.
Verses, it is true, make not thy glory greater,
To which naught can accrue, to make it better.
Yet love (whose fame surmounteth) takes delight
When we, in Verse his glorious Acts indite.
And when the Giants wars men do rehearse,
It Is like he joyeth in their praising Verse.
Thy fame there are which chaunt with lofty strain
Whose larger quilles thy praises high proclaim,
And yet the gods as kindly incense take,
As when the rich large A (...) he of (...). Oxen.
Hecatombs do make,
Ah! more then cruel was that foe to me,
Who first my wanton lines did read to thee.
Or else my Poems, which thine honor spread,
Might with more candid censure have been read.
But thou once angry, who dare friendship show,
I almost to my self (...)
was turned foe,
When once a crazed house begins to reele,
The weight oth' whole, the sliding parts do feel.
And when by some mischance the wall does rend,
The weight it self make all to ruin bend.
So when thou frownedst, men began wrest my Books
To hatred, and with thee, to change their looks.
And yet there was a time, thou did approve
My life, and gav'st an horse in pledge of love.
And though poor honesty got me little gain,
Or honor, yet she kept me from just blame.
Poor Clients causes were to me commended,
Which before the The Cent^^ (...).
hundred judges I defended.
And private matters I so fairly judged,
That even the losing parties never grudged.
And had I not at last, poor wretch offended,
Even thou thy self would still have me commended.
This last undoes me: this one storm has drowned
My bark, which had so long escaped sound.
Nor did some slender billow now distress me,
But the whole Ocean did at once oppress me.
Alas, why wast my lucklesse hap to see
A fault at unawares to ruin me!
Actaeon chanced Diana naked spy,
Yet (...).
by his hounds must poor Actaon dic,
Belike though fortune did offend, not he,
Even chan^e, against the gods must treason be.
What day that fatal error me betrayed,
A small, but yet a harmless house decayed.
Yet, not so small, but in my fathers days
For best nobility it bore the praise.
And, as not wealthy, so nor poort reputed,
But in the middle rank of knight hood suited.
Yet, had mine house for means or blood been small,
My wit, I Am sure, has made it known to all.
Which, though too youth fully I usd the same,
Yet through the world does bear a glorious Name.
And even the learned sort have Naso known,
Still ranking him with men of great renown.
Lot then, this house thus by the Muses graced,
By one great fault of mine is sore defaced.
Yet not so false, but it may soon recover,
If Caesar's fury like a storm blow over.
Whose mercy in my punishment was such,
That of my fear it has abated much.
For first, thy Censure.
sentence did my life forbear
In boundless power, so do thou mildness wear,
Nay more, (as if the gift of life were small)
Thou sparedst me nay goods to live withal.
Nor by decree oth' Senate was I sent,
Or some deputed judge to banishment.
But by thy Princely mouth, whom I offended,
I was in sharp but royal sort condemned.
Add, that thine Edict (though severe and stern)
Yet gave my punishment a gentle term,
I am not banished, but confinde there by,
My heavy doom in gentle terms does lie,
Indeed to one in's wits, no greater blow
Can hap, then make so great a man His.
ones foe.
Yet gods incenst, sometimes appeased are,
A cloudy morning cleares and proves fair.
My self have seen an Elm with Grapes O^loces.
oppressed
Which erst with Lightnings had been sore distressed,
I therefore still will hope, though thou say nay,
In this one matter I may disobey.
When I thy mildness view my hope is great,
Reflecting on my fault, it does retreat.
And as the Sea with winds and tempests torn,
Are not with equal rage and fury borne,
But now the winds abate and silent stay,
(...) rage away.
So do my fears still varying ebb and flow,
Now bid mo hope for grace, and now say no.
Which grace I beg, even by the gods above
Who will prolong thy times, if Rome they love.
And by thy Country which thou rendrest blessed,
Where late I was a part amongst the rest.
So may thou still the Cities love inherit,
Which both thy mind and actions justly merit.
So may the Gods thy Livia long preserve,
Whom but thy self no Husband could deserve,
And but for her, thou still should single be,
For none but Livia were a match for thee.
So may thy (...)
Son be safe, and son and father
Govern this happy Empire long together.
And let thy Cai^^ and (...) ^o^s of (...) and (...)
nephews (that are now a star)
Count thine and Iuli^^ acts in the calendar.
So may Victoria to thy tents inured,
Still to thine ensign fly by her secured. (...).

And hovering over the Duke with wings outspread,
Still deck with Laurel crowns his shining head,
By whom thou wagest war, and do commend
Thy Gods and state as a most trusty Friend.
Thus whilst one half of thee at Rome does reign,
Thy other half abroad does wars maintain.
So may he come victorious home, and ride.
Through Rome in crowned chariot by thy side.
O spare, I pray, those deadly darts lay down,
Which to my sorrow I too long have known.
O spare thou Pater Patriae, and let that name,
Cherish my hopes to gain thy grace again.
Nor do I sue, my exile were repealed
Though greater suits no doubt, the gods have sealed,
Grant me but milder exile nearer home,
And it shall much assuage my heavy doom,
Who now do suffer even the worst of woes
Living so far from home among cruel foes.
Posted to (...)
Isters bank, (and none but I)
And (...)
Where hardly can Danubius waters deep
The (...) colchi Meter. Getes.
savage nations from our borders keep.
And though for greater faults some banished lie,
Yet no man's posted farther off then I.
For there is beyond us naught but foes and cold,
And frozen Seas detained in Icy hold.
The Roman part of the 2 See.
Euxine here is nigh,
And next to us the fell Sarmatians lie,
Here is the Roman Empires utmost bound,
This land is scarce the margin of thy ground.
This makes me crave a place of safer rest,
Lest with a double woe I be oppressed,
Exiled from home, and fearing to be made
Captive to them whom Ister scarce has stayed.
Since Law forbids a Roman should endure
Barbarian chains, while Caesar lives secure.
But now? what are the crimes that me oppress? Ovids faul^^.

My verse and error: This I must suppress.
I dare not open Caesar's wound again,
Whom, it is my grief, that once I put to pain.
The Other remains,
That I my pen to teach uncleanness used.
I see that heavenly breasts may be deceived, Ovids defense of the second.

And falsehood in small matters be believed.
For as high Jove imploid in heavenly cares,
Wants leisure to attend on flight affairs:
So, whilst this lower world thou do dispense,
Small matters may escape thy Royal sense. Non (...).

For what? should thou a Potentate find leisure
To road my verses, of ^. Elegiacke verses. H^^aepent.
unequal measure?
The weight oth' Roman Empire's not so light,
Nor is the burden on thy neck so slight,
That thou should bend thy powers to wanton rymes,
Or deigne to overlooke my foolish lines.
Now Hungary, then Illyria thou must tame.
R^tters and Thracians now rebel again.
The Armenian calls for peace: the Parthians stand
With bended bows, and ensigns in their hand.
Thy Prowess, in thy Tiberins.
Son the Germans feel,
Young Caesar making Caesar's Foes to reele.
And (though our Empire never was so wide)
Thy care permits no part thereof to slide.
Of city and of Laws thou take care,
And framest our manners by thy pattern rare.
Thou give the Nations rest, but take none;
And with thy foes thy wars are never done.
Amid such mass of cares, how thou had time,
I wonder much, to read my merry Rh^me.
Yet had thy mind (would God it had) been free,
Naught in my Art had then offended thee. H^^ Books of Love.

It Is true, 'twas not for graver judgments pena'd,
Nor for thy reading did we them intend:
And yet they nothing teach, that cresseth law,
But rather keep the Roman Wives.
Dames in awe.
And that thou may not doubt to whom I wrote,
l'th' first of those three Books these Verses note. First book of the Art of
Love.

'Avant ye Matrons who chaste vayles do bear,
"And bordered gowns down to the ankles weate,
"Of none but lawful scapes of love I sing,
My verse allows of no unlawful thing.
Have I not banished from my Art.
Book all such,
Whose veil and robe forbid all wanton touch?
But yet some Matron may abuse mine Art,
And draw that is another to her part.
Then let her nothing read,
And turn to sin what ever she does find.
Read what she will (if she be ill-dispos'd)
Her manners thence, will be to vice composed.
Let her the Annals take (though most severe)
How Ilia proved with child, she finds there.
If she the Aeneads read she searches there,
How Venus did our Sire Aeneas bear.
In fitterplace, I Will show, how every kind
Of writing may corrupt a vicious mind.
Yet may not Books be blamed or clean refused,
Nothing so useful,
Fire though most needful, yet do serve the turn
Of desperate boute fewes that houses burn.
^hysick which health does bring, often health destroies,
^eaching what herbs are good, and what annoyes.
^oth honest men, and thieves themselves do arm,
^^'one for defense, the other to do harm.
The skill of pleading causes in distress,
(...) does defend the wrong and right oppress.
(...) so my verse, who reads with honest mind,
Doubtl^sse therein shall nothing hurtful find.
(...) who takes Hatme.
hurt thereby, himself must shent,
Wresting m^ words to that they never meant.
(...) But be it true: then seeing public plays,
^eeld seeds of vice, take Stages clean away.
The field of Mars where sundry sports are used,
^s b^ too many unto lust abused.
Down with the Circus too: there danger bides,
And many a maid sits by a strangers side.
And why are O pe^ wall ^ port cas.
Galleries allowed to walk,
Where with their lovers maids do meet and talk,
Nay leave Even.
the sacred Temples unfrequented,
Where wanton wits have tricks of love invented.
In loves own house she standing, often does muse,
How Jove himself did many Maids abuse.
And while in Juno's Temples they adore,
Thinks how the Goddess does her Harlots ^t Mot^es.
wrongs deplore.
And seeing Pallas, fears she went astray,
Because Er^chthon she did hide away.
Coming to Mars his Tua numina.
Temple over the door,
She Vulcan spies, and Venus Mars his whore.
Sitting in I s^^ house asks why and how.
(...) transformed Io to a Cow.
When Venus and Anchises she does see,
She questions what may their relation be?
Of Ceres with Jasius? of the Moon,
And her perpetual mate Endymion?
All these may serve a wanton mind to stain,
Yet all these Statues in their place remain.
And my first page all honest hands removes
Far from my Art (...).
writ for mere Harlots loves.
If any one presume beyond the bownde,
The Pefest assigns, she straight is guilty found.
Nor is it a crime to read a wanton book,
On more then they may do, the chaste may Read.
look.
Grave Matrons of severest brow survay,
Statues which various shapes of lust display.
And vestall Virgins naked Of Ha^lots.
Pictures view
For which the cunning workmen never rue,
Yet why should I, that looser vein approve?
Or write a book,
It was my fault, it is plain; I must confes^e,
Herein my wit and judgment did transgress.
Why cl^ose I not to wri^e the Trojan war?
And after Homer fetch the Greeks from fair?
Why not the war of Thebes, whose sevenfold (...),
Were dyed with brothers blood through mortal here?
Even wa^like Rome an ample field afforded,
I had well done, her acts to have recorded.
And Caesar when thy merits so abounded
Some part thereof I ought to have resounded.
And as the Suns bright rays all eyes invite;
So should thy deeds have drawn my Muse to write.
The blame is causeless, for that spacious field,
Requires more stock then my poor farm would yield
For though a cock-bote on the lake may enter
Yet may she not on the maine S^a adventure.
And though perhaps I find my ssender vein
To to yes and lighter numbers may attain,
Yet should thou bid me write the Giants war,
That weighty work, my strength would master (...),
It is for happyer wits to sound thy facts,
Whose losty strain can reach thy glorious acts.
This I attempted once, but straight recoyled.
I saw thy worth was by my scribbling spoiled.
Then to my youth full verse did I reci^e,
And wrote of love, although with fained fre.
I did not mean it, yet my dest^ny drew me,
To show my wit, in that which overthrew me.
Woes me! why was I set to S^ftoole? or why
Did tempting Books bew^ch my curious eye?
This vein procured thy hate, through hard mistr^^
Mr Art was penned to kindle lawless lust.
Yet I to Wives no stolen D^lights permitted,
How could I teach what I had nere committed?
And though some Amorous verses I did frame,
Yet so, as ill report nere touched my name.
Nor is there any married man at all,
That can for me his child in question call,
Trust me, my verse and manners disagree,
My life is modest, though my Muse be free.
And of my Works the greater part is feigned,
And takes such license as my (...)
life disdayned.
Nor does ones book the Authors mind display,
An honest muse to please men's cares will play.
Else Terence were a glutton: Accius fell:
And they, all Soldiers, that of battles tell.
Lastly, not I alone Love-songs have framed,
Though I alone am for Love-sonnets shamed.
What does the Teian Lyricke-father sing. (...).

But Venus Toys, and Baochus revelings?
What taught the Lesbian Sappho but to love?
Yet did no censure him or her reprove.
Nor thou The sun^^ (...)
Challimachus, whose Rhymes relate
Thine own delights, did ever purchase hate.
Pleasant a Com^^^. (...).
Menanders plays with love are fraugh^,
And yet to boys and girls Menander's taught.
What are the Iliads, but a shameless Hele^^
whore,
For whom her Lord and Lover fought in gore?
Which first begins with The E^^^tter of Cory^^^.
Briseis burning love,
For whom Achilles and the Agamem^^t
General strove.
What Is the Ody^^ee, but contentious strife,
Of sundry suitors for Ulysses wife?
Yea Homer tells how Vulcans snare descryed
Venus with Mars in lewd embraces tied.
And but for Homer who should ever know
That two great (...) Calypso.
Ladies loved Ulysses so.
Of writings, Tragedies are the gravest verse
Yet these of Cupids matters still rehearse. Traged (...)

Hippolytus was by's own fierce Ph^dia.
stepdame loved.
And by her (...).
brother, Canace pregnant proved.
Who drove the Chariot but the winged boy,
When (...).
Helens Meaelaus.
husband bore her back from Troy?
It Is love enraged their frenzy does constrain,
When cruel mothers have their children slain.
'Twas love that into birds Frogue and P^^^emela.
two sisters turned,
With Tereus, whom incestuous passion burned.
Had not Thyestes wronged his (...) wife A^^^^e.
brothers bed,
The Sun had nere been faign'd to hide his lead,
Nor ere had S^ylla climbed the tragic staire,
Had not her To (...) Mino'
love cut off her (...) Nisut
fathers hair.
Who reads (...) fragedies.
Electra or Orestes, spies
How Agamemnon by The adulte. ter to Clytem.
Aegysthus d^^s.
Why name I Belleteph^n.
him that did Chimaera tame,
By his deceitful Schenob^^.
hosteffe almost slame?
Or why Hermione? or the Aralanta.
^imble maid?
Or Phoebus Nun, whose love a Of Mycenae.
Captain staid?
Or Danaus fifity daughters? Baochus mother?
Or Jove's When he got Heren of Alemean.
two nights conjoined each to other?
Or Pelias Son? or Theseus? or the Greeks,
Who first arrived at Troy with Grecian sleet?
Add Dole Pirrhus mother, Hercules wife,
Hylas, and Paris who set all at strife.
But should I here pursue these Tragic flames,
My book would scarce contain their empty names.
Thus Tragedy to wanton laughters bends,
And many shameful words (...) fice (...) broadly.
obscenely spends.
The Author's free, who stern Achilles frames,
Softning his martial deeds with music strains.
Nor yet was Aristides ere exiled,
Though he his own and Of Maleton.
neighbors faults compled.
Nor looser Eubius an historian vile,
Who teaches how the fruit oth' womb to spoil.
Nor he that Sybaries of late composed;
Nor they that have their own base lusts disclosed.
Nay these in the public Libraries do stand
For common use, by Benefactours hand.
Nor do I only plead outlandish Authors,
Our Roman books of liberty are Fautors.
For as great Enquis does of wars discourse,
(Whose wit is great although his art be course) Lucreti^^^

And Lucrece does explain with spirit of fire,
How Three priaciples. Catullut.
three first causes to the world conspire.
So does Catullus of his Mistress sing,
And under Lesbias name, her praises ring.
Not socontent, his muse does nothing shame,
His own and others whoredoms to proclaim.
And no whit less is little Calvus bold, Calvus.

In various kinds his looseness to unfold. Ticidas. Memmius.

Of Ticidas and Memmius I might tali^^,
Whose tongues of fowlest matters loosly walk. Ciona. Auser. Cornisicius. Cato.

And like to these, Cinna and Anser do,
And Cornificius and Cato too.
And he that lately feigned Perilla's name,
But as Metellus now does own the same. Metellus.

He likewise that of Iasons voyage singes,
Could not conceal his own ftolne wantonings. Horre^sius^ Servius.

Hortensius too, and Servius are as bad,
And who but fear, that such examples had?
Sisenna Aristides has translated, Sisen^^.

And in his story filthy jests related.
And Gallus too unblam'd, does praise his wench. Oallus. Lycvile.

Save that his tongue runs ore, on's tavern bench.
Tibullas writes. He Will trust no woman's oath,
She Will gull her husband when she breaks her troth, Tibulles.

He trains them how their Keeper to beguile,
(Yet swears himself is cosend by that wile)
And how soft touches of her hand to steal,
Making excuses to her Ring or Seal,
And how he talked by privy marks sometimes,
And on the table drew his Secret.
circled fignes.
What supple oil will that sam^ blewnesse cure,
Which to their lips much kissing does procure,
And how Or she
he often the wittoll hus band prays.
To look more strictly to hi^ and his Ways.
strayes.
He tells her how to know his drawing near,
When the dog barks, or she does coughing bear^.
Many such slippery tricks his writings teach
How women may their husbands overreach.
Yet is Tibullus safe, nay read and known,
And since thou camst toth' Crown is famous grown.
Thou Wilt find the same Propertius wanton vein, (...)

Yet does no blame his reputation stain.
These I succeeded; for good manners will
I should suppress their names are living still.
God knows I little feared to suffer wrack,
Where all these ships had made a common tracke.
Others have published now the Art of dice, (...).

Which in your fatl^ers days was held a vice. (...)

And teach to make the Cockbones higher run,
And how the losing casts and blankes to shun^
And how to cog and strike the nimble Dye,
To run the chance that you may gain thereby.
And how at Cheste, (...)
a winning battle make,
And play your men where none may vantage take.
And how the painted Soldier walks his Line,
But he is lost whom two oe's foes entwine.
And Low to chase, how to retire, and then
To back and second still your man again.
Others the childish game of three stones show, (...)

Where he does win that ranks them on a row,
Others at other games do teach to play,
Whereby we spend our precious ^oures away.
I his man the Art of Tennis play does write,
The Other of Tops, the third of swimming slight.
Here one the skill of painting faces Prints,
The Other the laws of Cooks and feasts invents.
A third, the best Potmetrall does assign,
And which does best set forth the sparkling wine.
These are the sporting gains of cold Decomber, (...)

Which all men sus^ly write, an I remember.
These of my meny Verses were the cause,
But to my sweet meats I h^ve bitter sauce:
Of all these Writers, lo, I see not one,
Whose Muse bath broke his back, b^^ mine alone:
If I had ^ W^^to^acts of Co^edy.
Mimicks p^u'd, of Scurrill stoine,
Which (...) Lust and Ribaldry contain,
Wherein the Adultrer bornes the Husbands head,
And crafty Wives abuse their Hu^bands bed,
Both young and ol^, both Ma^ons, Men and Maids,
And many Senators would have soene them played.
Yet there with brothe^ words the ears are tainted,
And the eyes with shameful objects are acquainted.
And when the Husband slily is deceived,
The Poet is with great applause received.
Yea even the worse he writes, the more his gains,
The Praeior dearest pays for loosest strames.
Look over, Casar, thine accounts of Plays, Ludi Angustales.

For many such t^y free Exchequer paies.
These thou beholdest, and bringst to public view,
So do thou Majesty and mildness show.
Yea with those eyes, by which the world does see,
Have graced these Scenicke Whoredoms
sleights, with merry glee.
If then these Mimickes lewd men safely write,
Why might vot I my chaster verse indite?
Or is it their stage which does these baudes excuse?
And warrants them to vent their Scurrill muse?
So have my Poems both been danced and sung
In Caesar's presence, with applause and throng.
And as within thy palace there do stand
The ancient Worthies wrought by cunning hand:
So there is a little Table hanging by,
Which various forms of venery does descry.
And as there Ajax sits in ragefull guise,
And fierce Medea with her murdring eyes,
Even so moist Venua dryes her dropping hair,
As naked from the Sea she does repair,
Others do sing of Mars, and bloody skars,
And sound thy kindred, and thy valiant wars.
Me envious nature scants, and thought it fit
To measure me a weak and flender wit.
And yet thy Virgil, who wi^h happy skill, Virgill.

Composed the AEneids, has not thought it ill
To bring his Ar^^^ edrunque. ^
man at arms to Didoes bed,
And this of all his work is ostnest read.
Nay in his youth, he sporting sung of Phyllis,
In pleasant Eclogues, and sweet Amarillis. (...).

Besides, my fault is done, and past long since,
And now I sufter for an old offense.
My book was written, when on horseback I
Before thee (...) no^nten.
then Romes Censour passed by.
What I a young man wrote, And thought
free and secure,
For these, now I am old, I smart endure.
My Account.
childish book is now revenged too late,
I suffer for a fault that is out of date.
Nor think that all my works are light and vain,
Often I have labored in an higher strain.
The Roman Calendar and feasts I wrote,
Where every book a several month does note,
That work I sacred to thy Princely name,
Though fate forbids me to conclude the same.
I pend a regal Tragedy one while,
In lofty words which suit a Tragic style. Meta^otphoit^s.

Then wrote of changed shapes with great delight,
Which work perfection wants through fortunes spite
O would.
Would God thine anger would so far abate,
As but to hear what I do there relate.
How from the time the infant werld begun,
To Caesar's days I have thy story spun.
There thou shall see how thou have given me miglt,
And with what favor I thy praises write.
Nor vex I any man with bitter gall,
My verses are not Satyre-tooth'd at all,
My geutle vein all brinish girds detests.
Nor would I any man with venome-jests,
Among all the throngs of People, none is found,
whom my My (...).
Calliope, but my self does wound.
There Is not a ^oman then, as I believe.
Rejoices at my fall, but thousands grieve,
I think there is no man triumphs at my fall.
That does my Candor to remembrance call,
Oh let these reasons then with many more, The (...)

Thy mind assuage, thy mercy I implore
O thou thy Countries Father, care, and friend
On whom the public safety does depend.
Nor is it my suite, I may return again,
And yet thou may at length repent my pain,
I only safer place of exile crave,
That mine offense may equal censure have.
The end of the second Book, containing 584, verses.
LIB. 3.
ELEGY, 1.
Here to the Reader, does the Book complain,
How being strange it met with much disdain.
Lo I an Exiles book do trembling come,
Sent from my Master now to visit Rome:
And being tired quite, by sea and land,
Reader, I crave safe harbor in thine hand.
Not fear lest I should work thee any shame,
This paper does No verse of Love.
not one Love-verse contain.
Nor were it for my Masters fortune fit,
He should disguise it by a jesting wit.
Those wanton lines his greener youth did vent,
He now (alas, too late) does sore repent.
See what I bring: here is naught but mourning lines
And verses suiting well my dismal times,
And that each other verse does halting go, In peuta ^etets

Shorr feet and journies length do cause it so.
And that no trimming does my leaves adorn,
It is because my Master's all for lorne.
And that my Letters are distained with blots,
Mine Authors tears have made these frequent spots.
If any words thou scarce do understand.
Know they were written in a barbarousland.
Now tell me, gentle Readers, where to go.
Some place of harbor to a stranger show.
Thus having closely spoke, with stammering tongue,
I scarce found one would say, come go along.
God grant thee in thy Country happy life,
And much unlike my Masters void of strife.
Lead on before, He follow as I may,
Tired with travail, and a tedious way.
Then on he went, there is the Law Court quoth he, Fota. Via sacta.

And this the holy street, where now we be.
That Is Vestaes Temple with her sacred fire:
In this small court old Nu^^a did retire.
There on the right hand, stnads the Palace gate, ^orts (...)

There Romulus first did found the Romanstate,
Wondering at all, I goodly bus^^dings spy,
Where glistring arms adorned the Porc^es high.
Doubtless quoth I, this is the house of Jove,
These Oken garlands my conjecture move.
Says he, it is Caesar's, both are true quoth I,
For Caesar shares with love in Majesty.
But why do Laurel boughs these Porches shade? The Tri^mphant Lawtell. Civica
coroua.

And circling garlands of the Laurel made?
Is It cause this house deserves triumphant Rayer?
Or it is most dear unto the Apollo god of learring and Pootry.
god of bays?
Or cause it keeps and makes a joyful feast?
Or does it note the public peaceful rest?
Or that this royal house shall flourish ever,
Even as the Bay does fresh and green persever?
And lo the Motto ore the wreath engraved,
Shows how his subjects by his power are saved,
To all the rest (mild Caesar) add one more,
Who lies expulsed on the Geticke shore.
The cause of whose distress, though justly due,
From no offense but from his error grew.
VVoes me! this Princely Palace makes me quake,
And every Letter through my fear does shake.
See how the bloudlesse paper waxes pale,
And how each other verses feet do fail.
O yet at length let me this palace see:
To my dear Master reconciled be.
From thence to Phoebus Temple we repair,
By the ascent of many a stately staire.
Where stand in statues made of sorraine stone,
The fifty daughters of on^ (...)
Sire alone.
And there lie open to the public view,
(...)
Learnings brave monuments both old and new.
Here I my brethren sought, excepting those,
Which brought their Father to these endless woes.
But whilst in vain I sought a little space,
The keeper thrust me from that sacred place.
Thence to the Temple I repair that is joynd
Close to the Theater, but cold welcome find.
For from the common Libraries outward (...)
yard,
Where learned Authors stand I am debard.
Our fathers fortune we his Sons inherit,
And suffer the exise which himself did merit.
Casar pethaps when time allaies his mind,
Both unto us and him will prove more kind.
Subscribe ve Gods to this my earnest call,
But chief^ly Caes^r greatest God of all.
For to invoke the vulgar gods were vai^e.
Whose favor cannot fre^ me from my pain.
Mean while fince public stations are denied me,
Let me within some private corner hide me.
And take me, me^ne Plebeians, in your hand,
Who, (...)
being repulsed, do confounded s^and.
ELEGY. 2.
Our Poet here his exile does deplore,
Desiring Death would open its Iron door.
WAs it my dest'ny then the Scythes to see,
Whose Zenith is the Northern Axletree:
And would not you sweet Muses, nor Apollo,
Help him who still your learned rites did follow:
Nor could my harmless verses me excuse:
And life more serious then my jesting muse.
But having suffered sore by sea and land,
I Am now exposed to Pontus frozen strand.
Yea I, who still my self from cares withdrew,
Loved quiet case, hard labor never knew,
Do now endore the very worst of ill,
And neither travel nor rough Seas can kill.
Yea and my mind holds out, and still I find
My body gathers hardness from my mind.
Whilst I was sailing toward mine exile,
I did with verse my fears and cares beguile, My labou^d

But to my journe yes end once being come,
The resting place of mine appointed doom,
I fell to tears which from mine eyes did slow,
L^ke waters running from the vernall snow.
Then Rome and house and friends came fresh to mind,
And all the comforts I had left behind.
VVoes me! that at the woeful gate oth' grave,
So often I knock yet can no entrance have!
O why have I so ^st escap^t the sword?
And raging tempests will no death a^^ord?
Ye gods, that prove too constant in your ire,
And in revenge with Casar still conspire,
I pray you hasten on my lingering sat,
And cause my grave to open her closed gate.
ELEGY. 3.

And craveth burial in his native land.
Dear Wife if thou cost all amazed stand,
My letter's written with a strangers hand,
Know I am sick in utmost parts, and lie,
Exceeding doubtful of recovery.
What comfort, think thou, can poor Ovid take,
Among these direful Getes and Sauromates?
Whose nature does not with this air agree,
Nor does their soil or waters suit with me,
Mine house is poor, God knows, my diet bad,
And for mine health no Physic can be had.
No friend to comfort, or by night or day,
With good discourse to pass the hours away.
But lying sick in solitary wise,
My musing thoughts on many things devise.
But thou, my dearest Wife, within my breast,
The chiefest place do hold, above the rest.
For on thine absent name my tongue does walk,
Of thee alone both night and day I talk.
Yea even when sickness does distract my wits,
They say I talk of thee in raving fits.
Nay should I deadly faint, and sound so sore,
That scarce hot water could my speech restore.
Yet knowing thou were come, I should revive:
Thy very presence would new vigor give,
But whilst I here in doubt of life do lie,
Thou knowing naught, perhaps liv'st merrily.
No, no, I am resolved that thou dear wife,
I being absent lead'st a mourners life.
Yet, if my thread of life the fates have spun,
And that my term of years I^ almost (...)
must shortly come.
Grant me a dying man, O Gods, to have,
Within my native soil a sorry grave.
Mine exile might till death have been delaid,
Or sudden death my banishment have staid.
Oh happy death, while I did upright stand
Now must I perish in a foreign land.
And must I thus far off resign my breath?
Where even the place adds sorrow to my death?
And languish thus on an unwonted bed
Where none shall mourn over my dying head?
Nor yet thy tears upon my face may fall
Which might my fleeting soul a while recall?
Nor may I make a will? nor with sad cries,
Some friendly hand close up my dying eyes!
But without funeral tears or honored grave,
Vild barbarous earth shall this my carcass have?
This, when thou hear'st, thou wilt be with grief oppressed
And in great passion beat thy throbbing breast.
Stretching thine hands toward these parts in vain,
Still calling on thy husbands empty name.
Yet spare to tear thy hair or cheeks for me.
Who am not now first taken away from thee.
Suppose me dead when I was bannisht first,
That was my first decease, and far the worst,
Yea rather, if thou can, Rejoice dear heart,
That death will end at once my tedious smart
At least, bear up thine heart, this well thou may,
Having been so inured to evils past.
And would my soul might with my breath expire,
And no part might survive my funeral fire.
For if our spirits live when we are dead, We hold the soul immortal

According to Pythagoras holy read,
My Roman soul with Geticke ghosts must wander.
And among those cruel spirits live a stranger.
Yet let my bones be laid in some small urne,
That after I am dead I may return.
It Is not forbidden, this, and though it were,
Her brothers corpse the Theban bid interre.
Then in the Suburbs let them lie at rest,
With flowers and spices having first been dressed.
And grave these Verses plainly on my tomb,
That all may read them as they pass along. Ovids Epitaph

I NASO, that erst wrote of wanton love,
Lve here interred, my wit my bane did prove.
Thou that have been in Love and possessed by,
Pray still that Naso's bones may softly lie:
This is enough for that: my books will be.
Aly livelyer monument to posterity.
They harmed me once, yet will they raise my name,
And gain their Author an enduring fame.
Present thou at my hearse due funeral Ritet,
And let thy tears my garland all bedight,
For though the fire my corpse to ashes burn,
Yet will thy love be Pleasing.
grateful to my urne.
I more would write but that my voice is spent,
And tongue too dry to dictate what I meant,
Take then my dying farewell: live in health,
Which he that sends to thee, does want himself.
ELEGY. 4.
He does advise his friend, if he be wise,
The acquaintance of the mighty to despise.
MY ever loved friend, yet now best known,
Since my estate was sunk and overthrown.
If thou will cred it thine experienced friend,
Live private and from great ones thee defend.
Live to thyselfe, and glistring gallants shun,
From glistering Towers the cruel (...)
thunders come.
For though the great have power to do us good,
They Will sooner hurt then help us, as they should.
The naked Sayleyard dreads no winter storms,
But largest sails still meet with greatest harms,
Thou see how Cork does on the water flow,
When heavy lead does sink the net below.
Had I forewarned been of this in time,
I had till now enjoyed Romes happy clime.
For whilst I sayld with thee, with gentle gale,
Through quiet streams my Boat did safely sail,
And he that Fal's by chance upon the plain,
Falling but low may quickly Rise again,
But poor Elpenor falling from on high,
His wailing ghost Ulysses did espy.
How wast that Daedalus wings did safely fly?
When Icarus in the Sea does d^owned lie?
The Son did fly aloft, the Father low,
Whilst through the air with borrowed wings they (...)
Trust me, the private life is most secure.
Let every man within his bounds endure,
Antomedon driver of Ach. Chariot.
Eumedes Son had not untimely dyed,
But that Achilles horses he would guide,
Merops had not his scorched Son lamented,
If Pha would be Son to Phoebus not to Merops, and was burnt.
Phaethon had with Merops been contented.
Beware, my friend how thou do soar aloft,
Contract thy sail, and curb thy aspiring thoughts,
Thou Art worthy to enjoy a prosperous fate,
And well deserve an inoffensive state.
Which I to wish for thee, am ever bound,
Whose faith I have so firm and constant found.
For at my fall, I saw how thou did mourn,
Even as thine own and not another turn.
I saw thy tears which on my face did fall,
And drank at once thy words and tears withal.
And for thine absent friend do labor still,
To lighten somewhat his unbounded ill.
Live without envy: and obscurely spend
Thy quiet years: seek out for equal friends.
And love thy Nasos name: that is all that is left,
Vnbannished: Pontus the rest has reft.
A Land that lies next to the Northern Bear.
Pole.
A land that is frozen with congealing cold.
Beyond it Tanais and the Bosphor run,
And a few places that are scarely known.
Past which unhabitable cold does lie,
Woes me the end oth' world should be so nigh.
But Wife and Country dear are absent far,
And whatsoever else beloved are.
All which, though to my sense they absent be,
Yet in my mind I do them plainly see.
My house, the City and each several place,
And all their actions stand before my face.
The Image of my wife, me thinks I see.
Which does increase and ease my misery.
Her absence causes grief, but then again
It joves my heart she does so Loyal.
firm remain.
And you my friends are fixed in my breast,
Whose names I wish might safely be expressed.
But wary fear my Does my desire or good will.
duty does restrain,
I think your selves do wish I should refrain.
Indeed time was, when you well pleased were,
That in my verse your names should still appear.
But, (now I Am loath to give you cause of fear)
I Will greet you in my thought but names forbear.
Nor shall my verse disclose my secret friends,
But let them.
So they will love me closely to the end.
Yet know, though I from you be far remote,
That you are never absent from my thought.
O strive I pray to ease my grievous pain,
And lend your hand to raise me once again,
So may your fortune still continue blessed,
Nor ever need to make the like request.
ELEGY 5.
Our Poet here one Charus does commend.
Who still had showed himself a steadfast friend.
THe use of friendship twixt us two was small,
Thou might affirm that it was none at all,
Had thou not loved me with a faithful mind,
Then when my ship did sail with prosperous wind
But at my fall when all men shund my wrack,
And many seeming friends did turn their back,
Yet thou wast bold, to come even to my door,
My thunderstrucken fortune to deplore.
Yea in our new acquaintance thou did show,
More love, then many ancient friends would do.
I saw thy looks amazed and overthrown,
Flowing with tears and paler then mine own.
I saw thy tears at every word distill,
So that my mouth and cares both drank their fill.
And while thy friendly arms my neck embraced,
Thy kisses with thy sobs were interlaced.
Yea thou upholdest still my absent name,
My Charus, this thou know must be thy name.
Some other pledges of thy Love there were,
Which I shall ever in remembrance bear,
The gods still make thee able to defend,
Although with more success, thy other friends.
If thou inquire (as I think thou do)
^ow I poor wretch do fare in the Geticke coast.
^^e spark of hopeless hope I still retain
^h' offended powers may be appeased again.
^ay be it is vain, yet it may fall out true,
and that it may, perform what lies in you.
^^ploy thy noble faculty of speech,
^^ show it is Reason which I do beseech.
(...) The greatest spirits the soon are appeased
and wrath in generous minds is soonest released,
(...) Lion, when his prey does p^ostrate lie,
^oth straight forbear his suppliant enemy.
^ut wolves and bears and each ignoble breast,
^ith cruelty pursues the Dying beast.
^ho stouter then Achilles does appear?
^et Was he.
he was Conquered.
melted with King Priam's tears.
^h' Emathian Captains clemency is known,
^y Porus exequies and the funeral moan.
and not to mention humane rage grown mild,
^ven Inno's foe, her son in Law is styled.
^cannot then but hope for calmer time,
^ho^m in trouble for no heinous crime.
(...) did no treason plot against Caesar's life,
^hereby to set the headless world at strife.
^or treason spoke: or let my lavish tongue,
^mid my cups of dangerous matters run.
(...) suffer, 'cause I chanced a fault to spy,
^o that my crime does in mine eyefight lie.
(...) know I cannot wholly be defended,
^et plead 'twas chance, no ill was then intended.
^ine hope is then that Caesar will accord,
^ome easier place of exile to afford.
(...) that the morning star which day renues,
With posting speed would bring such happy news.
ELEGY 6.
He writes this Elegy to a singular friend,
And does to him, his woeful state commend.
Our league of friendship, sure thou wilt not deny,
Or, if thou would, it cannot hidden lie.
^or, whilst we might, no Citizen was to me
More dear then thou: and I the like to th^e.
who but I with thee?
And this our friendship was so famous grown,
That more then we our selves, our love was known.
So that even he on whom thine hopes depend,
Took notice of thy candor to thy friend.
Thou from my knowledge nothing did conceal,
But even thy greatest secrets did reveal.
And I to thee alone, my secrets all,
Disclosed, excepting that which caused my f^ll,
Which had thou known, then I had safe remained,
And by thy friendly counsel been sustained.
But sure my fates that did to ruin hale me.
Did close up all the way, that should avail me.
Whether, with care I might this ill have shnu'd^
Or that no wit can destiny overcome.
Yet thou who of my long acquaintance art,
And in my love do hold the chiefest part.
Be mindful still, I pray, and do thy best,
That I may be, at least in part release.
And Caesar's anger being turned to grace,
Mine exile may be eased with change of place.
The rather, since I did no harm devise,
But a^l my fault from error did arise.
Twere tedious and unsafe to show the chance,
Whereby mine eyes did on that mischief glance,
M^ mind abhors on that time to muse.
At evety thought hereof my grief renues.
And it is but fit those things which blush at Light.
Should l^e concealed in (...).
Aeternall night.
This then is all I Will fay I was to blame,
Yet had I no reward whereat to aim.
So that if truth may have its proper name,
No crime but folly merely caused my blame.
But if I lie, let me be banished So fat.
so
Where Pontus may for City suburbs O^ show.
go.
ELEGY 7.
He sends this Letter to Perillas hand,
With charge to tell har this his stoic command.
Go sodden Letter as my faithful hind.
Salute Perilla and Relate.
impart my mind.
Thou Wilt find her sitting by her mothers side,
Or with her books and muses she does bide.
What ere she is doing, knowing thou art there,
She Will soon break off, and ask thee, how I cheer.
Tell her, I live, yet wishing 'twere not so,
Since length of time does nothing ease my woe,
That to my harmefull muse I turn afresh,
Contriving words into (...)
elegracke verse.
Then ask her, saying, do thou still apply
^ur commune studies, Greekish Poety?
For bounteous nature, as she framed thee fair,
Gave thee chaste manners, and a wit most rare.
This to the Muses well, I first did train
Least such a flowing stream should run in vain.
This in my tender years I first espyde,
And father-like was both my friend and guide.
And then thou wast to me surpassing kind.
Though time pephaps has sithence changed my mind
If then That sparkling w^t.
those sparks of wit in thee remain,
Thera's none but Lesbia has an higher strain.
Bdt since my fatal ruin I suspect.
Thou d^st thy wit and Poetry neglect.
For whilst we might, we read each others lines,
And I was judge and master oftentimes.
For to thy new-made verse I lent an ear,
Or made thee blush, wheu sloth made thee forbear.
But now through fear perchance thoult verses shun,
Lest with thy Tutour, thou should be undone.
Feate not Peailla, only careful prove,
Thy writings do not teach the Art of Love.
But setting sloth and all excuse apart,
Return wise Virgin to thy sacred Art,
That comely visage time will soon deface,
And aged wrinckles will thy braw disgrace.
And wasting age which creepes with silent pace,
Will seize his talents on thy beauties grace.
And when they fay, thou once wast comely fair,
Thoult think with grief, thy glasses liars are.
Thou have a good estate, and worthy more,
But yet suppose thou had rich Craesus store.
Fortune, even when she list will give and take,
And of a Croesus, soon an Irus make.
What ever we enjoy, we mortal find,
Except the rich endowments of the mind.
Lo I, that want my Country, house and thee,
Am stripped of all that can be plucked from me;
My wit and learned parts do still retain,
On these Augustus power could not distraine.
Yea should a bloody sword T^^^.
my life deprive,
Yet after death my same shall still survive.
And while stout Rome lifts up her seav'n-hild head
Over the conquered world, shall I be read.
Do thou likewise outlive thy funeral fires,
Whose prosperous studies Ovid much desires.
ELEGY. 8.
Our Poet here does much desire that he,

I (...) that I ^ould.
Now would feign Triptolemus Carre ascend,
Who first did seed unknown to the earth commend.
I would Medeas flying Dragons guide,
As when from Corinth Castle she did ride.
I now would wish for Perseus wings to fly,
Or those which Daedolus used to mount the sky.
That gliding through the air with flickering toil,
I might eftsoons review my native soil.
And my forsaken house once more behold,
And chiefly in mine arms my wife enfold.
But fondling why in vain do wish to see,
That which thou know can never never be?
Will thou needs wish? Augustus power adore,
And his incensed Deity implore.
He can both wings and flying Carre bestow,
At his release thou'l^ homeward flying go.
Should I for this so great a favor crave,
It Is more I fear then modesty would have.
In time perchance, when is anger is allayd,
This humble suite to Caesar may be made.
Mean while I Will take it for an ample grace,
If I may be assigned some other place.
For here nor heaven nor earth, water or air,
Agree with me: they all my health impair.
Whether my inward griefs my spirits kill,
^r that this soil and clymate Suit me, or work my.
cause my ill,
For since I came to Pontus, I wax lean,
Distasting meat, and vexed with nightly dreams.
My colour's waxen pale life Autumn leaves,
Which of their freshness winters cold bereaves.
My strength is gone, my bodies full of pain,
And still of some distemper I complain,
(...) neither well in body nor in mind,
But s^^ke in both, I double sorrow find.
And full my fortune stands before mine eyes,
Of ghastly shapes, composed of miseries.
And when I view this People and the place,
And weigh my breeding with my present case.
I with for death, and of my Caesar.
Judge complain,
That rid me not at once of life and pain.
But since his wrath was then to mildness bent,
Let him now grant me gentler banishment.
ELEGY. 9.
Here Ovid takes occasion to explain,
Whence Tomos City first received the name.
EVen here, among these Towns of barbarous kind
(Who could believe it) we Greek Cities find.
^^ther a Colony from ^ City in Afla.
Mileton came,
And amongst these Getes, a Greekish City frame.
(...) long before 'twas built, this place retains,
Still from Mede as brother.
Absyrtus death, the ancient Tomos.
name.
For in the At gone a vis the first ship.
ship by Pallas counsel made,
(Which in the untryed Seas first passage had)
Medea lewd, while she her Aeta King of Colchis.
Sire forsakes,
Unto this shore, they say, her Oars betakes.
A watchman from an hill her Sire does spy
O Medea or Jason you are y^^sued.
Stranger (quoth he) the Colchians hither hye.
The Minyae are afraid, and dare not stay,
But straight their ropes unloose, and Anchors weigh.
Conscious Medea strikes her guilty breast,
With her most impious hand to mischief pressed.
And though she were of most undanted spirit,
Yet waxed pale, through guilt of her Betraying (...) Golden (...) I^so^.
demerie.
And when she spyed the approaching ship she said,
W'ate taken, if my Father be not By so^ght.
staid,
And whilst in musing sort she does devise,
By fatal chance, her Brother she espies.
Whom when she saw, now are we safe, quoth she,
My Brothers ruin shall my safety be.
Forthwith, whilst he, poor soul did nothing fear,
Her bloody sword his ha melesse breast does tear.
And with his mangled limbs she strowes the ground,
That being dispersed, they might be slowly found.
Yet. that ^er Father might the slaughter know,
His hands and bloody head she sets to show.
With th^s new grief to stay her wrathful Father,
Whilst he Absrrtus scattered quarters gather.
Hence is this City styled by the name
Of Towos, (...)
cutting, from this ancient fame,
That here Medea, to all ages wonder,
Her murdered Brothers limbs did cut in sunder.
ELEGY. 10.
The place and people where he does abide,
Our Poet here does mournefully describe.
IF any there remember Naso's name,
And still my memory does in Rome remain.
Know that I live within a barbarous clyme,
Subjected to the Bear, or Northern sign.
The Getes and Sauromates our coast sur^ound,
Whose names, me thinks, in verse do rudely sound
Ith'Summer time, (...)
Ister defends from war,
For with his liquid streams we parted are.
But when sad Winter shows his louring face,
And the carth is whited over with Icy glass,
And Borcas broken loose does scatter snow,
Then does this climate wondrous dismal snow.
The Snow lies here, unthaw'd of Sun or rain.
Which hardened by the wind does long remain.
Then new, still falling, ere the old be gone,
Here snow of two years old is often known,
And with that violence Boreas often does blow,
That Towers and Houses he does overthrow.
With skins and mantles people fence the cold,
So as you scarcely can their face behold.
^^e sickles ruffle on their rugged hair,
And with the frost their beards all whited are.
The frozen wines, retain the Veffels shape,
Of which instead of drau hts they pieces take.
And how their Rivers freeze, I need not tell,
Nor how they dig their water from the Well.
Ister it self, which I like The River bearing Ra^h of Paper.
Nilus deem,
Whose many mouths into the Ocean stream,
Has its blew waters with the winds congealed,
And under the Ice slides into th'Sea concealed?
Where ships did sail, now men and women walk,
And horses hooves over frozen waters stalk.
And Geticke Oxen draw their wagons over,
These new-made bridges which the waters cover,
You Will scarce beleev't, yet I your faith require,
Since by untruthes I can expect no hyre.
I Have seen the very Seas with Ice congealed,
And slippery glaste their silent water sealed.
Nor only seen it, but have walked thereon,
And many thousands there have dryshod gone.
Had thou Leander such a Sea obtained,
Then had not Hellespont with thy death been staynd. He was drowned there in
swimming to (...).

Our crooked Dolphins cannot take the air,
The Ice forbids them upward to repair.
And though the winds with blustering wings resound
Yet on the waters are no billows found.
Our ships enclosed in Ice like marble stood,
Nor can the Oars divide the stubborn flood.
I Have seen the fishes stick in Ice fast bound,
In part of whom some spark of life were found.
But whether Bore^^ with his freezing force,
Had bound the Sea, or stopped the (...)
Rivers course,
Forthwith, when frost had Isters streams made plain
The barbarous foes come riding in amain.
And being skild in horseman-ship and bow,
They waste the Country wheresoere they go.
The people flying nere defend their fields,
And so their wealth unguarded pillage yields.
The Country wealth is small, sheep, Oxen, waine^,
And such poor stuff as in their shads remain^^.
The people, some are bound and captive led,
Homeward in vain turning their searefull he^d.
Others with barbed Arrows poisoned head,
Are cruelly dispatched, and fall down dead,
But what they cannot carry, that they stroy.
Making the sheds in siery flames to sry.
Yea even in times of peace we battle fear,
And no man dares his grounds with plowshare ear.
The foe is ever seen, or feared here
And so the land lies waste, through dail^ fear.
No Vines are here covered with Viny shade,
Nor vessels swelling full of wines new made
Here grows no fruit: nor could A^ontius fiade
(To write his Love there in) one Apples rind.
The fields are naked both of leaf and tree,
W^es me! a desert fraught with misery.
This is the place of all the worlds extent,
That is found out for Ovids banishment.
ELEGY. 11.
Here Ovid pens a tart invective Song.
Against a slandrous and backhiting tongue.
Lewd in in, who ere thou art, that do contemn
My fall, and still my faules with spite condemn,
A Rock thy Parent was, thy Nurse some beast,
For sure thou have a rocky flinty breast,
What can thy Malice heap upon me more?
Or what is wanting to my sorrows store?
On Pontus rude, unbarbarous shore I ^^e,
Under the Northern bear, and boistrous sky.
I have no commerce with their language her,
But every place is fraught with anxious fear.
And, as a Dear surpised by ravenous bears,
Or Lamb hemb'd in by wolves, extremely fears,
Even so do I, whom warlike bands enclose,
Encompast round about with bloody foes.
And say 'twere small to want my loving wise.
My Country too, and pledges of my life.
And grant I suffered only Casars wrath,
What is not that alone continual death?
Yet one there is, that still renewes my pains,
And against my manners copiously declaimes.
In facile causes every man can speak,
And bruised Reeds a feeble hand may break.
It Is strength must overthrow strong Castle-walles,
When tottering turrets with weak motion fall.
I am not what I was: it is my shade,
My tomb and ashes which thou do invade.
'Twas Hector that did manage martial steel,
Not Hector that was drawn at horses heel.
What ere I was, I am not now the same:
Of me, the shadow only does remain.
Spare then to vex a ghost with base despite,
Or rail upon a Spirit thou cruel wight,
Suppose my faults were true, nor did indeed,
From error, but from wickedness proceed.
Yet rest content since I endure enough,
Both in mine exile and the place thereof.
An Executioner would lament with tears,
My fortune, yet thou think I little bear.
Thou art more cruel then Busiris was,
Or Perillus.
he that first did frame the Bull of brass,
Which he on Phalati^.
Sicilies Tyrant then bestowed,
And in these words to him his cunning showed.
The gift is rich, O King, the fashion more,
But yet the beauty is not half the store.
On's side a secret door you may espy,
There put him in, whom you appoint to dye,
Then let him with soft burning scorched be,
No Bull will roar more naturally then he.
For which devise, I hope thou wilt think it fit,
That my reward shall Aequallize my wit.
The Phalati^.
King replied, since first thou have invented,
This witty pain, thou first shall be tormented.
Forthwith into the engine hewas thrown,
Where like a Bull he made a ruefull moan,
But why do I outlandish Tyrants name,
Of thee, thou Roman Tyrant I complain.
For if my blood will quench thy greedy thirst,
Who feign would have me to endure the worst.
Know, I have suffered that by Sea and Land,
Would move thy tears, if thou did understand.
Trust me, Ulysses nere was so distressed,
Him Neptune, me Jove's anger has oppressed.
Cease then to ransacke in my faults again,
And from my bleeding wounds thy nails refrain.
That tract of Time my faults at last may cover,
And these my smarting sores be skinned over.
Remember humane fortune which advances,
And then casts down: and fear her doubtful chances.
And since (which I admire) thou have such care,
Of my estate, still asking how I fare.
Thou need'st not fear, my (...).
state is fraught with woe
From Caesar's anger all misfortunes flow.
And to assure thee, that I nothing feign,
I wish thy self might undergo my pain.
ELEGY 12.
Here Tomos Spring with Romes he does compare,
And shows the difference of their sports and air.
THe West winds now blow warm, the year is ^un
Yet Winter In Tomos.
here me thinks, goes slowly on.
The A^^es makes (...).
Ram which carried Hell once astray,
Does weigh in aequall poyse the night and day.
Now (...)
wanton Boys and Girls sweet Violets get,
And other Country flowers that grow unset.
The Meadows now with various colors spring,
And warbling birds their untaught Sonnets sing.
The Swallow builds her little house or nest,
Under some Rafter for her younglings rest
And Ceres seed, which in the furrows lay,
Her tender blade gins freshly to display.
Where Vines do grow, their swelling buds appear,
Alas, this Geticke soil no Vine does bear.
Where trees do grow, their buds and bloomes appear,
Alas, this Geticke coast no Tree does bear.
It Is now with you vacation: the Law-courts
(...).
Resign their wrangling brawles to plays and sports
Now borses run the race, now Fencers play,
And some with balls and tops do spend the day:
Now Wrastlers do anoint their limbs with Oil,
And bathe in water, to refresh their toil.
The Stages flourish, loud applauses sound,
The threefold Courts and Theaters rebound,
O thrice and fouretimes happy man is he,
That may enjoy the City safe and free.
As for my self, I feel the melting Snow,
Which from the frozen Rivers gins to flow.
The Sea does now unthaw, nor dare the swayn
Drive over Ister now his creaking wayne,
If any foreign ship shall here arrive,
(Which to our shores but rare occasions drive)
Thither I Will have, and after salutation,
Enquire the Masters business, name and nation.
And it is a wonder, if he be not one,
That from some neighboring coast mightsafely come
For an Italian ship comes seldom hither,
Where is no harbor from tempestuous weather.
If yet his language Greek or Latin be,
He shall be far the welcomer to me.
Likewise the wind may bring from happy South
One from the Streights, and from Propontis mouth,
Who can inform me of the common fame,
And knows all circumstances of the same.
I wish he may of Caesar's Triumphs tell,
And of the vows to Jove performed well.
And how rebellious Germany does submit
Her conquered head under our Generals feet.
Who brings such news, (which I had rather see)
Shall to my house forthwith invited be.
VVoes me! is Ovids house in the Scythian strand?
And does my prison for my dwelling stand?
Grant O ye gods, Caesar may make this place,
No more the house, but Inn of my disgrace,
ELEGY. 13.
Of his last birthday he does here complain,
And wishes it migh; nere return again,
BEhold, in vain my Birthday does return,
At the set time, alas, why was I borne?
Hard-hearted day, why do thou still extend
My woeful veares? should rather make an end.
If thou had care of me, or any shame,
Thou would not trace me thus from Rome in vain,
But rather where thou first did give me breath,
Even there would have assaid to give me death.
Or when I left the City, thou might well
(As did my friends) have taken thy last farewell,
What make thou at Pontus? art thou sent
By Caes^rs doom with me to banishment?
Or, do expect thy wonted honors here?
That I white raiment for thy sake should wear.
Should flowty garlands girt the Altar round,
With solemn fires and smoking Incense crowned?
And offering cakes that note a geniall day,
Should I for thy return devoutly pray?
No, no, I do not now such seasons see,
That I at thy return should joyful be.
A funeral Altar dressed with Cypress bough,
And burning piles of wood befit me now.
I list not fruitless Incense throw away,
Nor will my depth of sorrows let me pray.
Yet if this day, I must some prayer frame,
I pra^^^ that thou may nere come here again. (...).

Whilst I in the utmost part oth' world do dwell
Mistermed Euxine, when it is rather hell.
ELEGY. 14.
He writes this Elegy to a learned friend,
Praying him still his writings to defend.
THou sacred Patron of all learned men,
Thou constant friend unto my wit and pen,
What, do thou slill my absent name upraise?
As thou did erst renown my happyer days?
Do gather up my Books excepting those
Of Loves vain Art, which wrought their Authors woes?
Do so, thou lover of new Poets strains,
And still in Rome maintain my dying name.
'Twas I, (...)
but not my books, was banished thence,
They did not merit ill by my offense.
Often, is the Father banished far away,
When yet the children, in the City stay.
My books my children are, like In Iupi^^^^ (...)
Pallas bred,
Without a mother, in their fathers head.
These I commend the rather to thy care,
Since of their father they bereaved are.
Th^^^ Books Jove.
Three of my Sons their Parents fortune share.
Thou may of all the rest take open care.
Of changed shapes I fifteen volumes left, M^tamorpho.

Which from their Authors ashes^ hoebus reft,
This work I had to more perfection brought,
If For^une had not first my ruinewrought.
This now in peoples mouths impollisht runs,
If ought of mine within their reading comes.
And let this My Tristia. Hoc nesci^ quid.
forry piece with his fellows stand,
Which now I send thee from a foreign Land.
This whosoever reads, must time and place conceive,
Where these poor Poems their composure have.
H^e'l grant their pardon sure, that weighs their case,
A time of exile, and a barbarous place.
And wonder how my trembling hand could write
Such verse as this, in Midst.
spite of Fortunes spite.
Sorrows have crazed my wit, and marred my streine,
Which at the best, was but a slender vein.
Yet, as it was, through long disuse is dry.
And wanting exercise must needs withered lie.
In Pontus.
Here are no books to cheer my Muse to write,
In stead of books are bows and weapons bright,
Here Is none to whom I may my lines rehearse,
Whose understanding ear may mend my Verse.
Here is no private Fit for study
walk, but murderous Getes,
Do shall assault our closed walls and gates.
Often times I want a word, a place or name,
But here is not one that can Inform.
supply the same.
Yea often when I write (I must confess)
I want fit Tet^^es.
words, my matter to express.
The Getticke language does me so surround,
That I, me thinks, could write their barbarous sound
And fear, believe me, lest you here do find,
That I in Latin mixed w^^^ Geticke;
mongrell speech express my mind.
However read, and pardon this my Muse,
Since my condition pleads her just excuse.
The end of the third Book, containing 798. Verses.
LIB. 4.
ELEG. 1.
His Verse, if faulty, be does here excuse,
Which he for solace, not for fame did use,
WHat saults thou find in these slender Rhimes,
Excuse them Reader, by their dismal times,
I sought not Fame, poor exile, but relief,
Lest still my mind should ^o^e ^^on.
ponder on her grief.
For this, the Ditcher sings in fetters strong
To ease his painful toil with rusticke song.
And Watermen that hail with bended side
The slow becalmed boat against stream and tide:
So he that tuggeth at the painful Oar
Does with his tunes refresh his labors sore.
The weary shepherd resting on a rock
Does cheer with pipe and voice his seely Flock.
The Maid her time and labor does beguile
With singing to her distaffes spinning toil.
Even sad Achilles for his Briseis loss,
Is said with warbling Harp to ease his cross.
And when sweet Orphcus songs drew woods and stons
His Wife twice lost did cause his tunefull moanes.
Even so my Muse, whilst I to Pontus went,
Even she alone, did cheer my banishment.
She neither treasons feared, nor soldiers hand,
Nor sea,
For she well knew what error wrought my sall
And in my Fact there was no Crime at all.
And now is kinder 'cause she harmd me erst
And was indicted with me at the first.
I wish I never had touched hirsacred Rites,
Which have procured me so much despite.
But now her sacred Furies so possess me,
I fondly love the Muses which oppresle me.
Thus did Ulysses the new Lote-tree love,
Whose pleasant verdurs did unwholesome prove.
Thus Lovers feel their harms; yet with delight
Still persevere to feed their appetite.
So I in books delight, which did confound me,
And Love the weapon which did deadly wound me.
Thus study may perchance some Fury (...).
be,
Yet has this Fury Very a^^f^ll beaue.
much availed me.
It suffers not my mind her grief to rue,
But for the present takes it from my view.
As drunken Bacchae feel not Bacchus wounds
Raving on Ida cliffes with howling sounds:
^o when my breast a sacred Fury warmes,
My raised spirit mounts 'bove Humane.
worldly harms.
^t feels no exile then, nor Ponticke shore,
Nor on the angry gods thinks any more;
And all m^ sense of present woe is wasted,
As I had bowls of drowsy Lethe tasted.
Needs must I then those helpful The Muses.
pow'res adore
Which changed their Helicon for my Ponticke shore.
Tracing my steps (so did they kindly please)
On foot by land: By ship through watery seas.
Let these at lest, still kind to me abide,
Since the other gods combine on Caesar's side,
Still loading me with griefs in number mote,
Then are the Fish in the sea, or sands on shore.
Thou Wilt sooner count spring-flowers or summer ears
Or Autumne-fruits, or winters snowy tears,
Then all the evils I suffered too and fro,
As to the cruel Euxine shores I go.
Yet being here I find no change of state,
But am pursued by my wonted Fate.
Here still I find my birthday-thred to run,
Which of the blackest Fleece my dest'nies spu^.
To pass the daily hazards of my life, To omit.

What I endure is true yet past belief.
How grievous is it for him with Getes to live,
To whom the Romans such applause did give?
How grievous to be Closed or shut up.
mur'd in wall and gates,
Yet not to be secure in such a state.
I from my youth did cruel war detest,
And never handled weapons save in jest;
Yet Now in ago.
aged now a sword and Backlet.
shield do bear,
And on my hoary head an Helmet wear.
And when the watchman sounds out an alarm,
All in a fear we straightway fall to Arm,
The bloody Foe, with poisoned shafts and Bow,
About our walls on painted steed does go.
As greedy wolves do dragge those sheep away
Into the woods, which from the folds do stray,
So does the barbarous Foe surprise them straight,
Whom he shall chance to find without the Gate,
Where st^eight their captive necks they do enchai^e
Or with empoison'd Arrows they are slain.
Lo here I dwell in this perplexed Pla^
case,
Woes me! my dest'nies run so slow a pace,
And yet in all these stirs, my exile Muse,
Her Verse and ancient Rites will not refuse,
Though here be none to whom I may recite,
That he may here the Latin I endite.
I to my self ( Alas.
God knows) both write and Read
And then to ju^ge my verses do proceed.
Yet often say, for whom is all this pains?
Will Getes and Sauromates peruse my streines?
And while I write sad tears have often shed,
With which my papers have been watered,
Yea when my mind renues old sores again,
Whole showers of tears upon my bosom rain.
And when upon my fall my ^^^ghts (...)
passions run.
How traitorous Fortune has my state undone,
My furious hand enraged at my verse,
Often makes them flame as on the funeral hearse,
Since then of thousands, only these remain,
With favor gentle friend, (...).
receive the same,
And thou for bidden Rome, accept My.
these Rhimes,
Though nothing better then my woeful times,
ELEGY. 2.
Here Ovid grieves he could not present see,
The triumph made for conquered Germany.
NOw the fierce Germane stoopes, and overcome,
C^n kneel to Caesar (as the world has done.)
The stately Palace is with garlands dig^t,
The smoke of crackling incense dims the light.
The milkewhite sacrifice with halbert slain,
The earth with purple blood does now distaine
The conquering Caesar's, (...).
in the temples now,
Pay to the friendly gods their promised vow,
The growing youth under Augustus name,
P^ay that his off spring may for ever reign.
Great Livia with her daughters largely give
Their sacred gifts, The Empress.
because her Son does live,
With them the Matrons and the Virgins pure,
Which keep the sacred fires of Vesta sure.
^he People and the Senate joy at heart
and Knighthood too, (of whom I was a part)
^^^se public joys are here to us unknown,
^^^ly a s^ght report does hither come.
^et may the people there enjoy the same
and In the Page (...).
read the conquered towns and Captains names
and see Low captive Kings in solemn show,
(...) the crowned Or A^^^st^^
Cha^ot chayned go.
Va^se looks, in some are (like their Fortun^) Lovv
Dthers still dread^ull though in-chained so.
(...) will enq^^e their caus^, affairs, and name,
And others (...).
by conjecture Answers frame.
(...) that in purple shines with gallant grace,
Was General of the wa^re: He, next in place.
^^^s whose sad eyes are fixed on the ground,
Looked brisker when in arms he marched round.
That fire man whose eyes still sparkle spite,
Gave counsel to the war with all his might.
This man whose locks his woeful face do hide
D^d a ^lye ambush for our men provide.
By him our Captives were at Altars slain,
Although the gods such offerings did disdain.
That Lake, those Rivers, and those Castles there
Were filled with blood of slaughterd Soldiers,
Here Drusus first obtained his Germane name, (...) of his (...).

Worthy the noble Sire from whom he came.
Rhenes horns were broken here, and here her flood,
Erst green with reeds, was died with German blood
Lo there with hair dispread, Germani^ borne.
At conquering Drusus feet, does sit and mourn,
To the Roman axe, yielding her stubborn neck,
To chains her hands, which arms did lately deck.
Above all these, with thousands at thy side,
Great Caesar, thou in conquering chair shall ride.
And where thou go, thy Subjects hands applaud,
Whilst all the ways with fragrant flowers are strawd.
Thy Temples shall be crowned with Phoebus bays,
Thine army sounding To (...)
Io to thy praise.
So that thy Chariot horses by the way,
Being chaft with shonts and hoyse shall stop and stay.
Then in Jove's Temple shall thou leave thy Bays,
In token of his aid, for future praise.
All this, though banished thence, in mind I see,
And she enjoyes the place forbidden me.
She does through spacious lands with freedom st^^^
And through the air finds out the quickest way.
Into the midst of Rome she brings mine eye,
Where all this joyful Triumph I descry.
Even Caesar's Ivory Chariot I shall see.
she will show,
And for the Time In my d^ere Country b^.
I shall my Country view.
Yet shall the happy people see the sight,
And with their joyful Captain take delight.
Poor I do see it by bare im^gination,
And reap the fruit by other men's relation.
And being sent to so remote a Clime,
Scarce one will come to tell the truth in time.
But 'twill be old and sta^e er't come to me,
Yet whensoere it comes, ^oyfull be,
't shall welcome be.
And I that day will d'off my mourning weed,
The public shall my private cause exceed.
ELEGY. 3.
Two heavenly Constellations here he wooes.
That Is wife her constant faith may never loose.
YOu great and lesser Bears, who They set not in the Sea.
thirsty still
Conduct the Greek, and Tyrian Sa^lors skill,
Who view all worldly things in your high motion
And never set beneath the western Ocean,
Nor does your circling Orb ere touch the ground,
Althou^t the Azure sky you compass round.
I pray, be hold those walls which they report
Remus once overleapt with fatal sport.
There turn your shining countenance on my Wife.
And tell me if she lead a constant life.
Woes me why question I a case so clear?
And let my hope give place to doubtful fear?
Fear nothing, but believe that all is well,
Have certain faith, she does in faith excel.
And what the fixed stars can nere descry,
Tell thou thy self with voice that cannot lie.
That, as thou car'st for her, so she again
Thy name within her heart does still retain.
Presenting still thy Countenance to her mind,
And while she lives though absent will be kind.
What, does thy sleep forsake thee in the night,
When once thy mournful thoughts on Ovid light?
Yea does thy vvidovved bed renew afresh
Thy cares? and cause thee think on my distress?
Do nights seem tedious through thine inward burning
And do thy bones even ache with often turning?
I make no doubt, but thus thou do and more,
Thy love even forcing signs of grief in store,
And griev'st no less for me, then A^^^omache
He^^ors wife,
To see her husband drawn devoid of life.
Yet doubt I what to Theba^.
ask, ^ Pray.
nor can I tell
What passion in thy mind I wish should dwell.
Art sad? it is my grief that I to thee So good a (...).
Of such deserts, a cause of grief should be?
If not? I wish that thou thy self may bear,
Beseeming one that lost an hu^band dear.
Bewail then gentle Wife, thine own great losses
And live a mourners life for my great crosses.
Shed tears for me; for tears are some relief, A (...).

And tears do ease and carry out our grief.
And would my death, not life, thou might bemone,
And that.
I wish my death had left thee all alone.
Then I with thee a^ home my life had ended,
Thy loving tears my deathbed had attended:
Thy fingers then had closed my dying eyes,
Which had been fastened on my Country skies.
And in my Grandsires Tomb my body dead
Had found its burial, where it first was bred.
Then had I lived and dyed without all blame,
Nor had this punishment soyld my former fame.
Yet, woe is me, if thou be much ashamed
When thou an Exiles wife art bluntly named.
Woe's me if thou do blush, that thou art mine,
And to be known for Ovids do decline.
O where is that time wherein thou tookest pride
That thou were known, and termed Ovids Bride?
There was a time, that thou did^^ pleasure take
To be, and to be flyled Ovids Mate.
And in my Parts and Manners tookst Delight
Love adding value to them in thy sight.
Yea then, (so precious was I in thine eyes)
All other men, thou did for me dispile.
T^^n blush not now, that thou my wise art named,
For are thou may be grieved, but not a^hamed.
When A bea^^ (...) the Cap^^^^e inve^^d (...) to belongs (...), and was (...)
from (...) wall with (...) will ^^a^ne cast h^^ self into h^s (...) all she
and was burned with him.
Capaneus was ^^aine on The^^^ wall
(...) blushed not, fot her ^^ate a^all.
^^^^gh Thact (...) with bolt of Jove,
Yet could not this (...) his ^ind^^^s love.
Not did old Cadmus, His daugh ter.
S^^^le deny
Though by her p^oud request she chan^'d to die.
Let (...) no cranson (...) cheeks dist^^^e
I hough I be stricken with Jove's heav^nly f^ame,
But ^a^her do the best still to desend me,
That for ^lo^ all Wife all may commend thee.
The way to glory through steep pat^s does he, ^^sentence. (...).

Slow then thy virtue in thy ^iserie.
Had Troy been happy, who had Hector known?
In mity ways are virtues foot steps shown.
When Seas are calm then The Pilot of the Argo.
Typhis Art's not seen:
And Physic.
Phoeb^s-skill the healthful disesteeme.
So virtue in prosperity lies concealed,
In barder times it is proved and revealed.
Lo then my Fortune may advance thy name,
And gives thy virtue scope to raise thy Fame.
Use well the occasion of these woeful da^es,
Which make an open passage for thy praise.
ELEGY. 4
This Elegy is to a Friend directed,
Who being unnamed, is by signs detected.
O Thou that art of ancient Nobles borne
And yet thy manners do thy Stock adorn,
Within whose breast thy Fathers Candor shines
Which thou with Norves of wisdom dest combine.
In whom thy Fathers eloquent tonguo does dwell,
Who among our Roman Pleaders (...).
bare the bell:
Thus unaw^^es I have by Signs beweayd thee,
Pardon thy praises due which have betrayed thee:
It Is not my fault but thine own worth pr^claimes thee.
Seem what thou Art, and none can justly blame me.
Nor shall my kind officious verse, I trust,
Harm thee at all under a Prince so just.
For he himself (so mild a Prince is he)
Will often in my verse recorded be.
Nor can he well forbid it, though he would.
Caesar^a public and a general good.
Nay Jove resignes his powers to Poets wits,
And to each common pen his praise permits.
By these two gods I do thy cause maintain,
The one believed the other seen to reign,
Yet if it be a fault, it is wholly mine,
T^is Letter was my act, and none of thine.
Nor gin I now to wrong thee with my talk,
In happy times our tongues did often walk.
And lest thou fear my friendship cost thee deaf,
It Is meet thy Authou^^
Father should thee envy bear.
For well thou know, if thou confess the truth,
Thy Father I observed from my youth.
Thou well remembrest, he approved my wit,
Far above that, my self did value it.
And often did my Poetry rehearse.
Ennobling by his praise my simple verse.
Thou art not now deceived, to show me favor,
For long before I did deceive thy Authori t^^.
Father.
But, trust me, here is no fraud: for, save the last,
Thou may defend my life and actions past.
Nor will thou call my last offense a crime,
That know the Series of this dismal time!
'Twas fear or error ruined mine estate,
But do not urge me once to mention what.
O tear not open my scar^e-closed wound,
Which hardly rest and quiet can make sound.
For though I grant that I am justly shent,
Yet was there in my faul^ no lewd intent.
This Caesar knows, and spared my guiltless blood,
And neit her seaz'd nor gave away my goods.
And, if he live, my flight per haps will end,
When length of time his fury (...) amen^^:
Mean while, if this bold sut^ be no^ repcoved,
I pray that I from hence may be removed,
I wish to have a place of more repose
Ncercr my Country, farther from my Foes.
And would some faithful friend move this request
Perhaps 'twere done, so mild is Caesar's breast.
The frozen (...) to (...).
Euxine shores now me surround
Which the Ancients styled well the (...).
Axen bound.
Our Seas are ever tossed with boystrous wind,
Nor can a foreign ship safe harbor find.
The lands about us live by blood and spoil,
Thus Sea and Land alike bring fear and toil.
Those which in shedding humane blood delight,
Under our stars enjoy the common light.
Tauricke Diana's Altar near us stands,
Distained often with blood of foreign lands.
This Country once, they say King Thoas had,
And th^^.
Without the rivalship of good or bad.
And (...)
Iphigenia exchanged for a Dear
Attends (...)
her goddess bloody offerings there.
Hither (...)
Orestes driven by's Furies came
(Whom natural or unnatural yoo may name)
And his friend Pylades, (...)
unto wonder kind,
Who were two bodies yet but one in mind.
These two fast bound, are to this Altar set,
Which bloody stood before the (...)
twoleav'd gate.
Fach for himself no jot of terror had,
Yet for each others death were wondrou^ sad.
With her drawn knife the Priest stood ready now
With barbrous ribbande on her Grecian brow.
But by their Parley, she her (...).
brother knows,
And straight in stead of killing, kindnesle shows.
And joyful did from thence to Rome translate
Her goddess which those cruel Rites did hate.
To this far-Northern Region I am nigh
From which both gods and men do jointly fly.
Man's blood is offered mere my Country land,
If Ponsus may for Ovids Country stand.
Oh that Orestes winds might drive me hence;
And Caesar's wrath appeased for mine offonce!
ELEGY. 5.
Unto his Friend he does his mind reveal,
Whose name for fear of harm he does conceal.
OH thou the chiefest of my loved mates,
The only refuge of my cracked estate.
Whose conference did my dying spirit revive,
As o^le infused does keep the Lamp alive.
Not fearing when my ship was thunder-broken
A friendly port of refuge to set open.
With whose revenues my wants had been supply'de,
It Casar had my Fathers goods deny'de.
But whilst I muse upon my troubles then,
Thy name well-neere had slipped out of my pen;
Yet this thou know, and, touched with love of fame
Do wish that I might boldly tell thy name.
Truly, were safe, I would thy titles give,
And praise such Faith as few men will believe?
It Is only fear my grateful Verse does charm,
Lest my untimely praise should do thee harm.
This thou may do even glory in thy breast,
That thou were kind, and I still mindful rest.
Go forward then to lend thine To tow my ^^ote, till etc.
helping hand
Till ( Caesar pleased) the wind shall prosperous stand.
Bear up my sinking head, which none can save,
But he that Pl^ag'd, (...)
drowned it in the Styg^an wave.
And which is rare, be constant to the end,
To do the office of a faithful friend.
So may thy Fortune ever well proceed,
Tha^ helping others, thou may never need. A vo^.

So may thy wives sweet virtues ^quall thine,
And seldom discord to your Chamber climb;
So may thou still be loved of thy brother,
As Castor Pollux loves, and he the other.
So may thy Son be like thee in his prime,
And by his manners all men know him thine.
So may thy Daughter prosp'rously be wed,
And with a Grandfirs name soon crown thine (...).
ELEGY. 6.
He (...), that time which all things does ass^^ge
And weakens him, (...) sorr^^es rage.
IN time the Ox endures the toilf^ll plow,
And to the crooked yoke his neck does (...),
In time the Steed to the bridle does submit*
And gently takes in's mouth the cur^ing b^.
In time the Afric Lions milder grow,
Nor to their keepers former fierceness show.
In time the Indian (...).
monster's overcome,
And servant-like obeyes his Masters doom.
Time makes the grapes so swell within the skin,
They scarce contain the liquor that is within.
Time brings the seed to a ripe care at last,
And makes the Apple of a mellow taste.
Time (...).
wastes the plowshare which the Land does ear
Yea time the Flints and Adamante does wear,
The fiercest wrath it cools by degrees,
Abateth grief, and mourners hearts does ease,
Yea every thing can silent time impair,
Except the burden of my growing care.
Twice since my exile has the Corn been t^resht,
And Grapes have twice with naked seete been pressed:
Yet all this time my mind no patience gains,
But still her wonted grief afresh retains,
Thus often the Oxen shun their wonted yoke,
And Horses shun the bit, though often broke.
Yea now my pain is greater then before,
And though the same, yet older pincheth more.
Me thinks I now my crosses better know,
And by this knowledge they (...)
much greater (...)
grow.
And 'twere the better if my strength were fresh,
And I were not Vorne out.
consumed with long distress.
The Wrastler entering fresh into the round,
Exceeds one long tired on the ground.
The unwounded Fencer in his shining arms,
Excels him whose blood bewrayes his harms.
The newbuilt ship strong storms can hardly bend,
When every blast the crazy Bark does rend:
Even so did I my gricfes with patience bear,
Till they with length of time increased were
But now I faint, and certainly presume,
These sorrows will ere long my life consume.
For through my slender skin my Bones appear,
Nor are my strength and color as they were,
And yet my mind is in far worser plight.
Her sorrows ever standing before her sight,
She sees not Rome, her friends are absent here.
And thou my loving wife of all most dear.
Only a rout of Scythes and Getes here be,
So what I have and want, both trouble me.
One hope there is, which yields me some relief,
That death, ere long will end my woeful grief.
ELEGY. 7.
A namelesse friend is here by Ovid shent,
Who had not all this time one Letter sent.
TWice has the Sun cold Winter overcome,
And twice through Pisces his careere has run,
And yet alas in all this tedious time,
Thou have not sent me one officious line.
Could thou this Love forbear, when those have wrote
With whom I had but small acquaintance got?
When any Letters Seal I did unlose,
Why did I hope it should thy name disclose?
Yet doubtless many a Letter thou have sent,
Although it came not hit her as 'twas meant.
I Will first believe there was a Medusa.
Gorgons head,
With snakes instead of hairs about it spread,
And Scillaes dogs, and strange Chimeraes frame.
Made of a Snake, a Lion, and a Flame.
Fourefooted Centaures horse and man in one,
Three headed Cerberus, and Gerion.
Sphinx and the Harpyes, men of Serpent-race,
And Giges an Handred.
hands, or Halse a (...) half a bull.
Minotaurus face:
All these shall sooner sincke into my mind,
Then this, that thou art changed and proved unkind.
For lo betvveene us, many mountains high,
And Fields and Floods, and several Seas do lie,
Yea thousand lets thy Letters may prevent,
From coming to my hands, though kindly sent,
Write then so often till thou have conquered all,
That I no more to these excuses fall.
ELEGY 8.
Here Ovid has a sad complaint compiled.
That he is constraind, being old, to live exiled.
WIth Swanlike plumes, my Temples now are dite,
And age has changed my (...).
Sable hairs to white
(...) (...) For whom I wept, as he for me would mourn,
And shortly after came my mothers turn.
Both of them happy that in season dyed,
Before my woeful exile did betide,
And happy I, that whilst my Parents live,
Gave them no cause at all for me to grieve.
Yet if the dead do more then names retain,
And their thin souls survive their funeral flame.
Dear Parents ghosts, if any slight report,
Of mine offenses sound in the Stygian court,
Take from your Son this certain truth withal,
That error and not malice caused my fall.
Let this suffice the dead, I now retire
To you kind friends, who of my life enquire.
I now was turned gray, my better years,
Gave place to age, which brought on mingled hairs
And since my birth, ten prizes have renowned
The running horse with Pisa Olive crowned. (...).

When Caesar's anger bids me pack away,
To Tomos on the left of the Euxine Sea.
Nor need I tell the occasion of my fall,
Which is too well already known of all.
Nor ^et of treacherous friends, or servants slights,
And many a cross as grievous as my flight.
My (...)
heart still scornd to yield, and in distress,
Unconquerable strength she did express.
And I forgetting former ease and fear
Was forced in age unwonted arms to bear,
Yea and more dangers both by Sea and Land,
Then are the stars which twixt the Poles do stand
Yet when I long had been with wanderings tossed,
At length I did attain the Geticke coast.
Where, though the noise of wars about me rage,
Yet with my verse do I my grief assuage.
And having none to hear my mournful style,
Yet I therewith the tedious hours beguile,
(...) My guide from Ister leading me along,
And seating me in midst of Helicon.
And mountest up on high my living name,
Though few till after death obtain the same.
Nor yet has envy, which does still repine
At present things, gnawed any work of mine.
But fame has still advanced my Muses head,
Though learned Poets this our age has bred,
And though I prize their worth beyond mine own,
Yet for their aequall, through the world am known.
I^ Poets then can future things foresee,
I shall not All.
whole to earth converted be.
Yet, be it desert or favor gives me fame,
I thank thee (gentle Reader) for the same.
The end of the fourth Book, Containing 680. Verses.
LIB. 5.
ELEG. 1.
This Elegy he writes to his friend.
And to his care does this Fist Book commend.
THis Book arrived from the Geticke shore,
My studious friend, add to the former four.
Which sorteth so unto the Poets times,
That thou shall find no pleasure in my Rhymes.
My Verses, like my fortune, mournful be,
The writing with the Sab^^.
matter does agree.
In happier state, I wrote a pleasant vein,
But now repent me of that youthful strain.
And being ruined, do my fall proclaim.
And of my self these sad disconrses frame.
And as the Swan on swift Caystert shore,
In fainting notes her funerals does deplore,
So I exposed on Geticke coasts to Dye.
lie,
Do here prepare my last sad obsequy.
Who ere in wanton verse does take delight.
I warn him not to read what here I write.
Gallu^ and sweet Propertiu^ suit his vein,
And other Poets more of honored name.
And wi^h my friends would still remember me.
If any muse I thus of sorrow sing,
Let him ascribe it to my sufferings.
I do not here compose by wit or Art;
The matter of it self does wit impart.
My verse the twentieth part cannot contain,
He Is happy that can Number.
utter all his pain.
Number the trees in the wood or Tibers sand,
What speeres of grass in Mars his meadow stand,
So many are the miseries I endure,
Of which my stadious muse is the only cure.
But when will Naso end his weeping Rhymes?
Even when his fortune yields him better times.
It Is she which fountains of complaint affords,
These are not mine, but my misfortunes words.
My wife and Country let a friend restore,
I Will be as merry as ere I was before.
Let Caesar's anger bate, and milder grow,
Shall see my verse with pleasant humor flow,
Yet as before, it shall not jest again,
Though once it sported in a lighter strain.
I Will sing to Caesar's liking, if he please
Mine exile of these savage Getes to ease,
Till then, what can my Papers do but mourn?
This pipe does well befit my funeral urne.
But, thou will say, twere better much to smother
Thy sorrows, and in silence pass them over.
Thou do forbid a torturd wretch to groan,
Or one that is deeply wounded once to moan.
Whom cruel Phakaris vexed with scorching pain,
He suffered, yet with Bullish voice to plain.
Aebilles did not Priams weeping blame,
Yet thou more cruel would my tears restrain.
When Niobes children great Diana slew,
She let her yet with tears her cheeks bedew.
^e bo^ling heart with doubled grief to ^we^^.
^en pardon, reader, or my books refrain,
^^at which is my comfort prove ^ay pain,
^^ough I am well assurd my harmless song,
^cept their Author, will do no man wrong.
^^te bad, I grant: who bids thee read them then?
(...) who forbids thee lay them down again?
^t read them on, as framed in the Geticke strand,
^^ey cannot be more barbarous then their Land.
^^^e with her Poets must not me compare,
though mong the Getes my wit was somewhat rare,
^doe not catch at great applause and fame,
(...) wits most quickening spur, a sasting name.
(...) only seek to free my mind from care,
^^^ch still break in, where they Forbidden.
unwelcome are.
For this I vvrote: But why do send them over?
^hus as I may, your prefence to recover.
ELEGY 2.
He wills his Wife to Caesar to address,
Her suit for ease of this his great distress,
WHen Letters come from Pontus art thou pale?
And does thy trembling hand in th'opening fail?
^eare not, for I am well, yea now at length.
My body erst Invalid.
but weakly gathers strength.
^ither the use of labor makes it hard,
^r else all time for sickness is debarred.
Yet is my mind as crazy as before,
And my afflictions still affect me More.
sore.
The wounds which Time I hoped would close again
^s if new made, afresh renew my pain.
^ome smaller crosses length of time may ease, Seate^.

(...) greater mischiefs do with time increase.
The wound which from the poisoned Arrow bred,
Poor Polystetes ten whole twelvemonths sed.
Yea (...) till deeth had nere been sound,
^^e that hurt him had not ^u^'d his wound,
And O that he, which wrought my sore disease
Since I have done no crime, would grant me ease,
And from my sea of sorrow would abate,
Sated with part of this my dolorous fate,
Abote he much, yet there will much remain,
And even the one part will seem sufficient pain,
As garden Roses, or the shells oth' shore,
Or grains which sleepy Poppy sheds in store,
As beasts in the woods,
Or winged birds that through the air are shding:
So numerous are my griefs, which would I tell,
I might sum up the drops oth' Sea as well.
My perils to pass ore, by Sea and Land,
How, often my life was sought by bloody hands,
In a remote and barbarous land I lie,
Which is environed by the enemy.
From whence (had thou due care) I had been freed
No question, having done no bloody deed.
That god, on whom the Roman state does lie,
She w^^ mercy often to the conquered enemy.
Go then preserre thy suit, thou may be bold,
The world a (...)
milder spirit does not bold.
Woes me! what shall I do, if thou wit^draw
Thy neeke from Wedlock yoke and friendships law?
What shall I hope? who shall my ship sustain?
Without an Anchor tost^th' watty maine?
He even to Casar as mine Altar run,
The Altar does no humble suitor shun.
ELEGY. 3.
To Caesar here our Poet makes his sat,
His place of woeful exile to commute.
TO the absent powers an absent suppliant speaks,
If I^^ man my mind to Jove may break,
Thou Empire-swayer, in whose preservation,
The gods express their care oth' Roman nation.
The ^lor^, and the Example of thy land,
Great as the world ore which thou do command.
So may thou live earths joy, and heavens desire,
And slowly to the promised stars aspire;
I pray thee Spare me, and abate my pain,
And of thy thunder take some part again.
Thy wrath indeed was mild, my life was sparde, Ius civilitie.

Nor of a Citizens Right was I debarred.
Nor were my goods bestowed on others than,
Nor did thine edict style me Relegatus ^od ex^^.
banisht-man.
All this I feared, as I had well deserved,
But by thy mercy I was better served.
Awarded only to the Ponticke land,
To plow with wandering ship the Scythian Sea.
sand.
I sent away to the Euxine shore do fly,
Which neerethe froxen Arcticke Pole does lie.
Yet am I not so vexed with freezing sky,
Or the Ice which ever on the ridges lie,
Or that these bruites no Latin understand,
But speak in Geticke-Gre^ke, through all the Land,
As that a bordring War does us enclose,
In slender walls scarce fencing of our foes.
W'ave sometimes peace, yet never are secure,
But either wars we fear, or wars endure.
So I remove from hence, Charybdis make
My speedy passage to the Stygian Lake.
Or else in sulphrous Aetna let me fry,
Or in the Ionian Sea.
gulf of Leucas drowned lie.
My suit is easy that no grief refuse,
But pray I may a safer mischief choose.
ELEGY. 4.
He sues to Bacchus here,
To move Augustus for his speedy ease.
BAccbus, this is the day, when Poets use
To honor thee (I take it) with cheerful muse.
With garlands sweet, their Temples they surround,
And midst thy bowls of wine thy praises sound.
Mong these, while Fortune sufferd, I was one,
A welcome part of thy devotion,
Who now remain in the cold Sarmatian land,
Which nigh the Getes, unto the Bear does stand.
And I who erst from labor did retire,
To softer studies and the Muses quire,
Now far from home, with Geticke swords a^^ vexed.
Having been sore by sea and land perplexed.
Whether these ills Jove's wreth or chance send down.
Or ^^a^ the dest ^ies as my birth did frown.
Yet thou thy Poet still should have sustaind,
By whom the sacred Ivy is maintaind,
But what those fatal sisters once agree,
It secmes no god can change their firm decree.
Thy merits Bacchus did thy place obtain
In heaven, and made thy passage through pain.
Thou left'st thy native Country, and from home
To snowy A River twi^t Macedon and Thrace.
Strimon, and fierce Getes did come
To Persia too, and spacious Ganges brinke,
And all those streams, which swarthy Indians drink.
It seems those powers which fatal threads do draw,
To thee O^^e of Se^^le, once of Lover Hugh.
twice borne, twice sung this fatal law.
So crabbed Fortune still has followed me,
If to a god I may resembled be.
And cast me headlong with his deadly fall,
Ca^ancus inv^nt our of (...) laddate
Whom Jove for pride, did hurl from Theban wall.
Yet when thou heard'st how I was thunderstrooke,
Thy heart, no doubt with Hi^ mother Semile was stainn by Thunder, lying with
Jupiter.
Son-like pity shook.
And looking ore thy Poets too, might say,
One of my servants is not here to day.
Good Bacchus help: so may thy fruitful Vine,
Burden her Elm with Gropes of precious wine,
So may the Bacchae with young Satyres-fry,
Attend thine hests with their confused cry.
So ma There two hate^ drunkencesse.
Licurgus bones be sorely pressed,
And M^^d^^^ Crown, (...) a (...) of stars.
Pe^theus Ghost from torment never rest,
So may thy 7 Wives fair crown shine ever bright,
Excelling all her neighboring stars in light.
Come hither Bacchus, help my woeful state,
Remembering I was one of thine of late.
To gentle mildne sle Coesars heart incline,
For sure you gods in sweet commerce combine.
And you my Fellow-Poets friendly crew
For me, amid your cups this Prayer renew.
And some of you, when Nasots name he hears,
Set down your bowl, mixed with friendly tears,
And looking round about on's fellows, say,
VVheres he was one oth' Quorum the other day?
Thus ^oe, if ever I deserved your love,
And did with candor all your lines approve.
And giving the ancient Poets honor due,
Yet think them fully equald by the new.
At least, retain amongst you Naso's name,
So thill Apollo still your verses frame.
ELEGY. 5.
This Elegy does the Authors woes express,
And pratse a Friena for's kindness ^^'s distress.
I Will Naso's letter come from the Euxine strand,
Ty^d out with travail both by Sea and land.
He weeping said go thou and visit Rome,
Whose fate is better then thy Masters doom.
And weeping wrote me, and the seal here set,
Not with his mouth but with his cheeks did wet.
If any ask me, wherefore he repines.
He bids me point him to the sun that shines.
Discernes no leaves in the wood, no grass in the field,
And thinks full Rivers do no waters yield,
Wonders, at Hectors death why Priam mones,
Or Wounded with a poisoned Arrow.
Philoctetes stung with poison groans.
I wish the Gods had sent him such a state,
He had no cause to blame his cruel fate.
And yet he bears his cross with patience fit,
And does not like a Colt refuse the bit.
Hoping that Caesar's wrath will end in time,
As being conscious of no heinons crime.
Of Caesar's mildness he does mention make,
And in himself he does example take.
For, (...) olding life, and lands and freemans name,
To Caesar's gift he does ascribe the same.
Yet thee his friend, believe me, he does bear
Still next his heart, of all his friends most dear.
Thee his Patroclus, thee his Theseus calls,
His Pylades and Euryalus withal.
Nor more does long to see his Country dears,
And the other Jewels that he wants here;
Then thy dear eyes, to him far sweeter still,
Then combs which Atticke Bees from flowers distill
And often that fatal hour to mind does call,
Greeving that death did not prevent his falls
And, when his ruin other men did shun
And baulkt the threshold of a man undone,
He tells how thou with few remainedst true,
If two or three be fitly called a few.
For (though amazed) yet he well perceived,
Thou at his fall even as himself was grieved.
The countenance, words, and groans he is wont to show,
And how thy tears his bosom did bedew:
And did no help deny, no comfort scant,
Although thy self did then much comfort want.
All which he vows, whether he live or dye,
He will retain in grateful memory.
Yea, by's own head and thine he is wont to swear,
I say by thine, which he does prize as dear:
Heel full requital make of all thy pains
Not suffering thee to plow the sands in vain.
Only defend him still, at my request
Not his, who fully knows thy constant breast.
ELEGY 6.
He does his wives Birth day solemnize here,
Wishing her after fortunes fair and clear.
MY Wives wished birthday honor does expect,
Let not mine hands her holy rites neglect.
Lo thus in utmost cost Ulysses placed,
His Wives birthday, long since with feasting graced.
And let my tongue her former plaints forbear,
Which has, I doubt, forgot to speak with cheer,
And let it not offend, if I shall wear
White Robes unlike my fortune once a year.
And let an Altar of green turfe be made,
Whose flaming fires the woven garlands shade.
And bring some incense, boy, to feed the flame,
And wine, which powered therein will hiss again.
I wish, (...) of (...).
most welcome day, thou may prove kind,
To her that's absent, and unlike to mine.
If any danger hover over her head,
Of my bad fortune let her now be rid.
And let her ship, late bruised with grievous storm,
Henceforth make happy voyage safe from harm.
Let her her Country, Daughter, house retain,
Let it suffice that these from me are taken.
And though she be unfortunate in me,
Yet let her other life unclouded be.
Still let her live, and love her absent mate,
And not till many years resign to fate,
I Would add mine own to hers, but for my fears,
My fates contagion should corrupt her years.
nothing is sure to man: who would have gest,
Among the Getes I should have kept this feast?
But lo the swelling wind to Rome-ward drives
The smoke, which from our Incense does arise.
It seems the vapors which the fire does raise
Have sense, as others do to shun my cause,
When common sacrifice those Eteocles and Poly^ices.
brothers twain
Did make, yet after by each other slain,
Into two parts the dusky flames did flow,
As if the brethren had commanded so.
Once I did think this tale a fable vain,
And that A Poet Son of Batt^^.
Call^machus did merely faigne.
Now I believe it, seeing smoke did bend
So wisely from the North, and Rome-ward wend.
This is the day, which had it never been.
I wretched man no festival had seen.
This day those virtues brought, which match the fame
Of The daughters of ^^^on, and Icarius.
Hectors wife, or chaste Penelopes name,
With her, faith, goodness, chastity were bred,
Yet poured this day no joy upon her head.
But labors cares, an ill-besuting fate,
And just complaints of an halfe-widowed state.
Indeed in hardest state is goodness tried,
She Is praised which does in crosses constant bide.
Had not Ulysses seen such dismal days,
Then had Penelope lost her glorious praise.
Had valiant Capaneus won the Theban Town,
Evadne then had never had renown,
Of Pelias daughters why admire we Alcestis wi^e of Admetus King of Thessaly,
he being sick, sent to the Oracle. and received answer that he must dye
presently unless so^^e friend would dye for him, this all refused and ^he
voluntarily dyed for him.
one;
Her husbands woes ennobled her alone.
Laodameia too obscure had layne,
Had not her Lord at Troy been foremost slain.
So had thy kindness, wife, been sti^^ unknown,
If on my sails the winds had furely blown.
Yet ye, O gods, and Caesar who shall be,
At Nestors years an heavenly Deity,
O spare, I pray, though not my guilty head,
Yet her who has no sorrow merited.
ELEGY. 7.
He wooes his friend that he would not withdraw
His kindness,
Do thou the Quondam hope of mine affairs,
The Refuge and the Port of all my cares,
Do thou likewise forsake thy ancient friend?
Do thou so soon thy Pious office end?
I am a burden: true, but why at first,
Did take it up to lay it down at the worst?
What (...)
Palinurus leave thy ship in the storm?
Flee not, but show thy skill in times forlorn.
Ith 'fight (...)
Automedon near left his charge,
Nor yet Achilles chariot run at large.
And (...)
Podalirius, his Greek Patients still
Once undertaken, followed with his skill.
Better near harbor, then thrust out thy guest,
Then let me on mine Altar firmly rest.
At first, thou only did maintain thy friend.
But now with me thy Judgment must defend,
At lest if I have done no trespass since,
To make t^ee change thy faith by mine offense.
First let my breath out of my br^st repair,
Which I but hardly draw in Scythian air,
Ere my default should thy displeasure move,
Or I should seem unworthy of thy love.
I am not so through cruel fates declined,
That ^riefe should breed a frenzy in my mind;
But say it had: often, in his frantic fie,
Flerce words at Pylades did Orestes spit,
Nor Is It unlike but that he struck his friend,
Who yet remaind officious to the end.
Mer^^^ the wretched with the rich agree,
Both must be pleased, and both must humored be,
We give blind men the way, as well as those,
Whose mases awe us and their purple clothes.
Then spare my fortune, though thou spare not me;
Who am no subject fit to anger thee.
Choose out but part of that which I sustain,
It Is more then all of which thou can complain;
Number the reeds which in the marshes stand,
Or Bees which feed on Hyb^as flowery land.
Or count the Pismires which in toyling swarms,
Do ligge the grain into their earthly barnes,
Such troops of sorrows me environ round,
That far above my plaints, my woes abound.
Whom they content not: let him heap on more,
Waterith' Seas, or Sands upon the shore.
The untimely^
Thy groundless fury then, my friend appease
Desert me not in midst of stormy Seas.
ELEGY. 8.
Our Poet here his woeful plight repeates,
And shows the attire and manners of the Getes.
THis Letter Reader, comes from Scythian clime,
Where Isters streams with The Ocean waves co^bine.
If thou a life of health do now retain,
I shall an happy man in part remain.
I know my dear, thou ask how I fare,
Which thou may gather, though I silent were.
I am, in brief and sum, a wretched wight,
As he must be, whom Caesar shall despite.
Besides, I know thou would, that I should tell,
The manner of these T^mites where I dwell.
The Greeks with Getes are mixed here in store,
Yet of fierce Getes, this coast contains more.
Whole troops of Getes and rude Sarmatians go,
Tracing our rodes with horses to and fro.
And there is not one but bow, and bowcase wears,
And arrows blew with gall of Vipers bears.
Rough speech, and looks that threaten death they have
Their heads and beards these shack-haires never shave
Their hands are ready still to stab and wound
With knives, which ever by their sides are bound.
With these he lives that wrote Loves tender glee,
These, these thy Poet still does hear and see.
And yet, with these O may he never dye,
But let his ghost this loathed Region fly!
Whereas thou writest of applauses rung
In the full Theaters, to my verses sung.
Thon know, I never pend to stages Laws,
Not was my Muse ambitious of applause.
Yet am I pleased, that I still retain
In fresh remembrance a poor exiles name.
My Muse and verses though I often forswear,
When I consider what for them I bear;
Yet having cursed them, cannot give them over,
But love the weapons dyed in my gore.
The Greekish ship torn in the Euboian maine,
Yet near Caphareus (...)
rock dares sail again.
Yet wish I not for praise or late renown:
Who had been safer, had I nere been known:
But with my studies do beguile my grief,
And yield my careful mind some short relief.
How else should I alone my time employ?
Or other cure of sorrow here enjoy?
For lo the place is most unpleasant ground,
In all the world a vilder is not found.
As for the men, they scarce deserve the name,
More ferity then wolves they do retain.
They fear no laws, but right gives place to might,
The stronger sword has still the better right.
They fence the cold with skins, and mantles wide,
And with long locks their dreadful countenance hide
In some of them a smacke of Greek is sound.
Though much corrupted by the Geticke sound.
Yet there is not one of all this savage throng,
That can express a word in the Latin tongue.
Pardon ye Muses, I (even forced erewhile)
A Roman Poet speak their Geticke style.
I blush to say it, ^et through disuse do find.
That Latin words come Hardly
slowly to my mind.
And doubtless, barbarous words these Poems shame
For which you must the place not Poet blame.
Yet lest I quite should lose the Ausonian tongue,
And in my Country speech prove wholly dumb,
I with my self discourse in words disused.
Under the Muses standard long refused.
Thus do I pass my hours, and so a while
Of fretting thoughts my pensive mind beguile.
Seeking by Poetry to forget my grief,
And well apaid, if thus I find relief.
ELEGY. 9.

Against one that had provoked him with despite.
THough I be fallen, I am not under thee,
Then whom there is nothing can more abject be.
What makes thee stomach thus, vild wretch? or why
Do thou insult over humane misery?
Can not my miseries make thee mild and tame
To me, when Tigers would condole the same?
Nor fear thou Fortunes power, which tickle stands
Upon a ball? nor yet her proud commands?
Yet will just Nemesis take revenge for me,
Since thou do trample on calamity.
I saw a ship, and passengers all lost,
And said, lo never was the sea more just.
And some that grudged the poor their broken meat,
Themselves are feign to beg before they cate.
Thus sickle fortune roves with wandering pace, Sentence.

And never constant bides in any place.
She Is merry now, but mourning by and by,
In nothing constant but inconstancy.
I once did flourish, but did quickly fade.
My blasing flame was but of stubble made.
Yet lest thy cruel joy should be entire,
I have some hope to quench this heavenly ire,
Since both I meant no harm, and though for shame
I blush, yet does not envy fret my name:
Besides the massy world from East to west,
Holds not then Caesar's a more tender breast.
For though he scorn to stoop to hostile strength,
Yet humble prayers will melt his heart at length.
And like the Gods. whose number heel increase,
Heel grant me many a boon, besides release.
Count all the days in the year, both foul and fair,
And thou shall find that these most frequent are.
Lest then thou chance to over joy my pain,
Suppose I may be yet restored again.
Suppose, when Caesar's wrath shall milder be,
My face in the City thou with grief may see,
And I thee banished for some fowler crime:
To this my twofold wish, let heaven incline.
ELEGY 10.
He shows the reason why he does not nam^,
His worthy friend for sear he purchase blame.
Would thou permit thy name within my verse,
How often there would I the same rehearse?
Thee only would I sing, and all my lays,
In every Page should sound thy worthy praise.
My debt to thee should through the City spread,
If I poor Exile, be in the City read.
This age, and after times should know thy love.
If these my slender rhymes shall lasting prove.
Yea learned Readers should thy praises ring,
A Poet saved might well such honor bring.
That now I breath, is first great Caesar's fee,
And next to him, the thanks are due to thee,
He gave me life, thou do his gift maintain,
And causest me that (...)
grace to entertain.
When at my fall, the most men were dismayed,
And others would be thought to be afraid,
And on my shipwreck gazed from the land;
Yet to me floting reached no helping hand,
Thou only did from present death recall me,
And make me live to know what did befall me.
Let all the gods, with Caesar thee befriend,
What can I wish thee better to thy end?
Would thou give leave, all this, my painful skill.
Should publish to the world in accents shrill.
My Muse even now (though chargd to hold her peace)
From publishing thy name can scarcely cease.
But as the dog, when the Deeres sent is found,
Contends to break the Lease wherein he is bound.
And as the Coursers hoof and head does beat,
The Lists and Bars till they be open set,
So my Thalia, with thy Laws enclosed,
To name thee, though forbidden is disposed.
Yet lest this friendly office do thee harm,
Fear not, my blabbing tongue thy law shall charm,
Yet not my thoughts, I Will still remember thee,
And (which thou barrest not) will grateful be.
Yea whilst I live (which may it be but short)
My soul shall from thy service never start.
ELEGY 11.

Three years already since his banishment.
THrice has the cold congealed Isters stream,
Thrice bound the Euxine, since I hither came.
The time, me thinks, since I did Rome enjoy,
Does seem as long as was the siege of Troy,
The months you would think did rather stand then go,
The year does pass and pace away so slow.
The Solstice shortens not the tedious night,
Nor Winter breviate the loathed light.
The natural course of things is changed to me,
Which with my cares me thinks enlarged be.
Or else the times their wonted courses run,
And only tedious seem to me alone,
Whom Pontus holds Euxine falsely stilde, (...) Hospitable

Being indeed the land of Scythia wild.
Where bordring nations threaten wars amain,
Accounting spoil the only honest gain.
Where nothing's safe abroad: our hil's entrencht
With slender walls, and its own native strength.
O^ soes, ere we perceive, like Birds of pray,
Flock to our spoils, and drive them quite away.
We often gather up within our wall
Their darts which in our closed streets do fall.
Few here dare plow the ground, who ever ears
With one hand plowes, in the other weapons bears.
The Shepherd armed pipes on's Oaten reed,
Instead of wolves, the sheep do warriors dread.
Our Castle scarce defends from foes without,
We fear within a mixed barbarous rout.
For here nixt savages and Graecians Rest.
nest,
Our houses most what are by them possessed.
Whom though you fear not, you must needs detest,
With skins and shagged hair to see them dressed.
Even those which from the Greekish line descend,
With Persian mantles do the cold defend:
And with the neighboring Getes in speech co^merce
So that I do by signs with them converse.
And no man understands m^ language here,
But at my Latin tongue these rustickes jeere,
And rail upon me Scotfree to my face,
Objecting often mine exile in disgrace.
And take in evil part, when many times
I strive to answer them by nods and signs,
Swords here determine what is wrongful right,
And often in the Court they fall to bloody fight.
O cruel Lachesis, to draw so far.
My thread of life, which had so ill a starie.
I wail my want of friends and Country dear,
And that I live with Scythian people here.
As two great evils: the first I did deserve,
Yet might a place of less disquiet serve.
What say I soole? who then deserved death,
When I did first incur great Caesar's wrath.
ELEGY 12.

And in disdain an Exiles wife had stilde her.
THy Letter does complain, that one, in strife
Misterm'd thee by the name of Exiles wife,
I grieved, not that my fortune ill does hear,
Who am inured with patience wrongs to bear,
But that I Am cause of shame dear wife, to thee,
And fear thou blushest at my low degree.
Hold out to bear: thou suffredst more that day,
When Caesar's anger sent me first away.
Yet was he wide, that me exiled thought,
A gentler Censure did attend my fault.
My greatest Cross was Caesar to offend,
Oh that I first had met my fatal end.
Indeed my ship is shattred, but not drowned,
It bears up still, though it have no haven found.
He seaz'd not on my life, wealth, Cities-right,
Although for my offense he justly might.
But, F^t.
cause no wickedness in me was found,
He only banished me my native ground.
And as to others, more then I can count,
So Caesar's mercy did to me surmount.
And stilde me not an exile, but proscribed.
My judge, himself my cause can best decide.
Therefore my verses, to my slender power,
Shall chaunt thy praises, Caesar, every hour,
I Will pray the gods to shut their heavenly gate,
A while, and thou may hold thy royal state,
So pra^es the people, yet my prayer shall run
Like a small Brook into th'vast Ocean.
But thou, who cal'st me exile, spare to press,
With lying titles this my hard distress.
ELEGY 13.

Verses in's Exile for a small delight.
THou writ'st that I should pass my mournful time
With study, lest my mind with rust decline.
It Is hard my friend to do, for Verses ask,
A quiet mind, being a cheerful task.
But my hard Fortune's driven with adverse wind,
So that a worse can hardly be assigned.
Thou bidst King Priam at's sons funerals sport,
And childlesse Niobe keep a dancing Court.
What, seem I fit for study, or for moan,
Who to the utmost Getes am sent alone?
Had I a mind with matchless strength sustained,
Like Anyti^ens.
Soorates whom Anytu^ defamed,
Yet such a weight would sink my wits at length,
Jove's anger far exceeds humane strength.
That aged man whom Phoebus styled wise,
Could not have wrote in such a woeful guise.
For say I could forget my home and fall,
And have no fe^ling of my grief at all,
Yet fear it self this quiet task would let,
Who am with sundry cruel foes beset.
Add that my wit is dulled, or rusted over,
And grown much weaker then it was before.
The ^ertile field, ift be not duly tild,
Will naught but grass,
The resty Horse, runs slowly, and arrives,
Hindmost of those,
The Boat that long stands dry, it is no wonder,
If it in time grow sear,
Well then may I despair (though weak before)
To reach that strain of verse I had of yore.
Continual troubles make my Genius fade,
Much of my former vigor is decade.
Yet often my Table books I take in hand,
Wooing my words in lawful feet to stand:
Yet can no verses make, or such as these
Which suit the Authors time, and states disease.
Lastly it is glory which the mind does raise, (...)

And eloquent strains do flow from love of praise
With fames bright luster was I moved of yore,
So long as prosperous winds my sails outbore.
Now it is not so with me, to seek for glory.
I rather wish that none should know my story.
Because my verse at first had good success,
Would have me still my former labors press?
Ye sisters nine (I Will speak it with your leave)
It Was you that did of Italy me bereave.
And as in's Bull the (...)
Author first did smart,
So am I justly punished for my Of Love.
Art.
T^cre meet, that I should verses quite forbear,
And after shipwreck the rough Ocean fear.
But say I would resume my harmefull Muse,
Here are no tools to serve a Poets use.
Here Is not a book, nor one to lend an ear.
Or that can understand me when they hear.
^^^hpl^^e is full of rude and brutish no^se,
Each place is full of Geticke fearful voice,
And I the Latin tongue have much forgot,
And fall to speak the rude ^armat^^ke note.
And ^et (to say the truth) cannot refaine.
But now and then my Muse a verse will frame,
I ^nte, and what I write with fire consume,
And all my study ends in flame and fume.
Not can I make a verse, nor do desire,
And therefore cast my labors in the fire.
So that to you, none of my fancies came,
But what by chance or stealth escaped the flame.
Even so, I wish my Art it self had burned,
Which to such sorrow has her Author turn^d
ELEGY 14.
Here O vid kindly chides a real friend,
Because he did no loving Letters send.
FRom Pontus land, thine Ovid sends thee health.
If one can send what he does want himself.
My sickly body grief of mind does taint,
Lest any part in me should torment want.
A stitch my payned side does daily hold,
Which I have got by VVinters deadly cold.
Yet am I well in part if thou be so,
Whose shoulders did support mine overthrow.
Thou nav'st me many pledges of thy love,
And the true Patron of my life did prove;
And yet in seldom writing do offend.
VVith-holding words, not deeds from me thy friend
Mend this I pray thee, which if thou correct,
There shall be found in thee no one defect.
I Would blame thee more, but that thy Letters sent,
Perhaps miscarried, against thy true intent.
Let my complaint, O gods be rash and hot,
And let me fasly fear, I was forgot,
I have my wish: for sure I shall not find,
That thou have ever changed thy constant mind.
First shall cold Pontus land gray Wormwood want,
And sweetest Time shall be in Hyb^a scant;
Ere thou to think upon thy fr^end grow slack,
My Dest'nies are not spun of threads so black.
Yet to prevent the least suspicions searre,
L^st thou should seem, what thou art not, pray beware
And as we wont our time to posse away,
In friendly talk tyring the tedious day,
Let Letters now our words transport along;
And pen and paper make supply of tongue.
But lest I seem distrustful of my friend,
Let me in these few lines my caution end.
And (that thy fates from mine may distant dwell)
I add our letters common close, farewell.
ELEGY 15
Here Ovid to his Wise, this comfort gives,
That she for ever in his Poems lives.
WHat monuments in my Book^s, thou seest^d are wife,
I leave of thee far dearer then my life.
For though hard Fortune press the Author sore,
Yet shall my works renown thee more and more.
Whilst I am read, the world shall read thy fame,
Thou shall not all consume in funeral flame.
And though thou seemst unhappy by my fate,
Yet many Wives will wish even thine estate,
Will call thee happy, yea and will envy,
Their bear a part in Ovids misery.
Could I give thousands, I could give no more,
The rich man's ghost must leave his wealthy store.
I give thee this, thy name shall ever live,
Then which, what greater dowry could I give?
And, when thou art alone my states defender,
This make thine honor neither light nor slender,
And that my tongue still chaunts thy praise aloud,
Thy husbands witness Well mav.
ought to make thee proud.
Which lest it should be rash, persist to the end,
And still thy husband and thy faith defend.
For while I stood upright, thou did maintain
Thy goodness free from any crime or s^ame.
Not i^ it lessened by this fall of mine,
Here may thy V^rtue much the brighter shine.
It Is easy to be good, when all things prove,
Fit to invite a wife to d^teout love
But in a thundering tempest not to fly,
This is true wedlock^^love and piety.
Ra^e virtue it is, which Fortune does not gurde,
But Fortune fleeing, yet does firm abide,
If there b^ any such which virtue prize,
Even for itself, and scorns adversities,
Recount the times, she never was concealed,
But of the world admired and famous held,
Thou see how chaste Pene^ope retains,
Through tract of time, a never dying name.
Alcest^ Admetus wife ^^ved to save him alive.
Admetus wife, and Hectors, Poets same,
And She was butned with her husband.
Hiphias, that despised the funeral flame.
Laodame^a's praise does still resound,
Whose lord did first set foore on Trojan ground.
Thou need'st not dye for me: by faithful love
At easy rate thou may renowned prove:
Nor by this counsel, think thy self accused,
Though Oars do good, yet are not sails refused.
Who warnes thee to persist, commends thy fact,
And by his Counsel does approve the act.
Ovid de seipso.
What unto Maro high Heroickes owe,
To me soft Elegies are indebted so.
(...)
The fifth Book contains 750. Verses.
The five Books contain 3556, Verses. The Arguments, 100. Verses.
FINIS.

