OVIDS FESTIVALLS, OR Roman Calendar, Translated into English verse
equinumerally, By John Gower Master of Arts, and sometimes of Jesus College in
Cambridge.

Nasonem Nasus me fecit pene secundum:
De te, Lector, erit, si quoque penna facit.
Printed by Roger Daniel, Printer to the University of Cambridge. 1640.

To his much honored and most Worthy friend Mr John Ethredge, Bachelour of
Divinity, and Vicar of Halsted in Essex.
Reverend Sir,
I Am bold to present to your favorable acceptance and friendly patronage this
worthy translation of Ovids Festivals. I will beg no pardon for my presumption
herein, for that were to traduce a friendly office, and to question the candor
of your ingenuous disposition. To you I commit this orphane Muse, which cannot
die with the deceased Parent, but under your grave protection will grow up and
flourish and wrestle with eternity. To my knowledge, the Author of this
Translation in the sincerity of his best affection always honored you, and I
am confident that out of the engagements of those respects he bare you, had
dedicated this his ensuing work unto you, had Fate lent him longer life, as a
pledge and testimony of his undissembled love. To you therefore, most worthy
Sr, I send this his learned Posthume, which humbly imploreth your smile upon it
and care over it, and that you would lovingly take it into the bosom of your
courtesy and there cherish it. In so doing you shall engage the devoted
gratitude of those friends it has, and satisfy the earnest request of

Your most respective friend Edward Albiston.

On Ovids Festivalls translated.
AS the well-bred Gentleman, whom Natures hand
Has given a taste of something more then land,
Now traveling to study and learn France,
Becomes their habits well, their mood and dance,
And, though translated hence from native place,
Reteins his virtue still with foreign grace,
And speaks the language in so quaint a phrase
That he both English does and French amaze:
So here the Poet which is Sulmo 's fame
Keeps up in a strange dialect his name;
Clothed in the Britain garb and modest fashion
Loses no virtue of the Latin nation,
But Arethusa-like, his purest strein
Preserves, though passing through the English vein.
So choice had his own words been, if worse meant,
The Sirens first had suffered banishment.
Well amongst the memorables this shall be
Involved in future ages registrie,
And give a note unto this year: Who ever
Saw such good numbers in a Calendar?
So sweetly ran those milkie streams of old,
When first the newborn world did shine with gold.
Such was the subtle thread Minerva spun
When she the garland from Arachne won.
So in the rainbow twisted colors shine,
Whose neat transition who can define?
Live then, our English Ovid; let thy fame
Mingle with Naso's, and become the same.
Challenge thy due: Others do not translate,
But strip their Authors and excoriate.
C. M.

Upon the ingenious translation of Ovids Fasti, entitled, The Roman Calendar.
ON this book, Reader, lay thy hand and swear,
Ovid himself is Metamorphos'd here.
Was his old Roman gown threadbare and old,
Whom thou have robbed in cloth of English gold?
'Twere infidelity to think (I trow)
His Muse with golden feet a begging go.
Yet I admire at this unwonted store:
Poet had never two suits at once before.
Who views these wel-form'd lines with judgment, shall
Think 't not translated but Original:
'T is known what blood by these most active strains
The Muse of Ovid carried in her veins.
Compare them both and you shall find it true,
The gold 's the same, but the impression 's new.
The noble heat of thy inspired brain
Tried, found it pure, and minted it again.
It Is so true done, it seems in every line
Thy soul was in his breast, or his in thine.
He 's metempsychos'd, and these verses fame
Speak but old Ovid in a newer name.
O had my thoughts but seen the sense, when thine
Unti'd the knots of every golden line,
I might have learned to make a verse by thee,
In viewing Wit in its Anatomy.
Thy modest Muse does not know how to rore
Like a Xantippe or an Oyster whore.
Thy breath is short but sweet: It shows thy style
Runs like smooth Helicon, not troubled Nile:
Not like bold ignorance, whose thundering words
Strike the sense dead, whose saucy vein affords
Nothing but wind and storm, at length to have
Their wit o'rwhelmed in the troubled wave.
Now Ovid has his wish, that he may be
In English read upon a Ladies knee.
The Roman Caesar's placed their names upon
The gladded brow of every crowned moon;
And to preserve their Saints deceased fames,
Into their Calendar enrolled their names.
Thy name outfaceth all their glories; here
It fills a Calendar and crowns a Year.
'T is thou alone do not subscribe to Fate:
Thy Calendar shall never be out of Date.
Isaac Tinckler, Coll. G. and C.

On the translation of Ovids Festivalls.
AM I awake! or do mine eyes put on
Some dreams fantastic apparition?
My fancy 's much perplexed to find whe'r this
Be Ovid, or his Metamorphosis.
Just so the learned Roman used to talk,
With the same voice, with the same steps to walk.
Just so his Muse did flow, just in such state
Did sing, when he Romes Feasts did celebrate.
There 's not an accent from the Latin fell,
But here in English 't is expressed as well.
And I dare hardly call this a translation,
But the same Latin in the English fashion;
Decked in such neat attire, so rich, and dear
That Julia could not choose but love him here:
And angry Caesar needs must be content
His exiled Muse to call from banishment.
Divine Translatour! tell me; Did thou call
For Ovids ghost, that he might tell thee all
His well-spun lines could mean? or have thou got
His very soul into thy breast? why not?
The wise Pythagoras held it might be;
And it is manifest in Sands and thee:
Whose quickening Muse and most miraculous pen
Have made deceased Ovid live again.
Shine then three glorious stars with equal rays:
And who have the same soul, wear the same bays.
Villiers Harrington, Aul. Clar.

Upon Mr Gower's smooth interpretation of the six books of Ovid's Fastorum.
CLear was the shadow of the circling year
In the emblem of an hooped snake: As clear
Was the ancient Mystick's ring to represent
Heavens endless motion and time's sweet consent:
This was that reverend ring did conjugate
Dame Vesta to her starre-enamell'd mate.
For fear time 's harmony through pause should fail,
The yearly snake in 's teeth does bite his tail.
This was that snake which Naso's Muse did strive
By her enchanting numbers to revive.
Event o'recame her wish; Her ring complete
She decked with native pearls of rich conceit.
Cursed be that Ibis, whose devouring maw
Half of this snake ingorg'd, e're that it saw
Great Caesar's face: thrice cursed be that wight
That half this ring deteins in base despite.
Perhaps this choler's rash: the Glutton Time
Himself perhaps did act this cursed crime;
The cormorant forgot ('t is like) what meat
Was in his jaws, and so himself did eat.
Hows'ere it was, this loss (w' are sure) will be
Cause of great grief to all posterity.
They say that snakes divided live: O then
'T were good if that some nectar-steeped pen
Would cherish this half-fainting Serpent; so
This living part might for the whole one go.
This Gower has done: by whose most sovereign skill
This snake has stripped his Roman skin; whose quill
Has bravely clothed his back with English silk,
And filled his stinglesse mouth with Muses milk.
Each Lady now will Cleopatra prove,
And yet never hurt her self; each Queen will love
To feel this serpent in her bosom, yet
Never shrike, but wear 't as some rare amulet.
Give me a second Gower, who thus can frame
The Years perfect ring; to him the coyest Dame
Would yield, to such a mate the chastest Muse
For such a ring to wed would not refuse.
Cease tedious Allegory, cease, be plain;
In brief declare what we by Gower do gain.
Good 's bettered by diffused community,
Now Caesar's Calendar may the Shepherds be.
Cu. Birstall, Coll. Regal. S^^.

The Life, Works, and Approof of OVID, Gathered out of his own works and the
relations of diverse faithful Authors.
PVB. Ovid, surnamed Naso (as is commonly supposed, from Nasus a Nose; because
his nose did somewhat exceed the ordinary Roman dimensions. Others say that
his family were called Nasones, from whom he took that surname: Which may very
well be true, and yet no great contradiction; for doubtless Nasus is the
Etymology of Nasones: so that some of his predecessors, or himself, or
peradventure both his progenitors and himself, had that extraordinary gift of
a prodigal Nose. He) was born in Sulmo a town in Peligni the fourteenth of the
Call. of April, March 19.
the second day of the great Quinquatrian feasts; that year wherein the
Consuls Hircius and Pansa perished in the Mutinensian war. His birth was
gentile, his father being in the order of Knighthood; and so afterward was
himself. Come to years of discretion, he with his elder brother employed his
studies under the most famous Grammarians and Rhetoricians in Rome: but
specially himself was instructed by Plotius Grippo; and afterward became in
favor with M. Varro and Corn. Gallus. He bent his studies to the Law; yet more
to please his father then his own fancy: where he defended criminal causes;
and gave sentence among the Centumviri. His oratory was exquisite and
excellent: and therefore not without good cause Seneca ranketh him among the
best Orators. At length, his father dying, he returned to his affected Muses,
and became entirely acquainted with the Poets of those times, Macer Veronensis,
who writ of Herbs, Birds, and Serpents; Ponticus, who penned Thebais;
Propertius the Elegiack, Battus the Iambick, and Horace the Lyrick Poet. At
last he followed the wars under M. Varro, and with him traveled into Asia;
and before his return to Rome he had got no small acquaintance with the Greek
tongue. He married three wives; but enjoyed not the two first very long: The
last lived with him lovingly and constantly; to whom he expresses much true
affection in his Tristium and De Ponto, with many praises of her for her love,
constancy, etc. By her he had one daughter named Perilla.

At length, in the fiftieth year of his age, he was banished by Augustus into
Tomos among the barbarous nations of Scythia: Where, as some affirm, he
continued till the ninth year, and then died: But his own writings make
mention but of the seventh year: of which, within the first three years he
wrote his Tristium, in the rest his De Ponto. For Trist. lib. 3. Eleg. 12. thus
he says, Frigora jam Zephyri minuunt, annoque peracto
Tardior antiquis visa recedit hyems.
Mild Zephyr breaks the cold, a year is run,
And winter slowlier then it wont is gone.
By which words he shows that he had now lived a year in Pontus, and that
that winter was much longer then the former which he spent in Rome. Afterward,
lib. 4. Eleg. 6. See also Eleg. 7. Vt patria careo, bis frugibus area trita est,
Dissiluit nudo pressa bis uva pede.
Since I my Country lost the floor has gained
Two crops, and twice have grapes the winepresse stained.
Hence, lib. 5. Eleg. 11. Vt sumus in Ponto, ter frigore constitit Ister,
Facta est Euxini dura ter unda maris.
Thrice has the Euxine Sea and Ister been
Congealed to ice since Pontus first was seen.
By these may we collect that three years passed e're he ended his Tristium. In
his books entitled De Ponto these following are to be read: lib. 1. Eleg. 1.
Hic me pugnantem cum frigore cumque sagittis
Cumque meo salo quarta fatigat hyems.
Here this fourth winter me does struggling hold
With my cursed fate, with rattling arms, and cold.
And in this year was the triumph of Tiberius upon the Dalmatians and
Illyrians, which he mentions in the first and second Elegies of the second
Book. After this, Book 4. Eleg 6. he goes on, In Scythia nobis quinquennis
Olympias acta:
Jam tempus lustrum transit in alterius.
Now have I passed in Scythia this fifth year;
And time begins another luster here.
This year Augustus died, and Fabius Maximus also; whom he celebrateth among
his special friends, which he mentions in the same Elegy. After this, Eleg.
10. Haec mihi in Euxino bis tertia ducitur aestas
Littore, pellitos inter agenda Getas.
Among the skin-clad Gets in Euxine bay
At length the sixth year I have worn away.
The like Eleg. 13. of the same book. Nor does he mention any longer time,
except it be thus: In the beginning of the seventh year of his exile, in a
congratulation of Lib. 4. Eleg. 9.
Graecinus his Consulship, he mentions also the Consulship of Pompeius
Flaccus brother to Graecinus, which was to ensue the next year after; to which
time he seems to prophecy that he should not live. Wherefore this being the
last year which he counts and speaks of, it is clear that he lived in
Pontus but six year, though seven in relegation: For the first year he spent
in his voyage. Beside, seeing that there is no mention made by him of the acts
of Germanicus performed in these his last years against the Catti and Cherusci,
(which he would never have omitted had life allowed him the fame of them,
especially because he had prophetically forementioned his Triumph yet future,
Lib. 2. Eleg. 1.
and promised the celebration of it in a poem if life gave leave, and moreover
had dedicated to him his books entitled Fastorum in his exile) we may conclude
he departed life within the seventh year, or at most in the beginning of his
eighth, which the testimony of Eusebius further confirms.

The cause of his banishment
For the cause of his banishment there may be many opinions. Some from the
authority of Sidonius affirm that he had amorous dealings with Livia or Julia,
daughter to Augustus, whom he masketh under the name of Corinna; and for this
cause was punished. But if we well ponder the words of Sidonius concerning
Ovid, we shall find it otherwise; Et te carmina per libidinosa
Notum, Naso, Tomosque missum,
Quondam Caesareae nimis puellae
Falso nomine subditum Corinnae.
And thee too, wanton Naso, so renowned
For amorous verses, and to Tomos bound,
Too much in love with that Caesarean Maid
With whom in false Corinna's name thou played.
Upon these last words, Caesareae puellae, they build their argument,
opinionating that it was Caesar's daughter. But it is well known that Puella
does not so well signify Filia, a Daughter, or Neptis a Niece, as Ancilla a
Maid: as Puer is used both by Poets and Orators as well for a Servant as for a
Son, or Young man; yea, rather more frequently: Which also Paulus
Jurisconsultus shows in his De Verborum significatione. And therefore I
rather conclude that he loved some (as I may so give the term) Lady of Honor
in Caesar's Court; and her he calls Corinna. Besides, in his books Amorum, of
which Corinna is the chief subject, there is no passage mentioned suitable to a
Princess. They go to the same supper: It is not likely that he should go with
the Princess. He wishes many imprecations upon her husband: How should he
dare to do it to Caesar! She comes to him: This a Princess would have been
ashamed to have done; and many more of the like nature, which plainly prove it
could not be the Princess. Moreover, in all his writings, either in his
Tristium or De Ponto, he makes no complaint of Love, but of his Ars Amandi,
nor utters any thing against his Love: and that which was the cause of his
punishment he calls an error only; no crime or dishonesty: as if he would
have said, that by an error he happened to discover another crime: Which, as
some say, was his seeing Julia in her nakedness; or rather he took Augustus in
the very act of some ignoble crime: And this we collect from that place, Trist.
lib. 2. Cur aliquid vidi? cur noxia lumina feci?
Cur imprudenti cognita culpa mihi?
Inscius Actaeon vidit sine vest Dianam;
Praeda suis canibus non minus ille fuit.
Why did I stain mine eyes? why did I see?
Alas, that ever the crime was known to me!
Thus poor Actaeon unawares once spied
Diana naked; yet a prey he died.
Here he shows that his error was the spying of some secret crime committed
by another: and thereupon he adjoyneth the example of Actaeon and Diana; That
as Actaeon unawares spied that which was not fit for him to see, and so
incurred Diana's displeasure and his own destruction; so he happened upon some
disastrous fight, thereby incurring his Princes anger and his own ruin. And
this is confirmed by that verse, Trist. lib. 3. Eleg. 5. Inscia quod crimen
viderunt lumina, plector:
Peccatumque oculos est habuisse meos.
I am condemned, because I chanced to spy
A secret act: my crime was but my eye.
Nor was this discovery of any meaner person then either of Augustus himself or
some one nearly allied to him: At which the Emperor incensed, banished him,
and, to cloak his own shame, for the pretended crime of his wanton verses De
Art Amandi. And this was the reason that Ovid never dared to reveal the other
true cause of his banishment, being (very likely) adjur'd to secrecy by the
Emperor: Lib. 2. Perdiderint cum me duo crimina, Carmen, and Error;
Alterius facti culpa silenda mihi.
Nam tanti non sum, renovem ut tua vulnera, Caesar,
Quem nimio plus est indoluisse semel.
Two crimes, my Error, and my Muse, did stroy me;
But one must never be revealed by me:
For who am I to dare renew thy wound,
Whose grieving once I too too grievous found.
And lib. 4. Eleg. 10. in his description of his own life, hereafter subjoyned,
we may read the like.

His loss was much lamented, not only by his kindred and allies, but by many
others, who highly esteemed him for his excellent parts, and in whose hearts
his sweet ingenuity ingraffed a true and sincere love toward him. Yea, he was
generally deplored, out of that general love and respect he held with all.

The manner of his departure himself sets forth in most patheticall
expressions: Which, for the elegance in the lively pourtraiture of the several
parts of sorrow and passion in himself and his friends, I have indevoured to
present it in the truest English colors I could to the readers view, whose
palate may with mine taste some sweetness in the midst of the bitterness of
sorrowful expressions: CVm subit illius tristissima noctis imago, Eleg. 3.
lib. 1.

Quae mihi supremum tempus in urbe fuit,
Cum repeto noctem qua tot mihi chara reliqui,
Labitur ex oculis tunc quoque gutta meis. etc.
1.
WHhenas the picture of that doleful night,
In which my utmost limits were,
My mind beholds, when that time comes to sight
Wherein I left so many dear,
Even then mine eyes let fall a tear.
2.
Now was the morn at hand wherein my Prince
Enjoined me to depart away
From Italy: Nor space, nor mind, nor sense
Had I to furnish for the day:
My soul affected dull delay.
3.
I never regarded choice of man or mate:
My clothes for journeying were not fit,
Nor ought beside: Such was my soul's estate,
As he that with Joves thunder smit
Has life but does not know of it.
4.
But when at length this agony was past,
And I my spirits did regain,
With last Farewell I mournfully embraced
My weeping friends, whose ample train
Was now shrunk into one or twain.
5.
My loving Wife (in Libya far was she
Here is a mistake, where that which belongs to the daughter is applied to
the mother.
Bred up, yet never the more foreskill'd
Of my sad fate) me weeping bitterly
In her embrace she weeping held,
With showers of tears from eyes distilled.
6.
Loud groans, deep sighs on every side were vented:
No silent funeral was there.
Men, women, little children, all lamented
My fate; each corner had a share
Throughout the house, and shed some tear.
7.
And, may I but compare great things with small,
This was the face of Troy, that night
Of treachery: No noise was heard at all
Of Man or Dog; and Luna bright
Did guide her steeds by glimmering light.
8.
On her I looked up; and beheld (as yet)
The Capitol (though all in vain)
Joined to my house: Ye Powers, said I, whose seat
Adjoyns to ours; thou Temple main,
Which these eyes never shall see again;
9.
And all ye Gods that live in Romes great State,
Whom I must leave; Adieu for ever.
And though a buckler I take up too late,
Yet do not ye in ire persever,
But ease my burden by your favor.
10.
Make known my error to that heavenly Man,
That he may judge my fault at least
No wickedness; and so the truth may scan
As ye have done. That God once pleased
My misery will soon be eased.
11.
Thus did I crave. My Wife more largely prayed,
Each accent broke with sighs most deep:
Then falling prostrate, with her hairs displaid
Before the Houshold-Gods, does creep
To kiss the hearth with quaking lip.
12.
There poures she forth before the sullen Powers
A many prayers, not prevalent
For doleful Husband. But the hasty Hours
Denied delay: the night was spent,
And Arotos down the West was bent.
13.
What should I do? The love of Country tied me?
But ah! that night was set to be
My utmost bound! How often, when any plied me,
Cried I, Alas! why have you? see
But whence or whither post you me!
14.
How often did I a certain hour feign
Convenient for my way assigned!
Thrice stepped I over the threshold; thrice again
Went back: my very foot inclined
To sloth, in flattery of my mind.
15.
Often Farewell given, I fell to talk again:
And often I kissed, as if just there
I would depart: my will repeat I then
In self-mistakes; my eyes each-where
Fixed on my souls engagements dear.
16.
Why should I hasten? Scythia is, said I,
The Country whither I am sent:
Rome must I leave, and leave perpetually:
In both respects just argument
Of our delays, though time be spent.
17.
My wife and I are both for ever parted,
Yet both alive; my family
With each sweet part, and all my friends true-hearted:
O dear-beloved Souls, to me
Knit in Thesean amity!
18.
Let Us change embraces while we may, and make
The best advantage of the hour:
Perhaps it is for ever. Thus I spoke
In halved words, and, in the power
Of soul, we clasped each friend of our.
19.
Thus while I talk and we lament, lo now
Bright Lucifer in the East appear;
Sad star to us! Oh! I am rent, as though
My joints all wrung in sunder were,
Torn part from part by rack severe!
20.
Such woe was Priam's, when that treachery
That fatal Horse did now confess.
But then arose a lamentable cry,
And sobbing groans did souls oppress;
And heavy hands smote heavier breasts.
21.
Then my poor wife, embracing me close to,
Poured forth these tear-mix'd words to me,
Oh! I cannot part from thee! I will go
I Will go, I say, I Will go with thee:
An exuls exiled wife I Will be.
22.
The way's as free for me; so is the land:
Small burden to the ship are we.
Thee Caesar's anger does (O grief!) command
To banishment; affection, me:
Affection shall my Caesar be.
23.
Thus did she strive, as she had done before,
And scarce her hold of me forbears
By best persuasions. Forth I go adoore
A walking hearse, with my soiled hairs
Confused and torn about my ears.
24.
Overwhelmed in grief she fell into a swound,
And head against the hard floor knocks:
Come to her self at length, and from the ground
Raised up, with much ado her locks
With dust bemoiled off she plucks:
25.
Now wails her case, then blames with many mones
The vexing Gods, and often does cry,
My Husband! Oh my Husband! with such groans
And sobs as if her child or I
Had been just now in pile to fry.
26.
Death she desired, by death her soul to ease:
Yet for my sake she life did will.
O may thou live! and, since the Fates so please,
Still live, sweet wife, my ease, and still
My absent soul with comfort fill!
27.
The Boreal Bear-man into sea does steep
His joul, and moils the waters there:
Yet does our keel plow up the Ionian Deep,
Not of our own minds, but we are
Compelled to boldness out of fear.
28.
Oh me! what winds arise! how Sea and Heaven
Both scoul! the bottom-sands do boil
Upon the top! huge mountain billows, driven
Against both sides, our vessel toil:
Our Gods continual dashes soil.
29.
The hatches moil: the beaten sail-ropes rore:
The very ship does seem to groan
At our harsh fate: The doubtful Mariner,
With terror in his visage shown,
Gives up and lets his art alone.
30.
And as some weak-arm'd groom the conquered rain
Resignes unto his stiff-neck'd horse;
Even so the Pilote through the toilsome main
Works on his ship, not his own course,
But every way the surges force.
31.
And had not Aeolus changed his blustering wind,
Upon the interdicted Land
I had been forced: for, leaving far behind
The Illyrian coast on our left hand,
We saw close by the Italian strand.
32.
O do not strive to pitch our vessel there!
Do ye obey that God with me!
While thus I cried betwixt desire and fear
Of being driven back, O what a Sea
Does smite the sides most furiously!
33.
Gods of the Sea, spare ye this life of ours.
O do not ye him further grieve
Whom Jove does scourge; nor to the Stygian Powers
This weary soul of mine yet give:
If one already dead may live.


For his respect and honor he held all his lifetime with those that were his
coetaneans, his own works well show: And for the fame and estimation he has
maintained by his Poemes through all ages in many parts of the world, let the
reader but turn to Mr Sandys his Collection of the Testimonies of diverse
learned and judicious Authors in the frontispice of his exquisite Translation
of our Poets Metamorph. I will content my self with one only added to his,
which is Angelus Politianus his Elegy upon his death, wherein he manifests
not only his own honor and estimation of him, but also the love, respect and
favor he won among the Barbarians with whom he lived, as you may read; AH
weladay!
Does Naso lie in Getick ground?
Our Roman Muses Joy
Entombed in barbarous bound!
That barbarous land
That lies by Isters frozen spring,
Press that sweet Poets hand
Whose pen soft Love did sing!
Art not ashamed,
O Rome, to be far more severe
Then Barbarism untamed
To thy own Son so dear?
Ho, Muses, say;
Was any friend in Scythian shore
His sorrows to allay,
Or ease his pains so sore?
Was any nigh
His languish'd joints on bed to lay,
Or with some melody
To pass the painful day?
Was any there
To feel his fainting pulses beat,
Or to administer
Some wholesome drams or meat?
Or at his death
What friend did close his dying eye,
Or suck up his last breath?
A work of piety!
None, none there was!
Thou, thou remorselesse cruel Rome,
Kept'st all his friends (alas!)
That none at him could come.
None, none, I say!
His Wife, his little His grandchildren, for he had no son.
Sons, and Daughter
Were parted far away,
And could not follow after.
No friends he had,
But Bessi and Coralli tawny,
And Gets in wild-skins clad,
With arms and shoulders brawny.
The Sarmats, brow'd
With horror and with looks austere,
That drink their horses blood,
His only comfort were:
The Sarmats grim,
Whose wiry-harsh and dangling hairs
Congealed with cold extreme
Do crash about their ears.
And yet his fate
The stern Coralli did deplore:
The Gets and Sarmats sat
And beat their bosoms sore.
Wood-Nymphs and woods
And mountains did bewail his fall:
And Isters swelling floods
Did bear a part withal.
Fame does rehearse,
That Pontus sealed up with thick ice,
Dissolved with lukewarm tears
Of Sea-Nymphs Elegies.
The gentle Dove
With mother Venus flying came,
And into pile did shove
Their brands to raise a flame.
And on the stone
Laid over his corpse this verse they sealed,
Within this tomb lies one
That was Loves Doctor skilled.
Even Venus bright
On him did holy waters pour,
And washed with hand milk-white
His body over and over.
And, Muses, ye
On Naso 's hearse fixed each a song;
But such as cannot be
Expressed by mortal tongue.
Thus far Politianus. But one thing is remarkable; In which we may say either
his desert or his good hap advanced him beyond the fortune of Homer or Maro:
Who both, though the very excellence of Poesy, had their detractours; Homer
his Zoilus, and Virgil his Bavius: but Ovid (as himself seems to vaunt in his
own lives description) was never touched with the least detraction, neither in
his own time nor in any age since; Nec, qui detrectat-praesentia, livor iniquo
Vllum de nostris dente momordit opus.
No black detraction to this day has bit
With fangs of envy any work I writ.
Such indeed was his estimation and honor among the noblest Citizens of Rome,
that, even while he was living, they wore his Picture in rings of gold; as
Eleg. 6. Trist. lib. 1. witnesses: Which being but brief, and tending all to
our present purpose of declaring his worth and exquisite parts, I have made
bold to trouble thee with the Translation; Si quis habes nostris similes in
imagine vultus,
Deem meis hederas Bacchica serta comis. etc.
DEar friend of mine that do my picture wear,
Pull off the Ivy-crown from my sad hair.
For happy brows those happy badges be:
My fortune with a crown does not agree.
Though I conceal thee, yet my meaning 's known
To thee whose finger wears me up and down:
Who at the second hand do me behold
Thy banished friend engraven in burnished gold.
Which when thou view'st, perhaps thou often may say so,
Ah! where is now our old companion Naso?
Sweet is thy love. But I (such as they be)
My Rhythmes, my nobler picture, give to thee.
My Poem that of bodies changed does sing;
Made by my exile an unperfect thing:
This, with the rest, I in my grief and woe
At my departure into fire did throw.
So I my books, my bowels, which to dye
Deserved not, did force in flames to fry:
Because my Muse I hated, as my crimes;
Or 'cause they were rude and unpolished rhythmes.
But seeing that they are not quite extinct;
(Sure they in copies were transcribed, I think)
Now may they live, and pleasing pastimes be,
And put the Reader often in mind of me.
And yet no man with patience them can read
If he perceive they are unfinished.
The work was from the anvile snatched yerwhile,
And left unpolished by the finer file.
Therefore for praise I pardon crave: I Have got
Great praise, if, Reader, thou disdain me not.
And this Hexastich (if you shall think fit)
Into the Front'spice of our book admit.
Whatever hand these orphane Rhythmes does touch,
Give them some welcome: and the more to crave
Thy favor, know, they were not published such,
But even reprieved from their Fathers grave.
Whatever crime therefore you shall perceive,
Know, he had mended, had the Fates given leave.
But above all, his own works testify of him to this day, and clearly
demonstrate, that what respect the world, and what approof and commendations
Authors have given him, was not affected but well deserved: For he has left
many fair monuments of his wit, both in Heroic and Elegiack verse, which are
no mean ornaments of the Latin tongue. He penned diverse Heroical Epistles;
III. Books De Art Amandi; II. Books De Remedio Amoris; II. Books De Amore; Of
Metamorphosis XV. Books. He penned also some Tragedies: Of which Medea is
highly approved by Quae ostentare videtur quantum vir ille praestare potuerit,
si ingenio suo temperare quam indulgere maluisset, Quint.
Quintilianus and Corn. Tacitus, and not without desert; for in it he has
shown the very vigor and quintessence of wit. He composed a book against
common Rhythmers, as Fabius Quintilianus witnesses. He penned an Epistle to
Livia in consolation for the death of Drusus. He began a book of the Actian
war. He wrote II. Books to Tiberius. In his banishment he wrote V. Books
entitled Tristium; IV. Books De Ponto; XII. Books entitled Fasti. He writ an
imprecation against Ibis; one Book De Vaticiniis; The Triumph of Germanicus
Caesar. He began a work De Piscibus; which after Oppianus imitated. He penned
also some works in the Getick tongue, the first about Augustus and his family,
as he affirms lib. 4. De Ponto, Eleg. 13.

To his friend Carus.
NEc te mirari, si sunt vitiosa, decebit
Carmina, quae faciam pene Poeta Getes. etc.
NOr wonder at my verses slips: for know it,
I am become almost a Getick Poet.
It shames me much; though in the Getick tongue
I am so skilled that I have Poemes sung,
And pleased them well: Congratulate my fame;
Among the Gets I Have won a Poets name.
You ask the subject. Caesar's praise I chaunted,
And in a Deity 's name my new rhythmes vaunted.
Therein I prove, though Caesar's body be
But mortal, yet his soul 's a Deity:
That he who did the Scepter long refuse,
His Fathers virtues in his heart renews:
That Livia Vesta is of Chastity,
Her Lord and Son becoming equally:
That those two Sons their Parent did maintein,
Who gave true symptoms of their noble vein.
When I this Poem in a foreign tongue
Had perfected, and it rehearsed among
The Getick crowd, their curled locks they shake,
With armed quivers, and a murmuring make.
Cries one, If Caesar thus imployes your pen,
To Caesar you should be restored again.
Thus said the Get: yet, Carus, this sixth year
Deteins me still beneath the frozen Bear.

At which (as he says) the Gets murmuring in that manner, to purchase their
favor, he wrote another book in the Getick tongue, Of the acts of their king:
which pleased them wondrous well. And diverse other works he composed; most of
which, either by the laziness of some age, or by the negligence of
Library-keepers, are become imperfect, or totally perished. His
Metamorphose(...)n he finished before his banishment, but left it uncorrected,
as is forementioned. He had written XII. Books entitled Fasti, as himself
evidenceth. Trist lib. 2. Sex ego Fastorum scripsi, totidemque libellos:
Cumque su^ finem mense libellus habet.
Twelve books of Fasti I in verse have penned:
And every Volume with his Month does end.
Diverse suppose he began this work at Rome, and not unlikely: but he ended it
in Pontus, as may be collected from his Preface, and many other places of his
book, but specially from a Distich in the fourth Book; Sulmonis gelidi patriae,
Germanice, nostrae!
Me miserum! Scythico quam procul ille solo est!
Sweet Sulmo's wall, great Prince, my native land!
Ah me! how distant from the Scythian sand!
There having corrected the first six books, he dedicated them to Germanicus,
purposing to proceed with the rest: but death cutting off his days, he left
them neither corrected nor published: and so through the carelessness of the
times, or ignorance of the Scythians, among whom they were left, they are
perished: Yet it was once reported they were all found: which I would I could
find not a report but a truth.

Some deny that this work was dedicated to young Germanicus, but would have it
to Tiberius Caesar: which they prove chiefly from that verse in the Preface, Tu
quoque cum Druso praemia fratre feres. This Drusus (say they) was brother to
Tiberius, and was he that dyed in his Germane wars: But this title Germanicus
was never known to be given to Tiberius: neither does Tranquillus mention it in
the rehearsal of all his titles. If any say that it has been read in old
moneys and monuments, I answer, that those inscriptions belonged not to
Tiberius Caesar, but to this Tiberius Germanicus our Poets patron, the son
of Drusus, who inherited his fathers title which he had gained in his Germane
designs. Beside, it is plain that this Germanicus whom our Poet means was
grandchild to Augustus* by adoption, and not his son: as lib. 1.

Et tuus Augusto nomine dictus avus. Then first Augustus was thy Grandsire's
name. So that this Germanicus was the son of Drusus Tiberius his brother, and
that Drusus whom he calls Frater Germanici was Tiberius his son and
Germanicus his first cousin; our Poet taking liberty (which is very frequent
with Authors both profane and divine) to use one title of consanguinity for
another. To Augustus Grandchild therefore not to his Son was this Poem
dedicated. Which Ovid might very well do, because this Germanicus was
exceedingly well beloved of all his soldiers and all the citizens of Rome for
his many rare performances in the wars, and beside was a man of singular
learning and an excellent Poet. From this favor that this Prince maintained
among all men our Poet had hopes that he might one day come to the crown, and
then might favor him so far as to call him home; or at least in the mean time
might purchase his release.

Diverse Poets before Ovid assayed this work Fasti, as Ennius, Livius,
Andronicus, and others. But Ovid a long time after diligently turning over all
the ancient Calendars and Monuments of the Pontifies, and other old Annals
which perteined to religious rites and ceremonies, and reducing the Roman
year into a more exact order, with an exquisite observation of the Cosmical,
Heliacal, and Acronicall rising and setting of all the fixed Constellations,
composed this memorable Poem with much labor and study.

Thus have I from the testimony of surest Authors related the principal parts
and passages of this worthy Poets life, as also partly from his own
handwriting. If any desires to be further informed of him, let him read this
following relation of his life, penned by no other hand then his own: which, as
perfectly as my faculty permitted, I have presented in our native tongue.

Ovid to Posterity. Trist. IV. Eleg. X.
THat aftertimes may know of me each thing;
I was the man who tender Love did sing.
My country, Sulmo, fed with fresh springs all;
Miles ninety distant from the Roman wall.
Here was I born: The very year to tell;
'T was when by one sad fate two Consuls fell.
May that avail, I was a Knight by blood,
Not only raised by my Fortunes good.
I was no firstborn child: for one son more
My father had, born just a year before.
Both he and I were born upon one day,
And at one time our natall gifts did pay.
It was the first day of the bloody lists
Presented at the great Quinquatrian feasts.
Our Parents then, to have us trained up well,
Put us to such as did in Arts excel.
My brother from his youth did bend his mind
To Rhetoric, and to the Law inclined.
But I a child the Thespian sweets did savor,
And more and more did win the Muses favor.
Leave, leave these fruitless Studies, Son, often cried
My father: Homer but a poor man died.
Moved at his words I left the dear delight
Of Helicon, and 'gan in prose to write.
Lo, verses of their own accord came fit:
It was a verse whate'r I spoke or writ.
Years growing on, my brother dear and I
Together took a Gown of Liberty.
Rich purple Robes with badges broad we wore*
Those studies followed which we used before.
My Brother now had passed his twenti'th year:
He dies in whom I lost my souls best share.
In youth to some preferment raised was I,
And took the office of Triumviri.
Both mind and body were unapt for labor,
And vexed ambition I could never savor.
And still the Muses did entice me still
To their calm sweets, which ever had my good will.
I dearly loved the Poets of the time:
Each Poet was a God in my esteem.
Often did I hear sage Macer read his Birds,
And Serpents, and the help each Herb affords.
And often Propertius my companion dear
With amorous raptures did present my ear.
Heroic Ponticus, Iambick Battus
With pleasing strains did often recreate us.
And tunefull Horace often my ear delighted
With curious ditties on his harp recited.
Virgil I only saw: and hasty Fate
Tibullus friendship did anticipate.
He followed Gallus; and Propertius, him:
I was the third man in the rank of time.
As I my Elders, so my Juniours me
Adored: my Muse grew famous suddenly.
Thrice and no more had I shav'n off my beard
When first my youthful strains the people heard.
My Mistress, in Corinna masked, did move
My wits: each village now could chaunt our love.
Much did I write: but what I faulty knew
Into the fault-correcting fires I threw.
And at my exile cast I into flame,
Vexed with my Muses, many a work of fame.
My tender heart often pierced through with Love
Each light occasion instantly did move.
But when I was from Cupids passions free,
My Muse was mute and wrote no Elegy.
A worthless, lovelesse Wife to me but young
Was matched: with whom I led my life not long.
My second wife, though free from any crime,
Yet she continued but a little time.
My last, with whom most of my days I spent,
Endured the blemish of my banishment.
One Daughter have I, which once and again
Made me a Grandsire, but by husbands twain.
And now my Father full of silver-hairs
His days concluded just at ninety years.
As he would have mourned for me, so did I mourn
For him. Next Sorrow was my Mothers urn.
Both happy sure and in good hours did die,
Whose death did come before my miscrie.
And happy I, in that they both being dead
No tears at all for my affliction shed.
Yet if, ye Dead, have ought beside a name;
If your light Ghosts escape the fatal flame:
Parentall Souls, if you have heard of me
In Styx; if there my crimes related be:
Be you assured, with whom I cannot lie,
My crime was Error not Dishonestie.
Enough for them. To you now I retire,
My friends, who the actions of my life enquire.
The Summer-tropick of my years now gone,
Declining Age with hoarie hairs came on.
Now since my birth ten times the Horse-courser
That won the race Pisaean wreaths did wear:
When ah, offended Caesar does command
My doleful exile to the Tomites land!
The cause of this, too much to most revealed,
Must be for ever by my self concealed.
Nor friends, nor servants wrongs will I here vent:
I Have suffered crosses next to banishment.
To which my mind did scorn to yield; and still
By its own strength did stand invincible.
And sans regard of self or calm life led,
With artlesse arm the wars Under M. Varro as is forementioned.
I followed.
As many troubles have surcharged this soul
As there be stars 'twixt North and Southern Pole.
Long being tossed about, at length I met
The surly Sarmat and the bow-arm'd Get.
Here, though I Am startled with the noise of arms,
My Muse with her best skill my sorrows charms.
And though no ear can relish here one rhythme,
Yet so I pass and so delude the time.
For life therefore, and power against my toils,
For passing of the tedious hours somewhiles,
Thanks, Muse, to thee: Thou art my sole relief,
My ease, my physic in my wasting grief.
Thou me, my Guide and dear Companion,
Do raise from Ister into Helicon.
Thou giv'st me, while I live, a name sublime,
The rarest gift that scorns both Tomb and Time.
No black Detraction to this day has bit
With fangs of envy any work I writ.
And though our age so many Poets high
Has bred, my fancy Fame did never envy.
I others honored: others honored
Me with the best; and through the world I Am read.
If then we Poets can the truth divine;
Come death whenever, Dust, I am not thine.
Whether by favor or desert I be
Thus famed; kind Reader, thanks I give to thee.
Sic cecinit Naso de se. CLIO's complaint for the death of OVID.
Clio. 1.
AH! with what tears shall I enlarge my grief?
In what sad accents shall I sigh and groan?
How vent my sorrows? knowing no relief,
Nor craving ought, but only to be known
To all: that all may share with me in moan.
2.
Let not Rome only and the Latin train
Lament and mourn, but all the world beside,
Sweet Naso 's Death, whose most ingenious brain
The world with peerlesse treasures beautified;
And more had done, had he not timelesse died.
3.
Ah! how I still remember to my woe,
In what a happy vein he walked along!
How readily his fancy quick did flow
In numbers even and raptures sound and strong,
Which presently made up some learned Song!
4.
Whose melody would make the Hills to ring,
The Wood-Gods wonder, and the Fauns admire.
The Dryads, Naiads, them would often sing;
And every Nymph to hear them did desire:
Which won the favor of each beauteous Quire.
5.
His very youth was ripe in Poesy:
For all assayes he was our witty Page.
Ofttimes Apollo, when he chanced to eye
His lines, would say, O thou of youthful age!
A Boy in years, but in our gifts a Sage!
6.
Those amorous raptures which in sport be writ
When, Venus servant, he did march yerwhile
In Cupids files, what quintessence of wit
Do they demonstrate! in what curious style
His verses flow, not fowl'd with vulgar soil!
7.
But now the vigor of his wit at full,
Like candid Cynthia in diameter
With her bright Brother, when our Thespian pool
He in full draughts drew in, O then how clear
His fancy streamed! what learning flourished there!
8.
That Poem of Transformed shapes can show;
A piece of all applauded, and desired:
Which whosoever reads, his pithy Muse may view
In beautiful variety attired.
The quaint contexture of that work 's admired.
9.
And when his buskined Muse in garb most grave
And voice majestic stalked on crowded Scene,
No Sophoclean strains more height could have,
Nor weight support. How often have they between
Each Act with general shouts applauded been!
10.
At length, inspired with a heat divine,
That worthy work he writ with happy pen
Of Months, with courses of each constant Sign,
And Phoebus toils: Where fitly now and then
He chaunts the praises of his contrymen:
11.
When in the middle of his fair carier
The cruel Parcae clipped (O grief! O gall!)
His precious twist: when he scarce half his Year
Had finished. By which did thousands fall
Short of their praises; of a jewel, all.
12.
O cruel Sisters! Why did you not spare,
And draw to Nestor's length his sacred twine?
Or to as large a twisted clue as were
The lasting Sibylls? 'T was as pure and fine,
And (if with you that values) as Divine.
13.
No work you wanted for your direful knives,
Their thirst to satiate. Charon 's boat does groan
With constant crowds. Ten thousand vulgar lives
You might have shared off, and let his alone:
Ten thousand lives might satisfy for one.
14.
Why did not I in time solicit Fate,
Backed with my Sisters, and (had Prayers been able
Or Gifts to conquer) beg a longer date?
We would have changed her nature never so stable,
Before w' had done, and made her exorable.
15.
But thou, dire Caesar, most to be upbraided,
Thy tyranny did cut him off in 's prime
By unjust banishment. His spirits faded
With blasting griefs, which ware out all his time,
And chill distempers of the Getick clime.
16.
O well it happened in the midst of ill!
Of half thy praise his death despoiled thee:
And what was given thee by his faithful quill,
The world by this thy unjust act shall see,
Was not thy merit but his loyalty.
17.
Thy thundering blow his dazzled fancy smit,
That in a trance long time she lay for slain:
At length revived, (O admirable Wit,
And even beyond my thought!) amid his pain
And misery his Muse did sing again.
18.
The crime was thine and not his own: How then
Could thou exile him to the furthest end
Of all the world, among monsters fierce, not men,
To wast his days? and him (O horrid!) rend
From Wife, from Children, Country dear, and Friend?
19.
His eyes beheld too much: Too bold was he
Into the secrets of a King to pry.
'T is true, alas! he saw too much of thee.
Were thou ashamed that he thy crime did spy?
That crime then banish more deservedly.
20.
O horrid! never call him home again?
Never afford a milder region?
Were those sweet expiations all in vain?
His oratorious Muse, his pleading moan,
That moved not thee, would move a marble-stone.
21.
Thy heart was Scythian, barbarous thy deed,
Just like that place where he was forced to be.
Thy name Augustus well with thee agreed:
'T was given in flattery; but by this all see,
Thou were Augustus in thy cruelty,
22.
Surpassing far the barbarism of Gets,
Coralli, Bessi, with their snarled hairs.
For lo, his Muse their rigor mitigates:
And that which could not pierce thy rockyears,
Did win their favor and Et tamen exstinctum Bessi and flevere Coralli, etc.
Ang. Polit. in his Elegy.
provoke their tears.
23.
Often did thou vaunt thy love unto our Art
And did reward our Priests with wealth and fame:
Often did thou take thy pen to play thy part
Among our Quire; and with our sacred flame
Inspired, did triumph in a Poets name:
24.
How then came all that heat and love so quail'd,
Overwhelmed and quenched? by one dire blast of ire?
Our Power contemned? which ever yet prevailed
With stoutest spirits. O why did we inspire
Thee with one spark, that thus do slight our Quire!
25.
Our force and virtue, that have raised the dead,
Carmina de coelo possunt deducere lunam, Virg. Vid. Fast. 2. of Arion. And the
power of Orpheus his Harp is a known story.
Drawn down the Moon, erected brazen Towers,
Tamed Bears and Tigers, moved the Rocks, and staid
The running Streams, and This Orpheus did when he went down into the Stygian
vaults to fetch back his wife.
charmed the greatest Powers
In Pluto 's cell, moved not that heart of yours.
26.
Jove, Juno, Venus, Janus, Mars, and all
Ye Powers of heaven, his pen your praises spoke:
Why did ye let so true a servant fall?
Why did ye not for your own honors sake
With draughts of Nectar him immortal make?
27.
And thou great Father of our sacred Quire,
Let me in Griefs prerogative be bold
To plead with thee. Thou did at full inspire
Thy darling Naso, and have him enrolled
Among thy most renowned Priests of old.
28.
Often have thou crowned with immortal Bays
His sacred brows? he was thy favorite.
Nor that grand Chanter of Achilles praise,
Nor that high pen which sung Aeneas flight,
Nor that sweet Lyrick thee did more delight.
29.
Why did not then with thine Ambrosia feed him?
(Food which thou giv'st to thine unwearied steeds)
To large eternity why did not breed him?
Then his pure fancy sown with heavenly seeds,
Had chanted more divine and humane deeds.
30.
Thou might at least have done the world that favor,
As to have begged a longer lease of life
From Joves own hand O thou had been a saver
Of thine own honor, had thou stayed the knife
(That bloody weapon!) of the Sisters rise.
31.
Behold that halved orphane work; a piece
Almost the last that by his hand was penned:
That work alone deserved a longer lease
Of life from thee. See how he did intend
Thy same and honor through the year to send.
32.
Had he accomplished that divine design,
And reached to his Years end without that wrong
From Fate and Caesar, that had all been thine:
Then in thy chariot thou had danced along
Thy Years twelve labors in a constant song.
33.
Now is thy race uneven: One half the year
Thou passest blank. Methinks thy wheels are numb
Those silenced Months: No song does calendar
Thy Signs and days. One side of heaven is dumb.
Such wrongs to us from Fates thwart actions come.
34.
Apollo duly to her plaint gave ear.
Her grief moved pity, and her words moved grief.
Much it affects him Naso 's death to hear;
That envious Fate so short had cropp'd his life.
He shakes his firelocks, and replies, not brief;
Apollo. 35.
Sweet Clio, Thy complaint is just and true;
And in thy sorrow I consent with thee.
The thought of Phaethon's fall does not renew
My passion so nor more distemper me
Then Ovid's death and sad calamity.
36.
And had I thought his fatal twist had been
So near the end, and that the Three consented
Amid his songs to cut his thread so green,
I would have tried my skill to have prevented
That stroke, and got a longer lease indented.
37.
But well thou know my mind about is hurled,
Each week, each day, each minute of an hour,
In general affairs of all the world,
In meting out of Time, and keeping our
Heaven's Accomplices in their due course and power:
38.
That I nor space nor respit have always
On each particular in this vast All
To set my thoughts; though men of worth and praise
Are cropp'd by Fates, who threads of Virtue gall;
And often my friends besides my knowledge fall.
39.
Thus Maro, Lucane, by their spiteful hand
A^n^^ares were banished from my light,
And that arch-Poet of the Fairie land,
With diverse more. Thus many a Favorite
Have lost their heads out of their Prince's sight.
40.
When I per chance foresee the fatal day
Of any Worthy, how it me does pain
To bring it onward! gladly would I stay.
And were it not Necessity constrain,
I should my chariot oftentimes refrain.
41.
But, Clio, stay thy tears. 'T is folly, never
To cease a grief for unrevers'd decrees.
'T is wisdom, when Necessity does sever
Her actions and our will, when what we please
We cannot do, to do what most may ease.
42.
Though Death has silenced his facetious quill,
And robbed him of his life, us of our praise;
Yet does his fame, his nobler portion, still
Survive and flourish like our lasting Bays:
And through the world his works his worth shall raise.
43.
As for his Poeme's loss, it proves his gain.
'T is greater honor to be much desired
Then much enjoyed. For that which does remain
To be made up, some Fancy well attired
May be ever long for that supply inspired.
44.
Thus in despite of Fate will we extend
Our Servants lives, and raise their dying head.
As for Augustus who did cause his end,
The world concludes it, Ovid banished
The unworthi'st act that ever Augustus did.
Sic questa est: Clio: moestae gemuere Sorores,
Concussitque comam scitus Apollo Lyrae.
OVIDS FESTIVALLS; OR, ROMAN CALENDAR. The first Book; or, JANUARIE.
The Argument.
THE old Roman year. The several sorts of days.
Discourse with Janus. The Astrosophi's praise.
The feast Agonia. Whence the Altar's filled
With blood of birds and beasts. Why the Ass is killed
To lustful Priap. Queen Carmentis rite
With her predictions. Great Tyrinthius fight
With fire-mouth'd Cacus. The Augustian name
Assumed by Caesar. In Carmentis fame
More sacreds paid. White Concord in white fane.
Mild Peace her altar. And a prayer for grain.
TImes with their causes to the Roman year
Disposed of old, Star's courses sing we here.
Germanick Caesar, O accept our charge:
With smooth aspect, and guide my feeble barge.
Be Patron to this piece devote to thee;
Let not this gift, though small, rejected be.
Here holy rites picked out of annals old
May thou read ore: and why each day's enrolled.
Here may you your domestic feasts adjoynd,
And here your father and grandfather find;
And how throughout the Calendar renowned,
Thy brother Drusus fame with thine shall sound.
Some Caesar's arms, we Caesar's altars sing;
What days were hallowed by that sacred king.
The whiles the glory of thy house I chaunt,
Do thou but smile, no fear our Muse shall daunt.
Your grace gives vigor to my verses poor,
Our fancy at your eye does flag or soat.
The censure of so learned a majesty
Our Muse does fear more then Apollo's eye.
For we did taste those sweets your lips let fall,
When you did plead in causes criminal.
But when Apollo thee inspired, O then
What streams of learning glided from thy pen!
O Poet, deigne a Poets rain to guide,
That so our year a sweeter course may slide.
WHen Romulus the times did first dispose,
Ten months to number out his year he chose.
(Forsooth, thou had more skill in signs of wars
To curb thy neighbors, then in signs of stars)
Yet he by reasons was to this induced:
His error, Caesar, may be well excused.
What time the mother in her womb does bear
Her breeding child, just that he made his year.
That time the widow from the fatal burning
Of her dead mate did wear the signs of mourning.
These arguments did Romulus regard
When he the seasons to his peasants shared.
Mars had the first, the next was Venus place;
He father, and she mother of his race:
The third from Eld, the fourth from Yongth is named:
The number titles for the rest has framed.
But Numa willing Janus to adore,
And dead men's ghosts, prepos'd a couple more.
Now you the duties of each day must know:
For every day did not the like allow.
That was Non-leet-day which the three words escaped,
That Leet-day was wherein the courts were kept.
These offices were not all day performing:
It Is Leet at noon, but 'twas a Non-leet morning.
Before the Praetour pleading then begun,
And suits of law when sacrifice was done.
Some days the people in the rails include,
Some on the ninth day still their course renewed.
Queen Juno's care our Roman Calends shield:
A fat white lamb in the Ides to Jove is killed.
The Nones are blank, and want a sacrifice:
Take heed, I pray, the next a black day is.
The reason's from th'events: In them, they say,
Our Roman host have often lost the day.
But once of these it shall suffice to speak
In all our book, lest I my order break.
GErmanick, lo! our Janus thee does bring
A happy year: he is the first I sing.
Tway-faced Janus, our still-pac't years guide,
Who only of the gods see thy backside.
Come gracious to our captains, by whose care
Both sea and land secure of tumult are.
Come gracious to our Roman lords and states,
And in good will unlock thy temple-gates.
A good day comes; let tongues from hearts salute:
Good words and greetings this good day do suit.
Let idle wranglings not molest the ear:
Ye brawling people now your suits defer.
See how the heavens with spicy fires do shine,
And spikenard crackles on the hearths divine.
Transplendent flames do lash the temples gold,
A twinkling luster to the roof extolled.
White robes now walk to our Tarpeian wall:
The people's decked in gaytie festival.
New purple shines: new rods now stalk in state:
The ivory'd benches bear another weight.
The fair fat ox, whose neck never felt the yoke,
Now yields it to the sacrificing stroke.
Jove when he views the world from towering skies
Has naught but Roman to employ his eyes.
Hail holy day; come always fortunate:
Deserving worship of a world-great state.
But, Janus, now what god shall I thee call?
For Greece has nere a god like thee at all.
Rehearse the reason why thou have such ods
Of looking both ways, more then all the gods.
I walked, my note-book in mine hand, I mused:
The temple brighter shines then erst it used.
Majestic Janus turns immediately
His double visage to my wondering eye.
Amazement makes my hairs upright to start:
A sudden terror chills me to the heart.
His staff in's right hand, in his left his key;
From former face he thus replies to me:
Time's studious prophet, cast aside all fear,
And from my mouth what thou desire hear.
Old times did call me Chaos (I Am a thing
Of deepest eld) mark what old acts I sing.
All these four elements, the Air so clear,
Fire, Earth, and Water, one whole body were.
When strife they ceased, and this laborious mass
To several houses separated was,
Fire mounted heaven; the next the Air possessed;
The Earth and Water in the midst were pressed.
Then I, who was a rude and shapelesse load,
Came to the true proportion of a god.
Because my badge of that rude lump is small,
My fore and back parts differ not at all.
The other reason of my shape I Will show,
Which with my office thou shall also know.
What-ere thou see, heaven, air, and sea, and land,
Are all locked up, and opened by mine hand:
This vast worlds guard is in my only power:
The wheeling of the hinge of heaven is our.
When peace I please into calm courts to send,
She in safe paths about does freely wend.
With fatal blood the world would drenched be,
Should I not curb stern war with this my key.
I with the gentle Hours heavens portalls guard:
Jove's self goes in and out too by my ward:
Thence Janus called. And when the priest does make
A wafer for me, and a salt-meal-cake,
The name does seem ridiculous: some whiles
He me Patusius, and then Clusius, styles.
My double office rude antiquity
By this alternate name would signify.
Thou see my office, now will I make known
My figure's ground, in part already shown:
Two fronts (thou know) belong to every gate:
This toward the people, toward the household that*
And as the porter at his gate with you
Does both the ingresse and the egresse view:
So I the porter or heavens court survey
Just at a wink the East and Western bay.
See Hecate, her faces three ways bends,
And so she easily three-leet ways defends:
So without motion I two ways can see,
Lest loss of time there should in moving be.
This said, he promised with a courteous eye,
If more I asked, he would not me deny.
I courage took, and thankt Sr Janus then,
And casting down mine eye thus spoke again.
Why does the New year in the cold begin?
The gentle spring a fitter time had bin.
Times age renews then, and renews all things:
On swelling twigs the pearly vine-bud springs.
Leaves deck the trees in summer-green attire:
Both grass and grain above the ground does spire.
Birds descants warble in the calmed air,
Both birds and beasts do sport about and pair.
The sun shines warm. Then comes the vagrant swallow,
And on a beam her morter-work does follow.
The farmers ploughes his fallow grounds manure:
This should have been the years beginning sure.
I largely ask't, he made no large replies,
But in two verses does his speech comprize.
Sols first and last day does in winter fall,
The year the same beginning has with Sol.
Then marvell'd I why with some suits of laws
This day is kept: Says Janus, Learn the cause.
Upon the first day some affairs we raise,
Lest from the Omen all the year should laze.
Each in his art for that some business does,
And by those acts his yearly studies shows.
But why (said I) do we bring myrrh and wine
To thee before the other powers divine?
That you (says he) by me who keep the door,
May have access to any other power.
And why (said I) on this first day such greetings,
And hearty wishes do we use at meetings?
Replies he, leaning on his staff in's hand,
In their beginnings do all Omens stand.
Your jealous ears you turn to each first word:
The watchful Augur marks the first-spy'd bird.
Gods ears and temples all stand open: no tongue
Makes idle prayers, but every word is strong.
Thus answered he. I was not silent much,
For his last word I with my first did touch.
What means dry figs and palm-fruit I wot not,
And honey offered in a fine-white pot.
That Is for good luck, that things may savor so,
And that our year a pleasant race may go.
This have I learned; but show the reason now
Of new-yeares gifts, that I may all parts know.
He smiled: O how does thy age thee deceive!
Honey more sweet than money to believe!
I scarce saw any in old Saturns reign
That was not taken with the sweets of gain.
In tract of time the Having love did grow:
It Is now at height, and can no further go.
Wealth now is far more set by then of yore,
Rome being a novice, and her people poor.
When Mars-got Romulus in mean stalls lived,
And little beds of river-reeds were weaved,
In narrow court Jove scarce upright could stand,
And held an earthen thunderbolt in's hand.
Then leaves for gold the Capitol adorned:
To keep his flocks the Senator nere scorned,
Nor shamed to sleep upon a lock of hay,
Or on a pad of straw his head to lay.
The Praetour kept his court new come from plow:
A plate of silver as a shame did show.
But when proud Fate this places head had reared,
And Romes top-gallant near the gods appeared,
Then wealth increased, and wealths unglut desire,
Men much possessing still much more require.
To spend what is gotten, and to get what is spent,
The very course is vices nourishment.
So they whose bodies swelling dropsies have,
The more they drink the more they liquour crave.
Coin has the count, wealth gets the honor still:
Wealth gets the friends, the poor shifts where he will*
But if thou ask why new-yeares gifts are sent,
And why old moneys us so well content:
Yerst brass was given; now better it is in gold:
The newer coin has taken place of old.
Gold-temples please us, though the old w'approve:
The majesty a god does most behove.
We praise old times, but yet make use of new;
To both their customs like observance due.
He made an end: When conging courteously
Key-keeping Janus thus accosted I;
Much have I learned: but why one side the brass
Is stamped a ship, and then a double face?
See thou, quoth he, that double picture in it?
It is my face, but time has blurred the print.
The Ships cause learn. A ship old Saturn brought
On Tuscan stream, the whole world roam'd about.
I well remember since He pitched upon
These coasts; when Jove the throne of heaven had won.
The name Saturnia thence this land did bear,
And Latium too: because he sheltred here.
But after ages, as a mindful sign
Of his arrival, stamped a ship in coin.
I then manured that ground on whose left side
Sand-guilded Tiber's courteous stream does glide.
Where Rome now stands there grew a lofty wood;
This mighty mass was then but pasture-food.
Mine altar stood upon you hill, which from
My name this age does all Janiculum.
Then reigned I, when gods did dwell on ground,
And powers divine in humane seats were found.
Man's crimes from earth yet had not Justice driven:
She last of gods withdrew her self to heaven.
Without constraint shame ruled the hearts of men,
Not fear: small pains to judge the Commons then.
I knew no wars, but kept my Peace and Door,
These arms, quoth he, his key advanced, I wore.
His lips he closing, mine then opened I,
My question still provoking his reply:
Since thou have many temples, why do stand
In this alone, with markets twain at hand.
He, coaxing then his grave and bushy beard
Down to his wast, the Tatian wars declared.
How that light guard enticed with Sabine chains
Led into tower king Tatius and his trains.
From thence, as now, where you, quoth he, descend,
A hill through markets to the vales does bend.
Now stole they to the gate, whose fastened lock
Malignant Juno off the bolts did knock.
I, loath to thwart it with so high a power,
Did slily help them with a feat of our,
And opened the spring-heads (which my art can do)
And suddenly let floods of water go.
First in the veins I sulphur threw about,
That scalding streams might force the Tatians out.
By which, the Sabines almost scallt and slain,
The place its former nature did regain.
For this good turn they me a Chapel raise,
Where cakes and barley on my altars blaze.
But why in wars unbolted are thy gates,
And locked in peace? The reason he relates:
In time of war I set my doors wide open,
To make retreat for every marched forth troop.
In peace I Am barred, lest forth stern war should flee:
And long in Cesars empire barred I Will be.
This said, he lifts his all-way-looking eyes,
And views what ever in the broad world lies.
'Twas peace, O Caesar, and subdued Rhene,
To raise thy triumphs, paid his tribute then.
Peace and peacemakers, Janus, death-lesse make:
Let not the author e're that work forsake.
Now let me tell what registers do say;
Our fathers gave two temples on this day.
The isle where Tiber in two parts does run,
Did welcome Aesculapius Phoebus son.
Jove has a part: one place them both conteins:
The grandchild's temple to the grandsire's joins.
What lets to sing the stars ascent and set?
This is a piece on which our Muse must treat.
Blessed souls who first did this rare science love,
And strived to climb those crystal courts above!
From worldly vices and all baser toys
They (doubtless) their diviner thoughts did raise.
Nor wine, nor love, nor wars, nor court-affairs
Did break those lofty-towring minds of theirs:
Nor varnish't glory, nor ambition light,
Nor thirst of riches did distract their spright.
They drew the stars familiar to our eyes,
And to their knowledge did submit the skies.
So heaven is scaled, not as Olympus yerst
Did Ossa bear, the clouds with Pelion pierced.
We by those guides will meet those heavenly lines,
And point each day to his associate signs.
The third night come before the Nones ensue,
When earth is dabbled with the morning dew,
To seek eight-footed Cancers arms were vain,
He headlong falls into the western main.
Much rain does threat from hovering clouds to flow:
The Nones, the Harp arising, signs will show.
Let four days from the Nones be past, then shall
Old Janus have his service Agonall.
The girt-up priest, who at the altar slayes
The beast to him, may be the titles cause:
Who being about to drench his knife in blood,
Agone cries, nor strikes till he is allowed.
This feast Agnalia they did term (some say)
In ancient times, one letter ta'n away.
Some think, because the beasts are driven, they call
This day from cattle-driving, Agonal.
Or else, because knives laid in water scare
The wary beast, it is called so from that fear.
Some hold that from those games the Greeks did make
In former times this day the name did take.
Which games old language did Agonia call:
And in my mind this ground is best of all.
How-ere it is doubtful. But the great King-priest
With sacred ram to Janus now must feast.
By hands victorious victima does fall:
From slaughtred host the beast we hostia call.
In times of eld men pleased the powers of heaven
With crummes of salt, and meal of barley given.
No foreign vessel through the swelling seas
Brought in sweet myrrh wept from the rinds of trees.
Euphrates incense, Ind no cost did send:
None did the strings of tawny saffron tend.
From Sabine weeds the altars fumes did rise,
And bay-boughs burning with a crackling noise.
If any in his flow'r-prank't chaplets than
Could violets put, he was a wealthy man.
The knife that now the oxes flesh does slice,
Then had no office in a sacrifice.
First Ceres in the greedy swines blood joy'd,
Him well requiting who her wealth destroyed.
For in the spring her tender juicy corn
She found up-rooted by the swine and torn.
He punished was. Sir goat, you might have learned
To keep from vines by his example warned:
Whom one beholding on the vine-tree feeding,
Did vent these words from no still grief proceeding;
Well goat gnaw on, yet when at the altar thou
Do stand for death the wine shall wash thy brow.
Truth proves his speech: to thee that foe of thine
Sir Bacchus, given, his horns are dash't with wine.
The swines fault wronged him and the goats: ye flocks
What did ye merit? or the useful ox?
The shepherd Aristaeus mourned and pined
His bees all dead and combs decayed to find.
Whom his blue mother comforted in grief,
And in the end did give him this relief;
Son, stay these sorrows: Proteus thee will show
Thy loss to cure, and thy dead stock renew:
But bind him sure in fetters strong, lest he
With his transformed shapes should coosen thee.
The young man to the Ocean Sage makes have,
And fast asleep his arms he shackles fast.
His shape he changes, and transforms by charm;
Straight tamed with shackles comes to his own form,
And raising his drencht face with his blue beard,
Do seek, quoth he, to have thy stock repaired?
An oxes carcass bury in the field,
And thy desire that buried ox shall yield.
This did the youth: The putrid corpse does glow
With swarms; from one life do a thousand flow.
The saucie sheep cropped vervine in the spring,
Which good old wives to countrey-gods did bring.
What beast's secure, when profitable flocks
Are slain at altars, and the toilsome ox?
Beam-girt Hyperion Persians please with horse:
No dull beast suits a god so swift in course.
The heart that did to triple Dian fall
Once for a maid, now dies for none at all.
Sabeans and chill Aemus have I seen
Dogs entrails offer to the Trivian queen.
The ass unto the Garden-god is killed:
The cause obscene, yet such this god does yield.
To ivi'd Bacchus Greece a feast did make,
Which each third year a constant course does take.
The gods that kept about Lyceus side
And all the neighbors to the banquet plied;
The Fauns and Satyrs with obscenenesse fired,
The Nymphs that haunt fresh springs and shades retired:
Silenus sage on bow-backt ass was there,
And he whose red flank frightfull birds does scare.
Who choosing in a grove a fitting place
For such a feast, sat down on turfs of grass.
They Had wines from Bacchus: each did bring his crown:
To cool their cups a brook hard by ran down.
The Fairies some in loose and careless hair,
Some in their artificial tires, were there.
Some with their coats tuckt up unto the knee,
Some naked-breasted in the service be.
Some with bare shoulders, some in garments side
Did sweep the grass: their feet no sandals tied.
Hence secretly at some the Satyrs glow;
And thou who with a pine-wreath bind'st thy brow.
And thee, Silenus, quenchlesse lusts still hold:
It Is lechery that makes thee never old.
But Priap's love, the dun-thigh'd garden-guard,
Amongst all the rest was bent to Lotis-ward:
For her he longs, for her he sighs and pines,
To her he winks, and sues with nods and signs.
Pride fills the fair, and beauty breeds disdain:
She laughs at him, and slights his suits but vain.
Night came, and sleep by wine provoked: they
Each in his place to rest, being drowzy, lay.
Beneath a maple Lotis on the grass,
Quite tired with sport, on the outside tumbled was:
Her sweetheart rising holds his breath, and goes
Most slily, creeping on his hands and toes.
Her private lodging soon as he came nigh,
He holds his wind from breathing out too high.
His bulk he lays down easily on the ground
Close to her side, yet she asleep was sound.
Full blithe, her coats above her knees he drew,
And luckily his business began pursue.
When lo! just then from his unpleasing throat
Silenus ass brayes out an ugly note.
Up starts the nymph affrighted much, and shoves
Sir Priap off, and flying wakes the groves.
The god too forward with his tool obscene,
Was soundly jeered at, by the moonlight seen.
This cost the braying ass his life, who is
To Lampsacs God a pleasing sacrifice.
Wood-haunting birds, the countries solace, ye
(A harmless brood) were yet untouched and free.
That build neat nests, and eggs with tender wing
Hatch up, and in melodious accents sing.
This naught avails: the Gods your tongues do find
Too faulty in discovering their mind.
And true it is; with wing and tattling bill
You near to heaven disclose their secret will.
The kind of birds, long free, at length yet died,
And Gods their traitors entrails gratified.
Thence on the burning hearths the milk-wing'd dove
Is sacrificed, snatched from her tender love.
Nor can the guarded Capitol release
The gooses liver from choice Inachs mess.
The cock by night to Nights black Queen they slay,
Because his watchful bill does wake the day.
Mean while the Dolphines glittering snout does rise
From native seas, and scales the azure skies.
Next day does winter equally divide:
What past made even to what remains beside.
Next days Aurora rising views in sight
The Arcadian Ladies pontificiall rite.
This day Juturna to a chapel took,
Where Mars his field is girt with maiden broo^.
From whence shall I their cause and customs take?
My doubtful barge who guides amid this lake?
Tell thou, who from thy verses take thy name,
My task assist, lest I should wrong thy fame.
Before the Moon Arcadia did derive
Her name from Arcas (may we her believe.)
Here lived Evander honorable in
Both pedegrees,, but most in mothers kin.
She, when her breast with heavenly fire was filled,
From full-voic'd mouth true prophesies did yield:
That troubles did herself and son pursue,
With much more news, which time approved true.
For he with his too-skilfull mother, beat
From Arcadie, forsook his native seat:
And weeping (cries his mother) Do not mourn,
My son; these fates must manfully be born.
'Twas thus enrolled in Fate: from thine abode
No crime has driven thee, but an angry God.
Thou suffer not thy merits, but heavens wrath:
Clean innocence in woe much comfort has.
As is the conscience, so the mind does breed
Or hope or fear for every acted deed.
Thou Art not the first that has such evils born:
These tempests have the greatest worthies torn.
This Cadmus banished from the Tyrian bay
Endured, then settled in Aonia.
This was both Tydeus and Jasons state,
And diverse more, too many to relate.
As seas to fish, to birds as air and wind,
All lands are native to a noble mind.
Nor shall this winter last perpetually:
Believe me, son, there is a spring for thee.
Evander raised by his mothers speech,
Plowes up the waves, and Italy does reach.
Then by her guidance to our river came
Of Tiber, and so sailed up the stream.
The rivers margent on Tarentums side,
And scattred stalls on desert plains she eyed.
With hairs about her shoulders poured she stands
O'th'poop, and scowling stays the pilots hands.
Her arms extended to the right side banks,
With frantic feet thrice stamped she on the planks.
Scarce could Evander scarce with might and main
Her leaping hast'ly on the bank restrain.
Hail Gods (cries she) of this desired place;
Hail land, the mother of a heavenly race:
Ye springs and rivers of this land hospitious,
Ye Fairies feat, and water-nymphs delicious,
With good luck of my son and me be seen:
With happy foot may we all touch this green.
I err, or else these hills huge walls shall see,
And to this land all lands shall subject be.
The world's engaged to yonder mountains state:
Who'uld think this place should comprehend such fate?
Troy's ships now shortly here arriving are:
Here shall a woman cause a second war.
Dear Pallas, why do fatal arms array thee?
Well, put them on; no common hand shall slay thee.
Yet conquered Troy shall conquer: fallen shall rise:
Her ruins shall subdue her enemies.
Ye conquering flames the Dardane towers devour:
Their dust, now small, shall here the world o'repower.
Aeneas now his gods and father brings:
O Vesta, entertein those holy things!
Time comes when one shall Earth with you defend;
That god himself shall sacrifices spend.
The Cesars then their country shall maintein:
That noble house must guide the kingdoms reign.
That god-born prince (although himself deny)
His fathers weight shall manage piously.
As sure as altars me perpetually
Shall worship, Julia shall a goddess be.
As with these words she came to these our times,
Her tongue prophetic stayed amid these rhy'mes.
A board on Italy these exuls went:
Right blessed; to whom that land was banishment!
Straight rise new walls. Nor could that clime afford
A greater Hero then the Arcadian lord.
Lo, great Tyrinthius, as he now did rove
The world, his Spanish oxen thither drove:
And being here entertein'd by king Evander,
His beasts unkept about the plains do wander.
The club-arm'd Heroes, when the morn appeared,
Arose, and missed two oxen in his herd.
He searched, but finds no tract of beasts nor men;
Fell Cacus dragged them backward to his den:
Cacus, the fear of Aventine, and woe;
A plague to strangers and to natives too:
Stern-look'd, strong-limb'd, a most prodigious mass:
Black Vulcane sire of this vast monster was.
In stead of house a desert cave, huge, vast
And far retired, by which no beast yet passed.
Men's sculls and limbs were hanged about his door:
The clottered ground was strewn with bones all over.
Jove's son departing with his ill-kept crowd,
The oxen stolen unto their fellows lowed.
Oh, I Am recalled, quoth he: and following then
The sound, through woods he rustles to his den.
A piece of rock barred up his wide-mouthed gate:
Ten yoke of oxen scarce could move the weight.
He shoves with shoulders which the heavens could bear,
And with the motion up the load does tear.
Which tumbling down, the noise does heaven affright:
The powerful mass the yielding ground does smite.
First Cacus gives the onset with heaved hands,
And fiercely deals with stones and burning brands:
Which being but vain, his fathers art to use
He strains, and fires from thundering throat he spues:
You would have thought 't had bin Typhoeus blast,
And clattering volleys out of Aetna cast.
Alcides drives on, and with knotty bat
Three or four times does dash him over the pate.
He falls, and forth fire-mingled blood does pour,
And, dying, with his huge bulk beats the floor.
One of these heads to Jove he offers then,
And calls Evander with the Contrymen;
And builds his Altar which is called the Great;
Here where the street derives the name from Neat.
Nor was Carmentis mute, but said, E're long
The gods Alcides should be ranked among.
But this heaven-loved Prophetess more blessed
This day, engoddess'd, in this month possessed.
In th'Ides the holy Priest for sacrifice
In Joves great court a wethers entrails fries.
Then to our nation every province came.
Then first Augustus was thy grandsires name.
Search, read the statues through the minsters old;
So great a title has no prince extolled.
One Africks conquest titles: these are named
To show the Cretians, or Isaurians tamed:
Numidians this, and him Messanians raise:
From curbed Numantia has another praise.
Germania was both Drusus death and name:
Ah me! how short a virtue was that same!
Should Cesars conquests give him appellations,
He Would have as many as the world has nations.
From some one action some renowned grow;
From bracelets taken, or from a lucky crow.
Magnus, thy name's the measure of thy deeds:
Yet he that conquered name and thee exceeds.
Above the Fabii's name there is no degree;
For their great acts Great fames that family.
Yet all these humane celebrations are:
With Jove himself Augustus name does share.
Old times Augusta called all things of state,
And temples which the Priest did consecrate.
From this words theme is Auguries descent,
And whatsoever Joves bounty does augment.
May he augment our Princes years and states,
May oaken garlands still protect our gates.
Still may this large names heir the cities weight,
By heavens aid, manage in his fathers fate.
The third day after that the Ides are gone,
The Arcadian goddess has more sacreds done.
In carrs at first our wives did ride about:
(The are called so from Carmentis out of doubt.)
This privilege taken from them, all agreed
No children for such thanklesse men to breed.
And, to prevent, her embryon every mother
Forced from her womb by some close means or other.
They chid their wives for this their act abhorred;
But yet their custom was again restored.
Then to Carmentis they consent to raise
Two sacrifices, both for girls and boys.
No beast self-dead her chapel will endure:
Because, unclean, it stains her altars pure.
Who e're thou art that love old rites, the prayer
Assist; unhear'd-of names you now shall hear:
Postverta since, and Porrima w'appease;
Carmentis sisters or her mates were these:
The first, because she speaks of future things;
The last, because of matters past she sings.
Next day White Concord in a white church placed,
Where tall Moneta on high steps is raised.
Now be protectresse of the Latin train,
Now sacred hands have reared thee up again.
The Tuscane conqueror Furius of eld
Did vow thee, and his solemn vow fulfilled.
The cause; The commons against the nobles were
In arms, and Rome did her own greatness fear.
This last is best: Brave Prince thy thundering knocks
Made Germany cut short her dangling locks.
Then gav'st thou gifts of that triumphed nation;
And rais'd'st a church for Concords adoration.
This did thy mother, Joves bed-worthy bride,
Endow with altars and rich gifts beside.
These things thus past, Sol leaving Capricorn,
His race-horse to the Water-boy does turn.
The seventh day hence, when Sol his fiery wheels
Cools in the sea, the Harp a part conceals.
Next morn to this the bright star that does shine
In Leo's breast, is quenched in Neptune's brine.
Three or four times I searched the Calendar,
But could not find a Seed-day any where.
My Muse perceiving, said, Seek thou always
For Holy Days: that is but a Bidden day.
The day's uncertain, certain is the time,
When seed-big fields do sprout forth in their prime.
Crowned oxen now at full-stuft mangers feed:
The thriving spring more work for you will breed.
His well-wrought plow the farmer on a post
Hangs up: the ground fears every wound in frost.
Farmers, let plowmen and manured soil
(Your seed-time finished) rest and sport a while.
Now plowmen feast, and now surround your corn;
And yearly gifts on Countrey-altars burn.
Ceres and Terra mothers of your seed
Please with big sow and fruits themselves do breed.
These two one common benefit maintein;
This yields the place, and she the cause of grain.
These two co-workers ancient times renewed;
That nobler food condemned akorns rude.
Fill up the Farmers gapings with rich crops:
Yield some requital to their pains and hopes.
With constant growths increase you still their corn:
Let not chill snows the blade yet tender burn.
In sowing seed let smooth gales open the skies:
Rain down soft showr's when underground it lies.
Scare grain-devouring flocks of birds away:
Because that they our Cereall wealth destroy.
Ye toyling pismires, spare the corn new sown:
In harvest-time more plenty will be grown.
Thus let it thrive from rusty blasting free;
Nor by the heavens distemper sickly be.
Not too too thin, nor yet too rank, whereby
To faint through too much prodigality.
Free all the grounds from eye-annoying darnel:
Let not an ear bring forth a chaffie kernel.
Let fields all yield in huge increase rich wheat,
And rye, and barley, twice enduring heat.
Thus I for you, thus for your own affairs
Ye Farmers pray: may both Powers hear our prayers!
Wars long have vexed us; swords were more in course
Then shares; the ox gave place to the haughty horse.
Rakes idle lay, and mattocks turned to piles;
In fire the spade to make a helmet boils.
Thanks to the Gods and to thy house, that long
Wars under foot have lain in fetters strong.
Let the ox be in his yoke, in soil the seed:
Peace, Ceres mother, Ceres still does feed.
The fifth before the Calends first begins,
Were temples raised to those Ledean twins.
Two brother-Gods to brother-Gods did make
These fabrics seated near Juturna lake.
To Peace her altar has our verse us brought,
Which is one day before the month goes out.
Sweet Peace, approach with Actian garlands crowned,
And through the world continue thou renowned.
Adieu all foes, though here no triumphs be;
Peace more then War does Princes magnify.
Let soldiers carry arms, arms to confound:
Let blaring trumpets naught but pomp resound.
Let Troy's brave race the world with terror move:
Let every land that dreads not Rome, her love.
On peaceful flames, ye Priests, sweet incense lay,
And cattle with wine-dabbled forelocks slay.
Let pious prayers the yielding Gods attend,
That this calm house in Peace may time transcend.
But now the first piece of my task is done:
And, with our book, we through this month are run.
The end of the first Book.
OVIDS FESTIVALLS; OR, ROMAN CALENDAR. The second Book; or, FEBRUARY.
The Argument.
THe Etymology of this months name.
St Safety's chapel. And Arions fame.
Great Cesars title. Nymph Calisto fair.
The Fabii slain. The Crow. Lupercals bare.
Pans love; the cheat. A Wolf the Martial twins
Exposed does nurse. Wives pregnant made with skins.
Quirinus deifi'd. Fools-Holy-day.
To Parents tombs and Silence rites they pay.
Charistia. Terminus. Young Tarquines lust
Lucrece from life, himself from's throne does thrust.
JAnus is done: Our year with rhythmes does run;
And with the Month another book's begun.
Now Elegies your sails you 'gin display:
Me thoughts you were but little flags to day.
You were my nimble pages in my love,
When first our Muse in youthful sports did rove:
Now Calendary Holy days you sing:
How should this new from that old subject spring?
This is my chivalry: these arms I wear:
Our hands not void of all employments are.
What though our arm no javelins flight does force,
Nor check the chidings of a foming horse,
Nor girt with sword, nor with a helmet fens'd?
(None but may vaunt in those habiliments)
We studiously, brave Caesar, search thy names,
And trace the Titles thy desert proclaims:
Accept this service with a calmed brow;
If freed a while from curbing of the foe.
Old Romans did Purgations Februa call:
And now good signs they guard this word withal.
The Nobles from the High Priest, and Flamen by
Took locks of wool, called Februa anciently.
Thus were those purgings styled, that hot-salt cake,
Which at some houses Lictours used to take.
The bough was termed thus which was cut down
From Laurel-tree the Priests chaste brows to crown.
I Have seen a Pine-branch to Flaminia's hand
Delivered, when she Februa did demand.
Whatever, lastly, us does purify
Was styled thus by unshorn Antiquity.
Hence comes this month, because Luperci run
With goat skin-thongs in that purgation:
Or else because the balefull days now rid,
The season's pure, and grave-ghosts quieted.
By due purgation men in times of eld
All crimes and evils expiable held.
Greece thought (which first this custom did begin)
By sprinkling men were quitted from their sin.
Once Peleus did Patroclus purge in water,
And him Acastus purged from Phocus slaughter.
Fond Aegeus vainly Phasis purified,
Who on curbed dragons in the air did ride.
Alcmaeon did to Achelous say,
Purge me from sin; he purged his sin away.
Ah, too too silly, who imagine water
Can wash away that heavy crime of slaughter!
But, that you may the ancient order know,
Know Janus, as before, the first is now.
The next to Janus was the old years last:
And Terminus did end the rites all past.
Janus the first month is, as 't were the Gate:
The next was last, to Ghosts being consecrate.
Long after, our Decemviri ('t is thought)
These months farre-distanc'd both together brought.
In this months entrance, near the Phrygian Dame,
New Temples once enlarged St Safety's fame.
Where are those buildings in these Calends raised,
If you enquire: Time them has quite defaced.
Our sacred Princes Care and Providence
Our other from the like decay prevents;
And lets no wrong to them be done by time:
Obliging Gods, as well as men, to him.
Great Temple-founder and repairer too,
Still may the Gods have mutual care of you!
May Gods those years which you give them give thee,
And for thy house stand to eternity.
Then is the Grove solemnized, and the Asyle,
Where foreign Tybris to the sea does toil.
At Numa's shrine and in the Capitol
Of thundering Jove a two-yeare-sheep does fall.
Ofttimes great gusts the mantled heavens do shed;
Or feath'ry snow the earth does overspread.
When next days Titan dives the western stream,
And pearly harness takes from purple team;
That night one lifting to the heavens his eyne,
Says, Where Is the Harp which yesternight did shine?
And seeking for the Harp, spies suddenly
The Lions middle drenched in western sea.
The starre-embossed Dolphine, which to night
Is seen, the next night after shuns our sight.
For being Neptunes faithful spy fixed there;
Or 'cause he did the Lesbian Harper bear.
What sea or land but rings Arions fame,
Whose sweetest strains the swiftest streams could tame?
The wolf often coursing silly lambs to kill,
The lamb often running from the wolf, stood still:
Often dogs and hares beneath one covert lay;
And hearts by lions on a bank did stay:
At sight of the owl the jackdaw made no prate;
And by the dove the puttock quiet sat.
'T is said that Cynthia did as much admire
Arions music as her Brothers lyre.
Arions fame had filled the Sicil sea;
His lyrick songs did charm Ausonia.
He, with his riches purchased by his art,
Took ship into his country to depart.
Perhaps, poor man, thou dread'st the waves and wind!
But thou the sea more safe then ship did find.
For lo, the Pilot, now a Pirate, stands,
And all his crew with naked swords in hands.
Pilot, what make thou with a sword? throw't from thee,
And guide thy ship: those tools do more become thee.
He pale with fear; For life I do not pray:
But on my harp let me rehearse one lay.
They in derision yielded. He puts on
His laurell-crown which might become the Sun:
Then dons his gown in Tyrian purple died:
The fingred strings in measures due replied.
He sings in mournful numbers, like a Swan
Whose hardened quills have pierced his aged brain-pan:
Then into water thus attired does skip:
The battred billows all bedash the ship.
Whom on his arched back (most strange to say!)
The Dolphine takes, and bears him on his way.
He sits, and for his portage-wages sings:
The melting waves are ravished at his strings.
Jove and the Gods this piety beheld,
And with nine stars in heaven the Dolphine sealed.
Now, grand Maeonian, I a thousand veins
Could wish, with thine Achilles-blazing strains.
Whiles holy times we sing on varying quill,
Still more renown our Calendar does fill.
My breast falls short: beyond my strength I strive:
We special numbers to this day must give.
Ah fool, to elegize a weight so great!
This should have walked upon Heroic feet.
Hail, Pater Patriae! thee this title grave
Both Court, and Commons, and our Order gave.
Yet 't was too late: Thy deeds e're that claimed more:
Thou were the worlds great Father long before.
Jove's name in heaven is thine on earth: small ods;
Thou Father of mankind, he of the Gods.
Yield, Romulus: Our Prince thy walls does keep
Invicted; Remus over thine could leap.
You curbed small Cures, Tatius, and Caenine:
His Roman reign out-starts Sols farthest line.
You but in small epitome did reign:
All under Jove does Cesars power contein.
He honors Chastity, defiled by thee:
Your grove did hatch, he stabs Iniquity:
He fosters Laws; you nurtured Violence:
You styled but Lord; he, Universal Prince:
You taxed by Remus; he is his foes Saver:
Thy father thee; he deifies his father.
The Trojane Lad now to the wast appears,
And sokes the earth with store of Nectar tears.
Now all whom Boreas rigid blasts made quake,
Cheer up; for Zephyr milder air does make.
When Lucifer his sparkling crest does raise
In this fifth morn, the Spring begins straightwayes.
But yet take heed; there still remains some cold:
For waning Winter still harsh signs does hold.
The third night after we may see in skies
The northern Bearherd with his feet to rise.
Calisto was the prettyest Less among
The Nymphs of quiver-girt Diana's throng.
Her Lady's bow she takes: This bow, quoth she,
I hold here witness my virginity.
This Cynthia praised: Thy vow, quoth she, maintein,
And thou shall be the Lady of my train.
Sh' had kept her promise had she not been fair:
All men she scorns; but Jove does her impair.
From hunting thousand games in forests vast
Diana comes about noontide or past.
Now in her grove with holms all overgrown,
Amid the which a clear-cool spring ran down,
Come Tegean Maid, and in the cool, she said,
Let Us wash. She blushed at that false title, Maid.
The Nymphs, all bidden, laid their coats away.
She grew suspicious by her shamed delay.
Her clothes pulled off, the swellings of her womb.
An open traitor to her shame become.
Avaunt, false Strumpet, from our virgin-train,
The Goddess cried, nor these pure waters stain.
Ten times the Moon her horns to orbs had brought;
She Is now a mother who a maid was thought.
Wronged Juno storming changed the wenches shape:
(O spare! She strove: it was thy Husbands rape)
And as the maid an ugly bear did turn,
Let Jove, says she, in those embraces burn.
The shapelesse beast in forests wild does rove,
Which did erewhile enamour mighty Jove.
The Bastard-boy his fifteenth year did run,
When lo! by chance his mother met her son.
She, as she him had known, stood still (poor wretch!)
And groned: groaning was her only speech.
Her deadly wound the ignorant lad had given,
But that they both were taken up to heaven;
Joint constellations: One we Arctos read:
The next Boots does behind succeed.
To hoary Tethys Juno vexed more went
To banish Arctos from her watery tent.
Wild Faunus Altars in the Ides do glow,
Where parted streams about the island flow.
This is the day wherein the Fabii's train,
Three hundred six, were by the Veians slain.
One House a city's weight and burden bear;
And kindred-armies arms professed wear.
All out of one tent march courageously;
Of whom there is none but might a Captain be.
Carmentis Gate's right hand to Janus leads;
(Go no man that way: it an omen breeds)
Forth by that portall marched this noble House:
The Gate's not faulty; yet 't is ominous.
Soon as to rapid Cremera, whose banks
Were now brim-full, they came in speedy ranks,
Their tents pitched down, they rush with blades in hand
In Martial prowess through the Tyrrbene band,
Like lions of the Libyan breed, which tear
The scattered herd about the fields each where.
The routed foes base wounds on back-sides bide:
The blushing ground in Tuscane blood is died.
Thus often they fall. Now when by chivalry
They naught could do, to policy they fly.
A plain there is enclosed on every side
With hills and woods; close coverts beasts to hide,
Amid this field few herds and men display:
Among the woods the rest in ambush lay.
Lo, like a torrent puffed by sudden storm,
Or banks of snow dissolved by Zephyrs warm:
Over corn and hedges it does range and rage;
Nor can the banks its luxury assuage:
Even so the Fabii range about the field;
And, fearing naught, whoms'ere they met they killed.
O whither royal brood? O trust them not!
Right noble blood, beware their treacherous plot.
Fraud murders valor: the ambushment unseen
Rush into open fields and hemme them in.
What could so few against ten thousand swords?
What help was there which misery affords?
Like as a boar chased by a cry of hounds,
The yelping curs with thundering tushes wounds;
Yet falls at last: so they with vengeance die;
And take and deal their wounds alternately.
One day the Fabii did in arms array:
In arms arrayed they all were slain one day.
'T is said the Gods provided that some seed
Might still be left in this Herculean breed.
For one young stripling of the Fabian race,
Unfit for feats of arms, surviving was.
Which, Maximus, was thee to propagate,
Who by delaying did restore the State.
Three constellations near: the Snake, the Crow,
And then the Cup that is couched between the two.
In the Ides they are concealed, but next night rise:
We'll tell the cause of their societies.
It chanced that Phoebus gave to Jove one day
A solemn feast: (My tale shall make no stay)
Go, Bird, that nothing may be wanting, bring,
Quoth he, some water from a running spring.
The golden tanker in his claws the Crow
Takes, and through air with waving wings does row.
A fig tree full of figs yet green there stood:
He pecks off one: it was not fit for food.
His errand slighted, he among the twigs
Sits loyt'ring, till the season ripped the figs:
Then fills his crop, and, catching up a Snake,
Comes to his Master, and this lie does make;
Lo, here my let, the springs usurper, who
Kept me from water and my duty too.
D' you add a lie to this vile trick of your?
Dare you delude an all-beholding Power?
For this no water shall thou drink, quoth he,
Whiles figs in ripening hang upon the tree.
This Phoebus said: Crow, Snake, and Cup, all shine
Near-neighbouring stars, the deeds eternal sign.
The third day next the Ides Luperci bare
Run, and horned Faunus rites solemnized are:
Relate, ye Muses, their original,
And whence derived to the Roman wall.
The old Arcadians much did Pan adore:
Who but Sr Pan in all Arcadia's shore?
Stymphalian waters, and green Pholoe,
And swift-stream'd Ladon may my witness be.
Pine-stately Nonacrine the same does know,
And high- Troezene, and Parrhasian snow.
Hards, Groves, and Springs Pans power there did keep:
Pan had large offerings for protected sheep.
His country Gods Evander did translate
To this our city, then a city's plat.
Thence we that God with Grecian rites adore:
Here Is still Joves Flamen, as was there of yore.
Why run they then about (you ask) so fast?
Why run they naked all their clothes off-cast?
The God himself over mountains does delight
To run, and force men to a sudden flight.
The God self-naked naked makes his fry:
Clothes are a hindrance to agility.
Before Joves birth Arcadians tilled the land:
They say that nation e're the Moon did stand.
At first rude Boores devoyd of wit and art,
Like bruits unexercis'd in reasons part:
Boughs were their house, roots were the food they knew:
With both their palms for drink they water drew:
No oxen panted at the crooked plow:
No landlord as his own a field did ow:
No horse was used; legs were in stead of steed:
Sheep wool for none but for themselves did breed.
With bodies naked they the air endured,
To nipping frosts and sturdy storms inured.
Therefore they naked run, in sign and honor
Of hardiness and that old bare-skinn'd manner.
Yet for the chief cause why Pan does detest
All clothes, Tradition tells a merry jest.
Perchance Tirynthius by his Sweet-hearts side
Walked, whereas Faunus on a bank them spied.
He eyes and fries, and, Countrey-lasses, cries,
None for my diet; here my Cupid lies.
The Lydians shoulders with perfumed hair,
Her breasts with glittring gold begaudy'd were.
A golden fan Sols rival heat repelled,
Which Hercules kind hand before her held.
To Bacchus groves and Tmoles vineyards now
They came when Hesper in the West did glow.
A cave, by which there plays a cheerful brook,
With topazes and pumice arched they took.
Now, while the servants had prepared the feast,
In her attire her Hercules she dressed.
She puts on him her purple wast-coat slender,
And girdle, which embraced her body tender.
Her zone's too little; and her wast-coats bands
He stretches out to thrust forth his huge hands.
Her bracelets break, not made for that intent:
His huge plaice-foot her pretty sandals rent.
His weighty club and lions spoils she tries,
And quiver-weapons of a lesser cise.
Thus, supper ended, both themselves apply
To sleep, and on two several couches lie,
Because next day some rites to Joves Wine-sonne
They should perform, which must be purely done.
Pan comes (What dares not venurous love assault?)
In midnight-darknesse to the silent vault:
He finds the servants clogged with wine and sleep,
And hopes the same clogs did the Lovers keep.
In comes the Lecher bold, romes here and there:
His groping hands his wary ushers were.
At last he on the Lady's bed lays hold,
At first right happy in his venture bold.
Soon as he touched the lions bristly hide,
He plucks his hand back greatly terrified.
Then trembling comes again, again goes back:
Just like a traveller that spies a snake.
Then feels he to the softer-clothed bed,
Which stood at hand, by couz'ning signs misled.
Up crawls he, and on the hither side lies down:
His member stiffer then his horns were grown.
Mean while the feet he softly does uncover:
His thighs with bristly hairs were harsh all over.
Attempting more, Alcides from the couch
Throws him quite off: down lumps the lustful slouch.
Maeonia at the noise for lights does cry;
Which brought there make a strange discovery.
He, with his fall much bruised, groans and mones;
And, much ado, heaves up his heavy bones.
Alcides laughed, and all, at that night-rover;
And Omphale laughs at her goodly Lover.
The God by garments cheated, hates them all,
And none but naked to his rites does call.
Muse, to these foreign add our Countrey's cause,
And let our steed in his own barriers race.
A goat to Faunus slain, as was the manner,
Invited neighbors came to that small honor.
And while the priests the embowell'd beast do roast
On willow-spits, about noontide almost,
The Martial twins and Countrey-lads begun
Some sports all naked in the fields and sun:
And with swift whorlbats, casting stones and darts,
They exercised their bodies strength and parts.
Behold a Shepherd on a mountain high,
Help, Sirs: thieves drive away our beasts, does cry.
'T were long to arm: two several ways both run;
And Remus first the prey recovered won.
Returned, he draws from spits the hissing meat:
Quoth he, Let none but those that conquered eat.
Thus did the Fabii too. Quirinus there
Came now devoyd, and spies the boards all bare.
He laughs; yet grieved that Remus Fabii
Should win the game, not his Quintilii.
The fame continues: they all naked race;
And he that got the day has got the grace.
But why and for what cause, perhaps you will say,
Do we Lupercal call that place and day?
Nun Sylvia at one birth two God-got twins
Brought forth, her uncle then the Countrey's Prince.
He charged his men in the river them to drown.
O spare! what mean thou? Romulus is one.
The unwilling men obey the tragic King;
And the infants to the place they weeping bring.
Then Albula (from Tyberine there drowned
Called Tyber since) had overflown the ground.
Here where now streets are and the valleys low
Of the ample Circus, cock-boats then did row.
Being hither come (nor could they further go)
In bitter grief thus burst forth one or two;
Alas, how fair! ah me, how like they be!
Yet this of both the perkest is to see.
If that the face the pedigree may show,
Unless I miss, a God is one of you.
Yet were a God the author of your race,
He sure would help in such a desperate case.
Your mother would: but help her self does need;
One day made mother and unmothered.
True twins in birth and death; together drown
In this sad stream. He ceased, and laid them down.
Both cried alike, as if they knew their woe.
These to their homes with watery cheeks do go.
A rush-boat on the top the babes upholds:
O how much fate that little cratch enfolds!
The boat by littles floting to the wood,
The flood decreasing, pitched upon the mud.
A fig tree stood, the stump remains this day,
Then Rumina, but now called Romula.
To these poor Barns there comes a she-wolf wild:
Most strange a wild beast should not hurt a child!
Yet that was nothing; she assists and nurses
Those whom their kindred to their death enforces.
She stands and fawns upon the nuddling twins,
And with her tongue licks over their tender skins.
Mars-got you will say: They boldly draw the teat,
And so are nourished with unhop'd-for meat.
The Wolf that place, that place Lupercals named:
She for her nurs'ry well is paid, she is famed.
Some draw Lupercal from the Arcadian hill,
Where Pan Lyceus has a chapel still.
Good wife leave craving; neither charms, nor vows,
Nor herbs can make thee mother of thy house.
Take patiently stripes from the fruitful hand;
Thy father then shall be a father grand.
For 't was that time whenas their issues rare
Good wives with sad tormenting pangs did bear.
My rape of Sabine maids was all in vain,
Cried Romulus, (This happened in his reign.)
If from my wrong not strength but strife is grown,
I had far better let those Dames alone.
A wood there grew to Juno's power divine,
An ages growth, beneath mount Esquiline.
Both men and women, all convented hither,
Right humbly fall down on their knees together.
Lo, suddenly the tops of trees did quake,
And in her grove strange things the Goddess spoke;
Ye Latin Dames, cries she, apply a Goat.
All stood amazed at that ambiguous note.
There was a Soothsayer (time conceals his name)
Who newly banished, from Hetruria came:
He kills a goat: the women, as was willed,
To the goat-thong-lashes their bare backs did yield.
Ten times the Moon her waned light did gather,
The wife's a mother, and the man a father.
Thanks, O Lucina! thee thy grove thus styled,
Or 'cause thou first giv'st light to every child.
O spare, Lucine; and when wives bellies swell,
Bring their ripe burden easily forth and well.
When day appears, trust thou the winds no more:
That season has deceitful bin before.
The wind's not certain, and for full six days
King Aeolus his castle-gate displayes.
Aquarius with his stooping pitcher now
Falls off, and Phoebus makes the Fishes glow.
He and his brother (for joynt-stars they shine)
Bare on their backs (they say) two Powers divine.
Dione flying terrible Typhone,
When Jove waged war for heavens imperial throne,
Comes to Euphrates with her little son,
And on the banks of Palestine sits down.
Tall canes and poplars on the margent grew,
And sallows hopes of her concealment show.
There hid, the trees did rustle in the wind:
She pale with fear supposed her foes behind:
And, in her bosom culling her young son,
Cried, Nymphs, O aid two Deities undone!
Thus leaps she in; these Fishes her did bear:
For which in heaven now deifi'd they are.
Hence Syrians hate to eat that kind of Fishes:
Nor is it fit to make their Gods their dishes.
Next day is void. Quirinus he does hold
The third, whose name was Romulus of old:
Either because the Sabines old that spear
Did Quiris call which him to heaven did rear;
Or his Quirites styled him thus their King;
Or cause the Curets he to Rome did bring.
For when God Mars beheld new walls to stand,
And great acts done by Romulus his hand,
Great Jove, says he, the Romans powerful are;
And my own blood has in their deeds a share.
Let me enjoy one Son; the other's dead:
Stand he in's own and in his brothers stead.
You promised me one of those brothers you
Would raise to heaven: Be Joves word ever true.
Jove gave a grant, and with his beckon shak'd
Both Poles: tall Atlas with his burden quaked.
There is a place called Caprean lake of old:
There Romulus then chanced a court to hold.
About sunne-set gross clouds heavens face withdrew;
A showring storm does instantly ensue.
It thundered; lightning cracks the heavens. All fly:
The King on's fathers horses mounts the sky.
The Lords all mourn for his supposed slaughter;
Which thought perhaps might have remained long after.
But Julius Procul from long Alba came;
The Moonlight scorned the use of torches flame:
Lo, suddenly the left-hand-hedges quake:
He with his hairs turned bolt-upright starts back.
Quirinus larger then a man, and fair
In's Consuls robe, does in the path appear;
Bid my Quirites not to mourn for me:
Their tears, quoth he, disgrace my Deity.
Bring pious spice, and Romulus adore:
And practice prowess with the Roman lore.
This charged, he vanished into gloomy air.
He calls a court, and does his charge declare.
They build his temple, give the hill his name,
And on set days adore him in the same.
Now learn thou why this day they also call
Fools-holy-day: the reason's apt, though small.
There were no skillful husbandmen of old:
Our sturdy fathers toilsome wars did hold.
The sword was then in more request then plow:
Grounds unmanur'd small profit did allow.
Yet did our ancients sow and mow some barley:
Of barley Ceres had her first fruits early.
This on their hearths to mend the taste they dried:
In which much loss for want of skill they bide.
For sometimes they sweep up dead coals for corn;
Sometimes the fire their cottages did burn.
Hence Goddess Fornax came; to whom the Boore
Does gladly pray his corn to dress and cure.
The Archcurate then bids Fornacalia
In form of words, but makes no Holy Day.
And in the courts with marks for all men's view
The pendent tables several wards do show.
But simpler folk, who their own wards know not,
The day's last part devote, the first forgot.
To Parents tombs now orisons they pay,
And on friends urns some little offerings lay.
Small things please Ghosts; in Styx none greedy be:
Gods for great gifts accept true piety.
A tilesherd covered with a flowery crown
Suffices, with some salt and meal thrown down.
Loose violets, corn steeped in wine a while:
Leave these in the midway heaped upon a tile:
More I forbid not; yet thus pleased are they:
And on built piles prayers and words suited say.
These rites Aeneas, piety's true mold,
Brought into just King Latine's land of old.
To fathers ghost he paid solemnities:
Of whom our Country learned this pious guise.
But while successors in long wars did blaze
They quite neglected these Parentall days.
It cost them dear: For that offense (some tell)
Rome all on fire from piles of dead men fell.
Old fables bruit (but I can scarce believe it)
At this did dead men's shapelesse ghosts much grieved
Creep from their tombs and monefull howlings made
About the streets and groves in nights dull shade.
Thenceforth to tombs were due solemnities
Restored; which ceased those ghostly prodigies.
These days, young wives, keep from your bed-desires:
The marriage-lamp a purer time requires.
And maids, in your fond mothers eyes so fair
And wedlock-ripe, now lay you out no hair.
Hymen, put out thy lamps in these black days:
The mournful tombs have other lights to blaze.
Let all the temples of the Gods be shut;
Nor fire nor incense on their altars put:
For now the flitting souls of ancients dead
Walk all about and feed on victuals spread.
But these sad rites no further may extend
Then till this month eleven days has to end.
The latter day, which to the Ghosts they pay,
From bringing gifts is called Feralia.
Lo, now a grandame sits with maidens young,
And worships Silence with no silent tongue.
First in a mousehole on the groundsil she
Three spice-grains lays taken up with fingers three.
Then strings enchanted tied to lead does hold,
While seven blew beans about her mouth are rolled.
The head compact of mint and well bepitch'd
She heats by the fire, with brazen needle stitched:
Then drops on wine; the remnant in the cup
She and her mates (yet she the most) drink up.
Departing then, W' have tied the tongues of foes,
She cries: then out in drunken garb she goes.
You ask it may be what this Muta is?
List what I tell, an old man's tale I wis:
Jove deeply wounded in Juturna's love
Endured much care, not fit for mighty Jove.
She in the woods among the hasils lay,
And sometimes in her kindred-springs would play.
The Nymphs he summons that in Latium dwell,
And to the quire his counsel thus does tell;
Your sister-Nymph refuses (her own foe)
Her greatest good, the greatest God to know.
Befriend us both: for that which my great pleasure
Will be, shall prove your sister's peerlesse treasure.
When me she flies then stop her in a ring
Upon the bank from leaping into spring.
To him the Nymphs of Ilia divine
Agreed, with all the quire of Tyberine.
One maid there was called Lara, but of yore
The former syllable was doubled over.
A vice her named: Ofttimes cried Almon old,
Wench hold thy tongue; but yet she could not hold.
To mate Juturna's spring she goes; Avoid
The banks, says she; and then Joves mind bewrayed:
Then goes to Juno, pitying wives hard case;
Your Jove, quoth she, Juturna would embrace.
Jove much enraged, the tongue she did employ
So ill takes from her: then calls Mercury;
Convey that wench to hell: hell fits the dumb:
Let her, if Nymph, a Nymph of Styx become.
His will's fulfilled; they come into a grove:
Her keeper now with her does fall in love.
Who forces her: For words with looks she prays,
And with dumb tongue to plead in vain assayes.
Conceived, she brings two Lares forth: who guard
Our streets, and houses ever watch and ward.
Next day dear kinsmen do Charistia call.
Now have we meetings in our houses all.
For 't is meet time from friends laid in their urn
On living kin our eye forthwith to turn;
And next those many whom black death has slain
To count all ranks that of our blood remain.
Come loving kinsmen all, but spiteful brothers
Keep off from hence with all inhumane mothers;
Who grieve at fathers or at mothers lives;
The stepmother that with her step-child strives;
Tantalian brothers, and Medea vile;
And she that scorched the farmers seed in the soil;
Tereus, and Progne, and mute Philomel,
And all that friends for gain do basely sell.
Kind kindred, spice to Gods allied now give;
(This day meek Concord most of all does thrive)
As symptoms of your love together feast,
And range your dishes neatly sawc'd and dressed:
And when at night you go to sleep, all stand
To make a vow with lustier bowls in hand,
And mount this prayer, all drinking off the Health,
Heavens prosper us, and Caesar Romes chief wealth.
That night now past, the God that does divide
Men's land possessions is solemnifi'd.
God Terminus, whether a Stone or Block,
Thou were a God too with the ancient stock.
Two several lords on several parts thee crown,
And lay two garlands with two offerings down.
An altar's raised: the Countrey-wife does come
With fire brought in some broken pan from home.
The old man cuts wood and piles it up on high,
And sticks in boughs about the ground thereby;
Then kindles up the fire with tinder sear:
His young son stands and holds the basket there.
Then when three grains he into fire does fling,
His little daughter honycombs does bring.
The rest hold wine: Each on the fire is laid:
The white-clad crowd with joyful voice applaud.
This God is sprinkled with a young lamb slain:
A sow-pig offered, he will not complain.
The homely neighbors feast with cheer they bring,
And, Terminus, thy sacred praises sing.
Thou lands and cities and large realms do bound:
Without thee suitfull would be every ground.
From avarice and all ambition free
Each tenement thou keep faithfully.
Had thou assigned but that Thyrean plain,
Three hundred men had not yerwhile bin slain;
Nor heaps of arms had crushed O tryad brave:
Oh what a flood of blood his land he gave!
And when the royal Capitol was raised,
All Gods to Jove gave way and were displaced:
But Terminus (says fame) being seated there
Would not remove, but in Joves house has share.
And now, lest ought but heaven he view, right over
His head the roof is framed without a cover.
Since, Terminus, be thou by no means light,
But keep the station where thou once art pight:
And let no landlords tricks nor suits thee move,
Lest thou prefer a man before great Jove.
And maugre thou art scratched with rake and plow,
Cry, This is yours, and this belongs to you.
There is a way leads to Laurentian plain,
Where once Aeneas pitched with all his train:
There, on the sixth stone from the city, I
To Terminus have seen sheeps fibers fry.
All other lands have certain limits given:
Our Rome with all the worlds wide room is even.
Now Muse relate the Regifuge; the fame
Of which the three and twentieth day did name.
King Tarquine did Romes Monarchy conclude,
A valiant soldier, but a Prince most lewd.
Some cities had he captived, some rased down,
And by a wile the Gabii overthrown.
For lo his young son and his own son right,
Came into their foes garrison by night.
They drew their swords; cries he, Me armlesse kill:
This is my fathers and my brothers will,
Who piteously have mangled me all over:
(For which pretense he had been lashed sore.)
He Is viewed by Moonlight: Up their swords they put;
And stripping him beheld his body cut:
And weeping simply they his aid request
In war: He subt'ly promises his best.
And now in power he sends his father word,
Fair way was made to put them all to the sword.
A garden stood with savoury flowers arrayed,
About the which a prattling current played:
There Tarquine had this private news made known,
And crops with wand the highest lilies down.
The scout brings word, He cropped the highest lilies:
I know, says Sextus, what my fathers will is.
Forthwith the Gabine Captains all they slay,
And Roman colors on the walls display.
Behold a snake (most strange!) from the altar crept,
Which quenched the fires and up the victuals slapt.
Apollo 's sought to; whose reply was this,
He conquers who his mother first does kiss.
The company Apollo's meaning missed:
Each man ran hast'ly and his mother kissed.
Brute was a fools wise counterfeit, to free
Himself from Tarquines direful treachery.
He straight falls down, as stumbling with his feet,
And with a kiss our mother Earth does greet.
Romes conquering Eagles in the mean time over
The city Ardea in a long siege hover.
The foe, not daring battle, couched in forts:
Our soldiers revel in their tents with sports.
Young Tarquine makes a feast to all his lords:
Amongst whom in mirth he falls into these words;
Whiles in dull war this Ardea us deteins
From carrying tropheys to our countrey-fanes,
Do any of our wives mind us? or are
They careful of us who for them take care?
Each praised his own, and very earnest grow:
The frollick bowls make lungs and tongues to glow.
Up starts Lord Collatine, Few words are best:
But come to trial; night's not yet deceast:
Mount we our steeds and to the city all
Carier. Content: They for their horses call;
And straight were galloped by their speedy feet
To the royal court. No watch was in the street:
Lo there the King's sons joviall wives they find
With garlands crowned, at midnight up, well win'd.
Thence to fair Lucrece post they out of hand;
By whose bedside the wool and baskets stand.
At little lights their task her maidens spun:
To whom she softly thus these words begun;
Maids, we must make (plie, plie your business faster)
A coat to send in have unto your master.
What news hear you? for more then I you hear:
How long will it be e're wars be ended there?
Well, Ardea, thou that keep'st our Lords from home,
Thy betters thou affront'st, thy fall will come.
Be they but safe! but my Lords bloud's so high,
That with his sword he anywhere does fly.
My heart does fail quite chilled with frozen fear
When-e're I think of his encounters there.
Tears were the period: She lets fall her thread,
And in her bosom hangs down her head.
This was a grace; her tears became her well:
Her beauty was her minds true parallel.
Fear not, sweet wife; I Am come, cries he. She meets
And hangs on's neck, a burden full of sweets.
Meanwhile the young Prince furiall lust does move;
His boiling spirits are fired in secret love.
Her lilie skin, her gold-deluding tresses,
Her native splendor slighting art him pleases.
Her voice, her stainlesse modesty h' admires:
And hope's decay still strengthens his desires.
Day's horn-mouth'd harbinger proclaimed the morn;
The frollick gallants to their tents return.
His mazing fancy on her picture roves;
The more he muses still the more he loves:
Thus did she sit, thus dressed, thus did she spin,
Thus played her hair upon her necks white skin;
These looks she had, these rosy words stilled from her;
This eye, this cheek, these blushes did become her.
As billows fall down after some great blast,
Yet make some swelling when the wind is past:
So though her person from his sight was taken,
Yet did that love her person bred remain.
He burns; and pricked with spurs of basest lust,
Against her chaste bed plots attempts unjust.
The event's ambiguous, yet we'll thoroughly try't:
That she shall see. Fate helps the venurous sprite.
We slav'd the Gabines by a daring deed.
Thus girts he on his sword and mounts his steed.
Into Collatia's brazen ports he came
About the time Sol hides his glowing flame.
A foe the Court does enter as a friend,
And there was welcome: For they were a kind.
Ah blind mankind! she thinking naught, good woman!
Provides good cheer to entertain her foeman.
The supper's ended: time to sleep invites;
In all the housen now are seen no lights.
Up starts he, and draws forth his gilded blade,
And chaste Lucretia's chamber does invade.
Laid on the bed; Lucretia, no denial:
Here is my sword: I Am Tarquine of blood royal.
Naught she replies; nor had she power to say
Or plead, but stupid and quite senseless lay.
And like a lamb that from the sheepfold rambles,
Now caught in claws of ravening wolf, she trembles.
What dares she? fight? ah, he could overmatch her!
Cry out? alas! his sword would soon dispatch her.
Fly? how? his arm is linked about her wast:
Her wast then first by strangers hand embraced!
The Lecher pleads with profers, threats, entreats:
She Is no whit moved with gifts, entreats, nor threats,
Yield, or I Will damn thee for a whore, cries he,
And thee accuse for base adultery:
I Will kill the man, with whom I Will bruit thy shame.
She yielded, conquered by the fear of fame.
Why triumph'st thou? thy conquest is thy fall:
Ah, what a price bought'st thou that night withal!
Now day appeared: with scattered hairs she lies,
As does a mother when her dear son dies.
For her old father and dear husband home
She sends: To her without delay they come.
Whose grief they seeing ask the cause of it,
Whom she laments, and with what evil smit.
She veils her modest face, nor any thing
Would utter; tears as from a fountain spring.
Her sire, her husband comfort her sad tears,
Pray her to speak, and weep in hidden fears.
Thrice she assayed to speak, thrice stopped; yet tries
Once more, but shamed to lift up her eyes.
Shall we ow Tarquine this too? ah! shall I,
Shall I here publish my own infamy?
Something she tells, and for the period weeps,
And her grave cheeks in pure vermilion steeps.
They both forgive her forced adultery.
That pardon you give, I, cries she, deny.
Forthwith her self she stabs with hidden knife,
And at their feet powers forth her crimson life;
And even in Fate's last act, as she did die,
Expressed a care to fall with modesty.
Her Sire, her Lord self-carelesse both fall down,
And over her corpse their common loss bemone.
Brute came, whose mind at length his name deceived,
And from her dying breast the knife reprieved:
There holds it spuing of her noble blood,
And dauntlesse threatenings breathed forth as he stood;
By this chaste noble blood I vow to thee
And thy dear ghost, which as my God shall be,
Proud Tarquine with his seed for this shall pay:
No longer I the counterfeit will play.
She at his words her sightlesse eyes does move,
And shook her head as seeming to approve.
The manly matrone's exequies are done,
Endowed with tears and emulation.
The wound lies open: Brute calls all the States,
And to their ears the Kings base act relates.
Proud Tarquine's house all fly. Two Consuls sway:
And that became the last Monarchick day.
Hark, hear the Swallow, herald of the Spring,
Adieu to Winter cheerfully does sing.
Yet, Progne, thou of have do often complain:
Thy husband Tereus joys at thy chilled pain.
Now two days of this month are still behind:
To Martial chariots are the race-horse joined.
Which games from thence are called Equiria:
Mars in his field spectatour is that day.
Hail, welcome Mars; thy time a place does claim:
The month's at hand that is honored by thy name.
Now strike we sail: Our Month and Book both done:
My boat shall in another chanel run.
The end of the second Book.
OVIDS FESTIVALLS; OR, ROMAN CALENDAR. The third Book; or, MARCH.
The Argument.
THe Martial Princes birth and pedigree.
This Month's Protector, and prioritie.
Why women sacrifice to Mars do bring.
And why the Salii do Mamurius sing.
The Pontificiall title. And Vejove.
The Gorgon courser. And Lyaeus love.
More Horse-races. Perennall Anna's rites.
The old wife to Bacchus-hony-cakes invites.
Games in the honor of the Athenian Dame.
Now blazing Phoebus backs the Phryxean Ram.
MAn-slaughtering Mavors, cast aside thy spear,
Thy shield, and helmet, and a while draw near.
Perchance thou wilt say, With Mars what make the Muses?
This Month we sing his name from thee deduces.
Thou see Minerva has her bloody fights;
Yet she sometimes in liberal arts delights.
Have thou, as Pallas, some void time assigned:
For out of arms thou may employment find.
Thou armlesse to the Roman Nun did come,
And layd'st in her the royal seeds of Rome.
Nun Sylvia (here our sail we hoise) something
To wash, in the morning went unto the spring.
Now when she came unto the wriggling brook,
Her earthen pitcher from her head she took.
There tricking up her flowing hair she sits,
And amorous air to her bare breasts admits.
The streams soft music, and the plumy quire,
With cheerful shades egged on a sleeps desire.
Inveigling sleep creeps on her yielding eyes,
Her hand slips down on which her cheek relies.
Mars sees and lusts, and in his lust does speed,
And cunningly conceals his juggling dead.
She wakes conceived, and in her pregnant womb
Conteins the Founder of imperial Rome.
She rises faint, but did not know the cause;
And leaning to a tree she makes this pause;
Pray heaven this dream does happy fortune bring
And good betide; Or is it some higher thing?
Me thoughts my garland, as I stood beside
My Lady's altar, from my head did slide.
From which two palms alike, (a wondrous thing!)
Yet one of them more eminent, did spring;
Whose fertile branches all the earth o're-spread,
And reached the welkin with their mounting head:
When lo, my uncle fain would them have cropped,
Smit at the sight, my heart for terror hopt:
A Pie Mars bird, a Wolf too having young
Did take their parts, and rescued both from wrong.
This said, she weakly up her pot does take
With water filled; she filled it as she spoke.
Time runs on; Romulus and Remus breed;
Her belly's swelled up with celestial seed.
Now had the God whose rays the world unmask
Two signs remaining of his yearly task;
The Maid's a Mother. Vesta's statue shamed
With virgin-hands did veil her face; ('It Is famed.)
The altars trembled as her pangs began;
The frighted flames beneath the ashes ran.
To tyrannous Amulius this made known,
Who had usurped his brothers wealth and crown:
He gives command to drown the Brats. The flood
Abhorres the deed, and sets them on the mud.
'T is known, these Infants sucked a wild-beasts teat,
And that a Pie did daily bring them meat.
Thee, Nurse Laurentia, I will not pass by,
Nor, Faustulus, thy plain rusticity:
The Laurentalian feasts shall sound your praise,
Kept in Decembers joviall-geniall days.
These sons of Mars to man's estate now grown,
On whose fair chins did bud the silken down;
The husbandmen and shepherds round about
To them for justice, in contention, sought.
Often came they home all drenched with robbers bloods;
And seized their cattels as their proper goods.
Their pedigree's made known: Mars raised their spirits:
In stalls now scorned they to enlarge their merits.
Amulius falls by Romulus his sword:
And to his Grandsire is the realm restored.
The wall is raised; which though it were but small,
'T was ill for Remus that he leaped the wall.
Where woods yerst grew, and beasts their dens did make,
The lasting City raised, the Founder spoke:
Arms-Arbitratour, of whose seed divine
I sprung, and will thereof give many a sign;
With thee will we begin our Roman year,
And our first Month thy noble name shall wear.
His word's made good: this Month he thus did call,
And pleased his Father very well withal.
Yet their forefathers Mars especially
Adored, in honor of their Chivalry:
The Athenians, Pallas; Creet, Diana's Quire;
The Lemnian Isle adored the God of Fire:
Mycenians, Juno, and the Spartanes too:
And Arcadie Pan crowned with pine-tree-bough:
Our Latium honored Mars, Warre's powerful King:
Wars to our land both wealth and fame did bring.
Yea, if we read but foreign Calendars,
There we shall find a month surnamed from Mars.
Faliscanes fifth month, and the Albanes third:
By Hernians 't is the sixth month registered.
The Aricinians, and high Tusculum,
And Albanes all to one account do come.
The fierce Aequicoli's tenth month it was:
Laurentians fifth; the Sabines fourth in place.
Pelignian Nobles with those Sabines old
Consent, and this month for their fourth they hold.
But Romulus, to go beyond them all,
This his first month by's Fathers name did call.
Nor months so many had our ancestors
As we: their year fell short two months of ours.
Greece, then a well-learn'd but an ill-arm'd land,
No arts had yielded to the Conquerours hand.
The Roman art was all to fight and fense;
To throw a dart, the only eloquence.
What man the Axle, and two Poles, or Hyades,
Did know in those times, or old Atlas Pleiades?
Who had the Bears, Charls-wain or Dogs-tail spied,
This Sidon's Pilote, that the Grecians guide?
That Cynthia's chariot in a month does run
Those signs which all the year do task the Sun?
Throughout the year startes notelesse rac'd and free:
Yet men were conscious of Divinity.
For signs of stars the signs of wars did they
Regard; whose loss was shame and great dismay.
Which, though of hay, yet made as great a show
And were as dreadful as our Eagles now.
They hung in bottles on a pole huge tall,
From whence our soldiers by that name we call.
Thus learning-void and rude Antiquity
Did make their Lustres ten months less then we.
Ten courses of the Moon a year was then:
Men much accounted of the number Ten;
Either because we with ten fingers tell,
Or 'cause ten months a woman's womb does swell,
Or else because our digits reach to ten,
From whence our number is begun again.
Thence Romulus did rank his centuries
By tens: Ten Pikemen to a rank did rise.
The Pileman and the General ten bands,
And he that did on horseback serve, commands.
Ten companies he gave the Tatians,
Ten to the Ramnes, ten the Lucerans.
This usual number kept he in his year:
Which time a widow mourning-weeds did wear.
And that this month (all question to remove)
Was first of old, plain arguments shall prove.
The Flamens laurel, hanged up all year long,
Is now taken down, and fresh boughs up are hung.
The Royal Court is decked with Bay-boughs green:
The like before the Old-Court-Gate is seen.
The old dry Bays from Vesta's Trojane fire
Are pulled, and now she is prank'd in green attire:
Besides, fresh fuel in her inward shrine
Is kindled, and the fire renewed does shine.
'T is no weak proof, that the old year here began,
In that we now adore Perennall Anne.
This month our Ancients chose their officers,
Until the perjured Carthaginian's wars.
In fine, the fifth month hence we Quintil call;
Hence have the rest their numbers titles all.
Pompilius first from Sabine confines brought
To Rome the error of two months found out:
Whether by that twice-born Pythagoras,
Or from Aegeria thus informed he was.
Yet after him times still erroneous were,
Until reformed by Cesars skillful care.
That God, the author of so great a race,
Did not account this task for him too base:
But studied to acquaint himself with heaven,
And know that Court to him by promise given.
He by exact accounts Day's golden King
In his just time to every Sign did bring.
His year had days three hundred sixty five;
And to the Leap-yeare one day more did give.
Which piec'd-up day must to the Luster come.
This is the yeare's exactest count and sum.
If Poets may (as fame abroad does give)
Some private notions from the Gods receive;
Mars, tell me why thy feasts observed are
By Wives, when thou art all for manly war?
As thus I spoke, Mars laid aside his shield;
But in his right hand still a javelin held:
Lo I, the God of War, to Peace's gown
Now first invited, march to tents unknown.
Nor think I much some time here to bestow,
Lest Pallas think she only this can do.
Thou studious Prophet of the Roman year,
Learn thy desire, and these my sayings hear.
Rome's elements were at the first but small:
Yet had that small great hopes of this great wall.
Those walls for Founders were too large a room;
But yet too strait for Citizens to come.
Ask you, where stood my Nephews Court of old?
That thatch there, made of straw and reed, behold.
On locks of hay he laid his sleeping head:
Yet heaven he mounted from that strawy bed.
And now the Romans name was spread and gone
Beyond his place: nor had he wife or son.
The fruitful neighbors my poor race did flout;
And I ill author of a stock was thought.
In dwelling in plain stalls, in tilling ground,
And feeding sheep more hurt then good was found.
Both birds and beasts do couple with their make;
Engendring fellows has the basest snake.
In other lands each man enjoyes his woman:
But none there be to marry with the Roman.
I grieved; and with my spirit endu'd my son:
Cease prayers (said I:) it must with arms be done.
Keep Consus feast: that day, in which his feast
You solemnize, he will suggest the rest.
The Curets and the rest rose up in storms:
Then first the father against the son took arms.
Now were the ravished almost mothers made:
The kindred-battel still is long delaid.
The wives assembled all to Juno's Fane:
To whom my daughter boldly thus began;
My ravished Mates, 't is all our case: behold,
We can no longer piously be cold.
The battel's pitched: Now choose for whom ye'll pray:
That side our fathers, this our husbands fray.
We now must widows or else orphans live.
To you I Will good and noble counsel give.
They took her counsel; and their hairs let down,
And mournful bodies clad in mourning gown.
Now stood the bands, resolved for arms and harms,
Expecting signalls of the trump's alarms:
The wives came running, with their babies dear
Culled in their arms, amid the armies there.
So soon as e're they came amid the field,
With locks all torn and scattered, down they kneeled.
The babes (as sensible) with moving cries
Held out their little arms to grandsires eyes.
All those that could cried, Ave, presently:
Those that could not their mothers forced to cry.
Down fell their arms and anger; and, their swords
Put up, they all shook hands in kind accords.
Each hugged his daughter, and his grandchild held
Upon his shield: the sweetest use of shield.
Thence Sabine wives no small advantage challenge
To keep a day to me on my first Calends:
Because on naked swords they venturing
Themselves, our wars to friendly peace did bring:
Or, 'cause Nun Ilia mother'd was by me,
The Mothers honor my solemnity:
Or 'cause chill Winter now takes his farewell,
And Sols warm beams the languish'd snow expel:
Frost-barbed trees their opening leaves renew,
The widowed vine-branch pearly buds does show:
The thrifty herb, within the ground long pent,
Into the air now finds a private vent:
Now frolic cattle breed, and fields all yield;
And birds on boughs their fost'ring nests do build.
Good cause have Wives, who vows and vigor spend
Upon their young, my pregnant times to tend.
Besides on that hill where that Son of mine
Kept Excubies, thence called Esquiline,
The Latin wives this day (or I mistake)
A public temple did to Juno make.
In brief, and not to load thy memory
With many words, the plainest reason see;
My Mother loves them, therefore they frequent me:
This pious cause does most of all content me.
Bring flowers, ye Dames; with flowers fresh garlands make:
In flowers your Goddess great delight does take:
Say, Thou Lucine giv'st light to all our eyes:
Thou help'st the woman that in travail lies.
But let the big with loos'ned tresses pray,
So may her child more easily come away.
Who tells me now why Salii in a ring
Dance with heaven's Buckler, and Mamurius sing?
Thou Nymph that Dian's grove and spring do haunt,
King Numa's Wife, teach me: thy feast I chaunt.
A lake, much honored in religion stale,
Begirt with woods, stands in the Arician vale.
Hippolytus, whom frighted steeds did tear,
Was hid herein: For whom no horse comes there.
There tapes, on which are many tablets hung
To this good Goddess, veil the hedges long.
Ofttimes have women, mistress of their vows,
Brought hither lamps with wreaths about their brows.
Men stout of hand and swift of foot are kings:
Each king at last his mate to ruin brings.
A giggling brook does on much gravel fall:
I often have drunk there in a draught but small.
Muse-lov'd Aegeria yields those waters clear;
Who was king Numa's Wife and Counselor.
She first the Peers, too prone to live at ods,
With laws did temper and the fear of Gods.
Thence Laws (that Strength might not bear all the sway)
Were made, and men their vows did purely pay.
Wrath laid aside, most powerful Peace became:
Amongst Citizens a skirmish was a shame.
At the Altars sight the furious man was turned:
And Wine and Wafers on the embers burned.
Behold, Heavens Monarch lets his lightning fly
Through crouding clouds, and rains the welkin dry.
A flaming city makes not such a blaze:
The King and People stood in great amaze.
The Nymph cries, Thunder (be n't too much afraid)
Is placable: Jove's ire may be allayed.
Yet must the means from Faun and Picus come,
Two Powers that live within the lands of Rome:
Yet not without constraint: First catch them you,
And bind them sure. And then she tells him how.
A black grove stood beneath mount Aventine,
At whose first sight you would say, 'T is sure divine:
In The midst of which a pure perpetual rill,
O're-grown with moss, from stony veins does still.
Here Faun and Picus used to drink. The King
Come hither kills a sheep unto the Spring.
There sets down wine perfumed with spice, and then
Takes up a cave in ambush with his men.
The wood-Gods to their old wont came: the bowls
They turned off, blithe, and quenched their thirsty souls.
Wine wins rest. From's cave does Numa creep,
And bound them fast while they were fast asleep.
They raised from rest, strive much themselves to free:
The more they strive the more they gyved be.
Ye Gods, cries Numa, pardon my bold act:
Ye know it no wicked, though a subtle fact.
Tell us which way may thunder be allaid.
Thus Numa. Faunus shook his horns, and said,
Great is thy question: We cannot aread
This hard precept: our power is limited.
Grove-Gods are we; to us the rule is given
But of vast Hills: Jove orders all in Heaven.
Him you alone from heaven cannot call down:
Perhaps you may when our direction's known.
Thus Faunus said; and thus said Picus too.
But yet, said Picus, first these cords undo.
By special art Jove charmed (you shall see)
Shall hither come: let Styx my witness be.
Unbound, they teach them what to do, which way
To draw down Jove, and what strange charms to say.
We license have to know; a pious pen
May chaunt such rhythms unfit for other men.
Jove is drawn down. Hence after-ages all
In celebration him Elicius call.
'T is said the tops of Aventine did move;
The earth shrunk down pressed with the weight of Jove.
King Numa quaked at heart: his blood affright
Ran from his veins: his hair stood bolt upright.
Come to himself, Great King of heaven, cries he,
Inform's how thunder may appeased be:
If we frequent thine altars with pure hand;
If our petition may with piety stand.
Jove yields; but yet does in short riddles blind
The truth, and with dark doubts distracts his mind.
Cut off a Head, cries he. -- It shall be done,
Replies the King: I Will cut an Onyon.
Of Man, says Jove: -- I Will take the hair, he cries.
The soul, quoth Jove. He, Of a Fish, replies.
Jove smiles: O Man that can discourse endure
With Gods! do this: this will my thunder cure.
But when to morrow's Sun is raised full-fac'd,
A pledge I Will give thee that thy realm shall last.
This said, he mounted with a mighty thunder
The acquainted heavens, and left the King in wonder:
Who straight returns with joy, and tells his Lords
The passages. They scarce believe his words.
But ye'll believe it if the event proves true:
Mark what, says he, to morrow will ensue.
So soon as Sol to morrow leaves the land,
Jove gives a pledge that this our realm shall stand.
All doubtful part. The promise seems too far.
The day appears. Their faiths suspended are.
The ground was soft, with drops of pearl bedewed:
To Numa's gate there flocks a multitude.
Forth comes the King, and takes his maple-throne:
A mighty crowd, all whist, about him run.
The Sun appears but only on his brim:
'Twixt hopes and fears their beating spirits swim.
His head with white veil covered, up he stands,
And lifts to heaven his God-familiar hands.
This is the hour of that thy promised sign,
Great Jove, cries he, confirm those words of thine.
As thus he prayed the Sun was fully raised;
Huge cracks of thunder through the heavens were noised.
Thrice in clear air he roared; thrice did he fling
His bolts. Believe me, though a wondrous thing.
Behold, the heaven just in the midst does open!
Down to the ground both Prince and People stoop.
A shield from thence, turned with a gentle gale,
Falls down. A shout the welkin clear does scale.
He takes it up, a bullock first knocked down
Whose youthful neck a yoke had never known.
'T is called Ancile, 'cause it was pared round
About the brims; no corners to be found.
Then, knowing that his kingdoms fate did lie
In that, by counsel of great policy,
Of shields like-shap'd he bids to make a dozen,
That so an error might the couzener cousen.
Mamurius, a man of great desert
As well for manners as his manual art,
Performed this work. To whom the bounteous King,
As I am true, 't is thine; ask any thing.
Now he from dancing had the Salii named;
Their Arms appointed, and their Canto's framed.
Mamurius said, I ask no meed but fame:
At their Songs end let them but sing my name.
From thence those Priests perform King Numa's grant
To that old merit, and Mamurius chaunt.
Would any marry? Though you both make speed,
Deferre't: small stay sometimes great good does breed.
Arms cause a strife; strife wedlock should abhor:
The time's more fit when the are laid up therefore.
Jove's Flamen's wife, till these days be exspir'd,
Must also go undressed and unattir'd.
Now, when this Months third night from heaven does fall,
One of the Fishes is not seen at all.
Two Twins they be: this to the South inclined,
That to the North; both named from either wind.
When Tithon's Bride her tulip-cheeks bedews;
And from the Orient porch the fifth day shows.
Whether the Bear-herd or the Car-man slow,
He dives the waves, and will no sight allow.
Yet may we still behold the Vintager:
I Will briefly sing the reason of this Star.
Young Bacchus once loved hairy Ampelon
Of Ismarus, a Nymph and Satyr's son.
To him his Elm-enamour'd Vine he gives
To keep, which vine its name from him receives.
He falls down dead by climbing ventrously
For ripened grapes: Whom Bacchus fixed in sky.
When next day's Phoebus steep Olympus scales,
And up the hill his winged race-horse hales,
You that adore chaste Vesta's shrine, now joy,
And incense heap upon the fires of Troy.
Now Caesar's endless styles, which he counts little,
Of gift, received their Pontificiall title.
Eternal Caesar's Deity does cure
Eternal Fires, his Kingdome's pledge most sure.
Ye Trojane Gods, your Porters worthy prey,
Which grave Aeneas kept from hostile lay;
A Priest, from that Aeneas sprung, does tend
Your hearth. O Vesta, his dear life defend.
Live long ye Fires fed by his hand divine:
Your flame his fame shall unextinguish'd shine.
One note's in Marches Nones: 'Twixt those two groves
Now hallowed was the Temple called Vejoves.
When Romulus his rock girt grove had ended,
Said he, Who hither flies shall be defended.
How grew the Romans! from what small foundation!
How clear of envy was that ancient nation!
But if this mystic name thou do not know,
Learn who this God is, and why called so.
This Jove is young: behold his youthful parts!
Behold his hand devoid of thunder-darts!
When those bold Giants would the heavens have pierced,
Then Jove took arms; who was unarmed at first.
Then Pelion, Ossa and Olympus toild
With his vast load, in new fire-volleys boild.
The Goat stands by which did allow her teat:
The Cretane Maids the Infant fed with meat.
But for the Name: Vegrandia farmers call
Their ill-thriv'n corn; and Vesca, kernells small.
If this the word imports, as well may I
The name Vejove to little Jove apply.
Now when the stars embosse the gaudy sphere,
Look up and see the Gorgon Courser there.
From pregnant neck of wild Medusa slain
('T is said) he leaped out with a bloody mane.
Heaven was his footing, and his feet his wings,
Whiles 'twixt the sky and ruffled clouds he springs.
Then first a bridle curbed his nostrils fell,
When his light foot dug up the Aonian well.
Now heaven he holds, which often his wings had mounted:
In whose possession fifteen stars are counted.
Next night thou Ariadne's Crown may see
Installed Divine by Theseus perjurie.
Now she that gave her thanklesse Love the thread,
Had changed for Bacchus that perjurious bed:
Joy'd in her match, Fool that I was to mourn:
'T is my advantage that he proved forsworn.
The long-lock'd Indians Liber in the mean time
Subdued* and came enriched from the Eastern clime.
Among the captive Maids which did excel
In beauty he the Princess loved too well.
His Wife bewails, and, wandering on the shore
With scattered hairs, her case does thus deplore;
Once more, ye waves, hear my old mournful cares:
Once more, ye sands, swim in a flood of tears.
I Theseus once accused for perjurie:
He Is gone; and Bacchus proves as false as he.
Once more I cry, No Woman trust a Man:
In change of names my act is new begun.
Oh, that my fate had its first course held on!
Now had my essence with my woes been done.
Why did thou, Liber, me from dying save?
My sorrows then but one release did crave.
Light Bacchus, lighter then thy brow bound leafs!
O Bacchus, known, but to my tears and griefs!
Why have thou brought before my nose a whore
To vex a bed so well composed before?
Ah! where is thy faith? those solemn vows indented?
Ah me? how often have I these Dirges vented!
Thou blamedst Theseus, and him false did style:
In thine own judgment thou art far more vile.
In secret griefs I burn, and dare not tell:
Lest it be thought I am thus often served well.
O let not Theseus know it, of all; lest he
Triumph the more in thy society.
Perhaps her white complexion you prefer
Before my tanned: that color be to her.
But what is all this? She Is liked the better in
Her black defects: take heed she stains thy skin.
O keep thy vow; nor strangers beds approve
Before thy wife's! A man I e're did love.
The white Bull's horns my mother caught; thine, me:
But this thy base love wounds me heavily.
Make not my love my bane: thine did not prove
So when to me thy self confessed thy love.
Thou burn'st me; 't is not strange: Thou were conceived
In fire; from fire by Fathers band repriv'd.
To me, O Bacchus, thou betrothedst Heaven:
Ah me! for heaven what dowries here are given!
She ended. Bacchus all the while did mind her
Lamenting, as by chance he came behind her.
He clips her wast, and tears with kisses dries:
Let Us both, quoth he, together mount the skies.
Our beds are one, our names shall be the same:
And Libera shall be thy changed name.
Thy Crown with thee a monument shall be:
What Vulcane gave to Venus, she to thee.
This said, her pearls to stars in number nine
He changed; with which she now in gold does shine.
When that swift Coach which purple Day does guide
Six Suns has hurried through the Welkin wide,
More Horse-races in Mars his flowery green,
Which wriggling Tyber laves, are to be seen.
But if the river overflows the place,
Then smouldry Caelius entertains the Race.
Perennal Anna's geniall feast in the Ides
Is kept hard by where foreign Tyber slides.
All sorts together flock; and on the ground
Displaid, each marrow by his make drinks round.
Some sit in open air; some build their tents;
And some themselves in branchy arbours fense.
For solid beams some stick in canes, and over
Their heads spread cloaks and blankets for a cover.
Yet Sun and Wine inflames. They drink by tale;
And for each bowl pray for a whole-yeare-hail.
Some tipplers there will drink to Nestors time,
And with their cups to Sibyll's years will climb.
There what is learned upon the stage each chaunts,
And hands full nimbly to their numbers dance.
Bowls set aside, each with his trick'd-up Less,
Whose hairs are loos'ned, trips it on the grass.
As home they come they stagger, viewed of all
The town for sport, which them does happy call.
Yerwhile I met this pomp ('t is worth the reading)
An old wife drunk her drunken husband leading.
But what she is (because reports thus flit)
In telling I no fable will omit.
Sad Dido in Aeneas love yerwhile
Was burned, and burned upon her fate-built pile.
Her ashes urn'd, and on her marble chest
That verse engrav'n, made by her dying breast;
HERE LIES QUEEN DIDO BY HER OWN HAND KILLED:
DEATH'S CAUSE AND WEAPON DID AENEAS YIELD.
Numidians straight sans let the realm invade:
Iarbas Lord of captive walls is made.
Who, thinking of her old contempt, Now see,
Her bed is mine, though not her self, quoth he.
The Tyrians fly, each as his fortunes led;
As bees do wander when their king is dead.
Three crops to the barn the barbed fields did yield;
Three vintages had fuming hogsheads filled:
Poor Anna is expelled; and weeping flies
Her Sister's walls: first pays her obsequies.
The ashes soft drink up her oil mix'd-tears,
And entertein her sacrificed hairs.
Thrice did she kiss the urn; thrice cried, Farewell.
Her Sister seemed to her as sensible.
A ship and mates taken up, she fails on clear,
Those walls reviewed, her Sisters fabric dear.
Near lean Cosyra lies a fertile seat,
Isle Melite, which Libyan surges beat.
There Battus reigned, whose stores much wealth did fill.
Here pitched she, trusting in his old good will.
Who hearing of these Sisters fates, This land,
Said he, whatever, is at thy command.
And this had lasted to the utmost hour,
Had he not feared Pygmalions armed power.
Twice through the Zodiac Sol had run his race:
She now must seek another exile-place.
Her brother armed there claims her: Battus he
Abhorring wars, and weak, said, Escape thou free.
Her ship she yields to wind and sea in flight:
No sea so cruel as her brothers spite.
Near stony Cratis fishie rivers lies
A little ground, there called Cameres.
To this their ship was bound. And now they came
Within nine furlongs of their wished aim:
Sails struck, they sally in uncertain gales.
Fall, cries the Pilote, to your oars for sails.
And while to hale their tackling down they have,
Their ship is smitten with a thwarting blast.
In spite of Pilote's power or skill it flies
Into the main: the shore forsakes their eyes.
Up start the waves; and up-side down they wallow:
The leaking keel the foming streams does swallow.
Winds Nonplus Art. The Pilote now is pressed
To use, for rudder prayers with all the rest.
The Tyrian Exul wanders up and down
The ways, her apron over her moist eyes thrown.
That time first Dido, and all those that were
Entombed in earth, were Happy called by her.
The ship is hurried to the Latin ground,
And all aland is swallowed up and drowned.
Now good Aeneas with his Wife and throne
Had well increased and made two peoples one.
Whiles with Achates on his land desired
He walked barefoot in a path retired,
He spies Anne wandering, nor could think 't was she:
What cause should bring her into Italy?
While thus he mused, 'T is Anne, Achates cries.
She at her name lifts up her mournful eyes.
Oh! should she fly? or how? what cave at hand?
Before her eyes her Sisters fate does stand.
She known, the Lord accosts her in her fears;
Yet at the thought of Dido's death sheds tears:
Anne, I protest by this land, which of late
Thou often did hear was given me by kind fate;
By my associate. Gods upon this bay
New placed; they often chid my slow delay.
Nor could I dream that death pursued her grief.
Ah me! her courage was beyond belief.
Relate thou nothing: Those unworthy wounds
I saw, whenas I walked the Stygian bounds.
But thou, did Will or Fortune thee here board,
Partake of all my kingdom can afford.
Much thou, the utmost Dido's merits make:
Welcome for thine and for thy Sisters sake.
To his kind love (nor comfort had she else)
She yields her self; and all her fortune tells.
The Court now entered in her Tyrian weeds;
The rest all whist, Aeneas thus proceeds,
Just cause have I, sweet wife, to bring to thee
This Queen: in shipwreck she relieved me.
A Tyrian born: Her walls in Libya were.
I pray affect her as a Sister dear.
Lavinia promised; and her forged wound
In secret lodged, her jealousy does drowned.
And, seeing tokens sent before her eyes,
She more suspects in subtle secrecies.
Still vexed with doubt, she hates her like a fiend,
And plots how with revenge to work her end.
At night, lo, Dido with besoiled hairs
Before Ann's bed all smeared with blood appears;
Fly, Sister; use this sullen house no more:
Fear not. Thus speaking, the air did turn the door.
Up starts she, and as nimbly as she could
Leaps down the window low: fear made her bold.
And winged with terror, in her tuck'd-up coat
Runs like a roe that hears the wolf's hoarce note.
Whom horny-brow'd Numicius (it is said)
Caught up in's stream and to his spring conveyed.
Next day lost Anne with calls and cries each-where
Is sought: the impression of her feet appear.
Come to the banks, her footsteps there are seen.
The conscious stream his murmuring noise held in.
She seemed to speak; Numicius Nymph I live here:
Perennall Anne of this Perennall River.
Straight feast they in those wandered fields with joy;
And tippling cheer their spirits and the day.
Some think her Luna, of whose months years grow:
Some say she is Themis; some, the Inachian Cow:
Some one of Atlas daughters her would prove,
And that she first gave food to sucking Jove.
Besides, a story I have read, which you
Shall hear rehearsed: nor does it seem untrue.
The old Commons once, without their Tribunes still,
Fled, and so pitched upon the Holy hill.
Now was their meat and useful corn all spent,
Which they had carried when they thither went.
An old wife Anne lived in a suburb-stall;
A thrifty houswife, though her means were small:
She, in a hood her gray hairs having dressed,
Made countrey-Cymnels with her palsie-fist;
And dealt each day her dole to all men there
Hot from the oven; wherewith refreshed they were.
Peace made at home, the people did erect her
For this kind office a Perennall picture.
Now hear the reason why the maids in throngs
Between themselves sing certain wanton songs.
Mars comes to Anne, a Goddess newly made,
And taking her aside thus to her said,
My month thee worships; my own times I Have joined
To thine; great hopes on thy good will I bind.
I King of Wars with Pallas Wars great Queen
Am fallen in love, and long inflamed have been.
Kind Soul, this office well becomes thee: see
If thou can win my mate to wed to me.
With promise feigned she yields to what he says,
And feeds his foolish hopes with long delays.
At length he urged: W' have done't; she is won, cries she,
And much ado has given her hand to me.
He credulous his chamber beautified:
Anne veiled is led in like a youthful bride.
About to kiss her, Anne he does descry.
Both shame and anger do his visage dye.
Dear Pallas Sweetheart this fresh-Goddesse gulled:
No action better please Dame Venus could.
For this old jests and songs obscene they chaunt:
Her jest on that great God is now her vaunt.
I thought to have passed the Emperors Murder by;
When from her hearth thus Vesta did apply.
Fear not to mention it: he was my Priest:
Those sacrilegious arms did me arrest.
I caught him thence, and left his picture bare:
'T was Caesar's shape those weapons dire did tear.
He, placed in heaven, admires Jove's Court of gold:
And in the Great Street does a temple hold
But those, who dared against the Gods, and did
That act, defiled his Pontificiall head.
Just death rewards them: Let Philippi show,
And those whose scattered bones the ground do strew.
'T was Caesar's work, his piety, his first grounds,
To justly vindicate his Fathers wounds.
When next Aurora dews the medows green,
The dreadful Scorpions cleyes are to be seen.
The Ides third day does Bacchus service bring:
Assist me, Bacchus, while thy rites I sing.
I sing not Semele, to whom if Jove
Had not come armed, thy name but small might prove:
Nor thee, an Embryon in thy Fathers thigh
Enclosed, to grow to full maturitie.
Sithonians and thy Scythian triumphs famed
I pass, with Indians or Arabians tamed:
Or Pentheus torn by mothers cruelty:
Or mad Lycurgus wounding of his knee.
Those Tyrrhene Pirates made Sea Monsters well
I might (but 't is not now my task) here tell.
My task is this: To show the original
Why the old wife neighbors to her cakes does call.
Before thy time on hearths of Gods all cold
Grass grew: no honor did the Altars hold.
Thou having Ganges and all India beat,
Did give the first fruits to thy Father great.
Thou captive Spice and Incense sanctifi'dst,
And first in triumph Bullocks entrails fry'dst.
Hence from the Author Libum takes the name,
By consecrating part on holy flame.
These Cakes are made to Liber, 'cause he loved
Sweet juice, and Honey first of all improved.
From sandy Heber with his Satyrs he
Did walk. My tale shall not unpleasant be.
To Rhodope and the Pangean Spring
Being come, their cymbals all his followers ring.
Lo, troops of bees with that shrill Music charmed
Fly after, as the noise did lead, and swarmed.
These Bacchus gets and in a tree-stock hives,
And so the glory of that gift receives.
When bald Silenus and the Satyrs tasted,
To seek bees nests about the groves they hasted.
In hollow Elm the old God a swarm does hear,
And sees the combs, but takes no notice there.
Anon he comes and ties his lazy mate
Fast to the Elm, as on his back he sat.
Up clambers he, and on a green-bough stands,
And to his booty thrusts his greedy hands.
Out of the hole a thousand Hornets spring
About his ears, and 's bald crown all besting.
Down tumbles he: his Ass about him laid
His heels: there lies he yawling out for aid.
The Satyrs flock, and laugh their Sire to see
With face swollen up. He halts on's Asse-kick'd knee.
The Wine-God laughs, and tells him mire is good
Applied: He simply daubs his face with mud.
Since, Honey is Bacchus due. A reaking Cake
With Honey moistened to the God they make.
Why Women deal therein, the reason's plain:
His ivy-staff spurs up their frantic train.
But why old Wives? That age most bouzie proves,
And most of all the pleasing vine-juyce loves.
And why with Ivy dressed? This God that tree
Loves well. The reason straight shall rendered be.
The Nysian maidens Ivy-leaves about
His cradle hung, when him vexed Juno sought.
Now must I show why Gowns of Liberty
Are given to Stripplings on thy feast-dayes free.
Because, fair Bacchus, thou art always seen
A Boy, or Young Man, or an age between:
Or 'cause, thou being a father, to thy care
All fathers do commend their children dear:
Or else because a gown and life more free
Is given by thee, the God of Liberty.
Or, when old times the ground more earnest tilled,
And Senators themselves wrought in their field:
When Plowmen often did take a Consuls place;
And thick-skinn'd hands were counted no disgrace:
The Countrey-folk to see these Games would make
To the town; yet for the Gods not pleasure's sake:
And Liber, who is now accompanied
With Ceres, then these feasts alone enjoyed:
Therefore, that more Youth might these games frequent,
'T was then thought best to give this ornament.
Kind Sr, your head and gentle antlets vail,
And guide my fancy with a prosperous gale.
On these two days (as I suppose) they go
To the Argive Brothers, whom their Leaf will show.
The Puttock verges toward Lycaon's Bear,
And on this night begins he to appear.
If you will know what him advanced to Heaven:
When Saturn from his throne by Jove was driven,
He in his rage the sturdy Titans armed,
And tries the aid the which the Fates had charmed.
An earth-bred Monster was there, wonderful,
Behind a Serpent but before a Bull.
This in a wood stern Styx enclosed in three
Huge bulwarks, by the triple Fates decree.
Such was the fate: He that this Monster slew
And burned the inwards, should the Gods subdue.
This Briareus with Diamant-ax did foil,
And was just now his guts about to broil:
Jove bids the Fowls to catch them up. The Kite
Did his command, and so in heaven was pight.
Next day but one Minerva's feast revives,
The which from those five days the name derives.
The first no blood nor sword-play does admit,
Because Minerva was brought forth in it.
The four next days the scaffolds all are filled:
This warlike Queen delights in weapons skilled.
Come Boys and Maids, your gifts to Pallas bring:
Her favor gives great skill in every thing.
In Pallas favor let the Lasses learn
To empty distaffs and to twist their yarn.
She also learns to make the Shuttle play
About the web, and how to fill the Stay.
Fullers and Diers, give her honor both;
You that do white, and you that dye the cloth.
No Shoemaker a shoe can fashion well
Without her help, though Tychius he excel.
He that Epeus shames in Carpentrie,
Becomes a dunce if Pallas angry be.
And you Physicians that diseases cure,
Salute this Lady with some gifts of your.
Dull Scholars curbed in cursed Schoolmasters lore,
Your wits she quickens: honor her therefore:
Ye that mete heaven, and ye that Pencils use;
And he that stones to curious statues hews.
A thousand Arts she skills. She Verse does savor:
Inspire my song, if I may ask that favor.
Where Caelius to a vale declineth prone;
The Vale's a level, yet no perfect one;
There Capt Minerva's Chapel you may see,
To her devote on her Nativitie.
The reason's doubtful: She Is the Mineral
Of wit, which quick is called Capital:
Or else because her Fathers a king head
Her armed with shield sans help of wife did shed:
Or'cause she captived with Phaliscanes came
To Rome; the foremost letter shows the same:
Or else because her law is capital
For sacrilege within her Temple-wall.
Whatever reason thee this name affords
Still keep thy Aegis, Pallas, for our Lords.
The last day bids to purge and round the green
With trumps, and offer to that warlike Queen.
Now may you lift your eyes to heaven, and say,
Sol backed the Phryxean Wether yesterday.
The seeds all scorched by wicked Ino's wile,
No fruits would grow, as they were wont yerwhile:
A message is to Delphian Tripos sent,
To beg some help for souls with famine spent.
He, with the seeds corrupt, brought word; Fates stood
To have both Phryxus and his Sisters blood.
Time, People, Ino, all do urging stand
The abhorring King to obey the sad command.
Phryxus and Hell crowned with flowers stand by
The altars, moning their joynt-destiny.
Their Mother spies them, as in the air she hung;
And hands against her frighted bosom flung:
Leaps into Thebes, girt with a troup of clouds,
And snatched her Children from amid the crowds.
And, for their flight, the Ram with golden fleece
Was given to both; which bears them over the seas.
The fainting Maid with weak left hand the Ram
Held by the horn, when she that Sea did name.
Her Brother, whiles he strained to help, and gave
His hand stretched to her, scarce himself could save.
He for his double-dangers-mate miscarried
Laments, not knowing Neptune her had married.
Ashore, the Ram was to the heavens extolled;
And Colchis kept his precious fleece of Gold.
When Lucifer has thrice appeared in heaven,
The balanced hours of Night and Day are even.
Hence, when the Shepherd four times folds his flocks,
And four times Earth bedews her pearly locks,
Then Janus and Rome's Safety are adored,
With Altar of mild Peace and meek Concord.
The Moon does guide the Months: The Moon in fine
Concludes this Month, adored on Aventine.
The end of the third Book.
OVIDS FESTIVALLS; OR, ROMAN CALENDAR. The fourth Book; or, APRIL.
The Argument.
THe pedigree of Romulus and Rome.
Fair April's name from Venus fair does come.
Male Fortune's Incense. Atlas daughters rise.
Grand Cybel's feasts. Nun Claudia testifies
Her Chastity. Some Stage-games. Feasts divine
To Ceres, and her search of Proserpine.
A Fordy Cow is sacrificed to Earth.
Now glowing Sol on Taurus back rides forth.
Palilia and Vinalia feasts. A prayer
To hurtful Rust. A feast to Flora fair.
ALme Queen of payring Love, Assist, I cried:
To me she straight her cheerful eye applied,
What news with you? you had another strain:
What? touched, says she, with your old wound again?
Madame, said I, you know my wound. She smiled:
And straight that way the air grew clear and mild.
Or sound or sore, I never forsook thy tent:
Thou art my daily task, my ornament.
I played my part throughout my youthful prime:
But now our quill a higher strain does climb.
Times with their causes picked from Annals old,
Stars sets and risings does our Muse unfold.
We come to the fourth month, which does thee renown:
You know, sweet Lady, Priest and Month's your own.
The Goddess pleased does lightly touch my head
With Myrtle-bough, and bade me still proceed.
I felt the virtue: All things straight grew clear.
Hoise up our sails then, while the wind blows fair,
And, Caesar, thou maintein'st as good a share
In April as in all the Calendar.
This Month descends to thee by pedigree;
Thine by adoptive great-nobilitie.
This Romulus knew when he did compound
The year; and thence his Parents both renowned.
And as he gave to Mars the foremost place,
Because he was next Author of his race;
So Venus many ranks before his mother
He Mistress made of this next following other.
And turning over Times rolls to find the ground
Of his descent, the Gods his Parents found.
Who knows not Dardan from Electra's seed
Did spring, whom she, conceived by Jove, did breed?
Hence Erichthonius, who begat King Tros
Assarac's Sire: hence Capys next arose.
The next Anchises, with whom Venus fair
Did not disdain a Parent's name to bear.
Aeneas next, whose Piety tried in fire
Brought several Sacreds, both his Gods and Sire.
Now come we to Iulus blessed name,
Where Teucrian Sages meet the Julian fame.
Next Posthumus, who was, being born among
The woods, called Sylvius in the Roman tongue.
Another Sylvius of his father's name
Joined with Aeneas, from this Sylvius came.
He was Latinus father. Alba's time
Succeeded his; and Epytus next him:
This man the names of Troy revived again.
Then Calpetus his grandchild next did reign.
Next Tyberine his father's throne implied;
Who, drowned in the Tuscane river, died:
Yet saw his son Agrippa, and grandchild
Stern Remulus, who was with lightning killed.
Then Aventine, whose mount does still maintein
His name, succeeds. Next Proca took the reign.
Next Numitor unjust Amulius brother,
Whose Wife was Lausus and Nun Ilia's mother.
Amulius Lausus slayes. Mars Ilia loves;
Who big by him with those twin-brothers proves.
Thence Romulus always for Parents chief
Held Mars and Venus, and deserves belief.
And that succeeding times might know the same,
These Months he joined in both his parents name.
But sure this name of Venus-month does come
From that Greek nown that notes the waters foam.
Nor wonder we at this Greek word at all;
For Italy old times Great Greece did call.
Here came Evander with his fleet well manned;
Here came Alcides: both of Grecia land.
That clubbed Pilgrim did his herd display
On Aventine, and drank of Albula.
Ulysses too, the Lestrygons can tell,
And that same shore where Circe once did dwell.
The walls of Telegon and Tybur stand
Still extant, raised by a Grecian hand.
Halesus, forced by Atrides fate, here came;
From whom Phaliscanes did derive their name.
Antenor too, who would Troy's peace have won:
And Diomed Appulian Daunus Son.
Aeneas late behind Antenor came,
And hither brought his Gods from the Ilian flame.
Sr Solemus from Phrygian Ida tall
Came in his train, who named Sulmo's wall:
Sweet Sulmo's wall, great Prince, my native land!
Ah me! how distant from the Scythian sand!
Well, Muse, suppress these long complaints, nor sing
These sacred strains upon a mournful string.
What will not Envy reach? Some, Venus, would
From thee the honor of this month withhold.
For 'cause the season opens every thing,
Gross cold departs, and plants begin to spring;
From the Open time they challenge April's name,
Which Venus with an earnest hand does claim.
She pleasantly does temper all the year,
And rule inferior to no God does bear:
She governs Heaven, and Earth, and native Seas,
And by her work mainteins each Species:
She all the Gods begat ('t were long to tell:)
And with warm seeds makes Herbs and Trees to swell:
She brought rude men to one harmonious mind;
And to his proper make each male she joined.
What but soft Pleasure Birds to breed does move?
Nor would Beasts couple if there were no Love.
The surly Ram will with a Ram knock horns;
But yet to hurt his lovely Ew he scorns.
The Bull, whose majesty does aw the grove,
With smoothed brow does gently woe his Love.
The same instinct does guide marinall things,
Which fills with thousand fish the Water-springs.
She first Mankind's more savage life refined,
And first to comely habits men inclined.
A Lover in an ill-sped night his fate
First wail'd in verse at's Sweet-hearts bolted gate,
To woe his Wench Love made him eloquent:
And in his cause each man was excellent.
She has discovered thousand arts: Love did
Find many a notion which before lay hid.
Who then this Month to Venus dares refuse
To give? Avaunt that folly from our Muse!
Beside, she is a general Power frequented
With numerous Fanes: but most in Rome augmented.
She for thy Troy, O Rome, did weapons wear,
When her soft hand was wounded with a spear.
She put two Ladies down (a Trojane, Judge:)
Ah, may those twain not think of that old grudge!
Assarac's daughter she became, that so
Great Caesar might the Julian Fathers ow.
Nor can she have a fitter time then Spring,
When earth grows gay, and jocund fields do sing.
The heads of plants above the cracked ground perk:
The vine begets new pearls in swelling bark.
So fair a season fits so fair a Queen;
Here joynd with Mars, as she before has been.
She now the wary Mariners calls down
To native seas, not fearing Winters frown.
Ye Latin Maids and Wives, and all that wear
No veil nor stole, adore this Goddess fair.
Your golden fillets from white necks unbind:
Let other flowers, and roses fresh be joynd.
You she invites with Myrtles veiled to lave:
Attend: the reason's certain that I have.
Her dropping locks once on a bank she dried;
The wanton Satyrs her all naked spied:
Which known, she with a myrtle hides her breast,
And was concealed. Which is by you expressed.
Learn why ye Incense to Male Fortune bring,
Near to the banks of Tybers gelid spring.
That place receives you all stripped to the skin,
Where each defect in every part is seen.
Male Fortune, pleased but with a little spice,
Hides from your husbands all deformities.
Pure milk may ye and seeds of poppy grownd
With honey squeezed out of the comb compound.
When Venus to her boorish Mate was led,
She drank of this, and left her Maidenhead.
With humble prayers adore her: She procures,
That beauty, carriage, and good name endures.
Through abstinence Rome's youth in time decayed;
Our fathers searched the old Cumaean Maid.
She bids a Chapel unto Venus build:
Which finished, Venus did her favor yield.
Sweet Queen, to thy Sonne's race thy kind eye bend
Thus always, and thy numerous Dames defend.
But see! the Scorpion with his dreadful tail
Advanced, falls headlong to the waters pale.
This night once past; when heaven is died again
With purple blush; and dabbled birds complain:
When watchful travelers their lights half-burn'd
Have quenched; and Peasants to their work returned:
Old Atlas Daughters over his head are mounted;
Which are but six in sight, though seven accounted:
Because but six did match with Powers Divine:
For Sterope (they say) with Mars did join;
Neptune did Alcyon and Celaeno love;
Taygeta, May, Electra lay with Jove.
With mortal Sisyphus matched Merope:
For which she grieving loves obscurity.
Or, at the ruins of her Trojane race
Electra grieved, with hands did hide her face.
Thrice more let Heaven on constant axles course;
Let Sol thrice harness and knock off his horse:
Then straight the Phrygian Horn-pipe does resound,
The Idaean Grandames feast is now renowned.
Her eunuchs marching beat their tabrets hollow:
From brasse-knock'd brass a noise a noise does follow.
She, carried on her servants necks in pride,
About the streets is whooted to, and cried.
Resort, ye Nobles; Scenes and Shows do call:
Now in the Court be there no suits at all.
More I should mention; but the brasse-shrill sound
And horrid Lotos-pipe does me confound.
Help, Cybele. She cast her courteous eye
On her learned Nieces, and bade them apply.
Ye Thespian Sisters, mindful of her voice,
Show why she is pleased with such continual noise.
Thus I. Then Erato, (This month to her
Gives place, because the name of Love she bare.)
This Fate was given to Saturn; Mighty King,
A Son of thine thee from thy throne shall fling.
He fearing this devoureth every child
As it came forth, and in his guts it killed.
Often Rhea mourned she could no Mother be,
Though pregnant; and bewailed fertility.
Jove's born: Antiquity's the Testament:
Why should we tax a truth so ancient?
His throat almighty gulps a swathed stone:
Fates did allow this cheat of him alone.
Long had a tinkling rung in Ida tall,
That so the Infant might in safety brall.
The Corybantes and Curetes, some
On ringling helmets, some on bucklers drum.
The Child's concealed. In sign of this therefore
Her followers make their brass and parchments rore.
For helmets, cymbals; drums they beat for shields:
The pipe those ancient Phrygian tunes still yields:
She ceased: I asked, But why do Lions stout,
Which scorn the harness, draw her coach about?
I ceased: She answered, She Ferocity
Restrains; and this her coach does testify.
Why wears she on her head a towred Crown?
Because she first gave towers to every town?
She liked. Said I, Whence comes that fury then
To geld themselves? The Muse replied again,
Young Atys beauty all the woods surpassed:
He joined with this towr'd Queen in love most chaste.
Be e're a Boy; reserve thy self for me;
And take, quoth she, my Temples custody.
His troth he plighted: If, said he, I lie,
Be that my last Love for my falsitie.
He ly'd; and with the Sangaritian Maid
Was stained. The Goddess vowed revenge, betrayed.
The Nymph, by cutting off her tree, she gives
A fatal wound. Their fates were relatives.
He runs stark mad; and, thinking over his head
His house beat down, to Dindymus he fled.
Sometimes he rores, O hold your lashes fell!
O stay your brands! I feel the Hags of hell!
Then lanch'd his flesh with stones, and on the dirt
Drags his long locks: O this is my desert!
And with my blood deserved revenge I press:
Confounded be those parts which did transgress!
Confounded be they. And so off he reft
His shame: No symptoms of his sex were left.
This is their pattern: Her gelt Priests from hence
Pluck off their locks and cut their Pudiments.
Thus by the music of the Aenian Quire
I did enjoy the cause of my desire.
Now, Lady Muse, relate: Whence came this Queen?
Or has she ever in our city been?
Grove-gaudy Ida, Dindym, Cybele,
And wealthy Troy she loved perpetually.
And when Aeneas Italized Troy,
She was about to follow him on's way:
But Fates informed her, that as yet that nation
Required her not. And so she kept her station.
But when rich Rome had now five ages viewed,
And raised her crest above the world subdued,
The Priest our Sibylls fate-recording lines
Reads over, and there this grand instruction finds;
You want your Mother: Romans, her in have
Go seek, and give her enterteinment chaste.
The fathers in these dark Maeanders were
Confused: What Goddess to be sought? and where?
They send to Phoebus: Seek the Mother grand
Of Gods, says he: She Is in the Idaean land.
Lords are dispatched. Then Attalus was King
Of Phrygia; who denies to them the thing.
Strange things I sing. The rumbling ground does shake;
And thus the Goddess from her chapel spoke,
Make have, and send me: My desire's to Rome:
Rome is a place that does all Gods become.
He, frighted at the voices fear, cries, Go:
Ours thou shall be; Rome from our stock does grow.
A thousand axes straight those Pine-groves smite,
Which good Aeneas yerst implied in flight.
Thousands are mustered: And a painted barge
Of Heavens great Grandame now does take the charge.
She sails most safely through her Nephews rea'm,
And salleys over the Hellesponts long stream:
Then passed Rhoeteum and Sigeum over,
And Tened, and old Etion's wealthy shore:
Then fetched the Cyclads, Lesbos at their backs,
And where Caristo's shore the waves refracts:
Then sails Icarium, where the molten fall
Of Icarus the waters so did call.
Creet on the left, of the right hand Pelop's main
She leaves; then lanches to Cithaeron's plain:
Hence to Trinacria, where in boiling steel
Steropians, Brontians, and Acmonians deal:
Then plows the Libyan sea, and of the left hand
Sardinia views; hence reached the Ausonian land.
There sounds that mouth, where Tyber to the main
Pays rent, and ranges in a broader plain.
The Peers and Commons with the Senates ranks
Came forth to meet her at the Tuscane banks.
The matrones with their husbands and their sons
Went forth, and all the holy Vestall Nuns.
The strained ropes men's toilsome hands do wring;
Yet to the port the Barge they scarce can bring.
The time was dry; much heat had parched the land:
The laden Barge sinks into mirie sand.
Each Labourer more then his share does toil;
And with loud whoots helps his stout hands each-while.
That, like an island in the sea, to the ground
Sticks fast. The wonder strikes them all astound.
Nun Claudia sprung of Clausus progeny,
Whose beauty equaled her nobility:
A maid, but not so counted; being abused
By base report, and wrongfully accused.
Her habits brave, and music so delicious,
And spruce attires did make her more suspicious.
Her conscience clear derides the lies of fame:
Yet we are prone to credit words of blame.
She steps before the Nuns religious train,
And in her hands takes up some water clean:
Thrice dews her head; thrice lifts her hand to the sky.
All think her frantic that her gestures eye.
Then on her humble knee with loosned hair
She eyes the Goddess, and thus makes her prayer,
Alm Mother of the Powers celestial,
Accept thy suppliants prayers conditional.
My shame is taxed: I yield if thou accuse:
If thou condemn me, death I Will not refuse.
But if I Am clear, then give a real sign:
Chaste Mother, follow these chaste hands of mine.
This said, she drew the rope with strength but small;
( I speak a truth, though strange, yet general.)
The Goddess follows, and therewith commends
Her Leader: Joy to heaven a huge shout sends.
Now came they to the bending which old days
Called Tyber's Court: hence turns he left-hand-wayes.
Night came: The rope to an oaken stump they tie;
And, being repasted, down to sleep they lie.
Light came: The rope from the oaken stump the untied;
But incense first on altars built applied;
And crowned the ship: Then kill a heifer clear
Which never bull nor servile yoke did bear.
There is a place where Almo does resign
His stream and name to nobler Tyberine:
There does the Priest, in purple robe most grave,
In Almo's stream her and her Sacreds lave.
Her followers hollow. Furious pipes resound:
And velome thumpt to her Eunuch's hands redound.
Joy'd Claudia honored walks before, at last
By heavenly witness scarce concluded chaste.
She in her wain into Capena- gate
Is brought; her oxen strewn with flowers in state.
Nasica takes her, not her Temples author:
Metellus was; but now Augustus rather.
Here Erato stayed, till I questioned more.
Show why small toll, said I, augments her store?
With coin collected, answered she, her sane
Metellus raised: thence is that custom ta'n.
But why, said I, do men, now frequent Guests,
By course solemnize her appointed feasts?
Because that she so happy a change did make
Of places, they this varying omen take.
Why then are her games Megalesia
By Rome kept first? To this my Muse did say,
She bred the Gods: They give their Mother place:
And so the first Games celebrate her grace.
Why then do they her Eunuchs Galli call;
When Phrygia is so distant from the Gaul?
A frantic stream called Gallus runs between
Celenae high and Cybel's verges green:
It causes madness: Fly it all, in sadness,
That love your wits: The water works madness.
Upon her table 't is, said I, in season
To set herb-puddings: Is there any reason?
Old times, said she, of milk and herbs did feed,
Such as the earth without control did breed.
Curds mixed with boiled herbs serve her board; that so
An ancient Power those ancient meats might know.
When stars are banished, and Pallantias shines
In the East, and Luna her white teem disjoyns,
Upon Quirinus we may truly say
Was Public Fortune consecrate this day.
The third to this brings Stage-games; which as I
Beheld, thus spoke a grave Gentile placed by,
This day did Caesar on the Libyan ground
Perjurious Juba's stubborn arms confound.
I served a Tribune under Caesar's banner
Lord of my actions; which I count my honor.
My warfare me, this place thy Gown gave thee,
Both raised to the office of Decemviri.
From this discourse w' are called off by a shower:
The pendent Tankerd airie drops did pour.
But e're the evening does the sights conclude,
Sword-arm'd Orion in the waves is stewed.
When next Tithonia views victorious Rome,
And posting stars give place to Titans Groom,
Large pomps, with ranks of Gods, the Circus grace,
And aire-foot Coursers for the first prize race.
Then Ceres games. The Cause need not b' expressed:
Her favors of themselves are manifest.
Green Herbs at first were hungry fathers food,
To them afforded from the earth unwoo'd.
Sometimes young stalks they gathered here and there:
And tender sprouts did make them goodly cheer.
They thought them well when they had found out Mast*
The Oak did yield them many a rich repast.
First Ceres men with nobler meats did store;
And into better food turned akorns poor.
She oxens brawny necks to the plow subdued.
Then first the lanched ground Sol's luster viewed.
Then Brass was prized; Steel great content did yield:
Ah, would that stuff had ever bin concealed!
She joys in peace: No prayers, ye Farmers, cease
For peace perpetual and our Prince of peace.
Meal mixed with salt to her may you present,
And make the old altars fumes of incense vent.
Or else for incense light your tapers greased.
With little gifts, if pure, is Ceres pleased.
Priests, spare the Oxens harmless lives; They plow:
Present the lazy soil-bemoiling Sow.
'T is pity an industrious life be slain:
Let it subsist and in her fields take pain.
This place invites the Virgins rape to show.
Hear many things comprised in a few.
A land with three rocks crowds into the sea,
From its Triangle called Trinacria:
Beloved of Ceres; plentifully town'd:
There stands fair Enna on a fertile ground.
Cold Arethuse the Dames of heaven invites:
The corn-crown'd Goddess comes to those delights.
Her Daughter, tended with her usual train,
Walked barefoot up and down her flowery plain.
Hard by a grovy vale a flat does lie,
Well watered with a sources fall from high.
The gaudy mead her pride much varied, clad
With all the colors Lady Nature had.
Which soon as spied, Come Playfellows, cries she,
And fill your aprons full of flowers with me.
Young Maidens minds delight in trifling spoil;
And fond desire calls off the sense of toil.
This fills her basket of fine osiers made;
This stores her apron; she her coats does lade.
This Marigolds; she plies the Violet-beds:
Her dainty finger crops the Poppy-heads.
On Hyacynth and Amaranth some dote:
Some Thyme, some Crowfoot, some love Melilote
And other flowers: The Rose does much delight:
She plucks the Saffron and the Lily white.
Her busy mind still further off does bear her;
And (as it chanced) none of her mates were near her:
Her Uncle spies her, and on sooty steeds
Rapes her away, and to his kingdom speeds.
She cries, and calls out, Io my Mother dear,
I Am forced away; and off her clothes does tear.
Forthwith the vault of Pluto does display:
His light-auk steeds could not abide the day.
Her Maids, their baskets filled with flowery treasures,
Cried, Ho Persephone, come see thy pleasures.
When naught was heard, with cries they fill the dale,
And smite their hands against their bosoms pale.
Ceres amazed at this to Enna flies;
And straight, Ah woeful! Where Is my Girl? she cries.
About she hurries in a dead distraction,
Like shrews of Bacchus in their frantic action:
Or as a Cow, robbed of her late-calv'd Love,
Runs sadly lowing all about the grove;
So she could neither sighs nor flight refrain,
But runs, and first begins at Enna's plain.
There first her daughter's footsteps she does note:
The ground betrays the passage of her foot.
Perchance she then had searched the furthest ground,
Had not some swine disturbed the tract she found.
The Leontini, and Anisus mazes
She searched, with all the medow-grounds of Acis:
Then Cyane, and mild Anapus fount,
And over Gela's dangerous gulf does mount:
Then over Orlygia and Pantagia goes,
And Megara; then over Simethus mouth:
Next to the Cyclops sooty forge she hy'th;
Thence to that place named from the crooked Sith.
Then Himere, Didym, Agrigentum, and
Tauromenus; thence to Mela's Holy-Ox-land.
Next Camarine with Swanny Tempe fair,
And Thapsos; Eryx free to Western air:
Then searched she Pachyne, Pelore, Lilybe,
Her Countrey's horn-like promontories three.
Each nook she fills with monefull Elegies,
As when the Lapwing to his Itys cries.
Sometimes, Persephone; sometimes she cried,
My Daughter; and by course both names implied:
But no Persephone could Ceres hear;
Nor Daughter, Mother: Vain both titles were.
When she a Shepherd or a Plowman spied,
Saw you no Damsel pass this way? she cried.
Nights cole-black color now alone possessed
All things: now watchful tongues of dogs did rest.
Where Aetna high Typhoeus vast bulk tires,
Whose ground is scorched with ever-spuing fires;
Here for her torch two Pines she does inflame:
Hence in her rites the Torches custom came.
There is a cave of rugged pumice made,
Which neither man nor beast could e're invade:
Here when she came, her bridled snakes she ties
TO her coach, and dry-foot over the water flies.
Next raught the Syrts, and to Charybdis passed,
And those naufragious Dogs of Scylla vast;
The spacious Adriack, and Corinthum bound
Within two seas; hence reached the Attick ground.
Sad, on a stone here rests she first of all,
Which stone the Athenians hence from Sadness call.
There many days in the air she did remain
Unstirr'd, and patient both of cold and rain.
No place but has its fate. Now Cereall
Eleusis then was Celeus farm but small.
He home was trudging with a trusse of wood,
With mast and berries from the hedge, for food.
His daughter with two goats from field did come:
His young son lay in cradle sick at home.
The Wench said, Mother (Her that name did move)
What d' ye alone here in this desert grove?
The Old man too stands there (though his load were sore)
And prayed her enter to his Cottage poor.
She now an old wife in a mitre dressed,
In these sad words denies his urged request,
Go safe, blessed Parent, my pore Daughter's gone:
Ah, sweet condition far above mine own!
She wiped her eyes; a pearly drop came from her
Much like a tear: for tears did not become her.
The old man and maid, both tenderhearted, make
A part in tears. The downright Sage then spoke,
God keep, God keep thy daughter safe from harm:
Come, pray, arise; reject not our poor farm.
Replies the Dame, Thy argument is strong.
So rising up she follows him along.
As on they walked, he this to her expressed,
His Son was sick and could by no means rest.
She, as she went into his little mound,
Sleep-poring poppy gathers on the ground.
The-whiles she plucked she tasted it ('t is said)
And unawares her long-long fasting stayed.
The which because she in the Evening did,
Her supper is not till the sun is hid.
Being entered in, great mourning she beheld:
No hope of life was in the senseless child.
The old wife saluted (called Menaline)
She daigns the boy's mouth to her own to join.
His strength and color instantly renewed:
Such vigor her celestial kiss ensued.
The whole house joy'd; to wit, the parents dear,
And little maid: these three the whole house were.
Forthwith they set the board; curds, apples, plumbs,
And golden honey in the hony-combs.
But Ceres fasted, and in milk lukewarm
Gives poppy to the boy, his sleep to charm*
Sleeps midnight-Silence did all things enwrap;
Triptolemus she takes into her lap:
Thrice stroak'd him with her hand: three charms she sung,
Not to be uttered by a mortal tongue:
Then raked up in hot embers him does lay,
That fire might purge his humane dross away.
Up starts the fool-kind Mother, and stark wild
Cries out, What mean you? and snatched up her child.
Said she, The art evil in not being so:
By thy fond fear my gifts are frustrate now.
Now he is Mortal: But he first shall till
The earth, whose plenty shall his garners fill.
Thus forth she goes, and with a cloud attended,
Her winged-Dragon-mounted coach ascended.
Exposed Sunion and retired Piraeum
And right-hand-ports she searched, and passes by 'um*
Then from the Aegean all the Cyclads eyed;
Hence passed the Icarian and Ionian wide.
And through all Asia's towns the Hellespont
She raught, and over several climes does mount.
For spic'd Arabians she beholds awhile;
Then Ind, Libs, Meroe, and the thirsty soil:
Then passed Hesperia, Po, the Rhene, and Rhode,
And Tyber, since a powerful River's God.
O hold! our pen in counting all would tire:
No place on Earth was left unransack'd by her.
Yea, Heaven she searched: and asked the signs that roll
(Expelled from the Ocean) next the frozen Pole;
Ye Northern Stars, (ye sure all actions know,
Because ye never dive the seas below:)
Tell what is become of my Persephone.
To her demand thus answers Helice,
The Night's not conscious of her: ask the Sun,
Who sees whatever in the Day is done.
Sol asked, answered, Toil no more in vain:
Thy Daughter's married to the Tertian reign.
Long having mourned to Jove she pleads her case;
Deep characters of sorrow in her face:
Had you remembered who my Proserpine
Begat, your care of her had equaled mine.
The whole world's search affords me naught but this,
To know my wrong. The Pirate has his prize.
This forced match my child deserved not;
Nor I, to have a Sonne-in-law thus got.
What heavier thrall could Gyges conquest bring
Then now sh' endures the while her Father's King?
Shall he go scot-free? we revengelesse mourn?
Make him repent his crime, and her return.
Jove pacifies: Let Love excuse, says he;
Nor be ashamed of his affinity.
He is our Equal. Heaven's my throne: One Brother
Reigns in the Ocean; and in Styx, the other.
But if no reason can thy will persuade,
But thou will break a match already made;
We'll try this means: Sh' is thine, if meat sh' abstein:
If not, she must the Infernal Bride remain.
Caduceus sails to Styx on nimble wings,
And quick as thought eye-witness'd tidings brings;
She had her stomach staid with kernels three
Of the apple plucked from the pomegranate-tree.
She mourns as much as if herself had now
Been forced away, and scarce could grief out-grow:
And thus she cries, Your heaven to me is hateful:
Let me go live in Tartary more grateful.
This had she done too, but that Jove did swear,
In heaven her Daughter should be half the year.
With this was Ceres cheered and comforted,
And put a corn-ear'd garland on her head.
The rested fields gave huge increase of grain,
Whose crowded treasures barns could scarce contein.
White pleases Ceres; in her Cereals wear
White vestures: black is out of date with her.
Jove surnamed Victor April's Ides does ow:
This day a Temple unto him did vow.
And Liberty, most fitting for our Nation,
This day (unless I err) enjoyed her station.
Next day let Seamen in their ports strike sail:
Out of the West come vapouring storms of hail.
And be it so: yet in these stony storms
Did Caesar quell the Mutinensian arms.
Now when the third day next the Ides does rise,
A Fordy Cow the high Priests sacrifice.
A Cow they Forda and Foecunda name
From Fero: Hence some think that Foetus came.
Now beasts are pregnant; pregnant are all seeds:
Please pregnant Earth a pregnant beast must needs.
Some in Joves Tower are offered: Thirty more
Dye in the Wards, whose blood does drench the floor.
And when the Priests have drawn the young calves forth,
And laid the Cow's sliced entrails on the hearth,
The eldest Nun the Calves to ashes dry
Does burn, on Pales day to purify.
In Numa's time the Earth the Plowmans pain
Did not requite; but all his prayers proved vain.
Sometimes 'twas feared with cold raw Northern drought:
Sometimes 't was dropsi'd by the excessive South.
Corn in the blade did often delude the Lord;
And Oaten stalks did naught but husks afford.
Beasts slunk their young with most untimely throws:
The Ew in giving life her own did lose.
A wood devoted to Menalian Pan
There stood, not lately cut by any man:
There he his notions to the soul asleep
By night infused. Here Numa kills two sheep:
The first to Pan, the next to Sleep they slay;
And both their fleeces on the ground display.
Twice with spring water he bedews his brows;
And twice his temples binds with beechen boughs.
Flesh-meat and Wives that night they must forbear;
Nor any ring upon their fingers wear.
At even to the God in his set form he prays,
Then on those new skins down himself he lays.
Anon comes poppy-headed Night, and brings
Calm Sleep and floating Dreams on mortal things.
Pan comes, and trampling on the sheepskins spread
With horny hoof, thus on the right side said,
The Earth, King Numa, must be reconciled
With two kine's lives which one alone must yield.
Fear shakes off sleep. About his thoughts he rolled
The Mystery, the meaning to unfold.
Grove-lov'd Aegeria does the meaning show:
A Cow with calf is claimed, says she, of you.
A Cow with calf is sacrificed: The year
Becomes more fruitful: Ground and Cattle bear.
This day once Venus did compel to run
Full speed, and spurred the horses of the Sun;
That this style Emperor might Augustus young
Salute next day from his Victorious throng.
But when the fourth morn from the Ides gives light,
The Hyads enter Doris court that night.
The third day next the Hyades are gone
The Race-horse in the lists are placed to run.
Here let me tell why Foxes in the rails
Run loose with fire-links at their backs and tails.
Through cold Carseoli, a soil but slow
In olives thrift, but apt for corn to grow,
I took my journey to my native seat
Pelignus small, but fed with waters sweet:
Into an old acquaintance-house I turned
Just as Sol's coach-horse had their day's task journey'd.
He many stories used to tell me there:
Among which was this, which I must mention here,
Here in this field, says he, and shows the field,
A hardy peasant with his houswife dwell'd.
He in his ground continually did work
With ripping plow, with sickle, spade or fork.
She in the meadows would sometimes make hay,
Or trodden eggs beneath her clock hens lay:
Or mushromes bald or mallows would she pluck;
Then makes a fire at her low chimney's stock.
Yet every day she at her wheel did stint her,
To arm her self against the frowns of winter.
A son some dozen years of age they had,
That kept the fields, a perk unhappy lad,
Beyond the furthest willows in yon field
He caught a Fox that had much poultry killed:
His prisoner up he wraps in straw and hay;
Sets it on fire: the Fox escapes away,
And fires the fields of corn wheres' ere he came:
The winds advantaged that pernicious flame.
That Is still remembered: for now when they burn:
This beast with stubble as he burned the corn,
It is a law amongst our Carseoli,
To keep no fox on purpose so to dye.
When Memnon's gold-lock'd mother next comes forth
In crimson coach to view the uncovered earth,
Sol, leaving that fair Ram that Hell lost,
Is enterteined by a stouter Host:
Yet doubt I whether't is an Ox or Cow:
None but the former parts thereof do show.
But be it Bull or Cow, I Am sure of this,
At that preferment Juno vexed is.
Next morning comes: Palilia now requires me.
I Will make reply if Pales but inspires me.
Kind Pales, help: Thy pastoral rites I sing:
As I devoutly do discharge each thing.
I often Calves-ashes and Bean-straws have held,
With burned purgations in a hand well filled:
Often over the bone-fires have I taken three hops,
And dew'd my self with Holy Water drops.
The Lady moved did my petition mind.
Our ship is lanch'd forth, and has got fair wind.
Sirs, fetch perfume from Vesta's Altars: she
Affords it you, your selves to purify.
With these three Simples fumigate you must,
With Horse-bloud, Bean-straw, and a slunk Calf's dust.
In the evening, Shepherds, purge your pastur'd Sheep:
First sprinkle waters, and your stall-floores sweep:
Trim up your sheepfolds with green herbs and boughs,
And with long garlands hang your gates and house:
Raise up blue fumes of brimstone pure and clean,
And smoke your cattle till they bleat again.
Gum, Sabine weeds, and barren Olives lay
Upon the fire, withal the crackling Bay.
First Fruits of Millet, with the basket, fire:
This countrey-Dame that meat does much desire.
Then add the Milk-bowl with her cates, and pray,
To her presenting lukewarm milk, and say,
Great Queen for ay both Sheep and Shepherds shield:
Be all offenses from our stalls expelled.
If under holy trees I Have laid my head;
If flocks on holy ground or graves have fed,
Or entered groves divine; if that cur eye
Have made the Goat-foot-God or Nymphs to fly;
If that my hook your groves of boughs bereaves,
To feed my sick sheep with a trusse of leaves:
Forgive the crime: and when it hails, my crowd
Admit with me into Pan's caves to shroud.
Forgive, O Nymphs, if we your fountains sweet
Have troubled, or our cattle with their feet.
Dear Queen, thou all the Fountains with their Powers
For us appease, with Gods of grovy Bowers.
Nor Nymphs, nor Cynthia in her cistern play
Let us not see, nor Pan in fields all day.
Let men and beasts be hail and freed from griefs:
Preserve our dogs, that us preserve from thiefs.
Let Us not at even bring tale uneven with morn,
Nor sadly show the skins of cattle torn.
Keep off base Dearth: let grass and trees spring fresh,
And springs of water, both to drink and wash.
Let kine give milk, milk cheese, and cheese good coin:
Let wholesome whey through osier-cheese-bowls drain.
Let rams be frolic, and the ews their seed
In time bring forth and many young lambs breed.
All yield full fleeces, work, not harsh, but fine
For maids, and pliant to the fingers twine.
Grant these our prayers, and we will every year
To thee the Queen of Shepherds make this cheer.
Thus pray: And turned to the East, four times this matter
Repeat: then wash thy hands in fresh spring water.
Then in a beaker, or a milk-dish for it,
Carouse milk mingled with decocted claret.
Then over the crackling stubble at the last
Your sturdy bodies in a quick leap cast.
The manner's told: the original remains:
Whose number troubles and our work deteins.
Fire is a purger; it refines each metal:
Therefore may purge the Shepherd with his cattle.
For since all things have two contrary seeds,
The Fire and Water, whence each compound breeds;
These Simples, Fire and Water, Fathers old
The best purgations for our bodies hold.
Or 'cause these are the very grounds of life;
The exuls loss; the portion of the wife.
I scarce believe 't: Some think there is understood
The fire of Phaethon and Deucalion's flood.
Some say a Shepherd striking of a flint
Perceived some sudden seeds of fire within 't:
The first spark died; the next does tinder take:
This the argument of Pales fire they make.
Or from Aeneas, to whose flight the flame
Did give a harmless way, this custom came.
This is the likelier: Rome now raised, the King
Commands his Gods to their new seats to bring.
The Shepherds all in their new transmigrations
Set fire upon their old thatched habitations:
Then with their flocks they all leaped through the lay:
Which still is acted on Romes natall day.
Mere chance to Romes first birth me now does bring:
Quirinus, favor, while thy deeds I sing.
Amulius blood his tyrants score had paid:
The crew of shepherds now two Lords obeyed.
They both agreed into one town to call
The Boores; but argued who should build the wall.
Says Romulus, What need this strife or words?
Birds will direct us: let us consult with birds.
Agreed: To grovy Palatine he climbs;
And he the top of Aventine betimes.
Six Remus spies; his Brother, twelve: he yields:
And Romulus at his election builds.
A day is chose to furrow out the wall:
They worship Pales, and to work they fall.
Down to the firm ground do they dig a ditch:
Then cast in corn: From neighboring lands they fetch
Earth to fill't up; and on the filled ditch raise
An altar, and there make a fresh fire blaze.
Thence with a dike he marks the wall: The plow
Is carried by a snow-white Ox and Cow.
Jove, prosper our design, the King thus prayed;
Thou father Mars and mother Vesta aid.
And all ye Gods, on whom I ought to call,
With all your favors let me raise this wall.
Be this the Lady of the world for ay,
Both to the rising and the setting day.
Thus prayed the King. Jove prosp'rously replied
From heaven with thunder on the left-hand-side.
All, joy'd at the omen, their foundation laid:
And in short time a perk new wall is made.
The King appoints Sr Celer to oversee
The work: Sr Celer, have a care, says he,
That no man over the wall or ditch does pass;
Who-ever dares it knock him down in the place.
This Remus knew not; but the walls so low
Begins to flout: Will these keep out the foe?
Straight leaps he over. Celer knocks him down.
He in his blood falls headlong with a groan.
This news the King, soon as it touched his ears,
Wounds to the soul: He swallows bosome-tears,
And shrines his sorrow for his honor's sake:
Such leaps, cries he, let all our foes here take.
Yet at his exequies he could not choose
But weep: imprisoned piety breaks loose.
He kissed the hearse whereon his body lies;
Adieu, dear brother, to my woe, he cries.
Then mournful Acca in her loose attire
With Faustulus anoint him for the fire.
The youth, not yet enstall'd Quirites, mourn:
The wept-o're pile is lastly fired to burn.
The City's built. O who would then have dreamed
She e're should trample over the whole world tamed!
Reign ever under our victorious Caesar:
Of this great title still reserve a treasure:
And while thou stand'st above the world extolled,
Beneath thy skirts the Earth subjected hold.
I Have done with Pales. Now Vinalia
I Will sing. Yet 'twixt the twain there is one day.
All common harlots, Venus now adore:
She furthers your Professions gain the more.
With incense fumed ask beauty, all men's love,
Alluring gestures, and quaint jests to move.
Give water-Mint and Myrtle to your Queen,
With weaves of Roses tied with rush-films green.
Her Chapel next Collina's portall fill,
Which takes its name from the old Sicilian hill.
Mark Claudius Arethusian Syracuse
And Eryx mountain both in war subdues.
Then Venus by the aged Sibylls verse
Was brought to her Sonne's land, which she preferres.
Why then (you ask) call we Vinalia
This Venus-feast? and why is it Joves day?
Prince Turnus and Aeneas for a Maid
Made wars. Young Turnus seeks the Etruscane aid.
Mezentius was a warrior of great note;
On horseback furious, but more fierce on foot:
Whom Turnus with his Rutuls to their side
Entreat. The Tuscane Captain thus replied,
"These wounds and arms often died in my own blood
"Can witness, Prowess me some price has stood.
"Petitioners, no great reward I ask;
"But half your vintage in the next years cask.
"We'll straight to work. The conquest 's ours: get you
"But wine. The foe shall our agreement rue.
The Rutuls yield. Mezentius is arrayed:
So is Aeneas; and to Jove thus prayed,
Our foes have vowed their wines to the Tyrrhene King:
Jove, wine to thee from Latin vines we'll bring.
The better vow prevails. Mezentius slain
Kicks at the ground in his fell souls disdain.
Blout Autumn in grape-soiled weeds arrayed
Was come: To Jove the promised wine is paid.
Hence is this day enstyl'd Vinalia: Jove
Does challenge it; and much the feast does love.
When April now has gained six days more,
The Spring has wasted half her pregnant store.
In vain thou seek'st the Ram which Hell bear:
Showers will give signs: The Dog does now appear.
As from Nomentum I returned this day
To Rome, a white train meets me in the way,
A Flamen into Rusts old grove did hie,
The entrails of a Dog and Sheep to fry.
I went along to learn that service: There
Quirinus Priest thus praying I did hear,
"Rough Rust, forbear our Cereal store to spoil,
"And let the smooth blade glister on the soil.
"Permit our grain to ripen full and fair*
"Nursed by the favor of a temperate air.
"Great is thy power: the corn which thou do rust
"The sorry Farmer does account as lost.
"Nor winds, nor nipping frosts, nor tempests strong
"Can work such hurt and do the corn such wrong
"As when the Suns hot gleams the dank blade warm:
"Then is thy time, dread Queen, to do the harm.
"O spare! take off from corn thy fingers rough:
"Hurt not our food: Thou can: be that enough.
"Eat up dire Ir'n, and not our food from us:
"First ruin that, which is so ruinous.
"On Swords and wastfull weapons rather seize:
"No need of them; the world now lives in peace.
"Let countrey-tools, the Spade, the Rake, the Share,
"Now glister bright: foul naught but tools of War.
"And when a soldier would his sword unsheath,
"Let tugging at it put him out of breath.
"Never may thou deal with Ceres; but always
"Let careful Farmers to thy absence pray.
He ends. His towel fringed with tufted locks
On's right side lay, with wine and the incense-box.
I saw him burn his wine and incense then,
With the entrails of the Sheep and Dog unclean.
To know the ground of this strange sacrifice
I asked the Flamen: who to me replies,
"There is a Dog Icarius called, the fire
"Of whose aspect both soil and seed does tire:
"To that Dog-starre this dog we burn in flame:
"Nor know I any reason but the name.
When thrice Tithonia Priam's Brothers Bride
Is marched forth, ushered by her gallant guide,
With crowns of flowers behold the Flowery Queen:
Now liberal Mirth luxuriates on the Scene.
Next Calends ends the feast; I Will mention 't then:
A greater task now calls away my pen.
This day does Vesta in her Cosin's shrine
Conclude: just Senators did so combine.
One share has Phoebus; Vesta has the second;
With whom Liege Caesar in the third is reckoned.
Let Oaken boughs and lasting Laurel crown
This Temple, which conteins three Gods in one.
The end of the fourth Book.
OVIDS FESTIVALLS; OR, ROMAN CALENDAR. The fifth Book; or, MAY.
The Argument.
THe Muses Descants on the name of May.
The Hyads called from Hyas made a prey.
Queen Flora's Plays and praises: every part
Of her feast shown: Mars born by Flora's art.
Old Chiron's story. Rites to Spirits pale
From Remus named. Orion, and his tale.
A temple to Bis-ultor Mars. Joves cheat.
The Nuns Rush-pictures into Tiber let.
The Merchants prayer of cheats to Mercury.
The Twins. More days of much diversity.
YOu ask me, whence this Month is called May.
I know not well what reason down to lay.
Just as a traveller, when as he views
More paths, stands still, and knows not which to choose:
So know not I, because I have such store,
What cause to give: even plenty makes me poor.
Relate, ye Nymphs of Hippocrene, that dwell
About the lovely Pegasean well.
The Sisters differ. Then Poly'mnia fair
First speaks: The rest in silence all give ear.
When Chaos wrought, and these three bodies made,
And that huge mass was into forms conveyed,
Earth's load pressed downward, and attracts the Sea:
Heaven mounted by its native levitie:
Sun, Moon, and Stars, clogged with no grosser weight,
With all their harness elevated straight.
But for a time Earth gave no place to Heaven;
Nor Stars, to Sol: All dignities were even.
Ofttimes a God but of the vulgar race
Presumed to take grand Saturn's royal place.
Each notelesse Deity would by Ocean old
Sit cheek by joul. Often Tethys was controlled.
Till awful Reverence and Honor grave
Seats suitable to every person gave.
Hence Majesty, which all the world does sway,
Did spring; accounted great on her birthday.
Amid Heaven's palace was she straight extolled,
Arrayed in purple and transparent gold.
Pale Fear and modest Shame sat by her side:
And all the Gods with like framed looks her eyed.
Straight Zeal of Honor seized their minds: all savor
Repute and Worth, and aim to purchase favor.
For many years in Heaven remained this state;
Till Father Saturn was expelled by fate.
Those monstrous Giants then the Earth did bear
Whose hands to invade the court of Jove did dare:
With hundred hands to them she snakes feet gave;
The Gods themselves, cries she, in wars outbrave.
Up to the Welkin with audacious might
They mountains pil'd, and challenged Jove to fight.
He from his tower discharged his thunder straight,
And on the invaders pates whelmed that vast weight.
Thus Majesty by Jove his arms protected
The conquest won, and since has been respected.
With Jove she sits, and is his guardian sure:
And sans constraint enstates his reign secure.
On earth she came, adored by diverse Sages,
Quirinus, Numa, in their several ages.
She Parents honor for them does defend:
To fair and virtuous youth she is a friend.
The ivory-Bench and Rods enstall'd she graces:
On crowned Steeds she in proud triumph paces.
Poly'mnia ends, and is approved in all
By Clio and Thalia lyricall.
Urania follows: All are whist and still;
And her voice only now the Quire does fill:
Of old great reverence had the hoary head;
And wrinkled Age was highly honored.
Youth practiced warfare with a sprightfull hand,
And marched in colors for their Gods and land.
Old Age, but weak, nor fit for battles brave,
Did aid their Country by their counsels grave.
The Court was then for none but Seniours free;
And Senate comes from Senioritie.
Old men kept Courts: The law was only tied
To that calm age; which thence was dignified.
Old men 'twixt young without distaste have gone;
And in the middle, if there were but one.
Who dared a rash word near a Seniour's ear
To speak? A Censure he should surely bear.
Quirinus knowing this the Sages chose
His cities new state-matters to dispose.
Hence, to renown those Majors who did sway
Those times, I hold this Month is called May.
And Numitor, whom he could not deny,
Would have this Month given to Majority.
Nor ill success had this same pledge of grace:
June, named of Juniours, follows next in place.
Then Queen of all Calliopea fair
Began: green ivy crowned her fluent hair:
Oceanus, whose streams the Earth confine,
To watery Tethys did in wedlock join.
Hence Pleione descended, who did wed
Heaven-propping Atlas, and the Pleiads bred.
The rest in beauty fame reports that May
Excelled, and Jove enamored with her lay.
She on Cyllene's cypresse-crown did bear
The Post of heaven, whose pinions cut the air.
Arcadia older then the Moon (some hold,)
Huge Maenalus, swift Ladon, him extolled.
Evander, banished from the Arcadian shore,
Came into Latium, and his Gods brought over.
Then whereas Rome the world's chief head now stands,
Were beasts, and trees, and stalls about the lands.
Here sailing; Hold, his learned Mother cried:
For in those fields a Kingdome's plat I Have spied.
His Prophetess and Mother he obeyed,
And on that unacquainted shore there stayed.
He taught these nations many services,
Both horn-hoof'd Pans and winged Mercuries.
The girt Luperci worship half-goat Pan
When with their thongs about the streets they ran.
But witty-shirking Mercury, who framed
The Harp, this month from his fair Mother named.
Nor was it his first good deed: for he made even
His Harp-strings number with the Pleiads seven.
She ended too: her Sisters did approve.
My thoughts their reasons all alike do move.
Like thanks, ye Muses, I to you express:
Nor can I praise you either more or less.
Jove leads my work: This night the Star we spy
Which was officious to Joves Infancy.
The wet Olenian Goat now rising see,
Whom Heaven rewarded for her nurserie.
Nymph Amalthea, famed in Cretane I Would,
Jove her young nursling in the woods did hide.
She had a Goat two little twins that bred,
Of all Dictaean flocks the fairest head;
With stately horns, which to her back did bend,
And teats that might Joves nurse right well commend.
She suckled Jove: But in a tree she broke
Her horn: the beauty half away this took.
The Nymph took't up, and crowned with flowers she filled it
With dainty fruits, and to Joves mouth she held it.
Heavens Commonwealth and Fathers throne when he
Possessed, and held the sole Supremacy,
He made his nurse a Sign; his nurses horn,
A spring, which since the mistress name has born.
May's Calends sees the little Images
And the altar raised to Lares Praestites.
The Altar for the Cures was; but down
'T is beat by age and time that wastes stone.
Because their vigilance make all things sure,
They stand for us, and keep the walls secure,
And are assistant, and in every need
Are present, we this name to them aread.
A Dog at their feet in the same stone carved
Does stand; of which this reason is observed.
Both loved of masters: both the house defend:
Both God and Dog the three-leet ways do tend.
By Dogs and Gods sly thieves away are scared:
Those Gods with Dogs do ever watch and ward.
The Statues twain of these twin-Gods I sought:
But their decay consuming Time had wrought.
Our City has a thousand Lares more,
With their Sires Ghost, which contrymen adore.
Where wander I? These lines are Augusts task.
Mean while St Bona in our verse should mask.
There is a mass by Nature wrought, no small
Part of a mountain: which the Stone we call.
On this did Remus stand, although in vain,
When to his Brother fowls did give the reign.
There Fathers on that easy hill did build
A Chapel, which a man detested held.
Nun Claudia, of the Clausi's family,
Did vow't; a maid unstained with Venerie.
Queen Livia did repair it, who presents
In all her acts her Lords magnificence.
When Phoebus next the Eastern gates unbarres,
And with bright taper damps the languish'd stars,
The cold north-west-wind amongst the corn-earssports,
And white flags sally from the Caprean ports.
But when the Evening leads the Night on clear,
The Hyads sparkling bevy all appear.
The Bulls snout shines with seven refulgent flames,
Which Grecia Hyads from their showring names.
Some think they Bacchus nursed: Some think them thus,
The seed of Tethys and Oceanus.
As yet grand Atlas had not shouldered Heaven,
When Hyas issued with his Sisters seven:
Which Aethra Oceans daughter bred and nursed:
But Hyas was the fairest and the first.
He in his youth the trembling Roe would chase;
Sometimes the Hare would make a sportfull race:
But whenas years increased his strength he would
With Boars encounter and the Lion bold.
At length he vent'ring for to steal away
A Lion's whelps became a Lion's prey.
Both Mothers, Sisters, Atlas now to sail
With heaven on's neck, their Hyas all bewail.
The Sisters yet surpassed their parents piety:
Their Hyas gave them names, their love a Deity.
Come, Queen of Flowers, renowned in jocund plays;
In The former month I did defer thy praise.
In April thou beginn'st, and end'st in May:
With thee one comes in, the other goes away.
Since both their confines do pertein to thee,
Both to thy honor may devoted be.
The Cirk with speeches cried on Theaters
Reach to this Month* so also shall my verse*
Thou know; inform me: men's opinions err:
Thou art thine own names best interpreter.
To my request this answer she bequeathed,
Whiles from her lips the vernall Roses breathed;
Once Chloris, now I Am Flora called: the sound
Of Latin letters does the Greek confound:
Chloris, a Nymph of that delicious field
Where those blist men did live in times of eld.
It were not modesty for me to tell
My beauty, which did please a God so well.
I walked in the Spring: me Zephyr spies: I fly:
He follows me, and swifter proves then I.
His brother Boreas lends him all his aid,
Who once did ravish the Erichthean maid.
Yet for his rape, by making me his wife,
He made amends. I cannot blame my life.
My Spring is constant; all my season 's good:
My trees with leaves, my ground is clad with food.
I have a garden in my dowry-fields
Culled by kind airs and cooled by courteous rills.
Here with rare sweets my husband decked my bowers;
Sweet wife, says he, be thou the Queen of Flowers.
To tell their colors I have often intended:
'T was vain; their number all accounts transcended.
Soon as their leaves have left their gemmy drops,
And Sol's beams warm their part colored tops,
The How'rs, in broydred gowns arrayed, come hither,
And my endowments in light baskets gather.
Then come the Graces, and quaint garlands here
And coronets weave for the Gods to wear.
I first did scatter several seeds all over
The Earth; which but one color had before.
A flower of Hyacinthus blood I made;
Whose leaves express his Elegy most sad.
Thou also, Narcisse, through the fields art known:
Unhappy youth, that were not two for one!
Young Crocus, Acis, and Adonis see,
Whose dying bloods were dignified by me.
Mars (thou may know it) was born too by my skill:
Heaven grant that trick from Jove be hidden still.
Queen Juno grieved that Jove without her aid
Brought forth the motherlesse Athenian Maid,
Comes to old Ocean for to make her moan;
And at our gate quite tired sits her down.
Great Queen, said I, what cause has thee here brought?
She told me whom, and for what cause, she sought.
To her I used some words of comfort there.
Bare words, says she, will never cure my care.
If Jove could his paternity enlarge
Sans use of wife, and both our parts discharge;
Why may not I as well a mother be
Without his help, and breed with chastity?
All charms and mixtures both in land and seas
I Will search, and try, and grope the Stygian lees.
She still talked on. My looks my doubt betrayed.
O Nymph, cries she, thy looks do promise aid.
Thrice I resolved to speak; and thrice I held:
Great Joves sad anger me with trouble filled.
I pray thee help, said she; Thy act most sure
Shall be concealed: to this I Styx adjure.
A flower, said I, sent from the Olenian fields
Will do the deed: but one my garden yields.
The giver bade me touch a barren Cow,
'T will make her breed. I tried; and it did so.
I plucked the flower, and touched her with it: she
With touch of it conceived immediately.
Now to Propontis left hand does she turn,
And Thrace, being big with child, where Mars was born.
Who still remembering of his birth by me,
Thou in our town shall have a place, said he.
Nor think my power soft garlands only yields:
It does extend as well to corn-sown fields.
If Corn blooms well, the harvest will be rich:
If Vines bloom well, 't will make the branches stretch.
If Olives bloom well, 't is chearly year:
Both Plumbs and Apples their success have here.
If blooms be nip'd, both Beans and Pease decay;
And foreign Nilus Lentils fade away.
Wine also flowers, laboriously tunn'd up
In buts; and thick clouds swim about the top.
Honey is mine: the Hony-bees I set
On Thyme, and Lilyes, and the Violet.
We also sport the fragrant flowers among,
When strength is sound, bloods fresh, and bodies young.
This her discourse in silence I admire.
Says she, Speak freely, if you ought require.
Lady, said I, thy Games first pedigree
Relate. I ceased: And she replies to me,
The other tools of Luxury unfound,
That man was rich that Cattle kept and ground:
Hence Locuples, and hence Pecunia came.
But now each man another wealth did claim.
The custom was to feed the peoples Commons
Without controllment: they long time were no man's.
Sans law the people did their Commons keep:
He was a churl that by himself fed sheep.
This liberty the Public Aediles made
For the Commons: Men before no courage had.
Some Judges took the cause in hand, and fined
The wrongful. Honors to their place were joined.
Part of the fine to me was contributed:
And with applause my Games were instituted,
Placed on the hills side, then a cliff huge tall;
Now 't is good way, which ye Publicius call.
I thought her Games had every year been played.
She did deny it, and again thus said,
We joy in honors, both of Feasts, Fires, Fanes:
We Deities are all ambitious trains.
Men have with sins incensed the Gods ofttimes;
Then flattered them with offerings for their crimes.
Often have I seen Jove, hurling his fire-storm,
At sight of incense hold his threatening arm.
But if contemned, the wrong we do require
With heavy vengeance, and exceed in ire.
See Meleager burned with absent brand,
'Cause Dian's altar did neglected stand.
The same Powers weapons Niobe afflicted:
A Maid, yet twice revenged her hearths neglected.
Hippolytus, when torn with frighted steeds,
How fain would he have honored Venus deeds.
'T were long to tell the errors of this kind.
My self once slipped out of the Romans mind;
What should I do? how show my discontent?
What damages should my disgrace invent?
Sad, I my office cast aside. I varnished
No meads: each garden lay unpriz'd, ungarnish'd.
The Lilies died: the Violets dried away:
The strings of ambre-Saffron did decay.
Often cried my Zephyr, O do thou not spoil
Thy dower! My dower to me was then but vile.
The Olive-blooms were nipp'd by tetchy wind:
Corn-blooms the hailstones did to powder grind.
The Vine was hopeful: but the South did frown,
And forced showers did beat the blossoms down.
I would not be, nor is my wrath extreme:
But I then cared not for protecting them.
The Fathers met: and, should the year well flower,
An annual feast they vowed unto my Power.
I yielded to their vow: To me my Plays
Two Consuls, Lenas and Posthumous, raise.
I would have asked why such licentious jests
And wanton sports were used in her feasts:
But I bethought me; She Is no Power austere:
But all her gifts are for delight and cheer.
Brows are embroydered with spruce garlands sewed,
And tables covered with fresh roses strewn.
The bouzy guest, decked with a film-flower crown,
In drunken garb there dances up and down:
And 's head with oil and flowers and wine well-lin'd,
He Catches sings at 's Sweet-hearts door unkind.
Crowned temples meddle with no serious matter;
Nor are flowers used in drinking of fair water.
Till Achelous tempered was with wine,
Flowers in their drinking men did never join.
Flowers Bacchus loves: Ariadne's crown can tell
That flowers and garlands please him passing well.
Scenes mirthfull please her: She does not belong,
Not she (believe me) to the Tragic throng.
But why do Strumpets in these joviall plays
The mymicks act? I easily learned the cause.
She Is none of those same grave and stately Dames:
To vulgar people she allows her games;
And bids then use Youth's flower before 't is worn:
The Rose once withered men despise the Thorn.
But why, said I, since Ceres is in white,
Art thou in part colored garments dight?
Is It 'cause her harvest has that only hue,
And in thy flowers all colors are to view?
She becken'd. From her head the flowers dropped down
As thick as roses on a table strown.
The Lights remained: whose cause was yet concealed.
To clear my ignorance she the cause revealed;
Because my Flowers shine in purple rays,
Therefore these Tapers well do suit my days.
Or 'cause my Flowers in colors bright do shine,
As well as Flames, and both attract the eyne.
Or 'cause Nights freedom to my sports agree.
Let this last reason best accounted be.
One thing more briefly I have yet to say,
If I may ask, said I. Said she, You may.
Why is the dastard Goat and frightfull Hare
For Lions fierce presented in a snare?
Not woods, but gardens are our interest,
Says she: Our fields scarce see a savage beast.
All ended thus. She vanished presently,
And left an odor of her Deity.
That Naso's name may flourish with his measures,
O strew his fancy with thy flowery treasures!
The third night after Chiron in his course
Draws forth his Stars; half-man, and half a horse.
Aemonian Pelion to the South inclines,
Whose sides with Oaks, whose head is clad with Pines.
Here just old Chiron dwelt, as fame does say:
His caves old trunk remains still to this day.
He did instruct in numbers Lyricall
Those hands which after were great Hector's fall.
Alcides, with the most part of his toils
Now well accomplished, thither comes the whiles.
Here met by chance were those two fates of Troy;
The great Tirynthian, and the Aemonian Boy.
Sage Chiron kindly welcomes him, and there
Asks of his travels; which he does declare.
Mean while the Club and Lion's skin he viewed:
How well, says he, do arms and armor suit!
Nor could Achilles hands themselves contein
From feeling of the Lion's bristly train.
The old man poising of the shafts, lets fall
A pois'ned dart, and pricked his foot withal.
Forth does he draw it with a monefull cry:
Alcides and Achilles both reply.
Yet he with herbs of those Thessalian hills
Applied in vain the raging fester stills.
The poison overcomes his salve; and now
Over all his joints the venomes taint does grow.
The Centaurs with the Hydra's blood impure
Infected will admit nor ease nor cure.
Achilles drowned in tears does him deplore:
The death of Peleus could have claimed no more.
Often with his hand his fainting pulse he tried:
Often kissed he him; and lying by him, cried,
O live! nor leave thy pupil, my dear father!
What fruit of manners did the Teacher gather!
The ninth day came. Just Chiron in twice seven
Bright Stars is fixed in the spangled heaven.
The wreathed Harp desires to follow him:
Not yet: the third night is a fitter time
The day before the Nones appear we may
Observe the Scorpion shine in heaven half way.
Hence when thrice Phosphor shows his gilded face,
And fainting Stars have thrice to Sol given place,
The Night- Lemuria an old Rite is paid,
And dirges to the silent Ghosts are said.
The old year was short: Unknown the Februa were;
And double Janus did not guide the year.
Yet to the Dead their gifts they did discharge:
The pious Son his Fathers tomb did purge.
This was in May from Majors first deduced,
In which are some of those old rites still used.
About midnight, when Sleep and Silence fill
The drowsy brains, and dogs and birds are still,
The rite-remembring, Ghost-abhorring Sun
Arises gently, and no shoes puts on;
Then points with his closed fingers and his thumb
Put in the midst, lest Ghosts should near him come.
Then in spring water he his hands does cleanse;
But first does roll about his mouth blue beans:
Then over his shoulders throws them down: Says he,
These beans I throw my house and self to free.
Nine times 't is said. The Ghost does trace his track;
And picks them up, if that he looks not back.
Again he washes; then a basin beats;
And so the Spirits to leave his house entreats.
Then nine times crying, Kindred-Ghosts, be gone,
He looks back, and all is purely done.
I am uncertain of the Original
Of this day's name: some God I now must call.
Cyllenius, teach me: Thou with powerful Rod
Often view'st the palace of the Stygian God.
Invoked Caducifer applies. Says he,
The reason hear. And thus he tells it me:
When Romulus had paid the obsequie
To 's Brother, hapless in agilitie,
Poor Faustulus, and Acca with torn hairs
Belave his burned bones in willing tears.
At evening home they come with hearts full sad,
And cast themselves on their hard bed unmade.
The gory Ghost of Remus by their bed
Appears to them, and softly whispered,
Lo, I the half of all your labors kind!
Behold my change, from what to what declined!
Who, if the Birds had been my friends, within
My peoples walls the Captain might have bin.
Now is your Remus but a dram of air,
A flitting relic of the piles impair.
Ah! where is my Father Mars, ( if you said true)
By whose instinct a wild beasts teat we drew?
A Wolf did nurse, a Subject murdered me:
How much more humane was the beast then he!
Thou cruel Celer, yield thy soul and dye,
And be a bloody Ghost as well as I.
'T was not my Brothers mind; his pious cares
Did what they could, discharge their due in tears.
Him by your tears entreat, and food you gave,
That he a day would sacer to my grave.
Thus spoke he. They him to embrace assay
The slippery vapor flitters quite away.
Sleep from their eyes this vision off does shake;
In whose relation to the King they make,
Him Romulus obeyed: and calls that day
Remuria, in the which these rites they pay.
By time the letter that begins the word
Is changed; the sharp into a mild transferred.
Hence dead men's Ghosts we Lemures do call:
This is the words direct original.
Our Ancestors barred up their Temples in
These balefull days, as now is to be seen.
Ill times for widows wedding, or for maid:
Those that have wedded have not long enjoyed.
And for this cause (if Proverbs thou do weigh)
The Proverb says, 'T is ill to wed in May.
But these three feasts succeed not one another,
But on the same days are all kept together.
Amid this time who seeks Orion, erres:
The cause of which Sign I will here rehearse.
Jove and his Brother Master of the Sea
A journey took with witty Mercury.
'T was even, and plowmen off their chains did knock,
And full-fed ews their frisking lambs did suck.
Perchance old Hyreus a Farmer poor
Espies them as he stood before his door;
Your journey's far, says he, and night at hand:
Our gate for travelers does open stand.
His words and looks consented: He does pray
Again. Themselves concealing, they obey.
His house they enter with dull smoke besmeared.
Upon a brand a spark of fire appeared.
He, on his knees, the cole does bigger blow:
Then lays the brands, and breaks small sticks in two:
Sets on two pipkins, one with beans, and one
With herbs. The scum the lids does overrun.
With palsie-hand, while meat was taken up,
He fills them wine. The Sea-God takes the cup,
And turns it off: The Cup, says he, now bear
To Jove. He quakes the name of Jove to hear.
Come to himself, for sacrifice he killed
His Ox, the tiller of his little field:
Then broached a hogshead of his special Sack,
Which in his young days he himself did make.
On fenny tufts a hempen cloth he spread,
And sets them down upon no stately bed.
Now braves his board with dainty cates and liquours,
In earthen dishes, and in beech-tree-beakers.
Says Jove, What-e're thou will request or can,
Ask and receive. Replies the good old man,
I had a wife in my young days, and one
I dearly loved: but now she is dead and gone.
To her I promised, when by you I swore,
She was my only wife; I Would wed no more.
My vow I Will keep: But in my mind does run
A cross desire, To have no Wife, but Son.
All gave a grant, and to the ox-hide came,
And over it strained: To tell the rest were shame.
Then buried it, all dropping, in the earth.
At ten months end a little Boy comes forth.
Him from his birth Vrion Hyreus styled:
Whose names first letter is a little soiled.
He grew a hunter of a mighty fame,
And Delia's Sergeant and her Guard became.
Words rashly spoken do the Gods displease:
No beast, braves he, but this arm can suppress.
Earth sends a Scorpion, who does whet his spite
To rifle Delia of her arrows light.
Orion rescues. Slain; Diana says,
Take thy desert, and him to heaven does raise.
Why does Orion, with his fellows, force
Their lights from heaven? and Night contract her course?
Why does white Day, by her bright Usher led,
More soon then erst extol her sparkling head?
Did not arms rattle? yes sure; arms did rattle:
Mars comes, and coming sounds the signs of battle.
The grand Revengers self descends his sport
And Tower to see in Augusts ample Court.
Great God; great work: Even thus did it become
God Mars to dwell in his Sonne's city Rome.
Gigantick tropheys best befit this wall:
From hence his squadrons Mars should march and call;
Be any Rebel in the utmost East
Or by departing Sol to be suppressed.
The God approving that invicted Powers
Do hold his Temple, views the lofty Towers.
He views in the Court arms of a sundry fashion,
The whole worlds weapons won by his own nation.
Next eyes Aeneas with his load divine,
And all those Nobles of the Julian line:
Then Romulus with arms of Acron tamed:
With acts and statues of more Worthies famed.
He views the walls graced with Augustus name;
Which makes it show a work of greater fame.
That Prince did vow it in his pious war.
Fit for a Prince such great beginnings are.
Just as the fight began, with heav'd-up hands
He vents these prayers against the Traitors bands;
If for my father Vesta's Priest I make
These wars, and vengeance for both titles take,
Come, Mars, and with their base blood glut thy sword,
And favor to the juster cause afford.
My conquest thee shall Ultor style, and raise
Thy temple. Having vowed, his foes he slayes.
Nor was this name deserved once alone:
He gained our Ensigns which the Parthians won.
That nation was with broad plains fens'd secure,
With horses, streams, and arrows deadly sure.
The Crassi's slaughter now had fleshed them well,
When Ensigns, Soldiers, Generals all fell.
Romes Colors, glory of the wars, were lost:
With Roman Eagles did the Parthian boast.
That shame had still remained, had not our land
Protected been by Caesar's valiant hand.
He took away that old disgrace and stain:
Our Flags redeemed saluted Rome again.
What good, O Parthian, did thy back-shot-flight?
Thy Country do thee? or thy race-horse light?
Thou yield'st our Eagles and thy conquered Bow:
Nor have one badge of our dishonor now.
A Temple (as both vow and merit claimed)
To Mars he raised, and him Bis-ultor named.
Ye Peers, solemnize on the Circus plays:
No Scene does suit a warlike Powers praise.
Now see the sister- Pleiades whole train,
Just when two nights before the Ides remain.
Then enters Summer, surest Authors write:
The gentle Spring concludes his soft delight.
The night before the Ides the Bull does rear
His sparkling brows: Of whom the story hear.
Once Jove, well horned and turned to a Bull,
Packed up the Tyrian Virgin by the gull.
Her right his mane, her gown her left hand held:
Pale fear her cheeks with other beauty filled.
The wanton air her coats does swell, and move
Her golden hairs: Such looks best pleased Jove.
Her pretty feet she from the water saves,
And shuns the tacture of the leaping waves.
The subtle God his back does often dive,
That to his neck she might the closer cleave.
Come to the shore, himself unhorn'd Jove showed,
And of an Ox his shape Divine indu'd.
There swells her womb, while heaven the Bull receives:
And Earth's third part the name from her derives.
The Pharian Heifer some suppose this Sign:
Made Beast of Humane; of a Beast, Divine.
Now from the timber-bridge the Vestall chaste
The rushie pictures of old men does cast.
Who thinks old men of sixty years to be
Thus drowned, too much does tax Antiquity.
Old fame reports that when Saturnia
This land was called the old Prophet thus did say,
Ye people to the Sickle- God deliver
Two men, thrown down into the Tuscane river.
This gift each year to that Leucadian power
Was given, till Hercules pitched on this shore.
He strawy Nobles over the bridge threw down:
From whose example pictures since were thrown.
Some think young men, that so they might engrosse
Their voice, crazed Seniours over the bridge did toss.
Inform me, Tyber, thou art far beyond
Our city's age, and know this custome's ground.
His reedy brows out of his murmuring source
Old Tyber roused, and vents these accents hoarce;
"This place of old a plain unwall'd and wide
"I knew: Few oxen grazed on either side.
"Old Tyber, known of all the world and feared
"Now, in those days was scorned of every herd.
"Thou know Arcadian Evander's name:
"He rowing in my chanel hither came.
"The next Alcides with his Greeks I saw;
"Then called, as I remember, Albula.
"The Arcadian King him freely here embraced:
"And Cacus had his due desert at last.
"Away he travels with his Spanish spoil.
"As for his mates, they would no further toil.
"A great part of them in this land remains,
"And pitched their hopes and houses on these plains.
"Yet of their country they had often a sense;
"And diverse dying left these testaments;
My body into Tyber throw, that so.
My dust at length may to my country go.
"The Heir was much displeased at his command,
"And tombs his father in the Ausonian land.
"A rush-weav'd image into me is cast
"In stead of him, to float to Greece at last.
His dewy cave of vital stone, this said,
He shrinks into: at which the River stayed.
Brave Lad of Atlas, whom of Joviall seed
Fair Maia on the Arcadian hills did breed;
Thou wing-foot Arbiter between the Gods
Of heaven and hell, in friendship and at ods;
Thou who delight'st to touch the Harp, and sense;
And varnishest the tongue with Eloquence:
Old times thy Chapel near the Circus framed
In the Ides: since when this day to thee is named.
All Tradesmen that their wares now open, thee crave
With incense fumed, some gains in sale to save*
Mercurius Pool is near Capena's Port,
A spring divine: believe experience for 't.
The coat-girt Chapman here his pitcher brings,
And water draws to purify his things.
He dips a bay-bough: with the dabbled bay
His wares he sprinkles to be sold away.
Then with the bough he sprinkles his own hair,
And with his glozing tongue thus makes his prayer;
Purge thou away my former perjuries,
My cheating words, and broken promises.
When by thy witness I untruths did prove,
Or falsely swore by by-abhorring Jove;
What Power soever broker to my lie
I Have made, now let them vanish all and die.
Wink thou at all my sly deceits to day:
Let not the Gods take notice what I say.
Afford me gains, and joy, that my desire
Of gain is fed, and that I Have gulled the Buyer.
These prayers make Mercury in heaven to smile,
Remembering his Ortygian cheat yerwhile.
But hear, quaint God, this better prayer of mine:
What time does Phoebus to the Twins combine?
Just when the days of this month equaled be
In number to. Alcides toils, says he.
Relate, said I, the reason of this Sign.
The smooth-tongu'd God replies with voice divine,
Jove's Twins, the Champion and the Horse-courser,
Had stoll'n fair Phoebe and her Sister dear.
Idas and Lynceus, both by contract made
Leucippus sons, took arms their wives to aid.
Love causes their demand, and their denial:
The self-same cause persuades both sides to trial.
The Oebalian Twins could easily fly away:
But that was base, by flight to get the day.
There is an open plain, a champion fair
And fit for arms: There stood this faithful pair.
Swift Castor 's bosom bored with Lynceus blade,
He on the ground at unawares was laid.
Revenging Pollux comes, and with his pike
Quite through the throat does Lynceus deadly strike.
At him flies Idas; Whom Joves flames scarce quelled:
They say his sword he in his hand still held.
Heavens open for Pollux enterteinment were:
Says he, O Father, my petition hear:
What thou me only, do thou two enstall:
One moity of thy boon is more then all.
Thus to his Brother he divides his charge:
A welcome couple to a vexed barge.
Who seeks Agonia must to Janus go:
Yet this day has it in this season too.
This night the Erigonian Dog does shine:
I Have given elsewhere the reason of this Sign.
Next day is Vulcane's, which is Lustria named:
They lustrate Trumpets by the Lemnian framed.
Four figures read from this, and lo, in sight
The Holy Customs, or the Tarquine's flight.
Lo, Public Fortune of our potent nation
This day beheld her Temples consecration.
When spring-rich Amphitrite this light removes,
Behold the Bird which Jove so dearly loves.
The sequent morning does Boots hide.
Next day the Hyads vaunt their glittering pride.
The end of the fifth Book.
OVIDS FESTIVALLS; OR, ROMAN CALENDAR. The sixth Book; or, JUNE.
The Argument.
THe several reasons of this Month he gives.
The Janal wand away Night Scrich-owls drives.
Moneta 's Chapell'd by Camillus vow:
So is Bellona. Mind is honored too.
The figure of Chaste Vesta's house: her rites.
Jove Pistor's Altar. Ino Matrones cites
Unto her feast. S t Fortune 's Temple built
By Servius. Tullia 's Hell-surpassing guilt.
Quinquatrian feasts. The grand Physician raised.
The feast of Fortune. Philip 's work is praised.
FOr this Months name too diverse reasons make:
I Will cite them all, that thou thy choice may take.
I sing a truth; though some elsewise may ween,
And hold no Gods of humane eyes are seen.
There is a God in us: in him we live:
His sacred spirits this heat and vigor give.
I specially may see a heavenly sight,
Or in a Prophet's or this subject's right.
There is a tree-throng'd Grove, reserved from all
Shape of a sound, unless some water-fall.
Upon this month I musing hither came,
And much revolved the original and name:
Lo! Nymphs I saw: Not those that Farmer old
Did meet in feeding his Ascraean fold:
Nor those that showed themselves to Priam's Son
In spring-fed Ida: Yet of them was one;
Even one of them, her Husbands Sister: Her
I often had seen in the Tower of Jupiter.
Amazed palenesse did my spirit betray:
Forthwith the fear she caused she took away.
"O thou that do the Roman Year maintein,
"And sing'st, says she, grand things on humble strain.
"This privilege of seeing Gods was thine
"When first thou undertook'st this task divine.
"But lest that thou in the vulgar error wade,
"Know thou that June his name from Juno had.
" Joves Wife and Sister! 't is no modern grace
"To me: I know not which should take the place.
"I was old Saturns eldest child; if birth
"And pedigree you count of any worth.
"My Fathers name once to this place was given:
"This land in his account was next to heaven.
"If wedlock 's prized, I am the Thund'rers Bride:
"My Temple stands just by his Temples side.
"Could May, that strumpet, have a Months renown?
"What? and shall any dare deny me one?
"Why do I then that royal title hold,
" The Queen of heaven? and wear a crown of Gold?
"Light makes the months; and I am Lucine styled:
"Shall I then be of my Months name beguiled?
"I should repent that my true love and grace
"I e're vouchsafed to the Trojane race.
"Young Ganimed's preferment and the award
"Of Paris judgment urged my anger hard.
"I should be sorry that I e're despised
"My Carthage, where my Coach and arms are prized;
"Or that I ever put this land between
"My Samos, Argos, Sparta, or Mycene.
"Besides the Sabines and Faliscanes, who
"Did honor me, to Rome I did subdue.
"But I Am not grieved: this is my darling land;
"And here my Temple with my Joves does stand.
"My Son Mars said, Dear Mother take this town:
" It is my Sonne's: here shall be thy renown.
"His word's performed; My altars here are many;
"And my Months honor is as great as any.
"Nor does Rome only this most welcome fame
"On me confer: the neighbors do the same.
"See but the Calendar of the Aricinians,
"Or my Laurentians, or of my Lavinians:
"See Tybur; there this month is proved mine:
"And read but over the rolls of Praenestine:
"This time they all give me: and yet they wanted
"My Sonne's foundation, who this city planted.
Thus Juno ends. I turned: and Herc'les Bride
With sorrows symptoms in her face I spied.
"Should my dear Mother bid me pack away
"From heaven, says she, in heaven I would not stay.
"Nor do I now contend for this Month's honor:
"I rather beg it in submissive manner.
"Fain by entreaty would I keep my due:
"Perhaps my cause may favor find with you.
"My Mother has her Capitol of gold;
"And, as is fit, her Tower with Jove does hold.
"But all my glory is in this Months name:
"All I regard is but this piece of fame.
" Rome need not grudge, with all her postern race,
"To give Alcides Wife this season's grace.
"More for my Husband's sake might she afford:
"With Spanish oxen he this kingdom stored.
"And Cacus, fens'd with flames of fire to strain
"By Vulcane's art, by his stout arm was, slain.
"But I come nearer: Romulus your King
"Into two parts his men distributing;
"The Youth for arms, for counsel were the Aged:
"The Old to plot the war, the Young to wage it.
"This by two months he stablish'd: For this reason
" May is the Majors, June the Juniors season.
Thus and in more words did they plead and chide:
Their eager anger did affection hide.
Then comes fair Concord decked with laurel-crown
Whose fame and Fabric is our Kings renown.
Of Romulus and Tatius she relates,
And how to one they did unite two States.
Both Son and Father made one common home:
From their conjunction June, says she, does come.
I Have heard three causes; but excuse me ye:
'T is not for me to arbitrate this plea.
I leave you even. Troy ru'd the award of Paris:
One cannot make so much as two will mar us.
The first day Carna Mistress of the Hinge
Is worshipped; she that shuts and opens things.
Whence she this office had, time does obscure
The truth; but yet our Muse shall thee assure.
The old grove Helernus near to Tyber lies:
The High Priest often there does sacrifice.
This Nymph was bred there; Crane called of yore:
A many suitors, but in vain, did woe her.
She kept in woods, and forrest-games did ply,
With nets, with races, and artillery.
She ware no quiver: yet she still was famed
For Phoebus sister: nor need he b' ashamed.
Some youthful Spark that would not be denied
Did court her close: To whom she thus replied,
These fields too open and immodest be:
Walk to some private cave, I Will follow thee.
He simply walks before: She steals behind
A bush: He nowhere could his sweetheart find.
Her Janus spies, and deeply falls in love:
His smooth entreaties her would little move.
She, as she used, bids him walk to a cave;
And, as she followed, him the slip she gave.
Fool! 't is in vain; for Janus sees thy scout:
He sees behind him; and will find thee out.
He says the same: and as thou close were laid,
He clipped thee close; and, thee enjoying, said,
The power of Hinges lo we give to thee
In lieu of thy deflowered virginity.
This said, a white-thorn-wand he her does give,
With which from houses she should Scrich-owls drive.
These Owls are ravenous fowls; not those that fed
On Phineus meats, but of those monsters bred:
Great heads; glore eyes; hook-beaks upon their jaws:
Their feathers gray; huge tallons on their claws.
All night they ranging, often seize upon
And spoil young Barns in cradles laid alone.
Some say that infants bowels for their food
They pierce and tear, and bath their beaks in blood.
The are called Scrich-owls; because that in the night
Their horrid Scriches mortal hearts affright.
Whether they be true fowls, or else transformed
From chaunting old wives by their Dirges charmed;
They came to Proca's chamber, where he lay
But five days old, and seized on him their prey;
In whose gored cheeks their ravening bills they bathed.
The poor young child for help and succor blathed.
The nurse affrighted runs, and up does cull
Her child, and sees his face (O pitiful!)
All torn with Scrich-owls claws: as tawny sear
As leaves long-blasted by a winter-air.
She comes to Crane, and her ail does tell.
Fear not, says she; your nursling shall do well.
Come to the cratch; the parents wept: Forbear
Your toars, quoth she; I Will cure him: there 's no fear.
Forthwith in order thrice she dashed the door
With wilding-bough; then marks the posts thrice more:
Then med'cin'd waters dashed about, does hold
A sow-pigs haslet of some two months old:
Then charms; Ye Night-fowls, let this child alone,
And take this little for a little one.
Heart for a heart, and flesh for flesh receive:
This for a nobler life to you we give.
This offered thus and sliced abroad she lays;
And warns them all from looking back that ways.
Then at the chamber-window with her hand
Takes in her sweetheart Janus white-thorn-wand.
The child is cured; his color 's fresh and clear:
And never after came those Night-fowls there.
Why is a Barley-bean-cake, you will say,
And lard of Pork now eaten on this day?
This ancient Nymph loves best her ancient fare;
And (plain) for farre-fetch'd dainties does not care.
Fish in those days about did safely play:
On sands the Oyster unrespected lay.
The Ionian fowl, nor yet the Pygmee's foe
On Indian hills, the Italian coasts did know.
The Peacock only by his gaudy train
Did please the eye. No beast in chase was slain.
Pork was the meat; with Pork their feasts were filled:
And Earth did only Beans and Barley yield.
These mixed whoever eats upon this day,
He Will be the hailer all the year, they say.
A Temple to Moneta Juno now
Is raised on Joves hill by Camillus vow.
There Manlius house once stood; who did remove
The Frenchmen's troops from Capitolian Jove.
O Heavens! how well might he have died that hour,
Defender of great Joves majestic Tower!
He lived to dye Aspirer to a throne:
Long life did bring him this aspersion.
This day besides, without Capena gate
They feast to Mars above his walks of state.
This day too, Tempest, was thy Temple hallowed;
When Corsick waves our fleet had almost swallowed.
You see these humane monuments: Divine
If thou do seek; Joves Bird at full does shine.
Next day the Hyads from the East does call
On Taurus horns; and dabbling showr's now fall.
Twice more when Phoebus has begot the Morn,
And twice Aurora 's tears bepearl the corn,
Bellona 's Chapel, who always our state
Did love, in Tuscane wars was consecrate.
'T was Appius work; who, though his eyes were blind,
Against Pyrrhus truce quick-sighted was in mind.
Behind the Circus lies a little Court,
Where stands a Pillar small of great report:
From hence a dart, wars harbinger, they fling,
When arms were levied against a foreign King.
The Circus next part Hercules Protector
Defends, of which the Sibyll was directour.
'T was given one day before the Nones: and read
The Title, Sylla did approve the deed.
I mused to whom the Nones I should refer;
To Sanctus, Fidius, or Semipater:
Said Sanctus, Name thou whom thou will, Sr Poet,
All three are mine: the Cures did allow it.
A chapel to this Saint-God in old days
The Cures on Quirinus hill did raise.
I have a daughter all my joy life gives:
Heavens grant that she her fathers date survives!
Her I was now to match, and for that reason.
Inquired a lucky and unlucky season.
Joves Flamens wife thus much me certifi'd;
The ides of June for Bridegroom and for Bride
Are always lucky: But his first days be
Unfortunate to Hymen: for, says she,
Till gilded Tyber all the soil and trash
Of Vesta's temple into sea does wash,
'T is not allowed to me my nails to pare,
To wear my dresses, or to kemb my hair,
Nor touch my husband, though Joves Priest he be,
And in a knot perpetual tied to me.
Make thou no have: 't is better marrying then,
When Vesta's fiery globe is purged and clean.
The third day next the Nones the Northern Bear
Descends, and nothing at her back does fear.
Then (I remember) I have often seen
Swift Tybers games in Mars his flowery green.
This is the Fishermens feast day, who tangle
Fish in their nets, with those who use the angle.
Mind is Divine, and had her Chapel raised
When in dread arms the perjured Poeni blazed.
Rebellious Poeni, that our Consul killed,
And all our state with Moorish terrors filled.
Fear cancelled Hope. Our Senate then to Mind
Did make a vow, and she did them befriend.
The day in which these vows discharged were
Is just six days before the Ides appear.
Help, Vesta; thee our Muse officious sings:
May we presume so near thy sacred things.
Devout in prayer, I felt a Power Divine:
The walls refreshed in blushing beams did shine.
Naught did I see (to balk Poetic lies:)
She is invisible to humane eyes.
But I was taught those things wherein I erred,
When no Instructour to my eyes appeared.
When forty years from Romes foundation past,
Then Vesta in a Temple here was placed
By that meek King. The Sabines sure did merit
In breeding up that most religious spirit.
That fabric which now wears a golden aw
Was then with osiers weaved and thatched with straw.
That place where stood at first her narrow wall,
Before she came was Numa's stately Hall.
And yet (they say) that form which was of old
Does still remain: whose reason shall be told.
This Vesta is the Earth: she has her hearth,
As Earth her heat. Her Globe 's the type of Earth.
Earth, as a weight, in figure like a Ball,
By nothing propp'd, hangs in the midst of all.
No corners in the Orb at all there be;
'T is evenly poised by its rotunditie.
For being directly in the Center tied,
Not bending more or less to any side;
Were it not round, it would not balance even
And in the midst, but some parts nearer heaven.
So in her concave by Geometry
There hangs a Globe, the worlds Epitome:
The Figure 's perfect circular devised,
That equi-distant from all sides 't is poised.
Like-form'd her Temple is; on no side plain:
The round-arch'd roof keeps off all showers of rain.
If you enquire why Nuns with purest hand
Her Altars tend; the reason understand.
Queen Ops, by Saturn, Juno forth did bring,
And Ceres next: but Vesta last did spring.
The two first wedded, and their issues bred:
The last resolved to keep her maiden head.
No wonder then if that a Maid desires
Her maidens chaste to tend her maiden-fires.
Nor think thou Vesta any thing indeed
But lasting Fire, which does conceive no seed.
Well ween'd a Maid, who neither takes nor gives
Seeds of conception, but with Virgins lives.
I simply thought a Picture her had feigned:
Forthwith I learned that none to her pertein'd.
Her Temple only keeps perpetual flame:
No shape of Fire nor Vesta can we frame.
As Earth, so Vesta, from Vi-stando named,
Stands of her self. Like name the Greeks have framed.
And Focus does from Flames and Fotus come;
Which was of old placed in the outward room.
Hence sure Vestibulum, where men make prayers,
Was drawn: for there stood Vesta's chief affairs.
Of old they used to sit on benches near
Her Altars, thinking that the Gods were there.
And when at old Vacuna 's feasts they meet,
Before her hearth they either stand or sit.
A custom 's come, scarce known from what example,
To send pure messes unto Vesta's temple.
Behold an Ass with barley-loaves is bound,
And rugged quern-stones are with fresh flowers crowned.
Old Farmers only barley-meal did bake,
Whence Lady Fornax Sacreds they did make.
Beneath the embers they did bake their bread
Upon their hearths, with tiles close-covered.
Thence Bakers, and the Ass that turns the mill,
Observe their hearths and their hearth-Mistresse still.
Sunne-burn'd Sr Priap, may I tell of thee
A merry jest? thy good old knaverie?
The tow'r-crown'd Lady Cybele invites
The immortal Gods unto her feasts delights.
Sh' invites the Satyrs and each Countrey-Dame:
Silenus thither uninvited came.
It were not fit to tell those feasts divine,
Nor brief. Night 's spent almost in cheer and wine.
Over Ida 's vales at random some do trace;
Some lay them down and rest them on the grass:
Some sport; some snort; some arm in arm a Round
Do make, and nimbly trip it on the ground.
Upon a green turf Vesta lays her head,
And with sweet sleep her weary members fed.
But tawny Priap up and down there traces,
And peers on all the Goddesses and Lasses.
There spies he Vesta, yet he knew not well
Who it should be: he vows he could not tell.
In lustful hope he steals unto her close:
The Lecher's heart pants as he creeps on 's toes.
Old bald Silenus there perchance his ass
Had left hard by a small brooks side at grass.
And now he was about his villainy,
Just when the ass does bray unseasonably.
She frighted at the noise starts up, and cries:
The Nymphs run to her: but away he flies.
The Lampsacanes to him the Ass do kill:
This tell-tale's guts are fitly broiled still.
But Vesta with bread-bracelets him arrayes,
His Quern stands still, and he keeps Holy Days.
Jove Pistor's altar here must I relate
In his high tower, more famed for name then state.
The cruel Gauls Romes Capitol beset,
Whose lasting siege had caused a famine great.
Jove calls the Gods before his royal throne:
By whose appointment Mars first makes his moan;
And is our sad calamity still hid?
Is this souls wound now to be uttered?
Yet if I must speak out our shameful woe,
In brief, Rome 's thralled by the Alpine foe.
Jove, this is she whose power should once extend
Beyond all limits, and the World transcend.
Her hopes in progress were; she had controlled
Her neighbors: now her walls she cannot hold.
Her purple Fathers, old Triumphers, I
Saw in their brazen courts drop down and die.
I saw Queen Vesta from her temple flee.
What? do they think that any Gods there be?
But should they know that You possess those Towers
And Fanes girt in by their presumptuous powers,
Would they not say, No hopes for them remain
In all their Gods: their incense is in vain?
Give them but room enough to pitch the field;
And, if they cannot conquer, let them yield.
But now they poorly die: base dearth them galls,
While stern Barbarians overcrop their walls.
Then Venus and Quirinus in his gown,
And Vesta pleaded stiffly for their Town.
Great Jove replies, Our care in general.
Is for that place. The Gaul shall pay for all.
Thou only, Vesta, help thy people poor;
And make the foe believe the abound in store.
That corn they have let them but grind, and knead
The liquour'd meal, and bake it into bread.
To Joves prescription Vesta gave consent.
'T was midnight now, and all the Captains, spent
With care and travel, to their rest were laid:
Jove chides, and tells them an ambiguous aid;
Arise, says he, and throw down to your foe
That help which you are all most loath to do.
They roused, and mused on this dark mystery,
What help that most disliked them that should be.
At last their corn it seemed: Which down they threw;
The rattling loaves among shields and helmets flew.
The foe quite out of hopes, their siege remove:
For this an Altar 's raised to Pistor Jove.
On Vesta's feast once walking where the street
Now called the New the Roman Court does meet,
I met a matrone walking down the hill
With feet all bare: I wondered, and stood still.
She, near to me, perceived my mind, and caused
Me to sit down: then spoke with voice half-craz'd,
And palsie-head; Here where these buildings stand,
The River-flouds with dikes o'reflow'd the land.
That lake called Curtius, which is sure ground now,
And bears dry altars, was a moorish slow.
Tall canes and sallows grew, where now a Tent
Does solemn pomp before the Cirk present.
Those suburb-streams often brought boon Rev'lers vaunting
Their liquid mirth, and joviall catches chaunting.
That God that quaintly turns to any form
Was not yet tit'led from his turned arm.
And here a grove with reeds and rushes was,
And moors, where none but with bare legs could pass.
Those moors were drein'd and to their banks confined:
But still this custom to this place is joined.
She ended. Farewell, good old soul, said I:
May thou spend all thy old days merrily.
Some other things in youth I learned long since,
Which must not be passed by in negligence.
Dardanian Ilus richly stored in all
The Asian wealth, had newly raised his wall.
Lo, armed Minerva's statue falling down
From heaven was seen, and pitched on Ilium-town.
I went and viewed her shrine and temple well,
Poor relics there: Her self at Rome does dwell.
They went to Smintheus in his grove obscure,
Who did return this answer true and sure;
Keep this Palladium, and you keep your wall:
Wheres'e're she goes she carries state and all.
King Ilus closed her in a Tower. This care
The next to him Laomedon did heir.
King Priam kept her little: 'T was thy will,
Great Queen, since Paris dealt by thee so ill.
Now whether good Aeneas gained her than,
Or Diomede, or that sly Ithacan,
Who-ever won her, she is now Romes prize,
In Vesta's guard, who all things always eyes.
Oh, in what plight was Rome when Vesta burned,
And all her house was almost overturned!
Pure fires and vulgar lights confused did raise,
And flames profane with flames divine did blaze.
Her Nuus and Servants all in scattered hair
Wept sorely, robbed of strength and heart by fear.
Metellus flies among them: Help, cries he;
O help! and quickly! Tears no aid can be.
Run, quickly, fetch those fatal things away:
Your hands not sighs must do the deed, I say.
O heavens! do you stand? Them in a stam he sees,
And in amazement fallen upon their knees.
Fair water dashed, with heaved hands; Gods, O scan
My venture well, though not allowed a man!
Be it a crime; let vengeance fall on me:
And by my life and blood let Rome be free.
Thus breaks he in. The Powers preserved by
This dutious act, approved their Pontifie.
Now happily in Caesar's name this day
Her fires shine pure, and so shall do for ay.
No Nun her sacred Chastity shall stain,
Nor be alive interred in his reign.
So dies the incestuous, closed in the Earth, which she
Has wronged: for one the Earth and Vesta be.
Then Brutus sword embrew'd the sands of Spain,
And gained his title from Calecians slain.
But yet sometimes sad haps the glad annoy:
Poor mortals seldom pure delights enjoy.
His Son and Eagles Crassus lost beside
Euphrates banks, and last himself too died.
Why vaunt'st thou, Parthian? Vesta said: thou shall
Return our signs, and rue for Crassus fall.
But when the Asses gaity is gone,
And he in 's corn-task walks about the stone:
That day deceased, the Pilote on the poop
At night does show the Dolphine's twinkling troop.
Now Lucifer sets open the Eastern gate,
And Tithone mourns to leave his youthful mate.
Good wives, to your Matralian feasts; away;
And to the Thebane Queen your white gifts pay.
A stately Court surnamed from the Neal
Joins to the wooden bridge and Circus great.
Upon this day (they say) King Servius gave
A Temple sacred to Matuta grave.
What Goddess she is, why no maids sh' admits
Into her chapel, and baked wafers eats,
Brow-ivy'd Bacchus, guide my sail; if she,
Whose rites I sing, be of thy family.
Fond Semele in Joves embraces boiled,
Kind Ino takes and nurses up her child.
Vexed Juno swelled, that she, the Strumpet gone,
Should nurse her brat; yet 't was her sisters son.
Straight Athamas runs mad, and piecemeal tears
Learchus, who a Lions whelp appears.
Poor Ino buries her Learchus torn,
And pays all duties to his doleful urn.
She runs with mourning locks about her ears,
And Melicerta from his cradle tears.
There is a narrow neck of land divides
Two seas, and curbs the billows on both sides.
Hither, with Son in frantic arms, comes she,
And from a rock rushed headlong into sea.
Nymph Panope with all her sister-train
Her gently latch'd, and bare her through the main.
Both came to Tyburs wallowing mouth, e're he
Palemon was, or she Leucothoe.
There is a grove 't was Bacchus Priests, ('t is famed)
Or Semele or Stimele 't is named:
There Ino learned the Arcadians till the land,
And King Evander did the realm command.
But Juno, coming in an old wives dress,
With subtle words provokes the Bacchides;
O simple souls! O senseless folk and blind!
D' ye take this vagrant huzzie for your friend?
She comes to circumvent and pry into you:
Believe 't she 's hired some mischief for to do you.
Scarce had she done; the Thyads all, their hair
About their backs, with howlings fill the air.
On Ino rush they: and would kill her son.
The yet-not-'quainted Gods she calls upon:
Help Gods, or Men; a doleful mother aid.
A noise to Aventine this outcry made.
Perchance Alcides, with his Spanish beasts
Not far off, heard, and to the noise does press.
At sight of whom those that began the fray
Began the flight, and frightfull ran away.
He knew her well. What, Bacchus Aunt, said he,
What make thou here? art thou like-vex'd with me?
Part tells she: part the presence of her son
Withheld. She Is shamed for those mad tricks were done.
Swift-pinion'd Fame upon her wings is raised,
And Ino's name about the country blazed.
Anon to kind Carmentis peaceful seat
She came: where first she was refreshed with meat.
The Holy woman made a fire in have,
And baked a biscuit for her quick repast.
Hence in her Matrals bake they biskets dry:
No art pleased her like that tight houswifry.
Now show my fate, said she, O Queen divine:
And add this favor to the rest of thine.
Forthwith the Queen with heavenly vigor filled,
By force of sacred inspiration swelled.
Scarce could a quick eye know her at first view,
So much more large and more divine she grew.
Good news, cries she: Joy, Ino, joy: thy labor
Is ended all. Our kingdom begs thy favor.
Thou and thy son two Sea-Gods now shall make,
And on our streams another name shall take.
Greece thee shall call Leucothoe, in our land
Matuta named. Thy son shall Ports command,
By us Portunus, but Palaemon styled
In his own tongue. O let us find you mild!
Truth tries her words: Both laid aside their name,
And travels: both Sea-Deities became.
You ask why she admits no maids. 'T is hate:
Whose reason (by her leave) I will relate.
False Athamas her husband secretly
Did love her maid, and often adultery
With her committed. And from her he found
His wife had scorched the seeds within the ground.
Though she denied it, fame divulged it true.
For this cause she does maidservants eschew.
Yet does no good-wife for her own child pray:
Her self no happy mother was they say.
Another child may better be commended:
She Bacchus better then her own befriended.
She told Rutilius that upon her day
The Marsian foe should him the Consul slay.
The event approves her words a truth: The flood
Of Thelon swelled in purple streams of blood.
On that same day the next year Didius slain
The hostile Tropheys did augment again.
Thine, Fortune, is this day, this place, this Founder:
But who 's that statue wrapped up in a gown there!
'T is Servius sure. But why he is wrapped about,
My self and diverse make a several doubt.
Queen Fortune deeply taken with this King,
(She used her eyes it seemed in this one thing)
Was now ashamed of her adultery,
That she a Goddess with a Man should lie.
By night to him she through a window came:
From whence an Entry we Fenestra name.
Now she repents, and in a mantle veils
His regal person so beloved yerwhiles.
Some give this cause: The commonwealth was all
Confused in grief for good King Tullus fall.
Their tears were boundless: wnich his pictures sight
Did still augment, till they had covered it.
I must more amply this last reason sing:
But we will keep our steeds within the ring.
Young Tullia, married in the base reward
Of wickedness, thus urged her husband hard;
To what end joined we in our kindreds murder?
To live like innocents in this good order?
My Husband and thy Wife might still have lived
Were there no further act to be achieved.
My Fathers Crown and head are both thy dower:
If the art a man, claim that indebted power.
Crimes are for Kings: Cut off my Father; take
His crown: His blood these hands shall ruddy make.
Thus egged by her he seizes privately
The Throne. To arms the amazed Commons fly.
Now blood and slaughter rule: Weak age is fain
To yield; and Tarquines violence does reign.
Beneath Esquiliae, where his palace stood,
Was Servius slain, and wallow'd in his blood.
She in a coach to her Fathers Court does ride
In public, puffed with cruelty and pride.
The coachman seeing his dead carcass, holds
The rein with tears: At whom she raves and scolds;
Drive, or I Will pay you for your foolish zeal:
Run over, I say, his carcass with the wheel.
This is most true: That street from this has got
The title wicked: an eternal blot.
Yet she her Fathers monument did dare
To enter. Truths, though wondrous, I declare.
Sage Tullus statue on a throne was framed.
He clapped his hands before his eyes ('t is famed.)
A voice was heard, O hide our eyes, lest we
Our wicked daughters odious face should see.
He 's mantled. Fortune in her Temple spoke,
Forbidding them this mantle off to take;
When Servius garment off his head is taken,
That day will show the shame of him forsaken.
Forbear, good Wives, to touch his vestiment:
Let nothing but your solemn prayers be sent.
Let him be ever clad in Roman gown,
Who was the sixth King in the Roman town.
This Temple fired, the flames would not come near
His seat. Sure Vulcane did his Son forbear.
For he from Vulcane issued and from
The fair Ocrisia of Corniculum.
Whom Tanaquil bade pour the wine upon
The gaudy fires, when sacrifice was done.
Amid the hearth a man's yard forth did spring
In show, or rather 't was a real thing.
With this Ocrisia coupled: from which deed
King Tullus iss'd of celestial seed.
His Father gave a sign he was his son,
When on his head a blazing light did run.
This same day Livia did to Concord raise
A stately Temple for her Halcyon-dayes.
Yet, where yerwhile stood that huge Palace, know
All postern times, there Livia 's porch stands now.
One house was like a City, and alone
Contained as much as many a walled town.
For too much luxury this was pulled down,
Not for the Founder 's aiming at the Crown.
The heir Octavius those vast ruins there
And loss of all that cost and charge did bear.
Thus Precepts relish when exemplifi'd;
And Teachers words still by their works are tried.
Two following days are blank. To Jove Invicted
Upon the Ides a chapel was addicted.
Now I the less Quinquatrian feasts must sing.
Assist, O fair Minerva, in this thing.
Why do the Waits walk all about the town?
Why do they mask disguised? what means the Gown?
Disarmed Pallas thus replied to me,
(Would I could sing 't as learnedly as she!)
Great was the use of Waits in times of old,
And always in great estimation held.
Feasts, Altars, mournful Funerals, and Plays
The useful Waits accompanied always.
Gain sweetened that fair Art: But afterward
Their liberties and gains were all debarred.
Yea, the Aediles they but ten of them in all
Allowed to play at every Funeral.
They left the city, and in exile went
To Tybur. Tybur then was banishment.
At Feasts, Scenes, Altars, are the Waits required:
Their mournful Ditties Funerals desired.
At Tybur lived a Libertine, in 's Art
A long time free, and one of great desert.
He makes a feast, and there this troup invites.
All come unto his festival delights.
Night came: their brains and senses swim in wine:
A message with a forged tale comes in;
Quick, quick, I say: dismiss this company:
Behold your Patron is at hand, cries he.
Away all staggering hastily do pack:
Their legs unruly large Indentures make.
Away, the Master cried: and as they slack'd,
Into a matted wagon all he packed.
Time, Wine and Motion sleep provoked. They thought,
All fox'd, the cart had them to Tybur brought.
Through Esquiline the wagon now does come,
And stood in the morning in the Court of Rome.
The States, to gull them both in show and number,
Command to mask them in their drunken flumber:
And mingled more among them; and to augment
The crew, the Minstrels in their long gowns went.
This was contrived lest that the rest should see
They were returned against their own decree.
All pleased; the are licensed in the Ides to go
In these new masks, and chaunt their Catches too.
She ceasing; This I fain would learn, said I,
Why this thy day is called Quinquatrie.
March has my feasts too of this name, said she:
'Twas my invention raised this Company.
I first the Pipe of bored Box did frame
With certain holes, and played upon the same.
Sweet were the notes; But when as I beheld
My face in the spring, I spied my cheeks all swelled.
I prize thee not so high, my Pipe, said I:
Farewell. and cast it on a bank thereby.
A Satyr finds it: But, the use unsound,
Admires. At last he blows, and hears a sound.
Now could his warbling fingers play their part,
And make the Nymphs admire his vaunted art.
He challenged Phoebus: Phoebus got the day:
Who hung him up, and took his skin away.
Yet I Am the inventresse of this Pipe: Therefore
This Company, these days, do me adore.
The third day after in her twinkling pride
Thyene fair on Taurus brows does ride.
This day does Tyber our Etruscane river
St Vesta's sweepings into sea deliver.
May Winds be trusted, Mariners, hoise sails
To Zephyr 's point: you shall have happy gales.
When Phaethon's Father in the waves profound
Does souse his beams, and both the Poles surround,
(For two there be: This in the South we find,
That in the North: both named from either wind.)
Old Hyreus Son his sturdy arms does rear;
And that same night the Dolphine does appear:
Whose stars the Volsci and the Equi saw
Yerwhile expelled the plains of Algida.
For which, brave Conqueror, thou, though first denied,
In suburb-Triumph on white steeds did ride.
A dozen days our month has still in store;
Yet to the dozen thou must add one more;
Sol leaves the Twins, and takes up Cancer's Sign;
And Pallas is adored on Aventine.
Now Tithone 's Bride the Eastern Court does view;
Dull Night's dispersed and the meadow-dew:
A Chapel to Summanus they did rear
(Who-e're he be) when Rome did Pyrrhus fear.
Now when the Ocean swallows up this Light,
And Earth is shrouded in the wings of Night,
The grand Physician stellifi'd awakes,
And in his hand brings forth his twisted Snakes.
Vile Phaedra 's lust and Theseus wrong all know:
He rashly unto death his son did vow.
The frighted horses run, and, scorning aw,
Their doleful Lord over rocks and mountains draw.
Down falls Hippolytus thrown from his wain,
Torn all in pieces with his snarled rain.
Displeased Diana much his death lamented:
Said Aesculapius, Be not discontented.
I Will make him sound and hail in every part:
I Will force the Fates to yield to my grand art.
He draws his medicines from his ivory-case,
Whose power on Glaucus yerst experienced was;
When he observed with what virtuous weed
The cunning Snake revived his fellow dead.
This he applies, and wholesome charms he says:
Hippolytus his grovelling head does raise.
Diana hides him in the midst of all
Grove Aricine, and him does Virbius call.
The balefull Sisters much repined, and grudged
To have their hands held, and their power abbridged.
Jove, fearing hurt by this presumptuous Art,
Slew Aesculapius with a thunder-dart.
Phoebus, be pleased: Thy Son a God is made:
Jove for thy sake has done what he forbade.
I wish not, Caesar, though thy conquests call,
If Signs forbid, to stir a flag at all.
Let but Flaminius speak and Thrasymene,
By what strange notes the Gods intents were seen.
Whos'e'r the day of that rash loss enquires;
It is eight days before the month expires.
Next day is happier in proud Syphax fall
By Masinissa, and slain Hasdrubal.
Time flies away: incroching Age creeps on:
The hours and days in restless paces run.
How soon do Happy Fortune's Feasts return!
Now but sev'n days the end of June adjourn.
To Tyber's banks, ye Lords, your offerings bring
To this kind Saint there honored by a King.
Some go on foot, in nimble cock-boats some;
And take a pride to come well-tippled home.
In crowned barge let joviall youngsters laugh
And feast, and freely in their full bowls quaff.
The Common people and Maidservants, they
Serve this inconstant Queen; because (they say)
The founder Tullus, who was made a King
From servile Maid, of vulgar stock did spring.
Lo, now in ^roups scarce sober home they walk:
When some starre-peeper with the Stars does talk;
Your belt, Sr Orion, now you will not show it;
Nor yet to morrow, but ever long we'll view it.
But, were his brains not pickled, he would say
The Summer Solstice is upon that day;
Next day a Chapel houshold-Gods receive,
Near where the Garland-weavers now do live.
The same day is Jove-Stator's feast divine,
Whose house Quirinus raised near Palatine.
The Parcae's number and our days are even;
A Temple to Quirinus now was given.
To morrow Julius native Calends come:
Ye Muses, to our work now add the sum!
Relate whose act you to his Temple brought,
Whose hands invicted Juno 's spite outwrought.
Clio replies, Brave Philip's work you see,
From whence chaste Martia draws her pedigree.
Sweet Martia sprung from Ancus so divine,
In whom Nobility and Beauty join.
Her Nature, Feature, Mind, and Blood so high
Make up an admirable harmony.
Nor blame us here that we her beauty praise.
For this the fame of Goddesses we raise.
Yerst Caesar's Aunt he in his Hymen's led:
O Grace, most worthy of that sacred bed!
The learned Nine applaud what Clio sang:
Alcides nodded: and the Harp cried twang.
FINIS. Caeterorum desiderium mundum fatigat.

