THE VARIETY of Memorable and worthy matters.

By Walter Owsolde.



Imprinted at London by I. R. for Ieffery Charlton and are to be sold at his
shop, at the great North door of Paul's. 1605.

To the Right worshipful Sir William Romney, Knight and Alderman of the
City of London.
RIght Worshipful, you may justly think I am very bold, being in respect a
stranger unto you, to offer up these lines to your favorable censure, yet the
love and good affection which I owe to your worship for some sufficient causes:
may fully excuse my rashness in that behalf: and considering withal your
gentle disposition, hoping you will take in good part this mean gift, not
respecting the value thereof but the good will of the giver, as did that worthy
King accepting with gentle heart a draught of water of a simple hind, so I
expecting you will courteously vouchsafe the patronizing of these simple
collexions, although there be nothing worthy your reviewing contained therein,
yet if you grant it but the reading, you may find some matter which may either
delight you, by bringing into your remembrance such memorable and worthy things
as have happened in former ages, or drive other drousie thoughts out of your
mind: which if it so come to pass, I shall have the full scope of my desires,
and be the more bold an other time to offer to your view some thing of better
worth. And so I leave you to the merciful protection of Almighty God, whom I
beseech to bless you with increase of worship, long life, and eternal
happiness.

Yours to command Walter Owsold.

To the curtious Reader.
WHen I consider with my self gentle Reader, of the sundry kinds of delights
which men of diverse natures take pleasure in: as some in reading ancient
histories, whereof there are many sorts and kinds containing the amorous
discourses of young gallants, with the lives of their enamored Mistresses,
lively disciphering foolish dotage in old men and stale widows, with the
inconvenience of matching old age and wilful youth together, and again: some
take pleasure in reading Chronicles, declaring the famous and worthy acts of
valiant Captains, and famous Gouerners, with the changes and alterations of
former times, which may much profit men of all sorts. Therefore I thought good
to publish this small Treatise, taken and collected out of diverse ancient
learned and well approved authors, not unnecessary to be had in remembrance,
which I hope the learned will take in good part, because it saves them a
labor in perusing over diverse volumes, to find the time and place where and
when the matters herein expressed, were begone, performed, continued, and
ended; and as for the other sort I hope they cannot mislike it, treating of
matters which without this book they should never have known: and so I leave
it to your favorable censure.

Yours as you like this Book, W. O.

The Table.
THE four parts of the World. page, 1. The four Monarchies. page, 1. The six
ages of the World. page, 2. The seven wonders of the World. page, 4. The
seven Wisemen of Greece. page, 5. The ten Sibylls. page, 6. The twelve
Apostles with their martyrdoms. page, 9. The ten persecutions of Christians
under the Roman Emperors. page, 11. The eight times that Rome has been
taken. page, 11. The seven Electors of the Emperors of Germany. pa. 14. The
three Crowns of the Emperor. page, 14. The twelve Peers or Pairs of France.
page, 14. The eight Parliaments of France. page, 15 The seven Saxon Kingdoms
that England was once divided into. page, 17 Five Orders of Chivalry which
continue at this day among Princes. page, 8 The xiij. Cantons of Swisserland.
page 22.
The four parts of the world.
ASIA, so called of the Daughter of Ocean and Thetis, or as some say, of Asia
the son of Manee King of Lidia: is separated from Europe by the river Tanais,
now called Don, by the sea called in time past Palus Meotides, now Mare de
Zabache: and by Pontus Euxinus, now Mer maiour: and by part of the
Mediterranian sea: and from Africa by the river of Nile.

Europe, that old Writers conjecture to be so called of Europa, daughter of
Agenor King of Libia, is separated from Asia as is already shown; and from
Africa by the Mediterranean Sea.

Afric, which some say is so called of one Affer, of the line of Abraham, is
separated from Europe by the Mediterranean sea, and from Asia by the river of
Nile.

America, or West India, so called of Americus Vespusius, but first found out
by Christopher Columbus of Genua, the year of our Lord 1492. It is in manner of
an Island, round about environed with the great Ocean sea.

The four Monarchies.
THE first Monarchy was of the Assirians, founded by Ninus about the year of
the World 2220. augmented by the Queen Semiramis, and after it had endured the
term of 1300 years, it was translated by Arbactus unto the Medes: and there
having endured 350 years, it was lost by Astiages, and conquered by Cyrus.

The second Monarchy was of the Persians, founded by Cyrus, the year of the
World 3425, which after it had endured 191 year, was lost by Darius, and
subdued by Alexander the great.

The third Monarchy was of the Grecians, founded by Alexander the great, in
the year of the world 3634, and before Christ 320 years; after whose death it
was divided among the Prefects, which in his life time he had appointed in
diverse countries: by which division Seleucus was King nf Syria, Ptolomeus of
Egypt, Antigonus of Asia, Cassander of Macedonia and Greece: all which
countries were after subdued by the Romans.

The fourth Monarchy or Empire was of the Romans, founded by Julius Caesar,
the year of the world 3914, after the building of Rome 706 years, and before
Christ 47 years. This Monarchy flourished about the space of 470 years, till
that after the death of Theodosius the great, it was divided by his two sons
into two Empires: Arcadius was Emperor of Constantinople, which Empire endured
(though afterward much diminished by the invasions of barbarous nations)
until the year of our Lord 1453, and then was quite lost by Constantine, and
conquered by Mahomet second king of Turks. Honorius was Emperor of Rome, which
Empire shortly after, in the year of our Lord 475, and about the ninth month
of the rain of Augustus, was utterly ruinated by Othacar king of Goths. And
long after, the year of our Lord 801 it was restored by Charles the great, and
by him united to the crown of France: and by his successors translated into
Germany, where it yet remains as a shadow only, or representation of the
greatness and majesty of the ancient Roman Empire.

The six ages of the World.
IN the dividing of these ages, there is great contrariety of opinions among
Writers: for that some follow the computation of the 72 Interpreters, and some
follow the Hebrews, and the common text of the Bible. The first age from the
creation of the world till the universal flood, endured according to the
Hebrews 1656 years, which agrees with the saying of Saint Hierom, Bid, Filo,
and the common text of the Bible. The Seauentie two Interpreters, and Eusebius
hold that it endured 2242 years, and Saint Austine is of opinion, that it
endured 2272. Of this age few or no things are recited worthy of memory.

The second age from Noe his flood till the birth of Abraham, endured according
to the 72 Interpretours, Eusebeus, and the greatest part of writers 942: and
according to the Hebrews but 292 years: Saint Austin counts 172 years. In
this age was builded The tower of confusion: the Empire of the Assirians
began, and the great City of Niniue was builded, which contained in circuit
three days journey.

The third age from Abraham to David, endured by the agreement of all Authors
942 years. During this age was the peregrination of Abraham: the beginning of
the Amazones, Sodom and Gommorre were destroyed: Joseph was sold to the
Egiptians: Moises passed the red Sea: Job the just: Jason conquered the golden
Fleece: the destruction of Troy: the Latins began to reign in Italy.

The fourth age from the beginning of the reign of David, till the
peregrination of the Jews into Babylon, endured 485 years: during this age
the Empire of Assirians was translated to the Medes, the Olimpiades of the
Grecians began: Carthage was builded by Dido, and Rome by Romulus: Byzance
was also builded: the destruction of Jerusalem by Nabucodonozor, and thereupon
the captivity of the Jews.

The fifth age from the transmigration of Babylon to the coming of Christ,
endured by the agreement of all, 589 years. During this age Cyrus began the
Monarchy of the Persians: the 70 year of this age the Jews returned to their
Country: Consuls began to rule in Rome: Zerxes invaded Greece with an army of
1000000 men: Plato, Aristotle, and Demostenes flourished with many other worthy
Philosophers: Alexander won the Monarchy of the world: the destruction of
Carthage by the Romans: Caesar usurped the Empire of Rome.

The Sixth age began at the birth of our savior Christ, which yet endures,
and shall endure to the end of the world.

The seven wonders of the world.
THe first, were the walls of Babylon, built by Semiramis, of stone joined
together with a strange kind of slimie and gluish mortar, which grows in the
mines of those Countries, and especially in the lake where stood in time past
Sodom and Gommorre, now called Asfaltide. These walls according to the town,
were built in quadrangle, and contained in circuit (as says Pliny in the 26
Chapter of his sixth book) 60 miles; so that every square was fifteen mile
long; they were 200 foot high, and fifty foot thick: and to build these
walls were hired by Semiramis, out of diverse Countries for a long space, 300000
men.

The second, was the Pillar of the son, offered by the Gentiles unto Jupiter.
This Pillar stood in the I Will of Rodes, and was made of iron, in the form of a
man of incredible greatness; in so much that a man might scarce fadom the
great finger thereof. After it had stood 56 years, it fell down by reason of
an earthquake, and so lay till the Island was won by the Souldan of Egypt; who
carried so much mettell away, as loaded 900 Camels.

The third, were the Piramides of Egypt: among the which there is one
especially noted, about the City of Memphis, now called the great Caire; this
Piramis covered about 40 acres of land, at the foot or foundation thereof; it
was all built of marble stone, and in the building thereof were employed
continually, for the space of 20 years, 3600000 men: and for the sustenance of
these workmen, was disburst in radish and such other roots 1800 talents, which
according to our reckening is the sum 1880000 crowns: this might seem
incredible, were it not that it is affirmed by so many authors of authority.

The fourth, was the Mausol, of Mausol King of Caria, and husband to Artemisia
so called: this woman for the great love she bare to her spouse, burned his
dead corpse, and drank the powder thereof, thinking no Sepulcher so worthy
thereof, as her own body; and the rest of the powder she buried in this famous
Tomb, the stone whereof was of an excellent kind of marble: it was 411 feet in
circuit, and 25 cubits high, and was environed about with 36 Pillars of stone,
wonderfully well carved.

The fifth, was the Temple of Diana, builded by the Amazones: it was 455 foot
long, and 220 foot broad, and in it stood 127 marble Pillars, each of them
being 70 foot high: the work thereof was so wonderful curious, that it was
220 years a making.

The sixth, was the image of Jupiter Olimpique, in Achaie; all of Porfire, an
infinite number of little pieces joined together: this image beside the
excellency of the work, is especially noted for the greatness thereof, and
was the more famous by reason of the gamigs, called Olimpiades, there kept.

The seventh, was the Tower Faros, nigh unto Alexandria in Egypt, builded by
Ptolomee Philadelphe King of Egypt, to direct the passengers which came to take
haven thereabouts, by burning of pitch, or other like things in the top: this
Tower was of a marvelous height, and singular workmanship; the building
whereof cost according to our money 480000 crowns. Some authors put for the
seventh wonder, the Gardens and Orchards upon the walls of Babylon. Others put
the Obelisque of Semiramis, which differreth in nothing from a Piramis, saving
that it is all of one stone: the Obelisque, Semiramis caused to be wraught, and
taken out of the mountains of Armenia: it was a hundredth and fifty foot high,
and every square was four and twenty foot braod at the bottom; so that it
contained in circuit 96 foot.

The seven wise men of Greece.
Blas borne in the haven Town of Prieme, in the Country of Ionia.

Solon borne in the Island of Salamine. Chilo borne in Lacedemonia. Cleobulus
borne at Lind in the I Will of Rhodes. Pittacus borne at Mycilene in the I Will of
Lesbos. Thales borne at Mileto in Greece. Periander King of Corinth.

The ten Sibylles.
THe first was of Persia, called Samberta: which among other Prophecies said.
The womb of the Virgin shall be the salvation of Gentiles.

The second was of Libia, one of her Prophecies were. The day shall come that
men shall see the King of all living things, and a Virgin Lady of the world
shall hold him in her lap.

The third was Themis, surnamed Delphica, because she was borne and
prophesied, at Delphos. A Prophet shall be borne of a Virgin.

The fourth was Cumea, borne at Cimerie a City of Campania in Italia: who
prophesied, that God should be borne of a Virgin, and converse among sinners.

The fifth was the famous Erithraea, borne at Babylon: who especially prophesied
a great part of our Christian religion, in certain verses recited by Eusebeus;
the first letters of every which verses being put together, make these words,
Jesus, Christ, Son of God, Savior. These verses are translated into Latin by
Saint Austine Lib. 18, and 23, de ciuitate dei: the substance whereof
follows. The earth shall sweat sign of judgment: from heaven shall come a
King which shall reign for ever, that is to say, in human flesh, to the end
that by his presence he judge the world, so the unfaithful as well as the
faithful shall see God with their eyes aloft among his Saints; and in the end
of the world, the souls of men with their bodies shall appear; whom he shall
judge when the roundnesse of the earth, untilled shall be full of clods of
earth and grass, men shall cast away their idols, and all their precious
Jewels, the world shall be consumed with fire, he shall pierce the inferior
parts, and break the gates of dark hell: then to the flesh of Saints shall be
given free and clear light, and the evil shall be burned with eternal fire,
all secrets shall be opened, and every one shall know the secret of his
neighbor, and God shall discover the consciences and hearts of all men: then
shall there be lamentation and gnashing of teeth, the Sun and Stars shall
loose their light, the firmament shall be dessolued, and the Moon shall be
darkened, the mountains shall be thrown down, and the valeis shall be made
equal with them, there shall be nothing in the world higher or lower then
another, mountains and valleis shall be made plain, all things shall cease;
the earth shall be dried unto powder and dust, the fountains and rivers shall
be burned likewise, then shall a trumpet sound from heaven in woeful and
horrible manner, and the opening of the earth shall discover confused and dark
hell, with the torments and pains of the miserable condemned, and here before
the judge shall come every King: a river of fire and brimstone shall fall from
heaven. Diverse other things were prophesied by this Sibylle: and because they
were obscure, and therefore not to be comprehended by the Gentiles before they
came to pass, she said of her self these words. They shall think me a false
and blind Prophetisse; but when they shall see these things come to pass, they
will remember me and call me no more a false Prophetisse, but a Prophetisse of
the almighty God.

The sixth was called Samia, borne in the I Will of Samos, which said: He being
rich shall be borne of a poor maid; the creatures of the earth shall adore
him, and praise him for ever.

The seventh was called Cumana, because she prophesied at Cumas a town of
Campania in Italy: she prophesied that he should come from heaven, and reign
here in poverty: he should rule in silence, and be borne of a virgen.

The eight was called Helespontica, borne at Marmise in the territory of Troy.
A woman shall descend of the Jews called Marie, and of her shall be borne the
son of God, named Jesus, and that without carnal copulation: for she shall
be a Virgen before and after his birth: he shall be both God and man, he shall
fulfill the laws of the Jews, and shall add his own law thereunto: and his
kingdom shall remain for ever.

The ninth was of Frigia, and prophesied in the town of Ancire, one of her
sayings were; The Highest shall come from heaven, and shall confirm the
counsel in heaven, and a virgen shall be showed in the valleis of the deserts.

The tenth was Albunea, surnamed Tiburtina, because she was borne at Tiber, 15
mile from Rome. The invisible Word shall be borne of a virgin: he shall
converse among sinners, and shall of them be despised. Lactantius Firmianus
reherseth diverse of their prophecies, without making any particular mention of
them: they are to be referred specially notwithstanding (as it should seem)
unto Sybilla Samberta, who wrote 24 Books in verse; chiefly entreating of the
coming, miracles, and life of Christ, whereunto, the sayings of all the other
Sibylles are conformable.

S. Austine likewise in the 23 chapter of his 18 book De ciuitate Dei,
recites those prophecies as follows. Then he shall be taken by the wicked
hands of the Infidels, and they shall give him buffets on his face with their
sacrilege hands, and they shall spit upon him with their foul and cursed
mouths. He shall turn unto them his shoulders suffering them to be whipped;
yea he shall hold his peace without speaking ere a word, to the end that none
shall know from whence his words proceeds. He shall also be crowned with
thorns; they shall give him gall to eat, and vinegar to drink: behold the
feast that they shall make him: in so much that thou ignorant and blind people
shall not know thy God conuersing among men, but thou shall crown him with
thorns, mingling for him gal and vinegar. Then the veil of the temple shall
rend, and at midde day it shall be dark night for the space of three hours. So
the just shall die the death, and his death or sleep shall continue three
days: and when he shall have been in the bowels of the earth, he shall
resuscit and return to life.

Lactantius moreover, lib. 4. chap. 15. reherseth these prophecies of them. He
shall raise the dead, the impotent and lame shall go, and run nimbly, the
deaf shall hear, the blind shall see, the dumb shall speak freely. And a
little before that, says, with five loaves and two fishes, he shall nourish in
the Deserts 5000 men, and the fragments thereof shall be sufficient to satisfy
many more. Many other things were foretold by these Sibyls, as well of the
ruins of great States as of Christ.

The twelve Apostles with their martyrdom.
James the son of Zebedee, called mayor, for that he was chosen to be an
Apostle, was sent to convert Spain, from whence by reason of the obstinacy of
the people, (for he converted in all but nine persons) he returned shortly
again to preach in Judea. Where by the envy of a Jewish Bishop called
Abiathar, he was accused, and beheadded by the consent of Herod Agrippa. His
body was conuaied by his disciples first to Jerusalem, and from thence to
Spain, where it yet remains in Compostella a famous pilgrimage.

James the son of Alphey, called minor, for that he was last chosen, he
was the first Bishop of Jerusalem, and that by the space of thirty years: and
then as he was preaching in the Temple, he was thrown headlong down by the
Pharisees, and by them stoned to death. He was buried by the Temple.

Simon by Christ called Peter, through the indignation of Nero, because he had
overcome Simon Magus, was crucified with his head downward, according as he
desired.

Saul, after his conversion called Paul, after he had endured and escaped many
dangers and torments, as beating with rods, and put in the stocks by Philippus;
stoned in Listria, delivered to wild beasts in Ephesis, bound and beaten in
Jerusalem, and many others: lastly came to Rome, whereby the commaundment of
Nero, he was beheaded (because he was a Roman borne) the same day that
Peter was crucified. Paul in stead of John, because he ended not his life
with martyrdom.

Phillip, after he had preached through the whole Country of Scythia, and
converted a great part thereof in the space of 20 years, was at the last in
the City of Ierapolis (when he had there extirped the heresy of the
Hebeonits) fastened to the cross, and so died.

Bartholmew went to preach in India, and afterward came to Albania a City of
Armenia the greater, where he converted the King of that City, and destroyed
the idols, wherefore by the commaundment of Astiagus brother to the King
Polemius, whom he had converted, he was flead quick. His body was
afterward brought to Italy, and is as some say at Rome.

Andrew, Simon Peter's brother, went first to preach in Achaia, and afterward
preached in Scithya: but lastly he was taken at Patras a City of Achaia, by
Egeas, Proconsull of that Province: who because he had converted his wife
Maximilla, cast him in prison, where he was sore beaten, and lastly stretched
out and bound on a slope cross, to augment his torment, and so died.

Thomas preached the Gospel to the Parthians, Medes, Persians, Hyrcanians,
Bragmans, and converted a great part of India. He was by the infidells thrown
into a burning furnace, and came out unhurt. Finally, because he prayed God to
destroy the idol of the son, which the infidells would have compelled him to
worship, he was by them thrust through with spears and swords.

Matthew, after he had preached much in Judea, he went into Ethiopia, and there
converted the greatest part of that Country. Finally, having newly ended his
prayers, and lefting up his hands to heaven by the altar, certain spies came
behind him, and ran him through with their swords: which was done by the
commaundment of a King of those Countries.

Judas, called also Thadeus, after the assention of our Lord, was sent by
Thomas to heal Abagar King of Edissa: afterward he preached in Ponte, and
Mesopotamia, and converted many cruel and barbarous people. Lastly, he came
to Persia, where for counfounding of their idols, was suddenly run upon, and
murdered by the Paymin Bishops of that Country. He is buried at Netre a City
of Armenia.

Simon, called Chananeus, brother to Thadeus, and James the less; after he had
preached in Egypt, returned to Jerusalem, whereof by the consent of the
Apostles, he was made Bishop after the martyrdom of his brother James. As
touching his death and martyrdom, some say that he sufferred with his brother
Judas Thadeus in Persia, others, that he was through the envy of Heretics,
accused to be a Christian before the Consul Atticus, and therefore crucified,
as his master was.

Mathy, after the ascension of Christ, chosen by the Apostles to supply Judas
^ome, was borne at Bethlem, and descended of the Tribe of Judah, he preched
altogether in Judea, where lastly he was accused by his enemies of perjury or
rather blasphemy, and therefore he was condemned to be stoned to death by two
men, during which torment, one smote him with a hatchet, and so he suffered
martyrdom.

The ten persecutions under the Roman Emperors.
THe first began in the 13 year of the reign of Nero, in such sort, that
the Christians were feign to hide themselves in caves of the earth.

The second began in the 12 year of the reign of Domician, who caused S. John
the Evangelist to be put in a vessel of burning oil, whereof he received no
hurt.

The third began in the tenth year of the reign of Traian, which ceased
afterward by the pity and means of Pliny, 2. prefect of the Empire.

The fourth began under Marcus Antoninus, and Aurelius Commodus Empire.

The fifth began at the commandment of the Emperor Seuerus.

The sixth began by the indignation of Maximinus, who especially persecuted the
Clergy.

The seventh began under the Emperor Decius, and continued cruelly.

The eight began under the Emperor Valerius, who though at the first he were a
Christian, yet afterward being corrupted by certain herericks, he became a
most cruel persecuter of Christ his Church.

The ninth began under the Emperor Aurelianus.

The tenth began by the commandment of the Emperors Dioclesianus and
Maximianus Herculeus: this persecution was far more cruel and general then
any of the rest: insomuch that Dioclesianus in the orient, and Maximianus in
the occident, destroyed all Churches, and tormented the Christians with all
strange torments.

The eight times that Rome has been taken.
ROme was first taken by the Gauls, under the conduct of their captain
Brennus, the year of the foundation of the City about 365, the year of the
world 4835, and the year before Christ 364. This Brennus is by the Britain and
English Chronicles reported to be a Britain, and brother to Belinus king of
Britain; but neither the Chronicles of Rome nor of Gaul do speak of any such
matter.

Rome was secondly taken by Alaricke king of Goths, after he had held his
siege to it the space of two years, which befell the year of the foundation
of the City 1164, the year of our Lord 412, and the 25 year of the Empire of
Honorius. It is written in the Chronicles of Constantinople, and in other
places, that as Alaricke (being a Christian,) marched with his host toward
Rome, a certain Munck, of holy life and great authority, came unto him, who
having audience, admonished and counseled him to break of that evil purpose,
and to remember that he was a Christian, and that for Gods sake he would
moderate his wrath, and that he should not take pleasure in the shedding of
Christian blood, since that Rome had not in any respect offended him. Unto whom
Alaricke answered him, Thou must understand man of God, that it proceeds not
of mine own will that I go against Rome: but contrarily I assure thee, that
every day there comes unto me a man, which constrains and importuneth me
thereunto, saying unto me, Hasten thee, go against Rome, destroy it utterly,
and make it desolate. At which words the religious man being astonished,
durst not reply: and so the King followed his enterprise.

Rome was thirdly taken by Gensericke king of Vandales, the year of the
foundation of the city 1208. the year of Christ 456. who sacked and burned it
in many places, which befell in the Empire of Marcian.

Rome was fourthly taken by Totila King of Goths, who because he could not
obtain peace of the Emperor Justinian, (who trusted too much in the power of
his Lieutenant Bellisarius) commanded the Citizens to avoid the City, and
afterward burned, sacked, and destroyed almost all the City, walls, and the
Capital, and made it altogether desolate: in so much that never since it could
be repaired according to the first form, although a while after Bellisarius
peopled and repaired a great part thereof, and calling again the old
inhabitants, fortified and strengthened much the walls. This desolation, and of
all other most lamentable, happened the year after the foundation of the City
1300: afther Christ 548, and the 21 year of the Empire of Justinian.

Rome was fifthly taken by the same Totila, King of Goths; after that
Bellisarius had repeopled and repaired it: but whereas before he had almost
destroyed it, he now called again the Citizens, which were fled at his
coming, and travailed all he could to restore and repair that which he had
destroyed: and behaved himself toward his subjects, and especially toward
the Romans, not like a stranger but a father. This happened but three years
after he had destroyed it.

Rome was sixthly taken by the Mores and Sarrazins, followers of Mohomet his
law, which in great multitude came into Italy, and in the year of our Lord
833, sitting in Rome, Gregory the fourth, and gouering the Empire Lewis the
first; besieged, took, and sacked Rome, profaning the Temple of Saint Peter:
which done they returned to their ships, charged with prays and prisoners.

Rome was seauenthly taken by Henry the fourth of that name, Emperor of
Germany, sitting in Rome, Gregory the seventh: this time Rome was most
cruelly destroyed, by reason that both the armies of the Pope and the Emperor
scurmished, and fought long within the City, and the Capitole, which had
been before (destroyed) was now again (repaired) which befell the year of
our Lord 1082: authors write that Rome never was so much endomaged at any
thing, as at this, for the lamentable destruction that was done by the Normans
on the Popes side, and Germans for the Emperor.

Rome was last taken by Charles, the last Duke of Bourbon: who being slain as
he scaled the walls at the first assaut, and by that chance, the soldiers
being in liberty and without a head, pitifully destroyed the City, and
committed all kind of enormities, and barbarous cruelties, saving that they
burned not the Churches, although they spoiled and robbed them to the
uttermost, for a great part of the army were Germans, and most of the
Germans Lutherans. This adversity happened to Rome the year of our Savior
1527, sitting at Rome Clement the seventh: and gouering the Empire Charles the
fifth.

The seven Electors of the Emperor of Germany.
THree Ecclesiastical: that is to mean, the Archbishop of Magonce, called
the Archchancelour of Germany: the Archbishop of Colen, called the
Archecancelour of Italy: and the Archbishop of Treues, called the
Archechancelour of France. Four Temporal: the Marquis of Brandebourg, great
Chamberlain of the Empire: the Duke of Saxony, bears the sword before the
Emperor: the Earl Palatin of Rhene, Dapifer, of carrying the plate: the King
of Baeme, Taster to the Emperor, or Karuer. These Electors were first ordained
by the Emperor Othon third of that name, in the year of our Lord 1000, to
take away the dissension which before times had been for the choosing of
Emperors: and ordained moreover, that being chosen by these seven Electors,
he should be called Caesar, but being afterward crowned by the Bishop of Rome,
he should be called Augustus.

The three crowns of the Emperor.
THe first Crown is of silver, for the Realm of German, and is kept at Aix
the Chapel. The second Crown is of iron, for the Realm of Lombardie, and is
kept at Modene, a little Town not far from Milan. And the third of gold, for
the Empire of Rome, where it is kept.

The xij. Peers, or Pairs of France.
IN the Realm of France to be a Peer, is the greatest dignity under the King,
for that in many things they have almost equal authority with the King; for
Peer in the French tongue signifies equal. But because it might be too
prolixe a matter to speak of their prerogatives, it shall suffice to number
them, and each of their offices at the sacring or coronation of a new King.
These ancient Peers are twelve in number; whereof six are of the Clergy, and
six are Lay men: the six of the Clergy with their offices at the
corronation, are the Archbishop and Duke of Reins, which has his accustomed
charge to oynt and consecrate the King, the Bishop and Duke of Laon, who office
is to bring the holy Ampoule, or divine water, wherewith the King is anointed:
the Bishop and Duke of Langres, whose office is to bring the scepter and the
hand of justice; the Bishop and Earl of Beauuais, brings the Kings cloak;
the Bishop and Earl of Chaalons, brings the Kings Ring; the Bishop and Earl
of Noyon, brings the Kings gyrdle. The six temporal Peers with their
offices at the corronation, are the Duke of Burgundy, Deane or chief of the
rest, whose office is to bring the kings crown: the Duke of Guyen brings the
first square banner: the duke of Normandy brings the second square banner:
the Earl of Earl of Tolowze brings the Kings spurs: the Earl of
Champaine brings the kingly banner, or the standart of war: and the Earl
of Flaunders brings the Kings sword. And although the five first temporal
Peerdoms be united to the crown, and the sixth be subject to another Prince,
yet at at the Kings corronation, there are other noble men appointed to supply
their room and offices. These be the twelve ancient Peers, although since
their creation others have been made, which though they have like authority to
judge in the Court of Parliament, yet they want offices at the Kings
coronation, and bear not that majesty that the other Pees do, for that they
are not of so great antiquity.

The eight Parliaments of France.
THE chief and generallest justice of the realm of France, is continually
kept in eight Cities, wherein are Palaces made expressly for that purpose: and
this general kind of justice is divided into eight parts, according to the
eight Cities, and every of them are called Parliaments, which differ very
little from our Terms: but whereas these are but four times in a year, those
are continually kept, each of them having in stead of our Lord Chancellor, a
chief President.

The first and chiefest of these Parliaments is that of Paris, called the Court
of the Peers of France: and to the equity and judgment of this Parliament,
many foreign Kings and Princes have submitted themselves in matters of
greatest importance, as to the most venerable and chiefest Senate of justice in
the world. Such were the Emperor Frederick the second, called Barberousse,
king of both Sicils, when he submitted himself to the judgment of this Court
of Parliament, as touching all the controversies of his Empire and kingdoms,
which he had against Pope Innocent the fourth: Philip prince of Tarente, and
the Duke of Burgundy, who sumbitted them selves to this Parliament, for the
controversy betwixt them upon the expenses of the recovery of the Empire of
Constantinople. The Duke of Lorraine subject to the Empire, and the Lord Guy of
Chastillon, who submitted the^se^lues to the judgment of this Court, as
concerning the limitation of their lands and possessions: the Daulphin of
Vienne, and the Earl of Sauoy summitted themselves to the judgment of this
Parliament, concerning the suit betwixt them, for the homage of the Marquisat
of Saluces. Moreover, without the consent of this Parliament, it has not been
seen that the Kings of France have done or passed any matter of importance
touching the state of the Realm, so much is it respected both within the
Realm and abroad. This Court of Parliament was first ordained by Phillip the
fair, King of France.

The second Parliament is at Bordeaux, for the countries of Gwyen, Gascoine,
Zaintonge, Perigort, part of Poictou, and others: and was first ordained by
Charles the seventh.

The third Parliament is at Rouen, for the Dukedom of Normandy, first made
Exchequer by Phillip the fair, and afterward continual Parliament by Jews
the twelfth.

The fourth Parliament is at Toulowze, first ordained for certain times of the
year by Phillip the fair, and afterward made continual by Charles the
seventh, for the Country of Languedoc.

The fifth Parliament is at Grenoble, for the country of Daulphine, instituted
by Jews the xj.

The sixth Parliament is at Dijon for the Dukedom of Burgundy, it was likewise
ordained by the said Jews the xj.

The seventh Parliament is at Aix, for the Earldom of Proueme, appointed by
Jews the xij.

The eight Parliament is at Renes in Britain, ordained by Henry the second. Of
all these Parliaments Paris Parliament is the chief; and certain cases are
reserved to be judged only at the Parliament of Paris.

The seven Saxon Kingdoms that England was once divided into.
THe first, was the Kingdom of Kent: which had his beginning of the Saxon
Hengist, in the year of our Lord 476: and the fifth year of Vortiger King of
Britain his last reign (for he had been deposed) the Kingdom continued 342
years, till that Egbert King of Westsaxons vanquished Baldred last King
thereof, and joined it to his own Kingdom.

The second Kingdom was of Sussex, or Southsaxons, which began by the Saxon
Ella, in the year of our Lord 482: and the second year of Aurelambrose King
of Britain. This kingdom continued not above 112 years.

The third kingdom was of Estangles, or east Englishmen, and contained
Northfolke and Southfolke: it was first begun by the Saxon Vffa, about the
year of our Lord 492: and the 11 year of Aurell Ambrose king of Britain.
This kingdom continued 376 years; the last king whereof was Saint Edmond
martired by the Danes.

The fourth was the kingdom of Westsaxons, containing the West country of
England, and had his beginning by the Saxon Cerdicus, the year of our Lord
522: and the fifth year of Arthur the great king of Britain, and endured from
the first year of Cerdicus to the last of Alured, the term of 378 years.
The kings of this Country subdued at length all the other six kingdoms,
which Egbert began, and Alured finished, making of all the South part of this
Island one Monarchy.

The fifth was the kingdom of Northumberland, containing the Countries betwixt
the River of Humber and Scotland, had his beginning of the Saxon Ida, king of
Brenicia; the year of our Lord 547: and the second or last year of the reign
of Aurele Canon, king of Britain. This kingdom of Northumberland was at the
first divided into two kingdoms, the one was called the Brenicia, which bended
toward the North, and the other Deyra (about) the Country of Durham: and this
kingdom continued some while under one king, sometime under two, the term of
409 years: first under the Saxons, and then under the Danes.

The sixth kingdom was of the East Saxons, or Essex, which began by the Saxon
Sobert, the year of our Lord about 614: and continued from the beginning of
the reign of Sebert till the eight year of Edward the elder, 293 years.

The 7. kingdom was of Mercia, containing Huntingtonshire, Hertfortshire,
Glocestershire, and others: and was the greatest of all the other, taking his
beginning of the Saxon Penda, in the year of our Lord 626: after the coming
of Hengist 126 years: during the reign of Cadwan king of Britain, and
continued from Penda till that Edward the elder chased out the Danes, about 280
years. These 7. kingdoms of the Saxons, beside that of Walls and Scotland,
were all contained at once in this Island of Britain, and continued along space.

Five Orders of Chivalry, which continue at this day among Princes.
THe first and ancientest of these Orders of Chivalry, or Knighthood, is the
Order of the Garter, instituted the year of our Lord 1348 in Bordeaux, chief
City of the dukedom of Guyne in France, by Edward the third, king of
England, and then possessor of that Dukedom: which order he consecrated, and
dedicated to S. George, though the motive of the institution thereof, proceeded
of the loss of a Garter, which he supposed to have been the Countess of
Salsburies, but I refer the Reader to the Chronicle. And it happened in this
manner: as one day he was entertaining her with pleasant talk, a Garter
chanced to unloose and fall down, the King endeavoring to take it up, wittingly
caused such a jest as moved the Noblemen to laughter: the Countess thereat
blushing, and blaming that more then seemly familiarity of the King, for that
he had caused such a jest among the assistance, said sharply to him, and the
rest, Honi soit qui mal y pense: which englished, is, diffamed be he which
evil therein thinks. And the King in recompense of his rashness, said
forthwith, that before it were long, those Noble men which had made a jest and
laughing at the Garter fallen down, should esteem themselves much honored to
wear it for a mark of honor and chivalry, and thereupon ordained the said
Order, and dedicated it to S. George, and made thereof 26 Knights, and ordained
that they should wear their clokes of violet color Velvet; their hoods of
read Velvet, lined with white Damask, their bases of read Velvet, and under
the left knee a blew Garter, buckled with gold, garnished with precious
stones, and about it wrought the words of the Countess of Salisbury, HONI
SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE, and a collar of gold full of red and white Roses, with an
Image of S. George hanging thereon: and about these Roses are written those
words which are in the Garter. This Order is celebrated on S. George his day,
being the 23 of April.

And although it was first ordained at Bordeaux, yet the said King Edward the
third, would that the siedge and place of the solemnising thereof should be at
the Church of Winsor, here in England, where at the same time he founded
Chanons or a Chanonry, for the better prosperity of the Knights of his order.

The second order in antiquity, is the order of the Annuntiation, instituted
anno dom. 1356 by Ame the sixth of that name, Earl of Sauoye, and surnamed the
green Knight. The Knights of this order wear a great collor of gold, made
wynding with three laces which are called of love, wherein are enterlaced these
words, FERT, FERT, FERT, every letter importing his Latin word, thus, F.
fortitudo, E. eius, R. Rhodum, T. tenuit: that is, his force has conquered
Rhodes: and at this Collor hangs an image of our Lady, and of an Angel
saluting her, and for that occasion is called the Order of the Annuntiation.
This Earl ordained this Order in memory of Ame the great, Earl of Sauoye,
which succored the Knights of Saint John, when they conquered the I Will of
Rhodes upon the Turks, in the year of our Lord 1310.

The third in antiquity is the Order of the golden Fleece founded upon the
fable of the golden Fleece, that Jason with the other Argonautes went to seek
in the I Will of Colohos, which is to mean, that he went to the mine of gold:
and ordained by Phillip the second, surnamed the good Duke of Burgundy, in the
year of our Lord 1430: the complete number of which Order are 24 Knights: and
wear their cloakes and hoods of Scarlat, guarded with imbroderie, made with
flames of fire, and a Collor of gold, made with fire stones sparkling out fire,
whereat hangs a Fleece of gold: and appointed for the celebrating of that
Order Saint Andrews day, being the 30 of November. But the Emperor Charles
the fifth (heir of the house of Burgundy, and chief of that Order) changed
their apparel, and ordained that their clokes should be of crimson Velvet,
and their hoodes of violet coullor Velvet, and that underneath they should were
a Cassoke of cloth of silver.

The fourth in antiquity is the Order of Saint Michaell the Archangell,
instituted by Lewis the 11, King of France, the first day of August, in the
year of our Lord 1469: and ordained that of that Order there should be 36
Knights, gentlemen of name and of arms without reprooch, of whom he himself
was chief and Sovereign, and after him his successors Kings of France. And
the brothers or companions of this order were bound, at the receiving thereof,
to forsake and leave all other Orders, if any they had, either of a Prince or
any company, only excepting Emperors, Kings, and Dukes, which beside this
Order, might wear that Order whereof they wear chief, with the agreement and
consent of the King and confrarie of the said Order: and in like manner the
said Kings of France might wear beside his own, the Order of other
Emperors, Kings, and Dukes. And for the connoissance of this Order, and the
Knights thereof, he gave to every of them a Collar of gold, wrought with
Cocquell shells, enterlacing on another with a double pointing Ribon of silk,
with golden Tagges, which King Francis the first, because his name was Francis,
changed into a white Friars or Franciscans girdle, made of a twisted cord: and
hangs on that Collor a tablet of Saint Michaell upon a Rock: of the
institution of this Order is made a book containing 98 Articles, wherein are
set down the things whereunto the Knights of this Order are subject.

The fifth Order is that of the holy Ghost, instituted by Henry the third, King
of France at this present, on New years day in the year of our Lord 1579: of
this also is written a book, containing the Articles whereunto the Knights
thereof are bound. Among the which I have principally noted one, that is, to
defend and sustain the Clergy: for the king does give to every of them the
rent of certain Abbeys, religious houses, or other spiritually Lands, whereof
they shall allow a certain stipend, to the entertaining of a certain number of
religious persons, in every religious house under him; and for that benefit,
are sworn at their entering into the said Order, always to defend the
spiritualitie, and maintain the Clergy in their privileges: but how they
keep their oath, it is well seen in every place of their spiritual
possessions: and thereof my self have often times had oculare experience, for
traveling in that Country, and passing often times by goodly religious
houses, I have sometimes for recreation (having well tried the curtious
demeanor, that commonly religious men use toward strangers that come to view
their houses) entered into sundry of them: where I have diverse times been
sufficiently informed by the religious, how the king had given the rents and
possessions of their houses to the Knights of his Order, with the conditions
already rehearsed, which Knights allow them such bare exhibitation, that by
reason it is not sufficient to entertain the fourth part of the number by them
appointed, almost all of them are constrained either to forsake their houses,
and beg, or else there to starve: through which occasion, many goodly
religious houses are of late fallen in decay for want of reparation, trimming
up, and inhabiting, and will do more and more without a redress. And this
have I learned in diverse religious houses, beside the common murmering of the
Clergy: and so we may see, how these Knights, called, of the holy spirit, for
to defend and maintain the spiritualitie, do under pretense thereof, rob, and
prodigally wast the spiritual possessions: so that it may seem only to be a
policy (under the correction of better judgment) put in the kings head, to
diminish spiritual livings (which in that Country are wonderful great) and
satisfy his prodigal mind, in rewarding by that means his flatterers;
because through his exceeding lavishness, he is scarce able otherwise to
reward them. The Bishop of Rome considering what dismembring of Church Lands,
and decay of Gods service, comes through this Order, in the Realm of
France; will not grant the confirmation thereof, although the King has been
instant for the same: but notwithstanding the Popes misliking thereof, the
Order is maintained, though to the great weakening of the religion in that
Country. Yea at the last celebration thereof, which was on New-yeeres day
eeuen, 1581, I saw three Bishops were admitted into that Order, the connissance
whereof is a Dove, representing the holy Ghost, wraught in Orange tauny Velvet,
garnished about with silver beams, which the Knights of that Order wear
commonly upon their clokes, before their heart.

The 13 Cantons of Swisserland.
THE inhabitants of Heluetia or Swisserland, after they had emancipated
themselves from the yoke of the Empire, and expelled the nobility of the
Imperial faction, began to make leagues and confederacies one town with
another, to fortify themselves by that means against foreign invasions, if
any happened. And in process of time, within little more then an hundred years,
are increased to the number of 13, which they call Cantons, by which the whole
Country of Swisse is governed and defended. And here (according to their
antiquity) I place them the first that confederated together, and gave example
to the rest, were Vri, Swits. Vnderuard, Villages: and these three by little
and little, have drawn to their faction all the rest that follows, Lucerne,
Zurich, Cities: Glaris, Zug, Villages: Berne, Fribourg, Soullcurre, Basle,
Schaffouse, Cities: Appensel, village. Whereof 7. profess the Romish
religion, j. Vri, Swits, Vnderuard, Zug, Lucerne, Fribourg, and Soullcurre, the
rest are Zuinglians: which diversity of religion has caused dissension, and
mortal wars of late years among them, although they be all sworn together
to defend their liberties against strangers.

FINIS. Non munus sed animus.

