Ouids Elegies: Three Books.

By C. M.

Epigrames by I. D.

At Mid(...)gh.

P. Ouidij Nasonis amorum, Liber primus.
ELEGIA. 1
Quemadmodum a Cupidine pro bellis amores scribere coactus sit.
WE which were Ouids five books now are three
For these before the rest prefers he.
If reading five thou plain'st of tediousness.
Two taken away, thy labor will be less.
With Muse prepared I meant to sing of Arms*
Choosing a subject fit for fierce alarmes.
Both verses were a like till lour (men say)
Began to smile and took one foot away.
Rash boy, who gave thee power to change a line*
We are the Muses Prophets, none of thine.
What if thy mother take Di^nas bow.
Shall Dian fan, when lone begins to glow.
In woody groves is it mere that Ceres reign?
And quiuer-bearing Dian till the plain.
Who Will set the fair trest sun in battle ray,
While Mars does take the Aonian Harp to play.
Great are thy kingdoms, over strong and large,
Ambitious impe, why ^eek'st thou further charge?
Are all things thine? the Muses Temple thine?
Then scarce can Phoebus say, this Harp is mine.
When in this works first verse I trod aloft,
Loue^slackt my Muse, and made my numbers soft.
I have no mistress, nor no (...)
Being fittest matter, for (...)
Thus I complained, but love unlocked his quiver,
Took out the shaft, ordain'de my heart to shiuer:
And bent his sinewie bow upon his knee,
Saying Poet, here is a work beseeming thee.
Oh woe is me, he never shootes but hits,
I burne*loue in my idle bosom sits.
Let my first verse be six, my last five feet,
Farewell stern war, for blunter Poets meet.
Elegian Muse, that warblest amorous lays,
Girt my shine brow with Sea-banke Myrtle praise.
ELEGIA. 2.
Quod prime amore correptus, in triumphum duc^ so a cupidine patiatur.
What makes my bed seem hard seeing it is soft?
Or why slips down the couerlet so often?
Although the nights be long, I sleep not tho,
My sides are sore with tumbling to and fro.
Were love the cause, it is like I should descry him,
Or lies he close, and shootes where none can spy him.
'Twas so, he stroke me with a slender darr,
It Is cruel love turmoyles my captive heart.
Yielding or struggling do we give him might,
Let Us yield, a burden easly borne is light.
I saw a brandisht fire increase in strength,
Which being not slackt, I saw it dye at length.
Young Oxen newly yoakt are beaten more,
Then Oxen which have drawn the plough before.
And rough Iades mouths with stuborne bits are torn,
But managde horses heads are lightly borne.
Unwilling lovers, love does more torment,
Then such as in their bondage feel content.
Lo I confess, I am thy captive I,
And hold my conquered hands for thee to tie.
What need'st thou war, I sue to thee for grace,
With arms to conquer armelesse men is base.
Yoke Venus Doves, put Myrtle on thy hair,
Vulcan will give thee chariots rich and fair.
The people thee applauding thou shall stand,
Guiding the harmless Pigeons with thy hand.
Young men, and women shall thou lead as thrall,
So will thy triumph seem magnificall.
I lately caught, will have a new made wound,
And captive like be manacled and bound.
Good meaning shame, and such as seek loves wra^^
Shall follow thee their hands tied at their back.
Thee all shall fear, and worship as a King,
Io, ^riumphing shall thy people sing.
Smooth speeches, fear, and rage shall by thee ride*
Which troops have always been on Cupids side*
Thou with these soul ^iours, conquerest Gods and men^
Take these away, where is thine honor then?
Thy mother shall from heaven applaude this show,
And on their faces heaps of Roses strew.
With beauty of thy wings thy fair hair gilded,
Ride golden love in chariots richly builded.
Unless I err, full many shall thou burn,
And give wounds infinite at every turn.
In spite of thee forth will thine arrows fly,
A scortching flame burns all the standers by.
So having coquer'd Jude was Bacchus hew,
The pompous Birds, and him two Tigers drew.
Then seeing I grace thy show in following thee,
Forbear to hurt thy self in spoiling me.
Behold thy kins-mans Caesar's prosperous bands,
Who guards thee conquered, with his conquering hands.
ELEGIA. 3.
Ad amicam.
I Ask but right: let he that caught me late,
Either love, or cause that I may never hate.
I ask too much, would she but let me love her,
Jove knows with such like prayers I daily move her.
Accept him that will serve thee all his youth,
Accept him that will love with spotelesse truth.
If lofty titles cannot make me thine,
That am descended but of Knightly line.
Soon may you plow the little land I have,
I gladly grant my parents given, to save.
Apollo, Bacchus and the Muses may,
And Cupid who has marked me for thy pray.
My spotelesse life, which but to Gods give place,
Naked simplicity, and modest grace.
I love but one, and her I love, change never,
If men have faith, I Will live with thee for ever.
The years that fatal destiny shall give,
I Will live with thee, and dye, ere thou shall grieve.
Be thou the happy subject of my books.
That I may write things worthy thy fair looks.
By verses horned Io got her name,
And she to whom in shape of Swanne Jove came.
And she that on a feigned Bull swamme to land,
Griping his false horns with her virgin hand.
So likewise we will through the world be rung,
And with my name shall thine be always sung.
ELEGIA. 4.
Amicam, qua art, quibusue nutibus in caena present viro vti debeat, admonet.
THy husband to a banquet goes with me,
Pray God it may his latest supper be.
Shall I sit gazing as a bashful guest,
While others touch the damse^l I love best?
With lying, under him his bosom clippe?
About thy neck shall he at pleasure skippe?
Marvel not, though the fair Bride did incite,
The drunken Centaures to a sudden fight.
I am no half horse, nor in woods I dwell,
Yet scarce my hands from thee contain I well.
But how thou should behave thy self now know
Nor let the winds away my warnings blow.
Before thy husband come, though I not see,
What may be done, ^et there before hi^ be.
Lie with him gently, when his limbs he spread,
Upon the bed, but on my feet first tread.
View me, my becks, and speaking countenance,
Take, and receive each secret amorous glaunce.
Words without voice shall on my eyebrows sit,
Lines thou shall read in wine by my hand writ.
When our lascivious toys come to thy mind,
Thy Rosy cheeks be to thy thombe inc^^n^e.
If ought of me thou speak in inward thought,
Let thy soft finger to thy ear be brought.
When I (my light) do or say ought that please thee,
Turn round thy gold-ring, as it were to ease thee.
Strike on the board like them that pray for evil,
When thou do wish thy husband at the deu^l.
What wine he fills thee, wisely will him drink,
Ask thou the boy, what thou enough do think.
When thou have tasted, I will take the cup,
And where thou drink'st, on that part I will sup.
If he gives thee what first himself did taste,
Even in his face his offered Goblets cast.
Let not thy neck by his vile arms be pressed,
Nor leave thy soft head on his boistrous breast.
Thy besomes Roseat buds let him not finger,
Chiefly on thy lips let not his lips linger.
If thou give kisses, I shall all disclose,
Say they are mine, and hands on thee impose.
Yet this I Will see, but if thy gown ought cover,
Suspicious fear in all my veins will houer.
Mingle not thighs, nor to his leg join thine,
Nor thy soft foot with his hard foot combine.
I have been wanton, therefore am perplexed,
And with mistrust of the like measure vexed.
I and my wench often under clothes did lurk,
When pleasure moved us to our sweetest work.
Do not thou so, but throw thy mantle hence,
Least I should think thee guilty of offense.
Entreat thy husband drink, but do not kiss,
And while he drinks, to add more do not miss,
If he lies down with wine and sleep oppressed,
The thing and place shall counsel us the rest.
When to go home^ wards we rise all along,
Have care to walk in middle of the throng.
There will I find thee or be found by thee,
There touch what ever thou can touch of me.
Aye me I warn what profits some few hours,
But we must part, when heaven with black night lowers^
At night thy husband clippes, I will weep
And to the doors sight of thy self keep;
Then will he kiss thee, and not only kiss,
But force thee give him my stolen honey bliss.
Constrained against thy will give it the pezan^s^
Forbear sweet words, and be your sport unpleasant.
To him I pray it no delight may bring,
Or if it do: to thee no joy thence spring.
But though this night thy fortune be to try it,
To me to morrow constantly deny it.
ELEGIA. 5.
Corinnae Concubitus.
IN summers heat and mid-time of the day,
To rest my limbs upon a bed I lay.
One window shut, the other open stood,
Which gave such light, ^s twincles in a wood.
Like twilight glimps at setting of the Sun,
Or night being past, and yet not day begun.
Such light to shamefast maidens must be shown,
Where they may sport, and seem to be unknown.
Then came Corinna in a long loose gown,
Her white neck hid with tresses hanging down.
Resembling fair Semiramis going to bed,
Or Layis of a thousand woers sped.
I snacht her gown being thin, the harm was small,
Yet strived she to be covered there withal.
And striving thus as one that would be cast,
Betrayed her self, and yielded at the last.
Stark naked as she stood before mine eye,
Not one wen in her body could I spy.
What arms and shoulders did I touch and see,
How apt her breasts were to be pr^st by me.
How smooth a belly under her wast saw I?
How large a leg, and what a lusty thigh?
To leave the rest all liked me passin^ well,
I cling'd her naked body, down the fell,
Judge you the rest, being t^^de she b^d me kiss,
Io^e send me more such after-noones as this.
ELEGIA. 6.
Ad Ianitorem, vt fores sibo aperiat.
Unworthy porter, bound in chains full sore,
On moved hooks set open the chur^sh door.
Little I ask, a little entrance make,
The gate half open my bent side in will take.
Long love my body to such use make slender,
And to get out does like apt members render.
He shows me how vn^eard to pass the watch,
And guides my feet least stumbling falls they catch
But in times past I feared veins shades, and night,
Wondering if any walked without light.
Love hearing it laug'd with his tender mother,
And smiling said, be thou as bold as other.
Forthwith love came, no dark night flying spright,
Nor hands prepared to slaughter, me affright.
Thee fear I too much: only thee I flatter,
Thy lightning can my life in pieces batter.
Why enuiest me, this hostile dende vnbarre,
See how the gates with my tears wat'red are.
When thou stood'st naked ready to be beat,
For thee I did thy mistress fair entreat.
But what entreates for thee sometimes took place,
(O mischief) now for me obtain small grace.
Gratis thou may be free give like for like,
Night goes away: the doors bar back ward strike.
Strike, so again hard chains shall bind thee never,
Nor servile water shall thou drink for ever,
Hard-hearted Porter do and wilt not hear,
With stiff oak propt the gate does still appear.
Such rampierd gates besieged Cities aid,
In midst of peace why art of arms afraid?
Exclud'st a lover, how would use a foe?
Strike back the bar, night fast away does go.
With arms or armed men I come not guarded,
I am alone, were furious love discarded.
Although I would, I cannot him cashiere,
Before I be divided from my geere.
See love with me, wine moderate in my brain,
And on my hairs a crown of flowers remain.
Who fears these arms? who will not go to meet them,
Night runs away, with open entrance gree^te them?
Art careless? or is it sleep forbids thee hear,
Giving the winds my words running in thine care.
Well I remember when I first did hire thee,
Watching till after midnight did not tire thee.
But now perchannce thy wench with thee does rest,
Ah how thy lot, is above my lot blessed:
Though it be so, shut me not out therefore,
Night goes away: I pray thee open the door.
Err we? or do the turned hinges sound,
And opening doors with creaking noise abound?
We err: a strong blast seemed the gates ^o ^ope:
A^e me how high that gale did lift my hope!
If Boreas bears Orithyas rape in mind,
Some break these deaf doors with thy boisterous wind.
Silent the city is: nights dea wie host,
March fast away: the bar strike from the poast.
Or I more stern then fire or sword will turn,
And with my brand these gorgeous houses burn.
Night, love, and wine to all extremes persuade:
Night, shameless wine, and love are fearelesse made.
All have I spent: no threats or prayer move thee,
O harder then the doors thou gardest I prove thee.
No pretty wenches keeper may ^st thou be,
The careful prison is more meet for thee.
Now forsty night her flight begins to take,
And crowing Cocks poor souls to work awake.
But thou my crown from sad hairs taken away,
On this hard threshold till the morning lay.
That when my mistress there beholds thee cast,
She may perceive how we the time did wast.
What ere thou art, farewell, be like me pained,
Careless farewell, with my fault not distained.
And farewell cruel posts rough thresholds block,
And doors conioyn'd with an hard iron lock.
ELEGIA 7.
Ad pacandam amicam, quam verberauerat.
Bind fast my hands, they have deserved chains,
While rage is absent, take some friend the pains.
For rage against my wench moved my rash arm,
My mistress weeps whom my mad hand did harm.
I might have then my parents dear misused,
Or holy Gods with cruel strokes abused.
Why? Ajax master of the seuen-fold shield,
Bu^cher'd the flocks he found in spacious field.
And he who on his mother veng'd his fire,
Against ^^e destinies durst, sharp darts require.
Could I therefore her comely tresses tear?
Yet was she graced with her ruffled hair.
(...) she was, Atalanta she resembled,
(...) whose bow the Arcadian wild beasts trembled.
(...) Ariadne was, when she bewayles,
^span; Theseus flying vows and sails.
^span; Minerua did Cassandra fall,
D^flowr'd except, within thy Temple wall.
That I was mad, and barbarous all men cried,
She nothing said, pale fear her tongne had tied.
But secretly her looks with checks did trounce me,
Her tears, she silent, guilty did pronounce me.
Would of mine arms, my shoulders had been scanted,
Better I could part of my self have wanted.
To mine own self have I had strength so furious?
And to my self could I be so injurious?
Slaughter and mischiefs instruments, no better,
Deserved chains these cursed hands shall fetter.
Punished I am, if I a Roman beat,
Over my Mistress is my right more great.
Tydides left worst signs of villainy,
He first a Goddess struck; another I.
Yet he harmed less, whom I professed to love,
I harmed: a so did Diomedes anger move.
Go now thou Conqueror, glorious triumphs raise,
Pay vows to Jove: engirt thy hairs with b^ies.
And let the troops which shall thy Chariot follow,
Io, a strong man conquered this wench, hollow.
Let the sad captive foremost with locks spread,
On her white neck but for hurt cheeks ke^ led.
Meeter it were her lips were blew with kissing,
And on he neck a wanton mark not missing.
But though I like a swelling fllood was driven,
And as a pray unto blind anger given.
Wa'st not enough the fearful wench to child?
Nor thunder in rough threatings haughty pride?
Nor shamefully her coat pull ore her crown,
Which to her wast her girdle still kept down,
But cruelly her tresses having rent,
My nails to scratch her lovely cheeks I bent.
Sighing she stood, her blood-lesse white looks showed,
Like marble from the Parian Mountains hewed.
Her half dead joints, and trembling limbs I saw,
Like Popler leaves blown with a stormy flaw.
Or slender ears, with gentle Zephire shaken,
Or waters tops with the warm south-winde taken.
And down her cheeks, the trickling tears did flow,
Like water gushing from consuming snow.
Then first I did perceive I had offended,
My blood, the tears were that from her descended
Before her feet thrice prosttate down I fell,
My feared hands thrice back she did repel.
But doubt thou not (revenge does grief appease,)
With thy sharp nails upon my face to seize.
Bescrath mine eyes, spare not my locks to break,
(Anger will help thy hands though nere so weak.)
And least the sad signs of my crime remain,
Put in their place thy keembed hairs again.
ELEGIA. 8.
Exacratur lenam^ quae puellam suam meretrici^ art instit^ebat.
THere is, who ere will know a bawd aright.
Give ear, there is an old trot Dipsas hight.
Her name comes from the thing: she being wise,
Sees not the morn on rosy hoises rise.
She magic arts and Thessale charms does know,
And makes large streams back to their fountains flow,
She knows with gras, with thrids on wrong wheels spun,
And what with Mares rank humor may be done.
When she will, clouds the darkened heaven obscure,
When she will, day shiner every where most pure.
(If I have faith) I saw the stars drop blood,
The purple moon with sanguine visage stood;
Her I suspect among nights spirits to fly,
And her old body in birds plumes to lie.
Fame says as I suspect, and in her eyes,
Two eye-balles shine, and double light thence flies.
Great grand-sires from their ancient graves she chides,
And with long charms the solid earth diuides.
She draws chaste women to incontinence,
Nor does her tongue want harmefull eloquence.
By chance I heard her talk, these words she said,
While closely hid betwixt two doors I laid.
Mistress thou know, thou haft a blessed youth pleased,
He stayde^ and on thy looks his gazes seaz'd.
And why should' st not please? none thy face exceedes,
Aye^ m^, thy body has no worthy weeds.
As thou art fair, would thou were fortunate,
Were thou rich, poor should not be my state.
Th'opposed star of. Mars has done thee harm,
Now Mars is gone: Venus thy side does warm,
And brings good fortune, a rich lover plants,
His love on thee, and can supply thy wants.
Such is his form as may with thine compare,
Would he not buy thee, thou for him should care.
She blush'tired shame becomes white checkes, but this
If feigned, does well; if true it does amiss.
When on thy lap thine eyes thou do deiect,
Each one according to his gifts respect.
Perhaps the Sabines rude, when Tatius r^ignde,
To yield their love to more then one disdainde.
Now Mars does rage abroad without all pity,
And Venus rules in her Aeneas city.
Fair women play she is chaste whom none will have,
Or, but for bashfulnesse her self would crave.
Shake off these wrinkles that thy front assault,
Wrinckles in beauty is a grievous fault.
Penelope in bows her youths strength tried,
Of home the bow was that approved their side.
Time flying shides hence closely, and deceaues us,
And with swift horses the swift year soon leaves us.
Brass shines with use; good garments would be worn,
Houses not dwelt in, are with filch forlorn.
Beauty not exercisde with age is spent,
Nor one or two men are sufficiant.
Many to rob is more sure, and l^sse hateful,
From dog-kept flocks come preys to woolus most grateful.
Behold what gives the Poet but new verses?
And thereof many thousand he rehearses.
The Poets God arrayed in robes of gold,
Of his gilt Harp the well tuned strings does hold.
Let Homer yield to such as presents bring,
(Trust me) to give, it is a witty thing.
Nor, so thou may obtain a wealthy prize,
The vain name of inferior slaves dispize.
Nor let the arms of ancient lives beguile thee,
Poor lover with thy grandsires I exile thee.
Who seeks, for being fair, a night to have,
What he will give, with greater instance crave.
Make a small price, while thou thy nets do lay,
Least they should fly, being taken, the tirant play.
Dissemble so as loved he may be thought,
And take heed, least he gets that love for naught,
Deny him often; feign now thy head does ache:
And Isis now will show what scuse to make.
Receive him soon, least patient use he gain,
Or least his love often beaten back should waine.
To beggars shut, to bringers open thy gate,
Let him within hear; bard out lovers prate.
And as first wronged the wronged sometimes banish^
Thy fault with his fault so rep^ls'd will vanish.
But never give a spacious time to ire,
Anger delaide does often to hate retire.
And let thine eyes constrained learn to weep,
That this, or that man may thy chcekes moist keep,
Nor, if thou coznest one, dread to forswear,
Venus to mocked men lends a senseless ^are.
Se^uauts fit for thy purpose thou must hire,
To teach thy lover, what thy thoughts desire.
Let them ask somewhat, many asking little,
Within a while great heaps grow of a little.
And sister, Nurse, and mother spare him not,
By many hands great wealth is quickly got.
What were it for thee to require a gift,
By keeping of thy birth make but a shift.
Beware least he vnriual'd loves secure,
Take strife away, love does not well endure.
On all the beds men tumbling let him view,
And thy neck with lasciuions marks made blew.
Chiefly show him the gifts, which other send:
If he gives nothing, let him from thee wend.
When thou have so much as he gives no more,
Pray him to lend what thou may'st^ ^e're restore.
Let thy tongue flatter, while thy mind harme-workes,
Under sweet honey deadly poison lurkes.
If this thou do to me by long use known,
Nor let my word be with the winds hence blown.
Often thou wile, say, live well, thou will pray often,
That my dead bones may in their grave lie soft,
As thus she spoke, my shadow me betraide,
with much a do my hands I scarsely staide.
But let ^er bleare eyes, bald scalpes thine hoary ^lieces,
And riueld cheeks I would have pulled a pieces.
The gods send thee no house a poor old age,
Perpetual thirst, and winters lasting rage.
ELEGIA. 9.
Ad Attionm, amantem non oportere desidiosum esse* sicuti nec militem.
ALL Lovers war, and Cupid has his tent,
At^icke, all lovers are to war far sent,
What age fits Mar^, with Venus does agree,
^Tis shame for eld in war or love to be.
What years in fo^^diours Captain^ do require,
Those in their lovers pretty may des desire.
Both of them watch: each on the hard earth sleeps:
His Mistress doors this; that his Captains keeps.
Soldiers must travail far: the wench forth send
Her valiant lover follows without end.
Mounts, and raine-doubled floods he passes over,
And treades the desert snowy heaps to cover.
Going to sea, East winds he does not chi^de,
Nor to hoist sail attends full time and tide.
Who but a soldier or a lover is bold,
To suffer storm mixed snowes with nights sharp cold?
One as a spy does to his enemies go,
The other eyes his rival as his foe.
He cities great, this thresholds lies before:
This breaks town gates, but he his Mistress door.
Often to invade the sleeping foe it is good,
And armed to shed unarmed peoples blood.
So the fierce troops of Thracian Rhesus fell,
And Captive horses bad their Lord farewell.
Sooth Lovers watch till sleep the husband charms,
Who slumbring, they rise up in swelling arms.
The keepers hands and corps-dugard to pass,
The soldiers, and poor lovers work e^^ was.
Doubtful is war and love, the vanquished rise,
And who thou never think should fall down lies.
Therefore who ere love sloatthfulnesse does call,
Let him surcease: love tries wit best of all.
Achilles burned Briseis being taken away,
Troianes destory the Greek wealth while you may*
Hector to arms went from his wives embraces,
And on Adromache his helmet laces.
Great Agamemnon was, men say amazed,
O^ Priams loose-trest daughter when he gazed.
Mars in the deed the black-smiths net did stable
In heaven was never more notorious fable.
My self was dull, and ^aint to sloth inclinde
Pleasure, and case had mollifide my mind.
A fair maids care expeld this sluggishnesse,
And to her tents wild me my self address.
Since may thou se me watch and night wars move,
He that will not grow slothful let him love.
ELEGIA. 10.
Ad p^ellam, ne pro amore praemia poseat.
SVch as the cause was of two husbands war, ^
Whom Trojan ships fetched from^ Europa far.
Such as was Leda, whom the God deluded
In snow-white plumes of a false swanne included.
Such as Aminione through the dry fields strayed.
When on her head a water pitcher laid.
Such were thou, and I feared the Bull and Eagle,
And what ere love made Io^e should thee inu^agle^
Now all fear with my minds hot love abates,
No more this beauty mine eyes captiuates.
Ask'st why I change? because thou crau'st reward;
This cause has thee from pleasing me debard.
While thou were plain I lou'dthy mind and fa^e:
Now inward faults thy outward form disgrace.
Love is a naked boy, his years saunce stain,
And has no clothes, but open does remain.
Will you for gain have Cupid sell himself?
He has no bosom, where to hide base pelf.
Love and Loves son are with firce arms to oddes^
To serve for pay beseemes not wanton gods,
The whore stands to be bought for each man's money,
And seeks vild wealth by selling of her Cony.
Yet greedy bawdes command she curses still,
And does constraind, what you do of good will.
Take from irrational beasts a president,
It Is shame their wits should be more excelent.
The Mare asks not the horse, the cow the bull,
Nor the mild ewe gifts from the ram does pull.
Only a woman gets spoil from a man
Farms out her self on nights for what she can.
And lets what both delight, what both desire,
Making her joy according to her hire.
The sport being such, as both alike sweet try it
Why should one sell it and the other buy it.
Why should I loose, and thou gain by the pleasure,
Which man and woman reap in equal measure?
Knights of the post of periuries make sail
The unjust Judge for bribes becomes a stale.
It Is shame sold tongues the guilty should defend
Or great wealth from a judgment seat ascend.
It Is shame to grow rich by bed merchandise,
Or prostitute thy beauty for bad prize.
Thanks worthily are due for things unbought,
For beds ill hyr'd we are indebted naught.
The hirer pays al, his rent discharged
From further duty he rests then enlarged
Fair Dames forbear rewards for nights to crave
Ill gotten goods good end will never have.
The Sabine gauntlets were too dearly wunne,
That unto death did press the holy Nun.
The son slew her, that forth to meet him went,
And a rich neck-lace caused that punishment,
Yet think no scorn to ask a wealthy churl,
He wants no gifts into thy lap to hurl.
Take clustred grapes from an ore-laden vine,
Many bounteous love Alcinous fruit resign.
Let poor men show their service; faith and care
All for their Mistress, what they have, prepare,
In verse to prepare kind Wenches it is my part,
And whom I like eternize by mine art.
Garments do wear, jewels and gold do wast,
The fame that verse gives does for ever last.
To give I love, but to be ask't disdain,
Leave asking, and I Will give what I refrain.
ELEGIA. 11.
Napen alloquitur, vt paratas tabellas ad Cori^nam perferat.
IN skillful gathering ruffled hairs in order,
Nape freeborn whose cunning has no border,
Thy service for nights scapes is known commodious,
And to give sighs dull wit is odious*
Corinna clips me often by thy persuasion,
Never to harm me made thy faith ^uasion.
Receive these lines, them to my Mistress carry,
Be sedulous, let no stay cause thee tarry*
Nor flint, nor iron, are in thy soft breast,
But pure simplicity in thee does rest.
And it is supposed loves bow has wounded thee,
Defend the ensigns of thy war in me.
If what I do, she asks, say hope for night,
The rest my hand does in my letters write.
Time passes while I speak, give her my writ^
But see that forthwith she peruseth it.
I charge thee mark her eyes and front in reading
By speechless looks we guess at things succeeding.
Straight being read, will her to write much back,
I hate fair Paper should writ matter lack.
Let her make verses, and some blotted letter,
On the last edge to stay mine eyes the better.
What need she try her hand to hold the quill
Let this word, come, alone the tables fill.
Then with triumphant laurel will I grace them*
And in the midst of Venus temple place them.
Subscribing that to her I consecrate,
My faithful tables being vile maple late.
ELEGIA. 12.
Tabelias quas miscrat exeoratur quod amica noctem negabat.
BEwa^le my chance the sad book is returned,
This day denial has my sport adiourned.
Presages are not vain, when she departed,
Nape by stumbling on the thre-shold started.
Going out again pass forth the door most wisely,
And som-what higher bear thy foot precisely.
Hence luck-lesse tables, funeral wood be flying,
And thou the wax stufe full with notes denying.
Which I think gathered from cold hemlocks flower,
Wherein bad honey Corsick Bees did power.
Yet as if mixed with red lead thou were ruddy,
That color rightly did appear so bloody.
As evil wood thrown in the highways lie*
Be bro^ke with wheels of chariots passing by.
And him that hewed you out for needful uses,
I Will prove had hands impure with all abuses.
Poor wretches on the tree themselves did strangle
There sat the hangman for men's necks to angle.
To hoarse scrich-owles foul shado^ves it allows
Vultures and furies nestled in the boughs.
To these my love I foolishly committed
And then with sweet words to my Mistrisse fitted^
More fitly had thy wrangling bonds contained
From barbarous lips of some Atturny strained.
Among day-bookes and bills they had layne better,
In which the Marchat wayles his banquerout debtor,
Your name approoues you made for such like things
The number two no good divining bringes.
Angry, I pray that rotten age you wrackes
And sluttish white-mould ouergrow the wax.
ELEGIA. 13.
Ad Aurorem ne properet.
NOw ore the sea from her old Love comes she
That draws the day from heavens cold axeltr^^.
Aurora whither ^^dest thou? down again
And birds from Memnon yearly shall be slain.
Now in her tender arms I sweetly bide
If ever, now well lies she by my fide.
The air is cold, and sleep is sweetest now
And birds send forth shrill notes from every bough,
Whether run'st thou, that men, and women love not
Hold in thy rosy horses that they move not?
Fire thou rise, stars teach seamen where to sail
But when thou come they of their courses fail.
Poor trauailers though tired, rise at thy sight,
And soldiers make them ready to the fight.
The painful hind by thee to field is sent,
Slow Oxen early in the yoke are pent.
Thou cousenst boys of sleep, and do betray them
To Pedants that with cruel lashes pay them.
Thou make the surety to the Lawyer run,
That with one word has night himself undone.
The Lawyer and the Client hate thy view,
Both whom thou raisest up to toil anew.
By thy means women of their rest are bard,
Thou setst their laboring hands to spin and card.
All could I bear, but that the wench should rise,
Who can endure save him with whom none lies?
How often wished I, night would not give thee place,
Nor morning stars shun thy vprising face.
How often that either wind would break thy coach,
Or steeds might fall forced with thick clouds approach.
Whether go thou hateful Nymph? Memnon the el^e
Received his cole-blacke color from thy self.
Say that thy love with Caephalus were not known,
Then think thou thy loose life is not shown.
Would Tithon might but talk of thee a while.
Not one in heaven should be more base and vile,
Thou leauest his bed, because he is fain^ through age,
And early mountest thy hateful carriage,
But heldst thou in thine arms some Caephalus,
Then would thou cry, stay night and run not thus.
Do punish me, because years make him waine,
I did not bid thee wed an aged swain?
The Moon sleeps with Endy^^ton every day,
Thou art as fair as she, then kiss and play.
Jove that thou should not have but wait his leisure,
Made two nights one to finish up his pleasure.
I chide no more, she blushed and therefore heard me,
Yet lingered not the day, but morning scard me.
ELEGIA. 14.
Puellam consolatur cuiprae nimia cura comae desiderant.
Leave coloring thy tresses I did cry,
Now have thou left no hairs at all to die.
But what had bin more fair had they bin kept?
Beyond thy robes thy dangling lackes had swept.
Feard'st thou to dress them being fine and thin,
Like to the silk the curious Seres spinne.
Or thrids which spiders slender foore draws out,
Fastening her light web some old beam about.
Not black, nor golden were they to our view,
Yet although either mixed of eithers hue.
Such as in hilly Idas watery plains,
The Cedar tall spoiled of his bark retains.
And they were apt to curle an hundred ways,
And did to thee no cause of dolor raise.
Nor has the needle, or the combs teeth re^t them,
The maid that kembd them ever safely left them.
Often was she dressed before mine eyes, yet never,
Snatching the comb, to bea^e the wench out drive her.
Often in the morn her hairs not yet digested,
Half sleeping on a purple bed she rested.
Yet seemly like a Thracian Bacchinall,
That tired does rashly on the green grass fall.
When they were slender, and like downy moss,
They troubled hairs, alas, endured great loss.
How patiently hot irons they did take,
In crooked trannells crispy curles to make.
I cried, it is sin, it is sin, these hairs to burn,
They well become thee, then to spare them turn.
Far off be force, no fire to them may reach,
Thy very hairs will the hot bodkin ^each.
Lost are the goodly locks, which from their crown,
Phoebus and Bacchus wished were hanging down.
Such were they as Dia^a painted stands,
All naked holding in her waue-moist hands.
Why do thy ill kembd tresses loss lament?
Why in thy glass doest^looke being discontent?
Be not to see with wonted eyes inclinde,
To please thy self, thy self put out of mind.
No charmed herbs of any harlot skath'd thee,
No fai^hlesse witch in Thessale waters bathed thee.
No sickness harmed thee, far be that away,
No envious tongue wrought thy thick locks decay.
By thine own hand and fault thy hurt does grow,
Thou made thy head with compound poison flow.
Now Germany shall captive haire-tyers send thee,
And vanqnisht people curious dressings lend thee.
Which some admiring O thou often wilt blush,
And say he likes me for my borrowed bush.
Praising for me some unknown Guelder dame,
But I remember when it was my fame.
Alas she almost weeps, and her white cheeks,
Died red with shame to hide from shame she seeks.
She holds, and viewes her old locks in her lap,
Aye me rare gifts unworthy such a hap.
Cheer up thy self, thy loss thou may repair,
And be hereafter seen with native hair.
ELEGIA. 15.
Ad^inuidos, quod fama poetarum sit perennis.
Envy why carpest thou my time is spent so ill,
And termst my works fruits of an idle quill.
Or that unlike the line from whence I come,
Wars rusty honors are refused being young.
Nor that I study not the brawling Laws,
Nor set my voice to sale in every cause,
Thy scope is mortal, mine eternal fame,
That all the World may ever chaunt thy name.
Homer shall live while Tenedos stands and I Would,
Or into Sea swift Symois does slide.
Ascraus lives, while grapes with new wine swel,
Or men with crooked sickles corn down fell.
The World shall of Callamichus ever speak,
His Art excelled, although his wit was weak.
For ever lasts high Sophocles proud vain,
With Sun and Moon, Aratus shall remain.
While bondmen cheat, fathers hoord, bawds whorish,
And strumpets flatter, shall Menandor flourish.
Rude Ennius^ and Plautus full of wit,
Are both in fames eternal Legend writ.
What age of Varroes name shall not be told,
And Iasons Argos and the fleece of gold,
Lo^ty Luereticus shall live that hour,
That nature shall dissolve this earthly bower.
Aeneas war, and Tityrus shall be read,
While Rome of all the conquered world is head,
Till Cupids Bow and fiery Shafts be broken,
Thy verses sweet Tybullus shall be spoken.
And Gallus shall be known from East to West,
So shall Lycoris whom he loved best.
Therefore when Flint and Iron wear away,
Verse is immortal, and shall nere decay.
To Verse let Kings give place, and Kingly shows,
And banks ore which gold-bearing Tagus flows.
Let base conceited wits admire vilde things,
Fair Phoebus lead me to the Muses springs.
About my head be quiuering mi^tle wound,
And in sad Lovers heads let me be found.
The Living, not the Dead can cauy bite,
For after Death all men receive their right.
Then though Death rakes my bones in funeral fire,
I Will live, and as he pulls me down mount higher.
The same by B. I.
Envy, why twitst thou me, my time's spent ill?
And call'st my verse fruits of an idle quil?
Or that (unlike the line from whence I sprung)
Wars dusty honors I pursue not young?
Or that I study not the tedious Laws;
And prostitute my voice in every cause?
Thy scope is mortal; mine eternal Fame,
Which through the world shall ever chaunt my name.
Homer will live, whilst Tenedos stands, and I Would,
Or to the Sea, fleet Symois does slide:
And so shall Hesiod too, while vines do bear,
Or crooked sickles crop the ripened care,
Call^^maehus* though in Invention low,
Shall still be sung, since he in Art does flow.
No loss shall come to Sophocles proud vain,
With Sun and Moon Aratus shall remain.
Whilst Slaves be false, Fathers hard, and Ba^ds be w^orish,
Whilst Harlots flatter, shall Menander flourish.
En^ius, though rude, and Accius high-reard strain,
A fresh applause in every age shall gain,
Of Varro's name, what ear shall not be told?
Of Iasons Argo? and the Fleece of gold?
Then, shall Lucretius lofty numbers die,
When Earth, and Seas in fire and flames shall fry.
Titirus, Tillage, Aeney shall be read,
Whilst Rome of all the conquered world is head,
Till Cupids fires be out, and his bow broken,
Thy verses (neat Tibullus) shall be spoken.
Our Gallus shall be known from East to west,
So shall Licoris, whom he now loves best.
The suffering Plough-share or the flint may wear,
But heavenly Poesy no death can fear.
Kings shall give place to it, and Kingly shows,
The banks ore which gold-beating Tagus flows.
Kneel hindes to trash: me let bright Phoebus swell,
With cups full flowing from the Muses well.
The frost-drad myrtle shall impale my head,
And of sad lovers I Will be often read.
Envy the living, not the dead does bite,
for after death all men receive their right.
Then when this body falls in funeral fire,
My name shall live, and my best part aspire.
P. Ouidij Nasonis Amorum Liber Secundus.
ELEGIA. 1.
Quod pro gigantomachia amores scriber^ sit coactus.
I Ovid Poet of thy wantonness,
Borne at Peligny to write more address.
So Cupid wills, far hence be the severe,
You are unapt my looser lines to hear.
Let Maids whom hot desire to husbands lead,
And rude boys touched with unknown love me read.
That some youth hurt as I am with loves bow,
His own flames best acquainted signs may know.
And long admiting say by what means learned,
Has this same Poet my ^a^ chance discerned?
I durst the great celestial battles tell,
Hundred-hand Gyges, and had done it well.
With earths revenge and how Olimpus top,
High Ossa bore mount Peli^^ up to proppe,
Jove and Jove's thunderbolts I had in hand,
Which for his heaven fell on the Giants band.
My wench ^^ef-dore shut, loves affares I left,
Even Jove himself out off my wit was rest.
Pardon me Jove, thy weapons aid me naught,
Her shut gates greater lightning then thine brought.
Toys, and light Elegies my darts I took,
Quickly soft words hard doors wide open struck*
Verses reduce the horned bloody moon,
And call the suns white horses black at noone.
Snakes leap by verse from caves of broken mountains,
And turned streams run backe-ward to their fountains.
Verses open doors, and locks put in the poast
Although of Oak, to yield to verses boast;
What helps it me of fierce Achill to sing?
What good to me will either Ajax bring?
Or he who war'd and wandered twenty year?
Or woeful Hector whom wild iades did tear?
But when I praise a pretty wenches face
She in requital does me often embrace.
A great reward: Heroes oh famous names
Farewell, your favor naught my mind inflames.
Wenches apply your fair looks to my verse,
Which golden love does unto me rehearse.
ELEGIA. 2.
Ad Bagoum, vt custodiam puellae sibi commissa Laxiorem habeat.
BAgous whose care does thy Mistress bridle,
While I speak some few, yet fit words be idle.
I saw the Damsel walking yesterday
There where the porch does Danaus fact display:
She pleased me soon, I sent, and did her woo,
Her trembling hand writ back she might not do.
And asking why, this answer she redoubied
Because they care too much thy mistress troubled.
Keeper if thou be wise cease hate to cherish,
Believe me, whom we fear, we wish to perish
Nor is her husband wife, that needs defense
When vn-protested there is no expense
But furiously he follow his loves fire,
And think her chaste whom many do desire:
Stolen liberty she may be thee obtain
Which giving her, she may give thee again:
Will thou her fault learn, she may make thee tremble
Fear to be guilty, then thou may dissemble.
Think when she reads, her mother letters sent her
Let him go forth known, that unknown did enter.
Let him go see her though she do not languish
And then report her sick and full of anguish.
If long she stays to think the time more short
Lay down thy forehead in thy lap to s^ort.
Enquire not what with Isis may be done
Nor fear least she to the theater's r^^^e.
Knowing her scapes thine honor shall increase,
And what less labor then to hold thy peace?
Let him please, haunt thy house, be kindly used
Enjoy the wench, let all else be refused.
Vain canses feign of him, the true to hide
And what she likes, let both hold ratifide.
When most her husband bends the brows and frowns,
His ^awning wench with her desire he crowns.
But yet sometimes to chide thee let her fall
Counterfeit tears: and thee lewd hangman call.
Object thou then what she may well excuse.
To stain all faith in truth, by false crimes use.
Of wealth and honor so shall grow thy heap,
Do this and soon thou shall thy freedom reap.
On tell-tales necks thou see the linke-kn^t chains,
The filthy prison ^aithlesse breasts restraynes.
Water in waters, and fruit-flying touch
Tantal^s feekes, his long tongues gathe is such.
While Iunoes watchman I^ too much ^yde,
Him timelesse death took, she was deiside
I saw ones legs with fetters black and blew,
By whom the husband his wives incest knew,
More he deserved, to both great harm he framed
The man did grieve, the woman was defamed.
Trust me all husbands for such faults are sad
Nor make they any man that hear them glad.
If he loves not, deaf ears thou do importune,
Or if he loves; thy tale breeds his misfortune.
Nor is it easily proved though manifest,
She safe by favor of her judge does rest.
Though himself see; heel credit her denial
Condemn his eyes, and say there is no trial.
Spying his mistress tears, he will lament
And say this blabbe shall suffer punishment.
Why fighst against odds? to thee being cast do hap
Sharp stripes, she sits in the judges lap.
To meet for poison or vilde facts we crave not
My hands an vnsheath'd shining weapon have not.
We seek that through thee safely love we may,
What can be easier then the thing we pray.
ELEGIA. 3.
Ad Eunuchum seruantem dominam.
AYe me an Eunuch keeps my mistress chaste,
That cannot Venus mutual pleasure taste.
Who first deprived young boys of their best part,
With self same wounds he gave, he ought to smart.
To kind requests thou would more gentle prove,
If ever wench had made lukewarm thy love:
Thou were not b^^ne to ride, or arms to bear,
Thy hands agree not with the warlike spear.
Men handle those, all manly hopes ref^g^ue,
Thy mistrisse enseignes must be likewise thine.
Please her, her hate makes others thee abhor.
If she discardes thee, what use seru'st thou for?
Good form there is, years apt to play together,
Unmeet is beauty without use to wither.
She may decei^e thee, though thou her protect,
What two determine never wants effect.
Our prayers move thee to assist our drift,
While thou have time yet to bestow that gift.
ELEGIA. 4.
Quod amet^ muli^res, cuiuscunque formae sint.
I Mean not to defend the scapes of any,
Or justify my vices being many.
For I confess, if that might merit, fauout,
Here I display my lewd and loose behavior.
I loathe, yet after that I loathe, I run,
Oh how the burden irkes, that we should shun.
I cannot rule my self, but where love please,
Am driven like a ship upon rough seas.
No one face likes me best, all faces move,
A hundred reasons make me ever love.
If any eye me with a modest look,
I blush, and by that blushfull glance am took.
And she that's coy I like for being no clown,
Me thinks she would be nimble when she is down,
Though her sour looks a Sabines brow resemble,
I think she will do, but deeply can dissemble.
If she be learned then for her skill I crave her.
If not, because she is simple I would have her.
Before Callimachus one preferrs me far,
Seeing she likes my books why should we jar?
Another railes at me and that I write
Yet would I lie with her if that I might.
Trips she, it likes me well, plods she, what than?
She will be nimbler, lying with a man.
And when one sweetly sings, then strait I long
To quauer on her lips even in her song.
Or if one touch the Lute with art and cunning
Who would not love those hands for their swift running?
And her I like that with a majesty
Folds up her arms and makes low curtesy.
To leave my self, that am in tocue with all
Some one of these might make the chastest fall.
If she be tall, she is like an Amazan,
And therefore fills the bed she lies, upon
If short, she lies the rounder to say troth;
Both short and long please me, for I: love both.
I think what one vndeckt would be, being dressed
Is she attired, then show her graces best.
A white wench thralls me, so does golden yellow
And nut-browne girls in doing have no fellow.
If her white neck be shadowed with brown hair,
Why so was Laedas, yet was Laeda fair.
Amber trest is she, then on the morn think I
My love alludes to every history:
A young wench pleases, and an old is good
This for her ^ookes and that for her woman-hood.
Nay what is she that any Roman loves
But my ambitious ranging mind approues.
ELEGIA. 5.
Ad amicam corruptam.
NO love is so dear (quiuer'd Cupid fly)
That my chief with should be so often to die.
Minding my fault, with death I wish to reuill,
Alas a wench is a perpetual evil.
No intercepted lines thy deeds display,
No gifts given secretly thy crime bewray.
O would my proofs as vain might be withstood,
Aye me poor soul why is my cause so good.
He Is happy, that his love dares boldly credit,
To whom his wench can say, I never did it.
He Is cruel, and too much his grief does favor,
That seeks the conquest by her loose behavior.
Poor wench I saw when thou did think I slumbred.
Not drunk, your faults on the spilt wine I numbered.
I saw your nodding eyebrows much to speak,
Even from your cheeks, part of a voice did break.
Not silent were thine eyes, the board with wine,
Was scribled, and thy fingers writ a line.
I knew your speech (what do not lovers see?)
And words that seemed for certain marks to be.
Now many guests were gone, the feast being done,
The youthful sort to diverse pastimes run.
I saw you then unlawful kisses join,
(Such with my tongue it likes me to purloyne)
None such the sister gives her brother grave,
But such kind wenches let their lovers have.
Phoebus gave not Diana such, it is thought,
But Venus often to her Mars such brought.
What do, I cried; transportst thou any delight?
My lordly hands i will throw upon my right.
Such bliss is only common to us two,
In this sweet good, why has a third to do?
This, and what grief enforced me say I said,
A scarlet blush her guilty face arrayed.
Even such as by Aurora has the sky,
Or maids that their betrothed husbands spy.
Such as a rose mixed with a lilly breeds,
Or when the Moon travails with charmed steedes.
Or such, as least long years should rurne the die,
Arachne staynes Assyrian iuory.
To these, or some of these like was her color,
By chance her beauty never shined fuller.
She viewed the earth: the earth to view, be^eem'd her,
She looked sad* sad, comely I esteemed her.
Even kembed as they were, her locks to rend,
And scratch her fair soft checkes I did intend.
Seeing her face, mine vpreard arms descended,
With her own armor was my wench defended.
I that ere-while was fierce, now humbly sue,
Least with worse kisses she should me indue.
She laughed, and kissed so sweetly as might make
Wrath-kindled Jove away his thunder shake.
I grieve least others should such good perceive,
And wish hereby them all unknown to leave.
Also much better were they then I tell,
And ever seemed as some new sweet befell.
^Tis ill they pleased so much, for in my lips,
Lay her whole tongue hid, mine in hers she dips.
This grieves me not, no joined kisses spent,
Bewail I only, though I them lament.
No where can they be taught but in the bed,
I know no master of so great hire sped.
ELEGIA. 6.
In mortem psittaci.
THE parrat from East- India to me sent,
Is dead, al-fowles her exequies frequent.
Go goodly birds, striking your breasts bewail,
And with rough claws your tender che^kes assail.
For woeful hairs let piece-torne plumes abound,
For long shrild trumpets let your notes resound.
Why Phylomele do T^reus lewdness mourn?
All wasting years have that complaint not worn?
Thy tunes let this rare birds sad funeral borrow,
It is as great, but ancient cause of sorrow.
All you whose pineons in the clear air sore,
But most thou friendly turtle-doue deplore.
Full concord all your lives was you betwixt,
And to the end your constant faith stood fixed.
What Pylades did to Orestes prove,
Such to the parrat was the turtle-doue.
But what auailde this faith? her rarest hew?
Or voice that how to change the wild notes knew?
What helps it thou were given to please my wench,
Birds haples glory, death thy life does quench.
Thou with thy quilles might make green Emeralds dark,
And pass our scarlet of red saffrons mark.
No such voyce-feigning bird was on the ground,
Thou spokest thy words so well with stammering sound.
Envy has rapt thee, no fierce wars thou mouedst,
Vain babbling speech, and pleasant peace thou louedst.
Behold how quails among their battles live,
Which do perchance old age unto them give.
A little filled thee, and for love of talk,
Thy mouth to taste of many meats did balke.
Nuts were thy food, and Poppie caused thee sleep,
Pure waters moisture thirst away did keep.
The ravenous vulture lives, the Puttock houers
Around the air, the Gadesse rain discouers.
And Crows suruiues armes-bearing Pallas hate,
Whose life nine ages scarce bring out of date.
Dead is that speaking image of man's voice,
The parrat give me, the far words best choice.
The greedy spirits take the best things first,
Supplying their void places with the worst.
Thersites: did Protesilaus survive;
And Hector dyed his brothers yet alive.
My wenches vows for thee what should I show,
Which stormy South-windes into sea did blow?
The seventh day came, none following might thou see,
And the fates distaffe empty stood to thee:
Yet words in thy benumbed pallat rung,
Farewell Corinna cried thy dying tongue.
Elisium has a wood of holme trees black,
Whose earth does not perpetual greene-grasse lack,
There good birds rest (if we believe things hidden)
Whence unclean fowls are said to be forbidden.
There harmless Swans feed all abroad the river,
There ^^ues the Phaenix one alone bird ever.
There Iunoes bird displayes his gorgious feather:
And loving Doves kiss egerly together.
The Parrat into wood received with these,
Turns all the goodly birds to what she please,
A grave her bones hides, on her corpse great grave,
The little stones these little verses have.
This ^ombe approues, I pleased my mistress well,
My mouth in speaking did all birds excel.
ELEGIA. 7.
Amicae se purgat, quod ancillam non^ amet.
Do me of new crimes always guilty frame?
To overcome, so often to fight I shame,
If on the Marble Theater I look,
One among many is to grieve thee took.
If some fair wench me secretly behold,
Thou arguest she does secret marks unfold
If I praise any, thy poor hairs thou tearest,
If blame, dissembling of my fault thou fear.
If I look well, thou think thou do not move,
If ill, thou say I dye for others love.
Would I were culpable of some offense,
They that deserve pain, bear't with patience.
Now rash accusing, and thy vain belief,
Forbid thine anger to procure my grief.
Lo how the miserable great ^ared Ass,
Duld with much beating slowly forth does pass.
Behold Cypassis wont to dress thy head,
Is charged to violate her mistress bed.
The Gods from this sin rid me of suspicion,
To like a base wench of despisd condition.
With Venus game who will a servant grace?
Or any back made rough with stripes embrace?
Add she was diligent thy locks to braide,
And for her skill to thee a grateful maid*
Should I solicit her that is so just:
To take repulse, and cause her show my lust?
I swear by Venus, and the wingd boys bow,
My self unguilty of this crime I know.
ELEGIA. 8.
Ad Cypassim ancillam Corinna.
CYpassis that a thousand ways trimst hair,
Worthy to keembe none but a Goddess fair.
Our pleasant scapes show thee no clown to be,
Apt to thy mistrisse, but more apt to me.
Who that our bodies were comprest bewrayde?
Whence knows Corinna that with thee I playde?
Yet blushed I not, nor used I any saying,
That might be urged to witness our false playing.
What if a man with bond-women offend,
To prove him foolish did I ere contend?
Achilles burnt with face of captive Briseis,
Great Agamemnon loved his servant Chriseis.
Greater then these my self I not esteem:
What graced Kings, in me no shame I deem.
But when on thee her angry eyes did rush,
In both my cheeks she did perceive thee blush.
But being present, might that work the best,
By Venus Deity how did I protest.
Thou Goddess do command a warm South-blast,
My self oaths in Carpathian seas to cast.
For which good turn my sweet reward repay,
Let me lie with thee brown Cypasse to day.
Ungrate why feign'st new fears? and do refuse;
Well may thou one thing for thy Mistrisse use.
If thou deni'st fool, I Will our deeds express,
And as a traitor mine own fault confess.
Telling thy mistress, where I was with thee,
How often, and by what means we did agree.
ELEGIA. 9.
Ad Cupidinem.
O Cupid that do never cease my smart,
O boy that lie so slothful in my heart.
Why me that always was thy soldier found,
Do harm, and in thy tents why do me wound?
Why burns thy brand, why strikes thy bow thy friends?
More glory by thy vanquished foes ascends.
Did not Pelides whom his Spear did grieve,
Being requirde, with speedy help relieve?
Hunters leave taken beasts, pursue the chase,
And then things found do ever further pace.
We people wholly given thee, feel thine arms,
Thy dull hand stays thy striving enemies harms.
Do joy to have thy hooked Arrows shaked,
In naked bones? love has my bones left naked.
So many men and maidens without love,
Hence with great laud thou may a triumph move.
Rome if her strength the huge world had not filled,
With strawie cabins now her courts should build.
The weary soldier has the conquered fields,
His sword laid by, safe, though rude places yields.
The Dock in harbors ships drawn, from the floods,
Horse freed from service range abroad the woods.
And time it was for me to live in quiet,
That have so often served pretty wenches diet.
Yet should I curse a God, if he but said,
Live without love, so sweet ill is a maid.
For when my loathing it of heat depriues me,
I know not whether my minds whirlwind drives me.
Even as a headstrong courser bears away,
His rider vainly striving him to stay.
Or as a sudden gaile thrusts into sea,
The heauen-touching bark now near the lea.
So wavering Cupid brings me back amain,
And purple love resumes his darts again.
Strike boy, I offer thee my naked breast,
Here thou have strength, here thy right hand does rest.
Here of themselves thy shafts come, as if shot;
Better then I their quiver knows them not:
Hapless is he that all the night lies quiet
And slumbring, thinks himself much blessed by it.
Fool, what is sleep but image of cold death,
Long shall thou rest when Fates expire thy breath.
But me let crafty damsells words deceive,
Great joys by hope I insy shall conceive,
Now let her flatter me, now chide me hard,
Let her enjoy me often, often be debard.
Cupid by thee, Mars in great doubt does trample,
And thy step-father fights by thy example.
Light art thou, and more windy then thy wings,
Joys with uncertain faith thou take and bringes:
Yet love, if thou with thy fair mother hear,
Within my breast no desert empire bear;
Subdue the wandering wenches to thy reign,
So of both people shall thou homage gain.
ELEGIA. 10.
Ad Graecinum quod eodem tempore duas amet.
GRaecinus (well I wot) thou toldst me once,
I could not be in love with two at once,
By thee deceived, by thee surpised am I
For now I love two women equally.
Both are welfauor'd, both in rich array,
Which is the louelyest it is hard to say.
This seems the fairest, so does that to me,
And this does please me most, and so does she.
Even as a Boat, tossed by contrary wind,
So with this love, and that, wauers my mind.
Venus, why doublest thou my endless smart?
Was not one wench enough to grieve my heart?
Why addst thou stars to heaven, leaves to green woods,
And to the vast deep sea fresh water stoods?
Yet this is better far then lie alone,
Let such as be mine enemies have none.
Yea let my foes sleep in an empty bed,
And in the midst their bodies largely spread.
But may soft love roufe up my drowise eyes,
And from my mistress bosom let me rise.
Let one wench cloy me with sweet loves delight
If one can door, if not, two every night.
Though I am slender, I have store of pith,
Nor want I strength, but weight to press her with
Pleasure adds fuel to my lust-full fire,
I pay them horn with that they most desire.
Often have I spent the night in wa^^^^esse,
And in the morn been lively (...) the less.
(...) happy who loves ^^^tuall skirmish lays*
And to the Gods for that death Ovid prays.
Let soldiers chase their enemies amain,
And with their blood eternal honor gain.
Let Merchants seek wealth with perjured lips;
And being wrackt carouse the sea tired by their ships.
But when I dye, would I might droupe with doing,
And in the midst thereof set my soul going:
That at my funerals some may weeping cry,
Even as he led his life, so did he dye.
ELEGIA. 11.
Ad amicam nauigantem.
THe lofty Pine from high mount Pelion raught
Ill ways by rough se as wodring waves first taught
Which rashly t'wixt the sharp rocks in the deep,
Carried the famous golden-^leeced sheep.
O would that no Oars might in seas have suncke*
The Argos wrackt had deadly waters drunk.
Lo country Gods, and know bed to forsake
Cortnna means, and dangerous ways to take.
For thee the East and West winds make me pale.
With Icy Boreas, and the Southern gale.
Thou shall admire no woods or Cities there,
The unjust seas all bluish do appear.
The Ocean has no painted stones or shelles,
The sucking shore with their abundance swells.
Maids on the shore, with marble white feet tread,
So far it is safe, but to go farther, dread.
Let others tell how winds fierce battles wage,
How Scyllaes and Caribdis waters rage.
And with what rock the feared Cerannia threat,
In what gulf either Syrtes have their seat.
Let others tell this, and what each one speaks
Believe, no tempest the believer wreakes.
Too late you look back, when with anchor weighd,
The crooked Barque has her swift sails displayed.
The careful ship-man now fears angry gufts,
And with the waters sees death near him thrufts,
But if that Triton toss the troubled flood,
In all thy face will be no crimson blood.
Then will thou Laedas noble twinne-starrs pray,
And he is happy whom the earth holds, say,
It is more safe to sleep, to read a book,
The Thracian Harp with cunning to have struck,
But if my words with winged storms hence slip,
Yet Galatea favor thou her ship.
The loss of such a wench much blame will gather,
Both to the Sea-nimphs and the Sea-nimphs father.
Go minding to return with prosperous wind,
Whose blast may hither strongly be inclinde,
Let Ner^^ bend the waves unto this shore,
Hither the winds blow, here the springtide rore,
Request mild Zepheres help for thy avail,
And with thy hand assist thy swelling sail,
I from the shore thy known ship first will see,
And say it brings her that preserves me;
I Will clip and kiss thee with all contentation,
For thy return shall fall the vowed oblatio*
And in the form of beds we will strew soft sand,
Each little hill shall for a table stand:
There wine being filled, thou many things shall tell,
How almost wrackt thy ship in maine seas fell.
And hasting to me, neither darkesome night,
Nor violent South winds did thee ought affright.
I Will think all true, though it be feigned matter,
Mine own desires why should my self not flatter?
Let the bright day star cause in heaven this day be,
To bring that happy time so soon as may be.
ELEGIA. 12.
Exultat, quod amica potitus sit.
ABout my temples go triumphant bays,
Conquered Corinna in my bosom lays.
She whom her husband, guard, and gate, as foes,
Least Art should win her, firmly did enclose:
That victory does chiefly triumph merit,
Which without bloodshed does the pray inherit.
No little ditched towns, no lowely walls,
But to my share a captive damfell falls.
When Troy by ten years battle tumbled down,
With the Acrides many gainde renown:
But I no partner of my glory brook,
Nor can another say his help I took.
I guide and soldier, won the field and wear her,
I was both horseman, footman, standard bearer.
Nor in my act has fortune mingled chance:
O care-got triumph hither wards advance.
Nor is my wars cause new; but for a Queen
Europe, and (...) in firm, peace had been.
The Lapithes, and the Centautes for a woman,
To cruel arms their drunken selves did summon.
A woman for^^ (...) the Troyanes new to enter
Wars, (...) La^th^s, in thy king somes center:
A woman against late-built Rome did send,
The Sabine Fathers, who sharp wars intend,
I saw how Bulls for a white Heifer strive,
She looking on them did more courage give.
And me with many, but yet me without murder,
Cupid commands to move his ensigns further.
ELEGIA. 13.
Ad Isidem, vt parientem Corinnam iuuet.
While rashly her wombes burden she casts out,
Weary Corinna has her life in doubt.
She secretly with me such harm attempted,
Angry I was, but fear my wrath exempted.
But sheconceiu'd of me, or I am sure
I often have done, what might as much procure.
Thou that frequents Canopus pleasant fields,
Memphis, and Pharos that sweet date trees yields.
And where swift Nile in his large channel slipping,
By seven huge mouths into the sea is slipping.
By feared Annubis visage I thee pray,
So in thy Temples shall Osiris stay.
And the dull-snake about thy offerings creep,
And in thy pomp horned Apis with thee keep.
Turn thy looks hither, and in one spare twain,
Thou give my mistress life, she mine again.
She often has served thee upon certain ^^ies,
Where the French rout engirt themselves with ^^ies.
On laboring women thou do pi^ty take,
Whose bodies with their heavy burden sake,
Ny wench Lucina, li^^creat thee favor,
Worthy she is, thou should in mercy save her.
In wives, with incest ^l thine Altars greet,
My self will bring vowed gifts before thy feet.
Subscribing Naso with Corinna saved,
Do but deserve gifts with this title grau'd.
But if in so great fear I may aduize thee,
To have this skirmish fought let it suffice thee.
ELEGIA. 14.
In amicam, quod abortivum ipsa fecerit.
What helps it Woman to be free from war?
Nor being armed fierce troops to follow far?
If without battle selfe-wrought wounds annoy them,
And their own privy weapon'd hands destroy them.
Who unborn infants first to flay invented,
Deserved thereby with death to be tormented.
Because thy belly should rough wrinckles lack,
Will thou thy wombe-inclosed offspring wrack?
Had ancient Mothers this vile custom cherisht,
All humane kind by their default had perished.
On stones, our stocks original should be hurld,
Again by some in this unpeopled world.
Who should have Priams wealthy substance won,
If watery Thetis had her child fordone?
In swelling womb her twins had (...) kilde?
He had not been that conquering Rome did build.
Had Venus spoilde her bellies Troyane fruit,
The earth of Caesar's had been destitute.
Thou also that were borne fair, had decayed,
If such a work thy mother had assayed.
My self that better dye with loving may,
Had seen, my mother killing me, to day.
Why take increasing grapes from Vine-trees full?
With cruel hand why do green Apples pull?
Fruits ripe will fall, let springing things increase,
Life is no ight price of a small surcease.
Why with hid irons are your bowels torn?
And why dire poison give you babes unborn?
At Cholcis stained with childrens blood men rail,
And mother-murtherd^ Itis, thee bewail.
Both unkind parents but for causes sad,
Their wedlocks pledges veng'd their husbands bad.
What Tereus, what Ias^^ you prouokes,
To plague your bodies with such harmefull strokes?
Armenian Tigers never did so ill,
Not dares the Lyone ^^^her young whelps kill.
But tender Damsels do it, though with pain,
Often dies she that her paunch-wrapt child has slain.
She dies, and with loose hairs, to grave is sent,
And who ere^see her, worthily lament.
But in the air let these words come to naught,
And my presages of no weight be thought.
Forgive her gracious Gods this one delict,
And one the next fau^^ punishment inflict.
ELEGIA. 15.
Ad annulum, quem dono amicae d^dit.
THou ring that shall my fair girls finger bind,
Wherein is seen the giuers loving mind:
Be welcome to her, gladly let her take thee,
And her small joints incireling round ho^^e make thee.
Fit her so well, as she is fit for me,
And of just compass for her knuckles be.
Bestring in my mistress arms shall lie,
My self, poor wretch mine own gifts now envy.
O would that suddenly into my gift,
I could my self by secret Magic shift.
Then would I wish thee touch my mistress pappe,
And hide thy left hand underneath her lap.
I would get off though straight, and sticking fast,
And in her bosom strangely fall at last.
Then I, that I may seal her privy leaves,
Least to the wax the hold-fast dry gemme cleaues.
Would first my beauteous wenches moist lips touch,
Only I Will sign naught, that may grieve me much.
I would not out, might I in one place hit,
But in less compass her small fingers knit,
My life, that I will shame thee never fear,
Or by a load thou should refuse to bear.
Wear me, when warmest showers thy members wash,
And through the gemme let thy lost waters pash.
But seeing thee, I think my thing will swell,
And even the ring perform a man's part well.
Vain things why wish I? go small gift from hand,
Let her my faith with thee given, understand.
ELEGIA. 16.
Ad amicant, vt adrura su^veniat.
SVlmo, Pelignies third part me contains,
A small, but wholesome soil with watrie veins.
Although the Sun to riue the earth incline,
And the Icartan froward Dog-starre shine.
Pilignian fields which liquid rivers flow,
And on the soft ground fertile green grass grow.
With corn the earth abounds, with vines much more,
And some few pastures Pallas Olives bore.
And by the rising herbs, where clear springs slide,
A grassie turffe the moistened earth does hide.
But absent is my fire, lies i will tell none,
My heat is here, what moves my heat is gone.
Pollux and Castor, might I stand betwixt,
In heaven without thee would I not be fixed.
Upon the cold earth pensive let them lay,
That mean to travail some long irksome way.
Or else will maidens, yong-menns mates, to go
If they determine to persevere so.
Then on the rough Alps should I tread aloft,
My hard way with my mistress would seem soft,
With her I durst the Lybian Sirtes break through,
And raging Seas in boistrous South-winds plough.
No barking Dogs, that Syllaes intrailes bear,
Not thy gulfes crooked Malea, would I fear.
No flowing waves with drowned ships forth powered,
By cloyed Chartbdis, and again devoured.
But if stern Neptunes windy power prevail.
And waters force, force helping Gods to fail,
With thy white arms upon my shoulders feaze,
So sweet a burden I will bear with eaze.
The youth often swimming to his Hero kind,
Had then swum over, but the way was blind,
But without thee, although vine-planted ground
Conteines me, though the streams in fields surround.
Though Hindes in brooks the running waters bring,
And cool gales shake the tall trees leauy spring.
Healthful Peligny I esteem naught worth,
Nor do I like the country of my birth.
Sythia, Cilicia, Britain are as good,
And rocks dyed crimson with Prometheus blood.
Elmes love the Vines, the Vines with Elmes abide,
Why does my mistress from me often divide?
Thou swearest, division should not twixt us ^ise,
By me, and by my stars, thy ra^iant eyes.
Maids words more vain and light then falling leaves,
Which as it seems, hence wind and sea bereaues,
If any godly care of me thou have,
Add deeds unto thy promises at last.
And with swift Naggs drawing thy little Coach,
(Their reins let loose) right soon my house approach.
But when she comes, your swelling mounts sinck down*
And falling valleys be the smooth-wayes crown.
ELEGIA. 17.
Quod Corinnae soli sit seruturus.
TO serve a wench if any think it shame,
He being judge, I am conuinc'd of blame.
Let me be slandered, while my fire she hides,
That Paphos, and the floud-beate Cithera guides,
Would I had been my mistress gentle prey,
Since some fair one I should of force obey,
Beauty gives heart, Corinnas looks excel,
Aye me why is it known to her so well?
But by her glass disdainefull pride she learnes,
Nor she her self but first trimmed up discernes.
Not though thy face in all things make thee reign,
(O Face most cunning mine eyes to de tayne)
Thou ought therefore to scorn me for thy mate,
Small things with greater may be copulate,
Loue-snarde Calypso is supposde to pray,
A mortal nymphs refusing Lord to stay.
Who doubts, with Pelius, Thetis did consort,
Egeria with just Numa had good sport,
Venus with Vulcan, though smiths tools laid by,
With his stumpe-foote he halts ill-fauouredly.
This kind of verse is not alike, yet fit,
With shorter numbers the heroic sit.
And thou my light accept me how so ever,
Lay in the mid bed, there be my law giver.
My stay no crime, my flight no joy shall breed,
Nor of our love, to be ashamed we need.
For great reuenews I good verses have,
And many by me to get glory crave.
I know a wench reports her self Corinue,
What would not she give that fair name to win?
But sundry floods in one bank never go,
Eurotas cold, and poplar-bearing Po.
Nor in my books shall one but thou be writ,
Thou do alone give matter to my wit.
ELEGIA. 18.
Ad Macrum, quod de amoribus scribat.
TO tragic verse while thou Achilles train'st,
And new sworn soldiers maiden arms retain'st,
We Macer sit in Venus slothful shade,
And tender love has great things hateful made.
Often at length, my wench depart, I bid,
She in my lap sits still as erst she did.
I said it takes me, half to weeping framed,
Aye me she cries, to love, why art a^^^^ed?
Then wrethes about my neck her winding arms,
And thousand kisses gives, that work my harms:
I-yeeld, and back my wit from battles bring,
Domestic acts, and mine own wars to sing.
Yet tragedies, and scepters filled my lines,
But though I apt were for such high deseignes.
Love laughed at my cloak, and buskines painted,
And rule so soon with private hands acquainted.
My mistress deity also drew me from it,
And love triumphs over his busking Poet.
What lawful is, or we profess loves art.
(Alas my precepts turn my self to smart)
We write, or what Penelope sends Ulysses,
Or Phillis tears that her Demophoon misses.
What thanklesse Jason, Macareus, and Paris,
Phedra, and Hipolite may read, my care is,
And what poor Did, with her drawn sword sharp,
Does say, with her that loved the Aonian ha^p.
As soon as from strange lands Sabinus came,
And writings did from diverse places frame.
White-cheekt Penelope knew Ulysses sign,
The step-dame read Hyppolitus lustlesse line.
Aeneas to Elisa answer gives,
And Phillis has to read; if now she lives.
Iasons sad letter does Hipsipile greet,
Sappho her vowed harp lays at Phoebus feet.
Nor of thee Macer that resound'st forth arms,
Is golden love hid in Mars mid alarmes.
There Paris is, and Helens crimes record,
With Laedemeia mate to her dead Lord.
Unless I err to these thou more incline,
Then wars, and from thy tents wilt come to mine,
ELEGIA. 19.
Adriualem, cui vxor curae non erat.
Fool if to keep thy wife thou have no need,
Keep her from me, my more desire to breed,
We skorne things lawful, stolen sweetes we affect,
Cruel is he that loves whom none protect.
Let us both lovers hope, and fear a like,
And may repulse place for our wishes strike.
What should I do with fortune that n'ere fails me?
Nothing I love, that at all times auailes me.
Wily Corinna, saw this blemish in me,
And craftily knows by what means to win me.
Ah often, that her haole head aked, she lying,
Wild me, whose slow feet sought delay by flying,
Ah often, how much she might she feigned offense;
And doing wrong made show of innocence.
So having vexed she nourisht my warm fire,
And was again most apt to my desire.
To please me, what fair terms and sweet words have ^ she
Great Gods what kisses, and how many gave she?
Thou also that late tookest mine eyes away,
Often cousen me, often being wooed say nay.
And on thy thre-shold let me lie dispred,
Suffering much cold by hoary nights frost bred.
So shall my love continue many years,
This does delight me, this my courage cheares.
Fat love, and too much fulsome me annoyes,
Even as sweet meat a glutted stomach cloyes.
In brazen tower had not Danae dwelt,
A mothers joy by Jove she had not felt.
While Juno Io keeps, when horns she wore,
Jove liked her better then he did before.
Who couets lawful things takes leaves from woods,
And drinks stolen waters in surrow^ding floodes.
Her lover let her mock, that long will reign,
Aye me, let not my warnings cause my pain.
What ever haps, by suffrance harm is done,
What flies, I follow, what follows me I shun.
But thou of thy fair damsel too secure,
Begin to shut thy house at evening sure.
Search at the door who knocks ost in the dark,
In nights deep silence why the ban-dogges bark.
Whether the subtle maid ^^^es bringes and carries,
Why she alone in empty bed often tarries.
Let this care sometimes bite thee to the quick,
That to deceits it may me forward prick.
To steal sands from the shore he loves alife,
That can effect a foolish wittals wife.
Now I forewarne, unless to keep her stronger,
Thou do begin, she shall be mine no longer.
Long have I borne much, hoping time would beat thee,
To guard her well, that well I might entreat thee.
Thou suffrest what no husband can endure,
But of my love it will an end procure.
Shall I poor soul be never interdicted?
Nor never with nights sharp revenge afflicted?
In sleeping shall I fearelesse draw my breath?
Wilt nothing do, why I should wish thy death?
Can I but loath a husband grown a bawd,
By thy default thou do our joys defaude.
Some other seek that may in patience strive with thee,
To pleasure me, for-bid me to coriue with thee.
P. Ouidij Nasonis amorum, Liber tertius.
ELEGIA. 1.
Deliberatio poetae, vtrum elegos pergat scribere an potius tragoedias.
AN old wood, stands uncut of long years space,
It Is credible some good head haunts the place,
In midst thereof a stone-pau'd sacred spring,
Where round about small birds most sweetly sing.
Here while I walk hid close in shadie grove,
To find, what work, my muse might move, I strove,
Elegta came with hairs perfumed sweet,
And one, I think, was longer, of her feet.
A decent form, thin robe, a lovers look,
By her footes blemish greater grace she took,
Then with huge steps came violent Tragedy,
Stern was her front, her look on ground did he.
Her left hand held abroad a regal scepter,
The Lydian buskin fit places kept her.
And first he said, when will thy love be spent?
O Poet careless of thy argument.
Wyne-bibbing banquets tell thy naughtiness,
Each cross ways corner does as much express.
Often some points at the prophet passing by,
And this is he whom fierce love burns, they cry,
A laughing stock thou art to all the city,
While without shame thou sing'st thy lewdness ditty.
It Is time to move grave things in lofty style,
Long have thou loyterd, greater works compile.
The subject hides thy wit, men's acts resound,
This thou will say to be a worthy ground.
Thy muse has played what may mild girls content,
And by those numbers is thy first youth spent,
Now give the Roman Tragedy a name,
To fill my laws thy wanton spirit frame,
This said, she moved her buskins gaily varnisht,
And seven time shook her head with thick locks garnisht
The other smilde, (I wot) with wanton eyes,
Err I? or mittele in her right hand lies,
With lofty words stout Tragedy (she said)
Why treadst me down? art thou aye gravely played?
Thou dignest unequal lines should thee rehearse,
Thou fightst against me using mine own verse.
Thy lofty style with mine I not compare,
Small doors unfitting for large houses are.
Light am I, and with thee, my care, light love,
Not stronger am I, then the things I move.
Venus without me should be rusticall,
This goddess company does to me befall.
What gate thy stately words cannot unlock,
My flattering speeches soon wide open knock.
And I deseru^^ more then thou can in verity,
By suffering much not borne by thy severity.
By me Corinna learnes, cousening her guard,
To get the door with little noise vnbard.
And slipped from bed, clothed in a loose nightgown
To move her feet unheard in siting down.
Ah how often on hard doors hung I engrau'd,
From no man's reading fearing to be fau'd.
But till the keeps went forth, I forget not,
^he maid to hide me in her bosom let not.
What gift with me was on her birth day sent,
But cruelly by her was drowned and rent.
First of thy mind the happy seeds I knew,
Thou have my gift, which she would from thee sue.
She left; I said, you both I must beseech,
To empty air may go my fearful speech.
With scepters, and high buskins ^h' one would dress me.
So through the world should bright renown express me.
The other gives my love a conquering name,
Come therefore, and to long verse shorter frame.
Grant Tragedy thy Poet times least title,
Thy labor ever lasts, she asks but little.
She gave me leave, soft loves in time make have.
Some greater work will urge me on at last.
ELEGIA. 2.
Ad amicam cursum equoru^^ spectantem.
I Sit not here the noble horse to see,
Yet whom thou fauourst, pray may conqueror be.
To sit, and talk with thee I hither came.
That thou may know with love thou make me flame.
Thou view'st the course, I thee: let either heed,
What please them, and their eyes let either feed.
What horse-driuer thou fauourst most is best,
Because on him thy care does hap to rest.
Such chance let me have: I would bravely run,
On swift steedes mounted till the race were done.
Now would I slack the reins, now lash her hide,
With wheles bent inward now the ring-turne ride.
In running if I see thee, I shall stay,
And from my hands the reins will slip away.
Ah Pelpos from his coach was almost feld,
Hippodameias looks while he beheld.
Yet he attained by her support to have her,
Let us all conquer by our mistress favor.
In vain why flyest back? force conioyns us now:
The places laws this benifit allow,
But spare my wench thou at her right hand seated,
By thy sides touching ill she is entreated.
And sit thou rounder, that behind us see,
For shame press not her back with thy hard knee.
But on the ground thy clothes too loosely lie,
Gat her them up, or lift them lo will I.
Envious garments so good legs to hide,
The more thou look, the more the gown enuide.
Swift Atalantas flying legs like these,
Wish in his hands graspt did Hippomines.
Coate-tuckt Dianas legs are painted like them,
When strong wild beasts, she stronger hunts to strike the^,
Ere these were seen, I burnt: what will these do?
Flames into flame, floods thou powerst seas into.
By these I judge delight me may the rest,
Which lie hid under her thin veil suppressed.
Yet in the mean time wilt small winds bestow,
That from thy fan, moved by my hand may blow.
Or if my heat, of mind, not of the sky?
Is It woements love my captive breast does fry?
While thus I speak, black dust her white robes ray:
Foul dust, from her fair body go away.
Now comes the pomp; themselves let all men cheer:
The shout is nigh; the golden pomp comes here.
First victory is brought with large spread wing,
Goddess come here, make my love conquering.
Applaud you Neptune, that dare trust his wave,
The sea I use not: me my earth must have.
Soldier applaud thy Mars, no wars we moan,
Peace pleases me, and in mid peace is lone.
With Augures Phoebus, Phaebe with hunters stands.
To thee Minerua turn the crafts-mens hands.
Ceres and Bacchus Countrymen adore,
Champions pleace Poll^^^, Castor loves horsemen more.
Thee gentle Venus, and the boy that flies,
We praise, great goddess aid my enterprise.
Let my new mistress grant to be beloved,
She beckt, and prosperous signs gave as she moved.
What Venus promised, promise thou we pray
Greater then her, by her leave thou art, I Will say.
The Gods, and their rich-pompe witness with me,
For evermore thou shall my mistres be.
Thy legs hang-downe, thou may, if that be best,
Or while thy tiptoes on the footstool rest.
Now greatest spectacles the Praector sends,
Fower-chariot horses from the lists even ends,
I see whom thou affectest: he shall subdue,
The horses seem, as they desire thy knew.
Alas he runs too far about the ring,
What do? thy wagon in less compass bring.
What do unhappy? her good wishes fade,
Let with strong hand the reine to bend be made.
One flow we favor, Romans him revoke:
And each give signs by casting up his cloak.
They call him back, least their gowns toss thy hair,
To hide thee in my bosom strait repair.
But now again the barriers open lie;
And forth the gay troops on swift horses fly.
As last now conquer, and out-runne the rest:
My mistress with confirm with my request.
My mistress has her wish, my wish remain:
He holds the palm: my palm is yet to gain.
She smilde, and with quicke-eyes behight some grace*
Pay it not here, but in an other place.
ELEGIA. 13.
De amica, quae periur auerat.
What are there Gods? her self she has forswort,
And yet remains the face she had before.
How long her locks were ere her oath she took:
So long they be, since she her faith forsook.
Fair white with rose red was before commixt:
Now shine her looks pure white and red betwixt.
Her foot was small: her footes form is most fit*
Comely tall was she, comely tall she is yet.
Sharp eyes she had: radiant like stars they be,
By which she periurd often has lied by me.
Insooth the eternal powers grant maids society.
Falsely to swear, their beauty has some diety.
By her eyes I remember late she swore,
And by mine eyes, and mine were pained sore.
Say Gods: if she unpunished you deceive,
For others faults why do I loss receive.
But did you not so envy Cepheus daughter,
For her ill-beautious mother judged to slaughter.
It Is not enough, she shakes your record off,
And unrevenged mocked Gods with me does scoff.
But by my pain to purge her periuries,
Couzend, I am the couzeners sacrifice.
God is a name, no substance, feared in vain,
And does the world in fond belief deteine.
Or if there be a God, he loves fine wenches,
And all things too much in their sole power drenches.
Mars girts his deadly sword on for my harm,
Pallas lance strikes me with vnconquerd arm.
At me Apollo bends his pliant bow,
At me Jove's right hand lightning has to throw.
The wronged Gods dread fair ones to offend,
And fear those, that to fear them least intend.
Who now will care the Altars to persume?
Tut, men should not their courage so consume.
Jove throws down woods, and Castles with his fire,
But bids his darts from perjured girls retire.
Poor Semele among so many burned.
Her own request to her own torment turned.
But when her lover came, had she drawn back,
The fathers thigh should unborn Bacchus lack,
Why grieve I? and of heaven reproaches pen?
The Gods have eyes, and breasts as well as men.
Were I a God, I should give women leave,
With lying lips my Godhead to deceive.
My self would swear the wenches true did sheare,
And I would be none of the Gods severe.
But yet their gift more moderately use,
Or in mine eyes good wench no pain transfuse,
ELEGIA. 4.
Ad virum seruantem coniugem.
RVde man,'it is vain, thy damsel to commend,
To keepers trust; their wits should them defend.
Who, without fear, is chaste: is chaste in sooth:
Who, because means want, does not she does.
Though thou her body guard, her mind is staind,
Nor, least she will, can any be restrainde.
Nor can by watching keep her mind from sin,
All being shut out, th'adulterer is within.
Who may offend, sins least; power to do ill,
The fainting feeds of naughtiness does kill.
Forbear to kindle vice by prohibition,
Sooner shall kindness gain thy wills fruition.
I saw a horse against the bitte stiffe-neckt,
Like lightning go, his struggling mouth being checked.
When he perceived the raines ler slack, he stayed,
And on his loose mane the loose bridle laid.
How to attain, what is denied, we think,
Even as the sick desire forbidden drink.
Argus had either way an hundred eyes.
Yet by deceit love did them all surprise,
In stone, and iron walls Dana^ shut,
Come forth a mother, though a maid there put.
Penelope, though no watch looked unto her,
Was not defiled by any gallant wooer.
What Is kept, we covet more: the care makes theft,
Few love, what others have unguarded left.
Nor does her face please, but her husbands love;
I know not, what men think should thee so move.
She is not chaste that keeps away her love.
Thy fear, is then her body, valued more.
Although thou chafe, stolen pleasure is sweet play,
She pleases best, I fear, if any say.
A freeborn wench, no right it is up to lock,
So use we women of strange nations stock.
Because the keeper may come say, I did it,
She must be honest to thy servants credit.
He is too clownish, whom a lewd wife grieves,
And this towns well known custom not believes.
Where Mars his sons not without fault did breed,
Romus and Romulus, Ilias twine-borne feed.
Cannot a fair one, if not chaste, please thee?
Never can these by any means agree.
Kindly thy mistress use, if thou be wise,
Look gently, and rough husbands laws despise.
Honor what friends, thy wife gives, she will give many,
Least labor thou shall win great grace of any,
So shall thou go with youths to feasts together,
And see at home much, that thou nere brought thither.
ELEGIA 5.
Ad amnem dum iter faceret ad amicam.
Flood with red-growne slime banks, till I be past,
Thy waters stay: I to my mistress have.
Thou have no bridge, nor boat with roapes to throw,
That may transport me without oars to row.
Thee I have passed and knew thy stream none such,
When thy waves brim did scarce my ankles touch.
With snow thawed from the next hill now thou rushest,
And in thy fowie deep waters thick thou rush^st.
What helps my have: what to have tare small rest?
What day and night to travail in her quest?
If standing here I can by no means ger,
My foot upon the further bank to set.
Now wish I those wings noble Perseus had,
Bearing the head with dreadful arrows clad,
Now wish the chariot, whence corn fields were found,
First to be thrown upon the vntill'd ground,
I speak old Poets wonderful inventions,
Nere was, nor shall be, what my verse mentions.
Rather thou large bank ouer-flowing river,
Slide in thy bounds, so shall thou run for ever.
(Trust me) land-streame thou shall no envy lack,
If I a lover be by thee held back.
Great floods ought to assist young men in love,
Great floods the force of it do often ptoue.
In mid Bithyma'tis said Inachus,
Grew pale, and in cold foords not lecherous.
Troy had not yet been ten years siege out-stander,
When nymph- Neaera rapt thy looks Scamander.
What? not Alpheus in strange lands to run,
The Arcadian Virgins constant love has won?
And Crusa unto Zanthas first asside,
They say Peneus near Phithias town did hide.
What should I name Aesope, that Thebe loved,
Thebe who mother of five daughters proved.
If Achelous, I ask where thy horns stand,
Thou say broke with Aloides angry hand.
Not Calyd^n, nor Aetolia did please,
One Deianirae was more worth then these.
Rich Nile by seven mouths to the west sea flowing,
Who so well keeps his waters head from knowing.
Is by Euadne thought to take such flame,
As his deep whirle-pooles could not quench the same.
Dry Enipeus, Tyro to embrace,
Fly back his shame charged, the stream charged, gave place;
Nor pass I thee, who hollow rocks down tumbling,
In Tiburs field with watery some are rumbling.
Whom Ilia pleased, though in her looks grief reueld,
Her cheeks were scratcht, her goodly ha^es discheueld.
She wailing Mars sin, and her uncles crime,
Strayd bare-foote through sole places on a time.
Her, from his swift waves, the bold flood perceau'd,
And from the mid foord his hoarse voice vpheau'd,
Saying why sadly tread'st my banks upon,
Ilia, sprung from Idaean Laomedon?
Where Is thy attire? why wand'rest here alc^e?
To stay thy tresses white veyle have thou none?
Why weep'st? and spoil'st with tears thy watery eyes?
And fiercely knock'st thy breast that open lies?
His heart consists of slint, and hardest steel,
That seeing thy tears can any joy then feel.
Fear not: to thee our Court stands open wide,
There shall be loved; Ilia lay fear aside.
Thou ore a hundredth Nymphs, or more shall reign.
For sine score Nimpher, or more our floods contain.
Not Roman stock scorn me so much (I crave,)
Gifts then my promise greater thou shall have.
This said he: she her modest eyes held down,
Her woeful bosom a warm shower did drown.
Thrice she prepared to fly, thrice she did stay,
By sear deptiu'd of strength to run away.
Yet rending with enraged thumb her tresses,
Her trembling mouth these unmeet foundes expresses.
O would in my forefathers tomb deep laid,
My bones had been, while yet I was a maid,
Why being a vestall am I wooed to wed,
Deflowered and stamed in unlawful bed.
Why stay I? men point at me for a whore,
Shame, that should make me blush, I have no more.
This said: her coat, hood-winckt her fearful eyes,
And into water desperately she flies.
It Is said the slippery stream held up her breast,
And kindly gave her, what she liked best.
And I believe some wench thou have affected,
But woods and groves keep your faults vndetected.
While thus I speak, the waters more abounded,
And from the channel all abroad surrounded.
Mad stream, why do our mu^uallioyes defer?
Clown, from my journey why do me deter?
How would thou flow were thou a noble flood?
If thy great same in every region stood.
Thou have no name, but come from snowy mountains,
No certain house thou have, nor any fountains,
Thy springs are naught but rain and melted snow,
Which wealth, cold winter does on thee beftow.
Either thou art muddy in mid winter tide,
Or full of dust do on the dry earth slide.
What thirsty traveler ever drunk of thee?
Who said with grateful voice perpetual be?
Harmefull to beasts, and to the fields thou proves,
Perchance these, others me mine own loss mooues.
To this I fondly loves of floods told plainly,
I shame so great names to have used so vainly.
I know not what expecting, I ere while,
Named Achelaus, Inachus, and Ii^,
But for thy merits I wish thee, white stream,
Dry winters aye, and suns in hear extreme.
ELEGIA. 6.
Quod ah amica receptus, cum ea coire non potuit, conqueritur.
EIther she was soul, or her attire was bad,
Or she was not the wench I wish to have had.
Idly I lay with her, as if I loved not,
And like a burden grieved the bed that moved not.
Though both of us performed our true intent,
Yet could I not cast anchor where I meant.
She on my neck her Iuory arms did throw,
Her arms fa^re wither, then the Sythian snow.
And eagerly she kissed me with her tongue,
And under mine her wanton thigh she flung.
Yea, and she soothed me up, and called me fire,
And used all speech that might provoke and ^^re.
Yet like as if cold Hemlock I had drunk,
It mocked me, hung down the head and sunk.
Like a dull Cipher, or rude block I lay,
Or shade, or body was I who can say?
What will my age do? age I cannot shun,
When in my prime my force is spent and done.
I blush, that being youthful, hot, and lusty,
I prove neither youth nor man, but old and rustie.
Pure rose she, like a Nun to sacrifice,
Or one that with her tender brother lies.
Yet boorded I the golden Chie twice,
And Libas, and the white cheekt Pitho th^i^e.
Corinna craved it in a summers night.
And nine sweet bowts we had before daylight.
What wast my limbs through some Thessalian charms?
May spells, and drugges do silly souls such harms?
With virgin wax has some imbast my joints?
And pierced my liver with sharp needless points?
Charms change corn to grass and make it die,
By charms are running springs and fountains dry.
By charms mast drops from oaks, from vines grapes fall,
And fruit from trees when there is no wind at all.
Why might not then my sinews be inchaunted?
And I grow faint as with some spirit haunted.
To this add shame: shame to perform it quaild me,
And was the second cause why vigor failde me.
My idle thoughts delighted her no more,
Then did the robe or garment which she wore.
Yet might her touch make youthful Pylius fire,
And Tythou liuelier then his years require.
Even her I had, and she had me in vain,
What might I crave more, if I ask agaiie?
I think the great gods grieved they had bestowed,
The benefit: which lewdly I fore-slow'd.
I wished to be received in, in I get me,
To kiss, I kiss: to lie with her she let me.
Why was I blessed? why made King to refuse it?
Chuffe-like had I not gold and could not use it?
So in a spring thriues he that told so much,
And looks upon the fruits he cannot touch.
Has any rose so from a fresh young maid,
As she might straight have gone to Church and praide.
Well I believe, she kissed not as she shonld,
Nor used the slight and cunning which she could.
Huge oaks, hard adamants might she have moved,
And with sweet words cause deaf rocks to have moved,
Worthy she was to move both gods and men,
But neither was I man nor lived then.
Can deaf ear take delight when Phaemius sings?
Or Thamiris in curious painted things.
What sweet thought is there but I had the same?
And one gave place still as an other came.
Yet not-withstanding like one dead I lay,
Drouping more like a rofe pulled yester-day.
Now when he should not iette, he boults upright,
And craves his task, and seeks to be at fight.
Lie down with shame and see thou stire no more,
Seeing thou would deceive me as before.
Thou cosonest me: by thee surpised am I,
And bide sore loss with endless infamy.
Nay more the wench did not disdain a whit,
To take it in hand, and play with it.
But when she saw it would by no means stand,
But still droupt down, regarding not her hand.
Why mockst thou me she cried? or being ill
Who bad thee lie down here against thy will?
Either the art witcht with blood of frogs now dead,
Or iaded camst thou from some others bed.
With her loose gown on from me she cast her,
In skiping out her naked feet much graced her.
And least her maid should know of this disgrace,
To cover it, spilt water in the place.
ELEGIA. 7.
Quod ab amica non recipiatur, dolet.
What man will now take liberal arts in hand,
Or think soft verse in any stead to stand.
Wit was sometimes more precious then gold,
Now poverty great barbarism we hold.
When our books did my mistress fair content,
I might not go, whether my papers went.
She praised me, yet the gate shut fast upon her,
I here and there go witty with dishonor.
Se a rich chuffe whose wounds* great wealth inferd,
For blodshed knighted before me preferred.
Fool can thou him in thy whit arms embrace
Fool can thou lie in his enfoulding space?
Know not this head a helm was wont to bear
This side that serves thee, a sharp sword did wear
His left hand whereon gold does ill alight
A target bore; blood sprinkled was his right.
Can touch that hand wherewith so^e one lie dead?
Ah whether is thy breasts soft nature fled?
Behold the signs of ancient fight his skarres,
What ere he has his body gaind in wars.
Perhaps he will tell how often he slew a man,
Confessing this, why do thou touch him than?
I the pure priest of Phoebus and the muses,
At thy deaf doors in verse sing my abuses.
Not what we slothful knew let wise men learn
But follow trembling camps, and battails stern.
And for a good verse draw the first dart forth,
Homer without this shall be nothing worth.
Jove being admo^isht gold had sovereign power
To win the maid came in a golden shewer.
Till then, rough was her father, she severe,
The posts of brass the walls of iron were,
But when in gifts the wise adulteres came,
She held her lap open to receive the same.
Yet when old Saturn heavens rule possessed,
All gain in darkness the deep earth suppressed.
Gold, silver, irons heauey weight, and brass,
In hell were harbourd, here was found no mass.
But better things it gave, corn without ploughes,
Apples, and honey in oaks hollow boughs.
With strong plough shares no man the earth did cleave
The ditcher no marks on the ground did leave.
Nor hanging oars the troubled seas did sweep,
Men kept the shore, and saild not into deep.
Against thy self, man's nature, thou were cunning,
And to thine own loss was thy wit swift running.
Why gird'st thy cities with a towred wall,
Why l^st discordant hands to armoun fall?
What do with seas? with the earth thou were content,
Why seek'st not heaven the third realm to frequent?
Heaven thou affects, with Romulus, temples brave,
Bacchus, Alcides, and now Caesar have. --
Gold from the earth in stead of fruits we pluck,
Soldiers by blood to be inricht have luck.
Courts shut the poor out: wealth gives estimation,
Thence grows the Judge, and knight of reputation.
All, thee possess: they govern fields, and laws,
They manadge peace, and raw wars bloody jaws.
Only our loves let not such rich churles gain,
It Is well, if some wench for the poor remain,
Now, Sabine-like, though chaste she seems to live,
One she commands, who many things can give.
For me, she does keeper, and husband fear,
If I should giue' both would the house forbear.
If of scornd lovers god be venger just,
O let him change goods so ill got to dust.
ELEGIA. 8.
Tibulli mortem deflet.
IF Thetis, and the morn their sons did wail,
And envious fates great goddesses assail.
Sad Eeliga thy woeful hairs unbind:
Ah now a name too true thou have, I find.
Tibullus, thy works Poet, and thy fame,
Burns his dead body in the funeral flame.
Lo Cupid brings his quiver spoiled quite,
His broken bow his firebrand without light.
How pitteously with drouping wings he stands,
And knocks his bare breast with selfe-angry hands.
The locks spread on his neck receive his tears,
And shakeing sobbes his mouth for speeches bears.
So at Aeneas burial men report,
Faire-fac'd Julius he went forth thy court.
And Venus greiues, Tiqullus life being spent,
As when the wild bore Adonus groine had rent.
The Gods care we are called, and men of piety,
And some there be that think we have a diety.
Outrageous death profanes all holy things,
And one all creatures obscure darkness brings.
To Thracean Orpheus what did parents good,
Or songs amazing wild beasts of the wood.
Where Linus by his father Phoebus laid,
To sing with his vequall harp is said.
See Homer from whose fountain ever filled,
Pierian deawe to Poets is dislild.
Him the last day in black Auorn has drowned,
Ve^^ts alone are with continuance crowned.
The work of Poets lasts Troyes labors fame,
And that slow web nights fal-shood did vnframe.
So Nemesis, so Delia famous are,
The one his first love, the other his new care.
What proffit to us has our pure life bred?
What to have layne alone in empty bed?
When bad fates take good men, I am forbod,
By secret thoughts to think there is a god.
Live godly thou shall die though honor heaven
Yet shall thy life be forcibly, bereauen.
Trust in good verse, Tibullus feels deaths pains,
Scarce rests of all what a small v^ne contains,
Thee sacred Poet could sad flames destroy?
Nor feared they thy body to annoy?
The holy gods gilt temples they might fire,
That durst to so great wickedness aspire.
Eryx bright Empress turned her looks aside,
And some, that she refrained reares, have denied.
Yet better i'ft, then if, Corcyras I Will,
Had thee unknown interred in ground most vile.
Thy dying eyes beer did thy mother close,
Nor did thy ashes her last offerings lose.
Part of her sorrow here thy sister beating.
Comes forth her vnkeembe looks a sunder rearing.
Nemesis and thy first wench join their kisses,
With thine, nor this last fire their presence misses.
Delia departing happier loved she faith,
Was I: thou liu'dst, while thou esteemdst my faith.
Nemesis answers, what is my loss to thee?
His fainting hand in death engarsped me.
If ought remains of us but name, and spirit,
Tibullus does Elysiums joy inherit.
Their youthful brows with Iuie girt to meet him,
With Caluus learned Catullus comes and greet him.
And thou, if falsely charged to wrong thy friend,
Gallus that car'st not blood, and life to spend.
With these thy soul walks, souls if death release,
The godly, sweet Tibullus does increase.
Thy bones I pray may in the vrne safe rest,
And may the earths weight thy ashes naught molest.
ELEGIA. 9.
Ad Cererem, conquerens quod eius sacris cum amica concumbere non permittatur.
COme were the times of Ceres sacrifice,
In empty bed alone my mistress lies.
Golden hair'd Ceres crowned with ears of corn,
Why are our pleasures by thy means forborne?
Thee, goddess, bountiful all nations judge,
Nor less at man's prosperity any grudge.
Rude husbandmen baked not their corn before,
Nor on the earth was known the name of floor,
On mast of oaks, first oracles, men fed,
This was their meat, the soft grass was their bed.
First Ceres taught the seed in fields to swell,
And ripe-earde corn with sharp-edg-d sithes to fell.
She first constrained bulls necks to bear the yoke,
And vntil'd ground with crooked plough-shares broke.
Who thinks her to be glad at lovers smart,
And worshipped by their pain, and lying apart?
Nor is she, though she loves the fertile fields,
A clown, nor no love from her warm breast yields;
Be witness Crete (nor Crete does all things feign)
Crete proud that Jove her nourcery maintain.
There, he who rules the worlds starre-spangled towers,
A little boy drunk teate-distilling showers.
Faith to the witness Jove's praise does apply,
Ceres, I think, no known fault will deny.
The goddess saw Iasion on Candian I Would,
With strong hand striking wild-beasts brist'led hyde.
She saw, and as her marrow took the flame,
Was diverse ways distract with love and shame.
Love conquered shame, the furrows dry were burned,
And corn with least part of it self returned.
When well-toss'd mattocks did the ground prepare,
Being fit broken with the crooked share.
And seeds were equally in large fields cast,
The plough-mans hopes were frustrate at the last.
The graine-rich goddess in high woods did stray,
Her long hairs eare-wrought garland fell away.
Only was Crete fruitful that plenteous year,
Where Ceres went each place was harvest there.
Ida the seat of groves did sing with corn,
Which by the wild boar in the woods was shorn.
Law-giuing Minos did such years desire,
And wished the goddess long might seele loves fire.
Ceres what sports to thee so gneuous were,
As in thy sacrifice we them forbear?
Why am I sad, when Proserpine is found,
And Juno like with Dis reigns under ground?
Festival days ask Venus, songs, and wine,
These gifts are mere to please the powers divine.
ELEGIA. 10.
Ad amicam, a cuius amore discedere non potest.
LOng have I borne much, mad thy faults me make,
Dishonest love my wearied breast forsake.
Now have I freed my self, and fled the chain,
And what I have borne, shame to bear again.
We vanquish, and tread tamed love under feet,
Victorious wreathes at length my Temples greet.
Suffer, and harden: good grows by this grief,
Often bitter juice brings to the sick relief.
I have sustained so often thrust from the door,
To lay my body on the hard moist floor.
I know not whom thou lewdlie did embrace,
When I to watch supplied a servants place.
I saw when forth a tired lover went,
His side past service, and his courage spent.
Yet this is less, then if he had seen me,
May that shame fall mine enemies chance to be.
When have not I fixed to thy side close laid?
I have thy husband, guard, and fellow played.
The people by my company she pleased,
My love was cause that more men's love she seaz'd.
What should I tell her vain tongues filthy lies,
And to my loss God-wronging periuries?
What secret beeks in banquets with her youths,
With privy signs, and talk dissembling truths?
Hearing her to be sick, I thither ran,
But with my rival sick she was not than,
These hardened me, with what I keep obscure,
Some other seek, who will these things endure.
Now my ship in the wished haven crowned,
With joy hears Neptunes swelling waters sound.
Leave thy once powerful words, and flatteries,
I am not as I was before unwise.
Now love, and hate my light breast each way move,
But victory, I think will hap to love.
I Will hate, it I can; if not, love against my will,
Bulls hate the yoke, yet what they hate have still.
I fly her lust, but follow beauties creature,
I loath her manners, love her bodies feature.
Nor with thee, nor without thee, can I live,
And doubt to which desire the palm to give.
Or less fair, or less lewd would thou might be,
Beauty with lewdness does right ill agree.
Her deeds gain hate, her face entreats love,
Ah she does more worth then her vices prove.
Spare me, O by our fellow bed, by all,
The Gods who by thee to be petiurde fall.
And by thy face to me a power divine,
And by thine eyes whose radiance burns out mine.
What ere thou art mine art thou: choose this course,
Wilt have me willing, or to love by force.
Rather I Will hoist up sail, and use the wind,
That I may love yet, though against my mind.
ELEGIA. 11.
Dolet amicam suam ita suis earminibus innotuissae vt riuales multos sibi
pararit.
What day was that, which all sad haps to bring,
White birds to lovers did not always sing.
Oris I think my wish against the star?
Or shall I plain some God against me wars?
Who mine was called, whom I loved more then any,
I fear with me is common now to many.
Err I? or by my looks is she so known?
It Is so: by my wit her abuse is grown.
And justly: for her praise why did I tell?
The wench by my fault is set forth to sell.
The bawd I play, lovers to her I guide:
Her gate by my hands is set open wide.
It Is doubtful whether verse avail, or harm,
Against my good they were an envious charm.
When Thebes, when Troy, when Caesar should be writ,
Alone Corinna moves my wanton wit.
With Muse opposed would I my lines had done,
And Phoebus had forsook my work begun.
Nor, as use will not Poets record hear,
Would I my words would any credit bear.
Scylla by us her fathers rich hair steals,
And Scyllaes womb mad raging dogs conceales.
We cause feet fly, we mingle hairs with snakes,
Victorious Perseus a winged steedes back takes.
Our verse great Tityus a huge space out-spreads,
And gives the viper curled Dog three heads.
We make Enceladus use a thousand arms,
And men inthral'd by Mermaids singing charms.
The East winds in Ulysses baggs we shut,
And babbing Tantalus in mid-waters put.
Niobe flint, Callist we make a Bear,
Bird-changed Progne does her Itys tear.
Ione turns himself into a Swanne, or gold,
Or his Bulls horns Europas hand does hold.
Proteus what should I name? teeth, Thebes first seed?
Oxen in whose mouths burning flames did breed,
Heaven star Electra that bewailed her sisters?
The ships, whose Godhead in the sea now glisters?
The Sun turned back from Atreus cursed table?
And sweet touched harp that to move stones was able?
Poets large power is boundless, and immense,
Nor have their words true histories pretense,
And my wench ought to have seemed falsely praised,
Now your credulity harm to me has raised.
ELEGIA. 12.
De Iunonis festo.
When fruit filled Tuscia should a wife give me,
We touched the walls, Camillus won by thee.
The Priests to Juno did prepare chaste feasts,
With famous pageants, and their homebred beasts.
To know their rites, well recompensed my stay,
Though thither leads a rough steep hilly way.
There stands an old wood with thick trees dark clouded,
Who sees it graunts some d^ity there is shrouded.
An Altar takes men's incense and oblation,
An Altar made after the ancient fashion^.
Here when the Pipe with solemn tunes does sound,
The annual pomp goes on the covered ground.
White Heifers by glad people forth are led,
Which with the grass of Tuscane fields are fed.
And calu^^ from whose feared front no threatening flies,
And little Piggs base Hog-Sties sacrifice,
And Rams with horns their hard heads wreathed back,
Only the Goddess hated Goat did lack.
By whom disclosed, she in the high woods took,
Is said to have attempted flight forsook.
Now is the goat brought through the boys with darts,
And give to him that the first wound imparts.
Where Juno comes, each youth, and pretty maid,
Show large ways with their garments there displayed.
Jewels, and gold their Virgin tresses crown.
And stately robes to their gilt feet hang down.
As is the use, the Nuns in white veyles clad,
Upon their heads the holy mysteries had.
When the chief pomp comes, loud the people hollow
And she her vestall virgin Priests does follow.
Such was the Greek pomp, Agamemnon dead,
Which fact, and country wealth Halesus fled.
And having wandered now through sea and land,
Built walls high towred with a prosperous hand.
He to the Hetrurians, Iunoes feast commended,
Let me, and them by it be aye be-friended.
ELEGIA. 13
Adamicam, si peccatura est, vt occulte peccet.
SEEing thou art fair, I bar not thy self playing,
But let not me poor soul know of thy straying.
Nor do I give thee counsel to live chaste,
But that thou would dissemble, when it is past.
She has not tred awry, that does deny it.
Such as confess have lost their good names by it,
What madness is it to tell nights pranckes by day?
And hidden secrets openly to bewray?
The strumpet with the stranger will not do.
Before the room be clear, and door put too.
Will you make shipwreck of your honest name?
And let the world be witness of the same.
Be more advised, walk as a puritan,
And I shall think you chaste, do what you can.
Slip still only deny it, when it is done,
And before folk immodest speeches shun.
The bed is for lascivious toyings meet,
There use all tricks, and tread shame under feet.
When y^u are up, and dressed, be sage and grave,
And in the bed hide all the faults you have.
Be not ashamed to strip you being there,
And mingle thighs yours ever mine to bear.
There in your Rosy lips my tongue in-tombe,
Practice a thousand sports when there you come.
Forbear no wanton words you there would speak,
And with your pastime let the bed-stead creake.
But with your robes put on an honest face,
And blush, and seem as you were full of grace.
Deceive all* let me err, and think I am right,
And like a Wittall think thee void of slight.
Why see I lines so often received, and given?
This bed and that by tumbling made uneven?
Like one start up your hair tossed and dsiplac'd,
And with a wantons tooth your neck new rac'd.
Grant this, that what you do I may not see,
If you weigh not ill speeches, yet weigh me.
My soul fleetes, when I think what you have done,
And thorough every vein does cold blood run.
Then thee whom I must love, I hate in vain,
And would be dead, but dead with thee remain.
I Will not sift much, but hold thee soon excused,
Say but thou were iniu^iously accused.
Though while the deed be doing you be took.
And I see when you open the two leau'd book,
Swear I was blind, deny if you be wise.
And I will trust your words more then mine eyes,
From him that yields the palm is quickly got,
Teach but your tongue to say, I did it not*
And being iustifi'd by two words think,
The cause acquit's you not, but I that wink.
ELEGIA. 14.
Advenerem, quod elegis ^inem imponat.
TEnder loves Mother a new Poet get,
This last end to my Elegies is set.
Which I Pelignis foster-childe have framed.
(Nor am I by such wanton toys defamed)
Heir of an ancient house, if help that can,
Not only by wars rage made Gentleman,
In Virgil Mantua joys: in Catul Verone,
Of me Pelignis nation boasts alone,
Whom liberty to honest arms compeld,
When careful Rome in doubt their prowess held.
And some guest viewing watery Sulmoes walls,
Where little ground to be enclosed befalles.
How such a Poet could you bring forth, says,
How small so ere, I Will you for greatest praise.
Both lou^s to whom my heart long time did yield,
Your golden ensigns plucked out of my field,
Horned Bacchus grauer fury does distill,
A greater ground with great horse is to till.
Weak Elegies, delightful Muse farewell;
A work, that after my death, here shall dwell.
FINIS.
EPIGRAMES.
By I. D.
Ad Musam.
Fly merry Muse unto that merry town,
Where thou mai'st plays, revels, and triumphs see,
The house of Fame, and Theater of renown,
Where all good wits and spirits love to be.
Fall in between their hands, that love and praise thee,
And be to them a laughter and a jest:
But as for them which scorning shall reprove thee,
Disdain their wits, and think thine own the best,
But if thou find any so gross and dull,
That think I do to private Taxing lean:
Bid him go hang, for he is but a gull,
And knows not what an Epigramme does mean.
Which taxes under a particular name,
A general vice which merits public blame.
Of a Gull.
Often in my laughing times, I name a gull,
But this new term will many questions breed,
Therefore at first I will express at full,
Who is a true and perfect Gull indeed.
A Gull is he, who fears a Velvet gown,
And when a wench is brave, dares not speak to her:
A Gull is he which trauer^eth the town.
And is for marriage known a common woer.
A Gull is he, which while he proudly wears,
A silver hilted Rapier by his side:
Indures the lies, and knockes about the ears,
Whilst in his sheath, his sleeping sword does bide.
A Gull is he which wears good hansome clothes:
And stands in presence stroaking up his hair.
And filles up his imperfect speech with oaths.
But speaks not one wise word throughout the year.
But to define a gull in terms precise,
A gull is he which seems, and is not wise.
In Rufum. 3.
Rvfus the Courtier, at the Theater,
Leaving the best and most conspicuous place,
Does either to the stage himself transfer,
Or through a grate, does show his double face.
For that the clamorous fry of Innes of court,
Fills up the private rooms of gre^ter price:
And such a place where all may have resort,
Hein his singularity does despise.
Yet does not his particular humor shun,
The common stews and brothell^ of the town,
Though all the world in troops do thither run.
Clean and unclean, the gentle and the clown.
Then why should Rufus in his pride abhor,
A common seat that loves a common whore.
In Quintum. 4.
QVintus the dauncer uses evermore,
His feet in measure and in rule to move.
Yet on a time he called his mistress whore,
And thought with that sweet word to win her love.
Oh had his tongue like to his ^eete bin taught,
It never would have uttered such a thought.
In Plurimos. 5.
FAustinus, Sextus, Cinna, Ponticus,
With Gella, Lesbia, Thais, Rodope:
Rode all to Stanes for no cause serious,
But for: their mitth, and for their lechery.
Scarce were they settled in their lodging, when
Wenches, with wenches; men with men fell out.
Men with their wenches, wenches with their men,
Which strait dissolues this ill assembled rout.
But since the devil brought them thus together,
To my discoursing thoughts it is a wonder.
Why presently as soon as they came thither,
The self same devil did them part a sunder.
Doubtless it seems it was a foolish devil,
That thus did part them, ere they did some evil.
In Titum. 6.
TItus the brave and valorous young gallant,
Three years together in this town has been,
Yet my Lord Chauncellors tomb he has not seen:
Nor the New water work, nor the Elephant.
I can not tell the cause without a smile,
He has bin in the Counter all this while.
In Faustum. 7.
FAustus not Lord nor knight, nor wise nor old,
To every place about the town does ride,
He tides into the fields, Plays to behold,
He rides to take boat at the water side.
He rides to Powles, he rides to th'ordinary,
He rides unto the house of bawdery too.
Thither his horse does him so often carry,
That shortly he will quite forget to go.
In Katum. 8.
KAte being pleased, wished that her pleasure could,
Endure as long as a buffe ierkin would.
Content thee Kate, although thy pleasure wastes,
Thy pleasures place like a buffe ierkin lasts.
For no buffe ierkin hath-bin oftener worn,
Nor has more scrapings, or more dressings borne.
In Librum. 9.
LIber does vaunt how chastely he has lived
Since he has bin seven years in town and more.
For that he swears he has four only swiude,
A maid, a wife, a widow, and a whore,
Then Liber thou have swiude all women kind,
For a sift sort, I know thou can not find.
In Medonem. 10.
GReat Captain Moedon wears a chain of gold,
Which at five hundred crowns is vallued
For that it was his graund-fires chain of old,
When great King Henry Bulloigne conquered.
And wear it Moedon for it may ensue
That thou by virtue of this Massy chain
A stronger town then Bulloigne mai'st subdue
If wise men's sawes be not reputed vain.
For what said Philip King of Macedon?
There is no Castle so well fortified,
But if an Ass laden with gold comes on,
The guard will stoop, and gates fly open wide.
In Gellam. 11.
GElla if thou do love thy self take heed,
Least thou my rimes, unto thy lover read.
For straight thou grin'st, and then thy lover sees
Thy canker-eaten-gumes and rotten teeth.
In Quintum. 12.
QVintus his wit infused into his brain,
Mislikes the place, and fled into his feet,
And there it wanders up and down the streets,
Dabled in the dyrt, and soaked in the rain,
Doubtless his wit intendes not to aspire,
Which leaves his head to travel in the mire.
In Seuerum. 13.
THe Puritan Seuerus often does read,
This text* that does pronounce vain speech a sin,
That thing defiles a man that does proceed,
From out the mouth, not that which enters in.
Hence is it, that we seeldome hear him swear,
And thereof as a Pharesie he vaunts.
But he deuour's more Capons in one year,
Then would suffice an hundred protestants.
And sooth those sectaries are gluttons all,
As Well the thread bare-Cobler as the knight.
For those poor slaves which have not wherewithal
Feed on the rich, till they devour them quite.
And so as Pharoes kine, they eat up clean,
Those that be fat, yet still themselves be lean.
In Leucam. 14.
LEuca in presence once a fart did let,
Some laughed a little, she refused the place,
And mad with shame, did then her glove forget,
Which she returned to fetch with bashful grace:
And when she would have said my glove,
My fart (quoth, she) which did more laughter move.
In Matrum. 15.
THou can not speak, yet Maecer, for to speak,
Is too distinguish sounds significant
Thou with harsh noise the air does rudely break
But what thou vtterest common sense does want.
Half English words, with sustian terms among.
Much like the burden of a Northeme song.
In Fastum. 16.
THat youth says Fanstus, has a Lion seen,
Who from a dycing-house comes monie-lesse.
But when he lost his hair, where had he been,
I doubt me he had seen a Lioness.
In Cosmum. 17.
COsmus has more discoursing in his head,
Then love, when Pallas ^ssued from his brain,
And still he strives to be delivered,
Of all his thoughts at once, but all in vain.
For as we see at all the playhouse doors,
When ended is the play, the dance and song:
A thousand townse-men gentlemen and whores.
Porters and seruing-men together throng,
So thoughts of drinking, thriuing, wenching, war,
And borrowing money, raging in his mind.
To issue all at once so forward are
As none at all can perfect passage find.
In Flaccum. 18.
THe false knave Flaccus once a bribe I gave,
The more fool I to bribe so false a knave,
But he gave back my bribe the more fool he,
That for my folly did not cosen me.
In Cineam. 19.
THou dogged Cineas hated like a dog,
For still thou grumblest like a masty dog.
Compar'st thy self to nothing but a dog.
Thou say thou art as weary as a dog
As angry, sick, and hungry as a dog,
As dul^ and melancholy as a dog.
As lazy, sleepy, and as idle as a dog.
But why do thou compare thee to a dog?
In that, for which all men despise a dog.
I will compare thee better to a dog.
Thou art as Fair and comely as a dog.
Thou art as true and honest as a dog.
Thou art as kind and liberal as a dog,
Thou art as wise and valiant as a dog.
But Cineas, I often have heard thee tell,
Thou art as like thy father as may be.
It Is like enough, and faith I like it well,
But I am glad thou art not like to me.
In Gerontem. 20.
GErons mouldie memory corrects,
Old Holinshed our famous Chronicler
With moral rules, and policy collects,
Out of all actions done these fourscore years.
Accounts the time of every old event,
Not from Christ's birth, nor from the Princes reign.
But from some other famous accident.
Which in men's general notice does remain.
The siedge of Bulloigne, and the plaugy sweat,
The going to Saint Quintines and New-hauen
The rising in the North, the frost so great.
That cart wheel printes on Thamis face were seen.
The fall of money, and burning of Powles sleeple,
The blazing star and Spaniards overthrow.
By these events, notorious to the people.
He mesures times, and things forepast does show.
But most of all, he cheefely reckons by,
A private chance, the death of his cu^st wife:
This is to him the dearest memory,
And the happyest accident of all his life.
In Marcum. 21.
When Marcus comes from Minnes he still does ^wear
By come on seaue^, that al is lost and gone
But that is not true, for he has lost his hair.
Only for that, he came too much at one.
In Ciprum. 22.
THe fine youth Ciprius is more tierse and neat,
Then the new garden of the old temple is,
And still the newest fashion he does get,
And with the time does change from that to this,
He wears a hat now of the flat crown-blocke,
The treble ruffes, long cloak, and doublet french
He takes Tobacco, and does wear a lock.
And wastes more time in dressing then a wench.
Yet this new fangled youth, made for these times
Does above all, praise old George Gascoines times.
In Cineam. 23.
When Cineas comes amongst his friends in morning*
He slyly spies who first his cap does move
Him he salutes, the rest so grimly scorning
As if for ever they had lost his love,
I seeing how it does the humor fit.
Of this fond gull to be saluted first.
Catch at my cap, but move it not a whit
Which to perceiving he seems for spite to burst
But Cineas, why expect you more of me,
Then I of you? I am as good a man,
And better too by many a quality.
For vault, and dance, and sense and time I can.
You keep a whore at your own charge men tell me,
Indeed friend (Cineas) therein you excel me.
In Gallum. 24.
GAllus has bin this Summer time in Friesland,
And now returned he speaks such warlike words*
As if I could their English understand,
I fear me they would cut my throat like swords.
He talks of counter-scar^^es and casomates,
Of parapets, of curteneys and pallizadois,
Of flankers, rauelings, gabions he prates,
And of false baits, and sallies, and scaladoes,
But to requite such gulling terms as these,
With words of my profession I reply:
I tell of fourching vouchers, and counterpleas,
Of withernames, essoynes and champarty.
So neither of us understanding one an other,
We part as wise, as when we came together.
In Decium. 25.
A Vdacious Painters have nine worthies made,
But Poet Decius more audacious far
Making his mistress march with men of war.
With title of tenth worthy does her lade.
Me thinks that gull did use his terms as ^it
Which termed his love a giant for her wit.
In Gellam. 26.
IF Gellas beauty be examined
She has a dull dead eye, a saddle nose,
An ill shapte face with morphew ouerspread.
And rotten teeth which she in laughing shows.
Briefly she is the filthiest wench in town,
Of all that do the art of whoring use:
But when she has put on her sattin-gowne,
Her out lawne apron, and her velvet shoes.
Her green silk stockings, and her petticoate,
Of taffa^y, with goulden friendge a-round,
And is withal perfumed with ciuet hot,
Which does her valiant stinking breath confound,
Yet she with these additions is no more,
Then a sweet, filthy, fine ill-fauoured whore.
In Sillam. 27.
SYlla is often challenged to the field,
To answer as a Gentleman his foes;
But then he does this only answer yield,
That he has livings and fair lands to lose.
Silla, if none but beggars valiant were,
The King of Spain would put us all in fear.
In Sillam. 28.
Who dares affirm that Silla dare not fight,
When I dare swear he dares adventure more,
Then the most brave and all-daring wight,
That ever arms with resolution bore.
He that dares touch the most unwholesome whore,
That ever was retired into the Spittle.
And dares court w^nches standing at a door,
(The portion of his wit being passing little)
He that dares give his dearest friends offenses,
Which other valiant fools do fear to do:
And when a fever does confound his senco^,
Dare eat raw-beefe, and drink strong wine thereto.
He that dares take Tobacco on the stage,
Dares man a whore at noonday through the street,
Dares dance in Pawles, and in this formal age,
Dares say and do what ever is unmeet,
Whom fear of shame could never yet affright,
Who dares affirm that Silla dares not fight.
In Haywodum. 29.
HAywood that did in Epigrames excel,
Is now put down since my light Muse arose.
As Buckets are put down into a Well,
Or as a school boy puts down his hose.
In Dacum. 30.
AMongst the Poets Dacus numbered is,
Yet could he never* make an English time,
But some prose speeches I have heard of his,
Which have binspoken many a hundred time.
The man that keeps the Eliphant has one,
Wherein he tells the wonders of the beast,
An other Bankes^ pronounced long a-gon,
When he his curtalls qualities expressed:
He first taught him that keeps the monuments,
At Westminster, his formal tale to say.
And also him with Puppets represents,
And also him which with the Ape does play:
Though all his Poetry be like to this,
Amongst the Poets Dacus numbered is,
In Priscum. 31.
When Priscus raisde from low to high estate,
Rod through the street in pompous iollitie,
Ca^us his poor familliar friend of late,
Be-spake him thus: Sir now you know not me.
It Is likly friend (quoth Priscus) to be so
For at this time my self I do not know.
In Brunam. 32.
BRunus which deemes himself a fair sweet youth,
Is thirty nine years of age at least:
Yet was he never, to confess the truth,
But a dry staruling when he was at best.
This gull was sick to show his Nightcap fine.
And his wrought pillow ouer-spread with lawne,
But has bin well since his griefs cause has line,
At Trollups by Saint Clements Church in pawn.
In Francum. 33.
When Francus comes to solace with his whore
He sends for rods, and strips himself stark naked;
For his lust sleeps, and will not rise before,
By whiping of the wench it be awaked.
I enuey him not, but wish I had the power,
To make my self his wench but one half hour.
In Castorem. 34.
OF speaking well, why do we learn the skill?
Hoping thereby honor and wealth to gain.
Since railing Castor does by speaking ill,
Opinion of much wit and gold obtain.
In Septimium. 35.
SEptimus lives, and is like Garlike seen,
For though* his head be white, his blade is green:
His old mad Coult deserves a Martyrs praise,
For he was burned in Queen Maryes days.
Of Tobacco. 36.
HOmer of Moly, and Nepenthe sings
Moly the gods most sovereign herb divine,
Nepenthe Heavens drink most gladness brings,
Hearts grief expels, and does the wits refine:
But this our age another world has found.
From whence a herb of Heavenly power is bought,
Moly is not so sovereign for a wound.
Nor has Nepenthe so great wonders wrought.
It is Tobacco, whose sweet substanciall fume,
The hellish torment of the teeth does ease,
By drawing down, and drying up the rewme,
The Mother and the Nurse of each diease,
It is Tobacco that does cold expel,
And cleares the obstructions of the Arteries,
And surfets threatening Death in general.
Decocting all the stomachs crudities,
It is Tobacco which has power to clarify,
The cloudy mists before dim eyes appearing,
It is Tobacco which has power to ratify,
The gross humor which does stop the hearing,
The wasting Hectique, and the Quartain fever,
Which does of Phisique make a mockery,
The gowt it cures, and helps ill breaths for ever,
Whether the cause in Teeth or stomach be,
And though il breath, were by it but confounded.
Yet that Medicine it does far excel,
Which by sir Thomas Moore has bin propounded.
For this is thought a Gentleman like smell,
O that I were one of these Mounti-bankes,
Which praise their Oils, and Powders which they sell,
My customers would give me coin with thanks,
I for this ware, forfooth a Tale would tell.
Yet would I use none of these terms before,
I would but say, that it the Pox will cure:
This were enough, without discoursing more,
All our brave gallants in the town t'allure,
In Crassum. 37.
CRassus his lies are not pernicious lies,
But pleasant fictious hurtful unto none:
But to himself, for no man counts him wise,
To tell for truth, that which for false is known.
He swears that Gaunt is three score miles about,
And that the bridge at Paris on the Seyn,
Is of such thicknes, length and breadth throughout,
That six score Arches can it scarce sustain.
He swears he saw so great a dead man's scull,
At Canterbury digd out of the ground:
That would contain of wheat, three bushels full,
And that in kent are twenty yeomen found,
Of which the poorest every year dispends.
Five thousand pound; these and five thousand mo,
So often he has teceited to his friends:
That now himself, persuades himself it is so.
But why does Crassus tell his lies so rife,
Of Bridges, Towns, and things that have no life.
He is a Lawyer, and does well epsy,
That for such lies an action will not lie.
In Philonem. 38.
PHilo the Lawyer and the Fortune teller,
The schoolmaster, the midwife and the bawd:
The coniurer, the buyer, and the seller,
Of painting which with breathing will be thawd,
Does practice Physic, and his credit grows.
As does the Ballad singers auditorie.
Which has at Temple bar his standing chose,
And to the vulgar sings an Alehouse story.
First stands a Porter, then an Oyster wife,
Does stint her cry, and stay her steps to hear him,
Then comes a cutpurse ready with a knife,
And then a country client passes near him.
There stands the constable, there stands the whore,
And listening to the song, heed not each other.
There by the serieant stands the debtor,
And does no more mistrust him then his brother:
Thus Orpheus to such gives Music,
And Philo to such patients gives Physic.
In Puscum. 39.
FVscus is fe^e, and has the world at will,
Yet in the course of life that he does lead:
He Is like a horse which turning round a mill,
Does always in the self same circle tread:
First he does rise at ten and at eleven
He goes to Gyls, where he does eat til one,
Then sees a play till six, and ^ups at seven,
And after supper, straight to bed is gone
And there till ten next day he does remain,
And then he dines, then sees a Commedy,
And then he suppes, and goes to bed again:
Thus round he runs without variety:
Save that sometimes he comes not to the play
But falls into a whore-house by the way.
In Afrum 40.
THe smell feast After, travails to the Burse
Twice every day the newest news to hear
Which when he has no money in his purse,
To rich men's tables he does often bear:
He tells how Grenigen is taken in,
By the brave conduct of illustrious Vere:
And how the Spanish forces Breast would win,
But that they do victorious Norris fear.
No sooner is a ship at sea surprised,
But straight he learnes the news and does disclose it.
Fair written in a scrowle he has names,
Of all the widows which the plague has made,
And persons, times and places, still he frames:
To every tale the better to persuade:
We call him Fame, for that the wide-mouth slave,
Will eat as fast as he will utter lies
For Fame it said an hundr^d mouths to have,
And he eats more then would five score suffice.
In Paulam. 41.
BY lawful mart, and by unlawful stealth,
Paulus in spite of envy fortunate,
Deriues out of the Ocean so much wealth,
As he may well maintain a Lords estate,
But on the land a little gulf there is,
Wherein he drowneth all the wealth of his.
In Licum. 42.
LYeus which lately is to Venice gone,
Shall if he do return, gain three for one:
But ten to one, his knowledge land his wit,
Will not be betered or increased a whit.
In Publium. 43.
PVblius student at the common Law,
Of^ cleaues his books, and for his recreation:
To Paris-garden does himself withdraw,
Where he is ravished with such delectation
As down amongst the Bears and Dogs he goes
Where whilst he skiping cries to head, to head.
His satin doublet and his velvet hose,
Are all with spittle from above be-spread.
When he is like his fathers country shall,
Stinking with dogs, and muted all with hawks.
And rightly too on him this filth does fall,
Which for such filthy sports his books for sakes,
Leaving old Ployden, Dier and Brook alone,
To see old Harry Hunkes and Sacarson.
In Sillam. 44.
When I this proposition had defended,
A coward cannot be an honest man,
Thou Silla seem forthwith to be offended,
And holds the contrary and swea^es he can.
But when I tell thee that he will forsake
His dearest friend, in peril of his life,
Thou then art changed and faist thou did mistake,
And so we end our argument and strife.
Yet I think often, and think I think aright,
Thy argument argues thou will not fight.
In Dacum. 45.
DAcus with some good color and pretense,
Terms his loves beauty silent eloquence:
For she does lay more colors on her face,
Then ever Tully used his speech to grace.
In Marcum. 46.
Why do thou Marcus in thy misery,
Rail and blaspheme, and call the heave ^vnkind,
The heavens do owe no kindness unto thee,
Thou have the heavens so little in thy mind,
For in thy life thou never use prayer,
But at primero, to encounter fair,
Meditations of a Gull. 47.
SEE yonder melancholy Gentleman,
Which hood-winked with his hat, alone does sit,
Think what he thinks and tell me if you can,
What great affairs troubles his little wit.
He thinks not of the war twixt France and Spain,
Whether it be for Europs' good or ill,
Nor whether the Empire can it self maintain
Against the Turkish power encroching still.
Nor what great town in all the Netherlands,
The States determine to besiedge this spring,
Nor how the Scottish policy now stands,
Nor what becomes of the Irish mutining.
But he does seriously bethink him whether
Of the guld people he the more esteemed,
For his long cloak, or his great black feather,
By which each gull is now a gallant deemed,
Or of a Journey he deliberates,
To Parris-garden cocke-pit or the play:
Or how to steal a dog he miditates,
Or what he shall unto his mistress say:
Yet with these thoughts he thinks himself most sit,
To be of Counsel with a King for wit.
Ad Musam. 48.
PEace idle Muse, have done, for it is time,
Since lousy Ponticus enuies my fame,
And swears the better sort are much too blame
To make me so well known for my ill rhyme;
Yet Banks his horse is better known then he,
So are the Cammels and the western Hog,
And so is Lepidus his printed dog:
Why does not Pontious their fames envy.
Besides this muse of mine, and the black fether
Grew both together fresh in estimation,
And both grown stale, were cast away together:
What fame is this that scarce lasts out a fashion:
Only this last in credit does remain,
That from henceforth, each bastard cast forth rhyme
Which does but savor of ^ libell vain,
Shall call me father, and be thought my crime.
So dull and with so little sense endued,
Is my gross headed judge the multitude.
I. D.

FINIS.

