The.xv. Books of P. Ouidius Naso, entytuled Metamorphosis, translated out of
Latin into English meeter, by Arthur Golding Gentleman, A work very pleasant
and delectable.

With skill, heed, and judgment, this work must be read, For else to the
Reader it stands in small stead.

Imprynted at London, by Willyam Seres.

To the right Honorable and his singular good Lord, Robert Earl of Leycester,
Baron of Denbygh, knight of the most noble order of the Garter. etc. Arthur
Golding Gent. wishes continuance of health, with prosperous estate and
felicity.
AT length my chariot wheel about the mark has found the way,
And at their weery races end, my breathless horses stay.
The woork is brought too end by which the author did account
(And rightly) with eternal fame above the stars too mount.
For whatsoever has been writ of ancient time in greek
By sundry men dispersedly, and in the latin ^eke,
Of this same dark Philosophy of turned shapes, the same
Has Ovid into one whole mass in this book brought in frame.
Four kind of things in this his work the Poet does conteyne.
That nothing under heaven does ay in steadfast state remain.
And next that nothing perishes: but that each substance takes
Another shape than that it had. Of these two points he makes
The proof by showing through his work the wonderful exchange
Of Gods, men, beasts, and elements, too sundry shapes right strange,
Beginning with creation of the world, and man of slyme,
And so proceeding with the turns that happened till his time.
Then shows he the soul of man from dying to be free,
By samples of the noblemen, who for their virtues be
Accounted and canonized for Gods by heathen men,
And by the peynes of Lymbo lake, and blysfull state again
Of spirits in th'Elysian feelds. And though that of these three
He make discourse dispersedly: yet specially they be
Discussed in the latter book in that oration where
He brings in Pythagoras dissuading men from fear
Of death, and preaching abstinence from flesh of living things.
But as for that opinion which Pythagoras there brings
Of souls removing out of beasts too men, and out of men
Too birds and beasts both wyld and tame, both too and fro again:
It is not too be understand of that same soul whereby
We are endewd with reason and discretion from on hie:
But of that soul or life the which brute beasts as well as we
Enjoy. Three sorts of life or soul (for so they termed be)
Are found in things. The first gives power too thryue, increase and grow,
And this in senseless herbs and trees and shrubs itself does show.
The second gives power too move and use of senses five,
And this remaynes in brutish beasts, and keeps them alive.
Both these are mortal, as the which received of the air
By force of Ph^bus, after death do thither eft repair.
The third gives understanding, wit, and reason: and the same
Is it alonly which with us of soul does bear the name.
And as the second does contain the first: even so the third
Conteyneth both the other twain. And neither beast, nor bird,
Nor fish, nor herb, nor tree, nor shrub, nor any earthly wight
(Save only man) can of the same partake the heavenly might.
I grant that when our breath does from our bodies go away,
It does eftsoons return too air: and of that air there may
Both bird and beast participate, and we of theirs likewise.
For while we live, (the thing itself appears to our eyes)
Both they and we draw all one breath. But for too deem or say
Our noble soul (which is divine and permanent for a^)
Is common too us with the beasts, I think it nothing less
Than for too be a point of him that wisdom does profess.
Of this I am right well assurde there is no Christen Wight
That can by fondness be so far seduced from the right.
And finally he does proceed in showing that not all
That bear the name of men (how strong, feerce, stout, bold, hardy, tall,
How wise, fair, rych, or hyghly borne, how much renownd by fame,
So ere they be, although on earth of Gods they bear the name)
Are for too be accounted men: but such as under awe
Of reasons rule continually do live in virtues law:
And that the rest do differ naught from beasts, but rather be
Much worse than beasts, because they do abace their own degree.
To natural philosophye the formest three perteyne,
The fowrth too moral: and in all are pitthye, apt and plain
Instructions which import the praise of vert^es, and the shame
Of vices, with the due rewards of either of the same.
As for example, Out of the first book.
in the tale of Daphnee turned too Bay,
A myrror of virginity appear unto us may,
Which yielding noyther unto fear, nor force, nor flatterye,
Does purchase everlasting fame and immortalitye.
In Phaetons fable unto sight the Poet does express Out of the second.

The natures of ambition blind, and youthful wilfulness.
The end whereof is misery, and brings at the last
Repentance when it is to late that all redress is past.
And how the weakness and the want of wit in magistrate
Confounds both his common weal and eeke his own estate.
This fable also does advise all parents and all such
As bring up youth, too take good heed of cockering them too much.
It further does commend the mean: and wills too beware
Of rash and hasty promises which most pernicious are,
And not too be performed: and in fine it plainly shows
What sorrow too the parents and too all the kindred grows
By disobedience of the child: and in the child is meant
The disobedient subject that against his prince is bent.
The transformations of the Crow and Raven do declare
That Clawbacks and Colcariers ought wisely too beware
Of whom, too whom, and what they speak. For sore against his will
Can any freendly heart abide too hear reported ill
The party whom he favors. This tale does eeke bewray
The rage of wrath and ielozie too have no kind of stay:
And that light credit too reports in no wise should be given.
For fear that men too late too just repentance should be driven.
The fable of Ocyroee by all such folk is told
As are in serching things too come too curious and too bold.
A very good example is describde in Battus tale
For covetous people which for gain do set their toongs too sale.
All such as do in flattring freaks, and hawks, and hownds delyght,
And dyce, Out of the iij.
and cards, and for too spend the time both day and night
In foul excess of chamberworke, or too much meat and drink:
Upon the piteous story of Acteon ought too think.
For these and their adherents used excessive are in deed
The dogs that daily do devour their followers on with speed.
Tyresias wills inferior folk in any wise too shun
Too judge between their betters least in peril they do run.
Narcissus is of scornfulnesse and pride a myrror clear,
Where beawties fading vanity most plainly may appear.
And Echo in the selfsame tale does kyndly represent
The lewd behavior of a bawd, and his due punishment.
The piteous tale of Pyramus and Thisbee does contain Out of the iiij.

The headie force of frentick love whose end is woe and pain.
The snares of Mars and Uenus show that time will bring too light
The secret sins that folk commit in corners or by night.
Her maphrodite and Salmacis declare that idleness
Is cheifest nurce and cherisher of all volupteousnesse,
And that voluptuous life breeds sin: which linking all toogither
Make men too be effeminate, vnweeldy, weak and lither.
Rich Piers daughters turned too Pies do openly declare,
That none so bold too vaunt themselves as blindest bayardes are. Out of the v.

The Muses plainly do declare ageine a toother side,
That whereas cheifest wisdom is, most meeldnesse does abide.
Arachnee may example be that folk should not contend
Against their betters, Out of the vj.
nor persist in error too the end.
So does the tale of Niobee and of her children: and
The transformation of the Carles that dwelt in Lycie land,
Toogither with the fle^ing of of piper Marsies skin.
The first do also show that long it is ere God begin
Too pay us for our faults, and that he warnes us often before
Too leave our folly: but at length his vengeance strikes sore.
And therefore that no Wight should strive with God in word nor thought
Nor deed. But pride and fond desire of praise have ever wrought
Confusion too the parties which account of them do make.
For some of such a nature be that if they once do take
Opinion (be it right or wrong) they rather will agree
To dye, than seem to take a foil: so obstinate they be.
The tale of Tereus, Philomele, and Prognee does conteyne
That folk are blind in things that too their proper weal perteyne.
And that the man in whom the fire of furious lust does reign
Does run too mischief like a horse that gets loose the re^ne*
It also shows the cruel wreake of women in their wrath
And that no heinous mischief long delay of vengeance has.
And lastly that distress does drive a man too look about
And seek all corners of his wits, what way too wind him out.
The good success of Jason in the land of Colchos, Out of the vij.
and
The doings of Medea since, do give too understand
That nothing is so hard but pain and travel do it win,
For fortune ever favors such as boldly do begin:
That women both in helping and in hurting have no match
When they too either bend their wits: and how that for too catch
An honest meener under fair pretense of friendship, is
An easy matter. Also there is warning given of this,
That men should never hastily give ear too fugitives,
Nor into hands of sorcerers commit their state or lives.
It shows in fine of stepmoothers the deadly hate in part,
And vengeance most unnatural that was in moothers heart.
The deeds of Theseus are a spur too prowess, and a glass*
How princes sons and noblemen their youthful years should pass.
King Minos shows that kings in hand no wrongful wars should take*
And what provision for the same they should before hand make.
King Aeacus gives also there example how that kings
Should keep their promise and their leages above all other things.
His grave description of the plage and end thereof, express
The wrath of God on man for sin: and how that nerethelesse
He does us spare and multiply ageine for goodmens sakes.
The whole discourse of Cephalus and Procris mention makes
That married folk should warely shun the vice of iealozie
And of suspicion should avoid all causes utterly.
Reproving by the way all such as causeless do misdeeme
The chaste and giltlesse for the deeds of those that faulty seem.
The story of the daughter of king Nisus sets out Out of the viij.

What wicked lust dr^ues folk unto too bring their wills about.
And of a rightuous judge is given example in the same,
Who for no meede nor friendship will consent too any blame.
We may perceive in Dedalus how every man by kind
Desires too be at liberty, and with an earnest mind
Does seek too see his native soil, and how that straight distress
Does make men wise, and sharpes their wits to find their own redress.
We also learn by Icarus how good it is too be
In mean estate and not too clymb too high, but too agree
Too wholesome counsel: for the hyre of disobedience is
Repentance when it is too late forthinking things amiss.
And Partrich tells that excellence in any thing procures
Men envy, even among those friends whom nature most assures.
Philemon and his feere are rules of godly pacient life,
Of sparing thrift, and mutual love between the man and wife,
Of due obedience, of the fear of God, and of reward
For good or evil usage showed too wandering strangers ward.
In Erisicthon does appear a lively image both
Of wickedness and cruelty which any Wight may loathe,
And of the hyre that longs theretoo. He shows also playn^
That whereas prodigality and gluttony does reign,
A world of riches and of goods are ever with the least
Too satisfye the appetite and eye of such a beast
In Hercules and Acheloyes encounters is set out Out of the ix.

The nature and behavior of two wooers that be stout.
Wherein the Poet covertly taunts such as being bace
Do seek by forged pedegrees too seem of noble race.
Who when they do perceive no truth upon their side too stand,
In stead of reason and of right use force and might of hand.
This fable also signifies that valiantness of heart
Consists not in words, but deeds: and that all slyght and Art
Give place too prowess. Furthermore in Nessus we may see
What breach of promise comes too, and how that such as be
Unable for too wreake their harms by force, do often deuyse
Too wreake themselves by policy in far more cruel wise.
And Deyanira does declare the force of iealozie
Deceived through too light belief and fond simplicity.
The process following peinteth out true manlynesse of heart
Which yields neither unto death, too sorrow, greef, nor smart.
And finally it shows that such as live in true renown
Of vortue here, have after death an everlasting crown
Of glory. Cawne and Byblis are examples contrary:
The Maid of most outrageous lust, the man of chas^itie.
The tenth book chiefly does contain one kind of argument
Reproving most prodigious lusts of such as have been bent Out of the x.

Too incest most unnatural. And in the latter end
It shows in Hippomenes how greatly folk offend,
That are ingrate for benefi^s which God or man bestow
Upon them in the time of need. Moreover it does show
That beawty (will they nill they) aye does men in danger throw:
And that it is a ^oolyshnesse too strive against the thing
Which God before determines too pass in time too bring.
And last of all Ado^s death does show that manhod strives
Against sorewa^ning though men see the peril of their lives.
The death of Orphey shows Gods just vengeance on the vile
And wicked sort which horribly with incest them defyle. Out of the xj.

In Midas of a covetous wretch the image we may see
Whose riches justly too himself a hellish torment be,
And of a fool whom neither proof nor warning ^an amend,
Until he feel the shame and smart that folly does him send.
His Harbor represents all blabs which seem with child too be
Until that they have blaazd abroad the things they hear or see.
In Ceyx and Al^yone appeeres most constant love,
Such as between the man and wife too be it does behoue.
This Ceyx also is a light of princely courtesy
And bounty toward such whom need compels for too fly.
His viage also does declare how vainly men are led.
Too utter peril through fond toys and fancies in their head.
For Idols doubtful oracles and soothsayres prophecies
Do nothing else but make fools feign and blind their bleared eyes.
Dedalions daughter warnes too use the tongue with modestee
And not too vaunt with such as are their betters in degree.
The seege of Troy, Out of the xij.
the death of men, the razing of the city,
And slaughter of king Priams stock without remors of pity,
Which in the xij. and xiij. books be written, do declare
How heinous wilful perjury and filthy whoredom are
In sight of God. The frentick fray between the Lapithes and
The Centaures is a note whereby is given too understand
The beastly rage of drunkenness. Out of the xiij.
Ulysses does express
The image of discretion, wit, and great aduisednesse.
And Ajax on the other side does represent a man
Stout, headie, irefull, hault of mind, and such a one as can
Abide too suffer no repulse. And both of them declare
How covetous of glory and reward men's natures are.
And finally it shows plain that wisdom does prevail
In all attempts and purposes when strength of hand does fail
The death of fair Polyxena does show a princely mind
And firm regard of honor rare engraft in woman kind.
And Polymnestor king of Thrace does show himself to be
A glass for wretched cou^tous folk wherein themselves to see
This story further witnesses that murder cries ay
For vengeance, and itself one time or other does bewray.
The tale of Giant Polypheme does evidently prove
That nothing is so feerce and wyld, which yields not to love.
And in the person of the self same Giant is set out
The rude and homely wooing of a country cloyne and lout.
The tale of Apes reproues the vice of wilful perjury, Out of the xiiij.

And wills people too beware they use not for too lie.
Aeneas going down too hell does show that virtue may
In saufty travel where it will, and nothing can it stay.
The length of life in Sybill does declare it is but vain
Too wish long life, sith length of life is also length of pain.
The grecian Achemenides does learn us how we ought
Be thankful for the benefits that any man has wrought.
And in this Achemenides the Poet does express
The image of exceeding fear in danger and distress.
What else are Circes witchcrafts and enchauntments than the vyl^
And silthy pleasures of the flesh which do our souls defyle?
And what is else herb Moly than the gift of stayednesse
And temperance which does all foul concupiscence repress?
The tale of Anaxaretee wills dames of high degree
Too use their lovers courteously how mean so ere they be.
And Iphis lernes inferior folks too fondly not too set
Their love on such as are too high for their estate too get.
Alemons son declares that men should willingly obey Out of the xv.

What God commaundes, and not upon exceptions se^me to stay.
For he will find the means too bring the purpose well about,
And in their most necessity dispatch them saufly out
Of danger. The oration of Pithagoras implies
A sum of all the former work. What person can deuyse
A notabler example of true love and godliness
Too ones own natyue countryward than Cippus does express?
The turning to a blazing star of Julius Caesar shows,
That fame and immortality of virtuous doing grows.
And lastly by examples of Augustus and a few
Of other noble princes sons the author there does show
That noblemen and gentlemen should strive too pass the fame
And virtues of their aunceters, or else too match the same.
These fables out of every book I have interpreted,
Too show how they and all the rest may stand a man in sted.
Not adding over curiously the meening of them all,
For that were labor infinite, and tediousness not small
Both unto your good Lordship and the rest that should them reed
Who well might think I did the bounds of modesty exceed,
If I this one epistle should with matters ouercharge
Which scarce a book of many quyres can well conteyne at large.
And whereas in interpreting these few I attribute
The things too one, which heathen men to many Gods impute,
Concerning mercy, wrath for sin, and other gifts of grace:
Described for examples sake in proper time and place.
Let no man marvel at the same. For though that they as blind
Through unbelief, and led astray through error even of kind,
Knew not the true eternal God, or if they did him know,
Yet did they not acknowledge him, but vaynly did bestow
The honor of the maker on the creature: yet it does
Behoue all us (who ryghtly are instructed in the sooth)
Too think and say that God alone is he that rules all things
And works all in all, as lord of lords and king of kings,
With whom there are none other Gods that any sway may bear,
No fatal law too bynd him by, no fortune for too fear.
For Gods, and fate, and fortune are the terms of heathennesse,
If men vsurp them in the sense that Paynims do express.
But if we will reduce their sense too right of Christian law,
Too signify three other things these terms we well may draw.
By Gods we understand all such as God has plaast in cheef
Estate to punish sin, and for the godly folks releef.
By fate the order which is set and stablished in things
By Gods eternal will and word, which in due season brings
All matters too their falling out. Which falling out or end
(Because our curious reason is too weak too comprehend
The cause and order of the same, and does behold it fall
Unwares too us) by name of chance or fortune we it call.
If any man will say these things may better learned be
Out of divine philosohie or scripture, I agree
That nothing may in worthiness with holy writ compare.
Howbeeit so far forth as things no whit impeachment are
Too virtue and too godliness but furtherers of the same,
I trust we may them sau^^y use without desert of blame.
And yet there are (and those not of the rude and vulgar sort.
But such as have of godliness and lerning good report)
That think the Poets took their first occasion of these things
From holy writ as from the well from whence all wisdom springs.
What man is he but would suppose the author of this book
The first foundation of his work from Moses wryghtings took*
Not only in effect he does with Genesis agree,
But also in the order of creation, save that he
Makes no distinction of the days. For what is else at all
That shapeless^, rude, and pestred heap which Chaos he does call,
Than even that universal mass of things which God did make
In one whole lump before that each their proper place did take.
Of which the Bible says that in the first beginning God
Made heaven and earth: the earth was waste, and darkness yet abod
Upon the deep: which holy words declare unto us plain
That fire, air, water, and the earth did vndistinct remain
"In one gross body at the first. For God the father that
"Made all things, framing out the world according too the plat,
"Conceived everlastingly in mind, made first of all
"Both heaven and earth vncorporall and such as could not fall
"As objects under sense of sight: and also air likewise,
"And emptynesse: and for these twain apt terms he did deuyse.
"He called air darkness: for the air by kind is dark.
"And emptynesse by name of depth full aptly he did mark:
"For emptynesse is deep and waste by nature. Ouermor^
"He formed also bodylesse (as other things before)
"The natures both of water and of spirit. And in fine
"The light: which being made too be a pattern most divine
"Whereby too form the fixed stars and wandering planets seven,
"With all the lyghts that afterward should beawtifie the heaven,
"Was made by God both bodylesse and of so pure a kind,
"As that it could alonly be perceived by the mind.
To this effect are Philos words. And certainly this same
Is it that Poets in their work confused Chaos name.
Not that Gods works at any time were pact confusedly
Toogither: but because no place nor outward shape whereby
To show them too the feeble sense of man's deceytfull sight
Was yet appointed unto things, until that by his might
And wondrous wisdom God in time set open too the eye
The things that he before all time had everlastingly
Decreed by his providence. But let us further see
How Ouids scantlings with the whole true pattern do agree.
The first day by his mighty word (says Moses) God made light,
The second day the firmament, which heaven or welkin hight.
The third day he did part the earth from sea and made it dry,
Commanding it too bear all kind of fruits abundantly.
The fowrth day he did make the lyghts of heaven to shine from hye,
And stablished a law in them too rule their courses by.
The fifth day he did make the whales and fishes of the deep,
With all the birds and fethered fowls that in the air do keep.
The sixth day God made every beast both wyld and tame, and woormes
That creep on ground according too their several kynds and foormes.
And in the image of himself he formed man of clay
Too be the Lord of all his works the very selfsame day.
This is the sum of Moses words. And Ovid (whether it were
By following of the text aright, or that his mind did bear
Him witness that there are no Gods but one) does plain uphold
That God (although he knew him not) was he that did unfold
The former Chaos, putting it in form and facion new,
As may appear by these his words which underneath ensew.
"This s^ryfe did God and nature break and set in order dew.
"The earth from heaven the sea from earth he parted orderly,
"And from the thick and foggie air he took the lyghtsome sky.
In these few lines he comprehends the whole effect of that
Which God did woork the first three days about this noble plat.
And then by distributions he entreats by and by
More largely of the selfsame things, and paynts them out too eye
With all their bounds and furniture: And whereas we do find
The term of nature joined with God: (according too the mind
Of learned men) by joining so, is meant none other thing,
But God the Lord of nature who did all in order bring.
The distributions being done right lernedly, anon
Too show the other three days works he thus proceeds on.
"The heavenly soil too Gods and stars and planets first he gave
"The waters next both fresh and salt he let the fishes have.
"The subtle air to flickering fowls and birds he has assignd,
"The earth too beasts both wyld and tame of sundry sorts and kind.
Thus partly in the outward phrase, but more in very deed,
He seems according too the sense of scripture too proceed.
And when he commes to speak of man, he does not vainly say
(As sum have written) that he was before all time for ay,
Ne mencioneth mo Gods than one in making him. But thus
He both in sentence and in sense his meening does discuss.
"Howbe^it yet of all this while the creature wanting was
"Far more divine, of nobler mind, which should the resdew pass
"In depth of knowledge, reason, wit and high capacitee,
"And which of all the resdew should the Lord and ruler be.
"Then either he that made the world and things in order set,
"Of heavenly seed engendered man: or else the earth as yet
"But late before, the seeds thereof as yet hild inwardly.
"The which Prometheus tempring straight with water of the spring,
"Did make in likeness to the Gods that govern every thing.
What other thing meenes Ovid here by term of heavenly seed,
Than man's immortal soul, which is divine, and commes in deed
From heaven, and was inspyrde by God, as Moses shows plain?
And whereas of Prometheus he seems too add a vain
Deuyce, as though he meant that he had formed man of clay,
Although it be a tale put in for pleasure by the way:
Yet by thinterpretation of the name we well may gather,
He did include a mystery and secret meening rather.
This word Prometheus signifies a person sage and wise,
Of great foresyght, who headily will nothing enterprise.
It was the name of one that first did images invent:
Of whom the Poets do report that he too heaven up went,
And there stole fire, through which he made his images alive:
And therefore that he formed men the Paynims did contryue.
Now when the Poet red perchance that God almighty by
His providence and by his word (which everlastingly
Is ay his wisdom) made the world, and also man to bear
His image, and too be the lord of all the things that were
Erst made, and that he shaped him of earth or slymy clay:
He took occasion in the way of fabling for too say
That wise Prometheus tempring earth with water of the spring,
Did form it like the Gods above that govern every thing.
Thus may Prometheus seem too be theternall word of God,
His wisdom, and his providence which formed man of clod.
"And where all other things behold the ground with groueling eye:
"He gave too man a stately look replete with majesty:
"And willd him too behold the heaven with countnance cast on hye,
"Too mark and understand what things are in the starrie sky.
In these same words, both parts of man the Poet does express
As in a glass, and gives us instruction too address
Our selves too know our own estate: as that we be not borne
Too follow lust, or serve the paunch like brutish beasts forlorn,
But for too lift our eyes as well of body as of mind
Too heaven as too our native soil from whence we have by kind
Our better part: and by the sight thereof too learn too know
And knowledge him that dwells there: and wholly too bestow
Our care and travel too the praise and glory of his name
Who for the sakes of mortal men crated first the same.
Moreover by the golden age what other thing is meant,
Than Adams time in Paradyse, who being innocent
Did lead a blist and happy life until that thurrough sin
He fell from God? From which time forth all sorrow did begin.
The earth accursed for his sake, did never after more
Yield food without great toil. Both heat and cold did vex him sore.
Disease of body, care of mind, with hunger, thirst and need,
Fear, hope, joy, grief, and trouble, fell on him and on his seed.
And this is termd the silver age. Next which there did succeed
The brazen age, when malice first in peoples hearts did breed,
Which never ceased growing till it did so far outrage,
That nothing but destrucion could the heat thereof assuage
For why men's stomachs wexing hard as steel against their God,
Provoked him from day too day too strike them with his rod.
Proud Giants also did arise that with presumptuous wills
Heapt wrong on wrong, and sin on sin like howge and lofty hills
Whereby they strove too cl^mb too heaven and God from thence too draw,
In scorning of his holy word and breaking natures law.
For which anon ensewd the slood which ouerflowed all
The whole round earth and drowned quyght all creatures great and small,
Excepting feaw that God did save as seed whereof should grow
Another offspring. All these things the Poet here does show
In color, altring both the names of persons, time and place.
For where according too the truth of scripture in this case,
The universal flood did fall but sixteen hundred years
And six^nd fifty after the creation (as appeeres
By reckening of the ages of the fathers) under Noy,
With whom seven other persons mo like saufgard did enjoy
Within the arc, which at the end of one whole year did stay
Upon the hills of Armenie: The Poet following ay
The fables of the glorying Greeks (who shamelessely did take
The praise of all things too themselves) in fablyng wise does make
It happen in Deu^alions time, who reignd in Thessaly
Eight hundred winters since Noyes flood or thereupon well nigh,
Because that in the reign of him a mighty flood did fall,
That drownde the greater part of Greece, towns, cattle, folk, and all,
Save feaw that by the help of boats atteyned unto him,
And too the highest of the forkt Parnasos top did swim.
And for because that he and his were driven a while to dwell
Among the stonny hills and rocks until the water fell,
The Poets hereupon did take occasion for too feyne,
That he and Pyrrha did repair mankind of stones again.
So in the sixth book afterward Amphions harp is said
The first foundation of the walls of Thebee too have laid,
Because that by his cloquence and justice (which are meant
By true accord of harmony and musical consent)
He gathered intoo Thebee town, and in due order knit
The people that dispersed and rude in hills and rocks did sit.
So Orphey in the tenth book is reported too delyght
The savage beasts, and for too hold the fleeting birds from flight,
Too move the senseless stones, and stay swift rivers, and too make
The trees too follow after him and for his music sake
Too yield him shadow where he went. By which is signifyde
That in his doctrine such a force and sweetness was implyde,
That such as were most wyld, stowre, feerce, hard, witless, rude, and bent
Against good order, were by him persuaded too relent,
And for too be conformable too live in reverent awe
Like neybours in a common weal by justice under law.
Considring then of things before reherst the whole effect,
I trust there is already showed sufficient too detect
That Poets took the ground of all their cheifest fables out
Of scripture: which they shadowing with their gloses went about
Too turn the truth too toys and lies. And of the selfsame rate
Are also these: Their Phlegeton, their Styx, their blisfull state
Of spirits in th'Elysian feelds. Of which the former twain
Seem counterfetted of the place where damned souls remain,
Which we call hell. The third does seem too fetch his pedigree
From Paradyse which scripture shows a place of bliss too be.
If Poets then with leesings and with fables shadowed so
The certain truth, what lets us too pluck those visers fro
Their doings, and too bring ageine the darkened truth too light,
That all men may behold thereof the cleernesse shining bright?
The readers therefore earnestly admonisht are too be
Too seek a further meening than the letter gives too se^.
The travel ^ane in that behalf although it have sum pain
Yet makes it double recompense with pleasure and with gain.
With pleasure, for variety and strangeness of the things,
With gain, for good instruction which the understanding brings.
And if they happening for too meet with any wanton word
Or matter lewd, according as the person does a^oord
In whom the evil is describde, do feel their minds thereby
Provoked too vice and wantonness, (as nature commonly
Is pro^e to evil) let them thus imagine in their mind.
Behold, by sent of reason and by perfect sight I find
A Panther here, whose peinted cote with yellow spots like gold
And pleasant smell allure mine eyes and senses too behold.
But well I know his face is grim and feerce, which he does hyde
Too this intent, that while I thus stand gazing on his hyde,
He may devour me vnbewares. Ne let them more offend
At vices in this present woork in lively colors p^^d,
Than if that in a crystal glass foul images they found,
Resembling folks foul visages that stand about it round.
For sure these fables are not put in wryghting too thentent
Too further or allure too vice: but rather this is meant,
That men beholding what they be when vice does reign in stead
Of virtue, should not let their lewd affections have the head.
For as there is no creature more divine than man as long
As reason has the souereintie and stands firm and strong:
So is there none more beastly, vile, and deu^lish, than is he,
If reason giving over, by affection mated be.
The use of this same book therefore is this: that every man
(Endeavoring for too know himself as nearly as he can,)
(As though he in a chariot sat well ordered,) should direct
His mind by reason in the way of virtue, and correct
His feerce affections with the bit of temprance, least perchance
They taking bridle in the teath like wilful iades do praunce
A way, and headlong carry him to every filthy pit
Of vice, and drinking of the same defyle his soul with it:
Or else do headlong harrie him upon the rocks of sin,
And overthrowing forcibly the chariot he sits in,
Do tear him worse than ever was Hippolytus the son
Of Theseus when he went about his fathers wrath too shun.
This worthy work in which of good examples are so many,
This Ortyard of Alcimous in which there wants not any
Herb, tree, or fruit that may man's use for health or pleasure serve,
This plenteous horn of Acheloy which justly does deserve
Too bear the name of treasorie of knowledge, I ^resent
Too your good Lordship once agein^ not as a member rent
Or par^ed from the resdew of the body any more:
But fully now accomplished, desiring you therefore
Too let your noble courtesy and favor counteruayle
My faults where Art or eloquence on my behalf does fail.
For sure the mark whereat I shoot is neither wreathes of bay,
Nor name of Poet, no nor meede: but chiefly that it may
Be lyked well of you and all the wise and learned sort,
And next that every wight that shall have pleasure for to sport
Him in this gardeine, may as well bear wholesome fruit away
As only on the pleasant ^^owres his rechlesse senses stay.
But why seem I these doubts too cast, as if that he who took
With favor and with gentleness a parcel of the book
Would not likewise accept the whole? or even as if that they
Who do excel in wisdom and in lerning, would not wey
A wise and learned work aryght? or else as if that I
Ought ay too have a special care how all men do apply
My doings too their own behoof? as of the former twain
I have great hope and confidence: so would I also feign
The other should according too good meening find success:
If otherwise, the fault is theyrs not mine they must confess.
And therefore breefly too conclude, I turn ageine too thee
O noble Earl of Leycester, whose life God grant may be
As long in honor, health and wealth as ancient Nestors was,
Or rather as Tithonussis: that all such students as
Do travel too enrich our tongue with knowledge heretofore
Not common too our vulgar speech, may daily more and more
Proceed through thy good furtherance and favor in the same.
Too all men's profit and delyght, and thy eternal fame.
And that (which is a greater thing) our natyue country may
Long time enjoy thy counsel and thy travel too her stay.
At Barwicke the.xx. of April. 1567. Your good L. most humbly too command
Arthur Golding.

Too the Reader.
I Would not wish the simple sort offended for too be,
When in this book the heathen names of feyned Godds they see.
The true and everliving God the Paynims did not know:
Which caused them the name of Godds on creatures too bestow.
For nature being once corrupt and knowledge blinded quyght
By Adams fall, those little seeds and sparks of heavenly light
That did as yet remain in man, endeuering forth too burst
And wanting grace and power too grow too that they were at furst,
Too superstition did decline: and drove the fearful mind,
Strange woorshippes of the living God in creatures for too find.
The which by custom taking root, and growing so too strength,
Through Satan's help possessed the hearts of all the world at length.
Some woorshipt all the host of heaven: some deadmens ghostes and bones:
Sum wicked feends: sum worms and fowls, herbs, fishes, trees and stones.
The fire, the air, the sea, the land, and every roonning brook,
Each queachie grove, each cragged cliffe the name of Godhead took.
The night and day, the fleeting hours, the seasons of the year,
And every strange and monstrous thing, for Godds mistaken weere.
There was no virtue, no nor vice: there was no gift of mind
Or body, but some God thertoo or Goddess was assignde.
Of health and sickness, life and death, of needinesse and wealth,
Of peace and war, of love and hate, of murder, craft and stealth,
Of bread and wine, of slothful sleep, and of their solemn games,
And every other tryfling toy their Gods did bear the names.
And look how every man was bent too goodness or too ill,
He did surmyse his foolish Gods enclyning too his will.
For God perceiving man's peruers and wicked will too sin
Did give him over too his lust too sink or swim therein.
By means whereof it cam^ too pass (as in this book ye see)
That all their Gods with whoordome, theft, or murder blotted be.
Which argues them too be no Gods, but woorser in effect
Than they whoose open po^^nishment their ^ooings does detect.
Whoo seeing Jove whom heathen folk do arm with triple fire
In shape of Eagle, ^^ll or swan too win his foul desire?
Or grysly Mars their God of war entangled in a net
By Venus husband purposely too trappe him warely set?
Whoo seeing Saturn eating up the children he begat?
Or Venus dalying wantonly with every lusty mate?
Whoo seeing Juno play the scold? or Phoebus moorne and rue
For loss of her whom in his rage through jealous mood he slew?
Or else the subtle Mercury that bears the charmed rod
Conueying neat and hyding them would take him for a God?
For if these faults in mortal men do justly merit blame,
What greater madness can there be than too impute the same
Too Gods, whoose natures ought too be most perfect, pure and bright,
Most virtuous, holly, chaast, and wise, most full of grace and light?
But as there is no Christen man that can surmyse in mind
That these or other such are Gods which are no Gods by kind:
So would too God there were not now of christen men professed,
That worshipped in their deeds these Godds whose names they do detest.
Whoose laws we keep his thralles we be, and he our God indeed.
So long is Christ our God as we in christen life proceed.
But if we yield too fleshlye lust, too lucre, or too wrath,
Or if that Envy, Gluttony, or Pride the maystry has.
Or any other kind of sin the thing the which we serve,
Too be accounted for our God most justly does deserve.
Then must we think the learned men that did these names frequent,
Some further things and purposes by those devises meant.
By Jove and Juno understand all states of princely port:
By Ops and Saturn ancient folk that are of elder sort:
By Phoebus young and lusty brutes of hand and courage stout:
By Mars the valiant men of war that love too feight it out:
By Pallas and the famous troop of all the Muses nine,
Such folk as in the sciences and virtuous arts do shine.
By Mercury the subtle sort that use too filch and lie,
With thieves, and Merchants whoo too gain their travel do apply.
By Bacchus all the meaner trades and handycraftes are meant:
By Venus such as of the flesh too filthy lust are bent.
By Neptune such as keep the seas: By Phebe maidens chaste,
And Pilgrims such as wandringly their time in travel waste.
By Pluto such as delue in mines, and Ghostes of persons dead:
By Vulcane smythes and such as work in iron, tynne or lead.
By He^at witches, Coniurers, and Necromancers reed:
With all such vain and deulish arts as superstition breed.
By Satyrs, Syluanes, Nymphs and Faunes with other such beside,
The plain and simple country folk that every where abide.
I know these names too other things often may and must agree
In declaration of the which I will not tedious be.
But leave them too the Readers will too take in sundry wise,
As matter rising gives cause constructions too deuyse.
Now when thou readst of God or man, in stone, in beast, or tree
It is a myrrour for thy self thine own estate too see.
For under feyned names of Gods it was the Poets guyse,
The vice and faults of all estates too taunt in covert wise.
And likewise too extol with praise such things as do deserve.
Observing always comlynesse from which they do not swerve.
And as the person greater is of birth, renown or fame,
The greater ever is his laud, or fouler is his shame.
For if the States that on the earth the room of God supply,
Declyne from virtue unto vice and live disorderly,
Too Eagles, Tygres, Bulls, and Bears, and other figures strange
Both too their people and themselves most hurtful do they change,
And when the people give themselves too filthy life and sin,
What other kind of shape thereby than filthy can they win?
So was Licaon made a Woolfe: and Jove became a Bull:
The tone for using cruelty, the toother for his trull.
So was Elpenor and his mates transformed intoo swyne,
For following of their filthy lust in women and in wine.
Not that they lost their manly shape as too the outward show.
But for that in their brutish breasts most beastly lusts did grow.
For why this lump of flesh and bones this body is not we.
We are a thing which earthly eyes denied are too see.
Our soul is we endewd by God with reason from above:
Our body is but as our house, in which we work and move.
Tone part is common too us all, with God of heaven himself:
The toother common with the beasts, a vile and stinking pelf.
The ^one bedect with heavenly gifts and endless: toother gross,
Fraylie, filthy, weak, and borne too dye as made of earthly dross.
Now look how long this clod of clay too reason does obey,
So long for men by ^ust desert account our selves we may.
But if we suffer fl^shly lusts as lawless Lords too reign,
Than are we beasts, we are no men, we have our name in vain.
And if we be so drowned in vice that feeling once be gone,
Then may it well of us be said, we are a block or stone.
This surely did the Poets meene when in such sundry wise
The pleasant tales of turned shapes they studied too deuyse.
There purpose was too profit men, and also too delyght
And so too hand^e every thing as best might like the sight.
For as the Image portrayed out in simple whight and black
(Though well proportiond, true and fair) if comely colors lack,
Delyghteth not the eye so much, nor yet contents the mind
So much as that that shadowed is with colors in his kind:
Even so a plain and naked tale or story simply told
(Although the matter be in deed of valewe more than gold)
Makes not the hearer so attent too print it in his heart,
As when the thing is well declarde, with pleasant terms and art.
All which the Poets knew right well: and for the greater grace,
As Persian kings did never go abroad with open face,
But with some lawne or silken skarf, for reverence of their state:
Even so they following in their works the selfsame trade and rate,
Did under covert names and terms their doctrines so emplye,
As that it is right dark and hard their meening too espy.
But being found it is more sweet and makes the mind more glad,
Than if a man of tried gold a treasure gained had.
For as the body has his joy in pleasant smelles and syghts:
Even so in knowledge and in arts the mind as much delights.
Whereof abundant hoordes and heaps in Poets packed been
So hid that (saving unto few) they are not too be seen.
And therefore whooso does attempt the Poets works too reed,
Must bring with him a stayed head and judgment too proceed.
For as there be most wholesome hestes and precepts too be found,
So are their rocks and shallowe shelues too run the ship a ground.
Some naughty person seeing vice showed lively in his hew,
Does take occasion by and by like vices too ensew.
Another being more severe than wisdom does require,
Beeholding vice (too outward show) exalted in desire,
Condemns by and by the book and him that did it make.
And wills it too be burnd with fire for lewd example sake.
These persons ouershoote themselves, and other folks deceive:
Not able of the authors mind the meening too conceive.
The Authors purpose is too paint and set before our eyes
The lively Image of the thoughts that in our stomachs rise.
Each vice and virtue seems too speak and argue too our face,
With such persuasions as they have their dooinges too embrace.
And if a wicked person seem his vices too exalt,
Esteem not him that wrate the work in such defaultes too halt.
But rather with an vpryght eye consider well thy thought:
See if corrupted nature hane the like within thee wrought.
Mark what affection does persuade in every kind of matter.
Judge if that even in heinous crimes thy fancy do not flatter.
And were it not for dread of law or dread of God above,
Most men (I fear) would do the things that fond affections move.
Then take these works as fragrant flowers most full of pleasant iuce.
The which the Be conueying home may put too wholesome use:
And which the spyder sucking on too poison may convert,
Through venym spread in all her limbs and native in her heart.
For too the pure and Godly mind, are all things pure and cleene,
And unto such as are corrupt the best corrupted been:
Like as the fynest meats and drinks that can be made by art
In sickly folks too nourishment of sickness do convert.
And therefore not regarding such whose diet is so fine
That nothing can digest with them unless it be divine,
Nor such as too their proper harm do wrest and wring awrye
The things that too a good intent are written pleasantly,
Through Ouids work of turned shapes I have with peinfull pace
Past on until I had atteynd the end of all my race.
And now I have him made so well acquainted with our ^oong
As that he may in English verse as in his own be soong.
Wherein although for pleasant style, I cannot make account,
Too match mine author, who in that all other does surmount:
Yet (gentle Reader) do I trust my travel in this case
May purchase favor in thy sight my doings too embrace:
Considring what a sea of goods and Iewelles thou shall find,
Not more delyghtfull too the ear than fruitful too the mind.
For this do learned persons deem, of Ouids present work:
That in no one of all his books the which he wrate, do lurk
Mo dark and secret mysteries, mo counselles wise and sage,
Mo good ensamples, mo reprooues of vice in youth and age,
Mo fine inventions too delight, mo matters clerkly knit,
No nor more strange variety too show a learned wit.
The high, the low: the rich, the poor: the master, and the slave:
The maid, the wife: the man, the child: the simple and the brave:
The young, the old: the good, the bad: the warrior strong and stout:
The wise, the fool: the country cloyne: the learned and the lout:
And every other living wight shall in this mirror see
His whole estate, thoughts, words and deeds expressly showed too be.
Whereof if more particular examples thou do crave,
In reading the Epistle through thou shall thy longing have.
Moreover thou may find herein descriptions of the times:
With constellacions of the stars and planettes in their clymes:
The Sites of Countries, Cities, hills, seas, forestes, playnes and floods:
The natures both of fowls, beasts, worms, herbs, metals, stones and woods,
And finally what ever thing is strange and delectable,
The same conveyed shall you find most featly in some fable.
And even as in a cheyne each link within another wynds,
And both with that that went before and that that follows binds:
So every tale within this book does seem too take his ground
Of that that was reherst before, and enters in the bound
Of that that folowes after it: and every one gives light
Too other: so that whoo so meenes too understand them right,
Must have a care as well too know the thing that went before,
As that the which he presently desires too see so sore.
Now too the intent that none have cause hereafter too complain
Of me as setter out of things that are but light and vain,
If any stomach be so weak as that it cannot brook,
The lively setting forth of things described in this book,
I give him counsel too abstain until he be more strong,
And for too use Ulysses feat against the Meremayds song.
Or if he needs will here and see and wilfully agree
(Through cause misconstrued) unto vice allured for too be,
Then let him also mark the peine that does thereof ensue,
And hold himself content with that that too his fault is due.
FINIS.
The first book of Ouids Metamorphosis, translated into English Meter.
OF shapes transformde to bodies strange, I purpose t^ entreat,
Ye gods vouchsafe (for you are they y^wrought this wo^drous feate)
To further this mine enterprise. And from the world begun,
Grant that my verse may to my time, his course directly run.
Before the Sea and Land were made, and Heaven that all does hide.
In all the world one only face of nature did abide,
Which Chaos hight, a huge rude heap, and nothing else but even
A heavy lump and clottred clod of seeds together driven,
Of things at strife among themselves, for want of order due.
No sun as yet with lightsome beams the shapelesse world did view.
No Moon in growing did repair her horns with borrowed light.
Nor yet the earth amiddes the air did hang by wondrous slight
Just peysed by her proper weight. Nor winding in and out
Did Amphitrytee with her arms embrace the earth about.
For where was earth, was sea and air, so was the earth unstable.
The air all dark, the sea likewise to bear a ship unable.
No kind of thing had proper shape, but each confounded other.
For in one self same body strove, the hot and cold together.
The moist with dry, the soft with hard, the light with things of weight.
This strife did God and Nature break, and set in order straight.
The earth from heaven, the sea from earth, he parted orderly,
And from the thick and foggie air, he took the lightsome sky.
Which when he once unfolded had, and severed from the blind
And clodded heap. He setting each from other did them bind
In endless friendship to agree. The fire most pure and bright,
The substance of the heaven it self, because it was so light
Did mount aloft, and set it self in highest place of all.
The second room of right to air, for lightness did befall.
The earth more gross drew down with it each weighty kind of matter,
And set it self in lowest place. Again, the wauing water
Did lastly challenge for his place, the utmost coast and bound,
Of all the compass of the earth, to close the steadfast ground.
Now when he in this foresaid wise (what God so ere he was)
Had broke and into members put this rude confused mass,
Then first because in every part, the earth should equal be,
He made it like a mighty ball, in compass as we see.
And here and there he cast in seas, to whom he gave a law:
To swell with every blast of wind, and every stormy flawe.
And with their waves continually to beat upon the shore,
Of all the earth within their bounds enclosde by them before.
Moreover, Springs and mighty Meeres and Lakes he did augment,
And flowing streams of crooked brooks in winding banks he pent.
Of which the earth does drink up some, and some with rest less race,
Do seek the sea: where finding scope of larger room and space,
In stead of banks, they beat on shores. He did command the plain
And champion grounds to stretch out wide: and valleys to remain
Aye underneath: and eke the woods to hide them decently
With tender leaves: and stony hills to lift themselves on hie.
And as two Zones do cut the Heaven upon the righter side,
And other twain upon the left likewise the same divide,
The middle in outrageous heat exceeding all the rest:
Even so likewise through great foresight to God it seemed best,
The earth encluded in the same should so divided be,
As with the number of the Heaven, her Zones might full agree.
Of which the middle Zone in heat, the utmost twain in cold
Exceed so far, that there to dwell no creature dare be bold.
Between these two so great extremes, two other Zones are fixed,
Where temprature of heat and cold indifferently is mixed.
Now over this does hang the Air, which as it is more sleightie
Than earth or water: so again than fire it is more weighty.
There has he placed mist and clouds, and for to fear men's minds,
The thunder and the lightning eke, with cold and blustering winds.
But yet the maker of the world permits not always,
The winds to use the air at will. For at this present day,
Though each from other placed be in sundry coasts aside:
The violence of their boystrous blasts, things scarsly can abide.
They so turmoyle as though they would the world in pieces rende,
So cruel is those brothers wrath when that they do contend.
And therefore to the morning graye, the Realm of Nabathie,
To Persis and to other lands and countries that do lie
Far underneath the Morning star, did Eurus take his flight
Likewise the setting of the Sun, and shutting in of night
Belong to Zephyr. And the blasts of blustering Boreas reign,
In Scythia and in other lands set under Charles his waine.
And unto Auster does belong the coast of all the South,
Who bears shoures and rotten mistes, continual in his month.
Above all these he set aloft the clear and lightsome sky,
Without all dregs of earthly filth or grossness utterly.
The bounds of things were scarsly yet by him thus pointed out,
But that appeared in the heaven, stars glistring all about,
Which in the said confused heap had hidden been before,
And to the intent with lively things each Region for to store.
The heavenly soil, to Gods and Stars and Planets first he gave.
The waters next both fresh and salt he let the fishes have.
The subtle air to flickring fowls and birds he has assignde.
The earth to beasts both wild and tame of sundry sort and kind.
Howbeit yet of all this while, the creature wanting was,
Far more divine, of nobler mind, which should the residue pas^e
In depth of knowledge, reason, wit, and high capacity,
And which of all the residue should the Lord and ruler be.
Then either he that made the world, and things in order set,
Of heavenly seed engendered Man: or else the earth as yet
Young, lusty, fresh, and in her flowers, and parted from the kie,
But late before, the seed thereof as yet held inwardly.
The which Prometheus tempring straight with wa^er of the spring,
Did make in likeness to the Gods that govern every thing.
And where all other beasts behold the ground with groueling eye,
He gave to Man a stately look repl^^e with majesty.
And willde him to behold the He^^en with countnance cast on hie*
To mark and understand what things were in the starrie sky.
And thus the earth which late before had neither shape nor hew,
Did take the noble shape of man, and was transformed new.
Then sprang up first the golden age, which of it self maintainde,
The truth and right of every thing vnforst and vnconstrainde.
There was no fear of punishment, there was no thr^^ining law
In brazen tables nailed up, to ^eepe the folk inlawe.
There was no man would cronch or creep to Judge with cap in hand,
They lived safe without a Judge, in every Realm and land.
The lofty Pynetree was not hewn from mountains where it stood,
In seeking strange and foreign lands, to roue upon the flood.
Men knew none other countries yet, than where themselves did keep:
There was no town enclosed yet, with walls and diches deep.
No horn nor trumpet was in use, no sword nor helmet worn,
The world was such, that soldiers help might easly be forborne.
The fertile earth as yet was free, untouched of spade or plough,
And yet it yielded of it self of every things enough.
And men themselves contented well with plain and simple food,
That on the earth of natures gift without their travel stood,
Did live by Raspis, heppes and hawes, by cornelles, plummes and cherries,
By sloes and apples, nuttes and pears, and loathsome bramble berries,
And by the acornes dropped on ground, from Jove's broad tree in field.
The Springtime lasted all the year, and Zephyr with his mild
And gentle blast did cherish things that grew of own accord,
The ground vntilde, all kind of fruits did plenteously auorde.
No mucke nor tillage was bestowde on lean and barren land,
To make the corn of better head, and ranker for to stand.
The^ streams ran milk, then streams ran wine, and yellow honny flowde
From each green tree whereon the rays of fiery Phoebus glowde.
But when that into Lymbo once Saturnus being thrust,
The rule and charge of all the world was under Jove unjust,
And that the silver age came in, more somewhat base than gold,
More precious yet than freckled brass, immediately the old
And ancient Spring did Jove abridge, and made thereof anon,
Four seasons: Winter, Summer, Spring, and Autumn of and on.
Then first of all began the air with fervent heat to swelt.
Then Isyeles hung roping down: then for the cold was felt
Men began to shroud themselves in house. their houses were the thickes,
And bushie queaches, hollow caves, or hardels made of sticks.
Then first of all were furrows drawn, and corn was cast in ground.
The simple Ox with sorry sighs, to heavy yoke was bound.
Next after this succeeded straight, the third and brazen age:
More hard of nature, somewhat bent to cruel wars and rage.
But yet not wholly past all grace. Of iron is the last
In no part good and traetable as former ages past.
For when that of this wicked Age once opened was the vein
Therein all mischief rushed forth. then Faith and Truth were feign
And honest shame to hide their heads: for whom stepped stoutly in,
Craft, Treason, Uiolence, Envy, Pride and wicked Lust to win.
The shipman hoyst his sails to wind, whose names he did not know:
And ships that erst in tops of hills and mountains had ygrowe,
Did leap and dance on uncouth waves: and men began to bound,
With dowles and diches drawn in length the free and fertile ground,
Which was as common as the Air and light of Sun before.
Not only corn and other fruits, for sustnance and for store,
Were now exacted of the Earth: but eft thy began to dig,
And in the bowels of the ground vnsaciably to rigge.
For Riches coucht and hidden deep, in places nere to Hell,
The spurs and stirrers unto vice, and foes to doing well.
Then hurtful iron came abroad, then came forth yellow gold,
More hurtful than the iron far. then came forth battle bold,
That feightes with both, and shakes his sword in cruel bloody hand.
Men live by rauine and by stelth: the wandering guest does stand
In danger of his host: the host in danger of his guest:
And fathers of their son in laws: yea seldom time does rest,
Between borne brothers such accord and love as ought to be.
The goodman seeks the goodwiues death, and his again seeks she.
The stepdames fell their husbands sons, with poison do assail.
To see their fathers live so long the children do bewail.
All godliness lies under foot. And Lady Astrey last
Of heavenly virtues, from this earth in slaughter drowned past.
And to the intent the earth alone thus should not be oppressed,
And heaven above in slothful ease and careless quiet rest,
Men say that Giantes went about the Realm of Heaven to win
To place themselves to reign as Gods and lawless Lords therein.
And hill on hill they heaped up aloft unto the sky,
Till God almighty from the Heaven did let his thunder fly.
The dint whereof the ayrie tops of high Olympus brake,
And pressed Pelion violently from under Ossa struck.
When whelmed in their wicked work those cursed Ca^tiues lay,
The Earth their mother took their blood yet warm and (as they say)
Did give it life. And for because some ympes should still remain
Of that same stock, she gave it shape and limbs of men again.
This offspring eke against the Gods did bear a native spite,
In slaughter and in doing wrong was all their whole delight.
Their deeds declared them of blood engendered for to be.
The which as soon as Saturns son from Heaven aloft did see,
He fetched a sigh, and therwithall reuoluing in his thought
The shameful act which at a feast Lycaon late had wrought,
As yet unknown or blown abroad: He began thereat to storm
And stomach like an angry Jove. And therefore to reform
Such heinous acts, he sommonde straight his Court of Parliament,
Whereto resorted all the Gods that had their sommons sent.
High in the Welkin is a way apparent to the sight.
In starrie nights, which of his passing whiteness milkie hight:
It is the street that to the Court and Princely Palace leads,
Of mighty Jove whose thunderclaps each living creature dreades.
On both the sides of this same way do stand in stately port
The sumptuous houses of the Pieres. For all the common sort
Dwell scattring here and there abroad: the face of all the sky,
The houses of the chief estates and Princes do supply.
And sure and if I may be bold to speak my fancy free
I take this place of all the Heaven the Palace for to be.
Now when the Gods assembled were, and each had taken his place,
Jove standing up aloft and leaning on his yuorie Mace,
Right dreadfully his bushie locks did thrice or four times shake.
Wherewith he made both Sea and Land and Heaven it self to quake,
And afterward in wrathful words his angry mind thus brake.
I never was in greater care nor more perplexity,
How to maintain my sovereign state and Princely royalty,
When with their hundredth hands a piece the Addersooted rout,
Did practice for to conquer Heaven and for to cast us out.
For though it were a cruel foe: yet did that war depend
Upon one ground, and in one stock it had his final end.
But now as far as any sea about the world does wind,
I must destroy both man and beast and all the mortal kind.
I swear by Styxes hideous streams that run within the ground,
All other means must first be sought: but when there can be found
No help to heal a festred sore, it must away be cut,
Least that the parts that yet are sound, in danger should be put.
We have a number in the world that man's estate surmount,
Of such whom for their private Gods the country folks account,
As Satyrs, Faunes, and sundry Nymphs, with Siluanes eke beside,
That in the woods and hilly grounds continually abide.
Whom into Heaven since that as yet we vouch not safe to take,
And of the honor of this place copartners for to make,
Such lands as to inhabit in, we erst to them assignde,
That they should still enjoy the same, It is my will and mind?
But can you think that they in rest and safety shall remain?
When proud Lycaon lay in wait by secret means and train:
To have confounded me your Lord, who in my hand do bear
The dreadful thunder, and of whom even you do stand in fear?
The house was moved at his words and earnestly requirde,
The man that had so traitorously against their Lord conspirde.
Even so when Rebels did arise to stroy the Roman name,
By shedding of our Cesars blood, the horror of the same,
Did pierce the hearts of all mankind, and made the world to quake.
Whose fervent zeal in thy behalf (O August) thou did take,
As thankfully as Jove does hear the loving care of his.
Who beckning to them with his hand, forbids them to hiss.
And therewithal through all the house attentive silence is.
As Soon as that his majesty all muttring had alayde,
He brake the silence once again, and thus unto them said.
Let pass this careful thought of yours: for he that did offend,
Has dearly bought the wicked Act, the which he did entende.
Yet shall you hear what was his fault and vengeance for the same.
A foul report and infamy unto our bearing came,
Of mischief used in those times: which wishing all untrue
I did descend in shape of man, th'infamed Earth to view.
It were a process ouerlong to tell you of the sin,
That did abound in every place where as I entered in.
The brute was lesser than the truth, and partial in report.
The dreadful dens of Menalus where savage beasts resort
And Cyllen had I ouerpast, with all the Pynetrees hie,
Of cold Lyceus, and from thence I entered by and by
The herbroughlesse and cruel house of late The Arcadian King,
Such time as twilight on the Earth dim darkness began to bring.
I gave a sign that God was come, and straight the common sort
Devoutly prayde, whereat Lycaon first did make a sport
And after said by open proof, ere long I mind to see,
If that this wight a mighty God or mortal creature be.
The truth shall try it self: he meant (the sequel did declare)
To steal upon me in the night, and kill me vnbeware.
And yet he was not so content: but went and cut the throat,
Of one that lay in hostage there, which was an Epyrote:
And part of him he did to roast, and part he did to stewe.
Which when it came upon the board, forthwith I overthrew,
The house with just revenging fire upon the owners head.
Who seeing that, slipped out of doors amazde for fear, and fled
Into the wild and desert woods, where being all alone,
As he endeuorde (but in vain) to speak and make his moan,
He fell a howling: wherewithal for very rage and mood
He ran me quite out of his wits and waxed furious wood.
Still practicing his wonted lust of slaughter on the poor
And stel^e cattle, thirsting still for blood as heretofore.
His garments turnde to shackie hair, his arms to rugged paws:
So is he made a ravening Wolf: whose shape expressly draws
To that the which he was before: his skin is horie graye,
His look still grim with glaring eyes, and every kind of way,
His cruel heart in outward shape does well it self bewraye.
Thus was one house destroyed quite. but that one house alone
Deserves not to be destroyde, in all the Earth is none,
But that such vice does reign therein, as that ye would believe,
That all had sworn and sold themselves to mischief us to grieve.
And therefore as they all offend: so am I fully bent,
That all forthwith (as they deserve) shall have due punishment.
These words of Jove some of the Gods did openly approve,
And with their sayings more to wrath his angry courage move.
And some did give assent by signs. Yet did it grieve them all
That such destruction utterly on all mankind should fall.
Demanding what he purposed with all the Earth to do,
When that he had all mortal men so clean destroyde, and who
On holy Altars afterward should offer frankincense,
And whother that he were in mind to lea^e the Earth fro thence
To savage beasts to wast and spoil, because of man's offense.
The king of Gods bade cease their thought and questions in that case,
And cast the care thereof on him. within a little space,
He promised for to frame a new, an other kind of men
By wondro^s means, unlike the first to fill the world again.
And now his lightning had he thought on all the earth to throw.
But that he feared least the flames perhaps so hie should grow
As for to set the Heaven on fire, and burn up all the sky.
He did remember furthermore how that by destiny,
A certain time should one day come, wherein both Sea and Land
And Heaven it self should feel the force of Vul^ans scorching brond*
So that the huge and goodly work of all the world so wide
Should go to wrecke, for doubt whereof forthwith he laid aside
His weapons that the Cyclops made, intending to correct,
Man's trespass by a punishment contrary in effect.
And namely with incessant showers from heaven ypoured down,
He did determine with himself, the mortal kind to drown.
In Aeolus prison by and by he fettred Boreas fast,
With all such winds as chase y^ clouds or break the^ with their blast,
And set at large the Southern wind: who straight with watery wings
And dreadful face as black as pitch, forth out of prison flings.
His beard hung full of hideous storms, all dankish was his head,
With water streaming down his hair that on his shoulders shead.
His ugly forehead wrinkled was with foggie mistes full thick,
And on his feathers and his breast a stilling dew did stick.
As Soon as he between his hands the hanging clouds had crushed,
With rattling noise adowne from heaven the rain full sadly gusht.
The Rainbow Iunos messenger bedect in sundry hue,
To maintain moisture in the clouds, great waters thither drue:
The corn was beaten to the ground, the Tilmans hope of gain,
For which he toyled all the year, lay drowned in the rain*
Jove's indignation and his wrath began to grow so hot.
That for to quench the rage thereof, his Heaven suffisde not.
His brother Neptune with his waves was feign to do him ease:
Who straight assembling all the streams, that fall into the seas,
Said to them standing in his house: Sirs get you home apace,
(You must not look to have me use, long preaching in this case.)
Pour out your foree (for so is need) your heads each one vnpende,
And from your open springs, your streams with flowing waters send.
He had no sooner said the word, but that returning back,
Each one of them vnlosde his spring, and let his waters slack.
And to the Sea with flowing streams yswolne above their banks,
One rolling in another neck, they rushed forth by ranks.
Himself with his threetyned Mace, did lend the earth a blow,
That made it shake and open ways for waters forth to flow.
The floods at randon where they list, through all the fields did stray,
Men, beasts, trees, corn, and with their gods, were Churches washed away.
If any house were built so strong, against their force to stand
Yet did the water hide the top: and turr^ts in that ponde
Were ouerwhelmde: no difference was between the sea and ground,
For all was sea: there was no shore nor landing to be found.
Some climbed up to tops of hills, and some rowde to and fro
In Botes, where they not long before, to plough and Cart did go,
One over corn and tops of towns, whom waves did ouerwhelme,
Does sail in ship, an other sittes a fishing in an Elm.
In meddowes green were Anchors cast (so fortune did provide)
And crooked ships did shadow vynes, the which the flood did hide.
And where but the other day before did feed the hungry ^ote,
The ugly Seals and Porkepisces now to and fro did flote.
The Seanymphes wondered under waves the towns and groves to ^ee,
And Dolphines played among the tops and boughs of every tree.
The grim and greedy Wolf did swim among the siely sheep,
The Lion and the Tiger fierce were borne upon the deep.
It booted not the foming Boar his crooked tuskes to whet,
The running Heart could in the stream by swiftness nothing get.
The fleeting fowls long having sought for land to rest upon,
Into the Sea with werie wings were driven to fall anon.
Th'outragious swelling of the Sea the lesser hillockes drownde,
Unwonted waves on highest tops of mountains did rebownde.
The greatest part of men were drownde, and such as scapte the floode,
Forlorn with fasting ouerlong did die for want of food.
Against the fields of Aonie and Atticke lies a land,
That Phocis hight, a fertile ground while that it was a land:
But at that time a part of Sea, and even a champion field,
Of sudden waters which the flood by forced rage did yield.
Where as a hill with forked top the which Parnasus hight,
Does pierce the clouds and to the stars does raise his head upright.
When at this hill (for yet the Sea had whelmed all beside)
Deucalion and his bedfellow, without all other guide,
Arrived in a little Bark immediately they went,
And to the Nymphs of Corycus with full devout intent
Did honor due, and to the Gods to whom that famous hill
Was sacred, and to Themis eke in whose most holy will
Consisted then the Oracles. In all the world so round:
A better nor more righteous man could never yet be found
Than was Deucalion, nor again a woman maid nor wife,
That feared God so much as she, nor led so good a life.
When Jove beheld how all the world stood like a plash of rain,
And of so many thousand men and women did remain
But one of each, howbeit those both just and both devout,
He brake the Clouds, and did command that Boreas with his stout
And sturdie blasts should chase the flood, that Earth might see the sky
And Heaven the Earth: the Seas also began immediately
Their raging fury for to cease. Their ruler laid away
His dreadful Mace, and with his words their woodnesse did alaye.
He called Tryton to him straight his trumpetter, who stood
In purple robe on shoulder cast, aloft upon the floode.
And bade him take his sounding Trumpe and out of hand to blow
Retreat, that all the streams might hear, and rease from thence to flow.
He took his Trumpet in his hand, his Trumpet was a shell
Of some great Whelke or other ^^she, in facion like a Bell
That gathered narrow to the mouth, and as it did descend.
Did wax more wide and writhen still, down to the nether end:
When that this Trumpe ami^ the Sea was set to Trytons mouth,
He blew so loud that all the streams both East, West, North and South,
Might eas^y hear him blow retreat, and all that heard the sound
Immediately began to ebb and draw within their bound.
Then began the Sea to have a shore, and brooks to find a bank,
And swelling streams of flowing floods within her channels sanke.
Then hills did ^ise above the wa^es that had them ouerflow,
And as the waters did decrease the ground did seem to grow.
And after long and tedious time the trees did show their tops
All bare, save that upon the boughs the mud did hang in knops.
The world restored was again, which though Deucalion ioyde
Then to behold: yet forbicause he saw the earth was void
And silent like a wilderness, with sad and weeping eyes
And ruthful voice he then did speak to Pyrrha in this wise.
O sister, O my loving spouse, O sielie woman left,
As only remnant of thy sex that water has bereft.
Whom Nature first by right of birth has linked to me fast
In that we brothers children been: and secondly the chaste
And steadfast bond of lawful bed: and lastly now of all,
The present perils of the time that latelye did befall.
On all the Earth from East to West where Phoebus shows his face
There is no more but thou and I of all the mortal race.
The Sea has swallowed all the rest: and scarsly are we sure,
That our two lives from dreadful death in safety shall endure.
For even as yet the duskie clouds do make my heart adrad.
Alas poor wretched sielie soul, what heart would thou have had?
To bear these heavy happes, if chance had let thee escape alone?
Who should have been thy comfort then? who should have rewd thy moan?
Now trust me truly loving wife had thou as now been drownde,
I would have followed after thee and in the sea been fownde.
Would God I could my fathers Art, of claye to facion men
And give them life that people might frequent the world again.
Mankind (alas) does only now within us two consist,
As mouldes whereby to facion men. For so the Gods do ly^t.
And with these words the bitter tears did trickle down their cheek,
Until at length between themselves they did agree to seek
To God by prayer for his grace, and to demand his aid
By answer of his Oracle. wherein they nothing stayde.
But to Cephisus sadly went, whose stream as at that time
Began to run within his ban^es though thick with muddie ^^ime,
Whose sacred liquor straight they took and sprinkled with the same
Their heads and clothes: and afterward to Themis chapel came,
The roof whereof with ci^drie moss was almost ouergrowne.
For since the time the raging flood, the world had overflowed,
No creature came within the Church: so that the Altars stood
Without one spark of holy fire or any stick of wood.
As Soon as that this couple came within the chapel door,
They fell down flat upon the ground, and trembling kissed the floor.
And said: if prayer that proceeds from humble heart and mind
May in the presence of the Gods, such grace and favor find
As to appease their worthy wrath, then vouch thou safe to tell
(O gentle Themis) how the loss that on our kind befell,
May now eftsoons recovered be, and help us to repair
The world, which drowned under waves does lie in great despair.
The Goddess moved with their suit, this answer did them make:
Depart you hence: Go hille your heads, and let your garments slake,
And both of you your Graundames bones behind your shoulders cast.
They stood amazed at these words, till Pyrrha at the last,
Refusing to obey the hest the which the Goddess gave,
Brake ^ilence, and with trembling cheer did meekely pardon crave.
For sure she said she was afraid her Graundames ghost to hurt
By taking up her buried bones to throw them in the dirt.
And with the answer here upon eftsoons in hand they go,
The doubtful words whereof they scan and canuas to and fro.
Which done, Prometheus son began by counsel wise and sage
His cousin germans fearfulness thus gently to assuage.
Well, either in these doubtful words is hid some mystery,
Whereof the Gods permit us not the meaning to epsy,
Or questionless and if the since of inward sentence deem
Like as the tenor of the words apparently do seem,
It is no breach of godliness to do as God does bid.
I take our Graundame for the earth, the stones within her hid
I take for bones, these are the bones the which are meaned here.
Though Titans daughter at this wise conjecture of her fere
Were somewhat moved, yet none of both did steadfast credit give,
So hardly could they in their hearts the heavenly hestes believe.
But what and if they made a proof? what harm could come thereby?
They went their ways and veild their heads, and did their cotes untie.
And at their backs did throw the stones by name of bones foretold.
The stones (who would believe the thing, but that the time of old
Reports it for a steadfast truth?) of nature tough and hard,
Began to war both soft and smothe: and shortly afterward
To win therewith a better shape: and as they did increase,
A mylder nature in them grew, and rudeness began to cease.
For at the first their shape was such, as in a certain sort
Resembled man, but of the right and perfect shape came short.
Even like to Marble images new drawn and roughly wrought,
Before the Caruer by his Art to purpose has them brought.
Such parts of them where any juice or moisture did abound,
Or else were earthie, turned to flesh: and such as were so sound,
And hard as would not bow nor bend did turn to bones: again
The part that was a vein before, does still his name retain.
Thus by the mighty power of God ere longer time was past,
The mankind was restorde by stones, the which a man did cast.
And likewise also by the stones the which a woman threw,
The womankinde repaired was and made again of new.
Of these are we the crooked ympes, and stony race in deed,
Bewraying by our ^oyling life, from whence we do proceed.
The lusty earth of own accord soon after forth did bring,
According to their sundry shapes each other living thing.
As Soon as that the moisture once caught heat against the Sun,
And that the fat and slimie mud in moorish grounds begun,
To swell through warmth of Phoebus beams, and that the fruitful seed
Of things well cherisht in the fat and lively soil in deed,
As in their mothers womb, began in length of time to grow,
To one or other kind of shape wherein themselves to show.
Even so when that seven mouthed Nile the watrie fields forsook*
And to his ancient channel eft his bridled streams betook.
So that the Sun did heat the mud, the which he left behind,
The husbandmen that tilde the ground, among the cloddes did find,
Of sundry creatures sundry shapes: of which they spied some,
Even in the instant of their birth but newly then bego^ne.
And some imperfect wanting breast or shoulders in such wise,
That in one body oftentimes appeared to the eyes
One half thereof alive to be, and all the rest beside
Both void of life and seemly shape, stark earth to still abide.
For when that moisture with the heat is tempred equally,
They do conceive* and of them twain engender by and by
All kind of things. For though that fire with water aye debateth
Yet moisture mixed with equal heat all living things creates.
And so those discordes in their kind, one striving with the other,
In generation do agree and make one perfect mother.
And therefore when the mirie earth bespred with slimie mud,
Brought over all but late before by violence of the flud,
Caught heat by warmness of the Sun, and culmenesse of the sky,
Things out of number in the world, forthwith it did apply.
Whereof in part the like before in former times had been,
And some so strange and ougly shapes as never erst were seen.
In that she did such Monsters breed, was greatly to her woe,
But yet thou ougly Python were engendered by her thoe.
A terror to the new made folk, which never erst had known
So foul a Dragon in their life, so monstrously foregrowne,
So great a ground thy poison paunch did underneath thee hide.
The God of shooting who no where before that present tide
Those kind of weapons put in ure, but at the speckled Dear,
Or at the Roes so wight of foot, a thousand shaftes well near,
Did on that hideous serpent spend, of which there was not one,
But forced forth the venimd blood along his sides to gone.
So that his quiver almost void, he nailde him to the ground,
And did him nobly at the last by force of shot confound.
And least that time might of this work deface the worthy fame,
He did ordeyne in mind thereof a great and solemn game,
Which of the serpent that he slew of Pythians bare the name.
Where who so could the maistrie win in feats of strength or sleight Of hand or foot or rolling wheel, might claim to have of right,
An Oken garland fresh and brave. There was not any wheare
As yet a Bay, by means whereof was Phoebus feign to wear
The leaves of every pleasant tree about his golden hear.
Peneian Daphne was the first where Phoebus set his love,
Which not blind chance but Cupids fierce and cruel wrath did move.
The Delian God but late before surprisde with passing pride:
For killing of the monstrous worm, the God of love espide,
With bow in hand already bent and letting arrows go:
To whom he said, and what have thou thou wanton baby so
With warlike weapons for to toy? It were a better sight,
To see this kind of furniture on our two shoulders bright:
Who when we list with steadfast hand both man and beast can wound,
Who the other day with arrows keen, have nailed to the ground,
The serpent Python so forswolne, whose filthy womb did hide
So many acres of the ground in which he did abide.
Content thy self son, sorry loves to kindle with thy brand,
For these our praises to attain thou must not take in hand.
To him quoth Venus son again, well Phoebus I agree
Thy bow to shoot at every beast, and so shall mine at thee.
And look how far that under God each beast is put by kind,
So much thy glory less than ours in shooting shall thou find.
This said, with drift of fethered wings in broken air he flue,
And to the forkt and shadie top of Mount Parnasus drue.
There from his quiver full of shafts two arrows did he take
Of sundry works: tone causes Love, the the other does it slake.
That causes love, is all of gold with point full sharp and bright,
That chaseth love is blunt, whose steel with leaden head is dight.
The God this fixed in the Nymph Peneis for the nones
The the other perst Apollos heart and ouerraft his bones.
Immediately in smoldring heat^ of Love the tone did swelt,
Again the the other in her heart no spark nor motion felt.
In woods and forests is her joy, the savage beasts to chase,
And as the price of all her pain^ to take the skin and case.
Unwedded Phebe does she haunt and follow as her guide,
Unordred do her tresses wave scarce in a fillet tide.
Full many a wooer sought her love, she lothing all the rout,
Impacient and without a man walks all the woods about.
And as for Hymen, or for love, and wedlock often sought
She took no care, they were the furthest end of all her thought.
Her father many a time and often would say, my daughter dear
Thou owe me a sonneinlaw to be thy lawful feere.
Her father many a time and often would say my daughter dear,
Of Nephews thou my debtour art, their Graundsires heart to cheer.
She hating as a heinous crime the bond of bridely ^ed
Demurely casting down her eyes, and blushing somewhat red,
Did fold about her fathers neck with ^auning arms: and sed,
Dear father grant me while I live my maidenhead for to have,
As to Diana here tofore her father freely gave.
Thy father (Daphne) could consent to that thou do require,
But that thy beauty and thy form impugn thy chaste desire:
So that thy will and his consent are nothing in this case,
By reason of the beauty bright that shines in thy face.
Apollo loves and longs to have this Daphne to his Feere,
And as he longs he hopes, but his foredoomes do fail him there.
And as light hame when corn is reapt, or hedges burn with brandes,
That passers by when day draws near throw loosely fro their hands,
So into flames the God is gone and burns in his breast
And feeds his vain and barraine love in hoping for the best.
Her hair vnkembd about her neck down flaring did he see
O Lord and were they trimd (quoth he) how seemly would she be?
He sees her eyes as bright as fire the stars to represent,
He sees her mouth which to have seen he holds him not content.
Her lilly arms mid part and more above the elbow bare,
Her hands, her fingers and her wrystes, him thought of beauty rare.
And sure he thought such other parts as garments then did hyde,
Excelled greatly all the rest the which he had espied.
But swifter than the whyrling wind she flees and will not stay,
To give the hearing to these words the which he had to say.
I pray thee Nymph Penaeis stay I chase not as a fo:
Stay Nymph: the Lambs so flee y^ Wolves, the Stags y^ Lions so.
With flittring feathers ^ielie Doves so from the Gossehauke fly,
And every creature from his foe. Love is the cause that I
Do follow thee: alas alas how would it grieve my heart,
To see thee fall among the briers, and that the blood should start,
Out of thy tender legs, I wretch the causer of thy smart,
The place is rough to which thou runst, take leisure I thee pray,
Abate thy flight, and I my self my running pace will stay.
Yet would I wish thee take advise, and wisely for to view
What one he is that for thy grace in humble wise does sewe.
I am not one that dwelles among the hills and stony rocks,
I am no sheepehearde with a Curre, attending on the flocks:
I am no Carle nor country Cl^wne, nor neathearde taking charge
Of cattle grazing here and there within this Forest large.
Thou do not know poor simple soul, God wot thou do nor know*
From whom thou fleest* For If thou knew, thou wouldste not flee me so.
In Delphos is my chief abode, my Temples also stand
At Glaros and at Patara within the Lycian land.
And in the I Will of Tenedos the people honor me.
The king of Gods himself is known my father for to be.
By me is known that was, that is, and that that shall ensue,
By me men learn to sundry tunes to frame sweet ditties true*
In shooting have I steadfast hand, but sured hand had he
That made this wound within my heart that heretofore was free.
Of Physic and of surgerie I found the Arts for need
The power of every herb and plant does of my gift proceed.
Now woe is me that near an herb can heal the hurt of love
And that the Arts that others help their Lord does helpelesse prove.
As Phoebus would have spoken more, away Penaeis stale
With fearful steps, and left him in the midst of all his tale.
And as she ran the meeting winds her garments backewarde blue,
So that her naked skin apearde behind her as she flue,
Her goodly yellowe golden hair that hanged loose and slack,
With every puff of air did wave and toss behind her back.
Her running made her seem more fair, the youthful God therefore
Could not abide to waste his words in dalyance any more.
But as his love aduysed him he began to mende his pace,
And with the better foot before the fleeing Nymph to chase.
And even as when the greedy Grewnde does course the sielie Hare,
Amiddes the plain and champion field without all covert bare,
Both twain of them do strain themselves and lay on footemanship,
Who may best run with all his force the the other to outstrip,
The tone for safety of his life, the the other for his pray,
The Grewnde aye pressed with open mouth to bear the Hare away,
Thrusts forth his snoute and gyrdeth out and at her loins does snatch,
As though he would at every stride between his teeth her latch:
Again in doubt of being caught the Hare aye shrinking slips,
Upon the sudden from his Jaws, and from between his lips:
So farde Apollo and the Maid: hope made Apollo swift,
And fear did make the Maiden fleet devising how to shift.
Howebeit he that did pursue of both the swifter went,
As furthred by the feathred wings that Cupid had him lent.
So that he would not let her rest, but preased at her heel
So near that through her scattred hair she might his breathing feel.
But when she saw her breath was gone and strength began to fail,
The color faded in her cheeks, and ginning for to quayle,
She looked to Penaeus stream and said now Father dear,
And if you streams have power of Gods then help your daughter here.
O let the earth devour me quick, on which I seem to fair,
Or else this shape which is my harm by changing straight appayre.
This piteous prayer scarce sed: her sinews waxed stark,
And therewithal about her breast did grow a tender bark.
Her hair was turned into leanes, her arms in boughs did grow,
Her feet that were ere while so swift, now rooted were as slow.
Her crown became the top, and thus of that she erst had been,
Remained nothing in the world, but beauty fresh and green.
Which when that Phoebus did behold (affection did so move)
The tree to which his love was turnde he could no less but love.
And as he softly laid his hand upon the tender plant,
Within the bark new ouergrowne he felt her heart yet pant.
And in his arms embracing fast her boughs and branches lythe,
He proferde kisses to the tree, the tree did from him writhe.
Well (quoth Apollo) though my Feere and spouse thou can not be,
Assuredly from this time forth yet shall thou be my tree.
Thou shall adorn my golden looks, and eke my pleasant Harp,
Thou shall adorn my Quyuer full of shaf^s and arrows sharp.
Thou shall adorn the valiant knyghts and royal Emperors:
When for their noble feats of arms like mighty conquerours,
Triumphantly with stately pomp up to the Capitol,
They shall ascend with solemn train that do their deeds ^xtoll.
Before Augustus Palace door full duly shall thou ward,
The Oak amid the Palace* yard aye faithfully to ga^de,
And as my head is never ^oulde nor never more without
A seemly bushe of youthful hair that spreads round about,
Even so this honor give I thee contin^ally to have
Thy branches clad from time to time with leaves both fresh and brave.
Now when that Pean of this talk had fully made an end,
The Laurel* to his just request did seem to condescende,
By bowing of her new made boughs and tender branches down,
and wagging of her seemly top, as if it were her crown.
There is a land in Thessalie enclosd on every side
With wooddie hills, that Timpe hight, through mid whereof does glide
Penaeus gushing full of froth from foot of Pindus hye.
Which with his headlong falling down does cast up violently,
A mistie steame like flakes of smoke, besprinckling all about
The tops of trees on either side, and makes a roaring out
That may be heard a great way off. This is the fixed seat,
This is the house and dwelling place and chamber of the great
And mighty River: Here he sittes in Court of Peeble stone,
And ministers justice to the waves and to the Nymphs each one,
That in the Brooks and waters dwell. Now hither did resort,
(Not knowing if they might rejoice and unto mirth exhort
Or comfort him) his Country Brooks, Sperchius well beseene,
With sedgie head and shadie banks of Poplars fresh and green.
Enipeus restless swift and quick, old father Apidane,
Amphrisus with his gentle stream, and Aeas clad with cane:
With diverse other Ryuers more, which having run their race,
Into the Sea their weary waves do lead with restless pace.
From hence the careful Inachus absentes him self alone.
Who in a corner of his cave with doolefull tears and moan,
Augments the waters of his stream, bewayling piteously
His daughter Io lately lost. He knew not certainly
And if she were a live or dead. But for he had her sought,
And could not find her any where, assuredly he thought
She did not live above the molde, ne drew the vital breath:
Misgiuing worser in his mind, if ought be worse than death.
It fortunde on a certain day that Jove espide this Maid
Come running from her fathers stream alone: to whom he said*
O Damsel worthy Jove himself like one day for to make
Some happy person whom thou list unto thy bed to take.
I pray thee let us shroude our selves in shadow here together,
Of this or that (he poynted both) it makes no matter whither,
Until the whotest of the day and Noone be ouerpast.
And if for fear of ^auage beasts perchance thou be aghast
To wander in the Woods alone, thou shall not need to fear,
A God shall be thy guide to save thee harmless every where.
And not a God of meaner sort, but even the same that has
The heavenly scepter in his hand, who in my dreadful wrath,
Do dart down thunder wandringly: and therefore make no have
To run away. She ran apace, and had already past
The Fen of Lerna and the field of Lincey set with trees:
When Jove intending now in vain no longer time to leese,
Upon the Country all about did bring a foggie mist,
And caught the Maiden whom poor fool he used as he list.
Queen Juno looking down that while upon the open field,
When in so fair a day such mistes and darkness she beheld,
Did marvel much, for well she knew those mistes ascended not
From any River, moorishe ground, or other dankishe plot.
She looked about her for her Jove as one that was acquainted
With such escapes and with the deed had often him attainted.
Whom when she found not in the heaven, unless I guess amiss,
Some wrong against me (quoth she) now my husband working is.
And with that word she left the Heaven, and down to earth she came,
Commanding all the mistes away. But Jove foresees the same,
And to a Cow as white as milk his Leman he conuayes.
She was a goodly Hecfar sure: and Juno did her praise,
Although (God wot) she thought it not, and curiously she sought,
Where she was bred? whose Cow she was, who had her thither brought?
As though she had not known the truth. Her husband by and by
(Because she should not search to near) deuisde a cleanly lie,
And told her that the Cow was bred even now out of the ground.
Then Juno who her husbands shift at fingers ends had found,
Desirde to have the Cow of gift. What should he do as tho?
Great cruelnesse it were to yield his Lover to her fo.
And not to give would breed mistrust. As fast as shame provoked,
So fast again a the other side his Love his mind revoked.
So much that Love was at the point to put all shame to flight.
But that he feared if he should deny a gift so light,
As was a Cow to her that was his sister and his wife,
Might make her think it was no Cow, and breed perchance some strife.
Now when that Juno had by gift her husbands Leman got,
Yet altogether out of fear and careless was she not.
She had him in a jealousy and thoughtfull was she still.
For doubt he should invent some means to steal her from her: till
To Argus old Aristors son she put her for to keep,
This Argus had an hundredth eyes: of which by turn did sleep
Always a couple, and the rest did duly watch and ward,
And of the charge they took in hand had ever good regard,
What way so ever Argus stood with face, with back, or side,
To Io ward, before his eyes did Io still abide.
All day he let her graze abroad, the Sun once under ground,
He shut her up and by the neck with wrythen With her bound.
With croppes of trees and bitter weeds now was she daily fed,
And in the stead of costly couch and good soft featherbed,
She sat a nights upon the ground, and on such ground whereas
Was not sometime so much as grass: and oftentimes she was
Compeld to drink of muddie pittes: and when she did devise,
To Argus for to lift her hands in meek and humble wise,
She saw she had no hands at all: and when she did assay
To make complaint, she lowed out, which did her so affray,
That often she started at the noise, and would have run away.
Unto her father Inachs banckes she also did resort,
Where many a time and often before she had been wont to sport.
Now when she looked in the stream, and saw her horned head,
She was aghast and from her self would all in have have fled.
The Nymphs her sisters knew her not nor yet her own dear father,
Yet followed she both him and them, and suffered them the rather
To touch and stroke her where they list, as one that preaced still
To set her self to wonder at and gaze upon their fill.
The good old Inach pulze up grass and to her straight it bears.
She as she kyst and lickt his hands did shed forth dreerie tears.
And had she had her speech at will to utter forth her thought,
She would have told her name and chance and him of help besought.
But for because she could not speak, she printed in the sand,
Two letters with her foot, whereby was given to understand
The sorrowful changing of her shape. Which seen straight cried out
Her father Inach woe is me, and clasping her about
Her white and seemly Hecfars neck and crystal horns both twain,
He shricked out full piteously, Now woe is me again.
Alas art thou my daughter dear, whom through the world I sought
And could not find? and now by chance art to my presence brought?
My sorrow certesse lesser far a thousand fold had been
If never had I seen thee more, than thus to have thee seen.
Thou standst as dombe and to my words no answer can thou give,
But from the bottom of thy heart full sorry sighs do drive
As tokens of thine inward grief, and doolefully do mooe
Unto my talk, the only thing least in thy power to do.
But I mistrusting nothing less than this so great mischaunce.
By some great marriage earnestly did seek thee to advance,
In hope some issue to have seen between my son and thee.
But now thou must a husband have among the H^^rds I see,
And eke thine issue must be such as other cattles be.
Oh that I were a mortal wight as other creatures are,
For then might death in length of time quite rid me of this care,
But now because I am a God, and fate does death deny,
There is no help but that my grief must last eternally.
As Inach made this piteous moan quick sighted Argus drove
His daughter into further fields to which he could not have
Access, and he himself a loof did get him to a hill,
From whence he sitting at his ease viewd every way at will.
Now could no longer Jove abide his Lover so forlorn,
And thereupon he called his son that Maia had him borne,
Commanding Argus should be killed. He made no long abod,
But tide his feathers to his feet, and took his charmed rod.
(With which he brings things a sleep, and fetches souls from Hell)
And put his Hat upon his head: and when that all was well
He leaped from his fathers towers, and down to earth he flue
And there both Hat and wings also he lightly from him thrue.
Retayning nothing but his staff, the which he closely held
Between his elbowe and his side, and through the common field
Went plodding like some good plain soul that had some flock to feed.
And as he went he pyped still upon an Oten Reed.
Q^eene Iunos Heirdman far in love with this strange melody.
Bespake him thus: Good fellow mine, I pray thee heartely
Come sit down by me on this hill, for better feed I know
Thou shall not find in all these fields, and (as the thing does show)
It is a cool and shadowie plot, for sheepeheirds very ^itte
Down by his elbow by and by did Atlas nephew sit.
And for to pass the time withal for seeming ouerlong,
He held him talk of this and that, and now and than among,
He played upon his merry Pipe to cause his watching eyes
To fall a sleep. Poor Argus did the best he could devise
To overcome the pleasant nappes: and though that some did sleep,
Yet of his eyes the greater part he made their watch to keep*
And after other talk he asked (for lately was it found)
Who was the founder of that Pype that did so sweetly sound.
Then said the God, there dwelt sometime a Nymph of noble fame
Among the hills of Arcadie, that Syrinx had to name.
Of all the Nymphs of Nonacris and Fairie far and near,
In beauty and in parsonage this Lady had no peer.
Full often had she given the slip both to the Satyrs quick
And other Gods that dwell in Woods, and in the Forests thick,
Or in the fruitful fields abroad. It was her whole desire
To follow chaste Dianas guise in Maydenhead and attire.
Whom she did counterfaite so nighe, that such as did her see
Might at a blush have taken her, Diana for to be,
But that the Nymph did in her hand a bow of Eornell hold,
Whereas Diana evermore did bear a bow of gold.
And yet she did deceive folk so. Upon a certain day
God Pan with garland on his head of Pinetree, saw her stray
From Mount Lyceus all alone, and thus to her did say.
Unto a Gods request, O Nymph, voucesafe thou to agree
That does desire thy wedded spouse and husband for to be.
There was yet more behind to tell: as how that Syrinx fled,
Through waylesse woods and gave no ear to that that Pan had sed,
Until she to the gentle stream of sandy Ladon came,
Where, for because it was so deep, she could not pass the same,
She piteously to change her shape the water Nymphs besought:
And how when Pan between his arms, to catch y^ Nymph had thought,
In stead of her he caught the Reeds new grown upon the brook,
And as he sighed, with his breath the Reeds he softly shook
Which made a still and mourning noise, with strangeness of the which
And sweetness of the feeble sound the God delighted mich,
Said certesse Syrinx for thy sake it is my full intent,
To make my comfort of these Reeds wherein thou do lament:
And how that there of sundry Reeds with war together knit,
He made the Pipe which of her name the Greeks call Syrinx yet.
But as Cyllemus would have told this tale, he cast his sight
On Argus, and behold his eyes had bid him all good night.
There was not one that did not sleep, and fast he began to nodde,
Immediately he ceast his talk, and with his charmed rod,
So stroked all his heavy eyes that earnestly they slept.
Then with his Woodknife by and by he lightly to him s^ept,
And lent him such a perlous blow, where as the shoulders grue
Unto the neck, that straight his head quite from the body flue.
Then tombling down the headlong hill his bloody coarse he sent,
That all the way by which he rolde was stained and besprent.
There list thou Argus under foot, with all thy hundredth lights,
And all the light is clean extinct that was within those sights.
One endelesse night thy hundred eyes has now bereft for aye,
Yet would not Juno suffer so her Heirdmans eyes decay:
But in her painted Peacocks tail and feathers did them set,
Where they remain like precious stones and glaring eyes as yet.
She took his death in great dispight and as her rage did move,
Determinde for to wreeke her wrath upon her husbands Love.
Forthwith she cast before her eyes right strange and ugly sightes,
Compelling her to think she saw some Fiendes or wicked sprightes.
And in her heart such secret pricks and piercing stings she gave her,
As though the world from place to place with restless sorrow drove her.
Thou Nylus were assignd to stay her pains and trauelles past,
To which as soon as Io came with much a do at last,
With weary knockles on thy brim she kneeled sadly down,
And stretching forth her fair long neck and crystal horned crown,
Such kind of countnaunce as she had she lifted to the sky,
And there with sighing sobbes and tears and lowing doolefully
Did seem to make her moan to Jove, desiring him to make
Some end of those her troublous storms endured for his sake.
He took his wife about the neck, and sweetly kissing prayde,
That Ios penance yet at length might by her grant be stayde.
Thou shall not need to fear (quoth he) that ever she shall grieve thee
From this day forth. And in this case the better to believe me,
The Stygian waters of my words vnparciall witness been^.
As Soon as Juno was appeasde, immediately was seen
That Io took her native shape in which she first was borne,
And eke became the self same thing the which she was beforne.
For by and by she cast away her rough and hairie hyde,
In steed whereof a soft smouth skin with tender flesh did bide.
Her horns sank down, her eyes and mouth were brought in lesser room,
Her hands, her shoulders, and her arms in place again did come.
Her cloven Clees to fingers five again reduced were,
On which the nails like pollisht Gemmes did shine full bright and clear.
In fine, no likeness of a Cow save whiteness did remain
So pure and perfect as no snow was able it to stain.
She vaunst her self upon her feet which then was brought to two.
And though she gladly would have spoke: yet durst she not so do,
Without good heed, for fear she should have lowed like a Cow.
And therefore softly with her self she began to practice how
Distinctly to pronounce her words that intermitted were.
Now as a Goddess is she had in honor every where,
Among the folk that dwell by Nyle y^lad in linen weed.
Of her in time came Epaphus begotten of the seed
of myghtie Jove. This noble ympe now jointly with his mother,
Through all the Cities of that land have temples tone with toother.
There was his match in heart and years the lusty Phaeton,
A stalworth stripling strong and stout the golden Phoebus son.
Whom making proud and stately vauntes of his so noble race,
And unto him in that respect in nothing giving place,
The son of Io could not bear: but said unto him thus.
No marvel though thou be so proud and full of words yw^s.
For every fond and trifling tale the which thy mother makes
Thy gyddie wit and hairebrainde head forthwith for gospel takes.
Well, vaunt thy self of Phoebus still, for when the truth is seen,
Thou shall perceive that fathers name a forged thing to been.
At this reproach did Phaeton wax as red as any fire:
Howbeit for the present time did shame repress his ire.
Unto his mother Clymen straight he goes to detect
The spiteful words that Epaphus against him did object.
Yea mother (quoth he) and which ought your greater grief to be,
I who at other times of talk was wont to be so free
And stout, had near a word to say, I was ashamde to take
So foul a foil: the more because I could none answer make.
But if I be of heavenly race exacted as ye say,
Then show some token of that high and noble birth I pray.
And vouche me for to be of heaven. With that he gently cast
His arms about his mothers neck, and clasping her full fast,
Besought her as she loud his life, and as she loud the life
Of Merops, and had kept her self as undefiled wife,
And as she wished welthily his sisters to bestow,
She would some token give whereby his rightful Sire to know
It is a doubtful matter whither Clymen moved more
With this her Phaetons earnest suit exacting it so sore,
Or with the slander of the brute laid to her charge before,
Did hold up both her hands to heaven, and looking on the Sun,
My right dear child I safely swear (quoth she to Phaeton)
That of this star the which so bright does glister in thine ey^:
Of this same Sun that cheares the world with light indifferently
Were thou begot: and if I feign, then with my heart I pray,
That never may I see him more unto my dying day.
But if thou have so great desire thy father for to know,
Thou shall not need in that behalf much labor to bestow.
The place from whence he does arise adioyneth to our land.
And if thou think thy heart will serve, then go and understand
The truth of him. When Phaeton heard his mother saying so,
He began to leap and skip for joy. He fed his fancy tho,
Upon the Heaven and heavenly things: and so with willing mind,
From A^thiop first his native home, and afterward through Inde
Set underneath the morning star he went so long, till as
He found me where his fathers house and daily rising was.
Finis primi Libri.
THE SECOND BOOK of Ouids Metamorphosis.
THe Princely Palace of the Sun stood gorgeous to behold
On stately Pillars builded high of yellow burnisht gold,
Beset with sparckling Carbuncles that like to fire did shine.
The roof was framed curiously of Yuorie pure and fine.
The two door leaves of silver clear a radiant light did cast:
But yet the cunning workmanship of things therein far past
The stuff whereof the doors were made. For there a perfect plat,
Had Vulcane drawn of all the world: Both of the sourges that
Embrace the earth with winding waves, and of the steadfast ground,
And of the heaven it self also that both encloseth round.
And first and formest in the Sea the Gods thereof did stand
Loud sounding Tryton with his shirle and writhen Trumpe in hand:
Unstable Protevv changing aye his figure and his hue,
From shape to shape a thousand sithes as list him to renew:
Aegeon leaning boystrously on backs of mighty Whales
And Doris with her daughters all: of which some cut the wales
With splaied arms, some sat on rocks and dride their goodly hair,
And some did ride upon the backs of fishes here and theare.
Not one in all points fully like an other could ye see,
Nor verse far unlike, but such as sisters ought to be.
The Earth had towns, men, beasts and Woods with sundry trees and rods,
And running Ryuers with their Nymphs and other country Gods.
Directly over all these same the plat of heaven was pight,
Upon the two door leaves, the signs of all the Zodiak bright,
Indifferently six on the left and six upon the right.
When Clymens son had climbed up at length with weerie pace,
And set his foot within his doubted fathers dwelling place,
Immediately he preaced forth to put him self in sight,
And stood aloof. For near at hand he could not bide the light.
In purple Robe and royal Throne of Emeraudes fresh and green
Did Phoebus sit, and on each hand stood waiting well beseene,
Days, Months, years, ages, seasons, times, and eke the equal hours.
There stood the springtime with a crown of fresh and fragrant flowers.
There waited Summer naked stark all save a wheaten Hat:
And Autumn smerde with treading grapes late at the pressing Fat.
And las^^y quaking for the cold, stood Winter all forlorn,
With rugged head as white as Dove, and garments all to torn.
Forladen with the Isycles that dangled up and down
Upon his gray and hoarie bearde and ^nowie frozen crown.
The Sun thus sitting in the mids did cast his piercing eye,
(With which full lightly when he list he all things does espy)
Upon his child that stood aloof aghast and trembling sore
At sight of such unwonted things, and thus bespake him thore.
O noble ympe, O Phaeton which art not such (I see)
Of whom thy father should have cause ashamed for to be:
Why have thou traueld to my court? what is thy will with me?
Then answerde he, of all the world O only perfect light,
O Father Phoebus, (if I may usurp that name of right,
And that my mother for to save her self from worldely shame,
Hyde not her fault with false pretense and color of thy name)
Some sign apparent grant whereby I my be known thy Son,
And let me hang no more in doubt. He had no sooner done,
But that his father putting off the bright and fiery beams
That glistred round about his head like clear and golden streams,
Commanded him to draw him near, and him embracing said:
To take me for thy rightful Sire thou need not be afraid.
Thy mother Clymen of a truth from falsehood stands free.
And for to put thee out of doubt ask what thou will of me,
And I will give thee thy desire, the Lake whereby of old
We Gods do swear (the which mine eyes did never yet beeholde)
Bear witness with thee of my grant: he scarce this tale had told,
But that the foolish Phaeton straight for a day did crave
The guyding of his winged Steedes, and Chariot for to have.
Then did his Father by and by forethinke him of his oath.
And shaking twenty times his head, as one that was full wroth,
Beespake him thus: thy words have made me rashly to consent
To that which shortly both of us (I fear me) shall repent.
Oh that I might retract my grant, my son I do protest
I would deny thee nothing else save this thy fond request.
I may dissuade, there lies herein more peril than thou ween:
The things the which thou do desire of great importance been:
More than thy weakness well can wielde, a charge (as well appears)
Of greater weight, than may agree with these thy tender years.
Thy state is mortal, weak and frail, the thing thou do desire
Is such, whereto no mortal man is able to aspire.
Yea foolish boy thou do desire (and all for want of wit)
A greater charge than any God could ever have as yet.
For were there any of them all so ouerseene and blind.
To take upon him this my charge, full quickly should he find
That none but I could sit upon the fiery Axeltree.
No not even he that rules this wast and endless space we see
Not he that darts with dreadful hand the thunder from the Sky,
Shall drive this chare. And yet what thing in all the world perdie
Is able to compare with Jove? Now first the morning way
Lies steep upright, so that the steedes in coolest of the day
And being fresh have much a do to climb against the Hill.
Amiddes the heaven the ghastly height augmenteth terror still.
My heart does wax as cold yse full many a time and often
For fear to see the Sea and land from that same place aloft.
The Evening way does fall plump down requiring strength to guide
That Tethis who does harbrowgh me within her sourges wide
Does stand in fear least from the heaven I headlong down should slide
Besides all this the Heaven aye swimmes and wheels about full swift
And with his rolling dryues the stars their proper course to shift.
Yet do I keep my native course against this brunt so stout,
Not giving place as others do: but boldly bearing out
The force and swiftness of that heaven that whyrleth so about.
Admit thou had my winged Steedes and Chariot in thine hand:
What couldste thou do? do think thy self well able to withstand
The swiftness of the whyrled Pooles? but that their brunt and sway
(Yea do the best and worst thou can) shall bear thee quite away?
Percha^nce thou do imaginee there some towns of Gods to ^inde,
With groves and Temples richt with gifts as is among mankind.
Thou art deceyude utterly: thou shall not find it so.
By blind bywayes and ugly shapes of monsters must thou go.
And though thou knew the way so well as that thou could not stray,
Between the dreadful bulls sharp horns yet must thou make thy way.
Against the cruel Bow the which the Aemonian archer draws:
Against the ramping Lion armde with greedy teeth and paws:
Against the Scorpion stretching far his fell and venymd claws:
And eke the Crab that casts forth his crooked clees awrie
Not in such sort as the other does, and yet as dreadfully.
Again thou neither have the power nor yet the skill I know
My lusty coursers for to guide that from their nosetrilles throw
And from their mouths the fiery breath that breeds in their breast.
For scarcely will they suffer me who knows their nature best
When that their cruel courages begin to catch a heat.
That hardely should I deal with them, but that I know the ^eate.
But least my gift should to thy grief and utter peril tend
My Son beware and (while thou may) thy fond request amend.
Because thou would be known to be my child thou seemst to crave
A certain sign: what surer sign I pray thee can thou have?
Than this my fear so fatherly the which I have of thee?
Which proves me most certainly thy father for to be?
Behold and mark my countenance? O would to God thy sight
Could pierce within my woeful breast, to see the heavy plight,
And heaps of cares within my heart. Look through the world so round
Of all the wealth and goods therein: if ought there may be found
In Heaven or Earth or in the Sea, ask what thou lykest best,
And sure it shall not be denide. This only one request
That thou have made I heartely beseech thee to relent,
Which for to term the thing aright is even a punishment,
And not an honor as thou think: my Phaeton thou do crave
In stead of honor even a scourge and punishment for to have.
Thou fondling thou, what do thou mean with fawning arms about
My neck thus flattringly to hang? Thou need not to dout.
I have already sworn by Styx, ask what thou will of me
And thou shall have. Yet let thy next wish somewhat wiser be.
Thus ended his aduertisment: and yet the wilful Lad
Withstood his counsel urging still the promise that he had,
Desiring for to have the chare as if he had been mad*
His father having made delay as long as he could shift,
Did lead him where his Chariot stood, which was of Vulcans gift.
The Axeltree was massy gold, the Bucke was massy gold,
The utmost fellies of the wheels, and where the tree was rolde.
The spokes were all of silver bright, the Chrysolites and Gemmes
That stood upon the Collars, Trace, and hounces in their hemmes
Did cast a sheere and glimmering light, as Phoebus shone thereon.
Now while the lusty Phaeton stood gazing here upon,
And wondered at the workmanship of every thing: beeholde
The early morning in the East beegan me to unfold
Her purple Gates, and shewde her house bedeckt with Roses red.
The twinkling stars withdrew which by the morning star are led:
Who as the Captain of that Host that has no peer nor match,
Does leave his standing last of all within that heavenly watch.
Now when his Father saw the world thus glister red and trim,
And that his waning sisters horns began to waxen dim,
He had the fetherfooted hours go harness in his horse.
The Goddesses with might and main themselves thereto enforce.
His fierifoming Steedes full fed with juice of Ambrosie
They take from Maunger trimly dight: and to their heads do tie
Strong reyned ^its: and to the Charyot do them well appoint.
Then Phoebus did with heavenly salve his Phaetons head anoint,
That scorching fire could nothing hurt: which done, upon his hair
He put the fresh and golden rays himself was wont to wear.
And then as one whose heart misgaue the sorrows drawing fast,
With sorry sighs he thus bespake his retchlesse son at last.
(And if thou can) at least yet this thy fathers lore obey:
Son, spare the whip, and reyne them hard, they run so swift away
As that thou shall have much a do their fleeing course to stay
Directly through the Zones all ^iue beware thou do not ride,
A broad byway cut out a skew that bends on the side,
Contaynde within the bonds of three the midmost Zones does lie:
Which from the grisely Northren bear, and Southren Pole does fly.
Keep on this way: my Charyot rakes thou plainly shall epsy
And to the intent that heaven and earth may well the heat endure,
Drive neither over high nor yet too low. For be thou sure,
And if thou mount above thy bounds, the stars thou burnest clean.
Again beneath thou burnst the Earth: most safety is the mean.
And least perchance thou overmuch the right hand way should take,
And so misfortune should thee drive upon the writhen Snake,
Or else by taking ouermuche upon the lefter hand.
Unto the Altar thou be driven that does against it stand:
Indifferently between them both I wish thee for to ride.
The rest I put to fortunes will, who be thy friendly guide,
And better for th^e than thy self as in this case provide.
Whiles that I prattle here with thee, behold the dankish night
Beyond all Spain her utmost bound is passed out of sight.
We may no longer tariance make: my wonted light is called,
The Morning with her countnance clear the darkness has appald*
Take rain in hand, or if thy mind by counsel altered be,
Refuse to meddle with my Wayne: and while thou yet art free,
And doste at ease within my house in safegarde well remain,
Of this thine unadvised wish not feeling yet the pain,
Let me alone with giving still the world his wonted light,
And thou thereof as heretofore enjoy the harmless sight.
Thus much in vain: for Phaeton both young in years and wit,
Into the Chariot lightly lept, and vauncing him in it.
Was not a little proud that he the bridle gotten had.
He thankt his father whom it grieude to see his child so mad.
While Phoebus and his rechelesse son were entertalking this,
Aeous, Aethon, Phlegon, and the fiery Pyrois
The restless horses of the Sun began to ney so hie
With flaming breath, that all the heaven might hear them perfectly.
And with their houes they mainly beat upon the lattisde grate.
The which when Tethis (knowing naught of this her cousins fate)
Had put aside, and given the steedes the free and open scope
Of all the compass of the Sky within the heavenly Cope:
They girded forth, and cutting through the Clouds that let their race.
With splayed wings they ouerfl^w the Eastern wind a pace.
The burden was so light as that the Genets felt it not.
The wonted weight was from the Waine, the which they well did wot.
For like as ships amids the Seas that scant of ballace have,
Do reele and totter with the wind, and yield to every wave:
Even so the Waine for want of weight it erst was wont to bear,
Did hoyse aloft and scayle and reele, as though it empty were.
Which when the Cartware did perceive, they left the beaten way
And taking bridle in the teeth began to run astray.
The rider was so sore aghast, he knew no use of Reyne,
Nor yet his way: and though he had, yet had it ben in vain,
Because he wanted power to rule the horses and the Wayne.
Then first did sweat cold Charles his Wain through force of Phoebus rays
And in the Sea forbidden him to diue in vain assayes.
The Serpent at the frozen Pole both cold and slow by kind,
Through heat waxt wroth, and stird about a cooler place to find.
And thou Boots though thou be but slow of footemanship,
Yet were thou feign (as Fame reports) about thy Waine to skip.
Now when unhappy Phaeton from top of all the Sky
Beheld the Earth that underneath a great way off did lie.
He waxed pale for sudden fear, his joints and sinews quooke,
The greatness of the glistring light his eyesight from him took.
Now wished he that he never had his fathers horses see
It yrkt him that he thus had sought to learn his piedegre.
It grieude him that he had preuailde in gaining his request.
To have been counted Merops son he thought it now the best.
Thus thinking was he headlong driven, as when a ship is borne
by blustering winds, her saileclothes rent, her stern in pieces torn,
And tacling brust, the which the Pilote trusting all to prayre
Abandons wholly to the Sea and fortune of the air.
What should he do? much of the heaven he passed had behind
And more he saw before: both which he measurde in his mind,
Eft looking forward to the West which to approach as then
Might not betide, and to the East eft looking back again.
He wist not what was best to do, his wits were ravished so.
For neither could he hold the Reins, nor yet durst let them go.
And of his horses names was none that he remembered tho.
Strange uncouth Monsters did he see dispersed here and there
And dreadful shapes of ugly beasts that in the Welkin were.
There is a certain place in which the hidious Scorpion throws
His arms in compass far abroad, much like a couple of bows,
With writhen tail and clasping cles, whose poison limbs do stretch
On every side, that of two signs they full the room do retch,
Whom when the Lad beheld all moist with black and lothly swet,
With sharp and nedlepointed sting as though he seemde to thret,
He was so sore astraught for fear, he let the bridels slack.
Which when the horses felt lie lose upon their sweating back,
At rouers straight throughout the Air by ways unknown they ran
Whereas they never came before since that the world began.
For look what way their lawless rage by chance and fortune drue.
Without controlment or restraint that way they freely ^lue
Among the stars that fixed are within the firmament
They snatched the Chariot here and there. One while they coursing went
Upon the top of all the sky: anon again full round
They troll me down to lower ways and nearer to the ground.
So that the Moon was in a Maze to see her brothers Waine
Run under hirs: the singed clouds began to smoke amain.
Each ground the higher that it was and nearer to the Sky.
The sooner was it set on fire, and made therewith so dry.
That every where it began to chinke. The Medes and Pastures green*
Did sear away: and with the leaves, the trees were burned cleene.
The parched corn did yield wherewith to work his own decaie.
Tushe these are trifles. Mighty towns did perish that same day.
Whose countries with their folk were burnt: and forests full of woo^
Were turnde to ashes with the ^ocks and mountains where they stood.
Then Athe, Cilician, Taure and Tm^le and Oeta flamed hie,
And I Would erst full of flowing springs was then made utter dry.
The learned virgins daily haunt, the sacred Helicon
And Thracian Hemus (not as yet surnamde Oeagrion,)
Did smoke both twain: and Aetna hot of nature aye before,
Encreast by force of Phoebus flame now raged ten times more.
The forkt Parnasus, Eryx, Cynth, and Othrys then did swelt
And all the snow of Rhodope did at that present melt.
The like outrage Mount Dindymus, and Mime and Micale felt.
Cytheron borne to sacred use with Osse, and Pindus hie
And Olymp greater than them both did burn excessiuely.
The passing cold that Scithie had defended not the same
But that the barren Caucasus was partner of this flame.
And so were eke the Airie Alps and Appennyne beside,
For all the Clouds continually their snowie tops do hide.
Then wheresoever Phaeton did chance to cast his view,
The world was all on staining fire. The breath the which he drew,
Came smooking from his scalding mouth as from a seething pot.
His Chariot also under him began to wax red hot.
He could no longer dure the sparks and cinder flyeng out,
Again the culme and smouldring smoke did wrap him round about.
The pitchie darkness of the which so wholly had him he^t
As that he wist not where he was nor yet which way he went.
The winged horses forcibly did draw him where they would.
The Aethiopians at that time (as men for truth uphold)
(The blood by force of that same heat drawn to the outer part
And there adust from that time forth) became so black and swart.
The moisture was so dried up in Lybie land that time
That altogether dry and scorcht continues yet that Clyme.
The Nymphs with hair about their ears bewayld their springs and lakes
Beotia for her Dy^ces loss great lamentation makes.
For Amimone Argos wept, and Corinth for the spring
Pyrene, at whose sacred stream the Muses used to sing.
The Rivers further from the place were not in better case.
For Tanais in his deepest stream did boil and steme apace.
Old Penevv and Cay^us of the country Teuthranie,
And swift Ismenos in their banks by like misfortune fry.
Then burnde the Psophian Erymanth: and (which should burn ageine)
The Trojan Xanthus and Lycormas with his yellow vein.
Meander playing in his banks aye winding to and fro.
Migdonian Melas with his waves as black as any slo.
Eurotas running by the foot of Tenare boiled tho.
Then sod Euphrates cutting through the mids of Babylon
Then sod Orontes, and the Scithian swift Thermodoon.
Then Ganges, Colchian Phasis, and the noble Istre
Alpheus and Sperchins banks with flaming fire did glistre.
The gold that Tagus stream did bear did in the channel melt.
Amid Cayster of this fire the raging heat was felt.
Among the quieres of singing Swannes that with their pleasant lay
Along the banks of Lidian brakes from place to place did stray.
And Nyle for fear did run away into the furthest Clyme
Of all the world, and hid his head, which to this present time
Is yet unfound: his mouths all seven clean void of water been.
Like seven great valleys where (save dust) could nothing else be seen.
By like misfortune Hebrus dride and Strymon both of Thrace.
The Western Rivers Rhine and Rhone and Po were in like^case:
And Tyber unto whom the Gods a faithful promise gave
Of all the world the Monarchy and sovereign state to have.
The ground did cranie every where and light did pierce to hell
And made afraid the King and Queen that in that Realm do dwell.
The Sea did shrink and where as waves did late before remain,
Became a Champion field of dust and even a sandy plain.
The hills erst hid far under waves like Ilelandes did appear
So that the scattred Cyclades for the time augmented were.
The fishes drew them to the deepes: the Dolphines durst not play
Above the water as before, the Seals and Porkpis lay
With bellies upward on the waves stark dead* and fame does go
That Nereus with his wife and daughters all were feign as tho
To dine within the scalding waves. Thrice Neptune did advance
His arms above the scalding Sea with sturdy countenance:
And thrice for hotenesse of the Air, was feign himself to hide.
But yet the Earth the Nurce of things enclosde on every side
(Between the waters of the Sea and Springs that now had hidden
Themselves within their Mothers womb) for all the pain abidden,
Up to the neck put forth her head and casting up her hand,
Between her forehead and the sun as panting she did stand
With dreadful quaking all that was, she fearfully did shake,
And shrinking somewhat lower down with sacred voice thus spoke.
O King of Gods and if this be thy will and my desert,
Why doste thou stay with deadly dint thy thunder down to dart?
And if that needs I perish must through force of fiery flame,
Let thy celestial fire O God I pray thee do the same.
A comfort shall it be to have thee Author of my death.
I scarce have power to speak these words (the smoke had stopped her breath)
Behold my singed hair: behold my dim and bleared eye,
See how about my scorched face the scalding embers fly.
Is this the guerdon wherewithal ye quite my fruitfulness?
Is this the honor that ye gave me for my plenteousnesse
And duty done with true intent? for suffering of the plough
To draw deep wounds upon my back and rakes to rend me through?
For that I over all the year continually am wrought?
For giving foder to the beasts and cattle all for naught?
For yielding corn and other food wherewith to keep mankind?
And that to honor you withal sweet frankincense I find?
But put the case that my desert destruction duly crave,
What has thy brother: what the Seas deserved for to have?
Why do the Seas his lotted part thus ebb and fall so low,
Withdrawing from thy Sky to which it ought most near to grow?
But if thou neither doste regard thy brother, neither me,
At least have mercy on thy heaven, look round about and see
How both the Poles begin to smoke which if the fire appall
To utter ruin (be thou sure) thy palace needs must fall.
Behold how Atlas ginnes to faint* his shoulders though ^ull strong,
Unneth are able to uphold the sparkling Extree long.
If Sea and Land do go to wrecke, and heaven it self do burn
To old confused Chaos then of force we must return.
Put to thy helping hand therefore to save the little left
If ought remain before that all be quite and clean bereft.
When ended was this piteous plaint, the Earth did hold her peace
She could no longer dure the heat but was comp^lde to cease.
Into her bosom by and by she shrunk her cinged head
More nearer to the Stygnan caves, and ghostes of persons dead.
The Sire of Heaven protesting all the Gods and him also
That lent the Chariot to his child, that all of for^e must go
To havoc if he helped not, went to the highest part
And top of all the Heaven from whence his custom was to dart,
His thunder and his lightning down. But neither did remain
A Cloud wherewith to shade the Earth, nor yet a shower of rain.
Then with a dreadful thunderclap up to his ear he bent
His fist, and at the Wagoner a flash of lightning sent,
Which struck his body from the life and threw it over wheel
And so with fire he quenched fire. The Steedes did also reele
Upon their knees, and starting up sprang violently, one here,
And there another, that they brast in pieces all their gere.
They threw the C^llars from their necks, and breaking quite a sunder
The Trace and Harness flang away: here lay the bridles: yonder
The Extree plucked from the Naues: and in another place
The sheuered spokes of broken wheels: and so at every pace
The pieces of the Chariot torn lay strowed here and there
But Phaeton (fire yet blasing still among his yellow hair)
Shot headlong down, and glid along the Region of the Air
Like to star in Winter nights (the wether clear and fair)
Which though it do not fall in deed, yet falls to our sight.
Whom almost in another world and from his country quite
The River Padus did receive, and quenched his burning head.
The water Nymphs of Italy did take his carcass dead
And buried it yet smoking still, with Jove's threeforked flame.
And wrate this Epitaph in the stone that lay upon the same.
Here lies the lusty Phaeton which took in hand to guide
His fathers Chariot, from the which although he chaunst to slide:
Yet that he gave a proud attempt it cannot be denide.
With ruthful cheer and heavy heart his father made great mo^e.
And would not show himself abroad, but mournd at home alone.
And if it be to be believed, as bruted is by fame.
A day did pass without the Sun. The brightness of the flame
Gave light: and so unto some kind of use that mischief came.
But Clymen having spoke, as much as mothers usually,
Are wonted in such wretched case, discomfortablely,
And half beside her self for woe, with torn and scratched breast,
Sercht through the universal world, from East to furthest West,
First seeking for her sons dead coarse, and after for his bones.
She found them by a foreign stream, entumbled under stones.
There fell she groueling on his grave, and reading there his name,
Shed tears thereon, and laid her breast all bare upon the same.
The daughters also of the Sun no less than did their mother,
Bewaild in vain with floods of tears, the fortune of their brother:
And beating piteously their breasts, incessantly did call
The buried Phaeton day and night, who heard them not at all,
About whose tumbe they prostrate lay. Four times the Moon had filde
The Circle of her joined horns, and yet the sisters hilde
Their custom of lamenting still: (for now continual use
had made it custom.) Of the which the eldest Phaetuse
About to kneel upon the ground, complaynde her feet were nom.
To whom as fair Lampetie was rising for to com,
Her feet were held with sudden roots. The third about to tear
Her ruffled locks, filde both her hands with leaves in stead of hear.
One wept to see her legs made wood: another did repine
To see her arms become long boughs. And shortly to define,
While thus they wondered at themselves, a tender bark began
To grow about their thighs and loins, which shortly ouerran
Their bellies, breasts, and shoulders eke, and hands successively,
That nothing (save their mouths) remainde, aye calling pit^ously
Upon the woeful mothers help. What could the mother do?
But run now here now there, as force of nature drue her to?
And deal her kisses while she might? she was not so content:
But tare their tender branches down: and from the sliuers went
Red drops of blood as from a wound. The daughter that was rent
Cride spare us mother spare I pray, for in the shape of tree
The bodies and the flesh of us your daughters wounded be.
And now farewell. That word once said, the bark grew over all.
Now from these trees flow gummy tears that Amber men do call.
Which hardened with the heat of sun as from the boughs they fall.
The trickling River does receive, and sendes as things of price
To deck the dainty Dames of Rome and make them fine and nice.
Now present at this monstrous ^hap was Cygnus S^e^cls son
Who being by the mothers side a kin to Phaeton
Was in condition more a kin. He leaving up his charge.
(For in the land of Ligurie his Kingdom stretched large)
Went mourning all alone the banks and pl^asant stream of Po
Among the trees increased by the sisters late age.
Annon his voice became more small and shrill than for a man.
Gray feathers muffled in his face: his neck in length began
Far from his shoulders for to stretche: and furthermore there goes
A fine red string a cross the joints in knitting of his toes:
With feathers closed are his sides: and on his mouth there grew
A broad blunt byll: and finally was Cygnus made a new
and uncouth foul that hight a Swan, who neither to the wind,
The Air, nor Jove betakes himself, as one that bare in mind
The wrongful fire sent late against his cousin Phaeton.
In Lakes and Rivers is his joy: the fire he aye does shon.
And chooses him the contrary continually to won.
Forlorn and altogether void of that same body shene
Was Phaetons father in that while which erst had in him been,
Like as he looks in The^lypse. He hates the yrkesome light,
He hates him self, he hates the day, and settes his whole delight
In making sorrow for his son, and in his grief does storm
And chaufe denying to the world his duty to perform.
My lot (quoth he) has had enough of this unquiet state
From first beginning of the world. It yrkes me (though too late)
Of restless toils and thankelesse pains. Let who so will for me
Go drive the Chariot in the which the light should carried be.
If none dare take the charge in hand, and all the Gods persist
As insufficient, he himself go drive it if he list.
That at the least by venturing our bridles for to guide
His lightning making childlesse Sires he once may lay aside.
By that time that he has assayde the unappalled force
That does remain and rest within my f^riefooted horse,
I trow he shall by tried proof be able for to tell
How that he did not merit death that could not rule them well.
The Gods stood all about the Sun thus storming in his rage
Beseching him in humble wise his sorrow to assuage.
And that he would not on the world continual darkness bring,
Jove eke excusde him of the fire the which he chaunst to sting.
And with entreatance mingled threats as did become a King.
Then Phoebus gathered up his steedes that yet for fear did run
Like flaighted fiendes, and in his mood without respect begun
To beat his whipstocke on their pa^es and lash them on the sides.
It was no need to bid him chaufe* for ever as he rides
He still vpbraides them with his son, and lays them on the hides.
And Jove almighty went about the walls of heaven to try,
If ought were perished with the fire, which when he did epsy
Continuing in their former state, all strong and safe and sound,
He went to view the works of men, and things upon the ground.
Yet for his land of Arcadie he took most care and charge.
The Springs and streams that durst not run he set again at large.
H^ clad the earth with grass, the trees with leaves both fresh and grene
Commanding woods to spring again that erst had burned been.
Now as he often went and came it was his chance to light
Upon a Nymph of Nonacris whose form and beauty bright
Did set his heart on flaming fire. She used not to spinne
Nor yet to curle her fris^ed hair with bodkin or with pin.
A garment with a buckled belt fast girded did she wear
And in a white and slender Call slight trussed was her hear.
Sometime a dart sometime a bow she used for to bear.
She was a knight of Phebes troop. There came not at the mount
Of Menalus of whom Diana made so great account.
But favor never lasts long. The Sun had gone that day
A good way past the point of Noone: when werie of her way
She drue to shadow in a wood that never had been cut.
Here off her shoulder by and by her quiver did she put.
And hung her how unbent aside, and coucht her on the ground
Her quiver underneath her head* whom when that Jove had found
Alone and weary sure (he said) my wife shall never know
Of this escape, and if she do, I know the worst I trow.
She can but chide, shall fear of chiding make me to forslow?
He counterfeiteth Phebe straight in countnance and array.
And says O virgin of my troop, where did thou hunt to day?
The Damsel started from the ground and said hayle Goddess dear,
Of greater worth than Jove (I think) though Jove himself did hear.
Jove heard her well and smylde thereat, it made his heart rejoice
To hear the Nymph prefer him thus before himself in choice.
He fell to kissing: which was such as out of square might seem,
And in such sort as that a maid could nothing less beseem.
And as she would have told what woods she ranged had for game,
He took her fast between his arms, and not without his shame,
Bewrayed plainly what he was and wherefore that he came
The wench against him strove as much as any woman could
I would that Juno had it seen. for then I know thou would
not take the deed so heynously: with all her might she strove.
But what poor wench or who alive could vanquish mighty Jove?
Jove having sped flue straight to heaven. She hates in her heart
The guiltless fields and wood where Jove had played that naughty part,
Away she goes in such a grief as that she had welnie,
Forgot her quiver with her shaftes and bow that hanged by,
Dictynna guarded with her train and proud of killing Dear,
In raunging over Menalus espying called her near.
The Damsel hearing Phebe call did run away amain,
She feared least in Phebes shape that Jove had come again,
But when she saw the troop of Nymphs that guarded her about,
She thought there was no more deceyt, and came among the rout.
Oh Lord how hard a matter is it for guilty hearts to shift?
And keep their countnance? from the ground her eyes scarce durst she lift.
She prankes not by her mistress side, she preases not to be
The foremost of the company, as when she erst was free.
She stands muet: and by changing of her color ay.
The treading of her shoe awrie she plainly does bewray,
Diana might have found the fault but that she was a May.
A thousand tokens did appear apparent to the eye,
By which the Nymphs themselves (they say) her fault did well epsy.
Nine times the Moon full to the world had shewde her horned face
When fainting through her brothers flames and hunting in the chase,
She found a cool and shadie lawnde through midst whereof she spide
A shallow brook with trickling stream on gravel bottom glide.
And liking well the pleasant place, upon the upper brim
She dipped her foot, and finding there the water cool and trim,
Away (she said) with standers by: and let us bath us here.
Then Parrhasis cast down her head with sad and bashful chere.
The rest did strip them to their skins* she only sought delay,
Until that would or would she not her clothes were plucked away.
Then with her naked body straight her crime was brought to light.
Which ill ashamde as with her hands she would have hid from sight,
Fie beast (quoth Cynthia) get thee hence thou shall not here defile
This sacred Spring, and from her train she did her quite exile.
The Matrone of the thundering Jove had incling of the fact,
Delaying till convenient time the punishment to exact.
There is no cause of further stay. To spite her heart withal,
Her husbands Leman bare a boy that Arcas men did call.
On whom she casting lowering look with fell and cruel mind
Said: was there, arrant strumpet thou, none other shift to find?
But that thou needs must be with barn? that all the world must see
My husbands open shame and thine in doing wrong to me?
But neither unto heaven nor hell this trespass shall thou bear.
I will bereue thee of thy shape through pride whereof thou were
So hardy to entyce my Feere. Immediately with that
She raught her by the foretop fast and fiercely threw her flat
Against the ground. The wretched wench her arms up mekely cast,
Her arms began with griefly hair to wax all rugged fast.
Her hands began warpe and into paws ylfauordly to grow.
And for to serve instead of feet. The lips that late ago
Did like the mighty Jove so well, with side and flaring flaps
Became a wide deformed mouth, and further least perhaps
Her prayers and her humble words might cause her to relent:
She did bereue her of her speech. In stead whereof there went
An yrefull horce and dreadful voice out from a threatening throat:
But yet the self same mind that was before she turnde her cote,
Was in her still in shape of Bear* the grief whereof she shows
by thrusting forth continual sighs, and up she ghastly throws
Such kind of hands as then remainde unto the starrie Sky.
And forbicause she could not speak she thought Jove inwardly
To be unthankful. Oh how often she daring not abide,
Alone among the desert woods, full many a time and tide,
Would stalk before her house in grounds that were her own erewhile?
How often oh did she in the hills the barking hounds beguile?
And in the lawndes where she her self had chased erst her game,
Now fly hirselfe to save her life when hunters sought the same?
Full often at sight of other beasts she hid her head for fear,
Forgetting what she was her self* for though she were a Bear,
Yet when she spied other Bears she quooke for very pain:
And feared Wolves although her Sire among them did remain.
Behold Lycaons daughters son that Archas had to name
About the age of fiftene years within the forest came
Of Erymanth, not knowing ought of this his mothers case.
There after pitching of his toils* as he the stagges did chase,
Upon his mother suddenly it was his chance to light,
Who for desire to see her son did stay hirselfe from flight.
And wistly on him cast her look as one that did him know.
But he not knowing what she was began his heels to show.
And when he saw her still persist in staring on his face,
He was afraid, and from her sight withdrew himself a pace,
But when he could not so he rid* he took an armed pike,
In full intent her through the heart with deadly wound to strike.
But God almighty held his hand, and lifting both away
Did disapoint the wicked Act. For straight he did convey
Them through the Air with whirling winds to top of all the sky,
And there did make them neighbor stars about the Pole on hie.
When Juno shining in the heaven her husbands minion found,
She swelde for spite: and down she comes to watery Tethys round
And unto old Oceanus, whom even the Gods aloft
Did reuer^nce for their just deserts full many a time and often
To whom demanding her the cause: And ask ye (quoth she) why
That I which am the Queen of Gods come hither from the sky?
Good cause there is I warrant you. Another holds my room.
For never trust me while I live, if when the night is coome,
And ouercasteth all the world with shadie darkness whole,
Ye see not in the height of heaven hard by the Northren Pole
Whereas the utmost circle runs about the Axeltree
In shortest circuit, gloriously enstalled for to be
In shape of stars the stinging wounds that make me ill apayde.
Now is there (trow ye) any cause why folk should be afraid
To do to Juno what they list? or dread her wrathful mood?
Which only by my working harm do turn my foes to good?
O what a mighty act is done? how passing is my power?
I have bereft her woman's shape, and at this present hour
She is become a Goddess. Lo this is the scourge so sour
Wherewith I strike mine enemies* Lo here is all the spite
That I can do: this is the end of all my wondrous might.
No force. I would he should (for me) her native shape restore,
And take away her brutish shape, Like as he has before
Done by his Paramour that fine and proper piece
Of Argos whom he made a Cow, I mean Phoronevvs Niece.
Why makes he not a full deuorce from me? and in my stead
Straight take his Sweetheart to his wife, and coll her in my bed?
He can not do a better deed (I think) than for to take
Lycaon to his fatherinlaw. But if that you do make
Account of me your foster child, then grant that for my sake,
The Oxen and the wicked Waine of stars in number seven,
For whoredom sake but late ago received into heaven,
May never diue within your waves. Ne let that strumpet vile
By bathing of her filthy limbs your waters pure defile.
The Gods did grant her her request: and straight to heaven she flue,
In ha^dsome Chariot through the Air. which painted peacocks drue
As well beset with blasing eyes late taken from Argus head,
As thou thou prating Raven white by nature being bred,
Had on thy feathers justly late a coly color spread.
For this same bird in ancient time had feathers fair and whight
As ever was the driven snow, or silver clear and bright.
He might have well comparde himself in beauty with the Doves
That have no blemish, or the Swan that running water loves:
Or with the Geese that afterward should with their gagling out
Preserve the Roman Capitol beset with foes about.
His tongue was cause of all his harm, his tatling tongue did make
His color which before was white, became so foul and blake.
Coronis of Larissa was the fairest maid of face,
In all the land of Thessalie. She stood in Phoebus grace
As long as that she kept her chaste, or at the least as long
As that she escaped vnespide in doing Phoebus wrong.
But at the last Apollos bird her privy packing spide.
Whom no entreatance could persuade but that he swiftly hide
Him to his master, to bewray the doings of his love.
Now as he flue, the prattling Crow her wings apace did move:
And ouertaking fell in talk and was inquisitiue
For what intent and to what place he did so swiftly drive.
And when she heard the cause thereof, she said: now trust me sure,
This message on the which thou ghost no goodness will procure.
And therefore hearken what I say: disdain thou not at all,
To take some warning by thy friend in things that may befall.
Consider what I erst have been and what thou see me now:
And what has been the ground hereof. I boldly dare a^ow,
That thou shall find my faithfulness imputed for a crime.
For Pallas in a wicker chest had hid upon a time
A child calde Ericthonius, whom never woman bare,
And took it unto Maidens three that Cecrops daughters were.
Not telling them what was within, but gave them charge to keep
The Casket shut, and for no cause within the same to peep.
I standing close among the leaves upon an Elm on hie,
Did mark their doings and their words, and there I did epsy
How Pandrosos and Hearse kept their promise faithfully.
Aglauros calls them Cowardes both, and makes no more a do,
But takes the Casket in her hand and does the knots vndooe.
And there they saw a child whose parts beneath were like a Snake.
Straight to the Goddess of this deed a just report I make.
For which she gave me this reward that never might I more,
Account her for my Lady and my Mistress as before.
And in my room she put the foul that flies not but by night.
A warning unto other birds my luck should be of right
To hold their tongues for being shent. But you will say perchance.
I came vnsentfor of my self, she did me not advance.
I dare well say though Pallas now my heavy Mistress stand.
Yet if perhaps ye should demand the question at her hand,
As sore displeased as she is, she would not this deny:
But that she chose me first her self to bear her company.
For (well I know) my father was a Prince of noble fame,
Of Phocis King by long descent, Coronevv was his name:
(I was his darling and his joy, and many a welthie Piere
(I would not have you think disdain) did seek me for their Fere.
My form and beauty did me hurt. For as I leysurely
Went ietting up and down the shore upon the gravel dry.
As yet I customably do the God that rules the Seas
Espying me fell straight in love. And when he saw none ease
In suit, but loss of words and time, he offered violence,
And after me he runs apace. I skudde as fast fro thence,
From sand to shore from shore to sand, still playing Fox to hole,
Until I was so tirde that he had almost got the gole.
Then called I out on God and man. But (as it did appear)
There was no man so near at hand that could my crying hear.
A Uirgin Goddess pitied me because I was a maid:
And at the utter plunge and pinche did send me present aid.
I cast mine arms to heaven, mine arms waxt light with feathers black
I went about to cast in have my garments from my back,
And all was feathers. In my skin the rooted feathers s^ack.
I was about with violent hand to strike my naked breast,
But nether had I hand nor breast that naked more did reast*
I ran. but of my feet as erst remained not the print.
Me thought I glided on the ground. Anon with sudden dint,
I rose and houered in the Air. And from that instant time
Did wait on Pallas faithfully without offense or crime.
But what auailes all this to me, and if that in my place
The wicked wretch Nyctyminee (who late for lack of grace
Was turned to an odious bird) to honor called be?
I pray thee did thou never hear how false Nyctyminee
(A thing all over Lesbos known) defilde her fathers couch?
The beast is now become a bird. whose lewdness does so touch
And prick her guilty conscience, that she dares not come in sight,
Nor show hirselfe abroad a days. but fleeteth in the night
For shame least folk should see her fault. and every other bird
Does in the Air and Iuie toddes with wondering at her girde.
A mischief take thy tatling tongue the Raven answerde tho.
Thy vain forspeaking moves me not. And so he forth did go
And tells his Lord Apollo how he saw Coronis lie
With Isthyis a Gentleman that dwelt in Thessalie.
When Phoebus heard his lovers fault, he fiersly began to frown,
And cast his garlond from his head, and threw his vial down.
His color chaungde, his face looked pale, and as the rage of ire
That boiled in his belking breast had set his heart on fire,
He caught me up his wonted tools, and bent his golden bow,
And by and by with deadly stripe of vnauoyded blow
Struck through the breast the which his own had touched so often before.
She wounded gave a piteous shrike, and (drawing from the sore
The deadly Dart the which the blood pursuing after fast
Upon her white and tender limbs a scarlet color cast)
Said Phoebus well, thou might have wreakt this trespass on my head
And yet forborne me till the time I had been brought a bed.
Now in one body by thy means a couple shall be dead.
Thus much she said: and with the blood her life did fade away.
The body being void of soul became as cold as clay.
Than all too late, alas too late began Phoebus to repent
That of his lover he had taken so cruel punishment.
He blames himself for giving ear so unadvisedly.
He blames himself in that he took it so outragiously.
He hates and bannes his faithful bird because he did inform
Him of his lovers naughtiness that made him so to storm.
He hates his bow, he hates his shaft that rashly from it went:
And eke he hates his hasty hands by whom the bow was bent.
He takes her up between his arms endeavoring all too late
By plaster made of precious herbs to stay her helpless fate.
But when he saw there was no shift: but that she needs must burn,
And that the solemn sacred fire was pressed to serve the turn,
Then from the bottom of his heart full sorry sighs he fet,
(For heavenly powers with watrie tears their cheeks may never wet)
In case as when a Cow beholdes the cruel butcher stand
With launcing Axe embrewd with blood and lifting up his hand
Aloft to snatch her sucking Calfe that hangs by the heels
And of the Axe the deadly dint upon his forehead feels.
Howbeit after sweet perfumes bestowde upon her corse
And much embracing, having sore bewailde her wrong divorce,
He followed to the place assignde her body for to burn.
There could he not abide to see his seed to ashes turn.
But took the baby from her womb and from the fiery flame,
And unto double Chyrons den conveyed straight the same.
The Raven hoping for his truth to be rewarded well,
He makes black, forbidding him with whiter birds to dwell.
The Cent^ure Chyron in the while was glad of Phoebus boy,
And as the burden brought some care the honor brought him joy.
Upon a time with golden locks about her shoulders spread,
A daughter of the Centaurs (whom a certain Nymph had bred
About the brook Caycus banks) that hight Ocyroe
Came thither. This same fair young Nymph could not contented be
To learn the craft of Surgerie as perfect as her Sire,
But that to learn the secret doomes of Fate she must aspire.
And therefore when the furious rage of frenzy had her cought,
And that the spright of Prophecy enflamed had her thought,
She looked upon the child and said: sweet babe the Gods thee make
A man. for all the world shall fare the better for thy sake.
All sores and sickness shall thou cure: thy power shall eke be syche,
To make the dead alive again. For doing of the which
Against the pleasure of the Gods, thy Graundsire shall thee strike
So with his fire, that never more thou shall perform the like.
And of a God a bludlesse corse, and of a corse (full strange)
Thou shall become a God again, and twice thy nature change.
And thou my father liefe and dear, who now by destiny,
Art borne to live for evermore and never for to die,
Shall suffer such outrageous pain throughout thy members all,
By wounding of a venimde dart that on thy foot shall fall,
That often thou shall desire to die, and in the latter end
The fatal dames shall break thy threede and thy desire thee send.
There was yet more behind to tell, when suddenly she fet
A sore deep sigh, and down her cheeks the tears did trickle wet.
Mine own misfortune (quoth she) now has overtake me sure.
I cannot utter any more, for words wax out of ure
My cunning was not worth so much as that it should procure
The wrath of God. I feel by proof far better had it been:
If that the chance of things to come I never had foreseen.
For now my native shape withdrawes. Me thinks I have delight
To feed on grass and fling in fields: I feel my self so light.
I am transformed to a Mare like other of my kin.
But wherefore should this brutish shape all over wholly win?
Considering that although both horse and man my father be:
Yet is his better part a man as plainly is to see.
The latter end of this complaint was fumbled in such wise,
As what she meant the standers by could scarcely well devise.
Anon she neither semde to speak nor fully for to ney,
But like to one that counterfeites in sport the Mare to play.
Within a while she neyed plain, and down her arms were pight,
Upon the ground all clad with hair, and bare her body tight.
Her fingers joined all in one, at end whereof did grow
Instead of nails a round tough hoof of welked horn bylow.
Her head and neck shot forth in length, her kirtle train became
A fair long tail. Her flaring hair was made a hanging Mane.
And as her native shape and doyce most monstrously did pass,
So by the uncouth name of Mare she after termed was.
The Centaure Chyron wept hereat: and piteously dismaide
Did call on thee (although in vain) thou Delphian God for aid.
For neither lay it in thy hand to break Jove's mighty hest,
And though it had, yet in thy state as then thou did not rest.
In Elis did thou then abide and in Messene land.
It was the time when under shape of shepehierde with a wande
Of Olyue and a pipe of reeds thou kept Admetus sheep.
Now in this time that (save of Love) thou took none other keep,
And madste thee merry with thy pipe, the glistring Maias son
By chance abroad the fields of Pyle spide certain cattle run
Without a hierde, the which he stole and closely did them hide
Among the woods. This pretty slight no earthly creature spide,
Save one old churl that Battus hight. This Battus had the charge
Of welthie Neleus feeding grounds, and all his pastures large,
And kept a race of goodly Mares. Of him he was afraid.
And least by him his privy theft should chance to be bewraide,
He took a bribe to stop his mouth, and thus unto him said.
My friend I pray thee if perchance that any man enquire
This cattle say thou saw them not. And take thou for thy hire
This fair young Bullock. The Other took the Bullock at his hand,
And showing him a certain stone that lay upon the land
Said, go thy way: As Soon this stone thy doings shall bewray,
As I shall do. So Mercury did seem to go his way.
Annon he commes me back again, and altered both in speech
And outward shape, said Countrieman Ich heartely bezeche,
And if thou zawest any Kie come royling through this ground,
Or driven away, tell what he was and where they may be vownde.
And I chill gethee vor thy pain an Hecfar an her match.
The Carle perceiving double gain, and greedy for to catch,
Said: under yonsame hill they were, and under yonsame hill
Cham zure they are, and with his hand he poynted therevntill.
At that Mercurius laughing said: false knave: and doste bewray
Me to my self? doste thou bewray me to my self I say?
And with that word strayt to a stone he turnde his double heart,
In which the slander yet remains without the stones desert.
The Bearer of the charmed Rod the subtle Mercury
This done arose with wauing wings and from that place did fly.
And as he houered in the Air he viewde the fields bylow
Of Atticke and the town it self with all the trees that grow
In Lycey where the learned Clerks did wholesome precepts show.
By chance the very self same day the virgins of the town
Of old and ancient custom bare in baskets on their crown
Beset with garlands fresh and gay and strowde with flowers sweet
To Pallas tower such sacrifice as was of custom meet.
The winged God beholding them returning in a troop
Continued not directly forth, but began me down to stoop.
And fetch a wyndlasse round about. And as the hungry Kite
Beholding unto sacrifice a Bullock ready dight,
Does sore about his wished pray desirous for to snatche
But that he dares not for such as stand about and watch:
So Mercury with nimble wings does keep a lower gate
About Mineruas lofty towers in round and wheeling rate.
As far as does the Morning star in clear and streaming light
Excel all other stars in heaven: as far also as bright
Dame Phebe dimmes the Morning star, so far did Herses face
Stain all the Ladies of her troop: she was the very grace
And beauty of that solemn pomp, and all that train so fair.
Jove's son was ravished with the sight, and hanging in the air
Began to swelt within himself, in case as when the poulder
Has driven the Pellet from the Gunne, the Pellet ginnes to smoulder
And in his flying wax more hot. In smoking breast he shrowdes
His flames not brought from heaven above but caught beneath the clouds.
He leaves his journey toward heaven and takes another race
Not minding any longer time to hide his present case.
So great a trust and confidence his beauty to him gave
Which though it seemed of it self sufficient force to have.
Yet was he curious for to make himself more fine and brave.
He kembd his head and strokt his beard, and pried on every side
To see that in his furniture no wrinkle might be spide.
And forbicause his Cloak was fringde and guarded broad with gold,
He cast it on his shoulder up most seemly to behold.
He takes in hand his charmed rod that brings things asleep
And wakes them when he list again. And lastly takes keep
That on his fair welformed feet his golden shoes sit cleene,
And that all other things thereto well correspondent been.
In Cecrops Court were Chambers three set far from all resort
With yuorie beds all furnished in far most royal sort.
Of which Aglauros had the left and Pandrose had the right,
And Hearse had the middlemost. She that Aglauros hight
First marked the coming of the God, and asking him his name
Demanded him for what intent and cause he thither came.
Pleiones Nephew Maias son did make her answer thus.
I am my fathers messenger his pleasure to discuss
To mortal folk and hellish fiendes as list him to command.
My father is the mighty Jove. To that thou doste demand
I will not feyne a false excuse. I ask no more but grant
To keep thy sisters counsel close, and for to be the Aunt
Of such the issue as on her my chance shall be to get.
Thy sister Hearse is the cause that has me hither fet.
I pray thee bear thou with my love that is so firmly set.
Aglauros cast on Mercury her scornful eyes aside,
With which against Mineruas will her secrets late she spide,
Demanding him in recompense a mighty mass of Gold:
And would not let him enter in until the same were told.
The warlike Goddess cast on her a stern and cruel look,
And fetched such a cutting sigh that forcibly it shook
Both breast and brestplate, wherewithal it came unto her thought
How that Aglauros late ago against her will had wrought
In looking on the Lemman child contrary to her oath,
The which she took her in the chest. for which she waxed wroth.
Again she saw her cancred heart maliciously repine
Against her sister and the God. And furthermore in fine
How that the gold which Mercury had given her for her meede,
Would make her both in wealth and pride all others to exceed.
She goes me straight to Enuies house, a foul and irksome cave
Replete with black and lothly filth and stinking like a grave.
It stands in a hollow dale where neither light of Sun
Nor blast of any wind or Air may for the deepenesse come.
A dreyrie sad and doleful den ay full of slothful cold
As which ay dimd with smoldring smoke does never fire behold,
When Pallas that same manly Maid approached nere this plot,
She staide without, for to the house in enter might she not.
And with her Iauelin point did give a push against the door.
The door flue open by and by and fell me in the floor.
There saw she Envy sit within fast gnawing on the flesh
Of Snakes and Todes the filthy food that keeps her vices fresh.
It lothde her to behold the sight. Anon the Elfe arose
And left the gnawed Adders flesh, and slouthfully she goes
With lumpish leisure like a Snayle, and when she saw the face
Of Pallas and her fair attire adournde with heavenly grace,
She gave a sigh a sorry sigh from bottom of her heart.
Her lips were pale, her cheeks were wan, and all her face was swart:
Her body lean as any Rake. She looked eke a skew.
Her teeth were furde with filth and dross, her gums were waryish blew,
The working of her festered gall had made her stomach green.
And all bevenimde was her tongue. No sleep her eyes had seen.
Continual Carke and cankred care did keep her waking still:
Of laughter (save at others harms) the Helhound can no skill.
It is against her will that men have any good success.
And if they have, she frettes and fumes within her mind no less
Than if her self had taken harm. In seeking to annoy:
And work distress to other folk, her self she does destroy.
Thus is she torment to her self. Though Pallas did her hate,
Yet spoke she briefly these few words to her without her gate.
Infect thou with thy venim one of Cecrops daughters three,
It is Aglauros whom I mean, for so it needs must be,
This said, she pight her spear in ground, and took her rise thereon.
And winding from that wicked wight did take her flight anon.
The Caitife cast her eye aside, and seeing Pallas gone,
Began to mumble with her self the Devils Paternoster.
And fretting at her good success, began to blow and bluster.
She takes a crooked staff in hand bewreathde with knubbed pricks,
And covered with a coly cloud, where ever that she sticks
Her filthy feet, she tramples down and seares both grass and corn:
That all the fresh and fragrant fields seem utterly forlorn.
And with her staff she tippeth of the highest poppie heads.
Such poison also every where ungraciously she sheades,
That every Cottage where she comes* and every Town and City
Do take infection at her breath. At length (the more is pity)
She found the fair Athenian town that flowed freshly then
In feastfull peace and joyful wealth and learned wits of men.
And forbicause she nothing saw that might provoke to weep,
It was a corsie to her heart her hateful tears to keep.
Now when she came within the Court, she went without delay,
Directly to the lodgings where King Cecrops daughters lay,
There did she as Minerua bad. she laid her scuruie fist
besmerde with venim and with filth upon Aglauros brist,
The which she fillde with hooked thorns: and breathing on her face
Did shead the poison in her bones: which spread it self apace,
As black as ever virgin pitch through Lungs and Lights and all.
And to the intent that cause of grief abundantly should fall,
She placed ay before her eyes her sisters happy chance
In being wedded to the God, and made the God to glaunce
Continually in heavenly shape before her wounded thought.
And all these things she painted out. which in conclusion wrought
Such corsies in Aglauros breast that sighing day and night
She gnawde and fretted in her self for very cancred spite.
And like a wretch she wastes her self with restless care and pine
Like as the yse whereon the Sun with glimering light does shine.
Her sister Herses good success does make her heart to yerne.
In case as when that fire is put to greenefeld wood or fearne
Which gives neither light nor heat, but smulders quite away:
Sometime she minded to her Sire her sister to bewray.
Who (well she knew) would ill abide so lewd a part to play.
And often she thought with wilful hand to brust her fatal threede,
Because she would not see the thing that made her heart to bleed.
At last she sat her in the door and leaned to a post.
To let the God from entering in. To whom now having lost
Much talk and gentle words in vain, she said: Sir leave I pray
For hence I will not (be you sure) unless you go away.
I take thee at thy word (quoth he) and therewithal he pusht
His rod against the barred door, and wide it open rusht.
She making proffer for to rise, did feel so great a weight
Through all her limbs, that for her life she could not stretch her straight.
She strove to set hirself upright: but striving booted not.
Her hamstrings and her knees were stiff, a chilling cold had got
In at her nails, through all her limbs. and eke her veins began
For want of blood and lively heat, to wax both pale and wan.
And as the freting Fistula forgrowne and past all cure
Runs in the flesh from place to place, and makes the sound and pure
As bad or worser than the rest, even so the cold of death,
Struck to her heart, and closde her veins, and lastly stopped her breath:
She made no profer for to speak, and though she had done so
It had been vain. For way was none for language forth to go.
Her throat congealed into stone: her mouth became hard stone,
And like an image sat she still, her blood was clearly gone.
The which the venim of her heart so fowly did infect,
That ever after all the stone with freckled spots was spect.
When Mercury had punished thus Aglauros spightfull tung
And cancred heart immediately from Pallas town he flung.
And flying up with flittering wings did pierce to heaven above.
His father calde him straight aside (but showing not his love)
Said: son, my trusty messenger and worker of my will
Make no delay but out of hand fly down in have until
The land that on the left side looks upon thy mothers light.
Yonsame where stands on the coast the town that Sidon hight.
The King has there a heirde of Neat that on the Mountains feed,
Go take and drive them to the sea with all convenient speed.
He had no sooner said the word but that the heirde begun
Driven from the mountain to the shore appointed for to run.
Whereas the daughter of the King was wonted to resort
With other Ladies of the Court there for to play and sport.
Between the state of Majesty and love is set such odds,
As that they can not dwell in one. The Sire and King of Gods
Whose hand is armd with triplefire, who only with his frown
Makes Sea and Land and Heaven to quake, does lay his scepter down
With all the grave and stately port belonging thereunto:
And putting on the shape of Bull (as other cattle do)
Goes lowing gently up and down among them in the field
The fairest beast to look upon that ever man beheld.
For why? his color was as white as any winters snow
Before that either trampling feet or Southern wind it thou.
His neck was brawnd with rolls of flesh, and from his chest before,
A dangling dewlap hung me down good half a foot and more.
His horns were small, but yet so fine as that ye would have thought
They bad been made by cunning hand or out of wax been wrought.
More clear they were a hundredth fold than is the Crystal stone
In all his forehead fearful frown or wrinkle there was none.
No fierce, no grim, nor griefly look as other cattle have.
But altogether so demure as friendship seemde to crave.
Agenors daughter marueld much so tame a beast to see,
But yet to touch him at the first too bold she durst not be.
Annon she reaches to his mouth her hand with herbs and flowers.
The loving beast was glad thereof and neither frowns nor lowres.
But till the hoped joy might come with glad and fauning cheer
He lickes her hands and scarce ah scarce the resdue he forbear.
Sometime he friskes and skippes about and shows her sport at hand
Annon he lays his snowie side against the golden sand.
So fear by little driven away, he offered eft his breast
To stroke and coy, and eft his horns with flowers to be dressed.
At last Europa knowing not (for so the Maid was calde)
On whom she venturde for to ride, was nerawhit appalde
To set her self upon his back. Then by and by the God
From maine dry land to maine moist Sea began leysurly to plod.
At first he did but dip his feet within the outmost wave,
And back again, then further in another plunge he gave.
And so still further till at the last he had his wished pray
Amid the deep where was no means to escape with life away.
The Lady quaking all for fear with rufull countnance cast,
Ay toward shore from whence she came, held with her righthand fast
One of his horns: and with the left did stay upon his back.
The weather flaskt and whisked up her garments being slack.
Finis secundi Libri.
THE THIRD BOOK of Ouids Metamorphosis.
THe God now having laid aside his borrowed shape of Bull,
Had in his likeness shewde himself: And with his pretty trull
Taken landing in the I Will of Crete. When in that while her Sire
Not knowing where she was become, sent after to enquire
Her brother Cadmus, charging him his sister home to bring.
Or never for to come again: wherein he did a thing,
For which he might both justly kind and cruel called be.
When Cadmus over all the world had sought, (for who is he.
That can detect the thefts of Jove?) and no where could her see.
Then as an outlaw (to avoid his fathers wrongful ire)
He went to Phoebus Oracle most humbly to desire
His heavenly counsel, where he would assign him place to dwell.
An Hecfar all alone in field (quoth Phoebus) mark her well,
which never bare the pinching yoke, nor drew the plough as yet,
Shall meet thee. follow after her, and where thou see her sit,
There build a town, and let thereof Beotia be the name.
Down from Parnasus stately top scarce fully Cadmus came,
When royling softly in the vale before the herd alone
He saw an Hecfar on whose neck of seruage print was none.
He followde after leysurly as her that was his guide,
And thanked Phoebus in his heart that did so well provide.
Now had he past Cephifus forde, and eke the pleasant grounds,
About the City Panope conteinde within those bounds.
The Hecfar staide, and lifting up her forehead to the sky
Full seemly for to look upon with horns like branches hie
Did with her lowing fill the Air: and casting back her eye
Upon the rest that came aloof, as softly as she could
Kneelde down and laid her hairie side against the grassie mould.
Then Cadmus gave Apollo thanks, and falling flat bylow
Did kiss the ground and hail the fields which yet he did not know.
He was about to sacrifice to Jove the Heavenly King,
And bad his servants go and fetch him water of the spring.
An old forgrowne vnfelled wood stood near at hand thereby,
And in the mids a queachie plot with Sedge and Oysiers hie.
Where courbde about with peble stone in likeness of a bow
There was a spring with silver streams that forth thereof did ^low.
Here lurked in his lowering den God Mars his griesly Snake
With golden scales and fiery eyes beswolne with poison blake.
Three spirting tongues, three rows of teeth within his head did stick.
No sooner had the Tirian folk set foot within this thick
And queachie plot, and deped down their bucket in the well,
But that to buscle in his den began this Serpent fell.
And peering with a marble head right horribly to hiss.
The Tirians let their pitchers slip for sudden fear of this.
And waxing pale as any clay, like folk amazde and flaight,
Stood trembling like an Aspen leaf. The specled serpent straight
Commes trailing out in wauing linkes, and knottie rolls of scales,
And bending into bunchie boughts his body forth he hales.
And lifting up above the wast himself unto the Sky,
He ouerlooketh all the wood, as huge and big welnie
As is the Snake that in the Heaven about the Nordren Pole
Deuides the Bears. He makes no stay but deals his dreadful dole
Among the Tirians. Whether they did take them to their tools,
Or to their heels, or that their fear did make them stand like fools,
And help themselves by none of both, he snapt up some alive,
And swept in others with his tail, and some he did deprive
Of life with rankenesse of his breath, and other some again
He stings and poisons unto death till all at last were stain.
Now when the Sun was at his height and shadows waxed short,
And Cadmus saw his company make tarience in that sort,
He marueld what should be their let, and went to seek them out.
His harness was a Lions skin that wrapped him about.
His weapons were a long strong spear with head of iron tried,
And eke a light and piercing Dart. And thereunto beside
Worth all the weapons in the world a stout and valiant heart.
When Cadmus came within the wood and saw about that part
His men lie slain upon the ground, and eke their cruel fo
Of body huge stand over them, and licking with his blo
And blasting tongue their sorry wounds, well trusty friends (quoth he)
I either of your piteous deaths will straight revenger be,
Or else will die my self therefore. With that he raughting fast
A mighty Millstone, at the Snake with all his might it cast.
The stone with such exceeding force and violence forth was driven,
As of a fort the bulwarks strong and walls it would have riuen.
And yet it did the Snake no harm: his scales as hard and tough
As if they had been plates of mayle did fence him well enough,
So that the stone rebounded back against his freckled slough.
But yet his hardness saude him not against the piercing dart.
For hitting right between the scales that yielded in that part
Whereas the joints do knit the back, it thirled through the skin,
And pierced to his filthy mawe and greedy guts within.
He fierce with wrath wrings back his head, and looking on the stripe
The Iaueling steal that sticked out, between his teeth does gripe.
The which with wresting to and fro at length he forth did wind,
Save that he left the head thereof among his bones behind.
When of his courage through the wound more kindled was the ire,
His throteboll swelde with puffed veins, his eyes began sparkle fire.
There stood about his smeared chaps a lothly foming froth.
His skaled breast ploughes up the ground, the stinking breath that goth
Out from his black and hellish mouth infectes the herbs full foul.
Sometime he winds himself in knots as round as any Bowl.
Sometime he stretches out in length as straight as any beam.
Anon again with violent brunt he rusheth like a stream
Encreast by rage of latefalne rain, and with his mighty sway
Bears down the wood before his breast that stands in his way.
Agenors son retiring back does with his Lions spoil
Defend him from his fierce assaults, and makes him to recoyle
Aye holding at the weapons point. The Serpent waxing wood
Does crashe the steel between his teeth, and bites it till the blood
Dropped mixed with poison from his mouth, did die the green grass black
But yet the wound was very light because he writhed back
And pulled his head still from the stroke: and made the stripe to die
By giving way, until that Cadmus following irefully
The stroke, with all his power and might did through y^ throat him riue,
And naylde him to an Oak behind the which he eke did cliue.
The Serpents weight did make the tree to bend. It grieude the tree
His body of the Serpents tail thus scourged for to be.
While Cadmus wondered at the hugeness of the vanquished foe
Upon the sudden came a voice: from whence he could not know.
But sure he was he heard the voice. Which said, Agenors son
What gazest thus upon this Snake? the time will one day come
That thou thy self shall be a Snake. He pale and wan for fear,
Had lost his speech: and ruffled up stiff staring stood his hear.
Behold (man's helper at his need) Dame Pallas gliding through
The vacant Air was straight at hand, and bade him take a plough
And cast the Serpents teeth in ground, as of the which should spring
Another people out of hand. He did in every thing
As Pallas bade, he took a plough, and earde a forrow low
And sowde the Serpents teeth whereof the foresaid folk should grow.
Anon (a wondrous thing to tell) the clods began to move,
And from the forrow first of all the pikes appearde above,
Next rose up helmes with fethered crests, and then the Poldrens bright,
Successively the Curets whole, and all the armor right.
Thus grew up men like corn in field in ranks of battle ray
With shields and weapons in their hands to feight the field that day.
Even so when stages are attirde against some solemn game,
With clothes of Arras gorgeously, in drawing up the same
The faces of the images do first of all them show,
And then by peecemeale all the rest in order seems to grow,
Until at last they stand out full upon their feet bylow.
Afrighted at this new found foes began Cadmus for to take
Him to his weapons by and by resistance for to make.
Stay, stay thy self (cride one of them that late before were bred
Out of the ground) and meddle not with civil wars. This sed,
One of the brothers of that brood with launcing sword he slew.
Another sent a dart at him, the which him ouerthrue.
The third did straight as much for him and made him yield the breath,
(The which he had receyude but now) by stroke of forced death.
Likewise outraged all the rest until that one by one
By mutual stroke of civil war dispatched euerychone,
This brood of brothers all behewen and weltred in their blood,
Lay sprawling on their mothers womb the ground where erst they stood,
Save only five that did remain. Of whom Echion led
By Pallas counsel, threw away the helmet from his head,
And with his brothers began to treat atonement for to make.
The which at length (by Pallas help) so good success did take,
That faithful friendship was confirmd and hand in hand was plight.
These afterward did well assist the noble Tyrian knight,
In building of the famous town that Phoebus had behight.
Now Thebes stood in good estate, now Cadmus might thou say
That when thy father banished thee it was a luckie day.
To join aliance both with Mars and Venus was thy chance,
Whose daughter thou had taken to wife, who did thee much advance,
Not only through her high renown, but through a noble race
Of sons and daughters that she bare: whose children in like case
It was thy fortune for to see all men and women grown.
But ay the end of every thing must marked be and known.
For none the name of blessedness deserves for to have
Unless the tenor of his life last blessed to his grave.
Among so many prosperous happes that flowde with good success,
Thine eldest Nephew was a cause of care and sore distress.
Whose head was armde with palmed horns, whose own hou^ds in y^ wood
Did pull their master to the ground and fill them with his blood.
But if you sift the matter well, ye shall not find desert
But cruel fortune to have been the cause of this his smart.
For who could do with oversight? great slaughter had been made
Of sundry sorts of savage beasts one morning: and the shade
Of things was waxed very short. It was the time of day
That mid between the East and West the Sun does seem to stay.
When as the Thebane stripling thus bespake his company,
Still raunging in the waylesse woods some further game to spy.
Our weapons and our toils are moist and staind with blood of Dear:
This day has done enough as by our quarrie may appear.
As Soon as with her scarlet wheels next morning brings light,
We will about our work again. But now Hiperion bright
Is in the mids of Heaven, and seares the fields with fiery rays.
Take up your toils, and cease your work, and let us go our ways.
They did even so, and ceast their work. There was a valley thick
With Pinaple and Cipresse trees that armed be with prick.
Gargaphie hight this shadie plot, it was a sacred place
To chaste Diana and the Nymphs that waited on her grace.
Within the furthest end thereof there was a pleasant Bower
So vaulted with the leauie trees the Sun had there no power:
Not made by hand nor man's devise: and yet no man alive,
A trimmer piece of work than that could for his life contriue.
With flint and Pommy was it wallde by nature half about,
And on the right side of the same full freshly flowed out
A lively spring with Crystal stream: whereof the upper brim
Was green with grass and matted herbs that smelled very trim.
When Phebe felt her self wax faint, of following of her game,
It was her custom for to come and bath her in the same.
That day she having timely left her hunting in the chase,
Was entered with her troop of Nymphs within this pleasant place.
She took her quiver and her bow the which she had unbent,
And eke her Iauelin to a Nymph that served that intent.
Another Nymph to take her clothes among her train she chose,
Two losde her buskins from her legs and pulled of her hose.
The Thebane Lady Crocale more cunning than the rest
Did trusse her tresses handsomely which hung behind undressed.
And yet her own hung wauing still. Then Niphe nete and cleene,
With Hiale glistring like the grash in beauty fresh and sheene,
And Rhanis clearer of her skin than are the rainie drops,
And little bibling Phyale, and Pseke that pretty Mops,
Powrde water into vessels large to wash their Lady with.
Now while she keeps this wont, behold, by wandering in the frith
He wist not whither (having staid his pastime till the morrow)
Comes Cadmus Nephew to this thick: and entering in with sorrow
(Such was his cursed cruel fate) saw Phebe where she washed.
The Damsels at the sight of man quite out of countnance dashed,
(Because they euerichone were bare and naked to the quick)
Did beat their hands against their breasts, and cast out such a shricke,
That all the wood did ring thereof: and clinging to their dame
Did all they could to hide both her and eke themselves fro shame.
But Phebe was of personage so comely and so tall,
That by the middle of her neck she ouerpeerd them all.
Such color as appears in Heaven by Phoebus broken rays
Directly shining on the Clouds, or such as is always
The color of the Morning Clouds before the Sun does show,
Such sanguine color in the face of Phoebe began to glowe
There standing naked in his sight. Who though she had her guard
Of Nymphs about her: yet she turnde her body from him ward.
And casting back an angry look, like as she would have sent
An arrow at him had she had her bow there ready bent.
So raught she water in her hand and for to wreake the spite
Besprinckled all the head and face of this unlucky Knight,
And thus forespake the heavy lot that should upon him light.
Now make thy vaunt among thy Mates, thou sawfte Diana bare.
Tell if thou can: I give thee leave: tell heardly: do not spare.
This done she makes no further threats, but by and by does spread
A pair of lively old Hearts horns upon his sprinkled head.
She sharpes his ears, she makes his neck both slender, long and lanke*
She turns his fingers into feet, his arms to spindle shanke.
She wrappes him in a hairie hyde beset with speckled spots,
And planteth in him fearfulness. And so away he trottes.
Full greatly wondering to him self what made him in that case
To be so wight and swift of foot. But when he saw his face
And horned temples in the brook, he would have cryde alas,
But as for then no kind of speech out of his lips could pass.
He sight and brayde: for that was then the speech that did remain,
And down the eyes that were not his, his bitter tears did rain.
No part remained (save his mind) of that he erst had been.
What should he do? turn home again to Cadmus and the Queen?
Or hyde himself among the Woods? Of this he was afraid,
And of the the other ill ashamde. While doubting thus he stayed.
His hounds espyde him where he was, and Blacksoote first of all
And Stalker special good of sent began aloud to call.
This latter was a hounde of Crete, the other was of Spart.
Then all the kenell fell in round, and every for his part,
Did follow freshly in the chase more swifter than the wind,
Spy, Eateal, Scalecliffe, three good hounds comne all of Arcas kind.
Strong Kilbucke, currish Savage, Spring, and Hunter fresh of smell,
And Lightfoote who to lead a chase did bear away the bell.
Fierce Woodman hurt not long ago in hunting of a Bore,
And Shepeheird wont to follow sheep and neat to field before.
And Laund a fell and eger bitch that had a Wolf to Sire:
Another brach callde Greedigut with two her Puppies by her.
And Ladon gant as any Greewnd a hownd in Sycion bred,
Blab, Fleetewood, Patch whose flecked skin with sundry spots was spread:
Wight, Bowman, Royster, beauty fair and white as winters snow,
And Tawnie full of duskie hairs that over all did grow,
With lusty Ruffler passing all the resdue there in strength,
And Tempest best of footemanshipe in holding out at length.
And Cole and Swift, and little Woolfe, as wight as any other.
Accompanide with a Ciprian hound that was his native brother,
And Snatch amid whose forehead stood a star as white as snow,
The resdue being all as black and slicke as any Crow.
And shaggie Rugge with other twain that had a Sire of Crete,
And Dam of Sparta: Tone of them callde Iollyboy, a great
And large flewd hound: the the other Chorle who ever gnoorring went,
And Ringwood with a shyrle loud mouth the which he freely spent.
With diverse mo whose names to tell it were but loss of time.
This fellows over hill and dale in hope of pray do clyme,
Through thick and thin and craggie cliffes where was no way to go,
He flies through grounds where oftentimes he chased had ere tho.
Even from his own folk is he feign (alas) to flee away.
He strayned oftentimes to speak, and was about to say.
I am Acteon: know your Lord and Master sirs I pray.
But use of words and speech did want to utter forth his mind.
Their cry did ring through all the Wood redoubled with the wind,
First Slo did pinch him by the haunch, and next came Kildeere in,
And Hylbred fastened on his shoulder, bote him through the skin.
These came forth later than the rest, but coasting thwart a hill,
They did gainecope him as he came, and held their Master still
Until that all the rest came in, and fastened on him to.
No part of him was free from wound. He could none other do
But sigh, and in the shape of Heart with voice as Hearts are wont,
(For voice of man was none now left to help him at the brunt)
By braying show his secret grief among the Mountains hie,
And kneeling sadly on his knees with dreerie tears in eye,
As one by humbling of himself that mercy seemde to crave,
With piteous look in stead of hands his head about to wave.
Not knowing that it was their Lord, the huntsmen cheer their hounds
With wonted noise and for Acteon look about the grounds.
They hallow who could lowdest cry still calling him by name,
As though he were not there, and much his absence they do blame
In that he came not to the fall, but slackt to see the game.
As often as they named him he sadly shook his head,
And feign he would have been away thence in some other stead.
But there he was. And well he could have found in heart to see
His dogs fell deeds, so that to feel in place he had not be.
They hem him in on every side, and in the shape of Stagge,
With greedy teeth and griping paws their Lord in pieces dragge.
So fierce was cruel Phoebes wrath, it could not be alayde,
Till of his fault by bitter death the ransom he had paid.
Much muttring was upon this fact. Some thought there was exte^ded
A great deal more extremity than neded. Some commended
Dianas doing: saying that it was but worthily
For safegarde of her womanhod. Each party did apply
Good reasons to defend their case. Alone the wife of Jove,
Of lyking or misliking it not all so greatly strove,
As secretly reioyst in heart that such a plague was light
On Cadmus lineage: turning all the malice and the spite
Conceived erst against the wench that Jove had set fro Tire,
Upon the kindred of the wench, and for to fierce her ire,
Another thing clean overthwart there comes in the nicke:
The Lady Semell great with child by Jove as then was quick.
Hereat she began to freat and fume, and for to ease her heart,
Which else would burst, she fell in hand with scolding out her part.
And what a goodyeare have I won by scolding erst? (she sed)
It is that arrant queen her self, against whose wicked head
I must assay to give assault: and if (as men me call)
I be that Juno who in heaven bear greatest swing of all,
If in my hand I worthy be to hold the royal Mace,
And if I be the Queen of heaven and sovereign of this place,
Or wife and sister unto Jove, (his sister well I know:
But as for wife that name is vain, I serve but for a show,
To cover other privy skapes) I will confound that Whore.
Now (with a mischief) is she bagd and bears out before,
Her open shame to all the world? and shortly hopes to be
The mother of a son by Jove, the which has hapt to me.
Not passing once in all my time, so sore she does presume
Upon her beauty. But I trow her hope shall soon consume.
For never let me counted be for Saturns daughter more,
If by her own dear darling Jove on whom she trustes so sore,
I send her not to Styxes stream. This ended up she rose
And covered in golden cloud to Semelles house she goes.
And ere she sent away the cloud, she takes an old wives shape
With hoarie hair and riueled skin, with slow and crooked gate.
As though she had the Palsy had her feeble limbs did shake,
And eke she foltred in the mouth as often as she spoke.
She seemde old Beldame Beroe of Epidaure to be,
This Lady Semelles Nourse as right as though it had been she.
So when that after mickle talk of purpose ministered
Jove's name was vpned: by and by she gave a sigh and sed,
I wish with all my heart that Jove be cause to thee of this.
But daughter dear I dread the worst, I fear it be amiss.
For many Uarlets under name of Gods to serve their lust,
Have into undefiled beds themselves full often thrust.
And though it been the mighty Jove yet does not that suffize,
Unless he also make the same apparent to our eyes.
And if it be even very he, I say it does behoue,
He prove it by some open sign and token of his love.
And therefore pray him for to grant that look in what degree,
What order, fashion, sort and state he use to company
With mighty Juno, in the same in every point and case,
To all intents and purposes he thee likewise embrace,
And that he also bring with him his bright threeforked Mace:
With such instructions Juno had informed Cadmus Niece:
And she poor sielie simple soul immediately on this
Requested Jove to grant a boon the which she did not name.
Ask what thou will sweet heart (quoth he) thou shall not miss the same,
And for to make thee sure hereof, the grisely Stygian Lake,
Which is the fear and God of Gods bear witness for thy sake.
She ioying in her own mischaunce, not having any power
To rule her self, but making speed to have her fatal hour,
In which she through her Lovers help should work her own decay,
Said: Such as Juno finds you when you and she do play,
The games of Venus, such I pray thee show thy self to me
In every case. The God would feign have stopped her mouth. But she
Had made such have that out it was. Which made him sigh full sore,
For neither she could then vnwish the thing she wished before,
Nor he revoke his solemn oath. Wherefore with sorry heart
And heau^e countnance by and by to Heaven he does depart.
And makes to follow after him with look full grim and ^toure
The flakie clouds all gris^y black, as when they threat a shoure.
To which he added mixed with wind a fierce and flashing flame,
With dry and dreadful thunderclaps and lightning to the same
Of deadly vnauoyded dynt. And yet as much as may
He goes about his vehement force and fierceness to allay.
He does not arm him with the fire with which he did remove
The Giant with the hundredth hands Typhoeus from above:
It was too cruel and too sore to use against his Love.
The Cyclops made an other kind of lightning far more light,
Wherein they put much less of fire, less fierceness, lesser might.
It hight in Heaven the second Mace. Jove arms himself with this
And enters into Cadmus house where Semelles chamber is.
She being mortal was too weak and feeble to withstand
Such troublous tumultes of the Heavens: and therefore out of hand
Was burned in her Lovers arms. But yet he took away
His infant from the mothers womb imperfect as it lay,
And (if a man may credit it) did in his thigh it sow,
Where byding out the mothers time it did to ripeness grow.
And when the time of birth was come his Aunt the Lady Ine
Did nourse him for a while by stealth and kept him trym and fine.
The Nymphs of Nysa afterward did in their bowres him hide,
And brought him up with Milk till time he might abroad be spyde.
Now while these things were done on earth, and that by fatal doom
The twice borne Bacchus had a time to man's estate to come,
They say that Jove disposde to mirth as he and Juno sat
A drinking Nectar after meat in sport and pleasant rate,
Did fall a ieasting with his wife, and said: a greater pleasure
In Venus games ye women have than men beyond all measure.
She answerde no. To try the truth, they both of them agree
The wise Tyresias in this case indifferent Judge to be,
Who both the man and woman's joys by trial understood.
For finding once two mighty Snakes engendring in a Wood,
He struck them overthwart the backs, by means whereof behold
(As strange a thing to be of truth as ever yet was told)
He being made a woman straight, seven winter lived so.
The eight he finding them again did say unto them tho:
And if to strike ye have such power as for to turn their shape
That are the giuers of the stripe, before you hence escape,
One stripe now will I lend you more. He struck them as beforne
And straight returned his former shape in which he first was borne.
Tyresias therefore being taken to judge this jesting strife,
Gave sentence on the side of Jove. The which the Queen his wife
Did take a great deal more to heart than needed, and in spite
To wreake her teene upon her Judge, bereft him of his sight.
But Jove (for to the Gods it is vnleefull to undo
The things which other of the Gods by any means have do)
Did give him sight in things to come for loss of sight of eye,
And so his grievous punishment with honor did supply.
By means whereof within a while in City, field, and town
Through all the coast of Aony was bruted his renown.
And folk to have their fortunes read that daily did resort
Were aunswerde so as none of them could give him misreporte.
The first that of his soothfast words had proof in all the Realm
Was freckled Lyriop, whom sometime surprised in his stream,
The flood Cephisus did enforce. This Lady bare a son
Whose beauty at his very birth might justly love have won.
Narcissus did she call his name. Of whom the Prophet sage
Demanded if the child should live to many years of age.
Made answer, yea full long, so that him self he do not know.
The Soothsayers words seemde long but vain, until the end did show
His saying to be true in deed by strangeness of the rage,
And strangeness of the kind of death that did abridge his age.
For when years three times five and one he fully lived had,
So that he seemde to stand beetwene the state of man and Lad,
The hearts of diverse trim young men his beauty began to move
And many a Lady fresh and fair was taken in his love.
But in that grace of Natures gift such passing pride did reign,
That to be touched of man or Maid he wholly did disdain.
A babbling Nymph that Echo hight: who hearing others talk,
By no means can restrain her tongue but that it needs must walk,
Nor of her self has power to ginne to speak to any wight,
Espyde him dryuing into toils the fearful stagges of flight.
This Echo was a body then and not an only voice.
Yet of her speech she had that time no more than now the choice.
That is to say of many words the latter to repeat.
The cause thereof was Iunos wrath. For when that with the feate
She might have often taken Jove in daliance with his Dames,
And that by stealth and vnbewares in mids of all his games.
This elfe would with her tatling talk deteine her by the way,
Until that Jove had wrought his will and they were fled away.
The which when Juno did perceive, she said with wrathful mood,
This tongue that has deluded me shall do thee little good,
For of thy speech but simple use hereafter shall thou have.
The deed it self did straight confirm the threatenings that she gave.
Yet Echo of the former talk does double often the end
And back again with just report the words erst spoken send.
Now when she saw Narcists stray about the Forest wide,
She wared warm and step for step fast after him she hyde.
The more she followed after him and nearer that she came,
The whoter ever did she wax as nearer to her flame.
Like as the lively Brimstone does which dipped about a match,
And put but softly to the fire, the flame does lightly catch.
O Lord how often would she feign (if nature would have let)
Entreated him with gentle words some favor for to get?
But nature would not suffer her nor give her leave to ginne.
Yet (so far forth as she by grant at natures hand could win)
Ay ready with attentive ear she harkens for some sound,
Whereto she might reply her words, from which she is not bound.
By chance the stripling being strayde from all his company,
Said: is there any body nie? straight Echo answerde: I.
Amazde he castes his eye aside, and looks round about,
And come (that all the Forest roong) aloud he calls out.
And come (says she:) he looks back, and seeing no man follow,
Why fliste, he cries once again: and she the same does hallowe,
He still persistes and wondering much what kind of thing it was
From which that answering voice by turn so duly seemde to pass,
Said: let us join. She (by her will desirous to have said,
In faith with none more willingly at any time or stead)
Said: let us join. And standing somewhat in her own conceit,
Upon these words she left the Wood, and forth she yeedeth streit,
To coll the lovely neck for which she longed had so much,
He runs his way and will not be embraced of no such.
And says: I first will die ere thou shall take of me thy pleasure.
She aunswerde nothing else thereto, but take of me thy pleasure.
Now when she saw her self thus mocked, she gate her to the Woods,
And hid her head for very shame among the leaves and buddes.
And ever sense she lives alone in dens and hollow Caves.
Yet stacke her love still to her heart, through which she daily raues
The more for sorrow of repulse. Through restless carke and care
Her body pynes to skin and bone, and waxes wondrous bare.
The blood does vanish into air from out of all her veins,
And naught is left but voice and bones: the voice yet still remaynes:
Her bones they say were turnde to stones. From thence she lurking still
In Woods, will never show her head in field nor yet on hill.
Yet is she heard of every man: it is her only sound,
And nothing else that does remain alive above the ground.
Thus had he mocked this wretched Nymph and many mo beside,
That in the waters, Woods and groves, or Mountains did abide
Thus had he mocked many men. Of which one miscontent
To see himself deluded so, his hands to Heaven up bent,
And said: I pray to God he may once feel fierce Cupids fire
As I do now, and yet not joy the things he does desire.
The Goddess Ramnuse (who does wreake on wicked people take)
Assented to his just request for ruth and pities sake.
There was a spring withouten mudde as silver clear and still,
Which neither sheepeheirds, nor the Goats that fed upon the hill,
Nor other cattle troubled had, nor savage beast had styrd,
Nor branch nor stick, nor leaf of tree, nor any foul nor byrd.
The moisture fed and kept aye fresh the grass that grew about,
And with their leaves the trees did keep the heat of Phoebus out.
The stripling weary with the heat and hunting in the chase,
And much delighted with the spring and coolness of the place,
Did lay him down upon the brim: and as he stooped low
To staunche his thurst, another thurst of worse effect did grow.
For as he drank, he chaunst to spy the Image of his face,
The which he did immediately with fervent love embrace.
He feeds a hope without cause why. For like a foolish noddie
He thinks the shadow that he sees, to be a lively boddie.
Astraughted like an image made of Marble stone he lies,
There gazing on his shadow still with fixed staring eyes.
Stretched all along upon the ground, it does him good to see
His ardant eyes which like two stars full bright and shyning be.
And eke his fingars, fingars such as Bacchus might beseem,
And hair that one might worthily Apollos hair it deem.
His beardlesse chinne and yuorie neck, and eke the perfect grace
Of white and red indifferently bepainted in his face.
All these he woondreth to behold, for which (as I do gather)
Himself was to be woondred at, or to be pitied rather.
He is enamored of himself for want of taking heed.
And where he lykes another thing, he lykes himself in deed.
He is the party whom he wooes, and su^er that does woo,
He is the flame that settes on fire, and thing that burns tooe.
O Lord how often did he kiss that false deceitful thing?
How often did he thrust his arms midway into the spring?
To have embraste the neck he saw and could not catch himself?
He knows not what it was he saw. And yet the foolish elfe
Does burn in ardent love thereof. The very self same thing
That does bewitch and blind his eyes, increases all his sting.
Thou fondling thou, why do thou raught the fickle image so?
The thing thou seek is not there. And if a side thou go?
The thing thou love straight is gone. It is none other matter
That thou do see, than of thy self the shadow in the water.
The thing is nothing of it self: with thee it does abide,
With thee it would depart if thou withdrew thy self aside.
No care of meat could draw him thence, nor yet desire of rest.
But lying flat against the ground, and lea^ing on his breast,
With greed^e eyes he gazeth still upon the falced face,
And through his sight is wrought his bane. Yet for a little space
He turns and settes himself upright, and holding up his hands
With piteous voice unto the wood that round about him stands,
Cries out and ses: alas ye Woods, and was there ever any?
That looude so cruelly as I? you know: for unto many
A place of harbrough have you been, and fort of refuge strong.
Can you remember any one in all your time so long?
That has so pinde away as I? I see and am full feign,
Howbeit that I like and see I can not yet attain:
So great a blindness in my heart through doting love does reign.
And for to spite me more withal, it is no journey far,
No drenching Sea, no Mountain hie, no wall, no lock, no bar,
It is but even a little drop that keeps us two a sunder.
He would be had. For look how often I kiss the water under,
So often again with upward mouth he rises toward me.
A man would think to touch at least I should yet able be.
It is a trifle in respect that lettes us of our love.
What wight soever that thou art come hither up above.
O pierlesse piece, why do thou me thy lover thus delude?
Or whither fliste thou of thy friend thus earnestly pursude?
Iwis I neither am so foul nor yet so grown in years
That in this wise thou should me shoon. To have me to their Feeres,
The Nymphs themselves have sude ere this. And yet (as should appear)
Thou do pretend some kind of hope of friendship by thy cheer.
For when I stretch mine arms to thee, thou stretchest thine likewise.
And if I smile thou smilest too: And when that from mine eyes
The tears do drop, I well perceive the water stands in thine.
Like gesture also do thou make to every beck of mine.
And as by moving of thy sweet and lovely lips I ween,
Thou speak words although mine ears conceive not what they been
It is my self I well perceive, it is mine Image sure,
That in this sort d^luding me, this fury does procure.
I am mamored of my self, I do both set on fire,
And am the same that swelteth too, through impotent desire.
What shall I do? be wood or woe? whom shall I woe therefore?
The thing I seek is in my self, my plenty makes me poor.
O would to God I for a while might from my body part.
This wish is strange to hear a Lover wrapped all in smart,
To wish away the thing the which he loves as his heart.
My sorrow takes away my strength. I have not long to live,
But in the flower of youth must die. To die it does not grieve.
For that by death shall come the end of all my grief and pain
I would this yongling whom I love might longer life obtain:
For in one soul shall now decay we steadfast Lovers twain.
This said in rage he turns again unto the forsaide shade,
And rores the water with the tears and sloubring that he made,
That through his troubling of the Well his image began to fade.
Which when he saw to vanish so, Oh whither do thou fly?
Abide I pray thee heartely, aloud he began to cry.
Forsake me not so cruelly that loves thee so dear,
But give me leave a little while my dazzled eyes to cheer
With sight of that which for to touch is utterly denide,
Thereby to feed my wretched rage and surie for a tide.
As in this wise he made his moan, he stripped off his cote
And with his fist outragiously his naked stomach smote.
A ruddie color where he smote rose on his stomach sheere,
Like Apples which do partly white and striped red appear.
Or as the clusters ere the grapes to ripeness fully come:
An Orient purple here and there begins to grow on some.
Which things as soon as in the spring he did behold again,
He could no longer bear it out. But fainting straight for pain,
As lith and supple wax does melt against the burning flame,
Or morning dew against the Sun that glareth on the same:
Even so by piecemale being spent and wasted through desire,
Did he consume and melt away with Cupids secret fire.
His lively hue of white and red, his cheerfulness and strength
And all the things that lyked him did wanze away at length.
So that in fine remained not the body which of late
The wretched Echo loved so. Who when she saw his state,
Although in heart she angry were, and mindful of his pride,
Yet ruing his unhappy case, as often as he cride
Alas, she cride alas likewise with shirle redoubled sound.
And when he beat his breast, or struck his feet against the ground,
She made like noise of clapping too. These are the words that last
Out of his lips beholding still his woonted image past.
Alas sweet boy beloude in vain, farewell. And by and by
With sighing sound the self same words the Echo did reply.
With that he laid his weary head against the grassie place
And death did cloze his gazing eyes that woondred at the grace
And beauty which did late adorn their Masters heavenly face.
And afterward when into Hell received was his spright
He goes me to the Well of Styx, and there both day and night
Stands tooting on his shadow still as fondely as before
The water Nymphs his sisters wept and wayled for him sore
And on his body strowde their hair clipped off and shorn therefore.
The Woodnymphes also did lament. And Echo did rebound
To every sorrowful noise of theirs with like lamenting sound.
The fire was made to burn the corse, and waxen Tapers light.
A Herce to lay the body on with solemn pomp was dight.
But as for body none remaind: In stead thereof they found
A yellow flower with milk white leaves new sprung upon the ground.
This matter all Achaia through did spread the Prophets fame:
That every where of just desert renowned was his name.
But Penthey old Echions son (who proudely did disdain
Both God and man) did laughe to scorn the Prophets words as vain,
Upbrading him most spitefully with loosing of his sight,
And with the fact for which he lost fruition of this light.
The good old father (for these words his patience much did move)
Said^ O how happy should thou be and blessed from above,
If thou were blind as well as I, so that thou might not see
The sacred rytesof Bacchus band? For sure the time will be,
And that full shortly (as I guess) that hither shall resort
Another Bacchus Semelles son, whom if thou not support
With pomp and honor like a God, thy carcass shall be tattred,
And in a thousand places eke about the Woods be scattred.
And for to read thee what they are that shall perform the deed,
It is thy mother and thine Auntes that thus shall make thee bleed.
I know it shall so come to pass, for why thou shall disdain,
To honor Bacchus as a God: and then thou shall with pain
Feel how that blinded as I am I saw for thee too much.
As old Tiresias did pronounce these words and other such,
Echions son did trouble him. His words prove true in deed,
For as the Prophet did forespeake so fell it out with speed.
Anon this newefound Bacchus commes: the woods and fields rebound,
With noise of shouts and howling out, and such confused sound.
The folk run flocking out by heaps, men, Mayds and wives together
The noble men and rascal sort ran gadding also thither.
The Orgies of this unknown God full fondely to perform,
The which when Penthey did perceive, he began to rage and storm.
And said unto them. O ye ympes of Mars his snake by kind
What ayleth you? What fiend of hell does thus enrage your mind?
Has tinking sound of pottes and pannes? has noise of crooked horn?
Have fond illusions such a force? that them whom heretoforne
No arming sword? no bloody trumpe? no men in battle ray
Could cause to shrink? no sheepish shriekes of simple women fray?
And dronken woodnesse wrought by wine? and roughts of filthy freakes?
And sound of toying timpanes dauntes? and quite their courage breaks?
Shall I at you ye ancient men which from the town of Tire?
To bring your household Gods by Sea, in safety did aspyre?
And settled them within this place the which ye now do yield
In bondage quite without all force and fighting in the field?
Or wonder at you younger sort approaching unto me
More near in courage and in years? whom meet it were to see
With spear and not with thirse in hand? with glittring helm on head,
And not with leaves? Now call to mind of whom ye all are bred,
And take the stomachs of that Snake, which being one alone,
Right stoutly in his own defense confounded many one.
He for his harbrough and his spring his life did nobly spend.
Do you no more but take a heart your County to defend.
He put to death right valiant Knights. Your battle is with such
As are but Meicocks in effect: and yet ye do so much
In conquering them, that by the deed the old renown ye save,
Which from your fathers by descent this present time ye have.
If fatal destnies do forbid that Thebae long shall stand,
Would God that men with Canon shot might raze it out of hand.
Would God the noise of fire and sword did in our hearing sound.
For then in this our wretchedness there could no fault be found.
Then might we justly wail our case that all the world might see
We should not need of sheading tears ashamed for to be.
But now our town is taken by a naked beardelesse boy,
Who does not in the feats of arms nor horse nor armor joy.
But for to moist his hair with Mirrhe, and put on garlands gay,
And in soft Purple silk and gold his body to array.
But put to you your helping hand and straight without delay
I will compel him point by point his lewdness to bewray,
Both in usurping Jove's high name in making him his son
And forging of these Ceremonies lately now begone.
Has King Atrisius heart enough this fondling for to hate?
That makes himself to be a God? and for to shit the gate
Of Argus at his coming there? and shall this rouer make
King Penthey and the noble town of Thebae thus to quake?
Go quickly sirs (these words he spoke unto his servant) go
And bring the Captain hither bound with speed, why stay ye so?
His Grandsire Cadmus, Athamas and others of his kin
Reproved him by gentle means but nothing could they win:
The more-intreatance that they made the fiercer was he still:
The more his friends did go about to break him of his will.
The more they did provoke his wrath, and set his rage on fire:
They made him worse in that they sought to bridle his desire.
So have I seen a brook ere this, where nothing let the stream,
Run smooth with little noise or none, but where as any beam
Or cragged stones did let his course, and make him for to stay:
It went more fiercely from the stop with ^omie wroth away.
Behold all bloody come his men, and straight he them demanded
Where Bacchus was, and why they had not done as he commanded?
Sir (aunswerde they) we saw him not, but this same fellow here
A chief companion in his train and worker in this geere,
We took by force: And therewithal presented to their Lord
A certain man of Tirrhene land, his hands fast bound with cord,
Whom they, frequenting Bacchus rites had found but late before.
A grim and cruel look which ire did make to seem more sore,
Did Penthey cast upon the man. And though he scarcely stayed
From putting him to torments strait. O wretched man (he said)
Who by thy worthy death shall be a sample unto other,
Declare to me the names of thee, thy father and thy mother.
And in what Country thou were borne, and what has caused thee,
Of these strange rites and sacrifice, a follower for to be.
He void of fear made answer thus. Acetis is my name:
Of Parents but of low degree in Lidy land I came.
No ground for painful Ox to till, no sheep to bear me wool
My father left me: no nor horse, nor Ass, nor Cow nor Booll.
God wot he was but poor himself, With line and bayted hook
The frisking fishes in the pooles upon his Reed he took
His hands did serve in stead of lands, his substance was his craft.
Now have I made you true account of all that he me laft,
As well of riches as of trades, in which I was his heir
And successor. For when that death bereft him use of air,
Save water he me nothing left. It is the thing alone
Which for my lawful heritage I claim, and other none.
Soon after I (because that loath I was to ay abide
In that poor state) did learn a ship by cunning hand to guide,
And for to know the raynie sign, that hight the Olenien Got
Which with her milk did nourish Jove. And also I did note
The Pl^iads and the Hiads moist, and eke the siely Plough
With all the dwellings of the winds that make the Seas so rough.
And eke such Havens as are meet to harbrough vessels in:
With every star and heavenly sign that guides to shipmen bin.
Now as by chance I late ago did toward Dilos sail,
I came on coast of Scios I Will, and seeing day to fail,
Took harbrough there and went a land. As Soon as that the night
Was spent, and morning can to peer with ruddie glaring light,
I rose and bad my company fresh water fetch aboard.
And pointing them the way that led directly to the foorde,
I went me to a little hill, and viewed round about
To see what weather we were like to have eresetting out.
Which done, I called my watermen and all my Mates together,
And willde them all to go a board my self first going thither.
Lo here we are (Opheltes said) (he was the Masters Mate)
And (as he thought) a booty found in desert fields a late,
He dragd a boy upon his hand that for his beauty sheene,
A maiden rather than a boy appeared for to been.
This child, as one forelade with wine, and dreint with drous^e sleep
Did reele, as though he scarcely could himself from falling keep.
I marked his countnance, weed and pace, no inckling could I see,
By which I might conjecture him a mortal wight to be.
I thought, and to my fellows said: what God I can not tell
But in this body that we see some Godhead sure does dwell.
What God so ever that thou art, thy favor to us show,
And in our labors us assist, and pardone these also.
Pray for thy self and not for us (quoth Dictys by and by.)
A nimbler fellow for to climb upon the Mast on hie
And by the Cable down to slide, there was not in our keele.
Swart Melanth patron of the ship did like his saying we will.
So also did Alcimedon: and so did Libys to,
And black Epopeus eke whose charge it did belong unto
To see the Rowers at their times their duties duly do.
And so did all the rest of them: so sore men's eyes were blinded
Where couetousenesse of filthy gain is more than reason minded.
Well sirs (quoth I) but by your leave ye shall not have it so,
I will not suffer sacrilege within this ship to go.
For I have here the most to do. And with that word I stepped
Upon the Hatches, all the rest from entrance to have kept.
The rankest Ruffian of the rout that Lycab had to name,
(Who for a murder being late driven out of Tu^cane came
To me for succor) waxed wood, and with his sturdie fist
Did give me such a churlish blow because I did resist,
That over board he had me sent, but that with much ado
I caught the tackling in my hand and held me fast thereto:
The wicked Uarlets had a sport to see me handled so.
Then Bacchus (for it Bacchus was) as though he had but the,
Been waked with their noise from sleep, and that his drous^e brain
Discharged of the wine, begone to gather sense again)
Said: what a do? what noise is this? how came I here I pray?
S^rs tell me whether you do mean to carry me away.
Fear not my boy (the Patron said) no more but tell me where
Thou do desire to go a land, and we will set thee there.
To Naxus ward (quoth Bacchus tho) set ship upon the ^ome.
There would I have harbrough take, for Naxus is my home.
Like periurde Caiti^s by the Sea and all the Gods thereof,
They falsely swear it should be so, and therewithal in scoff
They bade me hoyse up sail and go. Upon the righter hand
I cast about to fetch the wind, for so did Naxus stand.
What meanst? art mad? Opheltes cride, and therewithal begun
A fear of loosing of their pray through every man to run.
The greater part with head and hand a sign did to me make,
And some did whisper in mine ear the left hand way to take.
I was amazde and said take charge henceforth who will for me:
For of your craft and wickedness I will no furthrer be.
Then fell they to reuiling me, and all the rout began grudge:
Of which Ethalion said in scorn: by like in you Sir snudg^
Consistes the sauegard of us all* and with that word he takes
My room, and leaving Naxus quite to other countries makes.
The God then dalying with these mates, as though he had at last
Begone to smell their subtle craft, out of the foredecke cast
His eye upon the Sea: and then as though he seemde to weep,
Said: sirs to bring me on this coast ye do not promise keep.
I see that this is not the land the which I did request.
For what occasion in this sort deserve I to be dressed?
What commendation can you win, or praise thereby receive?
If men a Lad, if many one ye compass to deceive?
I wept and sobbed all this while, the wicked villains laughed,
And rowed forth with might and maine, as though they had been straught.
Now even by him (for sure than he in all the world so wide
There is no God more near at hand at every time and tide.)
I swear unto you that the things the which I shall declare,
Like as they seem incredible, even so most true they are,
The ship stood still amid the Sea as in a dustie docke.
They wondering at this miracle, and making but a mock,
Persist in beating with their Ores, and on with all their sails.
To make their Galley to remove, no Art nor labor fayles.
But Iuie troubled so their Ores that forth they could not row:
And both with Beries and with leaves their ^ailes did ouergrow
And he himself with clustred grapes about his temples round,
Did shake a Iaueling in his hand that round about was bound
With leaves of Uines: and at his feet there seemed for to couch
Of Tigers, Lynx, and Panthers shapes most ougly for to touch.
I cannot tell you whether fear or woodnesse were the cause,
But every person leapth up and from his labor draws.
And there one Medon first of all began to waxen black,
And having lost his former shape did take a courbed back.
What Monster shall we have of thee (quoth Licab) and with that
This Licabs chappes did waxen wide, his nosethrils waxed flat,
His skin waxt tough, and scales thereon began anon to grow.
And Libis as he went about the Ores away to throw,
Perceived how his hands did shrink and were become so short,
That now for finnes and not for hands he might them well report.
Another as he would have claspt his arm about the cord:
Had nere an arm, and so bemaimd in body, over board
He leapeth down among the waves, and forked is his tail
As are the horns of Phebes face when half her light does fail.
They leap about and sprinkle up much water on the ship,
One while they swim above, and down again anon they slip.
They fetch their friskes as in a dance, and wantonly they writhe
Now here now there among the waves their bodies bane and lithe.
And with their wide and hollow nose the water in they snuff,
And by their noses out again as fast they do it puff.
Of twenty persons (for our ship so many men did bear)
I only did remain nigh straught and trembling still for fear.
The God could scarce recomfort me, and yet he said go too,
Fear not but sail to Dia ward. His will I gladly do.
And so as soon as I came there with right deuou^ intent,
His Chaplain I became. And thus his Orgies I frequent.
Thou makste a process very long (quoth Penthey) to the intent
That (choler being coolde by time) mine anger might relent.
But Sirs (he spoke it to his men) go take him by and by,
With cruel torments out of hand go cause him for to die.
Immediately they led away Acetes out of sight,
And put him into prison strong from which there was no flight.
But while the cruel instruments of death as sword and fire
Were in preparing wherewithal t'accomplish Pentheys ire,
It is reported that the doors did of their own accord
Burst open and his chains fall off. And yet this cruel Lord
Persisteth fiercer than before, not bidding others go
But goes himself unto the hill Cytheron, which as tho
To Bacchus being consecrate did ring of chaunted songs,
And other loud confused sounds of Bacchus drunken throngs.
And even as when the bloody Trumpe does to the battle sound,
The lusty horse straight neying out bestirres him on the ground,
And takes courage thereupon t'assaile his emnie proud:
Even so when Penthey heard a far the noise and howling loud
That Bacchus frantic folk did make, it set his heart on fire,
And kindled fiercer than before the sparks of settled ire.
There is a goodly plain about the middle of the hill,
Enuirond in with Woods, where men may view each way at will.
Here looking on these holy rites with lewd profaned eyes
King Pentheys mother first of all her foresaid son espies,
And like a Bedlem first of all she does upon him run,
And with her Iaueling furiously she first does wound her son.
Come hither sisters come she cries, here is that mighty Bore,
Here is the Bore that stroyes our fields, him will I strike therefore.
With that they fall upon him all as though they had been mad,
And clustring all upon a heap fast after him they gad.
He quakes and shakes: his words are now become more meek and cold:
He now condemns his own default, and says he was too bold.
And wounded as he was he cries help Aunt Autonoe,
Now for Acteons blessed soul some mercy show to me.
She wist not who Acteon was, but rent without delay
His right hand off: and Ino tare his the other hand away.
To lift unto his mother the the wretch had nere an arm:
But showing her his maimed corse, and wound^s yet bleeding warm,
O mother see he says: with that Agaue howleth out:
And writhed with her neck awrie, and shook her hair about.
And holding from his body torn his head in bloody hands,
She cries: O fellows in this deed our noble conquest stands.
No sooner could the wind have blown the rotten leaves fro trees,
When Winters frost has bitten them, then did the hands of these
Most wicked women Pentheys limbs from one another tear.
The Thebanes being now by this example brought in fear,
Frequent this newfound sacrifice, and with sweet frankincense
God Bacchus Altars lode with gifts in every place do cense.
Finis (...) Libri.
THE FOVRTH BOOK of Ouids Metamorphosis.
YEt would not stout Alcitho^^ Duke Mineus daughter bow
The Orgies of this new found God in conscience to allow
But still she stiffly does deny that Bacchus is the son
Of Jove: and in this heresy her (...) with her run.
The Priest had bidden holiday, and that as well the Maid
As Mistress (for the time aside all other business laid)
In Buckskin cotes, with tresses loose, and garlondes on their hear,
Should in their hands the leauie spea^es (surnamed Thyrsis) bear,
Fore^elling them that if they did the Gods commandment break,
He would with sore and grievous plagues his wrath upon them wreake.
The women straight both young and old do thereunto obey.
Their yarne, their baskets, and their flax vnsponne aside they lay,
And burn to Bacchus frankins^nce. Whom solemly they call
By all the names and titles high that may to him befall.
As Bromius, and Lyeus eke, begotten of the flame,
Twice borne, the sole and only child that of two mothers came.
Unshorne Thyoney, Niseus, Leneus, and the s^tter
Of Uines, whose pleasant liquor makes all tables fare the better.
Nyctileus and the Elelean Sire, Iacchus, Euan eke,
With diverse other glorious names that through the land of Greek
To thee O Liber wonted are to attributed be.
Thy youthful years can never wast: there dwells ay in thee
A childhod tender, fresh and fair: In Heaven we do thee see
Surmounting every other thing in beauty and in grace
And when thou standste without thy horns thou have a Maidens face.
To thee obeys all the East as far as Ganges goes,
Which does the scorched land of Inde with tawnie folk enclose.
Lycurgus with his twibill sharp, and Penthey who of pride
Thy Godhead and thy mighty power rebelliously denide,
Thou right redowted did confound: Thou into Sea did send
The Tyrrhene shipmen. Thou with bittes the sturdy necks doste bend
Of spotted Ly^xes: Throngs of Frowes and Satyrs on thee tend,
And that old Hag that with a staff his staggering limbs does stay
Scarce able on his Ass to sit for reeling every way.
Thou come not in any place but that is heard the noise
Of gagling women's tatling tongues and showting out of boys.
With sound of Timbrels, Tabors, Pipes, and Brazen pannes and pots
Confusedly among the rout that in thine Orgies trots.
The Thebane women for thy grace and favor humbly sue,
And (as the Priest did bid) frequent thy rites with reverence due.
Alonly Mineus daughters bent of wilfulness, with working
Quite out of time to break the feast, are in their houses lurking:
And there do fall to spinning yarne, or weauing in the frame,
And keep their maidens to their work. Of which one pleasant dame
As she with nimble hand did draw her slender threede and fine,
Said: while that others idelly do serve the God of wine,
Let us that serve a better Saint Minerua, find some talk
To ease our labor while our hands about our profit walk.
And for to make the time seem short, let each of us recite,
(As every bodies turn shall come) some tale that may delight.
Her saying lik^e the rest so well that all consent therein,
And thereupon they pray that first the eldest would begin.
She had such store and choice of tales she wist not which to tell*
She doubted if she might declare the fortune that befell
To Dircetes of Babylon whom now with scaly hide
In altered shape the Philistine believes to abide
In watrie Pooles: or rather how her daughter taking wings
In shape of Dove on tops of towers in age now sadly sings:
Or how a certain water Nymph by witch^raft and by charms
Converted into fishes dumb, of yongmen many swarms,
Until that of the self same sauce her self did taste at last:
Or how the tree that used to bear fruit white in ages past,
Does now bear fruit in manner black, by sprincling up of blood.
This tale (because it was not stale nor common) seemed good
To her to tell: and thereupon she in this wise begun.
Her ^^sie hand still drawing out the flaxen threede she spun.
Within the town (of whose huge walls so monstrous high and thick^
The fame is given Semyramis for making them of brick)
Dwelt hard together two young folk in houses ioynde so nere
That under all one roof well nie both twain conveyed were.
The name of him was Pyramus, and Thisbe calde was she.
So fair a man in all the East was none alive as he,
Nor nere a woman maid nor wife in beauty like to her.
This neighbrod bred acquaintance first, this neyghbrod first did stir
The secret sparks, this neighbrod first an entrance in did show,
For love to come to that to which it afterward did grow.
And if that right had taken place they had been man and wife,
But still their Parents went about to let whith (for their life)
They could not let. For both their hearts with equal flame did burn.
No man was privy to their thoughts. And for to serve their turn
In stead of talk they used signs, the closelier they suppressed
The fire of love, the fiercer still it raged in their breast.
The wall that parted house from house had riuen therein a crany
Which shronke at making of the wall* this fault not marked of any
Of many hundred years before (what does not love epsy.)
These lovers first of all found out, and made a way whereby
To talk together secretly, and through the same did go
Their loving whisprings very light and safely to and fro.
Now as a tonefide Pyramus and This be on the the other
Stood often drawing one of them the pleasant breath from other
O thou envious wall (they said) why letst thou lovers thus?
What matter were it if that thou permitted both of us
In arms each other to embrace? Or if thou think that this
Were overmuch, yet might thou at least make room to kiss.
And yet thou shall not find us churles: we think our selves in de^
For this same piece of courtesy, in vouching safe to let
Our sayings to our friendly ears thus freely come and go,
Thus having where they stood in vain complained of their woe,
When night drew nere, they bade adieu and each gave kisses sweet
Unto the parget on their side, the which did never meet.
Next morning with her cherefull light had driven the stars aside
And Phoebus with his burning beams the dewse grass had dride.
These lovers at their wonted place by foreappointment met.
Where after much complaint and moan they couenanted to get
Away from such as watched them, and in the Evening late
To steal out of their fathers house and eke the City gate.
And to thentent that in the fields they strayde not up and down
They did agree at Ninus Tumb to meet without the town,
And tarry underneath a tree that by the same did grow
Which was a fair high Mulberie with fruit as white as snow,
Hard by a cool and trickling spring. This bargain pleased them both
And so daylight (which to their thought away but slowly goth)
Did in the Ocean fall to rest, and night from thence does rise.
As Soon as darkness once was come, straight Thisbe did devise
A shift to wind her out of doors, that none that were within
Perceived her: And muffling her with clothes about her chin,
That no man might discern her face, to Ninus Tumb she came
Unto the tree, and sat her down there underneath the same.
Love made her bold. But see the chance, there comes b^smerde with blood,
About the chappes a Lioness all foming from the wood
From slaughter lately made of Kine to staunch her bloody thurst
With water of the foresaid spring. Whom Thisbe spying furst
A far by moonelight, thereupon with fearful steps began fly,
And in a dark and yrkesome cave did hide hirselfe thereby.
And as she fled away for have she let her mantle fall
The which for fear she left behind not looking back at all.
Now when the cruel Lioness her thurst had stanched well,
In going to the Wood she found the slender weed that fell
From Thisbe, which with bloody teeth in pieces she did tear
The night was somewhat further spent ere Pyramus came there
Who seeing in the subtle sand the print of Lions paw,
Waxt pale for fear. But when also the bloody cloak he saw
All rent and torn, one night (he said) shall lovers two confound,
Of which long life deserved she of all that live on ground.
My soul deserves of this mischaunce the peril for to bear.
I wretch have been the death of thee, which to this place of fear
Did cause thee in the night to come, and came not here before.
My wicked limbs and wretched guts with cruel teeth therefore
Devour ye O ye Lions all that in this rock do dwell.
But Cowardes use to wish for death. The slender weed that fell
From Thisbe up he takes, and straight does bear it to the tree,
Which was appointed erst the place of meeting for to be.
And when he had bewept and kissed the garment which he knew,
Receive thou my blood too (quoth he.) and therewithal he drew
His sword, the which among his guts he thrust, and by and by
Did draw it from the bleeding wound beginning for to die,
And cast himself upon his back, the blood did spin on hie
As when a Conduite pipe is cracked, the water bursting out
Does shote it self a great way off and pierce the Air about.
The leaves that were upon the tree besprincled with his blood
Were died black. The root also bestained as it stood,
A deep dark purple color straight upon the Berries cast.
Anon scarce ridded of her fear with which she was aghast,
For doubt of disapointing him commes Thisbe forth in have,
And for her lover looks about, rejoicing for to tell
How hardly she had escaped that night the danger that befell.
And as she knew right well the place and facion of the tree
(As which she saw so late before): even so when she did see
The color of the Berries turnde, she was uncertain whither
It were the tree at which they both agreed to meet together.
While in this doubtful stounde she stood, she cast her eye aside
And there beweltred in his blood her lover she espide
Lie sprawling with his dying limbs: at which she started back,
And looked pale as any Box, a shuddring through her stracke,
Even like the Sea which suddenly with whissing noise does move,
When with a little blast of wind it is but touched above.
But when approaching nearer him she knew it was her love.
She beat her breast, she shricked out, she tare her golden hears,
And taking him between her arms did wash his wounds with tears,
She meynt her weeping with his blood, and kissing all his face
(Which now became as cold as yse) she cride in woeful case
Alas what chance my Pyramus has parted thee and me?
Make answer O my Pyramus: It is thy Thisb, even she
Whom thou doste love most heartely that speaks unto thee.
Give ear and raise thy heavy head. He hearing Thisbes name,
Lift up his dying eyes and having seen her closde the same.
But when she knew her mantle there and saw his scabberd lie
Without the swoorde: Unhappy man thy love has made thee die:
Thy love (she said) has made thee slay thy self. This hand of mine
Is strong enough to do the like. My love no less than thine
Shall give me force to work my wound. I will pursue the dead.
And wretched woman as I am, it shall of me be sed
That like as of thy death I was the only cause and blame,
So am I thy companion eke and partner in the same,
For death which only could alas a sunder part us twain,
Shall never so disseuer us but we will meet again.
And you the Parents of us both, most wretched folk alive,
Let this request that I shall make in both our names byliue
Entreat you to permit that we whom chaste and steadfast love
And whom even death has ioynde in one, may as it does behoue
In one grave be together laid. And thou unhappy tree
Which shroudest now the corse of one, and shall anon through me
Shroude two, of this same slaughter hold the sicker signs for ay
Black be the color of thy fruit and mourninglike always,
Such as the murder of us twain may evermore bewray.
This said, she took the sword yet warm with slaughter of her love
And setting it beneath her breast, did to her heart it shoue.
Her prayer with the Gods and with their Parents took effect.
For when the fruit is thoroughly ripe, the Berrie is bespect
With color tending to a black. And that which after fire
Remained, rested in one Tumbe as Thisbe did desire.
This tale thus told a little space of pawsing was betwist,
And then began Leucotho^ thus, her sisters being whist.
This Sun that with his streaming light al worldly things does cheer
Was taken in love. of Phoebus loves now list and you shall hear.
It is reported that this God did first of all epsy,
(For every thing in Heaven and Earth is open to his eye)
How Venus with the warlike Mars ad^outrie did commit.
It grieved him to see the fact and so discovered it,
He showed his husband Iunos son the aduoutrie and the place
In which this privy escape was done. Who was in such a case
That heart and hand and all did fail in working for a space.
Anon he featly forgde a net of Wire so fine and slight,
That neither knot nor nooze therein apparent was to sight.
This piece of work was much more fine than any handwarpe oofe
Or that whereby the Spider hanges in sliding from the roof.
And furthermore the suttlenesse and slight thereof was such.
It followed every little pull and closde with every touch,
And so he set it handsomely about the haunted couch.
Now when that Venus and her mate were met in bed together
Her husband by his newfound snare before conuayed thither
Did snarle them both together fast in mids of all their play
And setting open the I^orie doors, callde all the Gods straight way,
To see them: they with shame enough fast locked together lay,
A certain God among the rest disposed for to sport
Did wish that he himself also were shamed in that sort.
The resdue laughed and so in heaven there was no talk a while,
But of this Pageant how the Smith the lovers did beguile.
Dame Venus highly stomacking this great displeasure, thought
To be revenged on the part by whom the spite was wrought.
And like as he her secret loves and meetings had bewrayd.
So she with wound of raging love his guerdon to him paid.
What now auayles (Hyperions son) thy form and beauty bright?
What now avail thy glistring eyes with clear and piercing sight?
For thou that with thy gleames art wont all countries for to burn,
Art burnt thy self with other gleames that serve not for thy turn.
And thou that oughtst thy cherefull look on all things for to show
Alonly on Leucothoe doste now the same bestow.
Thou fastnest on that Maid alone the eyes that thou doste owe
To all the world. Sometime more rathe thou risest in the East,
Sometime again thou makste it late before thou fall to reast.
And for desire to look on her, thou often doste prolong
Our winter nights. And in thy light thou faylest eke among.
The fancy of thy faulty mind infectes thy feeble sight,
And so thou makste men's hearts afraid by daunting of thy light,
Thou looxte not pale because the globe of Phebe is between
The Earth and thee: but love does cause this color to be seen.
Thou love this Leucothoe so far above all other,
That neither now for Clymen^, for Rhodos, nor the mother
Of Circe, nor for Clytie (who at that present tide
Rejected from thy company did for thy love abide
Most grievous torments in her heart: thou seem for to care.
Thou mindest her so much that all the rest forgotten are.
Her mother was Eurynome of all the fragrant clime
Of Arabie esteemde the flower of beauty in her time.
But when her daughter came to age the daugher past the mother
As far in beauty, as before the mother past all other.
Her father was king Orchamus and ruled the public weal
Of Persey, counted by descent the.vij. from ancient Bele.
Far underneath the Western clyme of Hesperus do run
The pastures of the fiery steedes that draw the golden Sun.
There are they fed with Ambros^e in stead of grass all night
Which does refresh their werie limbs and keeps them in plight
To bear their daily labor out: now while the steedes there take
Their heavenly food and night by turn his timely course does make,
The God disguised in the shape of Queen Eurynome
Does prease within the chamber door of fair Leucothoe
His lover, whom amid.xii. Maids he found by candlelight
Yet spinning on her little Rock, and went me to her right.
And kissing her as mothers use to kiss their daughters dear,
Said Maids withdraw your selves a while and sit not listening here.
I have a secret thing to talk. The Maids avoid each one.
The God then being with his love in chamber all alone,
Said: I am he that metes the year, that all things do behold,
By whom the Earth does all things see, the Eye of all the world.
Trust me I am in love with thee. The Lady was so nipt
With sudden fear that from her hands both rock and spindle slipped
Her fear became her wondrous well. he made no mo delays,
But turned to his proper shape and took his glistring rays.
The damsel being sore abasht at this so strange a sight,
And overcome with sudden fear to see the God so bright,
Did make no outcrie nor no noise, but held her patience still,
And suffered him by forced power his pleasure to fulfill.
Hereat did Clytie sore repine. For she beyond all measure
Was then enamoured of the Sun: and stung with this displeasure
That he another Leman had, for very spite and ire
She plays the blab, and does defame Leucothoe to her Sire.
He cruel and unmerciful would no excuse accept,
But holding up her hands to heaven when tenderly she wept,
And said it was the Sun that did the deed against her will:
Yet like a savage beast full bent his daughter for to spill,
He put her deep in delued ground, and on her body laid
A huge great heap of heavy sand. The Sun full ill appaide
Did with his beams disperse the sand and made an open way
To bring thy buried face to light, but such a weight there lay
Upon thee, that thou could not raise thine hand aloft again,
And so a corse both void of blood and life thou did remain.
There never chaunst since Phaetons fire a thing that grieude so sore
The ruler of the winged steedes as this did. And therefore
He did attempt if by the force and virtue of his ray
He might again to lively heat her frozen limbs convey.
But forasmuch as destenie so great attempts denies,
He sprincles both the corse it self and place wherein it lies
With fragrant Nectar. And therewith bewayling much his chance
Said: yet above the starrie sky thou shall thy self advance.
Anon the body in this heavenly liquor steeped well
Did melt, and moisted all the earth with sweet and pleasant smell.
And by and by first taking root among the cloddes within
By little and by little did with growing top begin
A pretty spirke of Frankincense above the Tumbe to win.
Although that Clytie might excuse her sorrow by her love
And seem that so to play the blab her sorrow did her move,
Yet would the Author of the light resort to her no more
But did withholde the pleasant sportes of Venus used before.
The Nymph not able of her self the frantic fume to stay.
With restless care and pensiveness did pine her self away.
Bareheaded on the bare cold ground with flaring hair unkempt
She sat abroad both night and day: and clearly did exempt
Hirselfe by space of thrice three days from sustnance and repast
Save only dew and save her tears with which she brake her fast.
And in that while she never rose but stared on the Sun
And ever turnde her face to his as he his corse did run.
Her limbs stacke fast within the ground, and all her upper part
Did to a pale ashcolourd herb clean void of blood conuart.
The flower whereof part red part white beshadowed with a blew
Most like a Uiolet in the shape her countnance ouergrew.
And now (though fastened with a root) she turns her to the Sun
And keeps (in shape of herb) the love with which she first begun.
She made an end: and at her tale all wondered: some denide
Her saying to be possible: and other some replide
That such as are in deed true Gods may all things work at will:
But Bacchus is not any such. This arguing once made still.
To tell her tale as others had Alcithoes turn was come.
Who with her shettle shooting through her web within the Loome,
Said: Of the shepeheird Daplynis love of Ida whom erewhile
A iealouse Nymph (because he did with Lemans her beguile)
For anger turned to a stone (such fury love does send:)
I will not speak: it is to know: ne yet I do entende
To tell how Scython variably digressing from his kind,
Was as sometime woman, sometime man, as liked best his mind.
And Celmus also will I pass, who for because he cloong
Most faithfully to Jupiter when Jupiter was young,
Is now become an Adamant. So will I pass this hour
To show you how the Curets were engendered of a shower:
Or how that Crocus and his love fair Smylar turned were
To little flowers. with pleasant news your minds now will I chere.
Learn why the fountain Salmacis diffamed is of yore,
Why with his waters ouerstrong it weakeneth men so sore
That whosoever bathes him there commes thence a perfect man no more.
The operation of this Well is known to every wight.
But few can tell the cause thereof, the which I will recite.
The waternymphes did nurce a son of Mercuries in I Would
Begot on Venus, in whose face such beauty did abide,
As well therein his father both and mother might be known,
Of whom he also took his name. As Soon as he was grown
To fiftene years of age, he left the Country where he dwelt
And Ida that had fostered him. The pleasure that he felt
To travel Countries, and to see strange rivers with the state
Of foreign lands, all painfulnesse of travel did abate.
He trauelde through the land of Lycie to Carry that does bound
Next unto Lycia. There he saw a Poole which to the ground
Was Crystal clear. No fennie sedge, no barren reeke, no reed
Nor rush with pricking point was there, nor other moorish weed.
The water was so pure and shere a man might well have seen
And numbered all the gravel stones that in the bottom been.
The utmost borders from the brim enuirond were with clowres
Beclad with herbs ay fresh and green and pleasant smelling flowers.
A Nymph did haunt this goodly Poole: but such a Nymph as neither
To hunt, to run, nor yet to shoot, had any kind of pleasure.
Of all the Waterfairies she alonly was unknown
To swift Diana. As the brute of fame abroad has blown,
Her sisters oftentimes would say: take lightsome Dart or bow,
And in some painful exercise thine idle time bestow.
But never could they her persuade to run to shoot or hunt,
Or any other exercise as Phebes knights are wont.
Sometime her fair welformed limbs she batheth in her spring:
Sometime she down her golden hair with Boxen comb does bring.
And at the water as a glass she takes counsel ay
How every thing becomes her. Erewhile in fine array
On soft sweet herbs or soft green leaves her self she nicely lays:
Erewhile again a gathering flowers from place to place she strayes.
And (as it chaunst) the self same time she was a sorting gayes.
To make a Poisie, when she first the yongman did epsy,
And in beholding him desirde to have his company.
But though she thought she stood on thorns until she went to him:
Yet went she not before she had bedect her neat and trim,
And pride and peerd upon her clothes that nothing sat awrie.
And framde her countnance as might seem most amrous to the eye.
Which done she thus begone: O child most worthy for to be
Estemde and taken for a God, if (as thou seemste to me)
Thou be a God, to Cupids name thy beauty does agree.
Or if thou be a mortal wight, right happy folk are they,
By whom thou camste into this world, right happy is (I say)
Thy mother and thy sister too (if any be:) good hap
That woman had that was thy Nurce and gave thy mouth her pap.
But far above all other, far more blist than these is she
Whom thou vouchsafest for thy wife and bedfellow for to be.
Now if thou have already one, let me by stelth obtain
That which shall pleasure both of us. Or if thou do remain
A Maiden free from wedlock bond, let me then be thy spouse,
And let us in the bridelie bed our selves together rouse.
This sed, the Nymph did hold her peace, and therewithal the boy
Waxt red: he wist not what love was: and sure it was a joy
To see it how exceeding well his blushing him became.
For in his face the color fresh appeared like the same
That is in Apples which do hang upon the Sunnie side:
Or Iuorie shadowed with a red: or such as is espide
Of white and scarlet colors mixed appearing in the Moon
When folk in vain with sounding brass would ease unto her done.
When at the last the Nymph desirde most instantly but this,
As to his sister brotherly to give her there a kiss.
And therewithal was clasping him about the Iuorie neck:
Leave of (quoth he) or I am gone and leave thee at a beck
With all thy tricks. Then Salmacis began to be afraid,
And to your pleasure leave I free this place my friend she said.
With that she turns her back as though she would have gone her way:
But evermore she looks back, and (closely as she may)
She hides her in a bushie queach, where kneeling on her knee
She always has her eye on him. He as a child and free,
And thinking not that any wight had watched what he did
Romes up and down the pleasant Mede: and by and by amid
The flattring waves he dippes his feet, no more but first the sole
And to the ancles afterward both feet he plungeth whole.
And for to make the matter short, he took so great delight
In coolness of the pleasant spring, that straight he stripped quight
His garments from his tender skin. When Salmacis behilde
His naked beauty, such strong pangs so ardently her hilde,
That utterly she was astraught. And even as Phoebus beams
Against a myrrour pure and clear rebound with broken gleames:
Even so her eyes did sparcle fire. Scarce could she tarience make:
Scarce could she any time delay her pleasure for to take:
She would have run, and in her arms embraced him straight way:
She was so far beside her self, that scarsly could she stay.
He clapping with his hollow hands against his naked sides,
Into the water lithe and baine with arms displayde glydes.
And rowing with his hands and legs swimmes in the water clear:
Through which his body fair and white does glistringly appear,
As if a man an Iuorie Image or a Lilly white
Should ouerlay or close with glass that were most pure and bright.
The price is won (cride Salmacis aloud) he is mine own.
And therewithal in all post have she having lightly thrown
Her garments off, flew to the Poole and cast her thereinto
And caught him fast between her arms, for ought that he could do:
Yea maugre all his wrestling and his struggling to and fro,
She held him still, and kissed him a hundred times and mo.
And willde he nillde he with her hands she touched his naked breast:
And now on this side now on that (for all he did resist
And strive to wrest him from her gripes) she clung unto him fast:
And wound about him like a Snake which snatched up in have,
And being by the Prince of Birds borne lightly up aloft,
Does writhe her self about his neck and griping talants often:
And cast her ^aile about his wings displayed in the wind:
Or like as Iuie runs on trees about the utter rind:
Or as the Crabfish having caught his enmy in the Seas,
Does claspe him in on every side with all his crooked cleas.
But Atlas Nephew still persistes, and utterly denies
The Nymph to have her hoped sport: she vrges him likewise.
And pressing him with all her weight, fast cleaving to him still,
Strive, struggle, wrest and writhe (she said) thou froward boy thy fill:
Do what thou can thou shall not escape. Ye Gods of Heaven agree
That this same wilful boy and I may never parted be.
The Gods were pliant to her boon. The bodies of them twain
Were mixed and joined both in one. To both them did remain
One countnance: like as if a man should in one bark behold
Two twigges both growing into one and still together hold.
Even so when through her hugging and her grasping of the the other
The members of them mingled were and fastened both together,
They were not any longer two: but (as it were) a toy
Of double shape. Ye could not say it was a perfect boy,
Nor perfect wench: it seemed both and none of both to been
Now when Hermaphroditus saw how in the water sheene
To which he entered in a man, his limbs were weakened so
That out fro thence but half a man he was compelde to go.
He lifts up his hands and said (but not with manly reere)
O noble father Mercury, and Venus mother dear.
This one petition grant your son which both your names does bear,
That whosoever commes within this Well may so be weakened there,
That of a man but half a man he may fro thence retire.
Both Parents moved with the chance did stablish this desire
The which their doubleshaped son had made: and thereupon
Infected with an unknown strength the sacred spring anon.
Their tales did end and Mineus daughters still their business plie
In spite of Bacchus whose high feast they break contemptuously.
When on the sudden (seeing naught) they heard about them round
Of rubbish Timbrels perfectly a hoarse and iarring sound.
With shraming shalmes and gingling belles. and furthermore they felt
A cent of Saffron and of Myrrh that very hotly smelt.
And (which a man would ill believe) the web they had begun
Immediately waxt fresh and green, the flax the which they spun
Did flourish full of Iuie leaves. And part thereof did run
Abroad in Uines. The threede it self in branches forth did spring.
Young burgeous full of clustred grapes their Distaues forth did bring.
And as the web they wrought was did a deep dark purple hew,
Even so upon the painted grapes the self same color grew.
The day was spent, and now was come the time which neither night
Nor day, but even the bound of both a man may term of right.
The house at sudden seemde to shake, and all about it shine
With burning lamps, and glittering fires to flash before their eyes.
And likenesses of ougly beasts with gastfull noyses yield.
For fear whereof in smokie holes the sisters were compeld
To hide their heads, one here and there another, for to shun
The glistring light. And while they thus in corners blindly run,
Upon their little pretty limbs a fine crispe filme there goes,
And slender finnes in stead of hands their shortened arms enclose.
But how they lost their former shape of certainty to know
The darkness would not suffer them. No feathers on them grow,
And yet with shere and velume wings they houer from the ground
And when they go about to speak they make but little sound,
According as their bodies give, bewayling their despite
By chirping shirlly to themselves. In houses they delight
And not in woods: detesting day they flitter toward night:
Wherethrough they of the Evening late in Latin take their name,
And we in English language Backs or Reermice call the same.
Then Bacchus name was reverenced through all the Theban coast.
And Ino of her Nephews power made every where great boast.
Of Cadmus daughters she alone no sorrows tasted had,
Save only that her sisters haps perchance had made her sad.
Now Juno nothing how she waxt both proud and full of scorn,
As well by reason of the sons and daughters she had borne,
As also that she was aduaunst by marriage in that town
To A^hamas King Aeolus son a Prince of great renown,
But chiefly that her sisters son who nourced was by her
Was then exalted for a God: began thereat to stir,
And freating at it in hirselfe said: could this harlots burd
Transform the Lydian watermen, and drown thee in the foord?
And make the mother tear the guts in pieces of her son?
And Mineus al three daughters clad with wings, because they sponne
Whiles others howling up and down like frantic folk did run?
And can I Juno nothing else save sundry woes bewail?
Is that sufficient? can my power no more than so avail?
He teaches me what way to work. A man may take (I see)
Example at his enmies hand the wiser for to be.
He shows enough and overmuch the force of furious wrath
By Pentheys death: why should not Ine be taught to tread the path
The which her sisters heretofore and kindred trodden has?
There is a steep and irksome way obscure with shadow fell
Of balefull yewgh, all sad and still, that leads down to hell.
The foggie Styx does breath up mistes: and down this way do wave
The ghostes of persons lately dead and buried in the grave.
Continual cold and ghastly fear possess this queachie plot
On either side: the siely Ghost new parted knows not
The way that does directly lead him to the Stygian City
Or where black Pluto keeps his Court that never shows pity.
A thousand ways, a thousand gates that always open stand,
This City has: and as the Sea the streams of all the land
Does swallow in his gredie gulf, and yet is never full:
Even so that place deuoureth still and hides in his gull
The souls and ghostes of all the world: and though that nere so many
Come thither, yet the place is void as if there were not any.
The ghostes without flesh, blood, or bones, there wander to and fro.
Of which some haunt the judgment place: and other come and go
To Plutos Court: and some frequent the former trades and Arts
The which they used in their life: and some abide the smartes
And torments for their wickedness and other ill desartes.
So cruel hate and spightfull wrath did boil in Iunos breast,
That in the high and noble Court of Heaven she could not rest:
But that she needs must hither come: whose feet no sooner touched
The thresholde, but it ga^ to quake. And Cerberus erst coucht
Start sternely up with three fell heads which barked all together.
She callde the daughters of the night the cruel furies thither:
They sat a kembing foul black Snakes from of their filthy hear
Before the dungeon door, the place where Caitiues punished were,
The which was made of Adamant. when in the dark in part
They knew Queen Juno, by and by upon their feet they start.
There Titius stretched out (at least) nine acres full in length,
Did with with his bow^ls feed a Grype that tare them out by strength.
The water sted from Tantalus that touched his nether lip,
And Apples hanging over him did ever from him slip.
There also labored Sisyphus that drove against the hill
A rolling stone that from the top came tumbling downward still*
Ixion on his restless wha^le to which his limbs were bound
Did fly and follow both at once in turning ever round.
And Danaus daughters forbicause they did their cousins kill,
Drew water into running tubbes which evermore did spill.
When Juno with a louring look had v^wde them all throughout,
And on Ixion specially before the other rout,
She t^rnes from him to Sisyphus, and with an angry cheer
Says: wherefore should this man endure continual penance here?
And Athamas his brother reign in wealth and pleasure free?
Who through his pride has ay dis^ainde my husband Jove and me.
And therewithal she poured out the occasion of hirhate,
And why she came and what she would. She would that Cadmus state
Should with the ruin of his house be brought to swyft decay.
And that to mischief Athamas the Fiendes should force some way,
She biddes, she prays, she promises, and all is with a breath.
And moves the furies earnestly: and as these things she seth,
The hateful Hag Tisiphone with horie ruffled hear,
Removing from her face the Snakes that loosely dangled there,
Said thus: Madame there is no need long circumstance to make.
Suppose your will already done. This loathsome place forsake,
And to the wholesome Air of heaven your self again retire.
Queen Juno went right glad away with grant of her desire.
And as she would have entered heaven, the Lady Iris came
And purged her with streaming drops. Anon upon the same
The furious Friend ^isiphone does cloth her out of ^and
In garment streaming gorie blood, and takes in her hand
A burning Cresset steepte in blood, and girdeth her about
with wreathed Snakes and so goes forth. And at her going out,
Fear, terror, grief and pensiu^nesse for company she took,
And also madness with his s^aight, and ghastly staring look.
Within the house of Athamas no sooner foot she set,
But that the posts began to quake and doors look black as Iet.
The son withdrew him, Athamas and eke his wife were cast
With ougly sighies in such a fear, that out of doors aghast
They would have fled. There s^oode the Fiend, and stopped their passage out,
And splaying forth her filthy arms beknit with Snakes about,
Did toss and wave her hateful head. The swarm of s^aled snakes
Did make an irksome noise to hear as she her tresses shakes.
About her shoulders some did craule: some trayling down her breast
Did hiss and spit out poison green, and spirt with tongues infest.
Then from amyd her hair two snakes with venymd hand she drew
Of which she one at Athamas and one at Ino threw.
The snakes did craule about their breasts, inspiring in their heart
Most grievous motions of the mind: the body had no smart
Of any wound: it was the mind that felt the cruel stings.
A poison made in Syrup wise, she also with her brings.
The filthy fame of Cerberus, the casting of the Snake
Echidna, bred among the Fennes about the Stygian Lake:
Desirde of gadding forth abroad: forgetfulness of mind:
Delight in mischief: woodnesse: tears: and purpose whole inclinde:
To cruel murder: all the which she did together grind:
And mingling them with new shed blood had boiled them in brass,
And stird them with a Hemblock stalk, Now while that Athamas
And Ino stood and quakte for fear, this poison rank and fell
She turned into both their breasts and made their hearts to swell.
Then whisking often round about her head her balefull brand,
She made it soon by gathering wind to kindle in her hand.
Thus as it were in triumph wise accomplishing her hest,
To Duskie Plutos empty Realm she gettes her home to rest,
And puts of the snarled Snakes that girded in her breast.
Immediately King Aeolus son stark mad comes crying out,
Through all the court what mean ye Sirs? why go ye not about
To pitch our toils within this chach. I saw even now here ran
A Lion with her two young whelps. And there withal he began
To chase his wife as if in deed she had a Lion been
And like a Bedlem boystouslie he snatcheth from between
The mothers arms his little babe Loearchus smyling on him
And reaching forth his preatie arms and floong him fiercely from him
A twice or thrice as from a slyng: and dashed his tender head
Against a hard and rugged stone until he saw him dead.
The wretched mother (whither grief did move her thereunto
Or that the poison spread within did force her so to do)
Hold out and frantikly with scattered hair about her ears
And with her little Melicert whom hastily she hears
In naked arms she cries out hoe Bacchus. At the name
Of Bac^hus Juno began to laugh and scorning said in game,
This guerden lo thy foster child requiteth for the same.
There hangs a rock about the Sea the foot whereof is eat
So hollow with the saltish waves which on the same do beat.
That like a house it keeps off the moysting showers of rain
The top is rough and shootes his front amiddes the open main.
Dame Ino (madness made her strong) did climb this cliffe anon
And healong down (without regard of hurt that hoong thereon)
Did throw her burden and her self, the water where she dashed
In sprincling upward glisterd red. But Venus sore abasht
At this her Neeces great mischaunce without offense or fault,
Her Uncle gently thus bespake. O ruler of the hault
And swelling Seas, O noble Neptune whose dominion large
Extends to the Heaven, whereof the mighty Jove has charge,
The thing is great for which I sew. But show thou sor my sake
Some mercy on my wretched friends whom in thine endless lake
Thou seeest tossed to and fro. Admit thou them among
Thy Gods. Of right even here to me some favor does belong
At least wise if amid the Sea engendered erst I were
Of Froth, as of the which yet still my pleasant name I bear.
Neptunus granted her request, and by and by bereft them
Of all that ever mortal was. In sted whereof he left them
A hault and stately majesty: and altring them in hew
With shape and names most meet for Gods he did them both endew.
Leucothoe was the mothers name, Palemon was the son.
The Thebane Ladies following her as fast as they could run,
Did of her feet perceive the print upon the utter stone.
And taking it for certain sign that both were dead and gone,
In making moan for Cadmus house, they wrang their hands and tare
Their hair, and rent their clothes, and railde on Juno out of square,
As nothing just, but more outrageous far than did behoue
In so revenging of his self upon her husbands love.
The Goddess Juno could not bear their railing. And in faith
You also will I make to be as witnesses (she says)
Of my outrageous cruelty. And so she did in deed.
For she that loved Ino best was following her with speed
Into the Sea. But as she would her self have downward cast.
She could not stir, but to the rock as nailed sticked fast.
The second as she knocked her breast, did feel her arms wax stiff.
Another as she stretched out her hands upon the cliffe,
Was made a stone, and there stood still ay stretching forth her hands
Into the water as before. And as an other stands
A tearing of her ruffled locks, her fingers hardened were
And f^stned to her frisled top still tearing of her hear,
And look what gesture each of them was taken in that tide,
Even in the same transformde to stones, they fastened did abide.
And some were altered into birds which Cadmies called be
And in that goolfe with flittering wings still to and fro do flee.
Naught knows Cadmus that his daughter and her little child
Admitted were among the Gods that rule the surges wild.
Compellde with grief and great mishappes that had ensewd together,
And strange foretokens often seen since first his coming thither,
He utterly forsakes his town the which he builded had,
As though the fortune of the place so hardly him bestad,
And not his own. And fleeting long like pilgrims, at the last
Upon the coast of Illirie his wife and he were cast.
Where ny forpind with cares and years, while of the chances past
Upon their house, and of their toils and former trauails taken
They sadly talked between themselves, was my spear head the bane
Of that same ougly Snake of Mars (quod Cadmus) when I fled
From Sidon? or did I his teeth in ploughed pasture spread?
If for the death of him the Gods so cruel vengeance take,
Drawn out in length upon my womb then traile I like a snake.
He had no sooner said the word but that he began to glide.
Upon his belly like a Snake. And on his hardened side
He felt the s^ales new budding out, the which was wholly fret
With speccled drops of black and gray as thick as could be set.
He falls groueling on his breast, and both his shankes do grow
In one round spindle Bodkinwise with sharpened point below.
His arms as yet remained still: his arms that did remain,
He stretched out, and said with tears that plentuously did rain
A down his face, which yet did keep the native fashion sownd,
Come hither wife, come hither wight most wretched on the ground,
And while that ought of me remaynes vouchsafe to touch the same.
Come take me by the hand as long as hand may have his name,
Before this snakish shape do whole my body over run.
He would have spoken more when suddenly his tongue begun
To split in two and speech did fail: and as he did attempt
To make his moan, he hist: for nature now had clean exempt
All other speech. His wretched wife her naked stomach beete:
And cryde, what means this? dear Cadmus where are now thy feet?
Where are thy shoulders and thy hands? thy hew and manly face?
With all the other things that did thy princely person grace?
Which now I ouerpasse. But why ye Gods do you delay?
My body into like misshape of Serpent to convey?
When this was spoken, Cadmus lickt his wife about the lips:
And (as a place with which he was acquaynted well) he slippes
Into her boosome, lovingly embracing her, and cast
Himself about her neck, as often he had in time forepast.
Such as were there (their folk were there) were flaighted at the ^ight,
For by and by they saw their necks did glister slicke and bright.
And on their snakish heads grew crests? and finally they both
Were into very Dragons tournd, and forth together goth
Lone trayling by the tothers side, until they gaynd a wood,
The which direct against the place where as they were then stood.
And now remembering what they were themselves in times forepast,
They neither shonne nor hurten men with stinging nor with blast.
But yet a comfort to them both in this their altered hew
Became that noble impe of theirs that Indie did subdew,
Whom al Achaia worshipped with temples builded new.
All only Acrise Abas son (though of the self same stock)
Remaind, who out of Argos walls unkindly did him lock.
And moved wilful war against his Godhead: thinking that
There was not any race of Gods for he believed not
That Persey was the son of Jove: or that he was conceived
By Danae of golden shower through which she was deceived.
But yet ere long (such present force has truth) he does repent
As well his great impiety against God Bacchus meant,
As also that he did disdiane his Nephew for to know.
But Bacchus now full gloriously himself in Heaven does show.
And Persey bearing in his hand the monster Gorgons head,
That famous spoil which here and there with snakish hair was spread,
Does beat the air with wauyng wings. And as he ouerflew
The Lybicke sands, the drops of blood that from the head did sew
Of Gorgon being new cut off, upon the ground did fall.
Which taking them (and as it were conceyuing therwithall,)
Engendered sundry Snakes and worms: by means whereof that clyme
Did swarm with Serpents ever since, even to this present time.
From thence he like a watrie cloud was carried with the weather,
Through all the heaven, now here, now there as light as any feather.
And from aloft he viewes the earth that underneath does lie,
And swiftly over all the world does in conclusion fly,
Three times the chilling bears, three times y^ crabbes fell cleas he saw:
Often times to Weast, oftimes to East did drive him many a flaw.
Now at such time as unto rest the son began to draw,
Because he did not think it good to be abroad all night,
Within King Atlas western Realm he ceased from his flight,
Requesting that a little space of rest enjoy he might,
Until such time as Lucifer should bring the morning gray,
And morning bring the lightsome Sun that guides the cherefull day.
This Atlas Iapets Nephewe, was a man that did excel
In stature every other wight that in the world did dwell.
The utmost coast of all the earth and all that Sea wherein
The tired steedes and wearied Wayne of Phoebus diued bin,
Were in subjection to this King. A thousand flocks of sheep,
A thousand heirdes of Rother beasts he in his fields did keep:
And not a neighbor did anoy his ground by dwelling nie.
To him the wandering Persey thus his language did apply.
If high renown of royal race thy noble heart may move,
I am the son of Jove himself: or if thou more approve
The valiant deeds and hault exploytes, thou shall perceive in me
Such doings as deserve with praise extolled for to be.
I pray thee of thy courtesy receive me as thy guest,
And let me only for this night within thy palace rest.
King Atlas called straight to mind an ancient prophecy
Made by Parnassian Themys, which this sentence did implie.
The time shall one day Atlas come in which thy golden tree
Shall of her fair and precious fruit dispoyld and robbed be.
And he shall be the son of Jove that shall enjoy the pray.
For fear hereof he did enclose his Orchard every way.
With mighty hills, and put an ougly Dragon in the same
To keep it. Further he forbad that any stranger came
Within his Realm, and to this knight he said presumtuouslie:
Avoid my land, unless thou will by utter peril try
That all thy glorious acts whereof thou do so loudly lie
And Jove thy father be too far to help thee at thy need.
To these his words he added force, add went about in deed
To drive him out by strength of hand. To speak was loss of wind
For neither could entreating fair nor stoutnesse turn his mind.
Well then (quod Persey) since thou do mine honor set so light,
Take here a present: and with that he turns away his sight,
And from his left side drew me out Medusas lothly head.
As huge and big as Atlas was he turned in that stead
Into a mountain: Into trees his beard and locks did pass:
His hands and shoulders made the ridge: that part which lately was
His head, became the highest top of all the hill: his bones
Were turned to stones: and therewithal he grew me all at ones
Beyond all measure up in height (For so God thought it best)
So far that Heaven with all the stars did on his shoulders rest.
In endless prison by that time had Aeolus locked the wind
And now the cheerely morning star that puts folk in mind
To rise about their daily work shone brightly in the sky.
Then Persey unto both his feet did straight his feathers tie
And girt his Woodknife to his side, and from the earth did stie.
And leaving nations nomberlesse beneath him every way
At last upon King Cepheyes fields in Aethiop did he stay.
Where clean against all right and law by Jove's commandment
Andromad for her mothers tongue did suffer punishment.
Whom to a rock by both the arms when fastened he had seen,
He would have thought of Marble stone she had some image been,
But that her tresses to and fro the whisking wind did blow,
And trickling tears warm from her eyes a down her cheeks did flow
Unwares hereat began secret sparks within his breast to glow.
His wits were straught at sight thereof and ravished in such wise,
That how to houer with his wings he scarsly could devise.
As Soon as he had stayed himself, O Lady fair (quod he)
Not worthy of such bands as these, but such wherewith we see
Together, kn^t in lawful bed the earnest lovers be
I pray thee tell me what thy self and what this land is named
And wherefore thou do wear these Chains? the Lady ill ashamed
Was at the sudden stricken domb: and like a fearful maid
She durst not speak unto a man. Had not her hands been staid
She would have hid her bashful face. Howbeit as she might
With great abundance of her tears she stopped up her sight
But when that Persey oftentimes was earnestly in hand
To learn the matter, for because she would not seem to stand
In stubborn silence of her faults, she told him what the land
And what she hight: and how her mother for her beauties sake
Through pride did unadvisedly too much upon her take.
And ere she full had made an end, the water ga^ to rore:
An ougly monster from the deep was making to the shore
Which bare the Sea before his breast. The Uirgin shrieked out.
Her father and her mother both stood mourning thereabout,
In wretched ease both twain, but not so wretched as the maid
Who wrongly for her mothers fault the bitter ransom paid.
They brought not with them any help: but (as the time and case
Required) they wept and wrang their hands, and straightly did embrace
Her body fastened to the rock. Then Persey them bespake,
And said: the time may serve too long this sorrow for to make:
But time of help must either now or never else be take
Now if I Persey son of her whom in her fathers tower
The mighty Jove begat with child in shape of golden shower,
Who cut off ougly Gorgons head bespred with snakish hear,
And in the air durst trust these wings my body for to bear,
Perchance should save your daughters life, I think ye should as then
Accept me for your son in law before all other men.
To these great thewes (by the help of God) I purpose for to add
A just desert in helping her that is so hard bestadde.
I covenant with you by my force and manhod for to save her,
Conditionly that to my wife in recompense I have her.
Her parents took his offer straight: for who would stick thereat
And praid him fair, and promisde him that for performing that
They would endow him with the right of al their Realm beeside.
Like as a Gally with her nose does cut the waters wide,
Enforced by the sweating arms of Rowers with the tide
Even so the monster with his breast did bear the waves aside,
And was now come as near the rock as well a man might s^ing
Amid the pure and vacant air a pellet from a s^ing.
When on the sudden Persey pusht his foot against the ground,
And stied upward to the clouds his shadow did rebound
Upon the sea: the beast ran fierce upon the passing shade.
And as an Egle when he sees a Dragon in a glade
Lie beaking of his bluish back against the sunnie rays,
Does cease upon him vnbeware, and with his talants lays
Sure hold upon his scaly neck least writhing back his head
His cruel teeth might do him harm: So Persey in that stead
Discending down the air a maine with all his force and might
Did cease upon the monsters back: and underneath the right
Finne hard unto the very hilt his hooked sword did smight.
The monster being wounded sore did sometime leap aloft,
And sometime under water diue, bestirring him full often
As does a chaufed Boar beset with barking Dogs about.
But Persey with his lightsome wings still keeping him without
The monsters reach, with hooked sword does sometime hew his back
Where as the hollow scales give way: and sometime he does hacke
The ribs on both his maled sides: and sometime he does wound
His spindle tail where into fish it grows most small and round.
The Whale at Persey from his mouth such waves of water cast,
Bemixed with the purple blood, that all bedreint at last
His feathers very heavy were: and doubting any more
To trust his wings now waxing wet, he straight began to sore
Up to a rock which in the calm above the water stood:
But in the tempest evermore was hidden with the flood.
And leaning thereunto and with his left hand holding just
The top thereof a dozen times his weapon he did thrust
Among his guts. The joyful noise and clapping of their hands
The which were made for loosening of Andromad from her bands,
Fillde all the coast and heaven it self. The parents of the Maid
Cassiope and Cepheus were glad and well appayde:
And calling him their son in law confessed him to be
The help and sauegarde of their house. Andromade the fee
And cause of Perseys enterprise from bonds now being free,
He washed his victorious hands. And least the Snakie head
With lying on the gravel hard should catch some harm, he spread
Soft leaves and certain tender twigs that in the water grew,
And laid Medusas head thereon: the twigs yet being new
And quick and full of iuicie pith full lightly to them drew
The nature of this monstrous head. for both the leaf and bough
Full straungely at the touch thereof became both hard and tough.
The Seanymphes tried this wondrous fact in diverse other rods
And were full glad to see the change, because there was no odds
Of leaves or twigs or of the seeds new shaken from the coddes.
For still like nature ever since is in our Coral found:
That look how soon it touches Air it waxes hard and sound.
And that which under water was a stick, above is stone,
Three altars to as many Gods he makes of Turfe anon.
Upon the left hand Mercuries: Mineruas on the right:
And in the middle Jupiters: to Pallas he did dight
A Cow: a Calfe to Mercury: a Bull to royal Jove.
Forthwith he took Andromade the price for which he strove
Endowed with her fathers Realm. For now the God of Love
And Hymen unto marriage his mind in have did move.
Great fires were made of sweet perfumes, and eurious garlandes hung
About the house, which every where of mirthfull music rung
The gladsome sign of merry minds. The Palace gates were set
Wide open* none from coming in were by the Porters let.
All Noblemen and Gentlemen that were of any port
To this same great and royal feast of Cephey did resort.
When having taken their repast as well of meat as wine
Their hearts began to pleasant mirth by leisure to incline,
The valiant Persey of the folk and ^acions of the land
Began to be inquisitiue. One Lincide out of hand
The rites and manners of the folk did do him t'vnderstand.
Which done he said: O worthy knight I pray thee tell us by
What force or wile thou go^st the head with hairs of Adders sly.
Then Persey told how underneath cold Atlas lay a plain
So fenced in on every side with mountains high, that vain
Were any force to win the same. In entrance of the which
Two daughters of King Phorcis dwelt whose chance and hap was such
That one eye served both their turns: whereof by wily slight
And stealth in putting forth his hand he did bereue them quight,
As they from tone to the other were delivering of the same.
From whence by long blind crooked ways vnhandsomly he came
Through ghastly groves by ragged cliffes unto the drerie place
Whereas the Gorgons dwelt: and there he saw (a wretched case)
The shapes as well of men as beasts lie scattered every where
In open fields and common ways, the which transformed were
From living things to stones at sight of foul Medusas hear
But yet that he through brightness of his monstrous brazen shield
The which he in his left hand bare, Medusas face beheld.
And while that in a sound dead sleep were all her Snakes and she,
He softly pared of her head: and how that he did see
Swift Pegasus the winged horse and eke his brother grow
Out of their mothers new shed blood. Moreover he did show
A long discourse of all his happes and not so long as true:
As namely of what Seas and lands the coasts he ouerflew,
And eke what stars with stying wings he in the while did view.
But yet his tale was at an end ere any looked therefore.
Upon occasion by and by of words reherst before
There was a certain noble man demanded him wherefore
She only of the sisters three hair mixed with Adders bore.
Sir (aunswerde Persey) since you ask a matter worth report
I grant to tell you your demand. she both in comely port
and beauty, every other wight surmounted in such sort,
That many suitors unto her did earnestly resort.
And though that whole from top to toe most bewtifull she were,
In all her body was no part more goodly than her hear.
I know some parties yet alive, that say they did her see.
It is reported how she should abusde by Neptune be
In Pallas Church: from which foul fact Jove's daughter turnde her eye,
And with her Target hid her face from such a villainy.
And least it should unpunished be, she turnde her seemly hear
To lothly Snakes: the which (the more to put her foes in fear)
Before her breast continually she in her shield does bear.
Finis quarti Libri.
THE FYFT BOOK of Ouids Metamorphosis.
NOw while that Danaes noble son was telling of these things
Amid a throng of Cepheys Lords, through all the Palace rings
A noise of people nothing like the sound of such as sing
At wedding feasts, but like the rore of such as tidings bring
Of cruel war. This sudden change from feasting unto fray
Might well be likened to the Sea: which standing at a stay
The woodnesse of the winds makes rough by raising of the wave.
King Cepheys brother Phyney was the man that rashly gave
The first occasion of this fray. Who shaking in his hand
A Dart of Ash with head of steel, said lo: lo here I stand
To challenge thee that wrongfully my ravished spouse doste hold.
Thy wings nor yet thy forged Dad in shape of feyned gold
Shall now not save thee from my hands. As with that word he bent
His arm aloft, the foresaid Dart at Persey to have sent
What doste thou brother ( Cephey cride) what madness moves thy mind
To do so foul a deed? is this the friendship he shall find
Among us for his good deserts? And will thou needs requi^e
The saving of thy Neeces life with such a foul despite?
Whom Persey has not from thee taken: but (if thou be aduisde)
But Neptunes heavy wrath because his Seanymphes were despisde
But horned Hammon: but the beast which from the Sea arrived
On my dear bowels for to feed. That time were thou deprived
Of thy betroothed, when her life upon the losing stood:
Unless perchance to see her lost it would have done thee good,
And easde thy heart to see me sad. And may it not suffice
That thou did see her to the rock fast bound before thine eyes
And did not help her being both her husband and her Eame?
Unless thou grudge that any man should come within my Realm
To save her life? and seek to rob him of his just reward?
Which if thou think to be so great, thou should have had regard
Before, to fetch it from the rock to which thou sawste it bound,
I pray thee brother seeing that by him the means is found
That in mine age without my child I go not to the ground,
Permit him to enjoy the price for which we did compounde,
And which he has by due desert of purchase dearly bought.
For brother let it never sink nor enter in thy thought
That I set more by him than thee: but this may well be sed
I rather had to give her him than see my daughter dead.
He gave him not a word again: But looked eft on him,
And eft on Persey irefully with countnance stoure and grim,
Not knowing which were best to hit: And after little stay
He shook his Dart, and flung it forth with all the power and sway
That Anger gave at Perseys head. But harm it did him none,
It sticked in the Bedsteddes head that Persey sat upon.
Then Persey sternely starting up and pull^ng out the Dart
Did throw it at his foe again, and therewithal his heart
Had cliuen a sunder, had he not behind an Altar start.
The Altar (more the pity was) did save the wicked wight.
Yet threw he not the Dart in vain: it hit one Rhetus right
Amid the foreheade: who therewith san^e down, and when the steel
Was plucked out, he sprawlde about and spurned with his heel,
And all berayd the boorde with blood. Then all the other rout
As f^erce as fire flang Darts: and some there were that cried out
That Cephey with his son in law was worthy for to die.
But he had wound him out of doors protesting solemly
As he was just and faithful Prince, and swearing eke by all
The Gods of Hospitality, that thatsame broyle did fall
Full sore against his will. At hand was warlie Pallas straight
And shadowed Persey with her shield, and gave him heart in feight.
There was one Atys borne in Inde, (of fair Lymniace
The River Ganges daughter thought the issue for to be,)
Of passing beauty which with rich array he did augment.
He ware that day a scarlet Cloak, about the which there went
A guard of gold: a cheyne of gold he ware about his neck:
And eke his hair perfumde with Myrrh a costly crown did deck.
Full sixtene years he was of age: such cunning skill he could
In darting, as to hit his mark far distant when he would.
Yet how to handle Bow and shaftes much better did he know.
Now as he was about that time to bend his horned Bow,
A firebrand Persey raught that did upon the Altar smoke,
And dashed him ouertwhart the face with such a violent stroke,
That all bebattred was his head the bones a sunder broke.
When Lycabas of Assure land his most assured friend
And dear companion being no dissembler of his miend
Which most entierly did him love, beheld him on the ground
Lie weltring with disfigurde face, and through that grievous wound
Now gasping out his parting ghost, his death he did lament,
And taking hastly up the Bow that Atys erst had bent,
Encounter thou with me (he said) thou shall not long enjoy
Thy triumphing in bravery thus, for killing of this boy,
By which thou getst more spite than praise. All this was scarsly sed,
But that the arrow from the string went streyned to the head.
Howbeit Persey (as it hapt) so warely did it shun,
As that it in his coteplights hung. then to him did he run
With Harp in his hand bestaind with grim Medusas blood,
And thrust him through the breast therewith* he quothing as he stood
Did look about where Atys lay with dim and dazeling eyes,
Now wauing under endless night: and down by him he lies,
And for to comfort him withal together with him dies.
Behold through gredie haste to feight one Phorbas Methions son
A Svveuite: and of Lybie land one callde Amphimedon
By fortune sliding in the blood with which the ground was we^,
Fell down: and as they would have r^se, Perseus fauchon met
With both of them, Amphimedon upon the ribs he smote,
And with the like celeritie he cut me Phorbas throat.
But unto Erith Actors son that in his hand did hold
A broad brown Bill, with his short sword he durst not be too bold
To make approach. With both his hands a great and massy cup
Embost with cunning portrayture aloft he takes up,
And sendes it at him. He spewes up red blood: and falling down
Upon his back, against the ground does knock his dying crown.
Then down he Polydemon throws extract of royal race
And Abaris the Scithian, and Clytus in like case.
And Elice with his unshorn locks, and also Phlegias,
And Lycet old Spe^chefies son, with diverse other mo,
That on the heaps of corses slain he treades as he does go.
And Phyney daring not presume to meet his foe at hand,
Did cast a Dart: which hapt to light on Idas who did stand
Aloof as neuter (though in vain) not meddling with the Fray.
Who casting back a frowning look at Phyney, thus did say.
Since whether that I will or no compeld I am perforce
To take a part, have Phyney here him whom thou doste enforce
To be thy ^oe, and with this wound my wrongful wound requite.
But as he from his body pullde the Dart, with all his might
To throw it at his foe again, his limbs so feebled were
With loss of blood, that down he fell and could not after steare.
There also lay Odites slain the chief in all the land
Next to King Cephey, put to death by force of Clymens hand.
Protenor was by Hypsey killde, and Lyncide did as much
For Hypsey. In the throng there was an ancient man and such
a one as loved righteousness and greatly feared God:
Emathion called was his name: whom since his years forbod
To put on arms, he feights with tongue, inueying earnestly
Against that wicked war the which he banned bitterly.
As on the Altar he himself with quiuering hands did stay,
One Cromis tipped of his head: his head cut off straight way
Upon the Altar fell, and there his tongue not fully dead,
Did babble still the banning words the which it erst had sed,
And breathed forth his fainting ghost among the burning brandes.
Then Brote and Hammon brothers, twins, stout cha^pions of their hands
In wrestling Pierlesse (if so be that wrestling could sustain
The furious force of slicing swords) were both by Phyney slain.
And so was Alphit Ceres Priest that ware upon his crown
A stately Miter fair and white with Tables hanging down.
Thou also Iapets son for such affairs as these unmeet
But meet to tune thine instrument with voice and Ditie sweet
The work of peace, were thither callde th'assemblie to rejoice
And for to set the marriage forth with pleasant singing voice.
As with his Uiall in his hand he stood a good way off,
There comes to him Petalus and says in way of scoff:
Go sing the resdue to the ghostes about the Stygian Lake,
And in the left side of his head his dagger point he struck.
He sanke down dead with fingers still yet warbling on the string
And so mischaunce knit up with woe the song that he did sing.
But fierce Lycormas could not bear to see him murdered so
Without reuengement. Up he caught a mighty Leauer tho
That wonted was to bar the door a right side of the house
And therewithal to Petalus he lends such a souse
Full in the noddle of the neck, that like a snetched Ox
Straight tu^bling down, against the ground his groueling face he knox.
And Pelates a Garamant attempted to have caught
The left door bar: but as thereat with stretched hand he raught,
One Coryt son of Marmarus did with a Iauelin stricke
Him through the hand, that to the wood fast nailed did it stick.
As Pelates stood fastened thus, one Abas goard his side:
He could not fall, but hanging still upon the post there did
Fast nailed by the hand. And there was overthrown a Knight
Of Perseyes band callde Melaney, and one that Dorill hight
A man of greatest lands in all the Realm of Nasamone.
That occupide so large a ground as Dorill was there none,
Nor none that had such store of corn. there came a Dart a skew
And lighted in his Coddes the place where present death does sew.
When Alcion of Barcey he that gave this deadly wound
Beheld him yesking forth his ghost and falling to the ground
With warrie eyes the white turnde up: content thy self he said
With that same little plot of ground whereon thy corse is laid,
In stead of all the large fat fields which late thou did possess.
And with that word he left him dead. Per^eus to redress
This slaughter and this spightfull taunt, straight snatched out the Dart
That sticked in the fresh warm wound, and with an angry heart
Did send it at the throwers head: the Dart did split his nose
Even in the mids, and at his neck again the head out goes:
So that it peered both the ways. Whiles fortune does support
And further Persey thus, he killes (but yet in sundry sort)
Two brothers by the mother: tone callde Clytie the other Dane.
For on a Dart through both his thighs did Clytie take his bane:
And Danus with another Dart was stricken in the mouth.
There died also Celadon a Gyps^e of the South:
And so did bastard Astrey too, whose mother was a Jew:
And sage Ethion well foreseen in things that should ensew,
But utterly beguilde as then by Birds that aukly flew.
King Cepheyes harnessebearer callde Thoactes lost his life,
And Agyrt whom for murdring late his father with a knife
The world spoke shame off. Nathelesse much more remainde behind
Than was dispatched of of hand: for all were full in mind
To murder one. the wicked throng had sworn to spend their blood
Against the right, and such a man as had deserved good.
A totherside (although in vain) of mere affection stood
The father and the Motherinlaw, and eke the heavy bride,
Who filled with their piteous playnt the Court on every side.
But now the clattring of the swords and harness at that ^^de
With grievous groans and sighs of such as wounded were or did,
Did raise up such a cruel rore that nothing could be heard.
For fierce Bellona so renewde the battle afterward,
That all the house did swim in blood. Duke Phyney with a rout
Of more than a thousand men enuirond round about
The valiant Persey all alone. The Darts of Phyneys band
Came thicker than the Winters hayle does fall upon the land,
By both his sides his eyes and ears. He warely thereupon
Withdrawes, and leanes his back against a huge great arche of stone:
And being safe behind, he ^ettes his face against his foe
Withstanding all their fierce assaults. There did assail him thoe
Upon the left side Molpheus a Prince of Choanie,
And on the right Ethemon borne hard by in Arabie.
Like as the Tiger when he hears the lowing out of Neat
In sundry Medes, enforced sore through abstinence from meat,
Would feign be doing with them both, and can not tell at which
Were best to give adventure first: So Persey who did itch
To be at host with both of them, and doubtful whether side
To turn him on, the right or left, upon advantage spide
Did wound me Molphey on the leg, and from him quight him drove.
He was contented with his flight: for why Ethemon gave
No respite to him to pursue: but like a frantic man
Through egernesse to wound his neck, without regarding when
Or how to strike for haste, he burst his brittle sword in twain
Against the Arche: the point whereof rebounding back again,
Did hit himself upon the throat. Howbeit that same wound
Was insufficient for to send Ethemon to the ground.
He trembled holding up his hands for mercy, but in vain.
For Persey thrust him through the heart with Hermes hooked skaine.
But when he saw that valiantness no longer could avail,
By reason of the multitude that did him still assail,
Since you your selves me force to call mine enmie to mine aid,
I will do so: if any friend of mine be here (he said)
Sirs turn your faces all away: and therewithal he drew
Out Gorgons head. One Thessalus straight raging to him flew,
And said: go seek some other man whom thou may make abasht
With these thy foolish iuggling toys. And as he would have dashed
His Iaueling in him with that word to kill him out of hand,
With gesture throwing forth his Dart all Marble did he stand.
His sword through Lyncids noble heart had Amphix thought to shoue:
His hand was stone, and neither one nor other way could move:
But Niley who did vaunt himself to be the Rivers son
That through the bounds of Egypt land in channels.vij. does run,
And in his shield had graven part of silver, part of gold
The said.vij. channels of the Nile, said: Persey here behold
From whence we fetch our piedegree: it may rejoice thy heart
To die of such a noble hand as mine* The latter part
Of these his words could scarce be heard: the dint thereof was drownde:
Ye would have thought him speaking still with open mouth: but sound
Did none forth pass: there was for speech no passage to be found.
Rebuking them cries Eryx: Sirs it is not Gorgons face
It is your own faint hearts that make you stony in this case.
Come let us on this fellow run and to the ground him bear
That feightes by witchcraft: as with that his feet forth stepping were,
They stacke still fastened to the floor: he could not move a side,
An armed image all of stone he speachlesse did abide.
All these were justly punished. But one there was a knight
Of Perseys band, in whose defense as Acont stood to feight,
He waxed ouergrowne with stone at ugly Gorgons sight.
Whom still as yet Astyages supposing for to live,
Did with a long sharp arming sword a washing blow him give.
The sword did clinke against the stone and out the sparcles drive.
While all amazde Astyages stood wondering at the thing,
The self same nature on himself the Gorgons head did bring.
And in his visage which was stone a countnance did remain
Of wondering still. A weary work it were to tell you plain
The names of all the common sort. Two hundred from that fray
Did escape unslain: but none of them did go alive away.
The whole two hundred every one at ^ight of Gorgons hear
Were turned into stocks of stone. Then at the length for fear
Did Phyney of his wrongful war forthinke himself full sore.
But now (alas) what remedy? he saw there stand before
His face, his men like Images in sundry shapes all stone.
He knew them well, and by their names did call them euery^hone:
Desiring them to succor him: and trusting not his sight
He feels the bodies that were next, and all were Marble quight.
He turns himself from Persey ward and humbly as he stands
He wries his arms behind his back: and holding up his hands,
O noble Persey thou have got the upper hand he sed.
Put up that monstrous shield of thine: put up that Gorgons head
That into stones transformeth men: put up I thee desire.
Not hatred, nor because to reign as King I did aspire,
Have moved me to make this fray. The only force of love
In seeking my betrothed spouse, did hereunto me move.
The better title seems thine because of thy desert:
And mine by former promise made. It irkes me at the heart
In that I did not give the place. None other thing I crave
O worthy knight, but that thou grant this life of mine to save.
Let all things else beside be thine. As he thus humbly spoke
Not daring look at him to whom he did entreatance make,
The thing (quoth Persey) which to grant both I can find in heart,
And is no little courtesy to show without desert
Upon a Coward, I will grant O fearful Duke to thee.
Set fear a side: thou shall not hurt with any weapon be.
I will moreover so provide as that thou shall remain
An everlasting monument of this days toil and pain.
The palace of my Fathrinlaw shall henceforth be thy shrine
Where thou shall stand continually before my spouses eyes.
That of her husband having ay the Image in her sight,
She may from time to time receive some comfort and delight.
He had no sooner said these words but that he turnde his shield
With Gorgons head to that same part where Phyney with a mielde
And fearful countnance set his face. Then also as he wride
His eyes away, his neck waxt stiff, his tears to stone were dride.
A countnance in the stony stock of fear did still appear
With humble look and yielding hands and ghastly ruthful cheer.
With conquest and a noble wife does Persey home repair
And in reuengement of the right against the wrongful heir,
As in his Graundsires just defense he falls in hand with Prete
Who like no brother but a foe did late before defeat
King Acrise of his towns by war and of his royal seat.
But neither could his men of war nor fortress won by wrong
Defend him from the griesly look of grim Medusa long.
And yet thee foolish Polydect of little Seriph King,
Such rooted rancor inwardly continually did sting,
That neither Perseys prowess tried in such a sort of broils
Nor yet the parils he endurde, nor all his troublous toils
Could cause thy stomach to relent. Within thy stony breast
Works such a kind of festred hate as cannot be represt.
Thy wrongful malice has none end. Moreover thou of spite
Kepining at his worthy praise, his doings doste backbite:
Upholding that Medusas death was but a forged lie:
So long till Persey for to show the truth apparently,
Desiring such as were his friends to turn away their eye,
Drue out Medusas ougly head. At sight whereof anon
The hateful Tyran Polydect was turned to a stone.
The Goddess Pallas all this while did keep continually
Her brother Persey company, till now that she did stie
From Seriph in a hollow cloud, and leaving on the right
The Isles of Scyre and Gyaros, she made from thence her flight
Directly over that same Sea as near as eye could ame
To Thebe and Mount Helicon. and when she thither came,
She stayde her self, and thus bespake the learned sisters nine.
A rumor of an uncouth spring did pierce these ears of mine
The which the winged steed should make by stamping with his hoof.
This is the cause of my repair: I would for certain proof
Be glad to see the wondrous thing. For present there I stood
And saw the self same Pegasus spring of his mothers blood.
Dame Vranie did entertain and answer Pallas thus.
What cause so ever moves your grace to come and visit us,
Most heartely you welcome are: and certain is the fame
Of this our Spring, that Pegasus was causer of the same.
And with that word she led her forth to see the sacred spring.
Who musing greatly with her self at strangeness of the thing,
Surueyde the Woods and groves about of ancient stately port.
And when she saw the Bowres to which the Muses did resort,
And pleasant fields beclad with herbs of sundry hew and sort,
She said that for their studies sake they were in happy case
And also that to serve their turn they had so trim a place.
Then one of them replied thus. O noble Lady who
(But that your virtue greater works than these are calls you to)
Should else have been of this our troop, your saying is full true.
To this our trade of life and place is commendation due.
And sure we have a luckie lot and if the world were such
As that we might in safety live. but lewdness reigns so much
That all things make us Maids afraid: Me thinks I yet do see
The wicked Tyran Pyren still: my heart is yet scarce free
From that same fear with which it hapt us flighted for to be.
This cruel Pyren was of Thrace and with his men of war
The land of Phocis had subdude, and from this place not far
Within the City Davvlis reignde by force of wrongful hand,
One day to Phoebus Temples ward that on Parnasus stand
As we were going, in our way he met us courteously,
And by the name of Goddesses saluting reverently
Said: O ye Dames of Meonie (for why he knew us well)
I pray you stay and take my house until this storm (there fell
That time a tempest and a shower) be past: the Gods aloft
Have entered smaller sheddes than mine full many a time and often.
The rainie weather and his words so moved us, that we
To go into an outer house of his did all agree.
As soon as that the shower was past and heaven was voyded clear^
Of all the Clouds which late before did every where appear,
Until that Boreas had subdude the rainie Southern wind.
We would have by and by been gone. He shet the doors in mind
To ravish us: but we with wings escaped from his hands.
He purposing to follow us, upon a Turret stands,
And says he needs will after us the same way we did (...).
And with that word full frantickly he leapeth down from hie,
And pitching euelong on his face the bones a sunder crasht,
And dying, all abroad the ground his wicked blood bedasht.
Now as the Muse was telling this, they heard a noise of wings
And from the leauie boughs aloft a sound of greeting rings*
Minerua looking up thereat demanded wh^nce the sound
Of tongues that so distinctly spoke did come so plain and round?
She thought some woman or some man had greeted her that stounde.
It was a flight of Birds. Nine Pies bewailing their mischaunce,
In counterfetting every thing from bough to bough did dance.
As Pallas wondered at the sight, the Muse spoke thus in sum.
These also being late ago in challenge overcome,
Made one kind more of Birds than was of ancient time beforne.
In Macedone they were about the City Pella borne
Of Pierus a great rich Chuffe and Euip, who by aid
Of strong Lucina traveling ninetimes, nine times was laid
Of daughters in her childbed safe. This fond and foolish rou^
Of doltish sisters taking pride and waxing very stout,
Because they were in number nine came flocking all together
Through all the towns of Thessalie and all Achaia hither,
And us with these or such like words to combat did provoke.
Cease off ye Thespian Goddesses to mock the s^mple folk
With fondness of your Melody. And if ye think in deed
Ye can do ought, contend with us and see how you shall speed.
I warrant you ye pass us not in cunning nor in voice.
Ye are here nine, and so are we. We put you to the choice,
That either we will vanquish you and set you quight beside
Your fountain made by Pegasus which is your chiefest pride,
And Aganippe too: or else confound you us, and we
Of all the woods of Macedone will dispossessed be
As far as snowie Peonie: and let the Nymphs be Judges.
Now in good sooth it was a shame to cope with suchie Drudges,
But yet more shame it was to yield. The chosen Nymphs did swear
By Styx, and sat them down on seats of stone that growed there.
Then straight without commission or election of the rest,
The foremost of them preasing forth indecently, professed
The challenge to perform: and song the battles of the Gods.
She gave the Giants* all the praise, the honor and the odds,
Abasing sore the worthy deeds of all the Gods. She tells
How Typhon issuing from the earth and from the deepest helles,
Made all the Gods above afraid, so greatly that they fled
And never staide till Egypt land and Nile whose stream is shed
In channels seven, received them forwearied all together:
And how the Helhound Typhon did pursue them also thither.
By means whereof the Gods each one were feign themselves to hide
In forged shapes. She said the Jove the Prince of Gods was wride
In shape of Ram: which is the cause that at this present tide
Jove's image which the Lybian folk by name of Hammon serve,
Is made with crooked welked horns that inward still do terue:
That Phoebus in a Raven lurkt, and Bacchus in a Geate,
And Phoebus sister in a Cat, and Juno in a Neat,
And Venus in the shape of Fish, and how that last of all
Mercurius hid him in a Bird which Ibis men do call.
This was the sum of all the tale which she with rolling tung
And yelling throteboll to her harp before us rudely sung.
Our turn is also come to speak, but that perchance your grace
To give the hearing to our song has now no time nor space.
Yes yes (quoth Pallas) tell on forth in order all your tale:
And down she sat among the trees which gave a pleasant swale.
The Muse made answer thus: To one Calliope here by name
This challenge we committed have and ordring of the same.
Then rose up fair Calliope with goodly bush of hear
Trim wreathed up with yuie leaves, and with her thumb began steare
The quiuering strings, to try them if they were in tune or no.
Which done, she playde upon her Lute and song her Ditie so.
Dame Ceres first to break the Earth with plough the manner found,
She first made corn and stouer soft to grow upon the ground,
She first made laws. For all these things we are to Cer^s bound.
Of her must I as now entreat: would God I could resound
Her worthy laud: she doubtless is a Goddess worthy praise.
Because the Giant Typhon gave presumptuously assayes
To conquer Heaven, the howgie I Will of Trinacris is laid
Upon his limbs, by weight whereof perforce he down is weyde.
He strives and strugles for to rise full many a time and often.
But on his right hand toward Rome Pelorus stands aloft:
Pachynnus stands upon his left: his legs with Lilybie
Are pressed down: his monstrous head does under Aetna lie.
From whence he lying bolt upright with wrathful mouth does spit
Out flames of fire* he wrestleth often and walloweth for to wit
And if he can remove the weight of all that mighty land
Or tumble down the towns and hills that on his body stand.
By means whereof it commes to pass that often the Earth does shake:
And even the King of Ghostes himself for very fear does quake,
Misdoubting least the Earth should cliue so wide that light of day
Might by the same pierce down to Hell and there the Ghostes affray
Forecasting this, the Prince of Fiendes forsook his darksome hole,
And in a Chariot drawn with Steedes as black as any cole
The whole foundation of the I Will of Sicill warely vewde.
When thoroughly he had sercht each place that harm had none ensewde,
As carelessely he raungde abroad, he chanced to be seen
Of Venus sitting on her hill: who taking straight between^
her arms her winged Cupid, said: my son, mine only stay,
My hand, mine honor and my might, go take without delay
Those ^ooles which all wightes do subdue, and strike them in the heart
Of that same God that of the world enioyes the lowest part.
The Gods of Heaven, and Jove himself, the power of Sea and Land
And he that rules the powers on Earth obey thy mighty hand:
And wherefore then should only Hell still ^nsubdued stand?
Thy mothers Empire and thine own why doste thou not advance.
The third part of all the world now hangs in doubtful chance.
And yet in heaven too now, their deeds thou see me feign to bear.
We are despisde: the strength of love with me away does wear.
Seeste not the Darter Diane and dame Pallas have already
Exempted them from my behestes? and now of late so heady
Is Ceres daughter too, that if we let her have her will,
She will continue all her life a Maid unwedded still.
For that is all her hope, and mark whereat she minds to shoot.
But thou (if ought this gracious turn our honor may promote,
Or ought our Empire beautify which jointly we do hold,)
This Damsel to her uncle join. No sooner had she told
These words, but Cupid opening straight his quiver chose therefr^
One arrow (as his mother bade) among a thousand mo.
But such a one it was, as none more sharper was than it,
Nor none went streighter from the Bow the amed mark to hit.
He set his knee against his Bow and bent it out of hand,
And made his forked arrows steal in Plutos heart to stand.
Near Enna walls there stands a Lake Pergusa is the name.
Cayster hears not mo songs of Swannes than does the same.
A wood enuirons every side the water round about,
And with his leaves as with a veyle does keep the Sun heat out.
The boughs do yield a cool fresh Air: the moystnesse of the ground
Yeeldes sundry flowers: continual spring is all the year there found.
While in this garden Proserpine was taking her pastime,
In gathering either Uiolets blew, or Lillies white as Lime,
And while of Maidenly desire she fillde her Maund and Lap,
Endeavoring to outgather her companions there. By hap
Dis spide her: loud her: caught her up: and all at once well nere.
So hasty, hot, and swift a thing is Love as may appear.
The Lady with a wailing voice afright did often call
Her Mother and her waiting Maids, but Mother most of all.
And as she from the upper part her garment would have rent,
By chance she let her lap slip down, and out her flowers went.
And such a silly simpleness her childish age yet bears,
That even the very loss of them did move her more to tears.
The Catcher drives his Chariot forth, and calling every horse
By name, to make away apace he does them still enforce:
And shakes about their necks and Manes their rustie bridle reins
And through the deepest of the Lake perforce he them constreynes.
And through the Palik pooles. the which from broken ground do boil
And smell of Brimstone very rank: and also by the soil
Where as the Bacchies folk of Corinth with the double Seas,
Between unequal Hauons twain did reere a town for ease.
Between the fountains of Cyane and Arethuse of Pise
An arm of Sea that meets enclosde with narrow horns there lies.
Of this the Poole callde Cyane which bears greatest fame
Among the Nymphs of Sicilie did Algates take the name.
Who vauncing her unto the waste amid her Poole did know
Dame Proserpine, and said to Dis: ye shall no further go
You cannot Ceres sonneinlawe be, will she so or no.
You should have sought her courteously and not enforst her so.
And if I may with great estates my simple things compare,
Anapus was in love with me: but yet he did not fare
As you do now with Proserpine. He was content to woo
And I vnforst and vnconstreind consented him unto.
This said, she spreaded forth her arms and stopped him of his way.
His hasty wrath Saturnus son no longer then could stay.
But chearing up his dreadful Steedes did smight his royal mace
With violence in the bottom of the Poole in that same place.
The ground straight yielded to his stroke and made him way to Hell,
And down the open gap both horse and Chariot headlong fell.
Dame Cyan taking sore to heart as well the rauishment
Of Proserpine against her will, as also the contempt
Against her fountains privilege, did shrowde in secret heart
An inward corsie comfortless, which never did depart
Until she melting into tears consumde away with smart.
The self same waters of the which she was but late ago
The mighty Goddess, now she pines and wastes hirselfe into.
Ye might have seen her limbs were lithe, ye might have bent her bones.
Her nails wext soft: and first of all did melt the smallest ones:
As hair and fingars, legs and feet: for these same slender parts
Do quickly into water turn. and afterward conuerts
To water, shoulder, back, breast, side: and finally in stead
Of lively blood, within her veins corrupted there was spread
Thin water: so that nothing now remained whereupon
Ye might eake hold, to water all consumed was anon.
The careful mother in the while did seek her daughter dear
Through all the world both Sea and Land, and yet was nere the near.
The Morning with her deawy hair her slugging never found,
Nor yet the Evening star that brings the night upon the ground.
Two seasoned Pynetrees at the mount of Aetna did she light
And bare them restless in her hands through all the dankish night.
Again as soon as chierfull day did dim the stars, she sought
Her daughter still from East to West. And being ouerwrought
She caught a thirst: no liquor yet had come within her throat.
By chance she spied nere at hand a pelting thatched Cote
With peevish doors: she knocked thereat, and out there commes a trot.
The Goddess asked her some drink and she denide it not:
But out she brought her by and by a draught of merry go down
And therewithal a Hotchpotch made of steeped Barlie brown
And Fla^e and Coriander seed and other simples more
The which she in an Earthen pot together sod before.
While Ceres was a eating this, before her gazing stood
A hard faaste boy a shrewde pert wag that could no manners good:
He laughed at her and in scorn did call her greedy gut.
The Goddess being worth therewith, did on the Hotchpotch put
The liquor ere that all was eat, and in his face it threw.
Immediately the skin thereof became of speckled hew.
And into legs his arms did turn: and in his altered hide
A wrigling tail straight to his limbs was added more beside.
And to the intent he should not have much power to worken scathe,
His body in a little room together knit she has.
For as with pretty Lucerts he in facion does agree:
So than the Lucert somewhat less in every point is he.
The poor old woman was amazde: and bitterly she wept:
She durst not touch the uncouth worm, who into corners crept.
And of the flecked spots like stars that on his hide are set
A name agreeing thereunto in Latin does he get.
It is our Swift whose skin with gray and yellow specks is fret.
What Lands and Seas the Goddess sought it were too long to saine.
The world did want. And so she went to Sicill back again.
And as in going every where she serched busily,
She also came to Cyane: who would assuredly
Have told her all things, had she not transformed been before.
But mouth and tongue for vttrance now would serve her turn no more.
Howbeit a token manifest she gave her for to know
What was become of Proserpine. Her girdle she did show
Still houering on her holy poole, which slightly from her fell
As she that way did pass: and that her mother knew too well.
For when she saw it, by and by as though she had but than
Been new aduertisde of her chance, she piteously began
To rend her ruffled hair, and beat her hands against her breast.
As yet she knew not where she was. But yet with rage oppressed.
She cursed all lands, and said they were unthankful euerychone
Yea and unworthy of the fruits bestowed them upon.
But bitterly above the rest she banned Sicilie,
In which the mention of her loss she plainly did epsy.
And therefore there with cruel hand the earing ploughes she brake,
And man and beast that tilde the ground to death in anger struck.
She marrde the feed, and eke forbade the fields to yield their fruit.
The plenteousnesse of that same I Will of which there went such brute
Through all the world, lay dead: the corn was killed in the blade:
Now too much drought, now too much wet did make it for to fade.
The stars and blasting winds did hurt, the hungry souls did eat
The corn in ground: the Tines and Briars did ouergow the Wheat.
And other wicked weeds the corn continually annoy,
Which neither tylth nor toil of man was able to destroy.
Then Arethuse flood Alpheys love lifts from her Elean wau^s
Her head, and shedding to her ears her deawy hair that waves
About her foreheade said: O thou that art the mother dear
Both of the Maiden sought through all the world both far and near,
And eke of all the earthly fruits, forbear thine endless toil,
And be not wroth without a cause with this thy faithful soil,
The Land deserves no punishment. unwillingly God wo^e
She opened to the Rauisher that violently her smote.
It is not sure my native soil for which I thus entreat.
I am but here a soiourner, my native soil and seat
Is Pisa and from Ely town I fetch my first descent.
I dwell but as a stranger here. but sure to my intent
This Country likes me better far than any other land.
Here now I Arethusa dwell: here am I settled: and
I humbly you beseech extend your favor to the same.
A time will one day come when you to mirth may better frame,
And have your heart more free from care, which better serve me may
To tell you why I from my place so great a space do stray.
And unto Ortygie am brought through so great Seas and waves.
The ground does give me passage free, and by the lowest caves
Of all the Earth I make my way, and here I raise my head,
And look upon the stars again near out of knowledge fled.
Now while I underneath the Earth the Lake of Styx did pass,
I saw your daughter Proserpine with these same eyes. She was
Not merry, neither rid of fear as seemed by her cheer.
But yet a Queen, but yet of great God Dis the stately Feere:
But yet of that same droupie Realm the chief and sovereign Peer.
Her mother stood as stark as stone, when she these news did hear,
And long she was like one that in another world had been.
But when her great amazedness by greatness of her teene
Was put aside, she gettes her to her Chariot by and by
And up to heaven in all post haste immediately does stie.
And there bes^owbred all her face: her hair about her ears,
To royal Jove in way of plaint this spightfull tale she bears.
As well for thy blood as for mine a suter unto thee
I hither come. if no regard may of the mother be
Yet let the child her father move, and have not lesser care
Of her (I pray) because that I her in my body bare.
Behold our daughter whom I sought so long is found at last:
If finding you it term, when of recovery means is past.
Or if you finding do it call to have a knowledge where
She is become. Her rauishment we might consent to bear,
So restitution might be made. And though there were to me
No interest in her at all, yet forasmuch as she
Is yours, it is unmeet she be bestowde upon a thief.
Jove aunswerde thus. My daughter is a Jewel dear and leefe:
A collup of mine own flesh cut as well as out of thine.
But if we in our hearts can find things rightly to define,
This is not spite but love. And yet Madame in faith I see
No cause of such a son in law ashamed for to be,
So you contented were therewith. For put the case that he
Were destitute of all things else, how great a matter is it
Jove's brother for to be? but sure in him is nothing mist.
Nor he inferior is to me save only that by lot
The Heavens to me, the Helles to him the destnies did allot.
But if you have so sore desire your daughter to divorce,
Though she again to Heaven repair I do not greatly force.
But yet conditionly that she have tasted there no food:
For so the destnies have decreed. He ceaste: and Ceres stood
Full bent to fetch her daughter out: but destnies her withstoode,
Because the Maid had broke her fast. For as she hapt one day
In Plutos Ortyard rechlessely from place to place to stray,
She gathering from a bowing tree a ripe Pownegarnet, took
Seven kernels out and sucked them. None chaunst hereon to look.
Save only one Ascalaphus whom Orphne erst a Dame
Among the other Elues of Hell not of the basest fame
Bare to her husband Acheron within her duskie den.
He saw it, and by blabbing it ungraciously as then,
Did let her from returning thence. A grievous ^igh the Queen
Of Hell did fetch, and of that wight that had a witness bee^e
Against her made a cursed Bird. Upon his face she shead
The water of the Phleg^ton: and by and by his head
Was nothing else but Beak and Down, and mighty glaring eyes.
Quight altered from himself between two yellow wings he flies.
He grows chiefly into head and hooked talants long
And much a do he has to flaske his lazy wings among.
The messenger of Morning was he made, a filthy foul,
A sign of mischief unto men, the sluggish skreching Owl.
This person for his lauas tongue and telling tales might seem
To have deserved punishment. But what should men esteem
To be the very cause why you Acheloes daughters wear
Both feet and feathers like to Birds, considering that you bear
The upper parts of Maidens still? and commes it so to pass?
Because when Lady Proserpine a gathering flowers was,
Ye Meremaides kept her company? whom after you had sought
Through all the Earth in vain, anon of purpose that your thought
Might also to the Seas be known, ye wished that ye might
Upon the waves with houering wings at pleasure rule your flight,
And had the Gods to your request so pliant, that ye found
With yellow feathers out of hand your bodies clothed round?
Yet least that pleasant tune of yours ordained to delight
The hearing, and so high a gift of Music perish might
For want of vttrance, human voice to utter things at will
And countnance of virginity remained to you still.
But mean between his brother and his heavy sister goth
God Jove, and parts equally the year between them both.
And now the Goddess Proserpine indifferently does reign
Above and underneath the Earth, and so does she remain
One half year with her mother and the resdue with her Feere
Immediately she altered is as well in outward cheer
As inward mind. for where her look might late before appear
Sad even to Dis, her countnance now is full of mirth and grace
Even like as Phoebus having put the watrie clouds to chase,
Does show himself a Conqueror with bright and shining face.
Then fruitful Ceres void of care in that she did recover
Her daughter, prayde thee Arechuse the story to discover
What caused thee to fleet so far and wherefore thou became
A sacred spring? the waters whist. The Goddess of the same
Did from the bottom of the Well her goodly head up rear.
And having dried with her hand her fair green hanging hear,
The River Alpheys ancient loves she thus began to tell.
I was (quoth she) a Nymph of them that in Achaia dwell.
There was not one that earnester the Lawndes and forests sought
Or pitched her toils more handsomely. And though that of my thought
It was no part, to seek the fame of beauty: though I were
All courage: yet the prick and prise of beauty I did bear
My overmuch commended face was unto me a spigh^.
This gift of body in the which another would delight,
I rudesbye was ashamed off: me thought is was a crime
To be belikte. I bear it well in mind that on a time
In coming weary from the chase of Stymphalus, the heat^
Was fervent, and my traveling had made it twice as great.
I found a water neither deep nor shallow which did glide
Without all noise, so calm that scarce the moving might be spide.
And thoroughly to the very ground it was so crispe and clear,
That every little stone therein did plain aloft appear.
The horie Sallowes and the Poplars growing on the bri^
Unset, upon the shoring banks did cast a shadow trim.
I entered in, and first of all I deeped but my ^eete:
And after to my knees. And not content to wade so fleet,
I put off all my clothes, and hung them on a Sallow by
And threw my self amid the stream* which as I ^allyingly
Did beat and draw, and with my self a thousand maistries tr^e,
In casting of mine arms abroad and swimming wantonly:
I felt a bubling in the stream I wist not how nor what,
And on the Rivers nearest brim I stepped for fear. With that
O Arethusa whither runs^? and whither runst thou cride
Flood Alphey from his waves again with hollow voice. I hide
Away unclothed as I was. For on the further side
My clothes hung still. so much more hot and eger then was he,
And for I naked was, I seemde the readier for to be.
My running and his fierce pursuit was like as when ye se
The silly Doves with quiuering wings before the Gossehauke stie,
The Gossehauke sweeping after them as fast as he can fly,
To Orchomen, and Psophy land, and Cyllen I did hold
Out well, and thence to Menalus and Erymanth the cold,
And so to Ely. all this way no ground of me he won.
But being not so strong as he, this restless race to run
I could not long endure, and he could hold it out at length.
Yet over plains and wooddie hills (as long as lasted strength)
And stones, and rocks, and desert grounds I still maintaind my race.
The Sun was full upon my back. I saw before my face
A lazy shadow: were it not that fear did make me seete.
But certainly he feared me with trampling of his feet:
And of his mouth the boystous breath upon my hairlace blew.
For wearied with the toil of ^light: Help Diane, I thy tru^
And trusty Squire (I said) who often have carried after thee
Thy bow and arrows, now am like attached for to be.
The Goddess moved, took a cloud of such as scattred were
And cast upon me. Hidden thus in mistie darkness there
The River poard upon me still and hunted round about
The hollow cloud, for fear perchance I should have escaped out.
And twice not knowing what to do he stalk^ about the cloud
Where Diane had me hid, and twice he called ou^ a loud
Hoe Arethuse, hoe Arethuse* What heart had I poor wretch then?
Even such as has the silly Lamb that dares not stir nor quetch when
He hears the howling of the Wolf about or near the foldes.
Or such as has the squatted Hare that in her foorme beholdes
The hunting hounds on every side, and dares not moan a whit.
He would not thence, for why he saw no footing out as yet.
And therefore watched he narrowly the cloud and eke the place.
A chill cold sweat my sieged limbs oppre^^, and down a pace
From all my body steaming drops did fall of watr^e hew.
Which way so ere I stird my foot the place was like a st^w.
The deaw ran trickling from my hair. In half the while I then
Was turnde to water, that I now have told the tale again.
His loved waters Alphey knew, and putting off the shape
Of man the which he took before because I should not escape,
Returned to his proper shape of water by and by
Of purpose for to join with me and have my company.
But Delia brake the ground, at which I sinking into blind
Bycorners, up again my self at Ortigie do wind,
Right dear to me because it does Dianas surname bear,
And for because to light again I first was raised there.
Thus far did Arethusa speak: and then the fruitful Dame
Two Dragons to her Chariot put, and reyning hard the same,
Midway beweene the Heaven and Earth she in the Ay^r went,
And unto Prince Triptolemus her lightsome Chariot sent
To Pallas City lode with corn, commanding him to sow
Some part thereof in ground new broken up, and some thereof to strew
In ground long tillde before. Anon the young man up did stie
And flying over Europe and the Realm of Asias hie,
Alighted in the Scithian land. There reyned in that coast
A King callde Lyncus, to whose house he entered for to host.
And being there demanded how and why he thither came,
And also of his native soil and of his proper name,
I hight (quoth he) Triptolemus and borne was in the town
Of Athens in the land of Greece, that place of high renown
I neither came by Sea nor Land, but through the open Air
I bring with me Dame Ceres gifts which being sown in fair
And fertile fields may fruitful Haruests yield and finer fare.
The savage King had spite. and to the intent that of so rare
And gracious gifts himself might seem first founder for to be,
He entertainde him in his house, and when a sleep was he,
He came upon him with a sword. but as he would have killde him,
Dame Ceres turnde him to a Lynx, and waking the other willde him
His sacred Teemeware through the Air to drive abroad again.
The chief of us had ended this her learned song. and then
The Nymphs with one consent did judge that we the Goddesses
Of Helicon had won the day. But when I saw that these
Unnurtred Damsels overcome began to fall a scolding,
I said: so little since to us you think your selves beholding,
For bearing with your malapertnesse in making challenge, that
Besides your former fault, ye eke do fall to railing flat,
Abusing thus our gentleness: we will from hence proceed
The punishment, and of our wrath the rightful humor feed.
Euippyes daughters grind and ^eerde and set our threatenings light.
But as they were about to prate, and bent their fistes to smight
Their wicked hands with hideous noise, they saw the stumps of quilles
New budding at their nails, and how their arms soft feather hills.
Each saw how others mouth did purse and harden into Bill,
And so becoming uncouth Birds to haunt the woods at will.
For as they would have clapped their hands their wings did up the^ heave,
And hanging in the Air the scoldes of woods did Pies them leave.
Now also being turnde to Birds they are as eloquent
As ere they were, as chattring still, as much to babbling bent.
Finis quinti Libri.
THE SIXTH BOOK of Ouids Metamorphosis.
TRitonia unto all these words attentive hearing bendes,
And both the Muses learned song and rightful wrath co^mendes.
And thereupon within her self this fancy did arise.
It is no matter for to praise: but let our self devise
Some thing to be commended for: and let us not permit
Our Majesty to be despisde without revenging it.
And therewithal she purposed to put the Lydian Maid
Arachne to her neckeverse who (as had to her been said)
Presumed to prefer her self before her noble grace
In making cloth. This Damsel was not famous for the place
In which she dwelt, nor for her stock, but for her Art. Her Sier
Was Idmon one of Colophon a pelting Purple Dier.
Her mother was deceast: but she was of the baser sort,
And egall to her Make in birth, in living, and in port.
But though this Maid were meanly borne, and dwelt but in a shed
At little Hypep: yet her trade her fame abroad did spread
Even all the Lydian Cities through. To see her wondrous work
The Nymphs that underneath the Uines of shadie Tmolus lurk
Their Uineyards oftentimes forsook. So did the Nymphs also
About Pactolus oftentimes their golden streams forgo.
And evermore it did them good not only for to see
Her clothes already made, but while they eke a making be
Such grace was in her workmanship. For were it so that she
The newshorne fleeces from the sheep in bundels deftly makes,
Or afterward does kemb the same, and draws it out in flakes
Along like clouds, or on the Rock does spinne the handwarpe woofe,
Or else embroydreth, certainly ye might perceive by proof
She was of Pallas bringing up. which thing she nathelesse
Denies, and disdaining such a Mistress to confess,
Let her contend with me she said: and if she me amend
I will refuse no punishment the which she shall extend.
Minerua took an old wives shape and made her hair seem gray,
And with a staff her febled limbs pretended for to stay.
Which done, she thus began to speak. Not all that age does bring
We ought to shonne. Experience does of long continuance spring.
Despise not mine admonishment. Seek fame and chief report
For making cloth, and Arras work, among the mortal sort.
But humbly give the Goddess place: and pardon of her crave
For these thine unadvised words. I warrant thou shall have
Forgiveness, if thou ask it her* Arachne bent her brewes
And lowering on her, left her work: and hardly she eschewes
From flying in the Ladies face. Her countnance did bewray
Her moodie mind: which bursting ^orth in words she thus did say.
Thou come like a doting fool: thy wit is spent with years:
Thy life has lasted over long as by thy talk appears.
And if thou any daughter have, or any daughtrinlawe,
I would she heard these words of mine: I am not such a Daw,
But that without thy teaching I can well enough advise
My self. And least thou should think thy words in any wise
Avail, the self same mind I keep with which I first begone.
Why commes she not hirselfe I say? this match why does she shonne?
Then said the Goddess: here she is. And therewithal she cast
Her oldewiues riueled shape away, and shewde her self at last
Minerua like. The Nymphs did straight adore her Majesty.
So did the young newmaried wives that were of Migdonie.
The Maiden only vnabasht would naught at all relent.
But yet she blushed and suddenly a ruddynesse besprent
Her cheeks which wanzd away again, even like as does the Sky
Look sanguine at the break of day, and turns by and by
To white at rising of the Sun. As hot as any fire
She sticks to her tackling still. And through a fond desire
Of glory, to her own decay all headlong forth she runs.
For Pallas now no l^nger warnes, ne now no longer shunnes
Ne seeks the challenge to delay. Immediately they came
And took their places severally, and in a several frame
Each streynde a web, the warpe whereof was fine. The web was tide
Upon a Beam. Between the warpe a slay of reed did sl^de.
The woofe on sharpened pinnes was put betwixt the warp, and wrought
With fingars. And as often as they ^ad through the warpe it brought,
They struck it with a Bo^en comb. Both twain of them made has^:
And girding close for handsomnesse their garments to their wast
Bestirde their cunning hands apace. Their earnestness was such
As made them never think of pain. They weaued very much
Fine Purple that was did in Tire, and colors set so trim
That each in shadowing other seemde the very same with him.
Even like as after showers of rain when Phoebus broken beams
Do strike upon the Clouds, appears a compast bow of gleames
Which bends over all the Heaven: wherein although there shine
A thousand sundry colors, yet the shadowing is so fine,
That look men nere so wistly, yet beguileth it their eyes:
So like and even the self same thing each color seems to rise
Whereas they meet, which further off do differ more and more.
Of glittring gold with silken threede was weaued there good store,
And stories put in portrayture of things done long before.
Minerua painted Athens town and Marsis rock therein,
And all the strife between hirselfe and Neptune, who should win
The honor for to give the name to that same noble town.
In lofty thrones on either side of Jove were settled down
Six Peers of Heaven with countnance grave and full of Majesty,
And every of them by his face discerned well might be.
The Image of the mighty Jove was King like. She had made
Neptunus standing striking with his long threetyned blade
Upon the ragged Rock: and from the middle of the clift
She portrayed issuing out a horse, which was the noble gift
For which he chalengde to himself the naming of the town.
She picturde out hirselfe with shield and Morion on her crown
With Curet on her breast, and Spear in hand with sharpened end.
She makes the Earth (the which her Spear does seem to strike) to send^
An Olyf tree with f^uite thereon: and that the Gods thereat
Did wonder: and with victory she finished up that plat.
Yet to the intent examples old might make it to be known
To her that for desire of praise so stoutly held her own,
What guerdon she should hope to have for her attempt so mad,
Four like contentions in the four last corners she did add.
The Thracians He^^e and Rodope the foremost corner had:
Who being sometime mortal folk usurped to them the name
Of Jove and Juno, and were turnde to mountains for the same.
A Pigmie woman's piteous chance the second corner shewde,
Whom Juno turned to a Crane (because she was so lewd
As for to stand at strife with her for beauty) charging her
Against her native countriefolke continual war to ^tir.
The third had proud Antigone who durst of pride contend
In beauty with the wife of Jove: by whom she in the end
Was turned to a Storke, no whit auailed her the town
Of Troy, or that Laomedon her father ware a crown,
But that she clad in feathers white her lazy wings must s^ap
And with a bobbed Bill bewail the cause of her missehap.
The last had chyldelesse Cinyras: who being turnde to stone,
Was picturde prostrate on the ground, and weeping all alone,
And culling fast between his arms a Temples gree^es fine
To which his daughters bodies were transformde by wrath divine.
The utmost borders had a wreath of Olyf round about,
And this is all the work the which Minerua portrayed out.
For with the tree that she hirselfe had made but late before
She bounded in her Arras cloth, and then did work no more.
The Lydian maiden in her web did portray to the full
How Europe was by royal Jove beguilde in shape of Bull.
A swimming Bull, a swelling Sea, so lively had she wrought,
That Bull and Sea in very deed ye might them well have thought.
The Lady seemed looking back to landwarde and to cry
Upon her women, and to fear the water sprinkling hie,
And shrinking up her fearful feet. She portrayed also there
Asteriee struggling with an Erne which did away her bear.
And over Leda she had made a Swan his wings to splay.
She added also how by Jove in shape of Satyr gaye
The fair Antiope with a pair of children was besped:
And how he took Amphitrios shape when in Al^menas bed
He gate the worthy Hercules: and how he also came
To Danae like a shoure of gold, to Aegine like a flame,
A sheepeherd to Mnemosyne, and like a Serpent ^ly
To Proserpine. She also made Neptu^^s leaping by
Upon a Maid of Aeolus race in likeness of a Bull,
And in the stream Enipeus shape begetting on a trull
The Giants Oath and Ephialt, and in the shape of Ram
Begetting one Theophane Bisalties ympe with Lam,
And in a lusty Stalions shape she made him houering there
Dame Ceres with the yellow locks, and her whose golden hear
Was turnde to crawling Snakes: on whom he gate the winged horse.
She made him in a Dolphins shape Melantho to enforce.
Of all these things she missed not their proper shapes, nor yet
The full and just resemblance of their places for to ^it.
In likeness of a Country cloyne was Phoebus picturde there,
And how he now ware Gossehaukes wings, and now a Lions hear.
And how he in a shepeherdes shape was practicing a wile
The daughter of one Macarie dame Issa to beguile.
And how the fair Erygone by chance did suffer rape
By Bacchus who deceived her in likeness of a grape.
And how that Saturn in the shape of Genet did beget
The double Chiron. Round about the utmost Uerdge was set
A narrow Traile of pretty flowers with leaves of Iuie fret.
Not Pallas, no nor spite it self could any quarrel pick
To this her work: and that did touch Minerua to the quick.
Who thereupon did rende the cloth in pieces every whit,
Because the lewdness of the Gods was blased so in it.
And with an Arras weauers comb of Box she fiercely smit
Arachne on the forehead full a dosen times and more.
The Maid impacient in her heart, did stomach this so sore,
That by and by she hung hirselfe. Howbeit as she hing,
Dame Pallas pitying her estate, did stay her in the string
From death, and said lewd Callet live: but hang thou still for me.
And least hereafter from this curse that time may set thee free,
I will that this same punishment enacted firmly be,
As well on thy posterity for ever as on thee.
And after when she should depart, with juice of Hecats flower
She sprinkled her: and by and by the poison had such power,
That with the touch thereof her ha^re, her ears, and nose did fade:
And very small it both her head and all her body made.
In stead of legs, to both her sides stick fingars long and fine:
The rest is belly. From the which she nerethelesse does twine
A slender threede, and practices in shape of Spider still
The Spinners and the Websters crafts of which she erst had s^^ll.
All Lydia did repine hereat, and of this deed the fanie
Through Phrygie ran, and through the world was talking of the ^ame.
Before her marriage Niobe had known her very well,
When yet a Maid in Lydia.
Meonie and Sipyle she did dwell.
And yet Arachnes punishment at home before her eyes,
To use discreter kind of talk it could her not advise,
Nor (as behooves) to the Gods to yield in humble wise.
For many things did make her proud. But neither did the town
The which her husband builded had, nor houses of renown
Of which they both descended were, nor yet the puissance
Of that great Realm wherein they reignde so much her mind enhau^ce
(Although the liking of them all did greatly her delight)
As did the offspring of her self. And certainly she might
Have been of mothers counted well most happy, had she not
So thought her self. For she whom sage Tyresias had begot
The Prophet Manto through instinct of heavenly power, did say
These kind of words in open street. Ye Thebanes go your way
Apace, and unto Lato^ and to Latons children pray,
And offer godly Frankincense, and wreath your hair with Bay.
Latona by the mouth of me commaundes you so to do.
The Theba^e women by and by obeying thereunto,
Decked all their heads with Laurel leaves as Ma^to did require.
And praying with devout intent threw incense in the fire.
Behold out comes Niobe enuironde with a guard
Of servant and a solemn train that followed afterward.
She was hirselfe in raiment made of costly cloth of gold
Of Phrygia facion very brave and gorgeous to behold.
And of her self she was right fair and beautiful of face,
But that her wrathful stomach then did somewhat stain her grace.
She moving with her portly head her hair the which as then
Did hang on both her shoulders loose, did pawse a while. and when
With lofty look her stately eyes she rolled had about,
What madness is it (quoth she) to prefer the heavenly rout
Of whom ye do but hear, to such as daily are in sight?
Or why should Laton honored be with Altars? Never wight
To my most sacred Majesty did offer incense. Yet
My Father was that Tantalus whom only as most fit
The Gods among them at their boordes admitted for to sit.
A sister of the Pleyades is my mother. Finally
My Graundsire on the mothers side is that same Atlas hi^
That on his shoulders bears up the heavenly Axeltree.
Again my other Graundfather is Jove. and (as you see)
He also is my Fathrinlawe. wherein I glory may.
The Realm of Phrygia here at hand does unto me obey.
In Cadmus palace I thereof the Lady do remain
And jointly with my husband I as peerlesse Princess reign
Both over this same town whose walls my husbands harp did frame,
And also over all the folk and people in the same.
In what soever corner of my house I cast mine eye,
A world of riches and of goods I eurywhere epsy.
Moreover for the beauty, shape, and favor grown in me,
Right well I know I do deserve a Goddess for to be.
Besides all this, seven sons I have and daughters seven likewise,
By whom shall shortly sonneinlawes and daughtrinlawes arise.
Judge you now if that I have cause of statelynesse or no.
How dareye then prefer to me Latona that same fro
The Titan Ceus ympe, to whom then ready down to lie
The howgie Earth a little plot to child on did deny?
From Heaven, from Earth, and from the Sea your Goddess banished was,
And as an outcast through the world from place to place did pass,
Until that Delos pitying her, said thou dos^e fleet on land
And I on Sea, and thereupon did lend her out of hand
A place unstable. Of two twins there brought a bed was she:
And this is but the seventh part of the issue borne by me.
Right happy am I. who can this deny? and shall so still
Continu^ who does doubt of that? abundance has and will
Preserve me. I am greater thau that froward fortune may
Empeache me. For although she should pull many things away,
Yet should she l^aue me many more. My state is out of fear.
Of this my howge and populous race surmise you that it were
Possible some of them should miss: yet can I never be
So spoiled that no m^ than two shall ^a^ie still with me.
Leave quickly this lewd sacrif^ce, and put me off this Bay
That on your heads is wrea^hed thus. They laid it straight away
And left their holy rites undone, and closely as they may
With secret whispring to themselves to Laton they did pray.
How much from utter barrenness the Goddess wa^: so much
Di^deind she more: and in the top of Cy^thus framed such
Complaint as this to both her twins. Lo I your mother dear,
Who in my body once you twain with painful travel bear,
Lo I whose courage is so stout as for to y^^lde to none
Of all the other Goddesses except Jove's wife alone,
Am lately doubted whether I a Goddess be or no*
And if you help not children mine, the case now stands so
That I the honor must from hence of Altars quight forg^.
But this is not mine only grief. Besides her wicked fact
Most railing words has Niobe to my defacing rackt.
She durst prefer her Barnes to you. And as for me, she naamde
Me barren in respect of her, and was no whit ashaamde
To show her fathers wicked tongue which she by birth does take
This said: Latona was about e^treatance for to make.
Cease off (quoth Phoebus) long complaint is nothing but delay
Of punishment. and the self same words did Phebe also say.
And by and by they through the Air both gliding swiftly down,
On Cadmus pa^lace hid in clouds did light in Thebe town.
A field was underneath the wall ^oth level, large and wide,
Betrampled every day with horse tha^ men therein did ride,
Where store of Carres and Horses houes the cloddes to dust had trod
A couple of Amphions sons on lusty coursers rode
In this same place. Their horses fair Coper is^ns did wear
Of scarlet: and their bridles brave with gold bedecked were.
Of whom as Niobs eldest son Ismenos hapt to bring
His horse about, and reynde him in to make him keep the ring,
He cride alas: and in his breast with that an arrow stacke
And by and by his dying hand did let the bridle slack.
And on the right side of the horse he slipped to the ground.
The second brother Sipylus did chance to hear the sound
Of Quiuers clattring in the Air, and giving straight the reyne
And spur together to his horse, began to fly amayne:
As does the master of a ship: who when he se^s a shoure
Approaching, by some mistie cloud that gin^^s to gloume and loure
Does clap on all his sails because no wind should escape him by
Though nere so small: Howbeit as he turned for to fly,
He was not able for to escape the Arrow which did stricke
Him through the neck. The nocke thereof did shaking upward stick*
The head appeared at his throat. And as he forward gave
Himself in flying: so to ground he groueling also drove,
And toppled by the horses mane and feet amid his race,
And with his warm newshedded blood berayed all the place.
But Phedimus, and Tantalus the he^^r of the name
Of Tantalus his Graundfather, who customably came
From other daily exercise to wrestling, had begun
To close, and each at other now with breast to breast to run,
When Phoebus Arrow being sent with force from streyned string
Did strike through both of them as they did fast together cling.
And so they sighed both at once, and both at once for pain
Fell down to ground, and both of them at once their eyes did streine
To see their latest light, and both at once their ghostes did yield.
Alphenor this mischaunce of theirs with heavy heart beheld,
And scratcht and beat his woeful breast: and therewith flying out
To take them up between his arms, was as he went about
This work of kindly pity, killde. For Phoebus with a Dart
of deadly dint did riue him through the Bulk and brake his heart.
And when the steal was plucked out, a percell of his liver
Did hang upon the hooked head: and so he did deliver
His life and blood into the Air departing both together.
But Damasicthon (on whose head came never sizzer) felt
Mo wounds than one. It was his chance to have a gri^uous pelt
Upon the very place at which the leg is first begun
And where the hamstrings by the joint with supple sinews run
And while to draw this arrow out he with his hand assaide,
Another through his wezant went, and at the feathers staide.
The blood did drive out this again, and spinning high did spout
A great way off, and pierst the Air with sprinkling all about.
The last of all Ilionie with streched hands, and speech
Most humble (but in vain) did say* O Gods I you beseech
Of mercy all in general. He wist not what he said
Ne how that unto all of them he ought not to have praide.
The God that held the Bow in hand was moved: but as then
The Arrow was alredie gone so far, that back again
He could not call it. Nerethelesse the wound was very small
Of which he did, for why his heart it did but lightly gall.
The rumor of the mischief self, and moan of people, and
The weeping of her servants gave the mother t'vnderstand
The sudden stroke of this mischaunce. She wondered very much
And stormed also that the Gods were able to do such
A deed, or durst attempt it, yea she thought it more than right
That any of them over her should have so mickle might.
Amphion had fordone himself already with a knife,
And ended all his sorrows quite together with his life.
Alas, alas how greatly does this Niobe differ here
From the other Niobe who a late disdaining any Pere
Did from Latonas Altars drive her folk, and through the town
With haultie look and stately gate went pranking up and down,
Then spighted at among her own, but piteous now to those:
That heretofore for her deserts had been her greatest foes.
She falls on the corses cold, and taking no regard,
Bestowde her kysses on her sons as whom she afterward
Did know she never more should kiss. From whom she lifting th^e
Her blew and broosed arms to heaven said: O thou oruell foe
Latona feed, yea feed thy self I say upon my woe
And ouergorge thy stomach, yea and glut thy cruel heart
With these my present painful pangs of bitter griping smart.
In corses seven I seven times dead am carried tomy grave.
Rejoice thou foe and triumph now in that thou seemste to have
The upper hand. What? upper hand? no no it is not so.
As wretched as my case does seem, yet have I left me mo
Than thou for all thy happiness can of thine own account
Even after all these corses yet I still do thee surmount.
Upon the end of these same words the twanging of the ^tring
In letting of the Arrow fly was clearly heard: which thing
Made every one save Niobe afraid. Her heart was so
With sorrow hardened, that she grew more bold. Her daughters tho
Were standing all with mourning weed and hanging hair before
Their brothers coffins. One of them in pulling from the sore
An Arrow sticking in his heart, sanke down upon her brother
With mouth to mouth, and so did yield her fleeting ghost. Another
In comforting the (...) and sorrow of her mother
Upon the sudden held her peace. She stricken was within
With double wound: which caused hi^ her talking for to blin
And shut her mouth: But first her ghost was gone. One all in vain
Attempting for to escape by flight was in her flying slain.
Another on her sisters corse does tumble down stark dead.
This quakes and trembles piteously, and she does hide her head.
And when that six with sundry wounds dispatched were and gone*
At last as yet remained one: and for to save that one,
Her mother with her body whole did cling about her fast,
And wrying her did over her her garments wholly cast:
And cried out: O leave me one: this little one yet save:
Of many but this only one the least of all I crave.
But while she prayed, for whom she prayed was killed. Then down she sat
Bereft of all her children quite, and drawing to her fate,
Among her daughters and her sons and husband newly dead.
Her cheeks waxt hard, the Air could stir no hair upon her head.
The color of her face was dim and clearly void of blood,
And sadly under open lids her eyes unmoved stood.
In all her body was no life. For even her very tung
And palate of her mouth was hard, and each to other clung.
Her Pulses ceased for to bea^e, her neck did cease to bow,
Her arms to stir, her feet to go, all power forwent as now.
And into stone her very womb and bowels also bind.
But yet she wept: and being hoyst by force of whirling wind
Was carried into Ph^ygie. There upon a mountains top
She weepeth still in stone. from stone the drerie tears do drop.
Then all both men and women fearde* Latonaas open ire
And far with greater (...) and earnest^r desire
Did w^rship the great ma^estie of this their Goddess who
Did bear at once both Phoebus and his sister Phebe to
And through occasion of this chance, (as men are wont to do
In cases like) the people fell to telling things of old
Of whom a man among the rest this tale (...) told.
The (...) folk that in the field (...) of (...) Ly^ia dwelt
Du^ (...) also for their spite to this ^ame Goddess felt.
The baseness of the parties make the thing it self obscure.
Yet is the matter wonderful. My self I you assure
Did presently behold the Pond, and saw the very place
In which this wondrous thing was done. My father then in case,
Not able for to travel well by reason of his age,
To fetch home certain Oxen thence made me to be his page,
Appointing me a countryman of Lycia to my guide.
With whom as I went plodding in the pasture grounds, I spide
Amids a certain Pond an old square Altar colored black
With cinder of the sacrifice that still upon it stacke.
About it round grew wavering Reeds. My guide anon did stay:
And softly, O be good to me, he in himself did say.
And I with like soft whispering did say be good to me.
And then I asked him whether that the Altar we did see
Belonged to the Waternymphes, or Faunes or other God
Peculiar to the place it self upon the which we yod.
He made me answer thus. My guest no God of country race
Is in this Altar worshipped. That Goddess claymes this place.
From whom the wife of mighty Jove did all the world forfend:
When wandering restless here and there full hardly in the end
Unsettled Delos did receive then floting on the wave,
As tide and weather to and fro the swimming Island drove.
There maugre Juno (who with might and main against her straue)
Latona staying by a Date and Olyf tree that sted
In travel, of a pair of twins was safely brought a bed.
And after her deliurance folk report that she for fear
Of Iunos wrath did fly from hence, and in her arms did bear
Her babes which afterward became two Gods. In which her travel
In Summer when the scorching Sun is wont to burn the gravel
Of Lycie country where the fell Chymera has his place,
The Goddess weary with the long continuance of her race,
Waxt thirsty by the means of drought with going in the Sun.
Her babes had also sucked her breasts as long as milk would run.
By chance she spide this little Pond of water here bylow.
And country Carles were gathering there these Oysyer twigs that grow
So thick upon a shrubbie stalk: and of these rushes green:
And flags that in these moorish plots so rife of growing been.
She coming hither kneeled down the water up to take
To cool her thirst. The churlish cloynes forfended her the Lake.
Then gently said the Goddess: Sirs why do you me forfend
The water? Nature does to all in common water send.
For neither Sun, nor Air, nor yet the Water private be
I seek but that which natures gift has made to all things free.
And yet I humbly crave of you to grant it unto me.
I did not go about to wash my werie limbs and skin,
I would but only quench my thirst. My throat is scalt within
For want of moisture: and my chappes and lips are parching dry:
And scarsly is there way for words to issue out thereby.
A draught of water will to me be heavenly Nectar now.
And sure I will confess I have received life of you.
Yea in your giving of a drop of water unto me,
The case so stands as you shall preserve the lives of three.
Alas let these same silly souls that in my bosom stretch
Their little arms (by chance her babes their pretty dolles did re^ch)
To pity move you. What is he so hard that would not yield
To this the gentle Goddesses entreatance meek and meeld?
Yet they for all the humble words she could devise to say,
Continued in their wilful mood of churlish saying nay,
And threatened for to send her thence unless she went away,
Reuiling her most spightfully. And not contented so.
With hands and feet the standing Poole they troubled to and fro,
Until with trampling up and down maliciously, the soft
And ^^imie mud that lay beneath was raised up aloft.
With that the Goddess was so wroth that thirst was quight forgot*
And unto such unworthy Carles hirselfe she humbles not:
Ne speaks meaner words than might beseem a Goddess well.
But hol^ing up her hands to heaven: for ever might you dwell
In this same Pond, she said: her wish did take effect with speed.
For underneath the water they delight to be in deed.
Now diue they to the bottom down, now up their heads they pop,
Another wh^le with sprawling legs they swim upon the top.
And oftent^^es upon the banks they have a mind to stond,
And oftent^^es from thence again to leap into the Pond.
And there they now do practice still their filthy tongues to scold.
And shamelessely (though underneath the water) they do hold
Their former wont of brawling still amid the water cold.
Their voices still are hoarse and harsh, their throtes have puffed goawles,
Their chappes with brawling widened are, their hammer headed Ioawles
Are joined to their shoulders just, the necks of them do seem
cut off, the ridgebone of their back sticks up of color green.
Their paunch which is the greatest part of all their trunch is gray,
And so they up and down the Pond made newly Frogs do play.
When one of Lyce (I wo^e not who) had spoken in this sort,
Another of a Satyr straight began to make report,
Whom Phoebus ouercomming on a pipe (made late ago
By Pallas) put to punishment. Why fleaest thou me so,
Alas he cride it irketh me. Alas a sorry pipe
Deserves not so cruelly my skin from me to stripe.
For all his crying ore his ears quight pulled was his skin.
Naught else he was than one whole wound. The griesly blood did spin
From every part, the sinews lay discovered to the eye,
The quiuering veins without a skin lay beating nakedly.
The panting bowels in his bulk ye might have numbered well,
And in his breast the shere small strings a man might easly tell.
The Country Faunes, the Gods of Woods, the Satyrs of his kin,
The Mount Olympus whose renown did ere that time begin,
And all the Nymphs, and all that in those mountains kept their sheep,
Or grazed cattle thereabouts, did for this Satyr weep.
The ^^u^tfull earth waxt moist therewith, and moys^ed did receive
Their tears, and in her bowels deep did of the same conceive.
And when that she had turned them to water, by and by
She sent them forth again aloft to see the open Sky.
The River that does rise thereof beginning there his race,
In very deep and shoring banks to Seaward runs a pace
Through Phrygie, and according as the Satyr, so the stream
Is called Marsias, of the brooks the clearest in that Realm.
With such examples as these same the common folk returnde
To present things, and every man through all the City moornde
For that Amphion was destroyde with all his issue so.
But all the fault and blame was laid upon the mother tho.
For her alonly Pelops mournde (as men report) and he
In opening of his clothes did show that every man might see
His shoulder on the left side bare of Iuorie for to be.
This shoulder at his birth was like his the other both in hue
And flesh, until his fathers hands most wickedly him slew,
And that the Gods when they his limbs again together drue,
To join them in their proper place and form by nature due,
Did find out all the other parts, save only that which grue
Between the throteboll and the arm. which when they could not get
This other made of Iuorie white in place thereof they set
And by that means was Pelops made again both whole and sound
The neyghbor Princes thither came, and all the Cities round
About besought their Kings to go and comfort Thebe: as Arge
And Sparta, and Mycene which was under Pelops charge.
And Calydon vnhated of the frowning Phebe yet,
The welthie town Orchomenos, and Corinth which in it
Had famous men for workmanship in metals: and the stout
Messene which full twenty years did hold besiegers out.
And Patre, and the lowly town Cleona, Nelies Pyle,
And Troyzen not surnamed yet Pittheia for a while.
And all the other Borough towns and Cities which do stand
Within the narrow balke at which two Seas do meet at hand,
Or which do bound upon the balke without in maine firm land.
Alonly Athens (who would think?) did neither come nor send.
War barred them from courtesy the which they did entend.
The King of Pontus with an host of savage people lay
In siege before their famous walls and curstly did them fray.
Until that Tereus King of Thrace approaching to their aid,
Did vanquish him, and with renown was for his labor paid*
And since he was so puissant in men and ready coin,
And came of mighty Marsis race, Pandion sought to join
Aliance with him by and by, and gave him to his Feere
His daughter Progne. At this match (as after will appear)
Was neither Juno, President of marriage wont to be,
Nor Hymen, no nor any one of all the graces three.
The Furies snatching Tapers up that on some Herce did stand
Did light them, and before the Bride did bear them in their hand.
The Furies made the Bridegroomes bed. And on the house did rucke
A cursed Owl the messenger of ill success and luck.
And all the night time while that they were lying in their beds,
She sat upon the bedsteds top right over both their heds.
Such handsell Progne had the day that Tereus did her wed.
Such handsell had they when that she was brought of child a bed.
All Thracia did rejoice at them, and thankt their Gods, and wild
That both the day of Prognes match with Tereus should be hild
For feastfull, and the day likewise that Itys first was borne:
So little know we what behoues. The Sun had now outworne
Five Haruests, and by course five times had run his yearly race,
When Progne flattring Tereus said: If any love or grace
Between us be, send either me my sister for to see,
Or find the means that hither she may come to visit me.
You may assure your Fathrinlaw she shall again return
Within a while. Ye do to me the highest great good turn
That can be, if you bring to pass I may my sister see.
Immediately the King commaundes his ships a flote to be.
And shortly after, what with sail and what with force of Ores,
In Athe^s haven he arriues and lands at Pyrey shores.
As Soon as of his fathrinlaw the presence he obtainde,
And had of him been courteously and friendly entertainde,
Unhappie handsell entered with their talking first together.
The errandes of his wife the cause of his then coming thither
He had but new begone to tell, and promised that when
She had her sister seen, she should with speed be sent again:
When (see the chance) came Philomele in raiment very rich,
And yet in beauty far more rich, even like the Fairies which
Reported are the pleasant woods and water springs to haunt,
So that the like apparel and attire to them you grant.
King Tereus at the sight of her did burn in his desire,
As if a man should chance to set a gulf of corn on fire,
Or burn a stacke of hay. Her face in deed deserved love.
But as for him, to fleshly lust even nature did him move.
For of those countries commonly the people are above
All measure prone to lechery. And therefore both by kind
His flame encreast, and by his own default of vicious mind
He purposde fully to corrupt her servants with reward:
Or for to bribe her Nurce, that she should slenderly regard
Her duty to her mistresseward. And rather than to fail,
The Lady even hirselfe with gifts he minded to assail,
And all his kingdom for to spend. or else by force of hand
To take her, and in maintenance thereof by sword to stand.
There was not under heaven the thing but that he durst it prove,
So far unable was he now to stay his lawless love.
Delay was deadly. Back again with greedy mind he came
Of Prognes ^rrands for to talk: and underneath the same
He works his own ungraciousness. Love gave him power to frame
His talk at will. As often as he demanded out of square,
Upon his wives importunate desire himself he bare.
He also wept: as though his wife had willed that likewise.
O God, what blindness does the hearts of mortal men disguise?
By working mischief Tereus gets him credit for to seem
A loving man, and wins praise by wickedness extreme.
Yea and the foolish Philomele the self same thing desires.
Who hanging on her fathers neck with flattring arms, requires
Against her life and for her life his license for to go
To see her sister. Tereus beholdes her wistly tho,
And in beholding handles her with heart. For when he saw
Her kiss her father, and about his neck her arms to draw,
They all were spurs to prick him forth, and wood to feed his fire,
And food of forcing nourishment to further his desire.
As often as she her father did between her arms embrace,
So often wished he himself her father in that case.
For naught at all should that in him have wrought the greater grace.
Her father could not say them nay they lay at him so sore.
Right glad thereof was Philomele and thanked him therefore.
And wretched wench she thinks she had obtained such a thing,
As both to Progne and her self should joy and comfort bring,
When both of them in very deed should afterward it rue.
To endward of his daily race and travel Phoebus drew,
And on the shoring side of Heaven his horses downward flew.
A princely supper was prepaarde, and wine in gold was set:
And after meat to take their rest the Princes did them get.
But though the King of Thrace that while were absent from her sight,
Yet swelted he: and in his mind reuoluing all the night
Her face, her gesture, and her hands, imaginde all the rest
(The which as yet he had not seen) as likte his fancy best.
He feeds his flames himself. No wink could come within his eyes,
For thinking ay on her. As Soon as day was in the skies,
Pandion holding in his hand the hand of Tereus pressed
To go his way, and sheading tears betook him thus his guest.
Dear sonneinlaw I give thee here (since godly cause constraines)
This Damsel. Bythe faith that in thy Princely heart remains*
And for our late aliance sake, and by the Gods above,
I humbly thee beseech that as a Father thou do love
And maintain her. and that as soon as may be (all delay
Will unto me seem over long) thou let her come away
The comfort of my careful age on whom my life does stay.
And thou my daughter Philomele (it is enough ywis
That from her father set so far thy sister Progne is)
If any spark of nature do within thy heart remain,
With all the haast and speed thou can return to me again.
In giving charge he kissed her: and down his cheeks did rain
The tender tears. and as a pledge of faith he took the right
Hands of them both, and joining them did each to other plight.
Desiring them to bear in mind his commendations to
His daughter and her little son. And then with much a do
For sobbing, at the last he bad adieu as one dismayed.
The foremisgiuing of his mind did make him sore afraid.
As Soon as Tereus and the Maid together were a board,
And that their ship from land with Ores was haled on the foord,
The field is ours he cride aloude, I have the thing I sought
And up he skipt, so barbrous and so beastly was his thought,
That scarce even there he could forbear his pleasure to have wrought
His eye went never off of her: as when the scarefull Erne
With hooked talants trussing up a Hare among the Fern,
Has laid her in his nest, from whence the prisoner can not escape,
The ravening foul with greedy eyes upon his pray does gape.
Now was their journey come to end: now were they gone a land
In Thracia, when that Tereus took the Lady by the hand,
And led her to a pelting graunge that peakishly did stand
In woods forgrowen. There waxing pale and trembling sore for fear,
And dreading all things, and with tears demanding sadly where
Her sister was, he shet her up: and therewithal bewraide
His wicked lust, and so by force because she was a Maid
And all alone he vanquished her, It booted naught at all
That she on sister, or on Sire, or on the Gods did call.
She quaketh like the wounded Lamb which from the Wolves hoar t^th
New shaken thinks her self not safe: or as the Dove that feeth
Her feathers with her own blood staynde, who shuddring still does fear
The greedy Hawk that did her late with griping talants tear.
Anon when that this mazednesse was somewhat ouerpast,
She rent her hair, and beat her breast, and up to heauenward cast
Her hands in mourningwise, and said* O cankerd Carle, O fell
And cruel Tyrant, neither could the godly tears that fell
A down my fathers cheeks when he did give thee charge of me,
Ne of my sister that regard that ought to be in thee,
Nor yet my chaast virginity, nor conscience of the law
Of wedlock, from this villainy thy barbrous heart withdraw?
Behold thou have confounded all. My sister thorough me
Is made a Cucqueane: and thy self through this offense of thee
Art made a husband to us both, and unto me a foe
A just deserved punishment for lewdly doing so.
But to the intent O periurde wretch no mischief may remain
Unwrought by thee, why do thou from murdring me refrain?
Would God thou had it done before this wicked rape. From hence
Then should my soul most blessedly have gone without offense.
But if the Gods do see this deed, and if the Gods I say
Be ought, and in this wicked world bear any kind of sway
And if with me all other things decay not, sure the day
Will come that for this wickedness full dearly thou shall pay.
Yea I my self rejecting shame thy doings will bewray.
And if I may have power to come abroad, them blase I will
In open face of all the world. or if thou keep me still
As prisoner in these woods, my voy^e the very woods shall fill,
And make the stones to understand. Let Heaven to this give ear
And all the Gods and powers therein if any God be there.
The cruel tyrant being chaaft and also put in fear
With these and other such her words, both causes so him stung,
That drawing out his naked sword that at his girdle hung,
He took her rudely by the hair, and wrung her hands behind her,
Compelling her to hold them there while he himself did bind her.
When Philomela saw the sword, she hoapt she should have did,
And for the fame her naked throat she gladly did provide.
But as she yirnde and called ay upon her fathers name,
And striued to have spoken still, the cruel tyrant came
And with a pair of pinsons fast did catch her by the tung,
And with his sword did cut it off. The stumpe whereon it hung
Did patter still. The tip fell down and quiuering on the ground
As though that it had murmured it made a certain sound.
And as an Adders tail cut off does skip a while: even so
The tip of Philomelaas tongue did wriggle to and fro,
And nearer to her mistresseward in dying still did go.
And after this most cruel act, for certain men report
That he (I scarcely dare believe) did oftentimes resort
To maimed Philomela and abusde her at his will:
Yet after all this wickedness he keeping countnance still,
Durst unto Progne home repair. And she immediately
Demanded where her sister was. He sighing feynedly
Did tell her falsely she was dead: and with his subtle tears
He makes all his tale to seem of credit in her ears.
Her garments glittring all with gold she from her shoulders tears
And puts on black, and sets up an empty Herce, and keeps
A solemn obite for her soul, and piteously she weeps
And waileth for her sisters fate who was not in such wise
As that was, for to be bewailde. The Sun had in the Skies
Past through the twelve celestial signs, and finished full a year.
But what should Philomela do? She watched was so near
That start she could not for her life. the walls of that same graunge
Were made so high of maine hard stone, that out she could not raunge.
Again her tunglesse mouth did want the utterance of the fact.
Great is the wit of pensiveness, and when the head is ract
With hard misfortune, sharp forecast of practice enters in.
A warpe of white upon a frame of Thracia she did pin,
And weaued purple letters in between it, which bewraide
The wicked deed of Tereus. And having done, she praide
A certain woman by her signs to bear them to her mistress.
She bare them and delivered them not knowing nerethelesse
What was in them. The Tyrants wife unfolded all the clout,
And of her wretched fortune red the process whole throughout.
She held her peace (a wondrous thing it is she should so do)
But sorrow tide her tongue and words agreeable unto
Her great displeasure were not at commaundment at that stound.
And weep she could not. Right and wrong she reckeneth to confound,
And on reuengement of the deed her heart does wholly ground.
It was the time that wives of Thrace were wont to celebrate
The three year rites of Bacchus which were done a nighttimes late.
A nighttimes sounds Rhodope of tincling pannes and pots:
A nighttimes giving up her house abroad Queen Progne trots
Disguisde like Bacchus other froes and armed to the proof
With all the frenticke furniture that serves for that behoof.
Her head was covered with a vine. About her loose was tuckt
A Reddeeres skin. a lightsome Lance upon her shoulder ruckt.
In poast gaddes terrible Progne through the woods, and at her heels
A flock of froes. and where the sting of sorrow which she feels
Enforces her to furiousness, she feynes it to proceed
Of Bacchus motion. At the length she finding out in deed
The outset Graunge howlde out, and cride now well, and open brake
The gates, and straight her sister thence by force of hand did take,
And veyling her in like attire of Bacchus, hid her head
With Iuie leaves, and home to Court her sore amazed led.
As Soon as Philomela wist she set her foot within
That cursed house, the wretched soul to shudther did begin*
And all her face waxt pale. Anon her sister getting place
Did pull off Bacchus ^^ad attire, and making bare her face
Embraced her between her arms. But she considering that
Queen Progne was a Cucqueane made by means of her, durst not
Once raise her eyes: but on the ground fast fixed held the same.
And where she would have taken God to witness that the shame
And villainy was wrought to her by violence, she was feign
To use her hand in stead of speech. Then Progne chaaft a maine.
And was not able in her self her choler to restrain.
But blaming Philomela for her weeping, said these words.
Thou must not deal in this behalf with weeping, but with swords:
Or with some thing of greater force than swords. For my part, I
Am ready, yea and fully bent all mischief for to try.
This palace will I either set on fire, and in the same
Bestow the cursed Tereus the worker of our shame:
Or pull away his tongue: or put out both his eyes: or cut
Away those members which have thee to such dishonor put:
Or with a thousand wounds expulse that sinful soul of his.
The thing that I do purpose on is great, what ere it is.
I know not what it may be yet. While Progne hereunto
Did set her mind, came Itys in, who taught her what to do.
She staring on him cruelly, said. Ah, how like thou art
Thy wicked father, and without more words a sorrowful part
She purposed, such inward ire was boiling in her heart.
But notwithstanding when her son approached to her near,
And lovingly had greeted her by name of mother dear,
And with his pretty arms about the neck had hugde her fast,
And flattring words with childish toys in kissing forth had cast,
The mothers heart of hirs was then constreyned to relent,
Assuaged wholly was the rage to which she erst was bent,
And from her eyes against her will the tears enforced went.
But when she saw how pity did compel her heart to yield,
She turned to her sisters face from Itys, and beheld
Now tone, now the other earnestly and said. why tattles he
And she sittes dumb bereft of tongue? as well why calls not she
Me sister, as this boy does call me mother? See thou not
Thou daughter of Pandion what a husband thou have got?
Thou growest wholly out of kind. To such a husband as
Is Tereus, pity is a sin. No more delay there was.
She dragged Itys after her, as when it happes in Inde
A Tiger gets a little Calfe that suckes upon a Hynde
And drags him through the shadie woods. And when that they had found
A place within the house far off and far above the ground,
Then Progne struck him with a sword now plainly seeing whother
He should, and holding up his hands, and crying mother, mother,
And flying to her neck: even where the breast and side do bound,
And never turnde away her face. Enough had been that wound
Alone to bring him to his end. The the other sister slit
His throat. And while some life and soul was in his members yet,
In gobbits they them rent: whereof were some in Pipkins boyld,
And other some on hissing spits against the fire were broyld,
And with the gellied blood of him was all the chamber foyld.
To this same banquet Progne bade her husband knowing naught
Nor naught mistrusting of the harm and lewdness she had wrought.
And feyning a solemnity according to the guise
Of Athens, at the which there might be none in any wise
Besides her husband and her self, she banished from the same
Her householde folk and soiourners, and such as guestwise came.
King Tereus s^tting in the throne of his forefathers, fed
And swallowed down the self same flesh that of his bowels bred.
And he (so blinded was his heart) fetch Itys hither, sed.
No longer her most cruel joy dissemble could the Queen.
But of her murder coveting the messenger to been,
She said: the thing thou ask for, thou have within. About
He looked round, and asked where? To put him out of dout,
As he was yet demanding where, and calling for him: out
Lept Philomele with scattred hair aflaight like one that fled
Had from some fray where slaughter was, and threw the bloody head
Of Itys in his fathers face. And never more was she
Desirous to have had her speech, that able she might be
Her inward joy with worthy words to witness frank and free.
The tyrant with a hideous noise away the table shoues:
And reeres y^ fiends from Hell. One while with yauning mouth he proves
To perbrake up his meat again, and cast his bowels out.
Another while with wringing hands he weeping goes about.
And of his son he terms himself the wretched grave. Anon
With naked sword and furious heart he follows fierce upon
Pandions daughters. He that had been present would have deemd^
Their bodies to have houered up with feathers. As they seemde:
So houered they with wings in deed. Of whom the one away
To woodward flies, the other still about the house does stay.
And of their murder from their breasts not yet the token goth,
For even still yet are stainde with blood the feathers of them both.
And he through sorrow and desire of vengeance waxing wight,
Became a Bird upon whose top a tuft of feathers light
In likeness of a Helmets crest does trimly stand upright.
In stead of his long sword, his bill shootes out a passing space:
A Lapwing named is this Bird, all armed seems his face.
The sorrow of this great mischaunce did stop Pandions breath
Before his time, and long ere age determinde had his death.
Erecthey reigning after him the government did take:
A Prince of such a worthiness as no man well can make
Resolution, if he more in arms or justice did excel.
Four sons, and daughters four he had Of which a couple well
Did each in beauty other match. The one of these whose name
Was Procris unto Cephalus King Aeolus son became
A happy wife. The Thracians and King Tereus were a let
To Boreas: so that long it was before the God could get
His dearbeloued Orithy a, while trifling he did stand
With fair entreatance rather than did use the force of hand.
But when he saw he no relief by gentle means could find,
Then turning unto boystous wrath (which unto that same wind
Is too familiar and too much accustomed by kind)
He said I served am but well: for why laid I a part
My proper weapons, fierceness, force, and ire, and cruel heart?
And fell to fauning like a fool, which did me but disgrace?
For me is violence meet. Through this the pestred clouds I chase.
Through this I toss the Seas. Through this I turn up knottie Oaks,
And harden Snow, and beat the ground in hayle with sturdie strokes.
When I my brothers chance to get in open Air and Sky.
(For that is my field in the which my maisteries I do try)
I charge upon them with such brunt, that of our meeting smart
The Heaven between us soundes, and from the hollow Clouds does start
Enforced fire. And when I come in holes of hollow ground,
And fiersly in those empty caves do rouse my back up round,
I trouble even the ghostes, and make the very world to quake.
This help in wooing of my wife (to speed) I should have take.
Erecthey should not have been prayde my Fatherinlaw to be:
He should have been compelde thereto by stout extremity.
In speaking these or other words as sturdie, Boreas began
To flaske his wings. With wauing of the which he raised than
So great a gale, that all the earth was blasted therewithal,
And troubled was the maine broad Sea. And as he traylde his pall
Bedusted over highest tops of things, he swept the ground.
And having now in smokie clouds himself enclosed round,
Between his duskie wings he caught Orithya straught for fear,
And like a lover, very soft and easly did her bear.
And as he flew, the flames of love enkindled more and more
By means of stirring. Neither did he stay his flight before
He came within the land and town of Cicons with his pray.
And there soon after being made his wife she hapt to lay
Her belly, and a pair of boys she at a burden brings,
Who else in all resembled full their mother, save in wings
The which they of their father took. Howbeit (by report)
They were not borne with wings upon their bodies in this sort.
While Calais and Zetes had no beard upon their chin,
They both were callow. But as soon as hair did once begin
In likeness of a yellow Down upon their cheeks to sprout,
Then (even as comes to pass in Birds) the feathers budded out
Together on their pinyons too, and spreaded round about
On both their sides. And finally when childhod once was spent
And youth come on, together they with other Minyes went
To Colchos in the Galley that was first deuisde in Greece,
Upon a sea as then unknown, to fetch the golden fleece.
Finis sexti Libri.
THE SEVENTH BOOK of Ouids Metamorphosis.
ANd now in ship of Pagasa the Mynies cut the seas.
And leading under endless night his age in great disease
Of scarcity was Phiney seen. and Boreas sons had chaste
Away the Maidenfaced fowls that did his victels waste.
And after suffering many things in noble Iasons band,
In muddie Phasis gushing stream at last they went a land.
There while they going to the King demand the golden fleece
Brought thither certain years before by Phryxus out of Greece,
And of their dreadful labors wait an answer to receive:
Aeetas daughter in her heart does mighty flames conceive.
And after struggling very long, when reason could not win
The upper hand of rage: she thus did in her self begin.
In vain Medea doste thou strive. some God what ere he is
Against thee bendes his force. for what a wondrous thing is this?
Is any thing like this which men do term by name of Love?
For why should I my fathers hestes esteem so hard above
All measure? sure in very deed they are too hard and sore.
Why fear I least you stranger whom I never saw before
Should perish? what should be the cause of this my fear so great?
Unhappie wench (and if thou can) suppress this uncouth heat
That burns in thy tender breast. and if so be I could,
A happy turn it were, and more at case then be I should.
But now an uncouth malady perforce against my will
Does hale me. Love persuades me one, another thing my skill.
The best I see and like: the worst I follow headlong still.
Why being of the royal blood so fondly doste thou rave,
Upon a stranger thus to dote, desiring for to have
An husband of another world? at home thou might find
A lover meet for thine estate on whom to set thy mind.
And yet it is but even a chance if he shall live or no:
God grant him for to live. I may without offense pray so,
Although I loud him not: for what has Jason trespast me?
Who would not pity Iasons youth unless they cruel be?
What creature is there but his birth and prowess might him move?
And setting all the rest aside, who would not be in love
With Iasons goodly personage? my heart assuredly
Is touched therewith. But if that I provide not remedy,
With burning breath of blasting Bulls needs sindged must he be.
Of seeds that he himself must sow a harvest shall he see
Of armed men in battle ray upon the ground up grow
Against the which it houeth him his manhood for to show.
And as a pray he must be set against the Dragon fell.
If I these things let come to pass, I may confess right well
That of a Tiger I was bred: and that within my breast
A heart more hard than any steel or stony rock does rest.
Why rather do I not his death with wrathful eyes behold?
And joy with others seeing him to utter peril sold?
Why do I not enforce the Bulls against him? why I say
Exhort I not the cruel men which shall in battle ray
Arise against him from the ground? and that same Dragon too
Within whose eyes came never sleep? God shield I so should do.
But prayer smally boots, except I put to helping hand.
And shall I like a Caytife then betray my fathers land?
Shall I a stranger save whom we nor none of ours does know?
That he by me preserved may without me homeward row?
And take another to his wife, and leave me wretched wight
To torments? If I wist that he could work me such a spite,
Or could in any others love than only mine delight,
The Churl should die for me. But sure he bears not the face
Like one that would do so. His birth, his courage, and his grace
Do put me clearly out of doubt he will not me deceive,
No nor forget the great good turns he shall by me receive.
Yet shall he to me first his faith for more assurance plight
And solemly he shall be sworn to keep the covenant right.
Why fearste thou now without a cause? step to it out of hand:
And do not any longer time thus lingering fondly stand.
For ay shall Jason think himself beholding unto thee:
And shall thee marry solemly: yea honored shall thou be
Of all the Mothers great and small throughout the towns of Greece
For saving of their sons that come to fetch the golden fleece.
And shall I then leave brother, sister, father, kith and kin?
And household Gods, and native soil, and all that is therein?
And sail I know not whither with a stranger? yea: why not?
My father surely cruel is, my Country rude God wot:
My brother yet a very babe: my sister I dare say
Contented is with all her heart that I should go away:
The greatest God is in my self: the things I do forsake
Are trifles in comparison of those that I shall take.
For saving of the Greekish ship renoumed shall I be.
A better place I shall enjoy with Cities rich and free,
Whose fame does flourish fresh even here, and people that excel
In civil life and all good Arts: and whom I would not sell
For all the goods within the world Duke Aesons noble son.
Whom had I to my lawful Feere assuredly once won,
Most happy yea and blessed of God I might my self account,
And with my head above the stars to heaven I should surmount.
But men report that certain rocks (I know not what) do meet
Amid the waves, and monstruously again a sunder fleet:
And how Charybdis utter foe to ships that pass thereby
Now sowpeth in now speweth out the Sea incessantly:
And ravening Scylla being hemde with cruel dogs about,
Amids the gulf of Sicilie does make a barking out.
What skilleth that? As long as I enjoy the thing I love,
And hang about my Iasons neck, it shall no whit me move
To sail the dangerous Seas: as long as him I may embrace
I cannot surely be afraid in any kind of case.
Or if I chance to be afraid, my fear shall only tend
But for my husband. Callste thou him thy husband? doste pretend
Gay titles to thy foul offense Medea? nay not so:
But rather look about how great a lewdness thou doste go.
And shun the mischief while thou may. She had no sooner said
These words, but right and godliness and shamefastness were staid
Before her eyes, and frantic love did fly away dismayed.
She went me to an Altar that was dedicate of old
To Perseys daughter Hecate (of whom the witches hold
As of their Goddess) standing in a thick and secret wood
So close it could not well be spide: and now the raging mood
Of furious love was well alaide and clearly put to flight:
When spying Aesons son, the flame that seemed quenched quight
Did kindle out of hand again. Her cheeks began to glowe,
And flushing over all her face the scarlet blood did flow.
And even as when a little spark that was in ashes hid,
Uncouered with the whisking winds is from the ashes rid,
Ef^soones it takes nourishment and kindles in such wise,
That to his former strength again and flaming it does rise:
Even so her quailed love which late ye would have thought had quight
Been vanished out of mind, as soon as Jason came in sight
Did kindle to his former force in vewing of the grace
With which he did auaunce himself then coming there in place.
And (as it chanced) far more fair and beautiful of face
She thought him then than ever erst. but sure it does behoue
Her judgment should be borne withal because she was in love.
She gapte and gased in his face with fixed staring eyes
As though she never had him seen before that instant time.
So far she was beside her self ^he thought it should not be
The face of any worldly wight the which she then did see.
She was not able for her life to turn her eyes away.
But when he took her by the hand and speaking began to pray
Her softly for to succor him, and promisde faithfully
To take her to his wedded wife, she falling by and by
A weeping, said. Sir, what I do I see apparently.
Not want of knowledge of the truth, but love shall me deceive.
You shall be saved by my means. And now I must receive
A faithful promise at your hand for saving of your life.
He made a solemn vow, and swear to take her to his wife,
By triple Hecates holy rites, and by what other power
So ever else had residence within that secret bower.
And by the Sire of him that should his Fathrinlaw become
Who all things does behold, and as he hopte to overcome
The dreadful dangers which he had soon after to assay.
Duke Jason being credited receiude of her straight way
Enchaunted herbs: and having learnde the usage of the same,
Departed thence with merry heart, and to his lodging came.
Next Morn had chast^ y^ streaming stars: and folk by heaps did flock
To Marsis sacred field, and there stood thronging in a shocke,
To see the strange pastimes. The King most stately to behold
With yuorie Mace above them all did sit in throne of gold.
Anon the brazenhoued Bulls from stony nosethrils cast
Out flakes of fire: their scalding breath the growing grass did blast.
And look what noise a chimney full of burning fuel makes,
Or Flint in softning in the Kell when first the fire it takes
By sprincling water thereupon: such noise their boiling breasts
Turmoyling with the fiery flames enclosed in their chests,
Such noise their scorched throtebolles make. yet stoutly Jason went
To meet them. They their dreadful eyes against him grimly bent,
And eke their horns with iron tipped: and struck the dust about
In stamping with their cloven clees: and with their belowing out
Set all the field upon a smoke. The Myneis seeing that
Were past their wits with sudden fear. but Jason feeled not
So much as any breath of theirs: such strength has sorcerie.
Their dangling Dewlaps with his hand he coyd vnfearfully.
And putting yokes upon their necks he forced them to draw
The heavy burden of the plough which erst they never saw,
And for to break the field which erst had never felt the share.
The men of Colchos seeing this, like men amazed fare.
The Mynies with their shouting out their mazednesse augment.
And unto Jason therewithal give more encouragement.
Then in a soldiers cap of steel a Uipers teeth he takes,
And sowes them in the new plowde field. the ground the^ soking makes
The seed foresteepte in poison strong, both supple lithe and soft,
And of these teeth a right strange grain there grows anon aloft.
For even as in the mothers womb an infant does begin
To take the lively shape of man, and formed is within
To due proportion piece by piece in every limme, and when
Full ripe he is, he takes the use of Air with other men:
So when that of the Uipers teeth the perfect shape of man
Within the bowels of the earth was formed, they began
To rise together orderly upon the fruitful field:
And (which a greater wonder is) immediately they wielde
Their weapons growing up with them. who^ when the Greeks behilde
Preparing for to push their Pikes (which sharply headed were)
In Iasons face, down went their heads, their hearts did faint for fear:
And also she that made him safe began abasht to be.
For when against one naked man so huge an army she
Beheld of armed enmies bent, her color did abate
And suddenly both void of blood and lively heat she sat.
And least the chaunted weeds the which she had him given before
Should fail at need, a helping charm she whispred ouermore,
And practisde other secret Arts the which she kept in store.
He casting straight a mighty stone amid his thickest foes,
Does void the battle from him self and turns it unto those.
These earthbred brothers by and by did one another wound
And never ceased till that all lay dead upon the ground.
The Greeks were glad, and in their arms did clasp their Champion stout,
And clinging to him earnestly embraced him about.
And thou O fond Medea too could well have found in heart
The Champion for to have embraste, but that withheld thou wart
By shamefastne^^e. and yet thou had embraced him, if dread
Of stayning of thine honor had not staid thee in that stead.
But yet as far forth as thou may, thou doste in heart rejoice,
And secretly (although without expressing it in voice)
Doste thank thy charms and eke the Gods as Authors of the same.
Now was remaining as the last conclusion of this game,
By force of chaunted herbs to make the wa^chfull Dragon sleep
Within whose eyes came never wink: who had in charge to keep
The goodly tree upon the which the golden fleeces hung.
With crested head, and hooked paws, and triple spirting tung.
Right ougly was he to behold. When Jason had besprent
Him with the juice of certain herbs from Lethey River sent,
And thrice had mumbled certain words which are of force to cast
So sound a sleep on things that even as dead a time they last,
Which make the raging surges calm and flowing Rivers stay.
The dreadful Dragon by and by (whose eyes before that day
Wist never erst what sleeping meant) did fall so fast a sleep
That Jason safely took the fleece of gold that he did keep.
Of which his booty being proud, he led with him away
The Author of his good su^cesse another fairer pray:
And so with conquest and a wife he loosde from Colchos strond,
And in Larissa ^auen safe did go again a land.
The ancient men of Thessalie together with their wives
To Church with offerings gone for saving of their childrens lives.
Great heaps of fuming frankincense were fried in the flame
And vowed Bulls to sacrifice with horns fair gilded came.
But from this great solemnity Duke Aeson was away,
Now at deaths door and spent with years. Then Jason thus began say.
O wife to whom I do confess I owe my life in deed,
Though al things thou to me have given, and thy deserts exceed
Belief: yet if enchauntment can, (for what so hard appears
Which strong enchauntment can not do?) abate thou from my years,
And add them to my fathers life. As he these words did speak,
The tears were standing in his eyes. His godly suit did break
Medeas heart: who therewithal be thought her of her Sire
In leaving whom she had expressed a far unlike desire.
But yet bewraying not her thoughts, she said: O Husband fie,
What wickedness has escaped your mouth? suppose you then that I
Am able of your life the term where I will to bestow?
Let Hecat never suffer that. Your suit (as well you know)
Against all right and reason is. But I will put in proof
A greater gift than you require and more for your behoof.
I will assay your fathers life by cunning to prolong,
And not with your years for to make him young again and strong:
So our threeformed Goddess grant with present help to stand
A furthrer of the great attempt the which I take in hand.
Before the Moon should circlewise close both her horns in one
Three nights were yet as then to come. As Soon as that she shone
Most full of light, and did behold the earth with fulsome face,
Medea with her hair not trust so much as in a lace,
But flaring on her shoulders twain, and barefoote, with her gown
Ungirded, gate her out of doors and wandered up and down
Alone the dead time of the night. both Man, and Beast, and Bird
Were fast a sleep: the Serpents sly in trayling forward stird
So softly as ye would have thought they still a sleep had been.
The moysting Air was whist. no leaf ye could have moving seen.
The stars alonly fair and bright did in the welkin shine
To which she lifting up her hands did thrice hirselfe incline:
And thrice with water of the brook her hair besprincled she:
And gasping thrice she opte her mouth: and bowing down her knee
Upon the bare hard ground, she said: O trus^ie time of night
Most faithful unto priuities, O golden stars whose light
Does jointly with the Moon succeed the beams that blaze by day
And thou three headed Hecate who know best the way
To compass this our great attempt and art our chiefest stay:
Ye Charms and Witchcrafts, and thou Earth which both with herb and weed
Of mighty working furnish^st the Wizardes at their need:
Ye Airs and winds: ye Elues of Hills, of Brooks, of Woods alone,
Of standing Lakes, and of the Night approach ye euerychone.
Through help of whom (the crooked banks much wondering at the thing)
I have compelled streams to run clean backward to their spring.
By charms I make the calm Seas rough, and make ye rough Seas plain*
And cover all the Sky with Clouds and chase them thence again.
By charms I rasse and lay the winds, and burst the Uipers law.
And from the bowels of the Earth both stones and trees do draw.
Whole woods and Forestes I remove: I make the Mountains shake,
And even the Earth it self to groan and fearfully to quake.
I call up dead men from their graves: and thee O light some Moon
I darken often, though beaten brass abate thy peril soon.
Our Sorcerie dimmes the Morning fair, and darkes ye Sun at Noone.
The flaming breath of fiery Bulls ye quenched for my sake
And caused their vnwieldie necks the bended yoke to take.
Among the Earthbred brothers you a mortal war did set
And brought a sleep the Dragon fell whose eyes were never shet.
By means whereof deceiving him that had the golden fleece
In charge to keep, you sent it thence by Jason into Greece.
Now have I need of herbs that can by virtue of their juice
To flowring prime of lusty youth old withred age reduce.
I am assurde ye will it grant. For not in vain have shone
These twin^ling stars, ne yet in vain this Chariot all alone
By draught of Dragons hither comes. With that was fro the Sky
A Chariot softly glaunced down, and stayed hard thereby.
As Soon as she had gotten up, and with her hand had coyd
The Dragons reined necks, and with their bridles somewhat toyd,
They mounted with her in the Air, whence looking down she saw
The pleasant Temp of Thessalie, and made her Dragons draw
To places further from resort: and there she took the view
What herbs on high mount Pelion, and what on Ossa grew.
And what on mountain Othris and on Pyndus growing were,
And what Olympus (greater than mount Pyndus far) did bear.
Such herbs of them as liked her she pullde up root and rind
Or cropped them with a hooked knife. And many she did find
Upon the banks of Apidane agreeing to her mind:
And many at Amphrisus foords: and thou Enipeus eke
Did yield her many pretty weeds of which she well did like.
Peneus and Sperchius streams contributarie were,
And so were Boebes rushie banks of such as growed there.
About Anthedon which against the I Will Euboea stands,
A certain kind of lively grass she gatherd with her hands,
The name whereof was scarsly known or what the herb could do
Until that Glau^us afterward was changed thereinto.
Nine days with winged Dragons drawn, nine nights in Chariot swift
She searching every field and frith from place to place did shift.
She was no sooner home returnde but that the Dragons fell
Which lightly of her gathered herbs had taken but the smell,
Did cast their sloughes and with their sloughes their riueled age forgo.
She would none other house than heaven to hide her head as tho:
But kept her still without the doors: and as for man was none
That once might touch her. Altars twain of Turfe she builded: one
Upon her lefthand unto Youth, another on the right
To He^at. Both the which as soon as she had dight
With Ueruin and with other shrubbes that on the fields do rise,
Not far from thence she digde two pits: and making sacrifice
Did cut a couple of black Rams throtes and filled with their blood
The open pits, on which she pourde of warm milk pure and good
A boll full, and another boll of honey clarifide.
And babbling to her self therewith full bitterly she cride
On Pluto and his ravished wife the sovereign states of Hell,
And all the Elues and Gods that on or in the Earth do dwell,
To spare old Aesons life a while, and not in have deprive
His limbs of that same aged soul which kept them yet alive.
Whom when she had sufficiently with mumbling long besought,
She bade that Aesons ^eebled corse should out of doors be brought
Before the Altars. Then with charms she cast him in so deep
A slumber, that upon the herbs he lay for dead a sleep.
Which done she willed Jason thence a great way off to go
And likewise all the Ministers that served her as tho:
And not presume those secrets with unhallowed eyes to see.
They did as she commanded them. When all were voyded, she
With scattred hair about her ears like one of Bacchus froes
Devoutly by and by about the burning Altars goes:
And dipping in the pits of blood a sort of clif^ed brandes
Upon the Altars kindled them that were on both her hands.
And thrice with brimstone, thrice with fire, and thrice with water pure
She purged Aesons aged corse that slept and slumbred sure.
The medicine seething all the while a wallop in a pan
Of brass, to spirt and leap a loft and gather froth began.
There boiled she the roots, seeds, flowers, leaves, stalks and juice together
Which from the fields of Thessalie she late had gathered thither.
She cast in also precious stones fetched from the furthest East
And which the ebbing Ocean washed fine gravel from the West.
She put thereto the deaw that fell upon a Monday night:
And flesh and feathers of a Witch a cursed odious wight
Which in the likeness of an Owl abroad a nights did fly,
And Infants in their cradels change or suck them that they die.
The singles also of a A Ware wolf.
Wolf which when he list could take
The shape of man, and when he list the same again forsake.
And from the River Cyniphis which is in Lybie land
She had the fine sheere scaled filmes of water snayles at hand.
And of an endlesseliued heart the liver had she got.
To which she added of a Crow that then had lived not
So little as nine hundred years the head and Bill also.
Now when Medea had with these and with a thousand mo
Such other kind of namelesse things bestead her purpose through
For lengthning of the old man's life, she took a withered bough
Cut lately from an Olyf tree, and iumbling all together
Did raise the bottom to the brim: and as she stirred hither
And thither with the withered stick, behold it waxed green.
Anon the leaves came budding out: and suddenly were seen
As many berries dangling down as well the bough could bear.
And where the fire had from the pan the scumming cast, or where
The scalding drops did fall, the ground did springlike flourish there,
And flowers with fodder fine and soft immediately arose.
Which when Medea did behold, with naked knife she goes
And cuttes the old man's throat: and letting all his old blood go
Supplies it with the boiled juice: the which when Aeson tho
Had at his mouth or at his wound received in, his hear
As well of head as beard from gray to coleblacke turned were.
His lean, pale, hoar, and withered corse grew fulsome, fair and fresh:
His furrowed wrincles were fulfilde with young and lusty flesh.
His limbs waxt frolic, baine and lithe: at which he wondering much,
Remembered that at forty years he was the same or such.
And as from dull vnwieldsome age to youth he backward drew:
Even so a lively youthful spright did in his heart renew.
The wonder of this monstrous act had Bacchus seen from hie.
And finding that to youthful years his Nurses might thereby
Restored be, did at her hand receive it as a gift.
And least deceitful guile should cease, Medea found a shift
To feyne that Jason and her self were fallen at odds in wroth:
And thereupon in humble wise to Pelias Court she goth.
Wh^re forbicause the King himself was feebled sore with age,
His daughters entertainde her whom Medea being sage,
Within a while through false pretense of feyned friendship brought
To take her bait. For as she told what pleasures she had wrought
For Jason, and among the rest as greatest sadly told
How she had made his father young that withred was and old,
And tarried long upon that point: they hoped glad and feign
That their old father might likewise his youthful years regaine.
And this they craving instantly did proffer for her pain
What recompense she would desire. She held her peace a while
As though she doubted what to do: and with her subtle guile
Of counterfetted gravity more eger did them make.
As Soon as she had promisde them to do it for their sake,
For more assurance of my grant, your selves (quoth she) shall see
The oldest Ram in all your flock a Lamb straight made to be
By force of my confections strong. Immediately a Ram
So old that no man thereabouts remembered him a Lam*
Was thither by his warped horns which turned inward to
To his hollow Temples, drawn: whose withred throat she slit in two.
And when she clean had drayned out that little blood that was
Upon the fire with herbs of strength she set a pan of brass,
And cast his carcass thereinto. The Medcine did abate
The largeness of his limbs and seard his dossers from his pate,
And with his horns abridgde his years. Anon was plainly heard
The bleating of a new yea^d Lamb from mid the Ketleward.
And as they wondered for to hear the bleating, straight the Lam
Leapt out, and frisking ran to seek the vdder of some Dam.
King Pelias daughters were amazde and when they did behold
Her promise come to such effect, they were a thousand fold
More earnest at her than before. Thrice Phoebus having plucked
The Collars from his horses necks, in Iber had them duckt.
And now in Heaven the streaming stars the fourth night shined clear:
When false Medea on the fire had hanged water shere.
With herbs that had no power at all. The King and all his guard
Which had the charge that night about his person for to ward
Were through her nightspels and her charms in deadly sleep all cast.
And Pelias daughters with the Witch which eggde them forward, past
Into his chamber by the watch, and compast in his bed.
Then: wherefore stand ye doubting thus like fools Medea sed.
On: draw your swords: and let ye out his old blood, that I may
Fill up his empty veins again with youthful blood straight way.
Your fathers life is in your hands: it lies now in you
To have him old and withred still or young and lusty. Now
If any nature in ye be, and that ye do not feed
A fruitelesse hope, your duty to your father do with speed.
Expulse his age by sword, and let the filthy matter out.
Through these persuasions which of them so ever went about
To show hirselfe most natural, became the first that wrought
Against all nature: and for fear she should be wicked thought,
She executes the wickedness which most to shun she sought.
Yet was not any one of them so bold that durst abide
To look upon their father when she struck, but wride aside
Her eyes: and so their cruel hands not marking where they hit
With faces turnde another way at all adventure (...).
He all beweltred in his blood awaked with the smart,
And maimde and mangled as he was did give a sodeyne start
Endeavoring to have risen up. but when he did behold
Himself among so many swords, he lifting up his old
Pale wary^sh arms, said: daughters mine what do ye? who has put
These wicked weapons in your hands your fathers throat to cut?
With that their hearts and hands did faint. And as he talked yet,
Medea breaking of his words, his windpipe quickly slit,
And in the scalding liquor torn did drown him by and by.
But had she not with winged worms straight mounted in the sky
She had not escaped punishment. but stying up on hie
She over shadie Pelion flew where Chyron erst did dwell,
And over Othrys and the grounds renowinde for that befell
To ancient Ceramb: who such time as old Deucalions flood
Upon the face of all the Earth like one maine water stood,
By help of Nymphs with fethered wings was in the Air lift,
And so escaped from the flood vndrowned by the shift.
She left Aeolian Pytanie upon her left hand: and
The Serpent that became a stone upon the Lesbian sand.
And Ida woods where Bacchus hid a Bullock (as is said)
In shape of Stag the which his son had theeuishly conuayde.
And where the Sire of Corytus lies buried in the dust.
The fields which Meras (when he first did into barking brust)
Affraide with strangeness of the noise. And eke Eurypils town
In which the wives of Cos had horns like Oxen on their crown
Such time as Hercles with his host departed from the I Will.
And Rhodes to Phoebus consecrate: and Ialyse where ere while
The Telchines with their noisome sight did every thing bewitch.
At which their heinous wickedness Jove taking rightful pritch,
Did drown them in his brothers waves. Moreover she did pass
By Ceos and old Carthey walls where Sir Alcidamas
Did wonder how his daughter should be turned to a Dove.
The Swannie Temp and Hyries Poole she viewed from above,
The which a sodeine Swan did haunt. For Phyllie there for love
Of Hyries son did at his bidding Birds and Lions tame,
And being willde to break a Bull performed straight the same:
Till wrothfull that his love so often so straightly should him use,
When for his last reward he asked the Bull, he did refuse
To give it him. The boy displeasde, said: well: thou will anon
Repent thou gave it not: and leapt down headlong from a stone.
They all supposde he had been fallen: but being made a Swan
With snowie feathers in the Air to flacker he began.
His mother Hyrie knowing not he was preserved so,
Resolved into melting tears for pensiveness and woe,
And made the Poole that bears her name. Not far from hence does stand
The City Brauron, where sometime by mounting from the land
With wauing pinions Ophyes ympe dame Comb did eschew
Her children which with naked swords to slay her did pursue.
Anon she kend Calaurie fields which did sometime pertain
To chaste Diana where a King and eke his wife both twain
Were turnde to Birds. Cyllene hill upon her right hand stood,
In which Menephron like a beast of wild and savage mood
To force his mother did attempt. Far thence she spide where sad
Cephisus mourned for his Niece whom Phoebus turned had
To ugly shape of swelling Seal: and Eumelles palace fair
Lamenting for his sons mischaunce with whewling in the Air.
At Corinth with her winged Snakes at length she did arrive.
Here men (so ancient fathers said that were as then alive)
Did breed of deawie Mushrommes. But after that her teene
With burning of her husbands bride by witchcraft wreakt had been
And that King Creons palace she on blasing fire had seen,
And in her own dear childrens blood had bathde her wicked knife
Not like a mother but a beast bereuing them of life:
Least Jason should have punished her she took her winged Snakes,
And flying thence again in haste to Pallas City makes,
Which saw the ancient Periphas and rightuous Phiney to
Together flying, and the Niece of Polypemon who
Was fastened to a pair of wings as well as the other two.
Aegeus enterteinde her wherein he was too blame
Although he had no further gone but staid upon the same,
He thought it not to be enough to use her as his guest
Unless he took her too his wife. And now was Thesey pressed,
Unknown unto his father yet, who by his knightly force
Had set from robbers clear the balke that makes the straight divorce
Between the seas Ionian and Aegean. To have killde
This worthy knight, Medea had a Goblet ready fillde
With juice of Flintwoort venomous the which she long ago
Had out of Scythie with her brought. The common brute is so
That of the teeth of Cerberus this Flintwoort first did grow.
There is a cave that gapeth wide with darksome entry low,
There goes a way slope down by which with triple cheyne made new
Of strong and sturdie Adamant the valiant Her^le drew
The currish Helhounde Cerberus: who dragging arsward still
And writhing back his scowling eyes because he had no skill
To see the Sun and open day, for very moodie wroth
Three barkings yelled out at once, and spit his slauering froth
Upon the greenish grass. This froth (as men suppose) took root
And thriuing in the batling soil in burgeous forth did shoot,
To bane and mischief men withal: and forbicause the same
Did grow upon the bare hard Flints, folk gave the foresaid name
Of Flintwoort thereunto. The King by egging of his Queen
Did reach his soon this bane as if he had his enmie been.
And Thesey ^f this treason wrought not knowing ought had taken
The Goblet at his fathers hand which held his deadly bane:
When suddenly by the Iuor^e hi^^s that were upon his sword
Aegeus knew he was his son: and rising from the board
Did strike the mischie^e from his mouth. Medea with a charm
Did cast a mist and so scapte death deserved for the harm
Intended. Now albeit that Aegeus were right glad
That in the saving of his son so happy chance he had,
Yet grieved it his heart full sore that such a wicked wight
With treason wrought against his son should escape so clear and quight.
Then fell he unto kindling fire on Altars every where
And glutted all the Gods with gifts. The thick neckt Oxen were
With garlands wreathd about their horns knocked down for sacrifice.
A day of more solemnity than this did never rise
Before on Athens (by report.) The ancients of the Town
Made feasts: so did the meaner sort, and every common clown.
And as the wine did sharp their wits, they sung this song. O knight
Of peerlesse prowess Theseus, thy manhod and thy might
Through all the coast of Marathon with worthy honor soundes,
For killing of the Cretish Bull that wasted those same grounds.
The folk of Cremyon think themselves beholden unto thee.
For that without disquietting their fields may tilled be.
By thee the land of Epidaure beheld the clubbish son
Of Vulcane dead. By thee likewise the country that does run
Along Cephisus banks beheld the fell Procrustes slain.
The dwelling place of Ceres our Eleusis glad and feign
Beheld the death of Cercyon. That orpid Sinis who
Abused his strength in bending trees and tying folk thereto,
Their limbs a sunder for to tear when loosened from the stops
The trees unto their proper place did trice their streyned tops,
Was kilde by thee. Thou made the way that leads to the town
Alcathoe in Beotia clear by putting Scyron down.
To this same outlawes scattred bones the land denied rest,
And likewise did the Sea refuse to harbrough such a guest:
Till after floting to and fro long while as men do say
At length they hardened into stones: and at this present day
The stones are called Scyrons cliffes. Now if we should account
Thy deeds together with thy years, thy deeds would far surmount
Thy years. For thee most valiant Prince these public vows we keep
For thee with cherefull hearts we quaffe these bolles of wine so deep.
The Palace also of the noise and shouting did resounde
The which the people made for joy. There was not to be found
In all the City any place of sadness. Nathelesse
(So hard it is of perfect joy to find so great excess,
But that some sorrow therewithal is meddled more or less,)
Aegeus had not in his sons recovery such delight,
But that there followed in the neck a piece of fortunes spite.
King Minos was preparing war. who though he had great store
Of ships and soldiers yet the wrath the which he had before
Conceived in his fathers breast for murthring of his son
Androgeus made him far more strong and fiercer for to run
To rightful battle to revenge the great displeasure done.
Howbeit he thought it best ere he his warfare did begin
To find the means of foreign aides some friendship for to win.
And thereupon with flying fleet where passage did permit
He went to visit all the Isles that in those seas do fit.
Anon the Isles Astypaley and Anaphey both twain
The first constreynde for fear of war the last in hope of gain
Took part with him. Low Myconey did also with him hold
So did the chalkie Cymoley, and Syphney which of old
Was very rich with veins of gold, and Scyros full of bold
And valiant men, and Seryphey the smooth or rather fell,
And Parey which for Marblestone does bear away the bell.
And Sythney which a wicked wench callde Arne did betray
For money: who upon receipt thereof without delay
Was turned to a bird which yet of gold is gripple still,
And is as black as any cole, both feathers, feet and bill.
A Cadowe is the name of her. But yet Olyarey,
And Didymey, and Andrey eke, and Tene, and Gyarey,
And Pepareth where Olive trees most plenteously do grow,
In no wise would agree their help on Minos to bestow.
Then Minos turning lefthandwise did sail to Oenope
Where reignde that time King Aeacus. This I Will had called be
Of old by name of Oenope: but Aeacus turnde the name
And after of his mothers name Aegina callde the same.
The common folk ran out by heaps desirous for to see
A man of such renown as Minos bruted was to be.
The Kings three sons Duke Telamon Duke Peley, and the young
Duke Phocus went to meet with him. Old Aeacus also clung
With age, came after leysurely, and asked him the cause
Of his repair. The ruler of the hundred Shires began pause:
And musing on the inward grief that nipt him at the heart,
Did shape him answer thus. O Prince vouchsafe to take my part
In this same godly war of mine: assist me in the just
Reuengement of my murthred son that sleeps in the dust.
I crave your comfort for his death. Aeginas son replide:
Thy suite is vain: and of my Realm perforce must be denide.
For unto Athens is no land more sure than this alide:
Such leagues between us are which shall infringde for me abide.
Away went Minos sad: and said: full dearly shall thou bie
Thy leagues. He thought it for to be a better policy
To threaten war than war to make, and there to spend his store
And strength which in his other needs might much avail him more.
As yet might from Oenopia walls the Cretish fleet be kend.
When thitherward with puffed sails and wind at will did tend
A ship from Athens, which anon arriving at the strand
Set Cephal with Ambassade from his Countrymen a land.
The Kings three sons though long it were since last they had him seen:
Yet knew they him. And after old acquaintance eft had been
Renewde by shaking hands, to Court they did him straight convey
This Prince which did allure the eyes of all men by the way,
As in whose stately person still remained to be seen
The marks of beauty which in flower of former years had been
Went holding out on Olife branch that grew in Atticke land
And for the reverence of his age there went on either hand
A Nobleman of younger years. Sir Clytus on the right
And Butes on the left, the sons of one that Pallas h^ght.
When greeting first had past between these Nobles and the King,
Then Cephal setting straight a broche the message he did bring,
Desired aid: and shewde what leagues stood then in sorce between
His country and the Aeginites, and also what had been
Decreed betwixt their aunceters, concluding in the end
That under color of this war which Minos did pretend
To only Athens, he in deed the conquest did intend
Of all Achaia. When he thus by help of learned skill
His country message furthred had, King Aeacus leaning still
His left hand on his scepter, said. My Lords, I would not have
Your state of Athens seem so strange as succor here to crave.
I pray command. For be ye sure that what this I Will can make
Is yours. Yea all that ere I have shall hazard for your sake.
I want no strength. I have such store of soldiers, that I may
Both vex my foes and also keep my Realm in quiet stay.
And now I think me blessed of God that time does serve to show
Without excuse the great good will that I to Athens owe.
God hold it sir (quod Cephalus) God make the number grow
Of people in this town of yours: it did me good a late
When such a goodly sort of youth of all one age and rate
Did meet me in the street. but yet me thinks that many miss
Which at my former being here I have beheld ere this.
At that the King did ^igh, and thus with plaintfull voice did say.
A sad beginning aft^rward in better luck did stay.
I would I plainly could the same before your faces lay.
Howbeit I will disorderly repeat it as I may.
And least I seem to weary you with ouerlong delay,
The men that you so mindefully enquire for lie in ground
And naught of them save bones and dust remains to be found.
But as it hapt what loss thereby did unto me redound?
A cruel plague through Iunos wrath who dreadfully did hate
This Land that of her husbands Love did take the name of late,
Upon my people fell: as long as that the malady
None other seemde than such as haunts man's nature usually,
And of so great mortality the hurtful cause was hid,
We strove by Physic of the same the Pacients for to rid.
The mischief ouermaistred Art: yea Physic was to seek
To do it self good. First the Air with fogg^e stinking reeke
Did daily ouerdreepe the earth: and close culme Clouds did make
The wether faint: and while the Moon four time her light did take
And fillde her empty horns therewith, and did as often slake:
The warm South winds with deadly heat continually did blow.
Infected were the Springs, and Ponds, and streams that ebb and flow.
And swarms of Serpents crawld about the fields that lay vntillde
Which with their poison even the brooks and running waters fillde.
In sudden dropping down of Dogs, of Horses, Sheep and Kine,
Of Birds and Beasts both wild and tame as Oxen, Wolves, and Swine,
The mischief of this secret sore first outwardly appeeres.
The wretched Plowman was amazde to see his sturdie Steeres
Amid the ^orrow sinking down ere half his work was done.
Whole flocks of sheep did faintly bleate, and therewithal begone
Their fleeces for to fall away and leave the naked skin,
And all their bodies with the rot attainted were within.
The lusty Horse that erst was fierce in field renown to win
Against his kind grew cowardly: and now forgetting quight
The ancient honor which he pr^ast so often to get in fight,
Stood sighing sadly at the Rack as waiting for to yield
His weary life without renown of combat in the field.
The Boar to chafe, the Hind to run, the cruel Bear to fall
Upon the herdes of Rother beasts had now no lust at all.
A languishing was fallen on all. In ways, in woods, in plains,
The filthy cario^s lay, whose stinche, the Air it self distaines.
(A wondrous thing to tell) not Dogs, not ravening Fowls, nor yet
Horec^ted Wolves would once attempt to taste of them a bit.
Look where they fell, there rotted they: and with their savor bred
More harm, and further still abroad the foul infection spread.
With loss that touched yet more nere, on Husbandmen it crept,
And ragingly within the walls of this great City ^^ept.
It took men first with swelting heat that scalt their guts within:
The signs whereof were steaming breath and fiery colourde skin
The tongue was harsh and swollen, the mouth through drought of burning veins
Lay gaping up to hale in breath, and as the pacient streines,
To draw it in, he suckes therewith corrupted Air beside.
No bed, no clothes though nere so thin the pacients could abide.
But laid their hardened stomachs flat against the bare cold ground
Yet no abatement of the heat therein their bodies found:
But h^t the earth, and as for Leache was none that help could hight
The Surgians and Physicians too were in the self same plight.
Their cur^l^sse cunning hurt themselves. The nerer any man
Approaches his diseased friend, and does the best he can
To succor him most faithfully, the sooner did he catch
His bane. All hope of health was gone. No easment nor dispatch
Of this disease except in death and burial did they find.
Look whereunto that each man's mind and fancy was enclinde,
That followed he. he never past what was for his behoof.
For why? that naught could do them good was felt too much by proof.
In every place without respect of shame or honesty
At Wels, at brooks, at ponds, at pits, by swarms they thronging lie:
But sooner might they quench their life than stau^ch their thirst thereby.
And therewithal so heavy and vnwieldie they become,
That wanting power to rise again, they died there. Yet some
The self same waters guzled still without regard of fear,
So weary of their loathsome beds the wretched people were,
That out they lept: or if to stand their feeble force denide,
They wallowed down and out of doors immediately them hide:
It was a death to every man his own house to abide.
And for they did not know the cause whereof the sickness came,
The place (because they did it know) was blamed for the same.
Ye should have seen some half sord^ad go plundring here and there
By highways sides while that their legs were able them to bear.
And some lie weeping on the ground or rolling piteously
Their weary eyes which afterward should never see the Sky:
Or stretching out their l^^mes to Heaven that ouerhangs on hie,
Some here, some there, and yonder some, in what so ever cost
Death finding them enforced them to yield their fainting Ghost.
What heart had I suppose you then, or ought I then to have?
In faith I might have lothde my life, and wished me in my grave
As other of my people were. I could not cast mine eye
In any place, but that dead folk there strowed I did spy
Even like as from a shaken twig when rotten Apples drop,
Or Mast from Beches, Holmes or Oaks when Poales do scare their top.
Yo^ stately Church with greeces long against our Court you see:
It is the shrine of Jupiter. What Wight was he or she
That on those Altars burned not their frankincense in vain?
How often, yea even with Frankincense that partly did remain
Still unconsumed in their hands, did die both man and wife?
As each of them with mutual care did pray for others life?
How often did the mother there in sewing for her son,
Unheard upon the Altarstone, her prayer scarce begone?
How often at the Temple door even while the Priest did bid
His Beads, and pour pure wine between their horns, at sudden slid
The Oxen down without stroke given? Yea once when I had thought
My self by offering sacrifice Jove's favor to have sought,
For me, my Realm, and these three ymps, the Ox with grievous groan
Upon the sudden sunk me down: and little blood or none
Did issue scarce to stain the knife with which they slit his throat.
The sickly inwardes eke had lost the signs whereby we note
What things the Gods for certainty would warn us of before:
For even the very bowels were attainted with the sore.
Before the holy Temple doors, and (that the death might be
The more dispitefull) even before the Altars did I see
The stinking corses scattred. Some with haltars slopt their wind,
By death expulsing fear of death: and of a wilful mind
Did haste their end, which of it self was coming on a pace.
The bodies which the plague had slain were (O most wretched case)
Not carried forth to burial now. For why such store there was
That scarce the gates were wide enough for Coffins forth to pass.
So either lothly on the ground unburied did they lie,
Or else without solemnity were burnt in bonfires hie
No reverence nor regard was had. Men fell together by
The ears for firing. In the fire that was prepared for one
Another strangers corse was burnt. And lastly few or none
Were left to mourn. The fillie souls of Mothers with their small
And tender babes, and age with youth as Fortune did befall
Went wandering ghastly up and down vnmourned for at all.
In fine so far outrageously this helpelesse Murren raues,
There was not wood enough for fire, nor ground enough for graves.
Astnoied at the stourenesse of so stout a storm of ills
I said O father Jupiter whose mighty power fulfills
Both Heaven and Earth, if flying fame report thee not amiss
In vouching that thou did embrace in way of Love ere this
The River Asops daughter fair Aegina even by name,
And that to take me for thy son thou count it not a shame:
Restore thou me my folk again, or kill thou me likewise.
He gave a sign by sudden flash of lightning from the Skies,
And double peale of Thundercracks. I take this same (quod I)
And as I take it for a true and certain sign whereby
Thou do confirm me for thy son: so also let it be
A hansell of some happy luck thou mindest unto me.
Hard by us as it hapt that time, there was an Oken tree
With spreaded arms as bare of boughs as lightly one shall see.
This tr^e (as all the rest of Oaks) was sacred unto Jove
And sprouted of an Acorne which was fet from Dodon grove.
Here marked we how the pretty Ants the gatherers up of grain
One following other all along in order of a train,
Great burdens in their little mouths did painfully sustain*
And nimbly up the rugged bark their beaten path maintain.
As wondering at the swarm I stood, I said, O father dear
As many people give thou me, as Ants are creeping here.
And fill mine empty walls again. Anon the Oak did quake,
And vnconstreynde of any blast, his lofty branches shake,
The which did yield a certain sound. With that for dreadful fear
A ^huddring through my body struck and up stood stiff my hear.
But yet I kissed reverently the ground and eke the tree.
Howbeit I durst not be so bold of hope acknowne to be.
Yet hoped I: and in my heart did shroude my secret hope.
Anon came night: and sleep upon my careful carcass crope.
Me thought I saw the self same Oak with all his boughs and twigs,
And all the Pismeres creeping still upon his tawnts and sprigs.
Which trembling with a sudden brayd these Harvest folk of threw
And shed them on the ground about, who on the sudden grew
In bigness more and more. and from the earth themselves did lift:
And stood upright against the tree: and therewithal did shift
Their meygernesse, and coleblacke hue, and number of their feet:
And clad their limbs with shape of man. Away my sleep did fleet.
And when I wooke, misliking of my dream I made my moan
That in the Gods I did perceive but slender help or none.
But straight much trampling up and down and shuffling did I hear
And (which to me that present time did very strange appear)
Of people talking in my house me thought I heard the rear.
Now while I musing on the same supposde it to have been
Some fancy of the foolish dream which lately I had seen,
Behold, in comes me Telamon in have, and thrusting open
My Chamber door, said: Sir, a sight of things surmounting hope
And credit shall you have: come forth. Forth came I by and by
And even such men for all the world there standing did I spy
As in my sleep I dreamed of, and knew them for the same.
They coming to me greeted me their sovereign Lord by name.
And I (my vows to Jove performde) my City did divide
Among my new inhabiters: and gave them land beside
Which by decease of such as were late owners of the same
Lay wast. And in remembrance of the race whereof they came,
The name of Emets I them gave. Their persons you have seen:
Their disposition is the same that erst in them has been.
They are a sparing kind of folk, on labor wholly set,
A gatherer, and an hoorder up of such as they do get.
These fellows being like in years and courage of the mind,
Shall go a warfare wy as soon as that the Eastern wind
Which brought you hither luckely, (the Eastern wind was it
That brought them thither) turning, to the Southern coast do (...).
With this and other such like talk they brought the day to end.
The Even in feasting, and the night in sleeping they did spend.
The Sun next Morrow in the heaven with golden beams did burn,
And still the Eastern wind did blow and hold them from return.
Sir Pallas sons to Cephal came (for he their elder was)
And he and they to Aeacus Court together forth did pass.
The King as yet was fast a sleep. Duke Phocus at the gate
Did meet them, and received them according to their state.
For Telamon and Peleus already forth were gone,
To muster Soldiers for the wars. So Phocus all alone
Did lead them to an inner room, where goodly Parlours were,
And caused them to sit them down. As he was also there
Now sitting with them, he beheld a Dart in Cephals hand
With golden head, the steal whereof he well might understand
Was of some strange and unknown tree. when certain talk had past
A while of other matters there, I am (quoth he) at last
A man that has delight in woods and loves to follow game
And yet I am not able sure by any means to ame
What wood your Iaueling steal is of. Of Ash it can not be.
For then the color should be brown. and if of Cornell tree,
It would be full of knubbed knots. I know not what it is:
But sure mine e^es did never see a fairer Dart than this.
The one of those same brethren twain replying to him said:
Nay then the special property will make you more dismayed,
Than does the beauty of this Dart. It hitteth whatsoever
He throws it at. The stroke thereof by Chance is ruled never.
For h^uing done his feate, it flies all bloody back again
Without the help of any hand. The Prince was earnest then
To know the truth of all: as whence so rich a present came,
Who gave it him, and where^pon the party gave the same.
Duke Cephal answerde his d^maund in all points (one except)
The which (as known apparently) for shame he ouerlept:
^is beauty namely, for the which he did receive the Dart.
And ^or the loss of his dear wife right pensive at the heart.
He thus began with weeping eyes. This Dart O Goddess son
(Ye ill would think it) makes me yirne, and long shall make me done,
If long the Gods do give me life. This weapon has undone
My dear beloved wife and me. O would to God this same
Had never unto me been given. There was a noble Dame
That Procris hight (but you perchance have oftener heard the name
Of great Orythia whose renown was bru^ed so by fame,
That blustering Boreas ravished her.) To this Orythia she
Was sister. If a body should compare in each degree
The face and natures of them both, he could none other deem
But Procris worthier of the twain of rauishment should seem.
Her father and our mutual love did make us man and wife.
Men said I had (and so I had in deed) a happy life.
Howbeit Gods will was otherwise. for had it pleased him
Of all this while, and even still yet in pleasure should I swim.
The second Month that she and I by band of lawful bed
Had ioynde together been, as I my masking Toils did spread,
To overthrow the horned Stags, the early Morning gray
Then newly having chased night and gun to break the day,
From Mount Hymettus highest tops that freshly flourish ay,
Espide me, and against my will conueyde me quight away.
I trust the Goddess will not be offended that I say
The troth of her. Although it would delight one to behold
Her ruddie cheeks: although of day and night the bounds she hold:
Although on juice of Ambrosie continually she feed:
Yet Procris was the only Wight that I did love in deed.
On Procris only was my heart: none other word had I
But Procris only in my mouth: still Procris did I cry.
It vpned what a holy thing was wedlock: and how late
It was ago since she and I were coupled in that state.
Which band (and specially so soon) it were a shame to break.
The Goddess being moved at the words that I did speak,
Said: cease thy plaint thou Carle, and keep thy Procris still for me.
But (if my mind deceive me not) the time will shortly be
That wish thou will thou had her not. And so in anger she
To Procris sent me back again. in going homeward as
Upon the Goddess sayings with my self I musing was,
I began to dread bad measures least my wife had made some escape.
Her youthful years begarnished with beauty, grace and shape,
In manner made me to believe the deed already done.
Again her manners did forbid mistrusting over soon.
But I had b^ne away: but even the same from whom I come
A shrewde example gave how lightly wives do run in blame:
But we poor Lovers are afraid of al things. Hereupon
I thought to practice feats: which thing repented me anon:
And shall repent me while I live. The purpose of my drifts
Was for tassault her honesty with great rewards and gifts.
The Morning fooding this my fear, to further my device,
My shape (which thing me thought I felt) had altered with a trice.
By means whereof anon unknown to Pallas town I came,
And entered so my house: the house was clearly void of blame:
And showed signs of chastity in mourning ever since
Their master had been rapt away. A thousand means wherewith
To come to Procris speech had I deuisde: and scarce at last
Obteinde I it. As Soon as I mine eye upon her cast,
My wits were ravished in such wise that nigh I had forgot
The purposde trial of her troth. right much a do God wo^
I had to hold mine own that I the truth bewrayed not.
To keep my self from kissing her full much a do I had
As reason was I should have done. She looked very sad.
And yet as sadly as she lookte, no Wight alive can show
A better countenance than did she. Her heart did inward glow
In longing for her absent spouse. How beautiful a face
Think you Sir Phocus was in her whom sorrow so did grace?
What should I make report how often her chaste behavior straue
And overcame most constantly the great assaults I gave?
Or tell how often she shet me up with these same words? To one
(Where ere he is) I keep my self, and none but he alone
Shall sure enjoy the use of me. What creature having his
Wits perfect would not be content with such a proof as this
Of her most steadfast chastity? I could not be content:
But still to purchase to my self more woe I further went.
At last by profering endless wealth, and heaping gifts on gifts,
In ouerlading her with words I drove her to her shifts.
Then cride I out: Thine evil heart my self I tardie take.
Where of a strange aduouterer the countenance I did make,
I am in deed thy husband. O unfaithful woman thou,
Even I my self can testify thy lewd behauior now.
She made none answer to my words, but being stricken dum
And with the sorrow of her heart alonly ouercum,
Forsakes her entangling house, and naughty husband quight:
And hating all the sort of men by reason of the spite
That I had wrought her, straide abroad among the Mountains hie,
And exercisde Dianas feats. Then kindled by and by
A fiercer fire within my bones than ever was before,
When she had thus forsaken me by whom I set such store.
I prayde her she would pardon me, and did confess my fault.
Affirming that my self likewise with such a great assault
Of richesse might right well have been enforst to yield to blame,
The rather if performance had ensewed of the same.
When I had this submission made, and she sufficiently
Reuengde her wronged chastity, she then immediately
Was reconcilde: and afterward we lived many a year
In joy and never any jar between us did appear.
Besides all this (as though her love had been to small a gift)
She gave me eke a goodly Grewnd which was of foot so swift,
That when Diana gave him her, she said he should out go.
All others. and with this same Grewnd she gave this Dart also
The which you see I hold in hand. Perchance ye feign would know
What fortune to the Grewnd befell. I will unto you show
A wondrous case. The strangeness of the matter will you move.
The krinkes of certain Prophesies surmounting far above
The reach of ancient wits to read, the Brookenymphes did expound:
And mindlesse of her own dark doubts Dame Themis being found,
Was as a rechelesse Prophetisse thrown flat against the ground.
For which presumptuous deed of theirs she took just punishment.
To Thebes in Baeotia straight a cruel beast she sent,
Which wrought the bane of many a Wight. The cou^tryfolk did feed
Him with their cattle and themselves, until (as was agreed)
That all we youthful Gentlemen that dwelled there about
Assembling pitched our corded toils the champion fields throughout.
But Net ne toil was none so hie that could his wightnesse stop,
He mounted over at his ease the highest of the top.
Then every man let slip their Grewnds, but he them all outstript
And even as nimbly as a bird in daliance from them whipped.
Then all the field desired me to let my Laelaps go:
(The Grewnd that Procris unto me did give was named so)
Who struggling for to wrest his neck already from the band
Did stretch his collar. Scarsly had we let him of of hand
But that where Laelaps was become we could not understand.
The print remained of his feet upon the parched sand,
But he was clearly out of sight. Was never Dart I trow,
Nor Pellet from enforced Sling, nor shaft from Cretish bow,
That flew more swift than he did run. There was not far fro thence
About the middle of the Laund a rising ground, from whence
A man might ouerlooke the fields. I gate me to the knap
Of this same hill, and there beheld of this strange course the hap
In which the beast seems one while caught, and ere a man would think,
Does quickly give the Grewnd the slip, and from his bighting shrink:
And like a wily Fox he runs not forth directly out,
Nor makes a windlasse over all the champion fields about,
But doubling and indenting still auoydes his enmies lips,
And turning short, as swift about as spinning wheel he whips,
To disapoint the snatch. The Grewnd pursuing at an inch
Does cote him, never losing ground: but likely still to pinch
Is at the sudden shifted of. continually he snatches
In vain: for nothing in his mouth save only Air he latches.
Then thought I for to try what help my Dart at need could show.
Which as I charged in my hand by level aim to throw,
And set my fingars to the thongs, I lifting from bylow
Mine eyes, did look right forth again, and straight amids the field
(A wondrous thing) two Images of Marble I beheld:
Of which ye would have thought the tone had fled on still a pace
And that with open barking mouth the the other did him chase.
In faith it was the will of God (at least if any Gods
Had care of them) that in their pace there should be found none odds.
Thus far: and then he held his peace. But tell us ere we part
(Quoth Phocus) what offense or fault committed has your Dart?
His Darts offense he thus declarde. My Lord the ground of all
My grief was joy. those joys of mine remember first I shall.
It does me good even yet to think upon that blissfull time
(I mean the fresh and lusty years of pleasant youthful Prime)
When I a happy man enioyde so fair and good a wife,
And she with such a loving Make did lead a happy life.
The care was like of both of us, the mutual love all one.
She would not to have line with Jove my presence have forgone.
Ne was there any Wight that could of me have won the love,
No though Dame Venus had her self descended from above.
The glowing brands of love did burn in both our breasts alike.
Such time as first with crased beams the Sun is wont to strike
The tops of Towers and mountains high, according to the wont
Of youthful men, in woodie Parkes I went abroad to hunt.
But neither horse nor Hounds to make pursuit upon the sent.
Nor Seruingman, nor knottie toil before or after went.
For I was safe with this same Dart. when weary waxt mine arm
With striking Dear, and that the day did make me somewhat warm*
Withdrawing for to cool my self I sought among the shades
For Air that from the valleys cold came breathing in at glades.
The more excessive was my heat the more for Air I sought.
I waited for the gentle Air: the Air was that that brought
Refreshing to my weary limbs. And (well I beart in thought)
Come Air I wonted was to sing. come ease the pain of me
Within my bosom lodge thy self most welcome unto me,
And as thou heretofore art wont abate my burning heat.
By chance (such was my destiny) proceeding to repeat*
Mo words of daliance like to these, I used for to say
Great pleasure do I take in thee: for thou from day to day
Doste both refresh and nourish me. Thou make me delight
In woods and solitary grounds. Now would to God I might
Receive continual at my mouth this pleasant breath of thine.
Some man (I wot not who) did hear these doubtful words of mine,
And taking them amiss supposde that this same name of Air
The which I callde so often upon, had been some Lady fair:
He thought that I had looude some Nymph. And thereupon straight way
He runs me like a Harebrainde blab to Procris, t^ bewray
This fault as he surmised it: and there with lauas tung.
Reported all the wanton words that he had heard me sung.
A thing of light belief is love. She (as I since have hard)
For sodeine sorrow swounded down: and when long afterward
She came again unto her self, she said she was accursed
And borne to cruel destiny: and me she blamed wurst
For breaking faith: and treating at a vain surmised shame
She dreaded that which nothing was: she fearde a headless name.
She wist not what to say or think. The wretch did greatly fear
Deceit: yet could she not believe the tales that talked were.
Unless she saw her husbands fault apparent to her eye,
She thought she would not him condemn of any villainy.
Next day as soon as Morning light had driven the night away,
I went abroad to hunt again: and speeding, as I lay
Upon the grass, I said come Air and ease my painful heat.
And on the sudden as I spoke there seemed for to beat
A certain sighing in mine ears of what I could not guess.
But ceasing not for that I still proceeded nathelesse:
And said O come most pleasant Air. with that I heard a sound
Of russling softly in the leaves that lay upon the ground.
And thinking it had been some beast I threw my flying Dart.
It was my wife. who being now sore wounded at the heart,
Cride out alas. As Soon as I perceived by the shrieke
It was my faithful spouse, I ran me to the voiceward lieke
A madman that had lost his wits. There found I her half dead
Her scattred garments staining in the blood that she had bled,
And (wretched creature as I am) yet drawing from the wound
The gift that she her self had given. Then softly from the ground
I lifted up that body of hirs of which I was more chare
Than of mine own. and from her breast her clothes in have I tare.
And binding up her cruel wound I striued for to stay
The blood, and prayed she would not thus by passing so away
Forsake me as a murderer: she waxing weak at length
And drawing to her death a pace, enforced all her strength
To utter these few words at last. I pray thee humbly by
Our bond of wedlock, by the Gods as well above the Sky
As those to whom I now must pass, as ever I have ought
Deserved well by thee, and by Love which having brought
Me to my death does even in death vnfaded still remain
To nestle in thy bed and mine let never Air obtain.
This sed, she held her peace, and I received the same
And told her also how she was beguiled in the name.
But what auayled telling then? she quoathde: and with her blood
Her little strength did fade. Howbeit as long as that she coud
See ought, she stared in my face and gasping still on me
Even in my mouth she breathed forth her wretched ghost. But she
Did seem with better cheer to die for that her conscience was
Discharged quight and clear of doubts. Now in conclusion as
Duke Cephal weeping told this tale to Phocus and the rest
Whose eyes were also moist with tears to hear the pitious gest,
Behold King Aeacus and with him his eldest sons both twain
Did enter in and after them there followed in a train
Of well appointed men of war new levied: which the King
Delivered unto Cephalus to Athens town to bring.
Finis septimi Libri.
THE EIGHT BOOK of Ouids Metamorphosis.
THe day star now beginning to disclose the Morning bright
And for to cleanse the droupie Sky from darkness of the night.
The Eastern wind went down and flakes of foggie Clouds began show,
And from the South a merry gale on Cephals sails did blow.
The which did hold so fresh and large, that he and all his men
Before that he was looked for arrived safe again
In wished Haven. In that while King Minos with his fleet
Did wast the cost of Megara. And first he thought it meet
To make a trial of the force and courage of his men
Against the town Alcathoe where Nisus reigned then.
Among whose honorable hair that was of color gray,
One scarlet hair did grow upon his crown, whereon the stay
Of all his Kingdom did depend. Six times did Phoebe fill
Her horns with borrowed light, and yet the war hung wavering still
In fickle fortunes doubtful scoales: and long with fleeting wings
Between them both flew victory. A Turret of the Kings
Stood hard adjoining to the Wall which being touched rings
For Phoebus (so men say) did lay his golden Uiall there,
And so the stones the sound thereof did ever after bear.
King Nisus daughter oftentimes resorted to this Wall
And struck it with a little stone to raise the sound withal,
In time of peace. And in the war she many a time and often
Beheld the sturdie storms of Mars from that same place aloft.
And by continuance of the siege the Captains names she knew
Their arms, horse, armor and array in every band and crew.
But specially above the rest she noted Minos face.
She knew enough and more than was enough as stood the case.
For were it that he hid his head in Helm with fethered crest,
To her opinion in his Helm he stained all the rest.
Or were it that he took in hand of steel his target bright,
She thought in weelding of his shield he was a comely Knight.
Or were it that he raisde his arm to throw the piercing Dart,
The Lady did commend his force and manhood ioynde with Art.
Or drew he with his arrow nockt his bended Bow in hand
She swear that so in all respects was Phoebus wont to stand.
But when he shewde his visage bare his Helmet laid aside,
And on a Milk white Steed brave trapt, in Purple Robe did ride,
She scarce was Mistress of her self her wits were almost straught.
A happy Dart she thought it was that he in fingars caught,
And happy called she those reins that he in hand had raught
And if she might have had her will, she could have found in heart,
Among the enmies to have gone. she could have found in heart,
From down the highest Turret there her body to have thrown,
Among the thickest of the Tents of Gnossus to have flowne.
Or for to open the brazen gates and let the enmie in,
Or whatsoever else she thought might Minos favor win.
And as she sat beholding still the King of Candies tent,
She said: I doubt me whether that I rather may lament
Or of this woeful war be glad. It grieves me at the heart
That thou O Minos unto me thy Lover enmie art.
But had not this same warfare been, I never had him known.
Yet might he leave this cruel war, and take me as his own.
A wife, a feere, a pledge for peace he might receive of me.
O flower of beauty, O thou Prince most pearlesse: if that she
That bare thee in her womb were like in beauty unto thee,
A right good cause had Jove on her enamored for to be.
Oh happy were I if with wings I through the Air might glide
And safely to King Minos Tent from this same Turret slide.
Then would I utter who I am, and how the fiery flame
Of Cupid burned in my breast, desiring him to name
What dowry he would ask with me in loan of his love,
Save only of my Fathers Realm no question he should take place,
Adue desire of hoped Love. Yet oftentimes such grace
Has from the gentle Conqueror proceeded erst, that they
Which took the foil have found the same their profit and their stay.
Assuredly the war is just that Minos takes in hand,
As in reuengement of his son late murdered in this land.
And as his quarrel seems just, even so it cannot fail,
But rightful war against the wrong must (I believe) prevail.
Now if this City in the end must needs be taken, why
Should his own sword and not my Love be means to win it by?
It were yet better he should speed by gentle means without
The slaughter of his people, yea and (as it may fall out)
With spending of his own blood too. For sure I have a care
O Minos least some Soldier wound thee ere he be aware.
For who is he in all the world that has so hard a heart
That wittingly against thy head would aim his creull Dart*
I like well this devise. and on this purpose will I stand:
To yield my self endowed with this City to the hand
Of Minos: and in doing so to bring this war to end.
But smally it avails me the matter to intend.
The gates and yssues of this town are kept with watch and ward,
And of the Keys continually my Father has the guard.
My Father only is the man of whom I stand in dreede,
My Father only hinders me of my desired speed.
Would God that I were Fatherless. Tush every Wight may be
A God as in their own behalf, and if their hearts be free
From fearfulness. For fortune works against the fond desire
Of such as through faint heartedness attempt not to aspire.
Some other feeling in her heart such flames of Cupids fire.
Already would have put in proof some practice to destroy
What thing so ever of her Love the furtherance might anoy
And why should any woman have a bolder heart than I?
Throw fire and sword I boldly durst adventure for to fly.
And yet in this behalf at all there needs no sword nor fire,
There needs but my fathers hair to accomplish my desire.
That Purple hair of his to me more precious were than gold:
That Purple hair of his would make me ble^t a thousand fold:
That hair would compass my desire and set my heart at rest.
Night (chiefest Nurce of thoughts to such as are with care oppressed.)
Approached while she spoke these words, and darkness did increase
Her boldness. At such time as folk are wont to find release
Of cares that all the day before were working in their heds,
By sleep which falls first of all upon them in their beds,
Her fathers chamber secretly she entered: where (alas
That ever Maiden should so far the bounds of Nature pass)
She robde her Father of the hair upon the which the fate
Depended both of life and death and of his royal state.
And ioying in her wicked pray, she bears it with her so
As if it were some lawful spoil acquired of the fo.
And passing through a posterne gate she marched through the mid
Of all her enmies (such a trust she had in that she did)
Until she came before the King* whom troubled with the sight
She thus bespake. Enforst O King by love against all right
I Scylla Nisus daughter do present unto thee here
My native soil, my household Gods, and all that else is dear
For this my gift none other thing in recompense I crave
Tha^ of thy person which I love, fruition for to have.
And in assurance of my love receive thou here of me
My fathers Purple hair: and think I give not unto thee
A hair but even my fathers head. And as these words she spoke.
The cursed gift with wicked hand she proffered him to take.
But Minos did abhor her gift: and troubled in his mind
With strangeness of the heinous act so sore against her kind,
He aunswerde. O thou slander of our age the Gods expel
Thee out of all this world of theirs and let thee no where dwell.
Let rest on neither Sea nor Land be granted unto thee.
Assure thy self that as for me I never will agree
That Candie Jove's own foster place (as long as I there reign)
Shall unto such a monstrous Wight a Harbrow place remain.
This said, he like a righteous Judge among his vanquished foes
Set order under pain of death. Which done he willed those
That served him to go a boorde and Anchors up to wey.
When Scylla saw the Candian fleet a flote to go away,
And that the Captain yielded not so good reward as she
Had for her lewdness looked for: and when in fine she see
That no entreatance could prevail, then bursting out in ire
With stretched hands and scattred hair, as furious as the fire
She shraming cried out aloud. And whither doste thou fly
Rejecting me the only means that thou have conquerde by?
O cankerde Churl preferde before my native soil, preferred
Before my father, whither flyste O Carle of heart most hard?
Whose conquest as it is my sin, so does it well deserve
Reward of thee, for that my fault so well thy turn did serve.
Does neither thee the gift I gave, nor yet my faithful love,
Nor yet that all my hope on thee alonly rested, move?
For whither shall I now resort forsaken thus of thee?
To Megara the wretched soil of my nativity?
Behold it lies vanquished and trodden under foot.
But put the case it flourisht still: yet could it nothing boot.
I have foreclosde it to my self through treason when I gave
My fathers head to thee. Whereby my countriefolke I drove
To hate me justly for my crime. And all the Realms about
My lewd example do abhor. Thus have I shet me out
Of all the world that only Crete might take me in* which if
Thou like a Churl deny, and cast me up without relief,
The Lady Europ surely was not mother unto thee:
But one of Affricke Sirts where none but Serpents fostred be
But even some cruel Tiger bred in Armen or in Inde,
Or else the Gulf Charybdis raisde with rage of Southern wind
Thou were not got by Jove: ne yet thy mother was beguilde
In shape of Bull: of this thy birth the tale is false compilde.
But rather some vnwield^e Bull even altogether wild
That never lowed after Cow was out of doubt thy Sire.
O father Nisus put thou me to penance for my hire.
Rejoice thou in my punishment thou town by me betrayed.
I have deserved (I confess) most justly to be paid
With death. But let some one of the^ that through my lewdness smart*
Destroy me, why doste thou that by my crime a gainer art,
Commit like crime thy self? Admit this wicked act of me
As to my land and Fatherward in deed most heinous be.
Yet ought thou to take it as a friendship unto thee.
But she was meet to be thy wife, that in a Cow of tree
Could play the Harlot with a Bull, and in her womb could bear
A Barn, in whom the shapes of man and beasts confounded were.
How say thou Carle? compel not these my words thine ears to glow?
Or do the winds that drive thy shyps, in vain my sayings blow?
In faith it is no wonder though thy wife Pasiphae
Preferrde a Bull to thee for thou more cruel were than he.
Now woe is me. To make more have it stands me in hand.
The water sounds with Ores, and hales from me and from my land.
In vain thou striuest O thou Churl forgetful quight of my
Deserts: for even in spite of thee pursue thee still will I.
Upon thy courbed Keele will I take hold: and hanging so
Be drawn along the Sea with thee where ever thou do go.
She scarce had said these words, but that she leaped on the wave
And getting to the ships by force of strength that Love her gave
Upon the King of Candies Keele in spite of him she claue.
Whom when her father spide (for now he houered in the air,
And being made a Hobby Hawk did soar between a pair
Of nimble wings of iron Mayle) he soused down a maine
To seize upon her as she hung, and would have torn her feign
With bowing Beak. But she ^or fear did let the Caricke go:
And as she was about to fall, the lightsome Air did so
Uphold her that she could not touch the Sea as seemed tho.
Anon all ^ethers she became, and forth away did fly
Transformed to a pretty Bird that ^^^eth to the Sky.
And for because like clipped hair her head does bear a mark,
The Greeks it (...), and we do name the same a Lark.
As Soon as M^nos came a land in Crete, he by and by
Performde his vows (...) Jupiter in causing for to die
A hundred Bulls for sacrifice. And then he did adorn
His Pa^lace with the enmies spoils by conquest won beforne.
The slander of his house encreast: and now appeared more
The mothers filthy whoredom by the monster that she bore
Of double shape, an ugly thing. This shameful infamy,
This monster borne him by his wife he minds by policy
To put away, and in a house with many nookes and krinks
From all men's sights and speech of folk to shet it up he thinks.
Immediately one Daedalus renowned in that land
For fine devise and workmanship in building, went in hand
To make it. He confounds his work with sudden stops and stays,
And with the great uncertainty of sundry winding ways
Leads in and out, and to and fro, at diverse doors astray.
And as with trickling stream the Brook Maeander seems to play
In Phrygia, and with doubtful race runs counter to and fro,
And meeting with himself does look if all his stream or no
Come after, and retiring eft clean backward to his spring
And marching eft to open Sea as straight as any string,
Indenteth with reuersed stream: even so of winding ways
Unnumerable Daedalus within his work conuayes.
Yea scarce himself could find the means to wind himself well out:
So busy and so intricate the house was all about.
Within this Maze did Minos shet the Monster that did bear
The shape of man and Bull. And when he twice had fed him there
With blood of Atticke Princes sons that given for tribute were,
The third time at the ninth years end the lot did chance to light
On Theseus King Aegaeus son: who like a valiant Knight
Did overcome the Minotaur: and by the policy
Of Minos eldest daughter (who had taught him for to tie
A clew of (...) at the door to guide himself thereby)
As busy as the turnings were, his way he out did find,
Which never man had done before. And straight he having wind,
With Minos daughter sailde away to Dia: where
And cruel creature that he was) he left her post alone unkind
Upon the shore. Thus desolate and making doleful moan
God Bacchus did both comfort her and take her to his bed.
And with an everlasting star the more her fame to spread,
He took the Chaplet from her head, and up to Heaven it threw.
The Chaplet thirled through the Air: and as it gliding flew,
The precious stones were turned to stars which blased clear and bright,
And took their place (continuing like a Chaplet still to sight)
Amid between the kneeler down and him that gripes the Snake.
Now in this while began Daedalus a weariness to take
Of living like a banished man and prisoner such a time
In Crete, and longed in his heart to see his native Clime.
But Seas enclosed him as if he had in prison be.
Then thought he: though both Sea and Land King Minos stop fro me.
I am assurde he cannot stop the Air and open Sky.
To make my passage that way then my cunning will I try.
Although that Minos like a Lord held all the world beside:
Yet does the Air from Minos yoke for all men free abide.
This sed: to uncouth Arts he bent the force of all his wits
To alter natures course by craft. And orderly he knits
A row of feathers one by one, beginning with the short,
And ouermatching still each quill with one of longer sort,
That on the shoring of a hill a man would think them grow.
Even so the country Organpipes of Oten reeds in row
Each higher than another rise. Then fastened he with Flax
The middle quilles, and joined in the lowest sort with Wax.
And when he thus had finished them, a little he them bent
In compass, that the very Birds they full might represent.
There stood me by him Icarus his son a pretty Lad.
Who knowing not that he in hands his own destruction had.
With similing mouth did one while blow the feathers to and fro
Which in the Air on wings of Birds did flask not long ago:
And with his thumbes another while he chafes the yelow Wax
And lets his fat^ers wondrous work with childish ^oyes and knax.
As Soon as that the work was done, the workman by and by
Did peyse his body on his wings, and in the Air on hie
Hung wavering: and did teach his son how he should also fly.
I warn thee (quoth he) Icarus a middle race to keep.
For if thou hold to low a gate, the dankenesse of the deep
Will over ^ade thy wings with wet. And if thou mount to hie,
The Sun will ^indge them. Therefore see between the^ both thou fly.
I bid thee not behold the Star Boots in the Sky.
Nor look upon the bigger Bear to make thy course thereby,
Nor yet on Orions naked sword. But ever have an eye
To keep the race that I do keep, and I will guide thee right.
In giving counsel to his son to order well his flight,
He fastened to his shoulders twain a pair of uncouth wings.
And as he was in doing it and warning him of things,
His aged cheeks were wet, his hands did quake, in fine he gave
His son a kiss the last that he alive should ever have.
And then he mounting up aloft before him took his way
Right fearful for his followers sake: as is the Bird the day
That first she tolleth from her nest among the branches hie
Her tender young ones in the Air to teach them for to fly*
So heartens he his little son to follow teaching him
A hurtful Art. His own two wings he waueth very trim,
And looks backward still upon his sons. The fishermen
Then standing angling by the Sea, and shepeherdes leaning then
On sheepehookes, and the Ploughmen on the handles of their Plough,
Beholding them, amazed were: and thought that they that through
The Air could fly were Gods. And now did on their left side stand
The Isles of Paros and of Dele and Samos Iunos land:
And on their right, Lebinthos and the fair Calydna fraught
With store of home: when the Boy a frolic courage caught
To fly at randon. Whereupon forsaking quight his guide,
Of fond desire to fly to Heaven, above his bounds he stide.
And there the nerenesse of the Sun which burnd more hot alo^t,
Did make the Wax (with which his wings were glewed) lithe and soft.
As Soon as that the Wax was molt, his naked arms he shakes,
And wanting wherewithal to wave no help of Air he takes.
But calling on his father loud he drowned in the wave:
And by this chance of his those Seas his name for ever have.
His wretched Father (but as then no father) cride in fear
O Icarus O Icarus where art thou? tell me where
That I may find thee Icarus. He saw the feathers swim
Upon the waves, and cursed his Art that so had spighted him.
At last he took his body up and laid it in a grave,
And to the I Will the name of him then buried in it gave.
And as he of his wretched son the corse in ground did hide,
The cackling Partrich from a thick and leauie thorn him spide.
And clapping with his wings for joy aloud to call began.
There was of that same kind of Bird no mo but he as than.
In times forepast had none been seen. It was but late anew
Since he was made a bird: and that thou Daedalus may rue:
For while the world does last thy shame shall thereupon ensew.
For why thy sister ignorant of that which after hapt,
Did put him to thee to be taught full twelve years old and apt
To take instruction. He did mark the middle bone that goes
Through fishes, and according to the pattern taken of those
He filed teeth upon a piece of iron one by one
And so devised first the Saw where erst was never none.
Moreover he two iron shankes so ioynde in one round head,
That opening an indifferent space, the one point down shall tread,
And the other draw a circle round. The finding of these things,
The spightfull heart of Daedalus with such a malice stings,
That headlong from the holy tower of Pallas down he thrue
His Nephew feyning him to fall by chance. which was not true.
But Pallas (who does favor wits) did stay him in his fall
And changing him into a Bird did clad him over all
With feathers soft amid the Air. The quickness of his wit
(Which erst was swift) did shed it self among his wings and feet.
And as he Partrich hight before, so hights he Partrich still.
Yet mounteth not this Bird aloft ne seems to have a will
To build her nest in tops of trees among the boughs on hie
But flecketh nere the ground and lays her eggs in hedges dry.
And forbicause her former fall she ay in mind does bear.
She ever since all lofty things does warely shun for fear.
And now forwearied Daedalus alighted in the land
Within the which the burning hills of fiery Aetna stand.
To save whose life King Cocalus did weapon take in hand,
For which men thought him merciful. And now with high renown
Had Theseus ceast the woeful pay of tribute in the town
Of Athens. Temples decked were with garlands every where,
And supplications made to Jove and warlicke Pallas were.
And all the other Gods. To whom more honor for to show,
Gifts, blud of beasts, and frankincense the people did bestow
As in performance of their vows. The right redoubted name
Of Theseus through the land of Greece was spread by flying fame.
And now the folk that in the land of rich Achaia dwelt,
Praid him of succor in the harms and perils that they felt.
Although the land of Calydon had then Meleager:
Yet was it feign in humble wise to Theseus to prefer
A supplication for the aid of him. The cause wherefore
They made such humble suit to him was this. There was a Bore
The which Diana for to wreake her wrath conceyude before
Had thither as her servant sent the country for to waast.
For men report that Oenie when he had in storehouse plaast
The full increase of former year, to Ceres did assign
The firstlings of his corn and fruits: to Bacchus, of the Uine:
And unto Pallas Olife oil. This honoring of the Gods
Of grain and fruits who put their help to ^oyling in the clods,
Ambitiously to all, even those that dwell in heaven did clime.
Diannas Altars (as it hapt) alonly at that time
Without reward of Frankincense were ouerskipt (they say)
Even Gods are subject unto wrath. He shall not escape away
Unpunisht. Though vnworshipped he passed me with spite:
He shall not make his vaunt he escaped me unrevenged quight,
Quoth Phoebe. And anon she sent a Bore to Oenies ground
Of such a hugeness as no Bull could ever yet be found,
In Epyre: But in Sicilie are Bulls much less than he
His e^es did glister blud and fire: right dreadful was to see
His brawned neck, right dreadful was his hair which grew as thick
With pricking points as one of them could well by other ^^icke.
And like a front of armed Pikes set close in battle ray
The sturdie bristles on his back stood staring up always.
The scalding ^ome with gnashing hoarse which he did cast aside,
Upon his large and brawned shield did white as Curdes abide.
Among the greatest Oliphants in all the land of Inde,
A greater tush than had this Boar, ye shall not lightly find.
Such lightning flashed from his chappes, as seared up the grass.
Now trampled he the spindling corn to ground where he did pass
Now ramping up their riped hope he made the Plowmen weep.
And chankt the kernel in the ear. In vain their floores they sweep:
In vain their Barnes for Harvest long, the likely store they keep.
The spreaded Uines with clustred Grapes to ground he rudely sent,
And full of Berries laden boughs from Olife trees he rent.
On cattle also did he rage. The shepeherd nor his dog,
Nor ^et the Bulls could save the herdes from outrage of this Hog.
The folk themselves were feign to fly. And yet they thought the^ not
In safety when they had themselves within the City got.
Until their Prince Meleager, and with their Prince a knot
O^ Lords and lusty gentlemen of hand and courage stout,
With chosen fellows for the non^^ of all the Lands about,
Inflamed were to win renown. The chief that thither came
Were both Castor and (...).
the twins of Tyndarus of great renown and fame,
The one in all actiuitie of manhood, strength and force,
The other for his cunning skill in handling of a horse.
And Jason he that first of all the Gallie did invent:
And Theseus with Pirithous between which two there wont
A happy leage of amity: And Plexippus and Toxeus.
two of Thesties race:
And Lynce the son of Apharie and Idas swift of pace.
And fierce Leucyppus and the brave Acastus with his Dart
In handling of the which he had the perfect skill and Art.
And Caeny who by birth a wench, the shape of man had won
And Drias and Hippothous: and Phoenix eke the son
Of old Amyntor: and Eurytus and C^eatus
a pair of Actors ympes: and Phyle
Who came from Elis. Telamon was also there that while:
And so was also Peleus the great Achilles Sire:
And Admetus.
Pherets son: and Iolay the Thebane who with fire
Helped Hercules the monstrous heads of Hydra of to ^eare.
The lively Lad Eurytion and Echion who did bear
The prick and prise for footemanship, were present also there.
And Lelex of Narytium to. And Panopie beside:
And Hyle: and cruel Hippasus: and Naestor who that tide
Was in the Prime of lusty youth: Moreover thither went
Enesimus, Alc^n, and Dexippus.
Three children of Hippocoon from old Amicle sent.
And La^rtes.
he that of Penelope the fathrinlaw became.
And eke the son of Parrhasus Ancaeus called by name.
There was Mopsus.
the son of Ampycus of great forecasting wit:
And Amphiaraus.
Oeclies son who of his wife was vnbetrayed yet.
And from the City Tegea there came the Paragone
Of Lycey forest, Atalant, a goodly Lady, one
Of Schoenyes daughters, then a Maid. The garment she did wear
A brayded button fastened at her gorget. All her hear
Untrimmed in one only knot was trussed. From her left
Side hanging on her shoulder was an Iuorie quiver deft:
Which being full of arrows, made a clattring as she went.
And in her right hand she did bear a Bow already bent.
Her furniture was such as this. Her countnance and her grace
Was such as in a Boy might well be called a Wenches face,
And in a Wench be called a Boys. The Prince of Calydon
No sooner cast his e^e on her, but being caught anon
In love, he wished her to his wife. but unto this desire
God Cupid gave not his consent. The secret flames of fire
He haling inward still did say: O happy man is he
Whom this same Lady shall vouchsaue her Husband for to be.
The shortness of the time and shame would give him leave to say
No more: a work of greater weight did draw him then away.
A wood thick grown with trees which stood vnfelled to that day
Beginning from a plain, had thence a large prospect throughout
The falling grounds that every way did muster round about.
As Soon as that the men came there, some pitched up the toils,
Some took the couples from the Dogs, and some pursude the foyles
In places where the Swine had tract: desiring for to spy
Their own destruction. Now there was a hollow bottom by,
To which the watershots of rain from all the high grounds drew.
Within the compass of this pond great store of Oysyers grew:
And Sallowes lithe, and flackring Flags, and moorish Rushes eke,
And lazy Reeds on little shankes, and other baggage like.
From hence the Bore was rowzed out, and fiersly forth he flies
Among the thickest of his foes like thunder from the Skies,
When Clouds in meeting force the fire to burst by violence out.
He bears the trees before him down, and all the wood about
Does sound of crashing. All the youth with hideous noise and shout
Against him bend their Boarspeare points with hand and courage stout.
He rushes forth among the Dogs that held him at a bay,
And now on this side now on that, as any come in way,
He rippes their skins and splitteth them, and chaseth the^ away,
Echion first of all the rout a Dart at him did throw,
Which mist and in a Maple tree did give a little blow
The next (if he that threw the same had used lesser might,)
The back at which he aimed it was likely for to smight.
It ouerflew him. Jason was the man that cast the Dart.
With that the son of Ampycus said: Mopsus.
Phoebus (if with heart
I have and still do worship thee) now grant me for to hit
The thing that I do level at. Apollo graunts him it
As much as lay in him to grant. He hit the Swine in deed.
But neither entered he his hide nor caused him to bleed.
For why Diana (as the Dart was flying) took away
The head of it: and so the Dart could headless bear no sway.
But yet the moodie beast thereby was set the more on fire
And cha^ing like the lightning swift he vttreth forth his ire.
The fire did sparkle from his eyes: and from his boiling breast
He breathed flaming flakes of fire conceived in his chest.
And look with what a violent brunt a mighty Bullet goes
From engines bent against a wall, or bulwarks full of foes:
With even such violence rusht the Swine among the Hunts a main,
And overthrew Eupalamon and Pelagon both twain
That in the right wing placed were. Their follows stepping to
And drawing them away, did save their lives with much a do.
But as for poor Enesimus Hippocoons son had not
The luck to escape the deadly dint. He would away have got,
And trembling turnde his back for fear. The Swine him ouertooke,
And cut his hamstrings, so that straight his going him forsook.
And Naestor to have lost his life was like by fortune ere
The siege of Troie, but that he took his rist upon his spear:
And leaping quickly up upon a tree that stood hard by,
Did safely from the place behold his foe whom he did fly.
The Boar then whetting sharp his tuskes against the Oken wood
To mischief did prepare himself with fierce and cruel mood.
And trusting to his weapons which he sharpened had a new,
In great Orithyas thigh a wound with hooked groyne he drew.
The valiant brothers those same twins of Tyndarus (not yet
Celestial signs) did both of them on coursers sit
As white as snow: Castor and Pollux.
and each of them had shaking in his fist
A lightsome Dart with head of steel to throw it where he list.
And for to wound the bristled Bore they surely had not mist
But that he still recovered so the couerts of the wood,
That neither horse could follow him, nor Dart do any good.
Still after followed Telamon, whom taking to his feet
No heed at all for egernesse, a Maple root did meet,
Which tripped up his heels, and flat against the ground him laid
And while his brother Peleus relieved him, the Maid
Of Tegea took an arrow swift, and shot it from her bow.
The arrow lighting underneath the hauers ear bylow,
And somewhat rasing of the skin, did make the blood to show.
The Maid hirselfe not gladder was to see that luckie blow,
Than was the Prince Meleager. He was the first that saw,
And first that showed to his Mates the blud that she did draw:
And said for this thy valiant act due honor shall thou have.
The men did blush, and chearing up each other courage gave.
With shouting, and disorderly their Darts by beaps they threw.
The number of them hindered them, not suffering to ensew
That any lighted on the mark at which they all did ame.
Behold, enragde against his end the hardy Knight that came
From Arcadie, rusht rashly with a Pollar in his fist
And said you yonglings learn of me what difference is betwist
A wenches weapons and a man's: and all of you give place
To my redoubted force. For though Diana in this chase
Should with her own shield him defend, yet should this hand of mine
Even ma^gre Dame Dianaas heart confound this orped Swine.
Such boasting words as these through pride presumptuously he crakes:
And streyning out himself upon his ^iptoes straight he takes
His Pollar up with both his hands. But as this bragger meant
To fetch his blow, the cruel beast his malice did prevent:
And in his coddes (the sp^^ding place of death) his tusshes puts,
And rippeth up his paunche. Down falls Ancaeus and his guts
Come tumbling out besmearde with blood, and foiled all the plot.
Pirithous lxions son at that abashed not:
But shaking in his valiant hand his hunting staff did go
Still stoutly forward face to face t'encounter with his foe
To whom Duke Theseus cride a far. O dearer unto me
Than is my self, my soul I say, stay: lawful we it see
For valiant men to keep aloof. The over hardy heart
In rash aduentring of him self has made Ancaeus smart.
This sed, he threw a weighty Dart of Cornell with a head
Of brass: which being leueld well was likely to have sped,
But that a bough of Chestnut tree thick leaued by the way
Did latch it, and by means thereof the dint of it did stay.
Another Dart that Jason threw, by fortune mist the Bore,
And light between a Mastifes chaps, and through his guts did gore,
And naild him to the earth. The hand of Prince Meleager
Played hittymissie. Of two Darts his first did fly to far,
And lighted in the ground: the next amid his back stickt fast.
And while the Bore did play the fiend and turned round aghast,
And grunting flang his foam about together mixed m^^h blood
The giver of the wound (the more to stir his enmies mood,)
Stepped in, and underneath the shield did thrust his Boarspeare through.
Then all the Hunters shouting out demeaned joy enough.
And glad was he that first might come to take him by the hand.
About the ugly beast they all with gladness gazing stand
And wondering what a field of ground his carcass did possess,
There durst not any be so bold to touch him. Nerethelesse,
They every of them with his blood their hunting staves made red.
Then stepped forth Meleager, and treading on his head
Said thus: O Lady Atalant, receive thou here my fee,
And of my glory vouch thou safe partaker for to be.
Immediately the ugly head with both the tusshes brave
And eke the skin with bristles stur right griesly, he her gave.
The Lady for the giuers sake, was in her heart as glad
As for the gift. The rest repinde that she such honor had.
Through all the rout was murmuring. Of whom with roaring rear
And arms displayed that all the field might easily see and hear,
The Thesties cried Dame come of and lay us down this gear.
And thou a woman offer not us men so great a shame,
As we to toil and thou to take the honor of our game.
Ne let that fair smooth face of thine beguile thee, least that he
That being doted in thy love did give thee this our fee,
Be over far to rescow thee. And with that word they took
The gift from her, and right of gift from him. He could not brook
This wrong: but gnashing with his teeth for anger that did boil
Within, said fiersly: learn ye you that other folks dispoyle
Of honor given, what diffrence is between your threats, and deeds,
And therewithal Plexippus breast (who no such matter dreedes)
With wicked weapon he did pierce. As Toxey doubting stood
What way to take, desiring both t'aduenge his brothers blood,
And fearing to be murdered as his brother was before,
Meleager (to dispatch all doubts of musing any more)
Did heat his sword for company in blood of him again,
Before Plexippus blud was cold that did thereon remain.
Althaea going toward Church with presents for to yild
Due thanks and worship to the Gods that for her son had killed
The Boar, beheld her brothers brought home dead: and by and by
She beat her breast, and filde the town with shrieking piteously,
And shifting all her rich array, did put on mourning weed
But when she understood what man was doer of the deed,
She left all mourning, and from tears to vengeance did proceed.
There was a certain firebrand which when Oenies wife did lie
In childebed of Meleager, she chanced to epsy
The Destnies putting in the fire: and in the putting in,
She heard them speak these words, as they his fatal threede did spin
O lately borne, like time we give to thee and to this brand.
And when they so had spoken, they depar^ed out of hand.
Immediately the mother caught the blazing bough away,
And quenched it. This bough she kept full charely many a day:
And in the keeping of the same she kept her son alive.
But now intending of his life him clearly to deprive,
She brought it forth, and causing all the coals and shiuers to
Be laid by, she like a foe did kindle fire thereto.
Four times she was about to cast the firebrand in the flame:
Four times she pulled back her hand from doing of the same.
As mother and as sister both she strove what way to go:
The diverse names drew diversely her stomach to and fro.
Her face waxt often pale for fear of mischief to ensue:
And often red about the eyes through heat of ire she grew.
One while her look resembled one that threatened cruelnesse:
Another while ye would have thought she minded pitiousnesse.
And though the cruel burning of her heart did dry her tears,
Yet burst out some. And as a Boat which tide contrary bears
Against the wind, feels double force, and is compeld to yield
To both. So Thesties daughter now unable for to weelde
Her doubtful passions, diversely is carried of and on,
And chaungeably she waxes calm, and storms again anon.
But better sister ginneth she than mother for to be:
And to the intent her brothers ghostes with blood to honor, she
In meaning to be one way kind, does work another way
Against kind. When the plagie fire waxt strong she thus did say
Let this same fire my bowels burn. And as in cursed hands
The fatal wood she holding at the Hellish Altar stands:
She said ye triple Goddesses of wreake, ye H^lhounds three
Behold ye all this furious fact and sacrifice of me.
I wreake, and do against all right: with death must death be paid:
On mischief mischief must be heapt: on corse must corse be laid.
Confounded let this wicked house with heaped sorrows be
Shall Oenie joy his happy son in honor for to see
And Thestie mourn bereft of his? Nay: better yet it were,
That each with other company in mourning you should bear.
Ye brothers Ghostes and souls new dead I wish no more, but you
To feel the solemn obsequies which I prepare as now:
And that mine offering you accept, which dearly I have bought
The issue of my wretched womb. Alas, alas what thought
I for to do? O brothers I beseech you bear with me.
I am his mother: so to do my hands unable be
His trespass I confess deserves the stopping of his breath:
But yet I do not like that I be Author of his death.
And shall he then with life and limme, and honor to, escape free?
And vaunting in his good success the King of Calidon be?
And you dear souls (...) raked up but in a little dust?
I will not surely suffer it. But let the villain trust
That he shall die, and draw with him to ruin and decay
His Kingdom, Country and his Sire that does upon him stay.
Why where is now the mothers heart and pity that should reign
In Parents? and the ten Months pains that once I did sustain?
O would to God thou burned had a babie in this brand,
And that I had not taken it out and quenched it with my hand.
That all this while thou lived have, my goodness is the cause.
And now most justly unto death thine own desert thee draws.
Receive the guer^on of thy deed: and render thou again
Thy twice given life, by bearing first, and secondarly when
I caught this firebrand from the flame: or else come deal with me
As with my brothers, and with them let me entumbed be.
I would, and cannot. What then shall I stand to in this case?
One while my brothers corses seem to prease before my face
With lively Image of their deaths. Another while my mind
Does yield to pity, and the name of mother does me blind
No^ woe is me. To let you have the upper hand is sin:
But ne^ethelesse the upper hand O brothers do you win*
Cond^cio^ly that when that I to comfort you withal.
Have wrought this feate, my self to you resort in person shall.
This sed, she turnde away her face, and with a trembling hand
Did cast the deathfull brand amid the burning fire. The brand
Did either sigh, or seem to sigh in burning in the flame,
Which sorry and unwilling was to fasten on the same.
Meleager being absent and not knowing ought at all
Was burned with this flame: and felt his bowels to appall
With secret fire. He bare out long the pain with courage stout.
But yet it grieved him to die so cowardly without
The shedding of his blood. He thought Anceus for to be
A happy man that did of wound. With sighing called he
Upon his aged father, and his sisters, and his brother,
And lastly on his wife to, and by chance upon his mother.
His pain increased with the fire, and fell therewith again:
And at the self same instant quight extinguished were both twain.
And as the ashes soft and hoar by leisure ouergrew
The glowing coals: so leysurely his spirit from him drew.
The drouped stately Calydon. Both young and old did mourn
The Lords and Commons did lament. and married wives with torn
And tattred hair did cry alas. His father did beray
His horie head and face with dust, and on the earth flat lay,
Lamenting that he lived had to see that woeful day
For now his mothers guilty hand had for that cursed crime
Done execution on her self by sword before her time.
If God to me a hundred mouths with sounding tongues should send,
And reason able to conceive, and thereunto should lend
Me all the grace of eloquence that ere the Muses had,
I could not show the woe wherewith his sisters were bestad.
Unmindfull of their high estate, their naked breasts they smit,
Until they made them black and blew. And while his body yet
Remained, they did cherish it, and cherish it again.
They kissed his body: yea they kissed the chist that did contain
His corse. And after that the corse was burnt to ashes, they
Did press his ashes with their breasts: and down along they lay
Upon his tumb, and there embraste his name upon the stone,
And fillde the letters of the same with tears that from them gone.
At length Diana satisfide with slaughter brought upon
The house of Oenie, lifts them up with f^thers euerichone,
(Save Gorgee and the daughtriulaw of noble Al^mene) and
Makes wings to stretch along their sides, and horned nebs to stand.
Upon their mouths. And finally she altring quight their fair
And native shape, in shape of Birds does send them through the Air.
The noble Theseus in this while with others having done
His part in killing of the Boar, too Athens ward begone
Too take his way. But Acheloy then being swollen with rain
Did stay him of his journey, and from passage him restrain.
Of Athens valiant knight (quoth he) come underneath my roof,
And for to pass my raging stream as yet attempt no proof.
This brook is wont whole trees too bear and euelong stones too carry
With hideous roaring down his stream. I often have seen him harry
Whole Shepcotes standing nere his banks, with flocks of sheep therein.
Naught booted bulls their strength: naught steedes by swiftnes there could win,
Yea many lusty men this brook has swallowed, when y^ snow
From mountains molten, caused him his banks too ouerflow.
The best is for you for too rest until the River fall
Within his bounds: and run ageine within his channel small.
Content (quoth Theseus): Acheloy, I will not sure refuse
Thy counsel nor thy house. And so he both of them did use.
Of Pommy hollowed diversely and ragged Pebble stone
The walls were made. The floor with Moss was soft to tread upon.
The roof thereof was checkerwise with shelles of Purple wrought
And Perle. The Sun then full two parts of day to end had brought,
And Theseus down to table sat with such as late before
Had friendly borne him company at killing of the Bore.
A tone side sat Ixions son, and on the other sat
The Prince of Troyzen Lelex with a thin heard horie pate.
And then such other as the brook of Acarnania did
Uouchsafe the honor to his board and table for to bid,
Who was right glad of such a guest. Immediately there came
Barefooted Nymphs who brought in meat. And when that of the same
The Lords had taken their repast, the meat away they took,
And set down wine in precious stones. Then Theseus who did look
Upon the Sea that underneath did lie within their sight,
Said: tell us what is yonsame place, (and with his fingar right
He poynted thereunto) I pray, and what that Island hight,
Although it seems mo than one. The River answered thus,
It is not one main land alone that kenned is of us.
There are upon a five of them. The distaunce of the place,
Does hinder too discern between each I Will the perfect space.
And that the less ye wonder may at Phoebees act a late,
To such as had neglected her upon contempt or hate,
These Isles were sumtyme Waternimphes: who having killed Neat,
Twyce five, and called too their feast the Country Gods too eat,
Forgetting me kept frolic cheer. At that began I too swell,
And ran more large than ever erst, and being over fell
I^stomacke and in stream, I rent the wood from wood, and feeld
From feeld, and with the ground the Nymphs as then with stomachs meeld
Remembering me, I tumbled to the Sea. The waves of me
And of the sea the ground that erst all whole was wont too be
Did rend a sunder into all the Isles you yonder see,
And made a way for waters now too pass between them free.
They now of Vrchins have their name. But of these Islands, one
A great way of (behold ye) stands a great way of alone,
As you may see. The Mariners do call it Perimell.
With her (she was as then a Nymph) so far in love I fell,
That of her maydenhod I her spoyld: which thing displeasd so sore
Her father Sir Hippodamas, that from the craggy shore
He threw her headlong down to drown her in the sea. But I
Did latch her straight, and bearing her a flote did loud thus cry.
O Neptune with thy threetynde Mace who have by lot the charge
Of all the waters wild that bound upon the earth at large,
To whom we holy streams do run, in whom we take our end,
Draw near, and gently to my boon effectually attend.
This Lady whom I bear a flote myself has hurt. Be meek
And upright. If Hippodamas perchance were fatherleeke,
Or if that he extremity through outrage did not seek,
He oughted too have pitied her and for too bear with me.
Now help us Neptune I thee pray, and condescend that she
Whom from the land her fathers wrath and cruelnesse does chase
Who through her fathers cruelnesse is drowned: may find the grace
To have a place: or rather let hirselfe become a place.
And I will still embrace the same. The King of Seas did move
His head, and as a token that he did my suit approve,
He made his surges all too shake, The Nymph was sore afraid.
Howbeet she swam, and as she swam, my hand I softly laid
Upon her breast which quiuered still. And while I touched the same,
I sensibly did feel how all her body hard became:
And how the earth did ouergrow her bulk. And as I spoke,
New earth enclosde her swimming limbs, which by and by did take
Another shape, and grew intoo a mighty I Will. With that
The River ceast and all men there did wonder much thereat.
Pirithous being over hault of mind and such a one
As did despise both God and man, did laugh them euerychone
Too scorn for giving credit, and said thus. The words thou spaakst
Are feyned fancies Acheloy: and ouerstrong thou maakst
The Gods: to say that they can give and take way shapes. This scoff
Did make the heeres all amazde, for none did like thereof.
And Lelex of them all the man most ripe in years and wit,
Said thus. Unmeasurable is the power of heaven, and it
Can have none end. And look what God does mind too bring about,
Must take effect. And in this case too put ye out of dout,
Upon the hills of Phrygie near of Teyle there stands a tree
Of Oak enclosed with a wall. Myself the place did see.
For Pithey unto Pelops feelds did send me where his father
Did sumtyme reign. not far fro thence there is a poole which rather
Had been dry ground inhabited. But now it is a meare
And Moorecocks, Cootes, and Cormorants do breed and nestle there.
The mighty Jove and Mercury his son in shape of men
Resorted thither on a time. A thousand houses when
For room too lodge in they had sought, a thousand houses bard
Their doors against them. Nerethelesse one Cotage afterward
Received them, and that was but a pelting one in deed.
The roof thereof was thatched all with straw and fennish reed.
Howbeet two honest ancient folk, (of whom she Baucis hight
And he Philemon) in that Cote their faith in youth had plight:
And in that Cote had spent their age. And for they patiently
Did bear their simple poverty, they made it light thereby,
And showed it no thing to be repyned at atall.
It skilles not whether there for Hyndes or Master you do call.
For all the household were but two: and both of them obeyde,
And both commanded. When the Gods at this same Cotage staid,
And ducking down their heads, within the low made Wicket came,
Philemon bringing each a stool, bade rest upon the same
Their limbs: and busy Baucis brought them quishons homely geere.
Which done, the embers on the harth she began abroad to steer,
And laid the coals together that were raak^ up over night,
And with the brands and dried leaves did make them gather might,
And with the blowing of her mouth did make them kindle bright.
Then from an inner house she fetched sear sticks and clifted brands,
And put them broken underneath a Skillet with her hands.
Her Husband from their Gardenplot fetched Coleworts. Of the which
She shreaded small the leaves, and with a Forke took down a flitch
Of restie Bacon from the Balke made black with smoke, and cut
A piece thereof, and in the pan to boiling did it put.
And while this meat a seething was, the time in talk they spent,
By means whereof away without much tedousnesse it went.
There hung a Boawle of Beeche upon a spirget by a ring.
The same with warmed water filld the two old folk did bring
Too bathe their guests foul feet therein. Amid the house there stood
A Couch whose bottom sides and feet were all of Sallow wood,
And on the same a Mat of Sedge. They cast upon this bed
A covering which was never wont upon it too be spread
Except it were at solemn feasts: and yet the same was old
And of the coursest, with a bed of sallow meet too hold.
The Gods sat down. The aged wife right chare and busy as
A Be, s^t out a table. of the which the third foot was
A little shorter than the rest. A tylesh^rd made it even
And took away the shormgnesse: and when they had it driven
To stand up level, with green Mintes they by and by it wipte.
Then set they on it Olyss.
Pallas fruit with double color stripte.
And Cornels kept in pickle moist, and Endive, and a root
Of Radish, and a jolly lump of Butter fresh and ^oote,
And Eggs rear roasted. All these Eats in earthen dishes came.
Then set they down a graven cup made also of the same
Self kind of Plate, and Mazers made of Beech whose inner side
Was rubd with yellow wax. And when they pawsed had a tide,
Whote meat came pyping from the fire. And shortly thereupon
A cup of green hedge wine was brought. This taken away, anon
Came in the latter course, which was of Nuts, Dates, dried figs
Sweet smelling Apples in a Mawnd made flat of Oysyer twigges,
And Prunes and Plums and Purple grapes cut newly from the tree,
And in the mids a honnycomb new taken from the Be.
Besides all this there did ensew good countnance ouermore,
With will not poor nor nigardly. Now all the while before,
As ofen as Philemon and Dame Baucis did perceive
The empty Cup to fill alone, and wine too still receive,
Amazed at the strangeness of the thing, they began straight way
With fearful hearts and hands hilld up too frame themselves too pray.
Desyring for their slend^r cheer and fare too pardoned be.
They had but one (...) Goose which kept their little Tennantree,
And this too offer too the Gods their guestes they did intend.
The Gander wight of wing did make the slow old folk too spend
Their pains in vain, and mokt them long. At length he seemd too fly
For succor too the Gods themselves, who bade he should not dye.
For we be Gods (quoth they) and all this wicked towneship shall
Abye their gylt. On you alone this mischeef shall not fall.
No more but give you up your house, and follow up this hill
Toogither, and upon the top thereof abide our will.
They both obeyed. And as the Gods did lead the way before,
They lagged slowly after with their staves, and labored sore
Against the rising of the hill. They were not mickle more
Than full a flyghtshot from the top, when looking back they saw
How all the town was drowned save their little shed of straw.
And as they woondred at the thing and did bewail the case
Of those that had their neighbors been, the old poor Cote so base
Whereof they had been owners erst, became a Church. The proppes
Were turned into pillars howge. The straw upon the tops
Was yellow, so that all the roof did seem of burnisht gold:
The floor with Marble paued was. The doors on either fold
Were graven. At the sight hereof Philemon and his make
Began too pray in fear. Then Jove thus gently them bespake.
Declare thou ryghtuowse man, and thou O woman meet too have
A ryghtuowse howsband what ye would most chiefly wish or crave.
Philemon taking conference a little with his wife,
Declared both their meenings thus. We covet during life,
Your Chapleynes for too be too keep your Temple. And because
Our years in concord we have spent, I pray when death near draws,
Let both of us toogither leave our lives: that neither I
Behold my wives deceace, nor she see mine when I do dye.
Their wish had sequel to their will. As long as life did last,
They kept the Church. And being spent with age of years forepast,
By chance as standing on a time without the Temple door
They told the fortune of the place, Philemon old and poor
Saw Baucis floorish green with leaves, and Baucis saw likewise
Philemon braunching out in boughs and twigs before her eyes.
And as the Bark did ouergrow the heads of both, each spoke
Too other while they might. At last they each of them did take
Their leave of other both at once, and therewithal the bark
Did hyde their faces both at once. The Phrygians in that park
Do at this present day still show the trees that shaped were
Of their two bodies, growing yet together jointly there.
These things did ancient men report of credit very good.
For why there was no cause why they should lie. As I there stood
I saw the garlands hanging on the bo^ghes, and adding new
I said let them whom God does love be Gods. and honor dew
Be given to such as honor him with fear and r^uerence true.
He ^^lld his peace, and both the thing and he that did it tell
Did move them all, but Theseus most. Whom being minded well
To here of woondrous things, the brook of Calydon thus bespake.
There are O valiant knight sum folk that had the power too take
Strange shape for once, and all their lives continewed in the same.
And othersum too sundry shapes have power themselves to frame.
As thou O Protevv dwelling in the sea that cleepes the land.
For now a yoonker, now a boar, anon a Lion, and
Straight way thou did become a Snake, and by and by a Bull
That people were afraid of thee too see thy horned skull.
And oftentimes thou seemde a stone, and now and then a tree,
And counterfetting water sheere thou seemedst ott to be
A River: and another while contrary therevntoo
Thou wart a fire. No less power than also thus too do
Had Erisicthons daughter whom Avvtolychus took too wife.
Her father was a person that despised all his life
The power of Gods, and never did vouchsauf them sacrifyse.
He also is reported too have heawen in wicked wise
The grove of Ceres, and to fell her holy woods which ay
Had vndiminisht and vnhackt continewed to that day
There stood in it a warrie Oak which was a wood alone.
Upon it round hung fillets, crowns, and tables, many one,
The vows of such as had obteynd their hearts desire. Full often
The Woodnymphes underneath this tree did fetch their frisks aloft
And oftentimes with hand in hand they daunced in a round
About the Trunk, whose bigness was of timber good and sound
Full fifteen fadom. All the trees within the wood beside,
Were unto this, as weeds to them: so far it did them hyde.
Yet could not this move Triops son his axe therefro too hold,
But bade his servants cut it down. And when he did behold
Them stunting at his hest, he snatched an axe with furious mood
From one of them, and wickedly said thus. Although this wood
Not only were the derling of the Goddess, but also
The Goddess even herself: yet would I make it ere I go
Too kiss the clowers with her top that pranks with branches so.
This spoken, as he sweakt his axe aside to fetch his blow,
The manast Oak did quake and sygh, the Acornes that did grow
Thereon toogither with the leaves too wex full pale began,
And shrinking in for fear the boughs and branches looked wan.
As Soon as that his cursed hand had wounded once the tree,
The blood came spinning from the carf, as freshly as ye see
It issue from a Bullocks neck whose throat is newly cut
Before the Altar, when his flesh to sacrifyse is put.
They were amazed euery^hone. And one among them all
Too let the wicked act, durst from the tree his hatchet call.
The lewd Thessalian facing him said: Take thou here too thee
The guerdon of thy godliness. and turning from the tree,
He chopped of the fellows head. Which done, he went again
And heawed on the Oak. straight from amid the tree as then
There issued such a sound as this. Within this tree dwell I
A Nymph too Ceres very dear, who now before I dye
In comfort of my death do give thee warning thou shall bye
Thy doing dear within a while. he goes wilfully
Still thorough with his wickedness, until at length the Oak
Pulld partly by the force of ropes, and cut with axis stroke,
Did fall, and with his weight bare down of under wood great store.
The Woodnymphes with the losses of the woods and theyrs right sore
Amazed, gathered on a knot, and all in mourning weed
Went sad too Ceres, praying her too wreake that wicked deed
Of Erisicthons. Ceres was content it should be so.
And with the moving of her head in nodding too and fro,
She shook the feeldes which laden were with fruitful Harvest tho.
And therewithal a punishment most piteous she proceeds
Too put in practyse: were it not that his most heinous deeds,
No pity did deserve too have at any bodies hand.
With helpelesse hungar him too pyne, in purpose she did stand*
And forasmuch as she herself and famine might not meet.
(For fate forbids famine too abide within the leete
Where plenty is) she thus bespake a fayrie of the hill.
There lies in the utmost bounds of Tartarie the chill
A Dreerie place, a wretched soil, a barreine plot: no grain,
No fruit, no tree, is growing there: but there does ay remain
Unweeldsome cold, with trembling fear, and palenesse white as clowt,
And foodlesse famine. Will thou her immediately withowt
Delay too shed herself intoo the stomach of the wretch,
And let no plenty staunch her force. but let her working stretch
Above the power of me. And least the longnesse of the way
May make thee weary, take thou here my charyot: take I say
My draggons for to bear thee through the air. In saying so
She gave her them. The Nymph mounts up, and flying thence as the
Alyghts in Scythy land, and up the cragged top of hye
Mount Caucasus did cause her Snakes with much a do too stye.
Where seeking long for famine, she the gaptoothd elfe did spy
Amid a barreine stony feeld a ramping up the grass
With ougly nails, and chanking it. Her face pale colored was.
Her hear was harsh and shirle, her eyes were sunken in her head.
Her lyppes were hoar with filth, her t^^th were fu^d and rusty read.
Her skin was starched, and so sheere a man might well espy
The very bowels in her bulk how every one did lie.
And eke above her courbed loins her withered hippes were seen.
In stead of belly was a space where belly should have been.
Her breast did hang so sagging down as that a man would ween
That scarcely to her ridgebone had her ribs been fastened well.
Her leanness made her joints bolne big, and kneepannes for too swell.
And with exceeding mighty knubs her heels behynd boynd out.
Now when the Nymph behild this elfe a far, (she was in dout
Too come too near her:) she declarde her Ladies message. And
In that same little while although the Nymph aloof did stand,
And though she were but newly come, yet seemed she too feel
The force of famine. Whervppon she turning back her wheel
Did reyne her dragons up aloft: who straight with courage free
Conveyed her into Thessaly. Although that famine be
Ay contrary too Ceres woork, yet did she then agree
Too do her will. and glyding through the Air supported by
The wynd, she found thappoynted house: and entering by and by
The caytifs chamber where he slept (it was in time of night)
She hugged him between her arms there snort^ng bolt vpryght.
And breathing her into him, blew upon his face and breast,
That hungar in his empty veins might work as he did rest.
And when she had accomplished her charge, she then forsook
The fruitful Clymates of the world, and home ageine betook
Herself unto her frutelesse feeldes and former dwelling place.
The gentle sleep did all this while with feathers soft embrace
The wretched Erisicthons corse. Who dreaming straight of meat
Did stir his hungry jaws in vain as though he had too eat
And chanking tooth on tooth a pace he gryndes them in his head,
And occupies his empty throat with swallowing, and in stead
Of food deuoures the lither air. But when that ^leepe with night
Was shaken of, immediately a furious appetite
Of feeding began too rage in him, which in his greedy gummes
And in his meatlesse maw does reign vnstauncht. Anon there cummes
Before him whatsoever lives on sea, in air or land:
And yet he cries still for more. And though the platters stand
Before his face full furnished, yet does he still complain
Of hungar, craving meat at meal. The food that would sustain
Whole householdes, Towneships, Shyres and Realms suffyce not him alone
The more his pampred pau^ch consumes, ye more it makes moan
And as the sea receyues the brooks of all the worldly Realms,
And yet is never satisfyde for all the foreign streams.
And as the fell and ravening fire refuses never wood,
But burns faggots numberless, and with a furious mood
The more it has, the more it still desires evermore,
Encreacing in devouring through encreasement of the store:
So wicked Erisicthons mouth in swallowing of his meat
Was ever hungry more and more, and longed ay to eat.
Meat tolld in meat: and as he ate the place was empty still.
The hungar of his brinklesse Maw the gulf that nowght might fill
Had brought his fathers good too nowght. But yet continewed ay:
His cursed hungar vnappeasd: and nothing could alay
The flaming of his starued throat. At length when all was spent,
And intoo his vnfilled Maw both goods and lands were sent,
An only daughter did remain unworthy too have had
So lewd a father. Her he sold, so hard he was bestad.
But she of gentle courage could no bondage well abide.
And therefore stretching out her hands too seaward there beside,
Now save me quoth she from the yoke of bondage I thee pray,
O thou that my virginity enioyest as a pray.
Neptunus had it. Who too this her prayer did consent.
And though her master looking back (for after him she went)
Had newly seen her: yet he turned her shape and made her man,
And gave her look of fisherman. Her master looking than
Upon her, said. Good fellow thou that on the shore do stand
With angling rod and bayted hook and hanging line in hand,
I pray thee as thou do desire the Sea ay calm too thee,
And fishes for to byght thy bayt, and stricken still too be,
Tell where the frizzle topped wench in course and sluttish geere
That stood right now upon this shore (for well I wot that here
I saw her standing) is become. For further than this place
No footestep is appeering. She perceiving by the case
That Neptunes gift made well with her, and being glad too see
Herself enquyrd for of herself, said thus: who ere you be
I pray you for too pardon me. I turned not mine eye
A tonesyde ne a toother from this place, but did apply
My labor hard. And that you may the lesser stand in dowt,
So Neptune further still the Art and craft I go about,
As now a while no living Wight upon this level sand
(Myself excepted) neither man nor woman here did stand.
Her master did believe her words: and turning backward went
His way beguyld: and straight too her her native shape was sent.
But when her father did perceive his daughter for too have
A body so transformable, he oftentimes her gave
For monny. but the damzell still escaped now a Mare
And now a Cow, and now a Bird, a Heart, a Hynd, or Hare,
And ever fed her hungry Sire with undeserved fare.
But after that the malady had wasted all the meats
As well of store as that which she had purchased by her feats:
Most cused keytife as he was with bighting he did rend
His flesh, and by diminishing his body did intend
Too seed his body, till that death did speed his fatal end.
But what meene I too busye me in foreign matters thus?
Too alter shapes within precinct is lawful even too us
My Lords. For sumtime I am such as you do now me see
Sumtyme I wynd me in a Snake: and often I seem too be
A Captain of the herd with horns. For taking horns on me
I lost a tyne which heeretoofore did arm me as the print
Does plainly show. with that same word he syghed and did stin^.
Finis octaui Libri.
THE NINTH BOOK of Ouids Metamorphosis.
WHat ayleth thee (quoth Theseus) too sygh so sore? and how
Befell it thee too get this mayme that is upon thy brow?
The noble stream of Calydon made answer, who did wear
A Garland made of reeds and flags upon his sedgie hear.
A grievous penance you enjoin. for who would gladly show
The combats in the which himself did take the overthrow?
Yet will I make a just report in order of the same.
For why? too have the woorser hand was not so great a shame,
As was the honor such a match too undertake. And much
It comforts me that he who did me overcome, was such
A valiant champion. If perchance you erst have heard the name
Of Deyanyre the fairest Maid that ever God did frame
She was in mine opinion. And the hope too win her love
Did mickle envy and debate among her wooers move.
With whom I entering too the house of him that should have be
My fathrilaw, Parthaons son (I said) accept thou me
Thy Sonnylaw. And Hercules in self same sort did woo.
And all the other suitors straight gave place unto us two.
He vaunted of his father Jove, and of his famous deeds,
And how against his stepdames spyght his prowess still proceeds.
And I ageine a toother side said thus It is a shame
That God should yield too man. (this strife was long ere he became
A God). Thou seeist me a Lord of waters in thy Realm
Where I in wide and wynding banks do bear my flowing stream.
No stranger shall thou have of me sent far from foreign land:
But one of household, or at least a neighbor here at hand.
Alonly let it be too me no hindrance that the wife
Of Jove abhorres me not, ne that upon the pain of life
She sets me not too task. For where thou bostest thee too be
Al^menas son, Jove either is not father unto thee:
Or if he be it is by sin. In making Jove thy father,
Thou maakst thy mother but a whore. now choose thee whither rather
Thou had too grant this tale of Jove surmised for too be,
Or else thy self begot in shame and borne in bastardee.
At that he grimly bendes his brows, and much a do he has
Too hold his hands. so sore his heart inflamed is with wrath.
He said no more but thus. My hand does serve me better than
My tongue. Content I am (so I in feighting vanquish can)
That thou shall overcome in words. And therewithal he began
Me feercely to assail. Me thought it was a shame for me
That had even now so stoutly talked, in doings faint too be.
I casting of my greenish cloak thrust stiffly out at length
Mine arms and streynd my pawing arms too hold him out by strength,
And framed every limme too cope. With both his hollow hands
He caught up dust and sprincked me: and I likewise with sands.
Made him all yelow too. One while he at my neck does snatch
Another while my clear crisp legs he strives for too catch,
Or trippes at me: and euerywhere the vauntage he does watch.
My weightinesse defended me, and clearly did disfeate
His stout assaults as when a wave with hideous noise does beat
Against a Rock, the Rock does still both sauf and sound abide
By reason of his massinesse. We drew a while a side.
And then incountring fresh ageine, we kept our places stowt
Full minded not too yield an inch, but for too hold it out.
Now were we stonding foot too foot. And I with all my breast
Was leaning forward, and with head against his head did rest,
And with my gryping fingars I against his fingars thrust.
So have I seen two myghtie Bulls together feercely just
In seeking as their pryse to have the fairest Cow in all
The feeld too be their make, and all the herd both great and small
Stand gazing on them fearfully not knowing unto which
The conquest of so great a gain shall fall. Three times a twich
Gave Hercules and could not wrinch my leaning breast him fro
But at the fourth he shook me of and made me too let go
My hold: and with a push (I will tell truth) he had a knacke
Too turn me of, and heavily he hung upon my back.
And if I may believed be (as sure I meene not I
To vaunt my self vayngloriusly by telling of a lie,)
Me thought a mountain whelmed me. But yet with much a do
I wrested in my sweating arms, and hardly did undo
His griping hands. He following still his vauntage, suffered not
Me once too breath or gather strength. but by and by he got
Me by the neck. Then was I feign too sink with knee too ground,
And kiss the dust. Now when in strength too weak myself I found,
I took me too my slights, and slipped in shape of Snake away
Of woondrous length. And when that I of purpose him too fray
Did bend myself in swelling rolls, and made a hideous noise
Of hissing with my forked tongue, he smyling at my toys,
And laughing them too scorn said thus. It is my Cradle game
To vanquish Snakes O Acheloy. Admit thou overcame
All other Snakes, yet what art thou compared too the Snake
Of Lerna, who by cutting of did still encreasement take?
For of a hundred heads not one so soon was paarde away,
But that upon the stump thereof there budded other tway
This sprouting Snake whose braunching heads by slaughter did revive
And grow by cropping, I subdewd, and made it could not thryue.
And think thou (who being none would seem a Snake) too escape?
Who do with foorged weapons feyght and under borrowed shape?
This said, his fingars of my neck he fastened in the nape
Me thought he graand my throat as though he did with pinsons nip
I struggled from his churlish thumbes my pinched chappes too slip
But do the best and worst I could he overcame me so.
Then thirdly did remain the shape of Bull. and quickly tho
I turning too the shape of Bull rebelld against my ^o.
He stepping too my left side cloce, did fold his arms about
My wattled neck, and following me then running maynely out
Did brag me back, and made me pitch my horns against the ground,
And in the deepest of the sand he overthrew me round.
And yet not so content, such hold his cruel hand did take
Upon my welked horn, that he a sunder quight it brake,
And pulld it from my maimed brew. The waterfayries came
And filling it with fruit and flowers did consecrate the same,
And so my horn the Tresory of plenteousnesse became.
As Soon as Acheloy had told this tale a waiting Maid
With flaring hear that lay on both her shoulders and arayd
Like one of Dame Dianas Nymphs with solemn grace forth came
And brought that rich and precious horn, and heaped in the same
All kind of fruits that Harvest sendes, and specially such fruit
As serves for latter course at meals of every sort and suit.
As Soon as daylight came ageine, and that the Sunny rays
Did shine upon the tops of things, the Princes went their ways.
They would not tarry till the flood were altogether fallen
And that the River in his banks ran low ageine and calm.
Then Acheloy amid his waves his Crabtree face did hyde
And head disarmed of a horn. And though he did abide
In all parts else both sauf and sound, yet this deformitye
Did cut his comb: and for too hyde this blemish from the eye.
He hydes his hurt with Sallow leaves, or else with sedge and reed.
But of the selfsame Maid the love killd thee feerce Nesse in deed,
When percing swiftly through thy back an arrow made thee bleed.
For as Jove's issue with his wife was onward on his way
In going too his countryward, enforst he was too stay
At swift Euenus bank, because the stream was risen sore
Above his bounds through rage of rain that fell but late before
Agein so full of whoorlpooles and of gulles the channel was,
That scarce a man could any where find place of passage. As
Not caring for himself but for his wife he there did stand,
This Nessus came unto him (who was strong of body and
Knew well the foordes,) and said use thou thy strength O Hercules
In swimming. I will find the means this Lady shall with ease
Be set upon the further bank. So Hercules betook
His wife too Nessus. She for fear of him and of the brook
Lookte pale. Her husband as he had his quiver by his side
Of arrows full, and on his back his heavy Lions hyde,
(For too the further bank he erst his club and bow had cast)
Said. since I have begone, this brook both must and shall be past,
He never casts further doubts, nor seeks the calmest place,
But through the roughest of the stream he cuts his way a pace.
Now as he on the furthersyde was taking up his bow,
He heard his wedlock shreeking out, and did her calling know:
And cryde to Nesse (who went about to deal unfaithfully
In running with his charge away) Hoawe whither do thou fly
Thou Royster thou, upon a vain hope by swiftness too escape
My hands? I say give ear thou Nesse for all thy double shape,
And meddle not with that that's mine. Though no regard of me
Might move thee too refrain from rape, thy father yet might be
A warning, who for offering shame too Juno now does feel
Continual torment in his limbs by turning on a wheel.
For all that thou have horses feet which do so bold thee make,
Yet shall thou not escape my hands. I will thee overtake
With wound and not with feet. He did according as he spoke.
For with an arrow as he fled he struck him through the back,
And out before his brist ageine the hooked iron stacke.
And when the same was pulled out, the blood a main ensewd
At both the holes with poison foul of Lerna Snake embrewd:
This blood did Nessus take, and said within himself: well: fith
I needs must dye, yet will I not dye vnreuendgd. And with
The same he staynd a shirt, and gave it unto Dyanyre,
Assuring her it had the power too kindle Cupids fire.
A great while after when the deeds of worthy Hercules
Were such as filled all the world, and also did appease
The hatred of his stepmother, As he upon a day
With conquest from Oechalia came, and was about to pay
His vows to Jove upon the Mount of Cenye, tatling fame
(Who in reporting things of truth delyghts too sauce the same
With tales, and of a thing of nowght does ever greater grow
Through false and newly forged lies that she hirself does sow)
Told Dyanyre that Hercules did cast a liking too
A Lady called Iolee* And Dyanyra (whoo
Was jealous over Hercules,) gave credit too the same.
And when that of a Leman first the tidings too her came,
She being stricken too the heart, did fall too tears alone,
And in a lamentable wise did make most woeful moan.
Anon she said: what meene these tears thus gushing from mine eyes?
My husbands Leman will rejoice at these same tears of mine.
Nay, since she is too come, the best it were too shonne delay,
And for too woork sum new deuyce and practyse while I may,
Before that in my bed her limbs the filthy strumpet lay.
And shall I then complain? or shall I hold my tongue with skill?
Shall I return too Calydon? or shall I tarry still?
Or shall I get me out of doors, and let them have their will?
What if that I ( Meleager) remembering me too be
Thy suster, too attempt sum act notorious did agree?
And in a harlots death did show (that all the world might see)
What greef can cause the womankynd too enterprise among?
And specially when therevntoo they forced are by wrong.
With wavering thoughts right violently her mind was tossed long.
At last she did prefer before all others, for too send
The shirt bestayned with the blood of Nessus too the end
Too quicken up the quayling love. And so not knowing what
She gave, she gave her own remorse and greef too ^ychas that
Did know as little as herself: and wretched woman, she
Desyrd him gently too her Lord presented it too see.
The noble Prince receiving it without mistrust therein,
Did wear the poison of the Snake of Lerna next his skin.
Too offer incense and too pray too Jove he did begin,
And on the Marble Altar he full boawles of wine did shed,
When as the poison with the heat resolving, largely spread
Through all the limbs of Hercules. As long as ere he could,
The stoutnesse of his ha^t was such, that sygh no whit he would.
But when the mischeef grew so great all patience too surmount,
He thrust the altar from him straight, and filled all the mount
Of Oeta with his roaring out. He went about too tear
The deathfull garment from his back, but where he pulled, there
He pulld away the skin: and (which is lothsum too report)
It either cleaued too his limbs and members in such sort
As that he could not pull it o^, or else it tare away
The flesh, that bare his mighty bones and grisly sinews lay.
The scalding venim boiling in his blood, did make it hiss,
As when a gad of steel red whot in water quenched is.
There was no measure of his pain. The frying venim hent
His inwards, and a purple swet from all his body went.
His findged sinews shrinking crakt, and with a secret strength
The poison even within his bones the Maree melts at length.
And holding up his hands too heaven he said with hideous reere.
O Saturnes daughter feed thy self on my distresses here.
Yea feed. and cruel wight this plage behold thou from above
And glut thy savage heart therewith. Or if thy fo may move
Thee unto pity, (for too thee I am an utter so)
Bereeue me of my hateful soul distressed with helpless woe,
And borne too endless toil. For death shall unto me be sweet,
And for a cruel stepmother is death a gift most meet.
And is it I that did destroy Busiris who did foil
His temple floores with strangers blood? Is It I that did dispoyle
Antaeus of his moothers help? Is It I that could not be
Abashed at the Spanyard who in one had bodies three?
Nor at the trypleheaded shape O Cerberus of thee?
Are you the hands that by the horns the Bull of Candie drew?
Did you king Augies stable clenze whom afterward ye slew?
Are you the same by whom the fowls were s^aard from Stymphaly?
Caught you the Stag in Maydenwood which did not run but fly?
Are you the hands whose puissance received for your pay
The golden belt of Thermodon? Did you convey away
The Apples from the Dragon fell that waked night and day?
Against the force of me, defense the Centaures could not make,
Nor yet the Boar of Arcadie: nor yet the ougly Snake
Of Lerna, who by loss did grow and dooble force still take.
What? is it I that did behold the pampred Iades of Thrace
With Maungers full of flesh of men on which they fed a pace?
Is It I that down at sight thereof their greazy Maungers threw,
And both the fatted Iades themselves and ^ke their master slew?
The Nemean Lion by these arms lies dead upon the ground.
These arms the monstr^ous Giant Cake by Tyber did confound.
Upon these shoulders have I borne the weight of all the sky.
Jove's cruel wife is weerye of commanding me. Yet I
Unweerie am of doing still. But now on me is light,
An uncouth plage, which neither force of hand, nor virtues might,
Nor Art is able too resist. Like wasting fire it spreedes
Among mine inwards, and through out on all my body feeds.
But all this while Eurysthye lives in health. And sum men may
Beeleue there be sum Gods in deed. Thus much did Hercule say.
And wounded over Oeta high, he stalking began too stray,
As when a Bull in maimed bulk, a deadly Dart does bear,
And that* the dooer of the deed is shrunk aside for fear.
Often syghing might you him have seen, often trembling, often about
Too tear the (...) with his hands from top too to througho^t.
And throwing down the mighty trees, and chaufing with the hills,
Or casting up his hands too heaven where Jove his father dwelles.
Behold as Lychas trembling in a hollow rock did lurk,
He spyed him. And as his greef did all in fury woork,
He said. Art thou sir Lychas he that broughtest unto me
This plagye present? of my death must thou the woorker be?
He quaakt and shaakt, and looked pale, and fearfully began make
Excuse. But as with humbled hands he kneeling too him spoke,
The furio^s Hercule caught him up, and swindging him about
His head a half a doozen times or more, he floong him out
Into the Euboyan sea with force surmounting any sling.
He hardened intoo peble stone as in the air he hing.
And even as rain conieald by wynd is said too turn too snow,
And of the snow round rolled up a thicker mass too grow,
Which falls down in hayle: so men in ancient time report,
That Lychas being swindgd about by violence in that sort,
(His blood then being drayned out, and having left at all
No moisture,) intoo peble stone was turned in his fall.
Now also in the Euboyan sea appeeres a high short rock
In shape of man against the which the shipmen shun too knock,
As though it could them faeele* and they do call it by the name
Of Lychas still. But thou Jove's imp of great renown and fame,
Did fell the trees of Oeta high, and making of the same
A pyle, did give too Philoctet^.
Poeans son thy quiver and thy bow,
And arrows which should help agein Troy town too overthrow.
He put too fire, and as the same was kindling in the pyle,
Thy self did spread thy Lions skin upon the wood the while,
And leaning with thy head against thy Club, thou laydst thee down
As cheerfully, as if with flowers and garlonds on thy crown
Thou had been set a banqueting among full cups of wine.
Anon on every side about those careless limbs of thine
The fire began too gather strength, and crackling noise did make,
Assayling him whose noble heart ^or daliance did it take.
The Gods for this defender of the earth were sore afraid
Too whom with cheerful countnance Jove perceiving it thus said.
This fear of yours is my delyght, and gladly even with all
My heart I do rejoice O Gods that mortal folk me call
Their king and father, thinking me ay myndfull of their weal,
And that mine offspring should do well your selves do show such zeal.
For though that you do attribute your favor too desert,
Considring his most woondrous acts: yet I too for my part
Am bound unto you. Nerethelesse, for that I would not have
Your faithful hearts without just cause in fearful passions wave,
I would not have you of the flames in Oeta make account.
For as he has all other things, so shall he them surmount.
Save only on that part that he has taken of his mother,
The fire shall have no power at all. Eternal is the the other,
The which he takes of me, and cannot dye, ne yield too fire.
When this is rid from earthly dross, then will I lift it higher,
And take it intoo heaven: and I believe this deed of mine
Will gladsome be too all the Gods. If any do repyne,
If any do repyne I say that Hercule should become
A God, repyne he still for me, and look he sour and glum.
But let him know that Hercules deserves this reward,
And that he shall against his will allow it afterward.
The Gods assented euery^hone. And Juno seemd too make
No evil countnance too the rest, until her husband spoke
The last. for then her look was such as well they might perceive,
She did her husbands noting her in evil part conceive.
While Jove was talking with the Gods, as much as fire could waste
So much had fire consumde. And now O Hercules thou haste
No carkesse for too know thee by. That part is quyght bereft
Which of thy mother thou did take. Alonly now is left
The likeness that thou tookst of Jove. And as the Serpent slye
In casting of his withered slough, renewes his years thereby,
And wexeth lustyer than before, and looks crisp and bright
With scoured scales: so Hercules as soon as that his spryght
Had left his mortal limbs, began in his better part too thryue,
And for too seem a greater thing than when he was alive,
And with a stately majesty right reverend too appear.
His mighty father took him up above the cloudy spheere,
And in a charyot placed him among the streaming stars.
Howge Atlas felt the weight thereof. But nothing this disbarres
Eurysthyes malice. Cruelly he prosecutes the hate
Upon the offspring, which he bare against the father late.
But yet too make her moan unto and wayle her miscrie
And tell her sons great works, which all the world could testify,
Old Alcmen had Dame Iolee. By Hercules last will
In wedlock and in hearty love she joined was too Hill,
By whom she then was big with child: when thus Alcmena said*
The Gods at least be merciful and send thee then their aid,
And short thy labor, when the fruit the which thou ghost withal
Now being ripe en^orceth thee with fearful voice too call
Upon Ilithya president of chyldbirthes, whom the ire
Of Juno at my traveling made deaf too my desire.
For when the Sun through twyce five signs his course had fully run,
And that the paynfull day of birth approached of my son,
My burden strayned out my womb, and that that I did bear
Became so great, that of so howge a mass ye well might swear
That Jove was father. Neither was I able too endure
The travel any longer time. Even now I you assure
In telling it a shuddring cold through all my limbs does strike,
And partly it renewes my peynes too think upon the like.
I being in most cruel throws nights seven and days eke seven,
And tired with continual pangs, did lift my hands too heaven,
And crying out aloud did call Lucina too mine aid,
Too loose the burden from my womb. She came as I had prayed:
But so corrupted long before by Juno my most fo,
That for too martyr me too death with pain she purposde tho.
For when she heard my piteous plaints and gronings, down she sat
On you same altar which you see there standing at my gate.
Upon her left knee she had pitched her right ham, and beside
She stayed the birth with fingars one within another tide
In lattiswyse. And secretly she whisperde witching spells
Which hindered my deliverance more than all her doings else.
I labord still: and forced by pain and torments of my fitts,
I rayld on Jove (although in vain) as one beside her wits.
And ay I wished for too dye. The words that I did speak,
Were such as even the hardest stones of very flint might break.
The wives of Thebee being there, for sauf deliverance prayed
And giving cheerful words, did bid I should not be dismayed.
Among the other women there that too my labor came,
There was an honest yeomans wife, Galantis was her name.
Her hear was yellow as the gold, she was a jolly Dame,
And stoutly served me, and I did love her for the same.
This wife (I know not how) did smell some packing gone about
On Iunos part. And as she often was passing in and out,
She spyde Lucina set upon the altar holding fast
Her arms toogither on her knees, and with her fingars cast
Within each other on a knot, and said unto her thus.
I pray you who so ere you be, rejoice you now with us,
My Lady Alcmen has her wish, and sauf is brought a bed.
Lucina leaped up amazde at that that she had sed.
And let her ^ands a sunder slip. And I immediately
With loosening of the knot, had sauf deliverance by and by.
They say that in deceyuing Dame Lucina Galant laughed.
And therefore by the yellow locks the Goddess wroth her caught,
And dragged her. And as she would have risen from the ground,
She kept her down, and into legs her arms she did confound.
Her former stoutnesse still remaynes: her back does keep the hew
That ^rst was in her hear: her shape is only altered new.
And for with lying mouth she helped a woman laboring, she
Does kindle also at her mouth. And now she haunteth free
Our hou^es as she did before, a Weas^e as we see.
With that she syghes too think upon her servants hap, and then
Her daughtrinlaw immediately replied thus again.
But mother, she whose altered shape does move your heart so sore,
Was neither kith^nor kin too you. What will you say therefore,
If of mine own dear suster I the woondrous fortune show?
Although my sorrow and the tears that from mine eyes do flow,
Do hinder me, and stop my speech. Her mother (you must know
My father by another wife had me) bare never mo
But this same Lady Dryopee, the fairest Lady tho
In all the land of Oechalye Whom being then no maid
(For why the (...).
God of Delos and of Delphos had her frayd)
Andraemon takes too his wife, and thinks him well apayd.
There is a certain leaning Lake whose bowing banks do show
A likeness of the salt sea shore. Upon the brim do grow
All round about it Mirtletrees. My suster thither goes
Unwares what was her destiny, and (which you may suppose
Was more too be disd^yned at) the cause of coming there
Was too the fayries of the Lake fresh garlonds for too bear.
And in her arms a babye her sweet burden she did hold.
Who sucking on her breast was yet not full a tweluemoonth old.
Not far from this same pond did grow a Lote tree florisht gay
With purple flowers and beries sweet, and leaves as green as Bay.
Of these same flowers too please her boy my suster gathered sum,
And I had thought too do so too, for I was thither cum.
I saw how from the sliuered flowers red drops of blood did fall,
And how that shuddring horribly the branches quaakt withal,
You must perceive that (as too late the Countryfolk declare)
A Nymph called Lotos flying from foul Pryaps filthy ware,
Was turned intoo this same tree reserving still her name.
My suster did not know so much. who when she backward came
Afraid at that that she had seen, and having sadly prayed
The Nymphs of pardon, too have gone her way again assayd:
Her feet were fastened down with roots. She stryued all she might
Too pluck them up. but they so sure within the earth were pyght,
That nothing save her upper parts she could that present move.
A tender bark grows from beneath up leysurly above,
And softly ouerspreddes her loins. which when she saw, she went
About too tear her hear, and full of leaves her hand she hent.
Her head was ouergrowen with leaves. And little Amphise (so
Had Eurytus his Graundsyre naamd her son not long ago)
Did feel his mothers dugges wex hard. And as he still them drew
In sucking, not a whit of milk nor moisture did ^ns^w.
I standing by thee did behold thy cruel chance: but naught
I could relieve thee suster mine. yet too my power I wrought
Too stay the growing of thy trunk and of thy branches by
Embracing thee. Yea I protest I would right willingly
Have in the self same bark with thee been closed up. Behold,
Her husband good Andraemon and her wretched father old
Sir Eurytus came thither and enquyrd for Dryopee.
And as they asked for Dryopee, I showed them Lote the tree.
They kissed the wood which yet was warm, and falling down bylow,
Did hug the roots of that their tree. My suster now could show
No part which was not wood except her face. A deawe of tears
Did stand upon the wretched leaves late formed of her hears.
And while she might, and while her mouth did give her way too speak,
With such complaynt as this, her mind she last of all did break.
If credit may be given too such as are in wretchedness,
I swear by God I never yet deserved this distress.
I suffer pain without desert. My life has guiltless been.
And if I lie, I would these boughs of mine which now are green,
Might withered be, and I heawen down and burned in the fire.
This infant from his mothers womb remove you I desire:
And put him forth too nurce, and cause him underneath my tree
Often times too suck, and oftentimes too play. And when that he
Is able for too speak I pray you let him greet me here,
And sadly say in this same trunk is hid my mother dear.
But learn him for too shun all ponds and pulling flowers from trees,
And let him in his heart believe that all the shrubs he sees,
Are bodies of the Goddesses. Adieu dear husband now,
Adieu dear father, and adieu dear suster. And in you
If any love of me remain, defend my boughs I pray
From wound of cutting hook and ax, and bit of beast for ay.
And for I cannot stoop too you, raise you yourselues too me,
And come and kiss me while I may yet touched and kissed be.
And lift me up my little boy. I can no longer talk,
For now about my lillye neck as if it were a stalk
The tender rynd begins too creep, and ouergrowes my top.
Remove your fingars from my face* the spreading bark does stop
My dying eyes without your help. She had no sooner left
Her talking, but her life therewith toogither was bereft.
But yet a good while after that her native shape did fade,
Her newmade boughs continewed warm. Now while that Iole made
Report of this same woondrous tale, and while Alcmena (who
Did weep) was drying up the tears of Iole weeping too,
By putting too her thomb: there hapt a sodeine thing so strange.
That unto mirth from heaviness their hearts it straight did change.
For at the door in manner even a very boy as then
With short soft Down about his chin, revoked back again
Too youthful years, stood Iolay with countnance smooth and trim.
Dame Hebee Iunos daughter had bestowde this gift on him,
Entreated at his earnest suit. Whom mynding fully there
The giving of like gift ageine too any too forswear,
Dame Themis would not suffer. For (quoth she) this present hour
Is cruel war in Thebee town, and none but Jove has power
Too vanquish stately Canapey. The brothers shall a like
Wound either other. And alive a Prophet shall go seek
His own quick ghost among the dead, the earth him swallowing in.
The son by taking vengeance for his fathers death shall win
The name of kind and wicked man, in one and self same case.
And flayght with mischeefes, from his wits and from his native place
The furies and his mothers ghost shall restlessely him chase,
Until his wy^e demand of him the fatal gold for meede,
And that his cousin Phegies sword do make his sides too bleed.
Then shall the fair Callirrhoee Achelous daughter pray
The mighty Jove in humble wise too grant her children may
Retire ageine too youthful years, and that he will not see
The death of him that did revenge vnvenged for too be.
Jove moved at her suit shall cause his daughtrinlaw too give
Like gift, and back from age too youth Callirrhoes children drive.
When Themis through foresyght had spoke these words of prophecy,
The Gods began among themselves vain talk too multiply,
They mooyld why others might not give like gift as well as she.
First Pallants daughter grudged that her husband old should be.
The gentle Ceres murmurde that her Iasions hear was hoar.
And Vulcane would have called ageine the years long spent before
By Ericthonius. And the nyce Dame Venus having care
Of time too come, the making young of old Anchises swear.
So every God had ^ne too whom he special favor bare.
And through this partial love of theyrs seditiously increast
A hurlyburly, till the time that Jove among them preast,
And said. So smally do you stand in awe of me this hour,
As thus too rage? Thinks any of you himself too have such power,
As for too alter destinye? I tell you Iolay
Recovered has by destinye his years erst past away.
Callirrhoes children must return too youth by destiny,
And not by force of arms, or suit susteynd ambitiously.
And too th'entent with meelder minds ye may this matter bear,
Even I myself by destinyes am ruled. which if I were
Of power too alter, think you that our Aeacus should stoop
By reason of his feeble age? or Radamanth should droope?
Or Minos, who by reason of his age is now disdeynd,
And lives not in so sure a state as heretoofore he reygnd?
The words of Jove so movd the Gods that none of them complaynd,
Since Radamanth and Aeacus were both with age constreynd:
And Minos also: who (as long as lusty youth did last,)
Did even with terror of his name make mighty Realms aghast.
But then was Minos weakened sore, and greatly stood in fear
Of Milet one of Deyons race: who proudly did him bear
Upon his father Phoebus and the stoutnesse of his youth.
And though he feared he would rebel: yet durst he not his mouth
Once open for too banish him his Realm: until at last
Departing of his own accord, Miletus swiftly past
The Gotes^a and did build a town upon the Asian ground,
Which still reteynes the name of him that first the same did found.
And there the daughter of the brook Maeander which does go
So often backward, Cyane a Nymph of body so
Exceeding comely as the like was seldom heard of, as
She by her fathers wynding banks for pleasure walking was,
Was known by Milet: unto whom a pair of twins she brought,
And of the twins the names were Caune and Byblis* Byblis ought
Too be a mirror unto Maids in lawful wise too love.
This Byblis cast a mind too Caune. but not as did behoue
A suster too her brotherward. When first of all the fire
Did kindle, she perceyvd it not. She thought in her desire
Of kissing him so oftentimes no sin, ne yet no harm
In cleeping him about the neck so often with her arm.
The glittering gloss of godliness beguyld her long. Her love
Began from evil unto worse by little too remove.
She commes too see her brother decked in brave and trim attire,
And for too seem exceeding fair it was her whole desire.
And if that any fayrer were in all the ^locke than she,
It spyghts her. In what case she was as yet she did not see.
Her heat exceeded not so far as for too vow: and yet
She suffered in her troubled brist full many a burning fit.
Now calls she him master, now she utter hates all
The names of kin. She rather had he should her Byblis call
Than suster. yet no filthy hope she durst permit too creep
Within her mind awake. But as she lay in quiet sleep,
She often behild her love: and often she thought her brother came
And lay with her, and (though a sleep) she blushed at the same.
When sleep was gone, she long lay dumb still musing on the sight,
And said with wavering mind. Now woe is me most wretched wight.
What meenes the image of this dream that I have seen this night?
I would not wish it should be true, Why dreamed I then so?
Sure he is fair although he should be judged by his fo.
He likes me well* and were he not my brother, I might set
My love on him, and he were me right worthy for too get,
But unto this same match the name of kindred is a let.
Well. So that I wake do still me undefiled keep,
Let come as often as they will such dreamings in my sleep.
In sleep there is no witness by* In sleep yet may I take
As great a pleasure (in a sort) as if I were awake.
Oh Venus and thy tender son Sir Cupid, what delyght,
How present feeling of your sport has touched me this night?
How lay I as it were resolvd both maree, flesh, and bone?
How gladdes it me too think thereon? Alas too soon was gone
That pleasure, and too hastye and despyghtfull was the night
In breaking of my joys. O Lord if name of kindred might
Between us two removed me, how well it would agree
O Caune that of thy father I the daughtrinlaw should be?
How fitly might my father have a sonneinlaw of thee?
Would God that all save auncesters were common too us twain
I would thou were of nobler stock than I* I cannot said
O perle of beauty what she is whom thou shall make a mother.
Alas how ill befalles it me that I could have none other
Than those same parents which are (...)? So only s^ill my brother
And not my husband may thou be. The thing that hurts us both
Is one, and that between us ay inseparably gothe.
what meene my dreams the? what effect have dreams? and may there be
Effect in dreams? The Gods are far in better case than we.
For why? the Gods have matched with their susters as we see.
So Saturn did alie with Ops the nearest of his blood.
So ^ethys with Oceanus: So Jove did think it good
Too take his suster Juno too his wife* What then? the Gods
Have laws and charters by themselves. And since there is such odds
Between the state of us and them, why should I sample take,
Our worldly matters equal with the heavenly things too make?
This wicked love shall either from my heart he driven away,
Or if it can not be expulst, God grant I perish may.
And that my brother kiss me laid on Herce ^oo go too grave.
But my desire the full consent of both of us does crave.
Admit the matter likes me. He will for sin it take.
But yet the sons of Aeolus no scrup^lousnesse did make
In going too their susters beds. And how come I too know
The feats of them? Too what intent these samples do I show?
Ah whither am I headlong driven? auaunt foul filthy fire:
And let me not in otherwise than susterlyke desire
My brothers love. Yet if that he were first in love with me,
His fondness too inclyne unto perchaune I could agree.
Shall I therefore who would not have rejected him if he
Had sude too me, go sue too him? and can thou speak in deed?
And can thou utter forth thy mind? and tell him of thy need?
My love will make me speak. I can. Or if that shame do stay
My tongue, a sealed letter shall my secret love bewray.
This likes her best. upon this point now restes her doubtful mind
So raising up herself upon her leftsyde she enclynd,
And leaning on her elbow said. Let him advise him what
Too do, for I my frantic love will utter plain and flat.
Alas too what ungraciousness intend I for too fall?
What fury raging in my heart my senses does appall?
In thinking so, with trembling hand she framed her too wryght
The matter that her troubled mind in musing did indyght.
Her right hand holds the pen, her left does hold the empty wax.
She ginnes. She doutes, she wryghtes: she in the tables finds lacks.
She notes, she blurres, dislikes, and likes: and changes this for that.
She lays away the book, and takes it up. She wotes not what
She would herself. What ever thing she myndeth for too do
Misliketh her. A shamefastness with boldness mixed theretoo
Was in her countnance. She had once writ Suster: Out again
The name of Suster for too raze she thought it best. And then
She snatched the ^ables up, and did these following words ingraue.
The health which if thou give her not she is not like too have
Thy lover wishes unto thee. I dare not ah for shame
I dare not tell thee who I am, nor let thee hear my name.
And if thou do demand of me what thing I do desire,
Would God that namelesse I might plead the matter I require,
And that I were unknown too thee by name of Byblis, till
Assurance of my suit were wrought according too my will.
As tokens of my wounded heart might these too thee appear:
My color pale, my body lean, my heavy mirthlesse cheer,
My watery eyes, my sighs without apparent causes why,
My often embracing of thee: and such kisses (if perdye
Thou marked them) as very well thou might have felt and found
Not for too have been Susterlike. But though with grievous wound
I then were stricken too the heart. although the raging flame
Did burn within: yet take I God too witness of the same,
I did as much as lay in me this outrage for too tame.
And long I stryued (wretched wench) too escape the violent Dart
Of Cupid. More I have endurde of hardness and of smart,
Than any wench (a man would think) were able too abide.
Force forces me too show my case which feign I still would hyde,
And mercy at thy gentle hand in fearful wise too crave.
Thou only may the life of me thy lover spill or save.
Choose which thou will. No enmy craves this thing: but such a one
As thou^h she be alyde so sure as surer can be none,
Yet couets she more surely yet alyed for too be,
And with a nearer kind of band too link her self too thee.
Let aged folks have skill in law: too age it does belong
Too keep the rigor of the laws and search out right from wrong.
Such youthful years as o^rs are yet rash* ^olly does bese^me.
W^e know not what is lawful (...). And therefore we may* (...)
That all is lawful that (...) list: ensewing in the same
The doings of the mighty Gods. Not dread of worldly sham^
Nor yet our fathers roughness, no nor fearfulness should let
Our purpose. Only let all fear aside be wholly set.
We underneath the name of kin our pleasant scapes may hyde.
Thou know I have liberty too talk with thee a side.
And openly we kiss and ^ull. And what is all the rest
That wants? Have mercy on me now, who plainly have expressed
My case: which thing I had not done, but that the utter rage
Of love constreynes me therevntoo the which I cannot swage.
Deserve not on my tumb thy name subscribed for too have,
That thou art he whose cruelnesse did bring me too my grave.
Thus much she wrate in vain, and wax did want her too indyght,
And in the margent she was feign the latter verse too wryght.
Immediately too seal her shame she takes a precious stone,
The which she moystes with tears: from tung the moisture quight was gone.
She called a servant shamefastly, and after certain fair
And gentle words, my trusty man I pray thee bear this pair
Of tables (quoth she) too my (and a great while afterward
She added) brother. Now through chance or want of good regard
The table slipped down too ground in reaching too him ward
The handsell troubled sore her mind. But yet she sent them. And
Her servant spying time did put them intoo Caunyes hand.
Maeanders nephew sodeinly in anger floong away
The tables ere he half had red, (scarce able for too stay
His fistocke from the servants face who quaakt) and thus did say.
Auaunt thou baudye ribawd while thou may. For were it not
For shame I should have killed thee. Away afraid he got,
And told his mistress of the feerce and cruel answer made
By Caunye. By and by the hew of Byblis began too fade,
And all her body was benumd with Icie cold for fear
Too here of this repulse. As Soon as that her senses were
Returned ageine, her furious flames returned with her wits.
And thus she said so often that scarce her tongue the air hitts
And woorthely. For why was I so rash as too discover
By hasty wryghting this my wound which most I ought to cover.
I shou^^ with dowtfull glauncing words have felt his humor furst,
And made a train too try him if pursue or no he durst.
I should have vewed first the coast, too see the weather clear,
And then I might have launched sauf and boldly from the peer.
But now I hoyst up all my sails before I tryde the wynd:
And therefore am I driven upon the rocks against my mind,
And all the sea does ouerwhelme me. Neither may I find
The means too get too harbrough, or from danger too retire.
Why did not open tokens warn too bridle my desire,
Then when the tables falling in delivering them declaard
My hope was vain? And ought not I then either too have spaard
From sending them as that day? or have changed whole my mind?
Nay rather shifted of the day? For had I not been blind
Even God himself by soothfast signs the sequel seemd too hit.
Yea rather than too wryghting thus my secrets too commit,
I should have gone and spoke myself, and presently have showde
My fervent love. He should have seen how tears had from me flowde.
He should have seen my piteous look right louerlike. I could
Have spoken more than intoo those my tables enter would.
About his neck against his will, mine arms I might have wound
And had he shaakt me of, I might have seemed for too swound.
I humbly might have kissed his feet, and kneeling on the ground
Besought him for too save my life. All these I might have proved,
Whereof although no one alone his stomach could have moved.
Yet all toogit^er might have made his hardened heart relent.
Perchance there was some fault in him that was of message sent.
He stepped unto him bluntly (I believe) and did not watch
Convenient time, in merry kew at leisure him too catch.
These are the things that hindered me. For certainly I know
No sturdy stone nor massy steel does in his stomach grow.
He is not made of Adamant. He is no Tigers whelp.
He never sucked Lioness. He might with little help
Be vanquished. Let us give fresh charge upon him. While I live
Without obteyning victory I will not over give.
For firstly (i^ it lay in me my doings too re^oke)
I should not have begone at all. But seeing that the stroke
Is given, the second point is now too give the push too win.
For neither he (although that I mine enterprise should blin)
Can ever while he li^es forget my deed. And since I shrink,
My love was light, or else I meant too trap him, he shall think.
Or at the least he may suppose that this my rage of love
Which broyleth so within my breast, proceeds not from above
By Cupids stroke, but of some foul and filthy lust. In fine
I cannot but too wickedness now more and more inclyne.
By wryghting is my suit commenst: my meening does appear:
And though I cease: yet can I not accounted be for clear.
Now that that does remain behynd is much as in respect
My fond desire too satisfy: and little in effect
Too aggrauate my fault withal. Thus much she said. And so
Unconstant was her wavering mind still floting too and fro,
That though it irkt her for too have attempted, yet poceedes
She in the self same purpose attempting, and exceedes
All measure. and vnhapy wench she takes from day too day
Repulse upon repulse, and yet she has not grace too stay.
Soon after when her brother saw there was with her no end,
He fled his country forbycause he would not so offend,
And in a foreign land did buyld a City. Then men say
That Byblis through despair and thought all wholly did dismay.
She tare her garments from her breast, and furiously she wroong,
Her hands, and beete her arms, and like a bedlem with her tongue
Confessed her unlawful love. But being of the same
Dispoynted, she forsook her land and hateful house for shame,
And followed after flying Caune. And as the Froes of Thrace
In doing of the three year rites of Bacchus: in like case
The married wives of Babasie saw Byblis howling out
Through all their champion feeldes The which she leaving, ran about
In Caria too the Lelegs who are men in battle slout,
And so too Lycia. She had past Crag, Limyre, and the brook
Of Xanthus, and the country where Chymaera that same pooke
Has Goatish body, Lions head and brist, and Dragons tail,
When woods did want: and Byblis now beginning for too quayle
Through weerynesse in following Caune, sank down and said her head
Against the ground, and kissed the leaves that wynd from ^rees had shed.
The Nymphs of Caria went about in tender arms too take
Her often up. They oftentimes persuaded her too stake
Her love. And words of comfort too her deaf card mind they spoke.
She still lay dumb: and with her nails the greenish herbs she hild,
And moysted with a stream of tears the grass upon the feeld.
The waternymphes (so folk report) put under her a spring,
Which never might be dryde: and could they give a greater thing?
Immediately even like as when ye wound a pitchtree rynd,
The gum does issue out in drops: or as the western wynd
With gentle blast toogither with the warmth of Sun, vnbynd
The ice: or as the clammy kind of cement which they call
Bitumen issues from the ground full fraughted therewithal:
So Phoebus niece Dame Byblis then consuming with her tears,
Was turned too a fountain, which in those same vallyes bears
The title of the founder still, and gusheth freshly out
From underneath a Sugarchest as if it were a spowt.
The fame of this same wondrous thing perhaps had filled all
The hundred Towns of Candye had a greater not befall
More nearer home by Iphys means transformed late before.
For in the shyre of Phestos hard by Gnossus dwelt of yore
A yeoman of the meaner sort that Lyctus had too name.
His stock was simple, and his wealth according too the same.
Howbeet his life so vpryght was, as noman could it blame.
He came unto his wife then big and ready down too lie,
And said: two things I wish thee. Tone, that when thou out shall cry,
Thou may dispatch with little pain: the other that thou have
A Boay. For Gyrles too bring them up a greater cost do crave.
And I have no ability. And therefore if thou bring
A wench (it goes against my heart too think upon the thing)
Although against my will, I charge it straight destroyed be.
The bond of nature needs must bear in this behalf with me.
This sed, both wept exceedingly, as well the husband who
Did give commandment, as the wife that was commanded too.
Yet Telethusa earnestly at Lyct her husband lay,
(Although in vain) too have good hope, and of himself more stay.
But he was full determined. Within a while, the day
Approached that the fruit was ripe, and she did look too lay
Her belly every mynute: when at midnyght in her rest
Stood by her (or did seem too stand) the Goddess Isis, dr^st
And trained with the solemn pomp of all her rytes. Two horns
Upon her forehead like the moo^e, with ears of rypened corns
Stood glistring as the burnisht gold. Moreover she did wear
A rich and stately diade^^e. Attendant on her were
The barking bug Anubis, and the saint of Bubast, and
The pydecote Apis, and the God that gives too understand
By fingar holden too his lips that men should silence keep,
And Lybian worms whose stinging does enforce continual sleep,
And thou Osyris whom the folk of Egypt ever seek,
And never can have sought enough, and Rittlerattles eke.
Then even as though that Telethuse had fully been awake,
And seen these things with open eyes, thus Isis too her spoke.
My servant Telethusa, cease this care, and break the charge
Of Lyct. And when Lucina shall have let thy fruit at large,
Bring up the same what ere it be I am a Goddess who
Delyghts in helping folk at need. I hither come too do
Thee good. thou shall not have a cause hereafter too complain
Of serving of a Goddess that is thanklesse for thy pain.
When Isis had this comfort given, she went her way again.
A joyful wight rose Telethuse, and lifting too the sky
Her hardened hands, did pray her dream might work effectually.
Her throws increast, and forth alone anon the burden came,
A wench was borne too Lyctus who knew nothing of the same.
The mother making him believe it was a boay, did bring
It up, and none but she and nurce were privy too the thing.
The father thanking God did give the child the Graundsyres name,
The which was Iphys. Joyful was the moother of the same,
Because the name did serve alike too man and woman both,
And so the lie through godly guile forth vnperceyued gothe.
The garments of it were a boayes. The face of it was such
As either in a boay or gyrle of beawtie uttered much.
When Iphys was of thirteen years, her father did insure
The brown Ianthee unto her, a wench of look demure,
Commended for her favor and her person more than all
The Maids of Phestos: Telest, men her fathers name did call.
He dwelt in Dyctis. They were both of age and favor leeke,
And under both one schoolemayster they did for nurture seek.
And hereupon the hearts of both, the dart of Love did streeke.
And wounded both of them aleeke. But unlike was their hope.
Both longed for the wedding day toogither for too cope.
For whom Ianthee thinks too be a man, she hopes too see
Her husband. Iphys loves whereof she thinks she may not be
Partaker, and the self same thing augmenteth still her flame.
Herself a Maiden with a Maid (right strange) in love became.
She scarce could stay her tears. What end remaynes for me (quod she)
How strange a love? how uncouth? how prodigious reygnes in me?
If that the Gods did favor me, they should destroy me quyght.
Or if they would not me destroy, at least wise yet they might
Have given me such a malady as might with nature stond,
Or nature were acquainted with. A Cow is never fond
Upon a Cow, nor Mare on Mare. The Ram delyghts the Eawe,
The Stag the Hynde, the Cock the Hen. But never man could show,
That female yet was ^ane in love with female kind. O would
Too God I never had been borne. Yet least that Candy should
Not bring forth all that monstrous were, the daughter of the Son
Did love a Bull. Howbeet there was a Male too dote upon.
My love is furio^ser than hers, if truth confessed be.
For she was fond of such a lust as might be compast. She
Was served by a Bull beguyld by Art in Cow of tree.
And one there was for her with whom aduowtrie to commit.
If all the conning in the world and slyghts of subtle wit
Were here, or if that Daedalus himself with vncowth wing
Of Wax should hither fly again, what comfort should he bring?
Could he with all his conning crafts now make a boay of me?
Or could he O Ianthee change the native shape of thee?
Nay rather Iphys settle thou thy mind and call thy wits
About thee: shake thou of these flames that foolishly by fitts
With out all reason reign. Thou see what Nature has thee made
(Unless thou wilt deceive thy self.) So far forth wisely wade,
As right and reason may support, and love as women ought
Hope is the thing that breeds desire, hope feeds the amorous thought.
This hope thy sex denies thee. Not watching does restreyne
Thee from embracing of the thing whereof thou art so feign.
Nor yet the Husbands iealowsie, nor rowghnesse of her Sire,
Nor yet the coyness of the Wench does hinder thy desire.
And yet thou can not her enjoy. No though that God and man
Should labor too their uttermost and do the best they can
In they behalf, they could not make a happy wight of thee.
I cannot wish the thing but that I have it. Frank and free
The Gods have given me what they could. As I will, so will he
That must become my fathrinlaw. so wills my father too.
But nature stronger than them all consents not theretoo.
This hinders me, and nothing else. Behold the blisfull ^yme,
The day of Marriage is at hand. Ianthee shall be mine,
And yet I shall not her enjoy. Amid the water we
Shall thirst. O Juno president of marriage, why with thee
Comes Hymen too this wedding where no brydegroome you shall see,
But both are Brydes that must that day toogither coupled be?
This spoken, she did hold her peace. And now the toother maid
Did burn as whote in love as she. And earnestly she prayed
The brydale day might come with speed. The thing for which she longd
Dame Telethusa fearing sore, from day too day prolongd
The time, often feyning sickness, often pretending she had seen
Ill tokens of success. at length all shifts consumed been.
The wedding day so often delayed was now at hand. The day
Before it, taking from her head the kercheef quyght away,
And from her daughters head likewise, with scattred hear she laid
Her hands upon the Altar, and with humble voice thus prayed.
O Isis who do haunt the town of Paretonie, and
The feeldes by Maraeotis lake, and Pharos which does stand
By Alexandria, and the Nyle divided intoo seven
Great channels, comfort thou my fear, and send me help from heaven,
Thyself O Goddess, even thyself, and these thy relikes I
Did once behold and knew them all: as well thy company
As eke thy sounding rattles, and thy ^ressets burning by,
And myndfully I marked what commandment thou did give.
That I escape unpunished, that this same wench does live,
Thy counsel and thy hest it is. Have mercy now on twain,
And help us. With that word the tears ran down her cheeks amayne.
The Goddess seemed for too move her Altar: and in deed
She moved it. The temple doors did tremble like a reed.
And horns in likeness too the Moon about the Church did shine.
And Rattles made a raughtish noise. At this same luckie sign,
Although not wholly careless, yet right glad she went away.
And Iphys followed after her with larger pace than ay
She was accustomd. And her face continued not so whyght.
Her strength increased, and her look more sharper was too sight.
Her hear grew shorter, and she had a much more lively spryght,
Than when she was a wench. For thou O Iphys who right now
A modther were, art now a boay. With offerings both of you
Too Church retire, and there rejoice with faith vnfearfull. They
With offerings went too Church ageine, and there their vows did pay.
They also set a table up, which this breef meeter had.
The vows that Iphys vovvd a vvench he has performd a Lad.
Next morrow over all the world did shine with lightsome flame,
When Juno, and Dame Venus, and Sir Hymen jointly came
Too Iphys marriage, who as then transformed too a boay
Did take Ianthee too his wife, and so her love enjoy
Finis noni Libri.
THE TENTH BOOK of Ouids Metamorphosis.
FRom thence in saffron colored robe flew Hymen through ye air,
And into Thracia being called by Orphy did repair.
He came in d^^de at Orphyes call: bu^ neither did he sing
The words of that solemnity, nor merry countnance bring,
Nor any hand^ell of good luck. His torch with drizling smoke
Was dim: the same too burn out clear, no stirrr^ng could provoke.
The end was woorser than the sign. For as the ^ryde did rome
Abroad accompanyde with a train of Nymphs too bring her home,
A serpent lurking in the grass did (...) her in the ancle:
Whereof she did incontinent, so swift the (...) did ^ancle.
Whom when the Thracian Poet had bewayl^ sufficiently
On earth, the Ghostes departed hence he minding for too try,
Down at the gate of Taenarus did go too Limbo lake.
And thence by ghastly folk and souls late buried he did take
His journey too Persephon^e and too the king of Ghosts
That like a Lordly tyran reigns in those v^^^easant coasts.
And playing on his tuned harp he thus began too sound.
O you the Souereines of the world set underneath the ground,
Too whom we all (what ever thing is made of mortal kind)
Repair, if ^y your leave I now may freely speak my mind,
I come not hither as a spy (...)
Nor yet the foul three headed Eurre whose hears all Adders be
Too tie in cheynes. The cause of this my vyage is my wife
Whose foot a Uiper stinging did abridge her youthful life.
I would have bor^e it pa^iently: and so too do I straue.
But Love surmoun^ed power. This God is known great force too have
Above on earth. And whether he reign here or no I dow^.
But I believe he reigns here too. If fa^^e that flies about
Of former rape report not wrong, Love coupled also you.
By these same places full of fear: by this howge Chaos now,
And by the st^lnesse of this waste and emptye Kingdom, I
Beseech ye of Eurydicee v^^eele the destinye
That was so swiftly reeled up All things too you belong.
And though we lingering for a while our pageants do prolong,
Yet soon or late we all too one abiding place do rome:
We haste us hither all: this place becomes our latest home:
And you do over human kind reign longest time. Now when
This woman shall have lived full her time, she shall again
Become your own. The use of her but for a while I crave.
And if the Destnyes for my wife deny me for too have
Releace, I fully am resolvd for ever here too dwell.
Rejoice you in the death of both. As he this tale did tell,
And played on his instrument, the bloodlesse ghostes shed tears:
Too tire on Titius growing heart the greedy Grype forbeares:
The shunning water Tantalus endeuereth not too drink:
And Danaus daughters ceast too fill their tubbes that have no brink:
Ixions wheel stood still: and down sat Sisyphus upon
His rolling stone. Then first of all (so fame for truth has gone)
The Furies being stricken there with pity at his song
Did weep. And neither Pluto nor his Lady were so strong
And hard of stomach too withhold his just petition long.
They called forth Eurydicee who was as yet among
The newcome Ghosts. and limped of her wound. Her husband took
Her with condition that he should not back upon her look,
Until the time that he were past the bounds of Limbo quyght:
Or else too lose his gift. They took a path that steep vpryght
Rose dark and full of foggye mist. And now they were within
A kenning of the upper earth, when Orphye did begin
Too dowt him least she followed not, and through an eager love
Desirous for too see her he his eyes did backward move.
Immediately she slipped back. He re^ching out his hands.
Desirous too be caught and for too ketch her grasping stands.
But nothing save the slippry air (unhappy man) he caught.
She dy^ng now the second time compla^nd of Orphye naught.
For why what had she too complain, unless it were of love?
Which made her husband back again his eyes upon her move?
Her last farewell she spoke so often, that scarce he heard the sound,
And then revolted too the place in which he had her found.
This double dying of his wife set Orphye in a stound,
No less than him who at the sight of Plutos dreadful Hound
That on the middle neck of three does bear an iron cheyne,
Was stricken in a sodein fear and could it not restreyne,
Until the time his former shape and nature being gone,
His body quyght was ouergrowne, and turned intoo stone.
Or than the foolish Olenus, who on himself did take
Another fault, and giltlesse needs himself would guilty make,
Toogither with his wretched wife Lethaea, for whose pride
They both becoming stones, do stand even yet on watery I Would.
He would have gone too Hell ageine, and ^arnest suit did make:
But Charon would not suffer him too pass the Stygian lake.
Seven days he sat forlorn upon the bank and never ^ate
A bit of bread. Care, tears, and thought, and sorrow were his meat
And crying out upon the Gods of Hell as cruel, he
Withdrew too lofty Rhodopee and Heme which beaten be
With Northern wynds. Three times the Sun had passed through the sheere
And watery sign of Pisces and had finished full the year.
And Orphye (were it that his ill success he still did rue,
Or that he vowed so too do) did utterly eschew
The womankynd. Yet many a one desirous were too match
With him, but he them with repulse did all alike dispatch.
He also taught the Thracian folk a st^wes of Males too make
And of the flowring pryme of boayes the pleasure for too take.
There was a hill, and on the hill a very level plot.
Fair green with grass. But as for shade or covert was there not.
As Soon as that this Po^t borne of Gods, in that same place
Sat down and touched his tuned strings, a shadow came a pace.
There wanted neither Chaons tree, nor yet the trees too which
Fresh Phaetons susters turned were, nor Beeche, nor Holme, nor Which
Nor gentle Asp, nor wyuelesse Bay, nor lofty Chestnuttree.
Nor Hazle spalt, nor Ash whereof the shafts of spears made be.
Nor knotlesse Fur, nor cheerful Plane, nor Maple ^lecked grain.
Nor Lote, nor Sallow which delights by waters too remain.
Nor slender twigged Tamarisk* nor Bor ay green of hew.
Nor Figtrees laden with their fruit of colors brown and blew.
Nor double colored Myrtletrees. Moreover thither came
The wrything Iuye, and the Uyne that runs upon a frame.
Elmes clad with Uynes, and Ashes wyld, and Pitchtrees black as cole,
And full of trees with goodly fruit red stryped, Ortyards whole.
And Palmetrees lythe which in reward of conquest men do bear,
And Pynapple with tufted top and harsh and prickling hear,
The tree too Cybele mother of the Gods most dear. For why?
Her minion Atys putting of the shape of man, did dye,
And hardened intoo this same tree. Among this companee
Was present with a pyked top the Cypress, now a tree,
Sumtime a boay beloved of the God that with a string
Does arm his bow, and with a string in tune his Uiall bring.
For, hallowed too the Nymphs that in the feeldes of Carthye were
There was a goodly mighty Stag whose horns such breadth did bear,
As that they shadowed all his head. His horns of gold did shine,
And down his breast hung from his neck, a chyne with jewels fine.
Amid his fru^t with pretty strings a tablet being tide,
Did waver as he went: and from his cares on either side
Hung perles of all one growth about his hollow temples bright.
This goodly Spitter being void of dread, as having quyght
Forgot his native fearfulness, did haunt men's houses, and
Would suffer folk (yea though unknown) too coy him with their hand.
But more than unto all folk else he deerer was too thee
O Cyparisse the fairest Wight that ever man did see
In Coea. Thou too pastures, thou too water springs him led,
Thou wreathedst sundry flowers between his horns upon his head.
Sumtyme a horsman thou his back for pleasure did bestryde,
And haltring him with silken bit from place too place did ride.
In summer time about high noone when Titan with his heat
Did make the hollow crabbed cleas of Cancer for too sweat,
Unweeting Cyparissus with a Dart did strike this Heart
Quyght through. And when that of the wound he saw he must depart,
He purposd for too die himself. What words of comfort spoke
Not Phoebus too him? willing him the matter light too take
And not more sorrow for it than was requisite too make.
But still the Lad did sygh and sob, and as his last request
Desired God he might thenceforth from moorning never rest.
Anon through weeping overmuch his blood was drayned quyght:
His limbs were green: his hear which hung upon his forehead whyght
Began too be a bristled bush: and taking by and by
A stiffnesse, with sharpened top did face the starrie sky
The God did sigh, and sadly said. Myself shall moorne for thee,
And thou for others: and ay one in moorning thou shall be.
Such wood as this had Orphye drawn about him as among
The herdes of beasts, and flocks of Birds he sat amyds the throng.
And when his thumb sufficiently had tried every string,
And found that though they severally in sundry sounds did ring,
Yet made they all one Harmony. He thus began too sing.
O Muse my mother frame my song of Jove. for every thing
Is subject unto royal Jove. Of Jove the heavenly King
I often have showed the glorious power. I erst in grauer verse
The Giants slain in Phlaegra feeldes with thunder, did rehearse,
But now I need a meelder style too tell of pretty boys
That were the derlings of the Gods: and of unlawful joys
That burned in the breasts of Girls, who for their wicked lust
According as they did deserve, received penance just.
The King of Gods did burn erewhyle in love of Ganymed
The Phrygian and the thing was found which Jupiter that sted
Had rather be than that he was. Yet could ^e not beteeme
The shape of any other Bird than Aegle for too seem
And so he soring in the air with borrowed wings trust up
The Troiane boay who still in heaven even yet does bear his cup,
And brings him Nectar though against Dame Iunos will it be.
And thou Amyclys son (had not they heavy destinee
Abridged thee before thy time) had also placed been
By Phoebus in the firmament. How be it (as is seen)
Thou art eternal so far forth as may be. For as often
As warrie Piscis gives place too Aries that the soft
And gentle springtyde does succeed the winter sharp and stowre:
So often thou renewest thyself, and on the fair green clowre
Do shoot out flowers. My father bare a special love too thee
Above all others. So that while the God went often too see
Eurotas and unwalled Spart, he left his noble town
Of Delphos (which a mid the world is situate in renown)
Without a sovereign* Neither Harp nor Bow regarded were.
Unmyndfull of his Godhead he refused not too bear
The nets, nor for too hold the hounds, nor as a peynfull mate
Too travel over cragged hills, through which continual gate
His flames augmented more and more. And now the sun did stand
Well near midway between the nights last past and next at hand.
They stripped themselves and noynted them with oil of Olyfe fat.
And fell to throwing of a Sledge that was right howge and flat.
First Phoebus peysing it did throw it from him with such strength,
As that the weight drove down the clouds in flying. And at length
It fell upon substantial ground, where plainly it did show
As well the cunning as the force of him that did it throw.
Immediately upon desire himself the sport too try,
The Spartane lad made haste too take up unadvisedly
The Sledge before it still did lie. But as he was in hand
Too catch it, it rebounding up against the hardened land,
Did hit him full upon the face. The God himself did look
As pale as did the lad, and up his swounding body took.
Now culles he him, now wypes he from the wound the blood away,
Anotherwhyle his fading life he stryues with herbs too stay.
Naught booted Leechcraft. Helpless was the wound. And like as one
Broosd violet stalks or Poppie stalks or Lillies growing on
Brown spindles, straight they withering droope with heavy heads and are
Not able for too hold them up, but with their tops do stare
Upon the ground. So Hyacinth in yielding of his breath
Chopped down his head. His neck bereft of strength by means of death
Was even a burden too itself, and down did loosely wrythe
On both his shoulders, now a tone and now a toother lythe.
Thou faadst away my Hyacinth defrauded of the pryme
Of youth (quoth Phoebus) and I see thy wound my heinous crime.
Thou art my sorrow and my fault: this hand of my^e has wrought
Thy death: I like a murderer have too thy grave thee brought.
But what have I offended thou? unless that too have played,
Or if that too have loved, an offense it may be said.
Would God I render might my life with and in stead of thee.
Too which sith fatal destinee denies too agree,
Both in my mind and in my mouth thou evermore shall be.
My U^all stricken with my hand, my songs shall sound of thee,
And in a newmade flower thou shall with letters represent
Our syghings* And the time shall come ere many years be spent,
That in thy flower a valiant Prince shall join himself with thee,
And lea^e his name upon the leaves for men too reed and see.
While Phoebus thus did prophecy, behold the blood of him
Which did the grass, ceast blood too be, and up there sprang a trim
And goodly flower, more orient than the Purple cloth ingrayne,
In shape a Lillye, were it not that Lillyes do remain
Of silver color, whereas these of purple hew are seen.
Although that Phoebus had the cause of this great honor been,
Yet thought he not the same enough. And therefore did he wryght
His syghes upon the leaves thereof: and so in color bright
The flower has (...) writ thereon, which letters are of greef.
So small the Spartanes thought the birth of Hyacinth repree^
Unto them, that they woorship him from that day unto this.
And as their fathers did before, so they do never miss
With solemn pomp too celebrate his feast from year too year.
But if perchance that Amathus the rich in metals, weere
Demanded if it would have bred the Propets it would swear,
Yea even as gladly as the folk whose brewes sumtyme did bear,
A pair of welked horns: whereof they Cerastes named are.
Before their door an Altar stood of Jove that takes the care.
Of alyents and of travelers, which loathsome was too see,
For lewdness wrought thereon. If one that had a stranger be
Had looked thereon, he would have thought there had on it been killd
Sum sucking calves or lambs. The blood of strangers there was spilld.
Dame Venus sore offended at this wicked sacrifyse,
Too leave her Cities and the land of Cyprus did deuyse.
But then bethinking her, she said. What has my pleasant ground
What have my Cities trespassed? what fault in them is found?
Nay rather let this wicked race by exyle punnisht been,
Or death, or by sum other thing that is a mean between
Both death and exyle. what is that? save only for too change
Their shape. In musing with herself what figure were most strange,
She cast her eye upon a horn. And therewithal she thought
The same too be a shape right meet upon them too be brought:
And so she from their mighty limbs their native figure took,
And turned them intoo boystous Bulls with grim and cruel look
Yet durst the filthy Propets stand in stiff opinion that
Dame Venus was no Goddess till she being wroth thereat,
Too make their bodies common first compelld them euerychone
And after chaungd their former kind. For when that shame was gone,
And that they wexed brazen faast, she turned them too stone,
In which between their former shape was diffrence small or none.
Whom forbycause Pygmalion saw too lead their life in sin
Offended with the vice whereof great store is packt within
The nature of the womankynd, he led a single life.
And long it was ere he could find in heart too take a wife.
Now in the while by wondrous Art an image he did grave
Of such proportion, shape, and grace as nature never gave
Nor can too any woman give. In this his work he took
A certain love. The look of it was right a Maidens look,
And such a one as that ye would believe had life, and that
Would moved be, if womanhod and reverence let not:
So artificial was the work. He woondreth at his Art
And of his counterfetted corse conceyueth love in heart.
He often touched it, feeling if the woork that he had made
Were very flesh or Iuorye still. Yet could he not persuade
Himself too think it Iuory. For he oftentimes it kissed
And thought it kissed him ageine. He hild it by the fist,
And talked too it. He believed his fingars made a dint
Upon her flesh, and feared least sum black or broosed print
Should come by touching over hard. Sumtyme with pleasant boords
And wanton toys he dalyingly does cast forth amorous words.
Sumtime (the gifts wherein young Maids are wonted too delyght)
He brought her owches, fine round stones, and Lillyes fair and whygh^*
And pretty singing birds, and flowers of thousand sorts and hew,
And peynted ball^s, and Amber from the tree distilled new.
In gorgeous garments furthermore he did her also deck,
And on her fingars put me rings, and cheynes about her neck.
Rich perles were hanging at her ears, and tablets at her breast.
All kind of things became her well. And when she was undressed,
She s^emed not less beawtifull. He laid her in a bed
The which with scarle^ did in Tire was richly ouerspred,
And terming her (...) bedfellow, he couched down her head
Upon a (...) though she could have felt the same.
The feas^ (...) Venus hallowed through the I Will of Cyprus, cam^
And Bullocks whyght with gilden horns were slain for sacrifyse,
And up too heaven of frankincence the smoky fume did rise.
When as Pygmalion having doo^e his duty that same day,
Before the altar standing, thus with fearful heart did say.
If that you Gods can all things give, then let my wife (I pray)
(He durst not say be yoonsame wench of Iuory, but) be leeke
My wench of Iuory. Venus (who was naught at all to seek
What such a wish as that did meene) then present at her feast,
For handsell of her freendly help did cause three times at least
The fire to kindle and to spyre thryse upward in the air.
As Soon as he came home, straight way Pygmalion did repair
Unto the Image of his wench, and leaning on the bed,
Did kiss her. In her body straight a warmenesse seemd too spread.
He put his mouth again to hers, and on her breast did lay
His hand. The Iuory wexed soft: and putting quyght away
All hardness, yielded underneath his fingars, as we see
A piece of wax made soft against the Sun, or drawn too be
In diverse shapes by chaufing it between ones hands, and so
To serve to uses. He amazde stood wavering too and fro
Tweene joy, and fear too be beeguyld, ageine he burnt in love,
Ageine with feeling he began his wisshed hope too prove.
He felt it verrye flesh in deed. By laying on his thumb,
He felt her pulses beating. Then he stood no longer dumb
But thanked Venus with his heart. and at the length he laid
His mouth to hers who was as then become a perfect maid.
She felt the kiss, and blushed thereat: and lifting fearfully
Her eyelidds up, her Lover and the light at once did spy.
The marriage that her self had made the Goddess blessed so,
That when the Moon with fulsum light nine times her course had go,
This Lady was delivered of a Sun that Paphus hight,
Of whom the Island takes that name. Of him was borne a knight
Called Cinyras who (had he had none issue) surely might
Of all men underneath the sun been thought the happyest wight.
Of wicked and most cursed things to speak I now commence.
Ye daughters and ye parents all go get ye far from hence.
Or if ye minded be to here my tale, believe me naught
In this beehalfe: ne think that such a thing was ever wrought.
Or if ye will beeleeue the deed, believe the vengeance too
Which lyghted on the party that the wicked act did do.
But if that it be possible that any wight so much
From nature should degenerate, as for to fall to such
A heinous crime as this is, I am glad for Thracia, I
Am glad for this same world of ours, yea glad exceedingly
I am for this my native soil, for that there is such space
Between it and the land that bred a child so void of grace.
I would the land Panchaya should of Amomie be rich,
And Cinnamom, and Costus sweet, and Incence also which
Does issue largely out of trees, and other flowers strange,
As long as that it bears Myrrh: not worth it was the change,
New trees to have of such a price. The God of love denies
His weapons too have hurted thee, O Myrrha, and he tryes
Himself unguilty by thy fault. One of the Furies three
With poysonde Snakes and hellish brands has rather blasted thee
To hate ones father is a crime as heinous as may be.
But yet more wicked is this love of thine than any hate.
The youthful Lords of all the East and Peers of cheef estate
Desire to have thee too their wife, and earnest suit do make.
Of all (excepting only one) thy choice O Myrrha take.
She feels her filthye love, and stryues against it, and within
Herself said. whither roonnes my mind? what think I to begin?
Ye Gods (I pray) and godliness, ye holy rites and awe
Of parents, from this heinous crime my vicious mind withdraw,
And disappoynt my wickedness. At leastwyse if it be
A wickedness that I intend. As far as I can see,
This love infrindgeth not the bonds of godliness a whit.
For every other living wight dame nature does permit
Too match without offense of sin. The Hecfer thinks no shame
Too bear her father on her back: The Horse beestrydes the same
Of whom he is the sire: The Got does bucke the Kid that he
Himself begat: and birds do tread the self same birds we see
Of whom they hatched were before. In happy case they are
That may do so without offense. But man's malicious care
Has made a bridle for it self, and spyghtfull laws restreyne
The things that nature sets free. yet are their Realms (men said)
In which the moother with the son, and daughter with the father
Do match, where through of godliness the bond augments the rather
With doubled love. Now woe is me it had not been my lot
In that same country too be borne. And that this lucklesse plot
Should hinder me. Why think I thus? Auaunt unlawful love.
I ought too love him I confess: but so as does behoue
His daughter: were not Cinyras my father then, Iwis
I might obtain too lie with him. But now because he is
Mine own, he cannot be mine own. The neerenesse of our kin
Does hurt me. Were I further of perchance I more might win.
And if I wist that I thereby this wickedness might shun,
I would forsake my native soil and far from Cyprus run.
This evil hea^e does hold me back, that being present still
I may but talk with Cinyras and look on him my fill,
And touch, and kiss him, if no more may further granted be.
Why wicked wench? and can thou hope for further? do not see
How by thy fault thou do confound the ryghts of name and kin?
And will thou make thy mother be a Cucqueane by thy sin?
Will thou thy fathers leman be? will thou be both the moother
And suster of thy child? shall he be both thy son and brother?
And standst thou not in fear at all of those same susters three
Whose heads with crawling snakes in stead of hear bematted be?
Which pushing with their cruel bronds folks eyes and mouths, do see
Their sinful hearts? but thou now while thy body yet is free,
Let never such a wickedness once enter in thy mind.
Defyle not mighty natures hest by lust against thy kind.
What though thy will were fully bent? yet even the very thing
Is such as will not suffer thee the same too end too bring.
For why he being well disposde and godly, myndeth ay
So much his duty that from right and truth he will not stray.
Would God like fury were in him as is in me this day.
This said, her father Cinyras (who dowted what too do
By reason of the worthy store of suitors which did woo
His daughter,) bringing all their names did will her for too show
On which of them she had herself most fancy too bestow.
At first she hild her peace a while, and looking wistly on
Her fathers face, did boil within: and scalding tears anon
Ran down her visage. Cyniras, (who thought them too proceed
Of tender hearted shamefastness) did say there was no need
Of tears, and dried her cheeks, and kissed her. Myrrha took of it
Exceeding pleasure in her self: and when that he did wit
What husband she did wish too have, she said: one like too you.
He understanding not her thought, did well her words allow.
And said: in this thy godly mind continue. At the name
Of godliness, she cast me down her look for very shame.
For why her guilty heart did know she well deserved blame.
High mydnight came, and sleep both care and carkesses oppressed.
But Myrrha lying broad awake could neither sleep nor rest.
She fryes in Cupids flames, and works continewally upon
Her furious love. One while she sinkes in deep despair. Anon
She fully minds to give attempt, but shame does hold her in.
She wishes and she wotes not what too do, nor how too gin.
And like as when a mighty tree with axes heawed rownd,
Now reedye with a strype or twain to lie upon the grownd,
Uncerteine is which way to fall and tottreth every way:
Even so her mind with dowtfull wound effeebled then did stray
Now here now there vncerteinely, and took of both encreace.
No measure of her love was found, no rest, nor yet releace,
Save only death. death likes her best. She ryseth, full in mind
To hang herself. About a post her girdle she does bynd.
And said farewell dear Cinyras, and understand the cause
Of this my death. And with that word about her neck she draws
The nooze. Her trustye nurce that in another Chamber lay
By fortune heard the whispring sound of these her words (folk say.)
The aged woman rising up vnboltes the door. And when
She saw her in that plyght of death, she shreeking out began
Too smyght her self, and scratcht her breast, and quickly too her ran
And rent the girdle from her neck. Then weeping bitterly
And holding her between her arms, she asked the question why
She went about too hang her self so unadvisedly.
The Lady hilld her peace as dumb, and looking on the ground
Unmouably, was sorye in her heart for being found
Before she had dispatched herself. Hernurce still at her lay,
And showing her her empty dugges and naked head all gray,
Besought her for the pains she took with her both night and day
In rocking and in feeding her, she would vouchsafe to say
What ere it were that grieved her. The Lady turned away
Displeasde and fetched a sygh. The nurce was fully bent in mind
Too bowlt the matter out: for which not only she did bynd
Her faith, in secret things to keep: but also said, put me
In trust too find a remedy. I am not (thou shall see)
Yet altoogither dulld by age. If furiousenesse it be,
I have both charms and chaunted herbs to help. If any wight
Bewitcheth thee, by witchcraft I will purge and set thee quyght.
Or if it be the wrath of God, we shall with sacrifyse
Appease the wrath of God right well. What may I more surmyse?
No thieves have broken in upon this house and spoyld the wealth.
Thy mother and thy father both are living and in health.
When Myrrha heard her father naamd, a grievous sygh she fet
Even from the bottom of her heart. Howbeet the nurce as yet
Misdeemd not any wickedness. But nerethelesse she gest
There was some love: and standing in one purpose made request
Too break her mind unto her, And she set her tenderly
Upon her lap. The Lady wept and sobbed bitterly.
Then culling her in feeble arms, she said I well espy
Thou art in love. My diligence in this behalf I swear
Shall seruisable too th^e be. Thou shall not need too fear
That ere thy father shall it know. At that same word she lept
From nurces lap like one that had been past her wits, and stepped
With fury to her bed. at which she leaning down her face
Said, hence I pray thee: force me not to show my shameful case.
And when the nurce did urge her still, she answered either get
The hence, or ceace too ask me why myself I thus do fret.
The thing that thou desyrste too know is wickedness. The old
Poor nurce began quake, and trembling both for age and fear did hold
Her hands to her. And kneeling down right humbly at her feet,
One while she fair entreated her with gentle words and sweet.
Another while (unless she made her privy of her sorrow)
She threatened her, and put her in a fear she would next morrow
Bewray her how she went about to hang herself. But if
She told her, she did plyght her faith and help too her releef.
She lifted up her head, and then with tears fast gusshing out
Beesloobered all her nurces breast: and going often about
Too speak, she often stayed: and with her garments hid her face
For shame, and lastly said: O happy is my moothers case
That such a husband has. with that a grievous sygh she gave,
And hilld her peace. These words of hers a trembling ch^lnesse drove
In nurcis limbs, which perst her bones: (for now she understood
The case) and all her horye hear up stiff^y staring stood
And many things she talked to put away her cursed love,
If that it had been possible the madness to remove.
The Maid herself to be full true the council does espy:
Yet if she may not have her love she fully minds to dye.
Live still (quod nurce) thou shall obtain (she durst not say thy father,
But stayed at that.) And forbycause that Myrrha should the rather
Believe her, she confirmd her words by oath. The yearly feast
Of gentle Ceres came, in which the wives both most and least
Appareld all in whyght are wo^nt the firstlings of the feeld
Fine garlonds made of ears of corn too Ceres for to yield.
And for the space of thryce three nights they counted it a sin
To have the use of any man, or once too towche his s^in.
Among these women did the Queen freequent the secret rites.
Now while that of his lawful wife his bed was void a nights,
The nurce was dooble diligent: and fynding Cinyras
Well washed with wine, she did surmyse there was a pretye less
In love with him. And hyghly she her beawty sets out.
And being asked of her years, she said she was about
The age of Myrrha. well (quod he) then bring her too my bed.
Returning home she said: be glad my nurcechilde: we have sped.
Not all so wholly in her heart was wretched Myrrha glad,
But that her fore misgiuing mind did also make her sad.
Howbeete she also did rejoice as in a certain kind,
Such discord of affections was within her combred mind.
It was the time that all things rest. And now Boots bright
The driuer of the Oxen seven about the northpole pyght.
Had sumwhat turned his wayne aside, when wicked Myrrha sped
About her buysnesse. Out of heaven the golden Phoebee fled.
With clouds more black than any pitch the stars did hyde their head.
The night beecommeth utter void of all her woonted light.
And first before all other hid their faces out of sight
Good Icar and Erigonee his daughter, who for love
Most virtuous too her fatherward, was take up above
And made a star in heaven. Three times had Myrrha warning given
By stumbling, to retire. Three times the deathfull Owl that eeuen
With doolefull noise prognosticates unhappy luck. Yet came
She forward still: the darkness of the night abated shame.
Her left hand held her nurce, her right the dark blind way did grope.
Anon she too the chamber came: anon the door was open:
Anon she entered in. with that her foltring hammes did quake:
Her color did: her blood and heart did clearly her forsake.
The nearer she approached too her wickedness, the more
She trembled: Of her enterprise it irked her full sore:
And fayn she would she might vnknowne^ have turned back. Nurce led
Her pawsing forward by the hand: and putting her too bed,
Here take this Damzell Cinyras, she is thine own she sed.
And so she laid them breast too breast. The wicked father takes
His bowelles intoo filthy bed, and there with words asslakes
The maidens fear, and cheeres her up. And least this crime of theyres
Might want the ryghtfull terms, by chance as in respect of years
He daughter did her call, and she him father. Being sped
With cursed seed in wicked womb, she left her fathers bed,
Of which soon after she became great bagged with her shame.
Next night the lewdness doubled. And no end was of the same,
Until at length that Cinyras desirous for to know
His lover that so many nights upon him did bestow,
Did fetch a light: by which he saw his own most heinous crime,
And eeke his daughter. nathelesse, his sorrow at that time
Represt his speech. Then hanging by he drew a Rapier bright.
Away ran Myrrha, and by means of darkness of the night
She was delivered from the death: and straying in the broad
Datebearing feeldes of Arabye, she through Panchaya yode,
And wandering full nine moonethes at length she rested being tyrde
In Saba land. And when the time was near at hand expyrde,
And that uneath the burden of her womb sh^e well could bear,
Not knowing what she might desire, distressed between the fear
Of death, and tediousness of life, this prayer she did make.
O Gods, if of repentant folk you any mercy take,
Sharp vengeance I confess I have deserved, and content
I am to take it patiently. How be it too thentent
That neither with my life the quick, nor with my death the dead
Anoyed be, from both of them exempt me this same sted.
And altring me, deny too me both life and death. we see
Too such as do confess their faults sum mercy showed ^oo be.
The Gods did grant her this request, the last that (...) make.
The ground did ouergrow her feet, and ancles as she spoke.
And from her bursten toes went roots, which wrything here and there
Did fasten so the trunk within the ground she could not steare.
Her bones did intoo timber turn, whereof the marie was
The pith, and into watrish sap the blood of her did pass.
Her arms were turned too greater boughs, her fingars into twig,
Her skin was hardened into bark. And now her belly big
The eatching tree had ouergrowen, and ouertane her breast,
And hasted for to win her neck, and hyde it with the rest.
She made no taryence nor delay, but met the coming tree,
And shroonk her face within the bark thereof. Although that she
Toogither with her former shape her senses all did loose,
Yet weepeth she, and from her tree warm drops do softly woose.
The which her tears are had in price and honor. And the Myrrh
That issues from her gummy bark does bear the name of her,
And shall do while the world does last. The misbegotten child
Grew still within the tree, and from his mothers womb defyld
Sought means too be delivered. Her burdened womb did swell
Amid the tree, and stretched her out. But words wherewith to tell
And utter forth her greef did want, She had no use of speech
With which Lucina in her throws she might of help beseech.
Yet like a woman labring was the tree, and bowwing down
Gave often sighs, and shed forth tears as though she there should drown.
Lucina to this woeful tree came gently down, and laid
Her hand thereon, and speaking words of ease the midwife played.
The tree did cranye, and the bark dividing made away,
And yielded out the child alive, which cryde and wayld straight way.
The waternymphes upon the soft sweet herbs the child did lay,
And bathde him with his mothers tears. His face was such as spyght
Must needs have praysd. For such he was in all conditions right,
As are the naked Cupids that in tables picturde be.
But too thentent he may with them in every point agree,
Let either him be furnisshed with wings and quiver light,
Or from the Cupids take their wings and bows and arrows quight.
Away slippes fleeting time vnspyde and mocks us too our face,
And nothing may compare with years in swiftness of their pace*
That wretche^^ (...) whom wickedly his graundfather begat,
And whom his cursed suster bare, who hidden was alate
Within the tree, and lately borne, became immediately
The beawtyfullyst babe on whom man ever set his eye.
Anon a stripling he became, and by and by a man,
And every day more beawt^full than other he becam.
That in the end Dame Venus fell in love with him: whereby
He did revenge the outrage of his mothers villanye.
For as the armed Cupid kissed Dame Venus, vnbeware
An arrow sticking out did raze her breast upon the bare.
The Goddess being wounded, ^hrust away her son. The wound
Apyeered not too be so deep as afterward was found.
It did deceive her at the first. The beawty of the lad
Inflaamd her. Too Cythera I Will no mind at all she had.
Nor unto Paphos where the sea beats round about the shore,
Nor (...) Gnyde, nor Amathus that has of metalls store.
Yea ^uen from heaven she did absteyne. She lovd Adonis more
Than heaven* To him she clinged ay, and bare him company.
And in the shadow wont she was too rest continually,
And for too set her beawtye out most seemly too the eye
By trimly decking of her self. Through ^ushy grounds and groves,
And over H^lls and Dales, and Lawn^s and stony rocks she roues,
Bare kneed with garment tucked up according too the wont
Of Phebe, and she cheerd the hounds with hallowing like a hunt,
Pursewing game of hurtlesse sort, as Hares made low before.
Or stagges with loftye heads, or bucks. But with the sturdy Boar
And ra^ening woolf, and Bearewhelpes armd with ugly paws, and eeke
The cruel Lions which delyght in blood, and slaughter seek,
She meddled not. And of these same she warned also thee
Adonis for too shoonne them, if thou wooldst have warned be.
Be bold on cowards ( Venus said) for whosoever does advance
Himself against the bold, may hap too meet with sum mischaunce.
Wherefore I pray thee my sweet boy forbear too bold too be.
For fear thy rashness hurt thy self and woork the woe of me
Encounter not the kind of beasts whom nature armed has,
For dowt thou buy thy praise too dear procuring thee sum scath.
Thy tender youth, thy beawty bright, thy countnance fair and brave
Although they had the force too win the heart of Venus, have
No power against the Lions, nor against the brist led swyne.
The eyes and hearts of savage beasts do naught too these m^lyne.
The cruel Boares bear thunder in their hooked tushes, and
Exceeding force and feercenesse is in Lions too withstand.
And sure I hate them at my heart. Too him demanding why?
A monstrous chance (quod Venus) I will tell thee by and by,
That happened for a fault. But now unwonted toil has made
Me weerye: and behold, in time this Poplar with his shade
Allureth, and the ground for cowch does serve too rest upon.
I prey thee let us rest here. They sat them down anon.
And lying upward with her head upon his lap along,
She thus began: and in her tale she bussed him among.
Perchance thou have or this time hard of one that overcame
The swiftest men in footemanshippe. no fable was that fame.
She overcame them out of dowt. And hard it is to tell
Thee whither she did in footemanshippe or beawty more excel.
Upon a season as she asked of Phoebus, what he was
That should her husband be, he said. For husband do not pass
O Atalanta, thou at all of husband have no need
Shonne husbanding. But yet thou can not shonne it I thee reed.
Alive thou shall not be thy self. She being sore afraid
Of this Apollos Oracle, did keep herself a maid,
And lived in the shady woods. When wooers to her came,
And were of her importunate, she drove away the same
With boystous words, and with sore condition of the game.
I am not too be had (quod she) unless ye able b^e
In ronning for too vanquish me. Ye must contend with me
In footemanshippe. And who so winnes the wager, I agree
Too be his wife. But if that he be found too slow, then he
Shall lose his head. This of your game the verrye law shall be.
She was in deed unmerciful. But such is beawties power,
That though the said condition were extreme and over sour,
Yet many suitors were so rash too undertake the same.
Hippomenes as a looker on of this discourteous game,
Sat by, and said. Is any man so mad to seek a wife
With such apparent peril and the hazard of his life?
And utterly he did condemn the yongmens love. But when
He saw her face and body bare, (for why the Lady then
Did strippe her too her naked skin) the which was like too mine,
Or rather (if that thou were made a woman) like too thine:
He was amazde. And holding up his hands too heaven, he says:
Forgive me you with whom I found such fault even now: In faith
I did not know the wager that ye ran for. As he prayseth
The beawty of her, in him self the fire of love he rayseth.
And through an envy fearing least she should a way be woonne,
He wished that nere a one of them so swift as she might roonne.
And wherefore (quod he) put not I myself in preace too try
The fortune of this wager? God himself continually
Does help the bold and hardye sort. now while Hippomenes
Debates these things within himself and other like to these,
The Damzell ronnes as if her feet were wings. And though that she
Did fly as swift as arrow from a Turkye bow: yet he
More woondred at her beawtye than at swiftness of her pace
Her ronning greatly did augment her beawtye and her grace.
The wynd ay whisking from her feet the labells of her socks
Upon her back as whyght as snow did toss her golden locks,
And eeke thembroydred garters that were tide beneathe her ham.
A redness mixed with whyght upon her tender body came,
As when a scarlet curtain streynd against a playstred wall
Does cast like shadow, making it seem ruddye therwithall.
Now while the stranger noted this, the race was fully run,
And Atalant (as she that had the wager clearly won)
Was crowned with a garlond brave. The vanquished sighing sore,
Did lose their lives according too agreement made before.
Howbeeit naught at all dismayed with these men's lucklesse case
He stepped forth, and looking full upon the maidens face,
Said: wherefore do thou seek renown in vanquisshing of such
As were but dastards? cope with me. If fortune be so much
My friend too give me victory, thou need not hold scorn
Too yield too such a noble man as I am. I am borne
The son of noble Megaree Onchestyes son, and he
Was son to Neptune. Thus am I great graundchyld by degree
In right descent, of him that rules the waters. Neither do
I out of kind degenerate from virtue meet thertoo.
Or if my fortune be so hard as vanquished for too be,
Thou shall obtain a famous name by ouercomming me.
In saying thus, Atlanta cast a gentle look on him
And dowting whither she rather had too lose the day or win,
Said thus. What God an enmy to the beawtyfull, is bent
Too bring this person to his end, and therefore has him sent
Too seek a wife with hazard of his life? If I should be
Myself the judge in this behalf, there is not sure in me
That does deserve so dearly too be earned. neither does
His beawty move my heart at all. yet is it such in sooth
As well might move me. But because as yet a child he is,
His person mooues me not so much as does his age Iwis.
Beesydes that manhod is in him, and mind vnfrayd of death:
Beesydes that of the watrye race from Neptune as he seth
He is the fowrth: beesydes that he does love me, and does make
So great account too win me too his wife, that for my sake
He is contented for too dye, if fortune be so sore
Against him too deny him me. Thou stranger hence therefore.
Away I say now while thou may, and shonne my bloody bed.
My marriage cruel is, and craves the losing of thy head.
There is no wench but that would such a husband gladly catch.
And she that wise were might desire too meet with such a match.
But why now after heading of so many, do I care
For thee? Look thou too that. For since so many men as are
Already put too slawghter can not warn thee too beeware,
But that thou will be weerye of thy life, dye: do not spare.
And shall he perrish then because he sought to live with me?
And for his love unworthily with death rewarded be?
All men of such a victory will speak too foul a shame.
But all the world can testifye that I am not too blame.
Would God thou would desist. Or else because thou are so mad,
I would too God a little more thy feet of swiftness had.
Ah what a maidens countenance is in this chyldish face?
Ah foolish boy Hippomenes, how wretched is thy case?
I would thou never had me seen. Thou worthy art of life.
And if so be I happy were, and that too be a wife
The cruel destnyes had not me forbidden, sure thou art
The only wight with whom I would be matched with all my heart.
This spoken: she yet raw, and but new stricken with the dart
Of Cupid, being ignorant, did love and knew it not
Anon her father and the folk assembled, willed that
They should begin their woonted race. Then Neptunes issue prayed
With careful heart and voice too me, and thus d^uoutly said.
O Venus, favor mine attempt, and send me down thine aid
Too compass my desired love which thou have on me laid.
His prayer movd me (I confess,) and long I not delayed
Before I helped him. Now there is a certain feeld the which
The Cyprian folk call Damasene, most fertile and most rich
Of all the Cyprian feelds: the same was consecrate too me
In ancient time, and of my Church the glebland wont too be.
Amid this feeld, with golden leaves there grows a goodly tree
The crackling boughs whereof are all of yellow gold. I came
And gathered golden Apples three: and bearing thence the same
Within my hand, immediately too Hippomen I gat
Invisible too all wyghts else save him and taught him what
Too do with them. The Trumpets blew: and girding forward, both
Set forth, and on the houering dust with nimble feet each goth.
A man would think they able were upon the Sea too go
And never wet their feet, and on the ails of corn also
That still is growing in the feeld, and never down them tread.
The man took courage at the showt and words of them that sed,
Now now is time Hippomenes too ply it, hye a pace:
Enforce thyself with all thy strength: lag not in any case:
Thou shall obtain. It is a thing right dowtfull whither he
At these well willing words of theyrs reioysed more, or she.
O Lord how often when she might outstrippe him did she stay,
And gazed long upon his face, right loath too go her way?
A weerye breath proceeded from their parched lips, and far
They had too run. Then Neptunes imp her swiftness too disbarre,
Trolld down a toneside of the way an Apple of the three.
Amazde thereat, and covetous of the goodly Apple, she
Did step aside and snatched up the rolling fruit of gold.
With that Hippomenes coted her. The folk that did behold,
Made noise with clapping of their hands. She recompenst her slothe
And loss of* time with footemanshippe: and straight ageine outgothe
Hippomenes, leaving him behind, and being stayed again
With taking up the second, she him ouertooke. And when
The race was almost at an end: He said: O Goddess, thou
That art the author of this gift, assist me freendly now,
And therwithall, of purpose that she might the longer be
In coming, he with all his might did bowl the last of three
A skew a toneside of the feelde. The Lady seemde too make
A dowt in taking of it up. I forced her too take
It up, and too the Apple I did put a heavy weight,
And made it of such massinesse she could not lift it straight.
And least that I in telling of my tale may longer be,
Than they in ronning of their race, outstripped quight was she.
And he that wan her, marying her enjoyed her for his fee.
Think thou I was not worthy thanks, Adonis thinks thou
I earned not that he too me should frankincence allow?
But he forgetful neither thanks nor frankincence did give.
By means whereof too sooden wrath he justly did me drive.
For being grieved with the spyght, because I would not be
Despysd of such as were too come, I thought it best for me
Too take such vengeance of them both as others might take heed
By them. And so against them both in anger I proceed.
A temple of the mother of the Gods that vowwed was
And builded by Echion in a darksome grove, they pass
There through my might Hippomenes was touched and stirred so,
That needs he would too Uenerie though out of season go.
Not far from this same temple was with little light aden
With pommye vawlted naturally, long consecrate ere then
For old religion, not unlike a cave: where priests of yore
Bestowed had of Images of wooden Gods good store.
Hippomenes entering herintoo defyld the holy place.
With his unlawful lust: from which the Idols turned their face.
And Cybell with the towred tops disdeyning, dowted whither
She in the lake of Styx might drown the wicked folk toogither.
The penance seemed over light. and therefore she did cawse
Thin yellow manes to grow upon their necks: and hooked paws
In stead of fingars too succeed. Their shoulders were the same
They were before: with woondrous force deep brested they beecame.
Their look beecame feerce, cruel, grim, and sour: a tufted tail
Stretched out in length far after them upon the ground does trayle.
In stead of speech they rore: in stead of bed they haunt the wood:
And dreadful unto others they for all their cruel mood
With tamed teeth chank Cybells bitts in shape of Lions. Shonne
These beasts dear heart: and not from these alonely see thou run,
But also from each other beast that turns not back too flight
But offreth with his boystows breast too try the chance of fight:
Anemis least thy valeantnesse be hurtful to us both.
This warning given, with yoked swannes away through air she goth.
But manhod by admonishment restreyned could not be.
By chance his hounds in following of the tracke, a Boar did see,
And rowsed him. And as the swyne was coming from the wood,
Adonis hit him with a dart a skew, and drew the blood.
The Boar straight with his hooked groyne ye huntingstaffe out drew
Bestayned with his blood, and on Adonis did pursew
Who trembling and retyring back, too place of refuge drew.
And hyding in his codds his tuskes as far as he could thrust
He laid him all along for dead upon the yellow dust.
Dame Venus in her chariot drawn with swannes was scarce arrived
At Cyprus, when she knew a far the sygh of him depryued
Of life. She turned her Cygnets back. and when she from the sky
Beehilld him dead, and in his blood beweltred for to lie:
She leaped down, and tare at once her garments from her brist,
And rent her hear, and beat upon her stomach with her fist,
And blaming sore the destnyes, said. Yet shall they not obtain
Their will in all things. Of my grief remembrance shall remain.
( Adonis) while the world does last. From year too year shall grow
A thing that of my heaviness and of thy death shall show
The lively likeness. In a flower thy blood I will bestow.
Had thou the power Persephonee rank sented Mints too make
Of women's limbs? and may not I like power upon me take
Without disdeine and spyght, too turn Adonis too a flower?
This sed, she sprinkled Nectar on the blood, which through the power
Thereof did swell like bubbles sheere that rise in weather clear
On water. And before that full an hour expyred weere,
Of all one color with the blood a flower she there did find
Even like the flower of that same tree whose fruit in tender rynde
Have pleasant graynes inclosd^. Howbeet the use of them is short.
For why the leaves do hang so looce through lightness in such sort,
As that the winds that all things perce, with every little blast
Do shake them of and shed them so as that they cannot last.
Finis decimi Libri.
THE.XI. BOOK OF Ouids Metamorphosis.
NOw while the Thracian Poet with this song delyghts y^ mynds
Of savage beasts, and draws both stones and trees against their kynds,
Behold the wives of Ciconie with reddeerskinnes about
Their furious brists as in the feeld they gadded on a rout,
Espyde him from a hillocks top still singing too his harp.
Of whom one shook her head at him, and thus began to carp.
Behold (says she) behold yoonsame is he that does disdeine
Us women. And with that same word she sent her lawnce amayne
At Orphyes singing mouth. The Lawnce armd round about with leaves,
Did hit him, and without a wound a mark behynd it leaves.
Another threw a stone at him, which vanquished with his sweet
And most melodius harmonye, fell humbly at his feet
As sorye for the furious act it purposed. But rash
And heady riot out of frame all reason now did dash,
And frantik outrage reigned. Yet had the sweetness of his song
Appeasd all weapons, saving that the noise now growing strong
With blowing shalmes, and beating drums, and bedlem howling out,
And clapping hands on every side by Bacchus drunken rout,
Did drown the sownd of Orphyes harp Then first of all stones were
Made ruddy with the prophets blood, and could not give him ear.
And first the flock of Bacchus froes by violence brake the ring
Of Serpents, birds, and savage beasts that for to here him sing
Sat gazing round about him there. And then with bluddy hands
They ran upon the prophet who among them singing stands.
They flockt about him like as when a sort of birds have found,
An Owl a day times in a tod: and hem him in full round,
As when a Stag by hungrye hownds is in a morning found,
The which forestall him round about and pull him to the ground.
Even so the prophet they assail, and throw their Thyrses green
At him, which for another use than that invented been.
Sum cast me clods, sum boughs of trees, and sum threw stones. And least
That weapon wherwithall too wreake their woodnesse which increast
Should want, it chaunst that Oxen by were tilling of the ground
And labring men with brawned arms not far fro thence were found
A digging of the hardened earth, and earning of their food,
With sweating brows. They seeing this same rout, no longer stood,
But ran away and left their tools behynd them. Every where
Through all the feeld their mattocks, rakes, and shouells scattred were.
Which when the cruel feends had caught, and had a sunder rent
The horned Oxen, back ageine to Orphy ward they went,
And (wicked wights) they murthred him, who never till that hour
Did utter words in vain, nor sing without effectual power.
And through that mouth of his (oh lord) which even the stones had heard,
And unto which the witless beasts had often given regard,
His ghost then breathing intoo air, departed. Even the fowls
Were sad for Orphye, and the beast with sorye syghing howles:
The rugged stones did moorne for him, the woods which many a time
Had followed him too here him sing, bewailed this same crime.
Yea even the trees lamenting him did cast their leauy hear
The rivers also with their tears (men say) increased were.
Yea and the Nymphs of brooks and woods upon their streams did sail
With scattred hear about their ears, in boats with sable sail.
His members lay in sundry steds. His head and harp both came
To Hebrus. and (a woondrous thing) as down the stream they swam,
His Harp did yield a moorning sound: his liuelesse ^oong did make
A certain lamentable noise as though it still yet spoke,
And both the banks in moorning wise made answer too the same.
At length a down their country stream too open sea they came,
And lyghted on Methymnye shore in Lesbos land. There
No sooner on the foreign coast now cast a land they were,
But that a cruel naturde Snake did straight upon them fly,
And licking on his ruffled hear the which was dropping dry,
Did gape too tire upon those lips that had been wont to sing
Most heavenly hymns. But Phoebus straight preventing y^ same thing,
Dispoynts the Serpent of his bit, and turns him into stone
With gaping chappes* Already was the Ghost of Orphye gone
To Plutos realm, and there he all the places ^ft beehilld
The which he heretoofore had seen. And as he sought the feeld
Of fair Elysion (where the ^oules of godly folk do woonne,)
He ^ound his wife Eury dicee, to whom he straight did roonne
And hilld her in embracing arms. There now he one while walks
Toogither with her cheek by cheek: another while he stalks
Before her. and another while he follows her. And now
Without all kind of forfeyture he saufly might a^ow
His looking bakward at his wife. But Bacchus grieved at
The murder of the Chapleine of his Orgies, suffered not
The mischeef vnreuengd too be. For by and by he bound,
The Thracian women by the feet with writhen root in ground,
As many as consenting too this wicked act were found.
And look how much that each of them the prophet did pursew,
So much he sharpening of their toes, within the ground them drew.
And as the bird that fynds her leg besnarled in the net
The which the fowlers suttlelye has clocely for her set,
And feels she cannot get away, stands flickering with her wings,
And with her fearful leaping up draws clocer still the strings:
So each of these when in the ground they fastened were, assayd
Aflayghted for to fly away. But every one was stayed
With winding root which hilld her down. her frisking could not boot.
And while she lookte what was become of To, of nail, and foot,
She saw her legs grow round in one, and turning intoo wood.
And as her thyghes with violent hand she sadly striking stood,
She felt them tree: her breast was tree: her shoulders eeke were tree.
Her arms long boughs ye might have thought, and not deceived be.
But Bacchus was not so content: he quyght forsook their land:
And with a better company removed out of hand
Unto the Uyneyarde of his own mount Tmolus, and the river
Pactolus though as yet no streams of gold it did deliver,
Ne spyghted was for precious sands. His old accustomd rout
Of woodwards and of frantic froes enuyrond him about.
But old Silenus was away. The Phrygian ploughmen found
Him reeling both for droonkennesse and age, and brought him bound
With garlands, unto Midas king of Phrygia, unto whom
The Thracian Orphye and the priest Eumolphus coming from
The town of Athens erst had taught the Orgies. When he knew
His fellow and companion of the self same badge and crew.
Upon the coming of this guest, he kept a feast the space
Of twyce fine days and twyce five nights toogither in that place
And now theleuenth time Lucifer had mustred in the sky
The heavenly host, when Midas commes too Lydia iocundly
And yeeldes the old Silenus too his fosterchyld. He glad
That he his fosterfather had eftsoons recovered, bad
King Midas ask him what he would. Right glad of that was he,
But not a whit at latter end the better should he be.
He minding too misuse his gifts, said: grant that all and some
The which my body towcheth bare may yellow gold become.
God Bacchus granting his request, his hurtful gift performd,
And that he had not better wished he in his stomach stormd.
Rejoicing in his harm away full merye goes the king:
And for too try his promis true he towcheth every thing.
Scarce giving credit too himself, he pulled young grieve twiggs
From of an Holmetree: by and by all golden were the spriggs
He took a flintstone from the ground, the stone likewise became
Pure gold. He towched next a cold of earth, and straight the same
By force of towching did become a wedge of yellow gold.
He gathered ears of rypened corn: immediately behold
The corn was gold. An Apple then he pulled from a tree:
Ye would have thought the Hesperids had given it him. If he
On Pillars high his fingars laid, they glistred like the son.
The water where he washed his hands did from his hands so run,
As Danae might have been therewith beguyld. He scarce could hold
His passing joys within his heart, for making all things gold.
While he thus ioyd, his officers did spread the board anon,
And set down sundry sorts of meat and mancheate thervppon.
Then whither his hand did towch the bread, the bread was massy gold:
Or whither he chawde with hungry teeth his meat, ye might behold
The piece of meat between his ^awes a plat of gold too be.
In drinking wine and water mixed, ye might discern and see
The liquid gold run down his throat. Amazed at the strange
Mischaunce, and being both a wretch and rich, he wished too change
His riches for his former state, and now he did abhor
The thing which even but late before he chiefly longed for.
No meat his hunger slakes: his throat is shrunken up with thurst:
And justly does his hateful gold torment him as accursed.
Then lifting up his sorry arms and hands too heaven, he cryde:
O father Bacchus pardon me. My sin I will not hyde.
Have mercy I beseech thee and vouchsauf too rid me quyght
From this same harm that seems so good and glorious unto sight.
The gentle Bacchus straight upon confession of his crime
Restored Midas too the state he had in former time.
And having made performance of his promis, he beereft him
The gift that he had granted him. And least he should have left him
Beedawbed with the dregs of that same gold which wickedly
He wisshed had, he willed him too get him by and by
Too that great river which does run by Sardis town, and there
Along the channel up the stream his open arms to bear
Until he comes too the spring: and then his head too put
Full underneath the foming spowt where greatest was the gut,
And so in wasshing of his limbs too wash away his crime.
The king (as was commanded him) against the stream did clyme.
And straight the power of making gold departing quyght from him,
Infects the river, making it with golden stream too swim.
The force whereof the banks about so soked in their veins,
That even as yet the yellow gold upon the cloddes remaynes.
Then Midas hating riches haunts the pasturegrounds and groves,
And up and down with Pan among the Lawnds and mountains roues.
But still a head more fat than wise, and dol^^sh wit he has,
The which as erst, yet once again must woork their master scath.
The mountain Tmole from loftye top too seaward looks down,
And spreading far his boorely sides, extends too the town
Of Sardis with the tonesyde and too Hypep with the toother.
There Pan among the fayrye elues that dawneed round toogither
In setting of his conning out for singing and for play
Upon his pype of reeds and war, presuming for too say*
Apollos music was not like too his, did take in hand
A far unequal match, whereof the Tmole for judge should stand.
The ancient judge sitts down upon his hill, and ridds his ears
From trees, and only on his head an Oken garlo^d wears,
Whereof the Acornes dangled down about his hollow brow.
And looking on the God of n^ate he said: ye need not now
Too tarry longer for your judge. Then Pan blew loud and strong
His country pype of reeds, and with his rude and homely song
Delighted Midas ears, for he by chance was in the throng.
When Pan had done, the sacred Tmole too Phoebus turned his look,
And with the turning of his head his busshye hear he shook.
Then Phoebus with a crown of ^ay upon his golden hear
Did sweep the ground with scarlet robe. In left hand he did bear
His vial made of precious stones and Iuorye intermirt.
And in his right hand for too strike, his bow was reedy fixed.
He was the verrye pattern of a good Musician right
Anon he began with conning hand the tuned strings too smyght.
The sweetness of the which did so the judge of them delyght,
That Pan was willed for to put his Reedepype in his case,
And not too fiddle nor too sing where vialls were in place.
The judgment of the holy hill was lyked well of all,
Save Midas, who found fault therewith and wrongful did it call.
Apollo could not suffer well his foolish ears too keep
Their human shape, but drew them wide, and made them long and deep.
And filld them full of whytish hears, and made them down too sag.
And through too much unstableness continually too wag.
His body keeping in the rest his manly figure still,
Was ponnisht in the part that did offend for want of skill.
And so a slow paaste Asses ears his head did after bear.
This shame endeuereth he too hyde. And therefore he did wear
A purple nyghtcappe ever since. But yet his Barber who
Was wont too notte him spy^d it: and being eager too
Disclose it, when he neither durst too utter it, nor could
It keep in secret still, he went and dug up the mowld,
And whispring softly in the pit, declaard what ears he spyde
His master have, and turning down the clowre ageine, did hyde
His blabbed words within the ground, and closing up the pit
Departed thence and never made mo words at all of it.
Soon after, there began a tuft of quiuering reeds too grow
Which being ripe bewrayd their seed and him that did them sow.
For when the gentle sowtherne wynd did lightly on them blow,
They vttred forth the words that had been buried in the ground
And so reproude the Asses ears of Midas with their sound.
Apollo after this revenge from Tmolus took his flight:
And sweeping through the air, did on the selfsame side alyght
Of Hellespontus, in the Realm of king Laomedon.
There stood upon the right side of Sigaeum, and upon
The left of Rhetye cliffe that time, an Altar buylt of old
Too Jove that heereth all men's words. Here Phoebus did behold
The foresaid king Laomedon beginning for too lay
Foundation of the walls of Troy: which woork from day too day
Went hard and slowly forward, and requyrd no little charge,
Then he toogither with the God that rules the surges large,
Did put themselves in shape of men, and bargaynd with the king
Of Phrygia for a sum of gold his woork too end too bring.
Now when the woork was done, the king their wages them denayd,
And falsely faaste them down with oaths it was not as they said.
Thou shall not mock us vnreuendgd (quod Neptune.) And anon
He caused all the surges of the sea too rush upon
The shore of covetous Troy, and made the country like the deep.
The goods of all the husbandmen away he quight did sweep,
And ouerwhelmd their feeldes with waves. And thinking this too small
A penance for the falsehod, he demanded therwithall
His daughter for a monster of the Sea. whom being bound
Untoo a rock, stout Hercules delivering ^aufe and sound,
Requyrd his steeds which were the hyre for which he did compound.
And when that of so great desert the king denyde the hyre,
The twyce forsworn false town of Troy he sacked in his ire.
And Telamon in honor of his service did enjoy
The Lady Hesion daughter of the covetous king of Troy.
For Peleus had already got a Goddess too his wife,
And lived unto both their joys a right renowned life.
And sure he was not prowder of his graundsyre, than of thee
That were become his fathrinlaw. For many mo than he
Have had the hap of mighty Jove the nephews for too be.
But never was it heeretoofore the chance of any one
Too have a Goddess too his wife, save only his alone.
For unto watery Thetis thus old Protevv did foretell.
Go marry: thou shall bear a son whose doings shall excel
His fathers far in feats of arms, and greater he shall be
In honor, high renown, and fame, than ever erst was he.
This caused Jove the watery bed of Thetis too forbear
Although his heart were more than warm with love of her, for fear
The world sum other greater thing than Jove himself should breed,
And willd the son of Aeacus this Peleus to succeed.
In that which he himself would feign have done, and for too take
The Lady of the sea in arms a moother her too make.
There is a bay of Thessaly that bends like a boawe.
The sides shoot forth, where if the sea of any depth did flow
It were a haven. Scarcely does the water hyde the sand.
It has a shore so firm, that if a man thereon do stand,
No print of foot remaynes behynd: it hinders not ones pace
Ne covered is with houering reeke. Adjoining too this place,
There is a grove of Myrtletrees with fruit of dowle color,
And in the midds thereof a Cave. I can not tell you whither
That nature or the art of man were maker of the same.
It seemed rather made by art. Often Thetis hither came
Stark naked, ryding bravely on a brydled Dolphins back.
There Peleus as she lay a sleep upon her often bracke.
And forbycause that at her hands entreatance nothing winnes,
He folding her about the neck with both his arms, begins
Too offer force. And surely if she had not fallen too wyles
And shifted oftentimes her shape, he had obteind erewhyles.
But she became sumtymes a bird: He hilld her like a bird.
Anon she was a massye log: but Peleus never stird
Awhit for that. Then thirdly she of speckled Tiger took
The ugly shape: for fear of whose most feerce and cruel look,
His arms he from her body twicht. And at his going thence,
In honor of the watery Gods he burned frankincence,
And powered wine upon the sea, with fat of neat and sheep:
Until the prophet that does dwell within Carpathian deep,
Said thus. Thou son of Aeacus, thy wish thou sure shall have
Alonely when she lies a sleep within her pleasant Cave,
Cast grinnes too trappe her vnbewares: hold fast with snarling knot:
And though she feign a hundredth shapes, deceive thee let her not.
But stick vn^oot what ere it be, until the time that she
Returns too the native shape she erst was wont too be.
When Protevv thus had sed, within the sea he duckt his head,
And suffered on his latter words the water for too spread.
The lyghtsum Titan downward drew, and with declyning chair
Approached too the western sea, when Neryes daughter fair
Returning from the sea, resorts too her accustomd cowch.
And Peleus scarcely had begone her naked limbs too towch,
But that she chaungd from shape to shape, until at length she found
Herself surprysd. Then stretching out her arms with sighs profound,
She said: Thou ouercommest me, and not without the aid
Of God: and then she Thetis like, appeerd in shape of maid.
The noble prince embracing her obteynd her at his will,
Too both their joys, and with the great Achylles did her fill.
A happy wight was Peleus in his wife: A happy wight
Was Peleus also in his son. And if ye him acquight
Of murthring Phocus, happy him in all things count ye might.
But giltye of his brothers blood, and bannisht for the same
From both his fathers house and Realm, too Trachin sad he came.
The son of lyghtsum Lucifer king Ceyx (who in face
Expressed the lively beawtye of his fathers heavenly grace,)
Without all violent rigor and sharp executions reignd
In Trachin. He right sad that time unlike himself, remaynd
Yet moorning for his brothers chance transformed late before.
When Peleus thither came, with care and travail tired sore,
He left his cattle and his sheep (whereof he brought great store)
Behynd him in a shady vale not far from Trachin town,
And with a little company himself went thither down.
As Soon as leave too come too Court was granted him, he bare
A branch of Olyf in his hand, and humbly did declare
His name and lynage. Only of his crime no word he spoke,
But of his slyght another cause pretensedly did make:
Desyring leave within his town or country too abide.
The king of Trachin gently thus too him ageine replyde.
Our bownty too the meanest sort (O Peleus) does extend:
We are not wont the desolate our country too forfend.
And though I be of nature most inclyned good too do:
Thine own renown, thy graundsyre Jove are forcements therevntoo.
Misspend no longer time in suit. I gladly do agree
Too grant thee what thou will desire. These things that thou do see
I would thou should account them as thine own, such as they be
I would they better were. With that he weeped. Peleus and
His friends desired of his greef the cause too understand.
He answered thus. Perchance ye think this bird that lives by pray
And putts all other birds in fear had wings and feathers ay.
He was a man. And as he was right feerce in feats of arms,
And stout and ready both too wreake and also offer harms:
So was he of a constant mind. Daedalion men him hight.
Our father was that noble star that brings the morning bright,
And in the welkin last of all gives place too Phoebus light.
My study was too maynteine peace, in peace was my delyght,
And for too keep me true too her too whom my faith is plyght.
My brother had felicite in war and bloody fight.
His prowess and his force which now does chase in cruel flight
The Dooues of Thisbye since his shape was altered thus a new,
Right puyssant Princes and their Realms did heeretoofore subdew.
He had a child called Chyone, whom nature did endew
With beawtye so, that when too age of fowreteene years she grew,
A thousand Princes liking her did for her favor sew.
By fortune as bright Phoebus and the son of Lady May
Came tone from Delphos, toother from mount Cyllen, by the way
They saw her both at once, and both at once where taken in love.
Apollo till the time of night differd his suit too move.
But Hermes could not bear delay. He stroked on the face
The maiden with his charmed rod which has the power too chase
And bring in sleep: the touch whereof did cast her in so dead
A sleep, that Hermes by and by his purpose of her sped.
As Soon as night with twinkling stars the welkin had beesprent,
Apollo in an old wives shape too Chyon clocely went,
And took the pleasure which the son of Maya had forehent.
Now when she full her time had gone, she bare by Mercurye
A son that hight Avvtolychus who provde a wyly pie,
And such a fellow as in theft and filching had no peer.
He was his fathers own son right: he could men's eyes so bleere,
As for too make y^ black things whyght, and whyght things black appear.
And by Apollo (for she bare a pair) was borne his brother
Philammon, who in music art excelled far all other,
As well in singing as in play. But what auayled it
Too bear such twins, and of two Gods in favor too have sit.
And that she too her father had a stowt and valiant knight,
Or that her graundsyre was the son of Jove that God of might?
Does glory hurt too any folk? It surely hurted her.
For standing in her own conceyt she did herself prefer
Before Diana, and dispraysd her face. who there with all
Inflaamd with wrath, said: well, with deeds we better please her shall.
Immediately she bent her bow, and let an arrow go,
Which struck her through the tongue, whose spite deserved wounding so.
Her tongue wext dumb, her speech began fail that erst was over ryfe,
And as she stryued for too speak, away went blood and life.
How wretched was I then O God? how struck it too my heart?
What words of comfort did I speak too ease my brothers smart?
Too which he gave his ear as much as does the stonny rock
Too hideous roaring of the waves that do against it knock.
There was no measure nor none end in making of his moan,
Nor in bewayling comfortless his daughter that was gone.
But when he saw her body burn, four times with all his might
He russhed forth too thrust himself amid the fire in sight.
Four times he being thence repulst, did put himself too flight.
And ran me whereas was no way, as does a Bullock when
A hornet stings him in the neck. Me thought he was as then
More wyghter far than any man. Ye would have thought his feet
Had had sum wings. So fled he quyght from all, and being fleet
Through eagerness too dye, he gat too mount Parnasos knappe
And there Apollo pitying him and rewing his missehappe,
When as Daedalion from the cliffe himself had headlong floong,
Transformd him too a bird, and on the soodaine as he hung
Did give him wings, and bowwing beak, and hooked talants keen,
And eeke a courage full as feerce as ever it had been.
And furthermore a greater strength he lent him therwithall,
Than one would think conveyed might be within a room so small.
And now in shape of Gossehawke he too none indifferent is,
But wreakes his teene on all birds. And because him self ere this
Did feel the force of sorrows sting within his wounded heart,
He makes others oftentimes too sorrow and too smart.
As Caeyx of his brothers chance this wondrous story seth,
Commes ronning thither all in haste and almost out of breath
Anaetor the Phocayan who was Pelyes herdman. He
Said: Pelye Pelye I do bring sad tidings unto thee.
Declare it man (quod Peleus) what ever that it be.
King Ceyx at his fearful words did stand in dowtfull stowne.
Thiz noonetyde (quod the herdman) Iche did drive your cattle down
Too zea, and zum a them did zit upon the yellow zand
And looked on the large main poole of water near at hand.
Zum roayled zoftly up and down, and zum a them did zwim
And bare their jolly horned heads abooue the water trim.
A Church stondes near the zea not decked with gold nor marble stone
But made of wood, and hid with trees that dreeping hang thereon.
A vissherman that zat and dryde hiz netts vppo the zhore
Did tellz that Nereus and his Nymphs did haunt the place of yore,
And how that they been Gods a zea. There butts a plot vorgrowne
With zallow trees upon the zame, the which is ouerblowne
With tides, and is a marsh. Urom thence a woolf an orped wight
With hideous noise of rustling made the grounds near hand afryght.
Anon he commes me buskling out bezmeared all his chappes
With blood daubaken and with vome as veerce as thunder clappes.
Hiz eyes did glaster red as vyre, and though he raged zore
Uor vamin and vor madness both, yet raged he much more
In madness. Uor he cared not his hunger vor too zlake,
Or i the death of oxen two or three an end too make.
But wounded all the herd and made a havoc of them all,
And zum of us too, in devence did happen vor too vall,
In danger of his deadly chappes, and lost our lives. The zhore
And zea is staynd with blood, and all the ven is on a rore.
Delay breeds loss. The case denies now dowting vor too stond,
While owght remaynes let all of us take weapon in our hond.
Lets arm our zelues, and let vz altoogither on him vall.
The herdman hilld his peace. The loss movde Peleus not at all.
But calling his offense too mind, he thought that Neryes daughter
The chyldlesse Lady Psamathe determynd with that slaughter.
Too keep an Obit too her son whom he before had killd.
Immediately upon this news the king of Trachin willd
His men too arm them, and too take their weapons in their hand,
And he addressed himself too be the leader of the band.
His wife Alcyone by the noise admonisht of the same,
In dressing of her head, before she had it brought in frame,
Cast down her hear, and ronning forth caught Ceyx fast about
The neck, desyring him with tears too send his folk without
Himself, and in the life of him too save the lives of twain.
O Princess, cease your godly fear (quod Peleus then again.)
Your offer does deserve great thanks. I mind not war to make
Against strange monsters. I as now another way must take.
The seagods must be pacifyde. There was a Castle hye,
And in the same a lofty tower whose top does face the sky,
A joyful mark for maryners too guide their vessels by.
Too this same Turret up they went, and there with syghes behilld
The Oxen lying every where stark dead upon the feelde
And eeke the cruel stroygood with his bluddy mouth and hear.
Then Peleus stretching forth his hands too Seaward, prayed in fear
Too watrish Psamath that she would her sore displeasure stay,
And help him. She no whit relents too that that he did pray.
But Thetis for her husband made such earnest suit, that she
Obteynd his pardon. For anon the woolfe (who would not be
Revoked from the slaughter for the sweetness of the blood)
Persisted sharp and eager still, until that as he stood
Fast byghting on a Bullocks neck, she turned him intoo stone
As well in substance as in hew, the name of woolf alone
Reserved. For although in shape he seemed still yet one,
The verry color of the stone beewrayd him too be none,
And that he was not too be feared. How be it froward fate
Permitts not Peleus in that land too have a settled state.
He wandreth like an outlaw too the Magnets. There at last
Acastus the Thessalien purgd him of his murder past.
In this mean time the Trachine king sore vexed in his thought
With signs y^ both before and since his brothers death were wrought,
For counsel at the sacret Spelles (which are but toys too food
Fond fancyes, and not counselors in peril too do good)
Did make him reedy too the God of Claros for too go.
For heathenish Phorbas and the folk of Phlegia had as tho
The way too Delphos stopped, that none could travel too or fro.
But ere he on his journey went, he made his faithful make
Alcyone preeuye too the thing. Immediately their struck
A chillness too her verry bones, and pale was all her face
Like box and down her heavy cheeks the tears did gush a pace.
Three times about too speak, three times she washed her face with tears,
And stinting often with sobbes, she thus complained in his ears.
What fault of mine O husband dear has turned thy heart fro me?
Where is that care of me that erst was wont too be in thee?
And can thou having left thy dear Alcyone merrye be?
Do iourneyes long delyght thee now? does now mine absence please
Thee better then my presence does? Think I that thou at ease
Shall go by land? Shall I have cause but only for too moorne?
And not too be afraid? And shall my care of thy return
Be void of fear? No no. The sea me sore afraid does make.
Too think upon the sea does cause my flesh for fear too quake.
I saw the broken ribs of ships a late upon the shore.
And often on Tumbes I read their names whose bodies long before
The sea had swallowed. Let not fond vain hope ^educe thy mind,
That Aeolus is thy fathrinlaw who holds the boystous wynd
In prison, and can calm the seas at pleasure. When the wynds
Are once let looce upon the sea, no order then them bynds.
Then neither land has privilege, nor sea exemption fynds.
Yea even the clouds of heaven they vex, and with their meeting stout
Enforce the fire with hideous noise too brust in flasshes out.
The more that I do know them, (for right well I know their power,
And saw them often a little wench within my fathers bower)
So much the more I think them too be feared. But if thy will
By no intreatance may be turned at home too tarry still,
But that thou needs wilt go: then me dear husband with thee take.
So shall the sea us equally toogither toss and shake.
So woorser than I feel I shall be certain not too fear.
So shall we whatsoever happes toogither jointly bear.
So shall we on the broad main sea toogither jointly sail.
These woo^des and tears wherewith the imp of Aeolus did assail
Her husbond borne of heavenly race, did make his heart relent.
(For he lovd her no less than she lovd him.) But fully bent
He seemed, neither for too leave the journey which he meant
Too take by sea, nor yet too give Alcyone leave as tho
Companion of his perlous course by water for too go.
He many words of comfort spoke her fear away too chase.
But naught he could persuade therein too make her like the case.
This last asswagement of her greef he added in the end,
Which was the only thing that made her loving heart too bend.
All taryante will assuredly seem over long too me.
And by my fathers blasing beams I make my vow too thee
That at the furthest ere the time (if God thertoo agree)
The moon do fill her circle twyce, ageine I will here be.
When in sum hope of his return this promis had her set,
He willd a ship immediately from harbrough too be fet,
And thoroughly rigged for too be, that neither maast, nor sail,
Nor tackling, no nor other thing should apperteyning fail.
Which when Alcyone did behold, as one whoose heart misgaue
The happes at hand, she quaakt ageine, and tears out guss^ing drove.
And streyning Ceyx in her arms with pale and piteous look,
Poor wretched soul, her last farewell at length she sadly took,
And swounded flat upon the ground. Anon the watermen
(As Ceyx sought delays and was in dowt too turn again)
Set hand too Ores, of which there were two rows on either side,
And all at once with equal stroke the swelling sea deuyde.
She lifting up her watrye eyes behilld her husband stand
Upon the hatches making signs by beckening with his hand:
And she made signs to him ageine. And after that the land
Was far removed from the ship, and that the sight began
Too be unable too discern the face of any man,
As long as ere she could she looked upon the rowing keele.
And when she could no longer time for distance ken it we will,
She looked still upon the sails that flasked with the wynd
Upon the maast. And when she could the sails no longer find,
She gate her too her empty bed with sad and sorye heart,
And laid her down. The chamber did renew a fresh her smart,
And of her bed did bring too mind the dear departed part.
From harbrough now they quyght were gone: and now a plasant gale
Did blow. The master made his men their Ores aside too hale,
And hoysed up the toppesayle on the highest of the maast,
And clapped on all his other sails because no wind should waast.
Scarce full tone half, (or sure not much above) the ship had run
Upon the sea, and every way the land did far them shonne,
When toward night the wallowing waves began too waxen whyght,
And eeke the heady eastern wynd did blow with greater might,
Anon the Master cried strike the toppesayle, let the main
Sheate fly and fardle it too the yard. Thus spoke he, but in vain.
For why so hideous was the storm upon the soodeine brayd,
That not a man was able there too here what other said.
And loud the sea with meeting waves extreemely raging rores.
Yet fell they too it of them selves. Sum haalde aside the Ores:
Sum fensed in the Gallyes sides, sum down the sayleclothes rend:
Sum pump the water out, and sea too sea ageine do send.
Another hales the sayleyards down. And while they did each thing
Disorderly, the storm increast, and from each quarter ^^ing
The wyndes with deadly food, and bownce the raging waves toogither.
The Pilot being sore dismayed says plain, he knows not whither
Too wend himself, nor what too do or bid, nor in what state
Things stood. So howge the mischeef was, and did so ouermate
All art. For why of rattling ropes, of crying men and boys,
Of flusshing waves and thundering air, confused was the noise.
The surges mounting up aloft did seem too mate the sky,
And with their sprinckling for too wet the clouds that hang on hye.
One while the sea, when from the brink it raysd the yellow sand,
Was like in color too the same. Another while did stand
A color on it blacker than the Lake of Styx. Anon
It l^eth plain and loometh whyght with seething froth thereon*
And with the sea the Trachin ship ay alteration took.
One while as from a mountains top it seemed down too look
Too vallyes and the depth of hell. Another while beset
With swelling surges round about which near above it met,
It looked from the bottom of the whoorlepoole up aloft
As if it were from hell too heaven. A hideous flusshing often
The waves did make in beating full against the Gallyes side.
The Gallye b^ing stricken gave as great a sownd that ^yde
As did sumtyme the Battellramb of steel, or now the Gonne
In making battrye too a tower. And as feerre Lions run
Full brist with all their force against the armed men that stand
In order bent too keep them of with weapons in their hand,
Even so as often as the waves by force of wynd did rave:
So often upon the netting of the ship they maynely drove,
And mounted far above the same. Anon of fell the hoopes:
And having washed the pitch away, the sea made open loopes
Too let the deadly water in. Behold the clouds did melt,
And showers large came pooring down. The seamen that them felt
Might think that all the heaven had fallen upon them that same time,
And that the swelling sea likewise above the heaven would clyme.
The sails were thoroughly wet with showers. and with the heavenly rain
Was mixed the waters of the sea. no lyghts at all remain
Of sun, or moon, or stars in heaven. The darkness of the night
Augmented with the dreadful storm, takes dowble power and might.
Howbeet the flasshing lyghtnings often do put the same too flight,
And with their glauncing now and then do give a soodeme light.
The lightnings setts the waves on fire. Above the netting skippe
The waves, and with a violent force do light within the ship.
And as a souldyer stowter than the rest of all his band
That often assayles a city walls defended well by hand,
At length atteines his hope, and for too purchase praise withal
Alone among a thousand men getts up upon the wall:
So when the loftye waves had long the Gallyes sides assayd,
At length the tenth wave rising up with howger force and brayd,
Did never cease assaulting of the weery ship, till that
Upon the hatches like a fo victoriously it gat.
A part thereof did still as yet assault the ship without,
And part had gotten in. The men all trembling ran about,
As in a City commes too pass, when of the enmyes sum
Dig down the walls without, and sum already in are come.
All art and couning was too seek. Their hearts and stomachs fail:
And look how many furges came their vessel too assail,
So many deaths did seem too charge and break upon them all.
One weeps: another stands amazde: the third them blist does call
Whom buryall does remain. Too God another makes his vow,
And holding up his hands too heaven the which he sees not now,
Does pray in vain for help. The thought of this man is upon
His brother and his parents whom he clearly has forgone.
Another calls his house and wife and children unto mind,
And every man in general the things he left behynd.
Alcyone moves Ceyx heart. In Ceyx mouth is none
But only one Alcyone. And though she were alone
The wight that he desired most, yet was he verry glad
She was not there. Too Trachin ward too look desire he had,
And homeward feign he would have turned his eyes which never more
Should see the land. But when he knew not which way was the shore,
Nor where he was. The raging sea did roll about so fast:
And all the heaven with clouds as black as pitch was over cast,
That never night was half so dark. There came a flaw at last,
That with his violence brake the maste, and struck the stern away.
A billowe proudly pranking up as vaunting of his pray
By conquest gotten, walloweth hole and breaks not a sunder,
Beholding with a lofty look the waters woorking under.
And look as if a man should from the places where they grow
Rend down the mountains Athe and Rind, and whole them overthrow
Intoo the open sea: so soft the Billowe tumbling down,
With weight and violent stroke did sink and in the bottom drown
The Gallye. And the most of them that were within the same
Went down therewith and never up too open a^er came,
But dyed strangled in the gulf. Another sort again
Caught pieces of the broken ship. The king himself was feign
A shiuer of the sunken ship in that same hand to hold,
In which he erst a royal mace had hilld of yellow gold.
His father and his fathrinlawe he calls upon (alas
In vain.) But chiefly in his mouth his wife Alcyone was.
In heart was she: in tongue was she: He wisshed that his corse
Too land where she might take it up the surges might enforce:
And that by her most loving hands he might be laid in grave.
In swimming still (as often as the surges leave him gave
Too open his lips) he harped still upon Alcyones name,
And when he drowned in the waves he muttred still the same.
Behold, even full upon the wa^^ a (...) of water black
Did break, and underneath the sea the head of Ceyx stracke.
That night the lyghtsum Lucifer for sorrow was so dim,
As scarcely could a man discern or think it too be him.
And forasmuch as out of heaven he might not step aside,
With thick and darksum clouds that night his countnance he did hyd*
Alcyone of so great mischaunce not knowing aught as yet,
Did keep a reckening of the nights that in the while did flit,
And hasted garments both for him and for herself likewise,
Too wear at his homecomming which she vaynely did surmyse.
Too all the Gods devoutly she did offer frankincence:
But most above them all the Church of Juno she did sense.
And for her husband (who as then was none) she kneeld before
The Altar, wisshing health and soon arrival at the shore,
And that none other woman might before her be preferred.
Of all her prayers this one piece effectually was heard.
For Juno could not find in heart entreated for too be
For him that was already dead. But too thentent that she
From dame Alcyones deadly hands might keep her Altars free,
She said. Most faithful messenger of my commaundments, O
Thou Raynebowe, too the slugguish house of Slomber swiftly go.
And bid him send a Dream in shape of Ceyx too his wife
Alcyone, for too show her plain the losing of his life.
Dame Iris takes her pall wherein a thousand colors were
And bowwing like a stringed bow upon the clowdy sphere,
Immediately descended too the drowzye house of Sleep
Whose Court the clouds continually do clo^ely ouerdreepe.
Among the dark Cimmerians is a hollow mountain found
And in the hill a Cave that far does run within the ground, The house of
sleep.

The Chamber and the dwelling place where slothful sleep does cowch.
The light of Phoebus golden beams this place can never towch.
A foggye mist with dimnesse mixed streams upward from the ground,
And glimmering twylyght evermore within the same is found.
No watchful bird with barbed bill, and combed crown does call
The morning forth with crowing out. There is no noise at all
Of waking dog, nor gagling goose more waker than the hound
Too hinder sleep. Of beast ne wyld ne tame there is no sound.
No bowghes are stird with blastes of wynd. no noise of tatling tongue
Of man or woman ever yet within that bower roong
Dumb quiet dwells there. Yet from the Roches foot does go
The river of forgetfulness. which ronneth trickling so
Upon the little pebble stones which in the channel lie,
That unto sleep a great deal more it does provoke thereby.
Before the entry of the Cave, there grows of Poppye store.
With seeded heads, and other weeds innumerable more,
Out of the milkye iewce of which the night does gather sleeps,
And over all the shadowed earth with dankish deawe them dreepes.
Because the craking hindges of the door no noise should make,
There is no door in all the house, nor porter at the gate.
Amid the Cave, of Ebonye a bedsted stands hye,
And on the same a bed of down with keeuerings black does lie:
In which the drowzye God of sleep his lither limbs does rest.
About him, forging sundry shapes as many dreams lie pressed,
As ears of corn do stand in feeldes in harvest time, or leaves
Do grow on trees, or sea too shore of sandye cinder heaues.
As Soon as Iris came within this house, and with her hand
Had put aside the dazeling dreams that in her way did stand,
The brightness of her robe through all the sacred house did shine.
The God of sleep scarce able for too raise his heavy eyes,
A three or four times at the least did fall ageine too rest,
And with his nodding head did knock his chinne against his breast.
At length he shaking of himself, upon his elbowe leande.
And though he knew for what she came: he asked her what she meand.
O sleep (quod she,) the rest of things, O gentlest of the Gods,
Sweet sleep, the peace of mind, with whom crookt care is aye at odds:
Which cherrishest men's weery limbs appalld with toyling sore,
And make them as fresh too woork and lustye as before,
Command a dream that in their kinds can every thing express,
Too Trachine Hercles town himself this instant too address.
And let him lively counterfeit too Queen Alcyonea
The image of her husband who is drowned in the sea
By shipwrecke. Juno wills so. Her message being told,
Dame Iris went her way* she could her eyes no longer hold
From sleep. But when she felt it come she fled that instant time,
And by the boawe that brought her down too heave ageine did clyme.
Among a thousand sons and mo that father slomber had
He called up Morph the feyner of man's shape a craftye lad.
None other could so conningly express man's verrye face,
His gesture and his sound of voice, and manner of his pace,
Toogither with his woonted weed, and woonted phrase of talk.
But this same Morphye only in the shape of man does walk.
There is another who the shapes of beast or bird does take,
Or else appears unto men in likeness of a snake.
The Gods do call him Icilos, and mortal folk him name
Phobetor. There is also yet a third who from these same
Works diversely, and Phantasos he highteth. Intoo streams
This turns himself, and intoo stones, and earth, and timber beams,
And intoo every other thing that wants life. These three.
Great kings and Capteines in the night are woonted for too see.
The meaner and inferior sort of others haunted be.
Sir Slomber ouerpast the rest, and of the brothers all
Too do dame Iris message he did only Morphye call.
Which done he waxing luskish, straight laid down his drowzy head
And softly shroonk his layzye limbs within his sluggish bed.
Away flew Morphye through y^ air: no flickring made hi^ wings*
And came anon too Trachine. There his feathers of he flings,
And in the shape of Ceyx stands before Alcyones bed,
Pale, wan, stark naakt, and like a man that was but lately dead.
His berde seemd wet, and of his head the hear was dropping dry,
And leaning on her bed, with tears he seemed thus too cry.
Most wretched woman know thou thy loving Ceyx now
Or is my face by death disformd? behold me well, and thou
Shall know me. For thy husband, thou thy husbands Ghost shall see.
No good thy prayers and thy vows have done at all too me.
For I am dead. In vain of my return no reckning make.
The clowdy sowth amid the sea our ship did tardy take,
And tossing it with violent blastes asunder did it shake.
And floodes have filld my mouth which called in vain upon thy name.
No person whom thou may misdeeme brings tidings of the same
Thou hear not thereof by false report of flying fame.
But I myself: I presently my shipwrecke too thee show.
Arise therefore and woeful tears upon thy spouse bestow.
Put moorning raiment on, and let me not too Limbo go
Unmoorned for. In showing of this shipwrecke Morphye so
Did feyne the voice of Ceyx, that she could none other deem,
But that it should be his in deed. Moreover he did seem
Too weep in earnest: and his hands the verry gesture had
Of Ceyx. Queen Alcyone did groan, and being sad
Did stir her arms, and thrust them forth his body too embrace.
In stead whereof she caught but air. The tears ran down her face.
She cried, tarry: whither flyste? toogither let us go.
And all this while she was a sleep. Both with her crying so,
And flayghted with the image of her husbands ghastly spryght,
She started up: and sought about if find him there she might.
(For why her Grooms awaking with the shreeke had brought a light.)
And when she no where could him find, she began her face too smyght,
And tare her nyghtclothes from her breast, and struck it feercely, and
Not passing too vnty her hear she rent it with her hand.
And when her nurce of this her greef desyrde too understand
The cause: Alcyone is undone, undone and cast away
With Ceyx her dear spouse (she said.) Leave comforting I pray.
By shipwrecke he is perrisht: I have seen him: and I knew
His hands. When in departing I too hold him did pursew,
I caught a Ghost: but such a Ghost as well discern I might
Too be my husbands Nathelesse he had not too my sight
His woonted countenance, neither did his visage shine so bright,
As here toofore it had been wont. I saw him wretched wight
Stark naked, pale, and with his hear still wet: even verry here
I saw him stand. with that she looks if any print appear
Of footing where as he did stand upon the floor behynd.
This this is it that I did fear in far forecasting mind,
When flying me I thee desyrde thou should not trust the wynd.
But sith thou wentest too thy death, I would that I had gone
With thee* ah meet, it meet had been thou should not go alone
Without me. So it should have come too pass that neither I
Had ouerliued thee, nor yet been forced twice too dye.
Already, absent in the waves now tossed have I be.
Already have I perrished. And yet the sea has thee
Without me. But the cruelnesse were greater far of me
Than of the sea, if after thy decease I still would strive
In sorrow and in anguish still too pyne away alive.
But neither will I strive in care too lengthen still my life,
Nor (wretched wight) abandon thee: but like a faithful wife
At leastwyse now will come as thy companion. And the hearse
shall join us, though not in the selfsame coffin: yet in verse.
Although in tumb the bones of us toogither may not couch,
Yet in a graven Epitaph my name thy name shall touch.
Her sorrow would not suffer her too utter any more.
She sobd and sight at every word, until her heart was sore.
The morning came, and out she went right pensif too the shor^
Too that same place in which she took her leave of him before.
While there she musing stood, and said, he kissed me even here,
Here weyed he his Anchors up, here loosd he from the peer,
And while she called too mind the things there marked with her eyes:
In looking on the open sea, a great way of she spies
A certain thing much like a corse come houering on the wave.
At first she dowted what it was. As tide it nearer drove,
Although it were a good way of, yet did it plainly show
Too be a corce. And though that whose it was she did not know,
Yet forbycause it seemd a wrecke, her heart thereat did rise:
And as it had sum stranger been, with water in her eyes
She said, alas poor wretch who ere thou art, alas for her
That is thy wife, if any be. And as the waves did stir,
The body floted nearer land: the which the more that she
Behilld, the less began in her of stayed wit too be.
Anon it did arrive on shore. Then plainly she did see
And know it, that it was her feere. She shreeked it is he.
And therewithal her face, her hear, and garments she did tear,
And unto Ceyx stretching out her trembling hands with fear,
Said: cumst thou home in such a plyght too me O husband dear?
Returnst in such a wretched plyght? There was a certain peer
That builded was by hand, of waves the first assaults too break,
And at the hauons mouth too cause the tide too enter weak.
She lept thereon. (A wonder sure it was she could do so)
She flew, and with her newgrowen wings did beat the air as tho.
And on the waves a wretched bird she whisked too and fro.
And with her crocking neb then grown too slender bill and round,
like one that wayld and moorned still she made a moaning sound.
Howbeet as soon as she did touch his dumb and bloodlesse flesh,
And had embraast his loved limbs with wings made new and fresh,
And with her hardened neb had kissed him coldly, though in vain,
Folk dowt of Ceyx feeling it too raise his head did strain,
Or whither that the waves did lift it up. But surely he
It felt: and through compassion of the Gods both he and she
Were turned too birds. The love of them eeke subject too their fate,
Continued after: neither did the faithful bond abate
Of wedlock in them being birds: but stands in steadfast state.
They tread, and lay, and bring forth young and now the The kings fisher.
Alcyon sitts
In wintertime upon her nest (which on the water flitts
A seuennyght. During all which time the sea is calm and still,
And every man may too and fro sail saufly at his will.
For Aeolus for his ofsprings sake the winds at home does keep,
And will not let them go abroad for troubling of the deep.
An ancient father seeing them about the broad sea fly,
Did praise their love for lasting too the end so steadfastly.
His neighbor or the selfsame man made answer (such is chance)
Even this foul also whom thou see upon the surges glaunce
With spindle shanks, (he poynted too the wydegoawld Cormorant)
Before that he became a bird, of royal race might vaunt.
And if thou covet lineally his pedigree too seek,
His Auncetors were Ilus, and Assaracus, and eeke
Fair Ganymed who Jupiter did ravish as his joy,
Laomedon and Priamus the last that reygnd in Troy.
Stout Hectors brother was this man. And had he not in pryme
Of lusty youth been taken away, his deeds perchance in time
Had purchaast him as great a name as Hector, though that he
Of Dymants daughter Hecuba had fortune borne too be.
For Acsacus reported is begotten to have been
By escape, in shady Ida on a maiden fair and sheene
Whose name was Alyxothoe, a poor man's daughter that
With spade and mattocke for himself and his a living gat.
This Aesacus the City hates, and gorgious Court does shonne,
And in the vnambicious feeldes and woods alone does won.
He seeldoom haunts the town of Troy, yet having not a rude
And blockish wit, nor such a heart as could not be subdewd
By love, he spyde Eperie (whom often he had pursewd
Through all the woods) then sitting on her father Cebrius brim
A drying of her hear against the son, which hanged trim
Upon her back. As Soon as that the Nymph was ware of him,
She fled as when the grisild woolf does scare the fearful hynd
Or when the Fawcon far from brooks a Mallard happes too find.
The Troiane knight ronnes after her, and being swift through love,
Purseweth her whom fear does force apace her feet to move.
Behold an Adder lurking in the grass there as she fled,
Did byght her foot with hooked tooth, and in her body spread
His venim. She did cease her flight and soodein fell down dead.
Her lover being past his wits her carkesse did embrace,
And cryde, alas it irketh me, it irkes me of this chase.
But this I feared not. neither was the gain of that I willd
Worth half so much. Now two of us thee (wretched soul) have killd.
The wound was given thee by the snake, the cause was given by me.
The wickedder of both am I: who for too comfort thee
Will make thee satisfaction with my death. With that at last
Down from a rock (the which the waves had vndermynde) he cast
Himself intoo the sea. Howbeet dame Tethys pitying him,
Receyud him softly, and as he upon the waves did swim,
She covered him with feathers. And though feign he would have did,
She would not let him. Wroth was he that death was him denyde,
And that his soul compelld should be against his will too bide
Within his wretched body still, from which it would depart,
And that he was constreynd too live perforce against his heart.
And as he on his shoulders now had newly taken wings,
He mounted up, and down upon the sea his boddye dings.
His feathers would not let him sink. In rage he dyueth down,
And despratly he strives himself continually too drown.
His love did make him lean, long legs: long neck does still remain.
His head is from his shoulders far: of Sea he is most feign.
And for he underneath the waves delyghteth for too drive
A name according therevntoo the Latins do him give.
Finis vndecimi Libri.
THE.XII. BOOK OF Ouids Metamorphosis.
RIng Priam being ignorant that Aesacus his son
Did live in shape of bird, did moorne: and at a tumb whereon
His name was written, Hector and his brother solemly
Did keep an Obit. Paris was not at this obsequye.
Within a while with ravished wife he brought a lasting war
Home unto Troy. There followed him a thousand ships not far
Conspyrd toogither, with the aid that all the Greeks could find:
And vengeance had been taken forthwith but that the cruel wynd
Did make the seas vnsaylable, so that their ships were feign
At rode at fisshye Avvlys in Baeotia too remain.
Here as the Greeks according too their wont made sacrifyse
Too Jove, and on the Altar old the flame aloft did rise,
They spyde a speckled Snake creep up upon a planetree bye
Upon the top whereof there was among the branches hye
A nest, and in the nest eight birds, All which and eeke their dam
That flickering flew about her loss, the hungry snake did cram
Within his mawe. The standers by were all amazde thereat.
But Calchas Thestors son who knew what meening was in that,
Said* we shall win. Rejoice ye Greeks by us shall perish Troy
But long the time will be before we may our will enjoy.
And then he told them how the birds nine years did signify
Which they before the town of Troy not taking it should lie.
The Serpent as he wound about the boughs and branches green,
Became a stone, and still in stone his snakish shape is seen.
The seas continewed verry rough and suffered not their host
Embarked for too pass from thence too take the further coast.
Sum thought that Neptune favored Troy because himself did buyld
The walls thereof. But Calchas(who both knew, and never hilld
His peace in time) declared that the Goddess Phebe must
Appeased be with virgins blood for wrath conceived just.
As Soon as pity yielded had too case of puplicke weal,
And reason got the upper hand of fathers loving zeal,
So that the Lady Iphigen before the altar stood
Among the weeping ministers, too give her maidens blood:
The Goddess taking pity, cast a mist before their eyes,
And as they prayed and sti^d about too make the sacrifyse,
Conueyes her quight away, and with a Hynd her room supplies
Thus with a slaughter meet for her Diana being pleased,
The raging surges with her wrath toogither were appeasd,
The thousand ships had wynd at poope. And when they had abode
Much trouble, at the length all safe they gat the Phrygian rode.
Amid the world tweene heaven, and earth, and sea, there is a place,
Set from the bounds of each of them indifferently in space,
From whence is seen what ever thing is practisd any where,
Although the Realm be nere so far, and roundly too the ear
Commes whatsoever spoken is* Fame has his dwelling there.
Who in the top of all the house is lodged in a tower.
A thousand entryes, glades, and holes are f^amed in this bower.
There are no doors too shet. The doors stand open night and day.
The house is all of sounding brass, and roreth every way,
Reporting dowble every word it hears people say.
There is no rest within, there is no silence any where.
Yet is there not a yelling out: but humming, as it were
The sound of surges being heard far of, are like the sound
That at the end of thunderclappes long after does redound,
When Jove does make the clouds too crack, within the courts is preace
Of common people, which too come and go do never ceace.
And millions both of trothes and lies run gadding every where,
And words confusely fly in heaps. Of which, sum fill the ^are
That heard not of them erst, and sum Colearyers part do play
Too spread abroad the things they heard. And ever by the way
The thing that was invented grows much greater than before,
And every one that getts it by the end adds sumwhat more.
Light credit dwells there. There dwells rash error: There does dwell
Uayne joy: There dwells hartlesse fear, and Brute that loves too tell
Uncertayne news upon report, whereof he does not know
The author, and Sedition who fresh rumors loves too sow.
This Fame beholds what is done in heaven, on sea, and land,
And what is wrought in all the world he lays to understand.
He gave the Troyans warning that the Greeks with valiant men
And ships approached, that unawares they could not take them then.
For Hector and the Trojan folk well armed were at hand
Too keep the coast and bid them bace before they came a land.
Protesilay by fatal doom was first that did in feeld
Of Hectors spear: and after him great numbers mo were killd
Of valiant men. That battle did the Greeks full deerly cost.
And Hector with his Phrygian folk of blood no little lost,
In trying what the Greeks could do. The shore was red with blood.
And now king Cygnet Neptunes son had killed where he stood
A thousand Greeks. And now the stout Achilles causd to stay
His Charyot: and his lawnce did ^lea whole bands of men that day.
And seeking Cygnet through the feeld or Hector, he did stray.
At last with Cygnet he did meet. For Hector had delay
Until the tenth year afterward. Then hasting forth his horses
With flaxen manes, against his fo his Chariot he enforces.
And brandisshing his shaking dart, he said: O noble wight
A comfort let it be too thee that such a valiant knight
As is Achilles kills thee. In saying so he threw
A mighty dart, which though it hit the mark at which it flew,
Yet perst it not the skin at all. Now when this blunted blow
Had hit on Cygnets breast, and did no print of hitting show,
Thou Goddess son (quod Cygnet) for by fame we do the know)
Why woondrest at me for too see I can not wounded be?
( Achilles woondred much thereat.) This helmet which ye see
Bedect with horses yellow manes, this sheeld that I do bear,
Defend me not. For ornaments alonly I them wear.
For this same cause arms Mars himself likewise. I will disarme
Myself, and yet vnrazed will I pass without all harm.
It is too sum effect, not borne too be of Neryes race,
So that a man be borne of him that with threeforked mace
Rules Nereus and his daughters too, and all the sea beside.
This said, he at Achilles sent a dart that should abide
Upon his sheeld. It perced through the steel and through nine fold
Of Oxen hydes, and stayed upon the tenth. Achilles bold
Did wrest it out, and forcybly did throw the same again.
His body being hit ageine, unwounded did remain,
And clear from any print of wound. The third went eeke in vain.
And yitdid Cygnet too the same give full his naked brist.
Achilles chafed like a Bull that in the open list
With dreadful horns does push against the scarlet clothes that ther^
Are hanged up too make him feerce, and when he would them tear
Does find his wounds deluded. Then Achilles looked upon
His Iauelings socket, if the head thereof were looce or gone.
The head stacke fast. My hand byleeke is weakened then (quod he).
And all the force it had before is spent on one I see.
For sure I am it was of strength, both when I first down threw
Lyrnessus walls, and when I did I Will Tenedos subdew,
And eeke Axetions Thebe with her proper blood embrew.
And when so many of the folk of Tevvthranie I slew,
That with their blood Caycus stream became of purple hew.
And when the noble Telephus did of my Dart of steel
The dowble force, of wounding and of healing also feel.
Yea even the heaps of men slain here by me, that on this strond
Are lying still too look upon, do give too understand
That this same hand of mine both had and still has strength. This sed,
(As though he had distrusted all his doings ere that sted,)
He threw a Dart against a man of Lycia land that hight
Menetes, through whose Curets and his breast he struck him quyght.
And when he saw with dying limbs him sprawling on the ground,
He stepped too him straight, and pulld the Iaueling from the wound,
And said alowd: This is the hand, this is the self same dart
With which my hand did strike even now Menetes too the heart.
Against my toother Copemate will I use the same: I pray
Too God it may have like success. This sed, without delay
He sent it toward Cygnet, and the weapon did not stray,
Nor was not shunned. Insomuch it lighted full upon
His shoulder: and it gave a rappe as if upon sum ston
It lyghted had, rebownding back. Howbeeit where it hit,
Achilles saw it bloodye, and was vaynly glad of it.
For why there was no wound. It was Menetes blood. Then lept
He hastly from his Charyot down, and like a madman stepped
Too careless Cygnet with his sword. He saw his sword did pare
His Target and his morion both. But when it touched the bare,
His body was so hard, it did the edge thereof abate.
He could no lengar suffer him too triumph in that rate,
But with the pommell of his sword did thump him on the pate,
And bobd him well about the brewes a doozen times and more,
And preacing on him as he still gave back amaazd him sore,
And troubled him with buffetting, not respetting a whit.
Then Cygnet began too be afraid, and mistres beegan too flit
Before his eyes, and dimd his sight. And as he still did yield,
In giving back, by chance he met a stone amid the feeld,
Against the which Achilles thrust him back with all his might,
And throwing him against the ground, did cast him bolt vpryght.
Then bearing bostowsely with both his knees against his chest,
And leaning with his elbowes and his target on his breast,
He shet his headpeece cloce and just, and underneath his chin
So hard it straynd, that way for breath was neither out nor in,
And closed up the vent of life. And having gotten so
The upper hand, he went about too spoil his vanquished fo.
But naught he in his armor found, For Neptune had as tho
Transformd him too the foul whose name he bare but late ago.
This labor, this encounter brought the rest of many days,
And either party in their strength a while from battle stays.
Now while the Phrygians watch and ward upon the walls of Troy,
And Greeks likewise within their trench, there came a day of joy,
In which Achilles for his luck in Cygnets overthrow,
A Cow in way of sacrifyse on Pallas did bestow.
Whose inwards when he had upon the burning altar cast
And that the acceptable fume had through the air past
Too Godward, and the holy rytes had had their dewes, the rest
Was set on boords for men too eat in disshes fynely dressed.
The princes sitting down, did feed upon the roasted flesh,
And both their thirst and present cares with wine they did refresh.
Not Harpes, nor songs, nor hollow flutes too here did them delyght.
They talked till they nigh had spent the greatest part of night.
And all their communication was of feats of arms in fight
That had been done by them or by their foes. And every wight
Delyghts too vppen oftentimes by turn as came about
The perils and the narrow brunts himself had shifted out.
For what thing should be talked before Achilles rather? Or
What kind of things than such as these could seem more meeter for
Achilles too be talking of? But in their talk most breeme
Was then Achilles victory of Cygnet. It did seem
A wonder that the flesh of him should be so hard and tough
As that no weapon might have power too raze or perce it through,
But that it did abate the edge of steel: It was a thing
That both Achilles and the Greeks in woondrous maze did bring.
Then Nestor said: This Cygnet is the person now alone
Of your time that defied steel, and could be perst of none.
But I have seen now long ago one Cene of Perrhebye,
I saw one Cene of Perrhebye a thousand wounders defye
With vnatteynted body. In mount Othris he did dwell:
And was renowned for his deeds: (and which in him right well
A greater wonder did appear) he was a woman borne.
This uncouth made them all much more amazed than beforne,
And every man desired him to tell it. And among
The rest, Achilles said. Declare I pray thee (for we long
Too hear it every one of us) O eloquent old man
The wisdom of our age: what was that Cene and how he wan
Another than his native shape, and in what rode, or in
What fight or skirmish, tweene you first acquaintance did beegin,
And who in fine did vanquish him if any vanquished him.
Then Nestor. Though y^ length of time have made my senses dim,
And diverse things erst seen in youth now out of mine be gone:
Yet bear I still mo things in mind: and of them all is none
Among so many both of peace and war, that yet does take
More steadfast root in memory. And if that time may make
A man great store of things through long continuance for too see,
Two hundred years already of my life full passed be,
And now I go upon the third. This foresaid Ceny was
The daughter of one Elatey. In beawty she did pass
The maidens all of Thessaly. From all the Cities bye
And from thy Cities also O Achilles came (for why
She was thy countrywoman) store of wooers who in vain
In hope too win her love did take great travel suit and pain.
Thy father also had perchance attempted here too matched
But that thy moothers marriage was already then dispatched,
Or she at least affyanced. But Ceny match with none,
Howbeeit as she on the shore was walking all alone,
The God of sea did ravish her. (so fame does make report)
And Neptune for the great delight he had in Venus sport,
Said: Ceny, ask me what thou will, and I will give it thee.
This also bruted is by fame.) The wrong here done too me
(quod Ceny makes me wish great things. And therefore too thentent
I may no more constreyned be too such a thing, consent
I may no more a woman be. and if thou grant theretoo,
It is even all that I desire, or wish thee for too do.
In bacer tune these latter words were vttred, and her voice
Did seem a man's voice as it was in deed. For too her choice
The God of sea had given consent. He granted him beside
That free from wounding and from hurt he should from thence abide,
And that he should not dye of steel. Right glad of this same grant
Away went Ceny, and the feeldes of Thessaly did haunt,
And in the feats of Cheualrye from that time spent his life.
The over bold Piritho^s.
Ixions son had taken too his wife
Hippodame. And keuering boordes in bowres of boughs of trees
His Clowdbred brothers one by one he placed in degrees.
There were the Lords of Thessaly. I also was among
The rest, a cheerful noise of feast through all the Palace roong.
Sum made the altars smoke, and sum the brydale carrolls soong.
Anon commes in the maiden bryde a goodly wench of face,
With wives and maidens following her with comely gate and grace.
We said that sir Pirithous was happy in his wife:
Which handsell had deceived us wellneere through soodeine strife.
For of the cruel Centavvres thou most cruel Evvryt, tho
Like as thy stomach was with wine far over charged: so
As Soon as thou behilldst the bryde, thy heart began too frayne,
And doubled with thy droonkennesse thy raging lust did reign.
The feast was troubled by and by with tables overthrown.
The bryde was hayled by the head, so far was furye grown.
Feerce Evvryt caught Hippodame, and every of the rest
Caught such as ^ommed next to hand, or such as likte him best.
It was the lively image of a City taken by foes.
The house did ring of women's shreekes* we all up quickly rose.
And first said Theseus thus. What aylst? art mad O Evvrytus?
That dare (seeing me alive) mis^se Pirithous?
Not knowing that in one thou do abuse us both? And least
He might have seemd too speak in vain, he thrustway such as preast
About the bryde, and took her from them freating sore thereat.
No answer made him Evvrytus: (for such a deed as that
Defended could not be with words) but with his sawcye fist
He flew at gentle Theseus face, and b^^d him on the brist.
By chance hard by, an ancient cup of image woork did stand.
Which being howge himself more howge sir Theseus took in hand,
And threwt at Evvryts head. He spewd as well at mouth as wound
Mirt cloddes of blood, and brain and wine, and on the soyled ground
Lay sprawling bolt vpryght. The death of him did set the rest
His dowblelimbed brothers so on fire, that all the quest
With one voice cried out kill kill. The wine had given them heart.
Their first encounter was with cups and Cannes thrown overthwart,
And brittle tankerds, and with boawles, pannes, dishes, potts, and trayes,
Things serving late for meat and drink, and then for bluddy frayes.
First Amycus Ophions son with out remorse began
Too reeue and rob the brydehouse of his furniture. He ran
And pulled down a Lampbeame full of lyghtes, and lifting it
Aloft like one that with an Ax does fetch his blow too slit
An Oxis neck in sacrifyse, He on the forehead hit
A Lapith named Celadon, and crusshed so his bones
That none could know him by the face: both eyes flew out at ones.
His nose was beaten back and too his pallat battred slat.
One Pelates a Macedone exceeding wroth thereat,
Pulld out a maple tressles foot, and napt him in the necks,
That bobbing with his chin against his breast too ground he becks,
And as he spitted out his teeth with blackish blood, he lent
Another blow too Amycus which straight too hell him sent.
Gryne standing by and lowering with a fell grim visage at
The smoking Altars, said: why use we not these same? with that
He caught a mighty altar up with burning fire thereon,
And it among the thickest of the Lapithes threw anon.
And two he over whelmd therewith called Brote and Orion.
This Orions moother Mycale is known of certeintye
The Moon resisting too have drawn by witchcraft from the sky.
Full dearly shall thou by it (quod Exadius) may I get
A weapon: and with that in stead of weapon, he did set
His hand upon a vowed hearts horn that on a Pynetree hye
Was nayld, and with two tynes thereof he struck out either eye
Of Gryne: whereof sum stacke upon the horn, and sum did fly
Upon his beard, and there with blood like ielly mixed did lie,
A flaming fyrebrand from amids an Altar Rhaetus snatched.
With which upon the leftsyde of his head Charaxus latcht
A blow that cracked his skull. The blaze among his yellow hear
Ran sindging up, as if dry corn with lightning blas^ed were.
And in his wound the seared blood did make a grievous sound,
As when a piece of steel red who^ taken up with tongs is drowned
In water by the smith, it spirts and hisseth in the trowgh.
Charaxus from his curled hear did shake the fire. and thowgh
He wounded were, yet caught he up upon his shoulders twain.
A stone the Iawme of either door that well would load a wayne.
The mass thereof was such as that it would not let him hi^
His fo. I^ lighted short: and with the falling down of it
A mate of his that Comet hight, it all in pieces smit.
Then Rhaete restreyning not his joy, said thus: I would the rowt
Of all thy mates might in the selfsame manner prove them s^owt.
And with his halfeburnt brond the wound he searched new again,
Not ceasing for to lay on load upon his pate amayne,
Until his head was crushed, and of his scalp the bones did swim
Among his brains. In jolly ruff he passed straight from him
Too Coryt, and Euagrus, and too Dryant on a row.
Of whom when Coryt (on whose cheeks young mossy down began grow)
Was slain, what praise or honor ( quod Euagrus) have thou got
By killing of a boy? mo words him Rhetus suffered not
Too speak, but in his open mouth did thrust his burning brand,
And down his throteboll too his chest. Then whisking in his hand
His fyrebrand round about his head he feercely did assail
The valyant Dryant. but with him he could not so prevail.
For as he triumphed in his luck, proceeding for too make
Continual slaughter of his foes, sir Dryant with a stake
(Whose point was hardened in the fire) did cast at him a ^oyne
And thrust him through the place in which the neck and shoulders join.
He groand and from his cannell bone could scarcely pull the stake.
And being foiled with his blood too flight he did him take.
Arnaeus also ran away, and Lycidas likewise.
And Medon (whose right shoulderplate was also wounded) flies.
So did Pisenor, so did Cavvne, and so did Mermeros
Who late outronning every man, now wounded slower goes:
And so did Phole, and Menelas, and Abas who was wont
Too make a spoil among wild Boares as often as he did hunt:
And eeke the wyzarde Astylos who counseled his mates
Too leave that fray: but he too them in vain of leaving prates.
He eeke too Nessus (who for fear of wounding seemed shye)
Said, fly not thou shall escape this fray of Hercles bow too dye.
But Lycid and Evvrinomos, and Imbreus, and Are
Escapte not death. Sir Dryants hand did all alike them spare.
Cayneius also (though that he in flying were not slack,
Yet was he wounded on the face: For as he looked back,
A weapons point did hit him full midway between the eyes,
Whereas the nore and forehead meet. For all this deane, yet lies
Aphipnas snorting fast a sleep not mynding for to wake,
Wrapped in a cloak of Bearskinnes which in Ossa mount were take.
And in his lither hand he hilld a pot of wine. Whom when
That Phorbas saw (although in vain) not meddling with them, then
He set his fingars too the thong: and saying, thou shall drink
Thy wine with water taken from the Stygian fountaynes brink,
He threw his dart at him. The dart (as he that time by chance
Lay bolt upright upon his back) did through his throteboll glaunce.
He did and felt no pain at all. The black swart blood gusht out,
And on the bed and in the pot fell flushing like a spout.
I saw Petreius go about too pull out of the ground
An Oken tree. But as he had his arms about it round,
And shaakt it too and fro too make it looce, Pirithous cast
A Dart which nailed too the tree his wrything stomach fast.
Through prowess of Pirithous (men say) was Lycus slain.
Through prowess of Pirithous did Crome. But they both twain
Less honor too their conqueror were, than Dyctis was, or than
Was Helops. Helops with a dart was stricken which though ran
His head, and eutring at the right ear too the left ear went.
And Dyctis from a slipprye knappe down slyding, as he meant
Too shonne Perithous preaching on, fell headlong down, and with
His howgenesse brake the greatest Ash that was in all the frith,
And goard his gutts upon y^ stump. Too wreake his death co^mes Phare:
And from the mount a mighty rock with both his hands he tare:
Which as he was about too throw, Duke Theseus did prevent,
And with an Oken plant upon his mighty elbowe lent
Him such a blow, as that he brake the bones, and past no further.
For leisure would not serve him then his maimed corce too murder.
He lept on high Bianors back, who none was wont too bear
Besides himself. Against his sides his knees fast nipping were,
And with his left hand taking hold upon his foretoppe hear
He cuft him with his knubbed plant about the frowning face,
And made his wattled brows too break. And with his Oken mace
He overthrew Nedimnus: and Lycespes with his dart,
And Hippasus whose beard did hyde his breast the greater part:
And Riphey tallar than the trees, and Therey who was wont
Among the hills of Thessaly for cruel Bears too hunt,
And bear them angry home alive. It did Demoleon spyght
That Theseus had so good success and fortune in his fight.
An old long Pynetree rooted fast he straue with all his might
Too pluck up whole both trunk and root. which when he could not bring
Too pass, he brake it of, and at his emnye did it fling.
But Theseus by admonishment of heavenly Pallas (so
He would have folk believe it were) start back a great way fro
The weapon as it came. Yet fell it not without some harm.
It cut from Crantors left side bulk, his shoulder, breast, and arm.
This Crantor was thy fathers Squyre ( Achilles) and was given
Him by Amyntor ruler of the Dolops, who was driven
By battle for too give him as an hostage for the peace
Too be observed faithfully. When Peleus in the preace
A great way of behilld him thus fallen dead of this same wound,
O Crantor dearest man too me of all above the ground,
Hold here an obitgift he said: and both with force of heart
And hand, at stout Demoleons head he threw an asshen dart,
Which brake the watling of his ribs, and sticking in the bone,
Did shake. He pulled out the steal with much a do alone.
The head thereof stacke still behynd among his lungs and lyghts
Enforst too courage with his pain, he ryseth straight vprights,
And pawing at his emny with his horsish seete, he smyghts
Upon him. Peleus bare his strokes upon his burganet,
And fenst his shoulders with his sheeld, and evermore did set
His weapon upward with the point, which by his shoulders perst
Through both his breasts at one full blow. Howbeet your father erst
Had killed Hyle and Phlegrye, and Hiphinous aloof
And Danes who boldly durst at hand his manhod put in proof.
Too these was added Dorylas, who ware upon his head
A cap of woolues skin. And the horns of Oxen dy^d red
With blood were then his weapon. I (for then my courage gave
Me strength said: see how much thy horns less force than Iron have.
And therewithal with manly might a dart at him I d^aue.
Which when he could not shonne, he clapped his right hand flat upon
His forehead where the wound should be. For why his hand anon
Was nailed too his forehead fast. He roared out amayne.
And as he stood amazed and began too faint for pain,
Your father Peleus (for he stood hard by him) struck him under
The middle belly with his sword, and ripped his womb asunder.
Out girdes me Dorill straight, and trayles his guts upon ye ground
And trampling underneath his feet did break them, and they wound
About his legs so snarling, that he could no further go,
But fell down dead with empty womb Naught booted Cyllar tho
His beawtye in that frentick fray, (at leastwyse if we grant
That any might in that strange shape, of natures beawtye vaunt.)
His beard began but then too bud: his beard was like the gold:
So also were his yellowe lokes, which goodly too behold
Midway beneath his shoulders hung. There rested in his face
A sharp and lively cheerfulness with sweet and pleasant grace.
His neck, breast, shoulders, arms, and hands, as far as he was man,
Were such as never caruers woork yet stayne them could or can.
His nether part likewise (which was a horse) was every whit
Full equal with his upper part, or little worse than it.
For had ye given him horses neck, and head, he was a beast
For Castor too have ridden on. So bou^ly was his breast:
So handsome was his back too bear a saddle; and his hear
Was black as ieate, but that his tail and feet milk whyghtish were.
Full many Fema^es of ^is race did wish him too their make.
But only dame Hylonome for lover he did take.
Of all the halfbrutes in the woods there did not any dwell
More comely than Hylonome. She vi^e herself so well
In dalyance, and in loving, and in vttring of her love,
That she alone hilid Cyllarus. As much as did behoue
In suchye limbs, she trimmed them as most the eye might move.
With combing, smoothe she made her hear: she wallowed her full often
In Roses and in Rosemarye, or Uiolets sweet and soft:
Sumtyme she carried Lillyes whyght: and twyce a day she washed
Her visage in the spring that from the top of Pagase past:
And in the stream she twyce a day did bath her limbs: and on
Her leftsyde or her shoulders came the comlyest things, And none
But fynest skins of choycest beasts. Alike each loved other:
Toogither they among the hills roamd up and down: toogither
They went too covert: and that time toogither they did enter
The Lapithes house, and there the fray toogither did aduenter.
A dart on Cyllars left side came, (I know not who it sent)
Which sumwhat underneath his neck his breast a sunder splent.
As lightly as his heart was raazd, no sooner was the dart
Plucked out, but all his body wext stark cold and dyed swart.
Immediately Hylonome his dying limbs up stayed,
And put her hand upon the wound too stop the blood, and laid
Her mouth too his, and labored sore too stay his passing spryght.
But when she saw him thoroughly dead, then speaking words which might
Not too my hearing come for noise, she stikt herself upon
The weapon that had gored him, and did with him anon
Embracing him beetweene her arms. There also stood before
Mine eyes the grim Pheocomes both man and horse who wore
A Lions skin upon his ^acke fast knit with knotts before.
He snatching up a timber log (which scarcely two good teeme
Of Oxen could have stird) did throw the same with force extreme
At Phonolenyes son. The logge him all in fitters struck,
And of his head the braynepan in a thousand pieces brake,
That at his mouth, his ears, and eyes, and at his nosethrills too,
His crusshed brain came roping out as cream is wont too do
From siues or riddles made of wood, or as a Cullace out
From streyner or from Colender. But as he went about
Too strippe him from his harness as he lay upon the ground,
(Your father knows this full well) my sword his gutts did wound,
Teleboas and Cthonius both, were also slain by me.
Sir Cthonius for his weapon had a forked bough of tree.
The toother had a dart. His dart did wound. me you may see
The scarre thereof remaining yet. Then was the time that I
Should sent have been too conquer Troy. Then was the time that I
Might through my force and prowess, if not vanquish Hector stout,
Yet at the least have hilld him wag, I put you out of Dout.
But then was Hector no body: or but a babe. And now
Am I forspent and worn with years. What should I tell you how
Piretus did by Periphas? Or wherefore should I make
Long process for too tell you of sir Ampycus that struck
The fowrefoote Oecle on the face with dart of Cornell tree.
The which had neither head nor point? Or how that Macaree
Of Mountain Pelithronye with a leauer lent a blow
Too Erigdupus on the breast which did him overthrow?
Full well I do remember that Cymelius threw a dart
Which lyghted full in Nesseyes flank about his privy part.
And think not you that Mops the son of Ampycus could do
No good but only prophesye. This stout Odites whoo
Had both the shapes of man and horse, by Mopsis dart was slain,
And laboring for too speak his last he did but strive in vain.
For Mopsis dart toogither nayld his tongue and nether chappe,
And percing through his throat did make a wide and deadly gappe.
Five men had Cene already slain: their wounds I cannot say:
The names and number of them all right well I bear away.
The names of them were Stiphelus, and Brom, and Helimus,
Pyracmon with his forest bill, and stout Antimachus.
Out steps the biggest Centavvre there howge Latreus armed in
Alesus of Aemathias spoil slain late before by him.
His years were mid tweene youth and age, his courage still was young,
And on his abrun head hoar hears peerd here and there amoong
His furniture was then a sword, a target and a lawnce
Aemathian like. Too both the parts he did his face advance,
And brandishing his weapon brave, in circlewyse did prawnce
About, and stoutly spoke these words. And must I bear with you
Dame Cenye? for none other than a moother (I auow)
No better than a moother will I count thee while I live.
Remembrest not what shape by birth dame nature did the give
Forgettst thou how thou purchasedst this counterfetted shape
Of man? Consyderest what thou art by birth? and how for rape
Thou art become the thing thou art? Go take thy distaffe, and
Thy spindle, and in spinning yarne go exercise thy hand.
Let men alone with feats of arms. As Latreus made this stout,
And scornful taunting in a ring still turning him about,
This Cenye with a dart did hit him full upon the side
Where as the horse and man were joined toogither in a hyde.
The strype made Latreus mad: and with his lawnce in rage he stracke
Upon sir Cenyes naked ribs. The lawnce rebounded back
Like haylestones from a tyled house, or as a man should pat
Small stones upon a dromslets head. He came more near with that,
And in his brawned side did strive too thrust his sword. There was
No way for sword too enter in. Yet shall thou not so pass
My hands (said he.) Well since the point is blunted thou shall dye
Upon the edge: and with that word he fetched his blow awrye,
And sydling with a sweeping stroke along his belly smit.
The strype did give a clinke as if it had on marble hit.
And therewithal the sword did break, and on his neck did light.
When Ceny had sufficiently given Latreus leave too smyght
His flesh which was vnmaymeable. Well now (quod he) lets see,
If my sword able be or no too byght the flesh of thee.
In saying so, his dreadful sword as far as it would go
He underneath his shoulder thrust, and wrinching too and fro
Among his gutts, made wound in wound Behold with hydeous cry
The dowblemembred Centavvres sore abasht upon him fly,
And throw their weapons all at him. Their weapons down did fall
As if they had rebated been, and Cenye for them all
Abydes vnstriken through. Yea none was able blood too draw.
The strangeness of the case made all amazed that it saw.
Fie, fie for shame (quod Monychus) that such a rabble can
Not overcome one wight alone, who scarcely is a man.
Although (too say the very truth) he is the man, and we
Through faintness that that he was borne by nature for too be.
What profits these huge limbs of ours? what helps our dowble force?
Or what auayles our dowble shape of man as well as horse
By puissant nature joined in one? I can not think that we
Of sovereign Goddess Juno were begot, or that we be
Ixions sons, who was so stout of courage and so hault,
As that he durst on Iunos love attempt too give assault.
The emny that does vanquish us is scarcely half a man.
Whelme blocks, and stones, and mountains whole upon his hard brain pan:
And press ye out his lively ghost with trees. Let timber choke
His chappes, let weight enforce his death in stead of wounding stroke.
This said: by chance he gets a tree blown down by blustering blasts
Of Southern wynds, and on his fo with all his might it casts,
And gave example too the rest too do the like. Within
A while the shadows which did hyde mount Pehon waxed thin:
And not a tree was left upon mount Othris ere they went.
Sir Cenye underneath this great howge pyle of timber pent,
Did chauf and on his shoulders hard the heavy logges did bear.
But when above his face and head the trees up stacked were,
So that he had no venting place too draw his breath: One while
He faynted: and anotherwhyle he heaued at the pyle,
Too tumble down the loggs that lay so heavy on his back,
And for too win the open air ageine above the stacke:
As if the mountain Ida (lo) which yoonder we do see
So high, by earth quake at a time should chance to shaken be.
Men dowt what did become of him. Sum hold opinion that
The burden of the woods had driven his soul too Limbo flat.
But Mopsus said it was not so. For he did see a brown
Bird flying from amid the stacke and towering up and down.
It was the first time and the last that ever I behild
That foul. When Mopsus softly saw him soring in the feeld,
He looked wistly after him, and cried out on hye.
Hayle peerlesse perle of Lapith race, hayle Ceny, late ago
A valiant knight, and now a bird of whom there is no mo.
The author caused men believe the matter too be so.
Our sorrow set us in a rage. It was too us a greef
That by so many foes one knight was killd without releef.
Then ceast we not too wreake our ^eene till most was slain in fight,
And that the rest discomfit^d were fled away by night.
As Nestor all the process of this battle did reherce
Between the valiant Lapithes and misshapen Centavvres ferce,
Tlepolemus displeased sore that Hercules was past
With silence, could not hold his peace, but out these words did cast.
My Lord, I muse you should forget my fathers praise so quyght.
For often unto me himself was woonted too recite,
How that the clowdbred folk by him were chiefly put too flight.
Right sadly Nestor answered thus. Why should you me constreyne
Too call too mind forgotten greefs? and for to reere ageine
The sorrows now outworne by time? or force me too declare
The hatred and displeasure which I too your father bare?
In sooth his doings greater were than might be well believed.
He filled the world with high renown which nobly he atcheeued.
Which thing I would I could deny. For neither set we out
Deiphobus, Polydamas, nor Hector that most stout
And valiant knight the strength of Troy. For whoo will praise his fo?
Your father overthrew the walls of Messen long ago,
And razed Pyle, and Ely towns unworthy serving so.
And feerce against my fathers house he used both sword and fire.
And (not too speak of others whom he killed in his tree)
Twyce six we were the sons of Nele all lusty gentlemen.
Twyce six of us (excepting me) by him were murthred then.
The death of all the rest might seem a matter not so strange:
But strange was Periclymens death whoo had the power too change
And leave and take what shape he list (by Neptune too him given,
The founder of the house of Nele.) For when he had been driven
Too try all shapes, and none could help: he last of all became
The foul that in his hooked feet does bear the flasshing flame
Sent down from heaven by Jupiter. He practicing those birds,
With flapping wings, and bowwing beak, and hooked talants girds
At Hercle, and beescratcht his face. Too certain (I may say)
Thy father amde his shaft at him. For as he towering lay
Among the clouds, he hit him underneath the wing. The stroke
Was small: Howbeet because therewith the sinews being broke,
He wanted strength too maynteine flight, he fell me too the ground,
Through weakness of his wing. The shaft that sticked in the wound,
By reason of the burden of his body perst his side,
And at the leftsyde of his neck all bloodye forth did glyde.
Now tell me O thou beawtyfull Lord Amirall of the fleet
Of Rhodes, if me too speak the praise of Hercle it be meet.
But least that of my brothers deaths men think I do desire
A further vendge than silence of the prowess of thy sire,
I love thee even with all my heart, and take thee for my friend.
When Nestor of his pleasant tales had made this freendly end,
They called for a boll of wine, and from the table went,
And all the resdew of the night in sleeping soundly spent.
But neptune like a father took the matter sore too heart
That Cygnet too a Swan he was constreyned too convert.
And hating feerce Achilles, he did wreake his cruel teene
Upon him more discourteously than had beseeming been.
For when the wars well near full twyce five years had lasted. He
Unshorne Apollo thus bespake. O neuew unto me
Most dear of all my brothers impes, who helpedst me too lay
Foundation of the walls of Troy for which we had no pay,
And can thou syghes forbear too see the Asian Empire fall?
And does it not lament thy heart when thou too mind do call
So many thousand people slain in keeping Ilion wall?
Or (too thentent particlerly I do not speak of all)
Remembrest thou not Hectors Ghost whoo harryed was about
His town of Troy? where nerethelesse Achilles that same stout
And far in fight more butcherly, whoo stryues with all his might
Too stroy the work of me and thee, lives still in healthful plyght*
If ever he do come within my danger he shall feel
What force is in my tryple mace. But since with sword of steel
I may not meet him as my fo, I pray thee vnbeeware
Go kill him with a sodeine shaft and rid me of my care.
Apollo did consent: as well his uncle for too please,
As also for a pryuate grudge himself had for too ease.
And in a clowd he down among the host of Troy did slide,
Where Paris dribbling out his shaftes among the Greeks he spyde:
And telling him what God he was, said wherefore do thou waast
Thine arrows on the simple sort? It any care thou haste
Of those that are thy friends, go turn against Achilles head,
And like a man reuendge on him thy brothers that are dead.
In saying this, he brought him where Achilles with his brond
Was beating down the Troiane folk, and leueld so his hond
As that Achilles tumbled down stark dead upon the land.
This was the only thing whereof the old king Priam might
Take comfort after Hectors death. That stout and valiant knight
Achilles whoo had overthrown so many men in fight,
Was by that coward carpet knight beereeued of his life.
Whoo like a caytif stale away the Spartane princes wife.
But if of weapon womanish he had foreknowen it had
His destnye been too lose his life, he would have been more glad
That Queen Penthesileas bill had slain him out of hand.
Now was the fear of Phrygian folk, the only glory, and
Defense of Greeks, that peerless prince in arms, Achilles turned
Too ashes. That same God that had him armd, him also burnd.
Now is he dust: and of that great Achilles bydeth still.
A thing of naught, that scarcely can a little coffin fill.
Howbeet his worthy fame does live, and spreads over all
The world, a measure meet sor such a person too beefall.
This matcheth thee Achilles full. And this can never dye.
His target also (too thentent that men might plainly spy
What wyghts it was) did move debate, and for his armor burst
Out deadly food. Not Diomed, nor Ajax Oylye durst
Make claim or chalendge too the same, nor Atreus yoonger son,
Nor yet his elder, though in arms much honor they had won.
Alone the sons of Telamon and Laert did assay
Which of them two of that great pryse should bear the bell away.
But Agamemnon from himself the burden putts, and cleeres
His hands of envy, causing all the Capteines and the Peers
Of Greece too meet amid the camp toogither in a place,
Too whom he put the heering and the judgment of the case.
Finis duodecimi Libri.
THE.XIII. BOOK OF Ouids Metamorphosis.
THe Lords and Capteynes being set toogither with the King,
And all the soldiers standing round about them in a ring,
The owner of the seuenfold sheeld, too these did Ajax rise.
And (as he could not bridle wrath) he cast his frowning eyes
Upon the shore and on the fleet that there at Anchor lies
And throwing up his hands, O God and must we plead (quod he)
Our case before our ships? and must Ulysses stand with me?
But like a wretch he ran his way when Hector came with fire,
Which I defending from these ships did force him too retire.
It easyer is therefore with words in print too maynteine strife,
Than for too fight it out with fists. But neither I am ryfe
In words, nor he in deeds. For look how far I him excel
In battle and in feats of arms: so far bears he the bell
From me in talking. Neither think I requisite too tell
My acts among you. You your selves have seen them verry well.
But let Ulysses tell you his done all in hudther mudther,
And whervntoo the only night is privy and none other.
The pryse is great (I do confess.) For which we strive. But yet
It is dishonor unto me, for that in clayming it
So bace a person stands in contention for the same.
Too think it mine already, ought too counted be no shame
Nor pride in me: although the thing of right great value be
Of which Ulysses stands in hope. For now already he
Has won the honor of this pryse, in that when he shall sit
Besides the quisshon, he may brag he straue with me for it.
And though I wanted valiantness, yet should nobilitee
Make with me. I of Telamon am known the son too be
Who under valiant Hercules the walls of Troy did scale,
And in the ship of Pagasa too Colchos land did sail.
His father was that Aeacus whoo executes right
Among the ghostes where Sisyphus heaues up with all his might
The massye stone ay tumbling down. The highest Jove of all
Acknowledges this Aeacus, and does his son him call.
Thus am I Ajax the third from Jove. Yet let this Pedigree
O Achyues in this case of mine avaylable not be,
Unless I prove it fully with Achylles too agree
He was my brother, and I claim that was my brothers. Why
Should thou that art of Sisyphs blood, and for too filch and lie
Expressest him in every point, by foorged pedigree
Aly thee too the Aeacyds, as though we did not see
Thee too the house of Aeacus, a stranger for too be?
And is it reason that you should this armor me deny
Because I former was in arms, and needed not a spy
Too fetch me forth? Or think you him more woorthye it too have,
That came too warrefare hindermost, and feynd himself too rave,
Because he would have shund the war? until a suttler head
And more unprofitable for himself, sir Palamed
Escryde the crafty fetches of his fearful heart, and drew
Him forth a warfare which he sought so cowardly too eschew?
Must he now needs enjoy the best and richest armor? whoo
Would none at all have worn unless he forced were thertoo?
And I with shame be put beside my cousin germans gifts
Because too shun the formest brunt of wars I sought no shifts?
Would God this mischeef master had in verrye deed been mad,
Or else believed so too be: and that we never had
Brought such a panion unto Troy. Then should not Paeans son
In Lemnos like an outlawe too the shame of all us won.
Who lurking now (as men report) in woods and caves, does move
The verry flints with syghes and groans, and prayers too God above
Too send Ulysses his desert. Which prayer (if there be
A God) must one day take effect. And now beehold how he
By oath a Soldier of our Camp, yea and as well as we
A Captain too, alas, (who was by Hercules assignde
Too have the keeping of his shafts,) with pain and hungar pynde,
Is clad and fed with fowls, and dribs his arrows up and down
At birds, which were by destinye preparde too stroy Troy town.
Yet lives he because he is not still in company
With sly Ulysses. Palamed that wretched knight perdie,
Would eeke he had abandond been. For then should still the same
Have been alive: or at the least have did without our shame.
But this companion bearing (ah) too well in wicked mind
His madness which sir Palamed by wisdom out did find,
Appeached him of treason that he practysde too betray
The Greekish host. And for too bouch the fact, he showed straight way
A mass of goold that he himself had hidden in his tent,
And forged Letters which he feynd from Priam too be sent.
Thus either by his murthring men or else by banishment
Abateth he the Greekish strength. This is Ulysses fight.
This is the fear he puttes men in. But though he had more might
Than Nestor has, in eloquence he shall not compass me
Too think his leawd abandoning of Nestor for too be
No fault: who being cast behynd by wounding of his horse,
And slow with age, with calling on Ulysses waxing hoarce,
Was nerethelesse betrayed by him. Sir Diomed knows this crime
Is vnsurmysde. For he himself did at that present time
Rebuke him oftentimes by name, and feercely him upbraid
With flying from his fellow so who stood in need of aid.
With ryghtfull eyes does God behold the deeds of mortal men.
Lo, he that helped not his friend wants help himself again.
And as he did forsake his friend in time of need: so he
Did in the selfsame perrill fall forsaken for too be.
He made a rod too beat himself. He called and cried out
Upon his fellows. Straight I came: and there I saw the lout
Both quake and shake for fear of death, and look as pale as clout.
I set my sheeld between him and his foes, and him bestrid:
And savde the dastards life. small praise redoundes of that I did.
But if thou will contend with me, lets to the self same place
Agein: be wounded as thou wart: and in the foresaid case
Of fear, beset about with foes: cowch underneath my sheeld:
And then contend thou with me there amid the open feeld.
Howbeet, I had no sooner rid this champion of his foes,
But where for wounds he scarce before could totter on his toes,
He ran away apace, as though he naught at all did ayle.
Anon commes Hector too the feeld and brings at his tail
The Gods. Not only thy heart there ( Ulysses) did the fail,
But even the stowtest courages and stomachs began too quayle.
So great a terror brought he in. Yet in the midds of all
His bloody ruff, I coapt with him, and with a foyling fall
Did overthrow him too the ground. Another time, when he
Did make a chalendge, you my Lords by lot did choose out me,
And I did match him hand too hand. Your wisshes were not vain.
For if you ask me what success our combat did obtain,
I came away vnvanquished. Behold the men of Troy
Brought fire and sword, and all the feendes our nauye too destroy.
And where was slye Ulysses then with all his talk so smooth?
This breast of mine was feign too fence your thousand ships forsooth
The hope of your returning home. For saving that same day
So many ships, this armor give. But (if that I shall say
The truth) the greater honor now this armor bears away.
And our renownes toogither link. For (as of reason ought)
An Ajax for this armor, not an armor now is sought
For Ajax. Let Dulychius match with these, the horses whyght
Of Rhesus, dastard Dolon, and the coward carpetknyght
King Priams Helen, and the stelth of Palladye by night.
Of all these things was nothing done by day nor nothing wrought
Without the help of Diomed. And therefore if ye thought
Too give them too so small deserts, deuyde the same, and let
Sir Diomed have the greater part. But what should Ithacus get
And if he had them? Who does all his matters in the dark,
Who never wears armor, who shootes ay at his own mark
Too trappe his ^o by stelth unawares? The very headpeece may
With brightness of the glistring gold his privy feats bewray
And show him lurking. Neither well of force Dulychius were
The weight of great Achilles helm upon his pate too wear
It cannot but a burden be (and that right great) too bear
(With whose same shrimpish arms of his) Achilles mighty spear.
Again his target graven with the whole howge world thereon
Agrees not with a fearful hand, and chiefly such a one
As takes filching even by kind. Thou Lozell thou do seek
A gift that will but weaken thee* which if the folk of Greek
Shall give thee through their ouersyght, it will be unto thee
Occasion, of thine emnyes spoyld not feared for too be
And flight (wherein thou coward, thou all others may outbrag)
Will hindered be when after thee such masses thou shall drag.
Moreover this thy sheeld that feels so seeld the force of fight
Is sound. But mine is gasht and hakt and stricken thurrough quyght
A thousand times, with bearing blows. And therefore mine must walk
And put another in his stead. But what needs all this talk?
Lets now be seen another while what each of us can do.
The thickest of our armed foes this armor throw intoo,
And bid us fetch the same fro thence. And which of us does fetch
The same away, reward ye him therewith. Thus far did stretch
The words of Ajax. At the end whereof there did ensew
A muttring of the soldiers, till Laertis son the prew
Stood up, and raised soberly his eyliddes from the ground
(On which he had a little while them pitched in a stound)
And looking on the noblemen who longd his words too here
He thus began with comely grace and sober pleasant cheer.
My Lords, if my desire and yours might erst have taken place,
It should not at this present time have been a dowtfull case,
What person has most right too this great pryse for which we strive.
Achilles should his armor have, and we still him alive.
Whom since that cruel destiny too both of us denies,
^With that same word as though he wept, he wypte his watery eyes)
What wight of reason rather ought too be Achilles heir,
Than he through whom too this your camp Achilles did repair?
Alonly let it not avail sir Ajax here, that he
Is such a dolt and grossehead, as he shows himself too be
Ne let my wit (which ay has done you good O Greeks) hurt me.
But suffer this mine eloquence (such as it is) which now
Does for his master speak, and often ere this has spoke for you,
Be vndisdeynd. Let none refuse his own good gifts he brings.
For as for stock and auncetors, and other such like things
Whereof our selves no fownders are, I scarcely dare them grant
Too be our own. But forasmuch as Ajax makes his vaunt
Too be the fowrth from Jove: even Jove the founder is also
Of my house: and than four descents I am from him no mo.
Laertes is my father, and Arcesius his, and he
Begotten was of Jupiter. And in this pedigree
Is neither any damned soul, nor outlaw as ye see.
Moreover by my moothers side I come of Mercuree,
Another honor too my house. Thus both by fathers side
And moothers (as you may perceive) I am too Gods alyde.
But neither for because I am a better gentleman
Than Ajax by the moothers side, nor that my father can
Avouch himself vngiltye of his brothers blood, do I
This armor claim. wey you the case by merits uprightly.
Provided no prerogatyue of birthryght Ajax bear,
For that his father Telamon, and Peleus brothers were.
Let only prowess in this pryse the honor bear away.
Or if the case on kinrid or on birthryght seem too stay,
His father Peleus is alive, and Pyrrhus eeke his son.
What title then can Ajax make. This geere of right should woone
Too Phthya, or too Scyros I Will. And Tevvcer is as well
Achilles uncle as is he. Yet does not Tevvcer mell.
And if he did, should he obtain? well since the case does rest
On trial which of us can prove his doings too be best,
I needs must say my deeds are mo than well I can express:
Yet will I show them orderly as near as I can guess.
Foreknowing that her son should dye, The Lady Thetis hid
Achilles in a maids attire. By which fine slyght she did
All men deceive, and Ajax too. This armor in a pack
With other women's tryflyng toys I carried on my back,
A bayte too treyne a manly heart. Appareld like a maid
Achilles took the spear and sheeld in hand, and with them played.
Then said I: O thou Goddess son, why should thou be afraid
Too raze great Troy, whoose overthrow for thee is only stayed?
And laying hand upon him I did send him (as you see)
Too valiant doings meet for such a valiant man as he.
And therefore all the deeds of him are my deeds. I did wound
King Teleph with his spear, and when he lay upon the ground,
I was entreated with the spear too heal him safe and sound.
That Thebe lies overthrown, is my deed you must think
I made the folk of Tenedos and Lesbos for too shrink.
Both Chryse and Cillas Phoebus towns and Scyros I did take.
And my right hand Lyrnessus walls too ground did level make.
I gave you him that should confound (besides a number mo)
The valiant Hector. Hector that our most renowned fo
Is slain by me. This armor here I sew agein too have
This armor by the which I found Achilles. I it gave
Achilles while he was alive: and now that he is gone
I claim it as mine own agein. What time the grief of one
Had perst the hearts of all the Greeks, and that our thousand sail
At Avvlis by Evvboya stayed, because the wyndes did fail,
Continewing either none at all or cleene against us long,
And that our Agamemnon was by destnyes ouerstrong
Commanded for too sacrifyse his gil^lesse daughter too
Diana, which her father then refusing for too do
Was angry with the Godds themselves, and though he were a king
Continued also fatherlyke: by reason, I did bring
His gentle nature too relent for public profits sake.
I must confess (whereat his grace shall no displeasure take)
Before a parciall judge I undertook a right hard case.
Howbeeit for his brothers sake, and for the royal mace
Committed, and his peoples weal, at length he was content
Too purchase praise with blood. Then was I too the moother sent,
Who not persuaded was too be, but compast with sum guyle.
Had Ajax on this errand gone, our ships had all this while
Line still there yet for want of wynd. Moreover I was sent
Too Ilion as ambassador. I boldly thither went,
And entered and behilld the Court, wherein there was as then
Great store of princes, Dukes, Lords, knyghts, and other valiant men.
And yet I boldly nerethelesse my message did at large
The which the whole estate of Greece had given me erst in charge.
I made complaint of Paris, and accusde him too his head.
Demanding restitution of Queen Helen that same sted
And of the bootye with her taken. Both Priamus the king
And eeke Antenor his alye the words of me did sting.
And Paris and his brothers, and the resdew of his train
That under him had made the spoil, could hard and scarce refrain
There wicked hands. You Menelay do know I do not feyne.
And that day was the first in which we jointly began sustain
A taste of perrills, store whereof did then behind remain.
It would be ouerlong too tell each profitable thing
That during this long lasting war I well too pass did bring,
By force as well as pollycie. For after that the furst
Encounter once was ouerpast, our emnyes never durst
Give battle in the open feeld, but hild themselves within
Their walls and bulwarks till the time the tenth year did begin,
Now what did thou of all that while, that can do naught but streeke?
Or too what purpose seruedst thou? For if thou my deeds seek,
I practysd sundry pollycies too trappe our foes unware:
I fortifyde our Camp with trench which heretoofore lay bare:
I hartned our companions with a quiet mind too bear
The longnesse of the weery war: I taught us how we were
Both too be fed and furnished: and too and fro I went
Too places where the Counsel thought most meet I should be sent.
Behold the king deceived in his dream by false pretense
Of Jove's commandment, bade us raise our seedge and get us hence.
The author of his doing so may well be his defense.
Now Ajax should have let this, and called them back ageine
Too sack the town of Troy. he should have fought with might and maine.
Why did he not restreyne them when they ready were too go?
Why took he not his sword in hand? why gave he not as tho
Sum counsel for the fleeting folk too follow at the brunt?
In faith it had a tryfle been too him that ay is wont.
Such vaunting in his mouth too have. But he himself did fly
As well as others. I did see, and was ashamed I
Too see thee when thou fledst, and did prepare so cowardly
Too sail away. And thervppon I thus aloud did cry.
What meene ye sirs? what madness does you move too go too ship?
And suffer Troy as good as taken, thus out of hand too slip?
What else this tenth year bear ye home than shame? with such like word
And other, (which the eloquence of sorrow did a^oord,)
I brought them from their flying ships. Then Agamemnon called
Toogither all the capteines who with fear were yet appalld.
But Ajax durst not then once cre^ke. Yet durst Thersites be
So bold as rail upon the kings, and he was paid by me
For playing so the saweye Jack. Then stood I on my toes
And too my fearful countrymen gave heart against their foes.
And shed new courage in their mynds through talk that fro me goes.
From that time forth what ever thing has valeantly atcheeued
By this good fellow been, is mine, whoo him from flight repreeued.
And now too touch thee: which of all the Greeks commends thee?
Or seeks thee? But Diomed communicates with me
His doings, and allows me, and thinks him well apayd
Too have Ulysses ever as companion at the brayd.
And sumwhat worth you will it grant (I trow) alone for me
Out of so many thousand Greeks by Diomed pikt too be.
No lot compelled me too go, and yet I setting light,
As well the perrill of my foes as danger of the night,
Killd Dolon who about the self same fea^e that night did stray,
That we went out for. But I first compelld him too bewray
All things concerning faythlesse Troy, and what it went about.
When all was learnd, and nothing left behynd too harken out,
I might have then come home with praise. I was not so content.
Proceeding fruther too the Camp of Rhesus straight I went,
And killed both himself and all his men about his tent.
And taking both his chariot and his horses which were whyght,
Returned home in triumph like a conqueror from fight.
Deny you me the armor of the man whoose steedes the fo
Required for his playing of the spy a night, and so
May Ajax be more kind too me than you are what should I
Declare unto you how my sword did waste right valeantly
Sarpedons host of Lycia? I by force did overthrow
Alastor, Crome* and Ceranos, and Haly on a row.
Alcander, and Noemon too, and Prytanis beside,
And Thoon and Theridamas, and Charops also did
By me, and so did Evvnomos enforst by cruel fate.
And many mo in sight of Troy I slew of bacer state.
There also are (O countrymen) about me woundings, which
The place of them make beawtyfull. See here (his hand did twich
His shirt aside) and credit not vain words. Lo here the bri^t
That always too be one in your affairs has never mist.
And yet of all this while no drop of blood has Ajax spent
Upon his fellows. Woundlesse is his body and vnrent.
But what skills that, as long as he is able for to vaunt
He fought against both Troy and Jove too save our fleet? I grant
He did so. For I am not of such nature as of spyght
Well doings too deface: so that he chalendge not the right
Of all men too himself alone, and that he yield too me
Sum share, whoo of the honor look a partener for too be.
Patroclus also having on Achilles armor, sent
The Trojans and their leader hence, too burn our nauye bent.
And yet thinks he that none durst meet with Hector saving he.
Forgetting both the king, and eeke his brother, yea and me.
Where he himself was but the nyneth, appointed by the king,
And by the fortune of his lot preferred too do the thing.
But now for all your valeantnesse, what Issue had I pray
Your combat? shall I tell? forsoothe, that Hector went his way
And had no harm. Now woe is me how greeueth it my heart
Too think upon that season when the bulwark of our part
Achilles did? When neither tears, nor greef, nor fear could make
Me for too stay, but that upon these shoulders I did take,
I say upon these shoulders I Achilles body took,
And this same armor claspt thereon, which now too wear I look.
Sufficient strength I have too bear as great a weight as this,
And eeke a heart wherein regard of honor rooted is.
Think you that Thetis for her son so instantly besought
Sir Vulcane this same heavenly gift too give her, which is wrought
With such exceeding cunning, too thentent a soldier that
Has neither wit nor knowledge should it wear? He knows not wha^
The things engraven on the sheeld do meene. Of Ocean se,
Of land, of heaven, and of the stars no skill at all has he.
The Bear that never dyues in sea he does not understand,
The Pleyads, nor the Hyads, nor the Cities that do stand
Upon the earth, nor yet the sword that Orion holds in hand.
He seeks too have an armor of the which he has no skill.
And yet in fynding fault with me because I had no will
Too follow this same paynfull war and sought too shonne the same,
And made it sumwhat longer time before I thither came,
He sees not how he speaks reproach too stout Achilles name.
For if too have dissembled in this case, ye count a crime,
We both offenders be. Or if protracting of the time
Ye count blame woorthye, yet was I the tymelyer of us twain.
Achilles loving moother him, my wife did me deteyne.
The former time was given too them, the rest was given too you.
And therefore do I little pass although I could not now
Defend my fault, since such a man of prowess, birth and fame
As was Achilles, was with me offender in the same.
But yet was he espied by Ulysses wit, but not
Ulysses by sir Ajax wit* And least ye wonder at
The railing of this foolish dolt at me, he does object
Reproach too you. For if that I offended too detect
Sir Palamed of forged fault, could you without your shame
Arreyne him, and ^ondemne him eeke too suffer for the same?
But neither could sir Palamed excuse him of the crime
So heinous and so manifest: and you your selves that time
Not only his indytement hard, but also did behold
His deed auowched too his face by bringing in the gold.
And as for Philoctetes, that he is in Lemnos, I
Deserve not too be touched therewith. Defend your crime: for why
You all consented thervntoo. Yet do I not deny,
But that I gave the counsel too convey him out of way
From toil of war and travel that by rest he might assay
Too ease the greatness of his peynes. He did theretoo obey
And by so doing is alive. Not only faithful was
This counsel that I gave the man, but also happy, as
The good success has showed since. Whom since the destnyes do^
Require in oue^throwing Troy, Appoint not me thertoo:
But let sir Ajax rather go. For he with ^loquence
Or by some subtle pollycie, shall bring the man fro thence
And pacyfie him raging through disease, and wrathful ire.
Nay. first the river Simois shall too his spring retire,
And mountain Ida shall thereon have stonding never a tree,
Yea and the faythlesse town of Troy by Greeks shall reskewd be,
Before that Ajax blockish wit shall aught at all avail,
When my attempts and practyses in your affairs do fail.
For though thou Philoctetes with the king offended be,
And with thy fellows euerychone, and most of all with me,
Although thou curse and ban me too the hellish pit for ay,
And w^sshest in thy pain that I by chance might cross thy way,
Of purpose for too draw my blood: yet will I give assay
Too fetch thee hither once ageine. And (if that fortune say
Amen,) I will as well have thee and eeke thine arrows, as
I have the Troiane prophet whoo by me surprysed was,
Or as I did the Oracles and Troiane fa^es disclose,
Or as I from her chapel through the thickest of her foes
The Phrygian Pallads image fetched: And yet does Ajax still
Compare himself with me. Ye know it was the destnyes will
That Troy should never taken be by any force, until
This Image first were got. and where was then our valiant knight
Sir Ajax? where the stately words of such a hardy wight?
Why fears he? why dares Ulysses ventring through the watch
Commit his person too the night his buysnesse too dispatch?
And through the pykes not only for too pass the guarded wall?
But also for too enter too the strongest tower of all?
And for too take the Idol from her Chapel and her shryne?
And bear her thence amid his foes? For had this deed of mine
Been left undone, in vain his sheeld of Oxen hydes seven fold
Should yet the Son of Telamon have in his left hand hold.
That night subdewed I Troy town. that night did I it win.
And opened it for you likewise with ease too enter in.
Cease too upbraid me by these looks and mumbling words of thine
With Diomed: his praise is in this fact as well as mine.
And thou thy self when for our ships thou did in reskew stand,
Wart not alone: the multitude were helping thee at hand.
I had but only one with me. Whoo (if he had not thought
A wyseman better than a strong, and that preferment ought
Not always follow force of hand) would now himself have sought
This Armor. So would toother Ajax better stayed do,
And feerce Evvrypyle, and the son of hault Andremon too.
No less might eeke Idominey, and eeke Meriones
His countryman, and Menelay. For every one of these
Are valiant men of hand, and not inferior unto thee
In martial feats. And yet they are contented ruled too be
By mine aduyce. Thou have a hand that serves well in fight.
Thou have a wit that stands in need of my direction right.
Thy force is witless. I have care of that that may ensew.
Thou well can fight: the king does choose the times for fyghting dew
By mine aduyce. Thou only with thy body can avail.
But I with body and with mind too profit do not fail,
And look how much the master does excel the gally slave,
Or look how much pre-eminence the Captain ought too have
Above his souldyer: even so much excel I also thee.
A wit far passing strength of hand enclosed is in me.
In wit rests chiefly all my force. My Lords I pray bestow
This gift on him who ay has been your watchman as ye know.
And for my ten years cark and care endured for your sake
Full recompense for my deserts with this same honor make.
Our labor draws too an end, all lets are now by me
Dispatched. And by bringing Troy in case too taken be
I have already taken it. Now by the hope that ye
Conceive, within a while of Troy the ruin for too see,
And by the Gods of whom a late our emnyes I bereft,
And as by wisdom too be done yet any thing is left,
If any bold auentrous deed, or any perlous thing,
That asks hazard both of life and limb too pass too bring,
Or if ye think of Troiane fates there yet does ought remain,
Remember me. or if from me this armor you restrain,
Bestow it on this same. With that he showed with his hand
Mineruas fatal image, which hard by in sight did stand.
The Lords were moved with his words, and then appeered plain
The force that is in eloquence. The learned man did gain
The armor of the valiant. He that did so often sustain
Alone both fire, and sword, and Jove, and Hector could not bide
One brunt of wrath. And whom no force could vanquish ere that tide,
Now only anguish ouercommes. He draws his sword and says:
Well: this is mine yet. Untoo this no claim Ulysses lays.
This must I use against myself: this blade that heretoofore
Has bathed been in Troiane blood, must now his master gor^
That none may Ajax overcome save Ajax. With that word.
Intoo his breast (not wounded erst) he thrust his deathfull sword.
His hand too pull it out ageine unable was. The blood
Did spout it out. Anon the ground bestayned where he stood,
Did breed the pretye purple flower upon a clowre of green,
Which of the wound of Hyacinth had erst engendered been.
The selfsame letters eeke that for the child were written than,
Were now again amid the flower new written for the man.
The former time complaynt, the last a name did represent.
Ulysses having won the pryse, within a while was sent
Too Thoants and Hypsiphiles realm the land defamde of old
For murdering all the men therein by women over bold.
At length attayning land and luck according too his mind,
Too carry Hercles arrows back he set his sails too wynd.
Which when he with the lord of them among the Greeks had brought,
And of the cruel war at length the utmost feate had wrought,
At once both Troy and Priam fell. And Priams wretched wife
Lost (after all) her woman's shape, and barked all her life
In foreign country. In the place that brings too a straight
The long spread sea of Hellespont, did Ilion burn in height.
The kindled fire with blazing flame continewed vnalayd,
And Priam with his aged blood Jove's Altar had berayd.
And Phoebus preestesse casting up her hands too heaven on hye,
Was dragd and haled by the hear. The Grayes most spyghtfully
(As each of them had prisoners taken in meede of victory)
Did draw the Troiane wives away, whoo lingering while they might
Among the burning temples of their Gods, did hang about
Their sacred shrynes and images. Astyanax down was cast
From that same turret from the which his moother in time past
Had showed him his father stand often fyghting too defend
Himself and that same famous realm of Troy that did descend
From many noble auncetors. And now the northern wynd
With prosperous blasts, too get them thence did put y^ Greeks in mind.
The shipmen went aboard, and hoyst up sails, and made fro thence.
A deew dear Troy (the women cryde) we haled are from hence.
And therwithall they kissed the ground, and left yet smoking still
Their native houses. Last of all took ship against her will
Queen Hecub: who (a piteous case too see) was found amid
The tumbes in which her sons were laid. And there as Hecub did
Embrace their chists and kiss their bones, Ulysses void of care
Did pull her thence. Yet raught she up, and in her boosom bare
Away a crum of Hectors dust, and left on Hectors grave
Her hory hears and tears, which for poor offerings she him gave.
Against the place where Ilion was, there is another land
Manured by the Biston men. In this same Realm did stand
King Polemnestors palace rich, too whom king Priam sent
His little infant Polydore too foster, too thentent
He might be out of danger from the wars: wherein he meant
Right wisely, had he not with him great riches sent, a bayt
Too stir a wicked covetous mind too treason and deceyt.
For when the state of Troy decayed, the wicked king of Thrace
Did cut his nur^echylds weazant, and (as though the sinful case
Toogither with the body could have quyght been put away)
He threw him also in the sea. It happened by the way,
That Agamemnon was compeld with all his fleet too stay
Upon the coast of Thrace, until the sea were wexen calm,
And till the hideous storms did cease, and furious wynds were fallen.
Here rising ghastly from the ground which far about him brake,
Achilles with a threatening look did like resemblance make,
As when at Agamemnon he his wrongful sword did shake,
And said: Unmyndfull part ye hence of me O Greeks? and must
My merits thanklesse thus with me be buried in the dust?
Nay, do not so. But too thentent my death dew honor have,
Let Polyxene in sacrifyse be slain upon my grave.
Thus much he said: and shortly his companions doing as
By vision of his cruel ghost commaundment given them was,
Did fetch her from her mothers lap, whom at that time, well near,
In that most great adversity alonly she did cheer.
The haultye and unhappy maid, and rather too be thought
A man than woman, too the tumb with cruel hands was brought,
Too make a cursed sacrifyse. Whoo mynding constantly
Her honor, when she standing at the Altar pressed too dye,
Perceyvd the savage ceremonies in making ready, and
The cruel Neoptolemus with naked sword in hand,
Stand staring with ungentle eyes upon her gentle face,
She said. Now use thou when thou will my gentle blood. The case
Requyres no more delay. bestow thy weapon in my chest,
Or in my throat: (in saying so she proffered bare her breast,
And eeke her throat.) Assure your selves it never shall be seen,
That any wight shall (by my will) have slave of Polyxeene.
Howbeet with such a sacrifyse no God ye can delyght.
I would desire no more but that my wretched moother might
Be ignorant of this my death. My moother hinders me,
And makes the pleasure of my death much lesser for too be.
Howbeeit not the death of me should justly grieve her heart:
But her own life. Now too thentent I freely may depart
Too Limbo, stand ye men aloof: and since I ask but right
Forbear too touch me. So my blood vnsteyned in his sight
Shall far more acceptable be what ever wight he be
Whom you prepare too pacifye by sacrifysing me.
Yet (if that these last words of mine may purchase any grace,)
I daughter of king Priam erst, and now in prisoners case,
Beeseeche you all vnraunsomed too render too my moother
My body: and for burial of the same too take none other
Reward than tears: for while she could she did redeem with gold.
This said: the tears that she forbear the people could not hold.
And even the verry priest himself full sore against his will
And weeping, thrust her through the breast which she hild stoutly still.
She sinking softly too the ground with faynting legs, did bear
Even too the verry latter gasp a coun^nance void of fear.
And when she fell, she had a care such parts of her too hyde,
As womanhod and chastity forbids too be spyde.
The Troiane women took her up, and moorning reckened
King Priams children, and what blood that house alone had shed.
They sight for fayer Polyxeene: they syghed eeke for thee
Whoo late wart Priams wife, whoo late wart counted for too be
The flower of Asia in his flower, and Queen of moothers all:
But now the bootye of the so as evil lot did fall,
And such a bootye as the sly Ulysses did not pass
Upon her, saving that erewhyle she Hectors moother was.
So hardly for his moother could a master Hector find.
Embracing in her aged arms the body of the mind
That was so stout, she powrd thereon with sobbing syghes vnsoft
The tears that for her husband and her children had so often
And for her country sheaded been. She weeped in her wound
And kissed her pretye mouth, and made her brist with strokes too sound,
According too her woonted guyse, and in the iellyed blood
Beerayed all her grisild hear, and in a sorrowful mood
Said these and many other words with bre^t bescratcht and rent.
O daughter mine, the last for whom thy moother may lament,
(For what remaynes?) O daughter thou art dead and gone. I see
Thy wound which at the verry heart strikes me as well as thee.
And least that any one of mine unwounded should depart,
Thou also gotten have a wound. Howbeet because thou wart
A woman, I believed thee from weapon too be free.
But notwithstanding that thou art a woman, I do see
Thee slain by sword. Even he that killed thy brothers kills thee,
Achilles the decay of Troy and maker bare of me.
What time that he of Paris shaft by Phoebus means was slain,
I said of feerce Achilles now no fear does more remain.
But then, even then he most of all was feared for too be.
The ashes of him rages still against our race I see.
We feel an emny of him dead and buried in his grave
Too feed Achilles fury, I a fruitful issue gave.
Great Troy lies under foot, and with a right great grievous fall
The mischeeues of the common weal are fully ended all.
But though too others Troy be gone, yet stands it still too me:
My sorrows run as fresh a race as ever and as free.
I late a go a souereine state, advanced with such store
Of daughters, sons, and sonneinlawes, and husband over more
And daughtrinlawes, am carried like an outlawe bare and poor,
By force and violence haled from my childrens tumbes, too be
Presented too Penelope a gift, whoo showing me
In spinning my appointed task, shall say: this same is she
That was sumtyme king Priams wife, this was the famous moother
Of Hector. And now after loss of such a sort of other,
Thou (whoo alonly in my grief my comfort did remain,)
Too pacifye our emnyes wrath upon his tumb art slain.
Thus bare I deathgyfts for my foes. Too what intent am I
Most wretched wight remaining still? why do I linger? why
Does hurtful age preserve me still alive? too what intent
Ye cruel Gods reserve ye me that has already spent
Too many years? unless it be new buryalls for too see?
And whoo would think that Priamus might happy counted be
Since Troy is razed? Happy man is he in being dead.
His life and kingdoome he forwent toogither: and this stead
He sees not thee his daughter slain. But peradventure thou
Shall like the daughter of a king have sumptuous buryall now,
And with thy noble auncetors thy body laid shall be.
Our lineage has not so good luck. the most that shall too thee
Be yielded are thy moothers tears, and in this foreign land
Too hyde thy murdered corce withal a little heap of sand.
For all is lost. Nay yet remaynes (for whom I well can find
In heart too live a little while) an imp unto my mind
Most dear, now only left alone, sumtyme of many mo
The yoongest, little Polydore, delivered late ago
Too Polemnestor king of Thrace whoo dwelles within these bounds
But wherefore do I stay so long in wasshing of her wounds,
And face berayd with gory blood? in saying thus, she went
Too seaward with an aged pace and hory hear beerent.
And (wretched woman) as she called for pitchers for too draw
Up water, she of Polydore on shore the carkesse saw,
And eeke y^ mighty wounds at which the Tyrants sword went thurrow.
The Troiane Ladies shreeked out. But she was dumb for sorrow.
The anguish of her heart forclosde as well her speech as eeke
Her tears deuowring them within. She stood astonyed leeke
As if she had been stone. One while the ground she staard upon.
Another while a ghastly look she kest too heaven. Anon
She looked on the face of him that lay before her killd.
Sumtymes his wounds, (his wounds I say) she specially behilld.
And therwithall she armd her self and furnished her with ire:
Wherethrough as soon as that her heart was fully set on fire,
As though she still had been a Queen, too vengeance she her bent
Enforcing all her wits too find some kind of ponnishme^t.
And as a Lion robbed of her whelps becomm^th wood,
And taking on the footing of her emnye where he stood,
Purs^weth him though out of sight: even so Queen Hecubee
(Now having meynt her tears with wrath) forgetting quyght that see
Was old, but not her princely hard, too Polemnestor went
The cursed murderer, and desyrde his presence too thentent
Too she^ too him a mass of gold (so made she her pretense)
Which for her little Polydore was hid not far from thence.
The Thracian king believing her, as eager of the pray,
Went with her too a secret place. And as they there did stay,
With flattring and deceytfull tongue he thus too her did say.
Make speed I prey thee Hecuba, and give thy son this gold.
I swear by God it shall be his, as well that I do hold
Already, as that thou shall give. Upon him speaking so,
And swearing and forswearing too, she looked sternely tho,
And being sore inflaamd with wrath, caught hold upon him, and
Straight calling out for succor too the wives of Troy at hand
Did in the traitors face bestow her nails, and scratched out
His eyes, her anger gave her heart and made her strong and stout.
She thrust her fingars in as far as could be, and did bore
Not now his eyes (for why his eyes were pulled out before)
But both the places of the eyes berayd with wicked blood.
The Thracians at their Tyrannes harm for anger wexing wood,
Began too scare the Troiane wives with darts and stones. Anon
Queen Hecub ronning at a stone, with gnarring seazd thereon,
And wirryed it beetweene her teeth. And as she opte her chappe
Too speak, in stead of speech she barkt. the place of this missehapp^
Remains still, and of the thing there done bears yet the name.
Long myndfull of her former illes, she sadly for the same
Went howling in the feeldes of Thrace. Her fortune moved not
Her Trojans only, but the Greeks her foes too ruthe: Her lot
Did move even all the Gods to ruthe: and se effectually,
That Hecub too deserve such end even Juno did deny.
Although the morning of the selfsame wars had fauorer been:
She had no leisure too lament the fortune of the Queen,
Nor on the slaughters and the fall of Ilion for too think.
A household care more nearer home did in her stomach sink,
For Memnon her beloved son, whom dying she behild
Upon the feerce Achilles spear amid the Phrygian f^^ld.
She saw it, and her ruddy hew with which she woonted was
Too dye the breaking of the day, did intoo palenesse pass:
And all the sky was hid with clouds. But when his corce was gone
Too burning ward, she could not find in heart too look thereon:
But with her hear about her ears she kneeled down before
The mighty Jove, and thus began speak unto him weeping sore.
Of all that have their dwelling place upon the golden sky
The lowest (for through all the world the feawest shrynes have I)
But yet a Goddess, I do come, not that thou should decree
That Altars, sh^ynes, and holidays be made too honor me.
Yet if thou mark how much that I a woman do for thee,
In keeping night within her bounds, by bringing in thee light,
Thou well may think me worthy sum reward too claim of right.
But neither now is that the thing the morning cares too have,
Ne yet her state is such as now dew honor for too crave.
Bereft of my dear Memnon who in fyghting valeantly
Too help his uncle, (so it was your will O Gods) did dye
Of stout Achilles sturdye spear even in his flowring pryme,
I sew too thee O king of Gods too do him at this time
Sum honor as a comfort of his death, and ease this heart
Of mine which greatly grieved is with wound of percing smart.
No sooner Jove had granted dame Aurora her desire
But that the flame of Memnons corce that burned in the fire
Did fall: and flaky rolls of smoke did dark the day, as when
A foggy mist steames upward from a River or a fen,
And suffers not the Son too shine within it. Black as cole
The cinder rose: and intoo one round lump assembling whole
Grew gross, and took both shape and hew. The fire did life it send,
The lyghtnesse of the substance self did wings unto it lend.
And at the first it flittred like a bird: and by and by
It flew a fethered bird in deed. And with that one began fly
Innumerable mo of selfsame brood: whoo once or twyce
Did sore about the fire, and made a piteous shreeking thryce.
The fowrthtyme in their flying round, th^mselues they all withdrew
In battles twain, and feercely forth of either side one flew
Too fight a combat. With their bills and hooked talents keen
And with their wings courageously they wreakt their wrathful teene.
And myndfull of the valiant man of whom they issued been,
They never ceased iobbing each upon the others breast,
Until they falling both down dead with fyghting ouerprest,
Had offered up their bodies as a worthy sacrifyse
Untoo their cousin Memnon who too Ashes burned lies.
These soodeine birds were named of the founder of their stock:
For men do call them Memnons birds. And every year a flock
Repair too Memnons tumb, where two do in the foresaid wise
In manner of a yeeremynd slay themselves in sacrifyse.
Thus where as others did lament that Dymants daughter bark^,
Auroras own greef busyed her, that smally she it marked
Which thing she too this present time with piteous tears does show:
For through the universal world she sheadeth moysting deawe.
Yet suffered not the destinyes all hope tooperrish quyght
Toogither with the town of Troy. That good and godly knight
The son of Venus bare away by night upon his back
His aged father and his Gods an honorable pack.
Of all the riches of the town that only pray he chose,
So godly was his mind: and like a bannisht man he goes
By water with his own young son Ascanius from the I Will
Antandros, and he shonnes the shore of Thracia which ere while
The wicked Tyrants treason did with Polydores blood defyle.
And having wynd and tide at will, he saufly with his train
Arrived at Apollos town where Anius then did reign.
Whoo being both Apollos priest and of that place the king,
Did enterteyne him in his house and unto church him bring,
And showed him both the City and the temples known of old,
And eeke the sacred trees by which Latona once took hold
When she of chyldbirth traveled As Soon as sacrifyse
Was done with Oxens inwards burnt according too the guyse,
And casting incence in the fire, and sheading wine thereon,
They joyful too the court returned, and there they took anon
Repaste of meat and drink. Then said the good Anchyses this
O Phoebus souereine priest, unless I take my marks amiss,
(As I remember) when I first of all this town did see,
Four daughters and a son of thine thou had here with thee.
King Anius shook his head whereon he ware a myter whyght,
And answered thus. O noble prince, in faith thou gessest right.
Of children five a father then, thou did me behold,
Whoo now (with such inconstancy are mortal matters rolld)
Am in a manner chyldlesse quyght. For what auayles my son
Whoo in the I Will of Anderland a great way hence does won?
Which country takes his name of him, and in the selfsayd place,
In stead of father, like a king he holds the royal mace.
Apollo gave his lot too him: And Bacchus for too show
His love, a greater gift upon his su^ters did bestow,
Than could be wished or credited. For whatsoever they
Did towche, was turned into corn, and wine, and oil streyghtway.
And so their was rich use in them. As Soon as that the fame
Hereof too Agamemnons ears the squorge of Trojans came,
Least you might taste your storms alone and we not feel the same
In part, an host he hither sent, and whither I would or no
Did take them from me, forcing them among the Greeks too go
Too feed the Greekish army with their heavenly gift. But they
Escaped whither they could by flight. A couple took their way
Too I Will Evvboya: toother two too Anderland did fly
Their brothers Realm. An host of men pursewd them by and by,
And threatened war unless they were delivered. Force of fear
Subdewing nature, did constreyne the brother (men must bear
With fearfulness) too render up his susters too their fo.
For neither was Aenaeas there, nor valiant Hector (who
Did make your war last ten years long) the country too defend.
Now when they should like prisoners have been fettred, in the end
They casting up their hands (which yet were free) too heaven, did cry
Too Bacchus for too succor them, who helped them by and by.
At leastwyse if it may be termd a help, in woondrous wise
Too alter folk. For never could I learn ne can surmyse
The manner how they lost their shape* The thing it self is known.
With fethered wings as whyght as snow they quyght away are flowen
Transformed intoo doou^house dooues thy wife dame Venus burdes.
When that the time of meat was spent with these and such like words,
The table was removed straight, and then they went too sleep.
Next morrow rising up as soon as day began too peep,
They went too Phoebus Oracle, which willed them too go
Untoo their moother country and the coasts their s^ocke came fro.
King Anius bare them company. And when away they shoold,
He gave them gifts. Anchises had a scepter all of goold.
Ascanius had a quiver and a Cloak right brave and tr^^.
Aenaeas had a standing Cup presented unto him.
The Thebane Therses whoo had been king Anius guest erewhyle
Did send it out of Thessaly: but Alcon one of Mile
Did make the cup. And he theron^a story portrayed out.
It was a City with seven gates in circuit round about,
Which men might easly all discern. The gates did represent
The Cities name, and showed plain what town thereby was meant.
Without the town were funerals a doing for the dead,
With herces, tapers, fyres, and tumbes. The wives with ruffled head
And stomachs bare pretended greef. The nymphs seemd tears too shead,
And wayle the drying of their wells. The leauelesse trees did sear.
And licking on the parched stones Goats romed here and there.
Behold amid this Thebane town was lively portrayed out
Echions daughters twain, of which the one with courage stout
Did profer both her naked throat and stomach too the knyfe:
And toother with a manly heart did also spend her life,
For saufgard of her countryfolk: And how that thervppon
They both were carried solemly on herces, and anon
Were burned in the cheifest place of all the Thebane town.
Then (least their lineage should decay whoo did with such renown,)
Out of the Ashes of the maids there issued two young men,
And they unto their moothers dust did obsequies again.
Thus much was graued curiously in ancient precious brass,
And on the brim a trayle of flowers of bearbrich gilded was.
The Trojans also gave too him as costly gifts again.
Because he was Apollos priest they gave too him as then
A Chist too keep in frankincence. They gave him furthermore
A Crown of gold wherein were set of precious stones great store.
Then calling too remembrance that the Trojans issued were
Of Tevvcers blood, they sayld too Crete. But long they could not there
Abide the infection of the air: and so they did forsake
The hundred Cities, and with speed to Itayle ward did make.
The winter wexed hard and rough, and tossed them verry sore.
And when their ships arrived were upon the perlous shore
Among the Strophad Isles, the bird Aello did them fear.
The costs of Dulich, Ithaca, and Same they passed were,
And eeke the Court of Neritus where wise Ulysses reignd,
And came too Ambrace for the which the Gods strong strife mayntein^.
There saw they turned into stone the judge whoose image yet
At Actium in Appollos Church in sign thereof does sit.
They vewed also Dodon grove where Oaks spoke: and the coast
Of Chaon where the sons of king Molossus s^apt a most
Ungracious fire by taking wings. From thence they coasted by
The country of the Pheaks fraught with fruit abundantly.
Then took they land in Epyre, and too Buthrotos they went
Whereas the Troiane prophet dwelt, whoose reign did represent
an image of their ancient Troy. There being certifyde
Of things too come by Helen (whoo while there they did abide
Informed them right faithfully of all that should betyde)
They passed into Sicilie. With corners three this land
Shootes out intoo the Sea: of which Pachinnus front does stand.
Against the southcoast: Lilibye does face the gentle west,
And Pelore unto Charlsis wayne does northward bear his breast.
The Troianes under Pelore gate with ores and prosperous tides
And in the even by Zanclye shore their fleet at anchor rydes.
Upon the leftsyde restlessely Charybdis ay does beat them.
And swalloweth ships and spewes them up as fast as it does eat them.
And Scylla beats on their right: which from the navel down
Is patched up with cruel curres: and upward too the crown
Does keep the countnance of a maid, And (if that all be true
That Poets feign) she was sumtyme a maid right fair of hew.
Too her made many wooers suit: all which she did eschew.
And going too the salt Sea nymphs (too whom she was right dear)
She vaunted, too how many men she gave the slip that year.
Too whom the Lady Galate in kembing of her hear
Said thus with syghes. But they that sought too thee (O Lady) were
None other than of humane kind, too whom without all fear
Of harm, thou myghtest (as thou do) give nay. But as for me
Although that I of Nereus and gray Doris daughter be,
And of my susters have with me continually a guard,
I could not escape the Cyclops love, but too my greef full hard.
(With that her tears did stop her speech.) As Soon as that the maid
Had dryde them with her marble thomb, and moande the nymph, she said.
Dear Goddess tell me all your greef, and hyde it not from me:
For trust me I will unto you both true and secret be.
Then unto Cratyes daughter thus the nymph her playnt did frame.
Of Fawn and nymph Simethis borne was Acis, whoo became
A joy too both his parents, but too me the greater joy.
For being but a sixteen years of age, this fair sweet boy
Did take me too his love, what time about his chyldish chin
The tender hear like mossy down too sprowt did first begin.
I loved him beyond all Gods forbod, and likewise me
The Giant Cyclops. neither (if demanded it should be)
I well were able for too tell you whither that the love
Of Acis, or the Cyclops hate did more my stomach move.
There was no odds between them. Oh dear Goddess Venus, what
A power haste thou? Behold how even this owgly Giant that
No spark of meekness in him has, whoo is a terror too
The verrye woods, whom never guest nor stranger came unto
Without displeasure, whoo the heavens and all the Gods despyseth,
Does feel what thing is love. The love of me him so surpryseth,
That Polypheme regarding not his sheep and hollow Cave,
And having care too please does go about too make him brave.
His stir stiff hear he kembeth now with strong and sturdy rakes,
And with a sithe does marcussotte his bristled berd: and takes
Delyght too look upon himself in waters, and too frame
His countnance. Of his murtherous heart the wyldnesse wexeth tame*
His vnastaunched thyrst of blood is quenched: ships may pass
And repasse saufly. In the while that he in love thus was,
One Telemus Evvrymeds son a man of passing skill
In birdflyght, taking land that time in Sicill, went until
The orped Giant Polypheme, and said: This one round eye
That now amid thy forehead stands shall one day ere thou dye
By sly Ulysses blinded be. The Giant laughed thereat,
And said O foolish soothsayre thou deceived art in that.
For why another (even a wench) already has it blinded.
Thus skorning him that told him truth because he was high minded,
He either made the ground too shake in walking on the shore,
Or rowzd him in his shadye Cave. With wedged point before
There shoots a hill intoo the Sea: whereof the sea does beat
On either side. The one eyd feend came up and made his seat
Thereon, and after came his sheep vndriuen. As Soon as he
Had at his foot laid down his staff which was a whole Pyne tree
Well able for too be a maast too any ship, he takes
His pype compact of fyuescore reeds, and therwithall he makes
So loud a noise that all the hills and waters therabout
Might easly ^eere the shirlnesse of the shepeherds whistling out.
I lying underneath the rock, and leaning in the lap
Of Acis marked these words of his which far I heard by hap.
More whyght thou art then Primrose leaf my Lady Galatee.
More fresh than meade, more tall and straight than lofty Aldertree*
More bright than glass, more wanton than the tender kid forsooth.
Than Cockleshelles continually with water worn, more smoothe.
More cheerful than the winters Sun, or Summers shadow cold,
More seemly and more comely than the Planetree too behold.
Of value more than Apples be although they were of gold.
More clear than frozen yea, more sweet than Grape through ripe ywis,
More soft than butter newly made, or down of Cygnet is.
And much more fair and beawtyfull than gardein too mine eye,
But that thou from my company continually do fly.
And thou the selfsame Galate art more tettish for too frame
Than Oxen of the wilderness whom never wight did tame.
More fleeting than the waves, more hard than warryed Oak too twyne,
More tough tha^ willow twiggs, more lyth tha^ is the wyld whyght vine.
More than this rock immovable, more violent than a stream.
More proud than Peacocke praysd, more feerce tha^ fire and more extreme.
More rough than Breers, more cruel than the new delivered Bear,
More merciless than trodden snake, than sea more deaf of ear.
And which (and if it lay in me I chiefly would restrain)
Not only swifter paced than the stag in chase on plain,
But also swifter than the wynd and flyghtfull air. But if
Thou knew me well, it would thee irke too fly and be a greef
Too tarrye from me. Yea thou would endeavor all thy power
Too keep me wholly too thy self. The Quarry is my bower
Heawen out of whole main stone. No Sun in summer there can swelt.
No nipping cold in wintertyme within the same is felt.
Gay Apples weying down the boughs have I, and* Grapes like gold,
And purple Grapes on spreaded Uynes as many as can hold.
Both which I do reserve for thee. Thyself shall with thy hand
The soft sweet strawbryes gather, which in woody shadow stand.
The Cornell berryes also from the tree thy self shall pull:
And pleasant plommes, sum yellow like new wax, sum blew, sum full
Of ruddy ^ewce. Of Chestnutts eeke (if my wife thou will be)
Thou shall have store: and frute^ all sorts: All trees shall serve for thee.
This Cattle here is all mine own. And many mo beside
Do either in the bottoms feed, or in the woods them hyde,
And many standing at their stalles do in my Cave abide.
The number of them (if a man should ask) I cannot show.
Tush beggars of their Cattle use the number for too know.
And for the goodness of the same, no whit believe thou me.
But come thyself (and if thou will) the truth there of too see.
See how their vdders full do make them straddle. Lesser ware
Shet up at home in cloce warm peends, are Lambs. There also are
In other pinfolds Kidds of selfsame yeaningtyme. Thus have
I always milk as white as snow. whereof I sum do save
Too drink, and of the rest is made good cheese. And furthermore
Not only stale and common gifts and pleasures whereof store
Is too be had at each man's hand, (as Leuerets, Kidds, and Dots,
A pair of pigeons, or a nest of birds new found, or Roes,)
Shall unto thee presented be. I found this toother day
A pair of Bearewhelpes, each so like the other as they lay
Upon a hill, that scarce ye each discern from other may.
And when that I did find them I did take them up, and say
These will I for my Lady keep for her therewith too play.
Now put thou up thy fair bright head good Galat I thee pray
Above the greenish waves: now come my Galat, come away.
And of my present take no scorn. I know my self too be
A iollye fellow. For even now I did behold and see
Mine image in the water sheere, and sure me thought I took
Delyght too see my goodly shape, and favor in the brook.
Behold how big I am not ^oue in heaven (for so you men
Report one ^oue too reign, of whom I pass not for too ken)
Is howger than this doughty corce of mine. A bush of hear
Does ouerdreepe my visage grim, and shadows as it were
A grove upon my shoulders twain. And think it not too be
A shame for that with bristled hear my body rough ye see.
A foul ^lfauored sight it is too see a leauelesse tree
A lothely thing it is, a horse without a mane too keep.
As feathers do become the birds, and wool becomes sheep,
Even so a beard and bristled skin becomes also men.
I have but one eye, which does stand amid my frunt. what then?
This one round eye of mine is like a mighty target. Why?
Uewes not the Sun all things from heaven? Yet but one only eye
Has he. moreover in your Seas my father bears the sway.
Him will I make thy fathrinlaw. Have mercy I the pray,
And harken too mine humble suit. For only unto thee
Yield I. Even I of whom both heaven and Jove despised be
And eeke the percing thunderbolt, do stand in awe and fear
Of thee O Nerye. Thine ill will is greeuouser too bear
Than is the deadly Thunderclappe. Yet could I better find
In heart too suffer this contempt of thine with pacient mind
If thou did shonne all other folk as well as me. But why
Rejecting Cyclops do thou love dwarf Acis? why say I
Preferst thou Acis unto me? well let him liked be
Both of himself, and also (which I would be loathe) of thee.
And if I catch him he shall feel that in my body is
The force that should be. I shall paunch him quick. Those limbs of his
I will in pieces tear, and strew them in the feeldes, and in
Thy waters, if he do thee haunt. For I do swelt within.
And being chaafte the flame does burn more feerce too my unrest.
Me thinks mount Aetna with his force is closed in my breast.
And yet it nothing moves thee. As Soon as he had talked
Thus much in vain, (I saw well all) he rose: and fuming stalkt
Among his woods and woonted Lawndes, as does a Bulchin, when
The Cow is from him taken. He could him no where rest as then.
Anon the feend espied me and Acis where we lay,
Before we wist or feared it: and crying out began say
I see ye. and confounded might I be with endless shame,
But if I make this day the last agreement of your game.
These words were spoke with such a reere as verry well became
An angry Giant. Aet^a shook with lowdnesse of the same.
I scaard therewith dopt underneath the water, and the knight
Simethus turning straight his back, did give himself too flight,
And cried help me Galate, help parents I you pray,
And in your kingdom me receive whoo perrish must streyghtway.
The roundeyd devil made pursewt: and rending up a fleece
Of Aetna Rock, threw after him: of which a little piece
Did Acis overtake. and yet as little as is was,
It overwhelmed Acis whole. I wretched wight (alas)
Did that which destnyes would permit. Forthwith I brought too pass
That Acis should receive the force his father had before.
His scarlet blood did issue from the lump, and more and more
Within a while the redness began too vannish: and the hew
Resembled at the first a brook with rain distroubled new,
Which wexeth clear by length of time. Anon the lump did clyue,
And from the hollow cliffe thereof high reeds sprang up alive.
And at the hollow issue of the stone the bubling water
Came trickling out. And by and by (which is a woondrous matter)
The stripling with a wreath of reed about his horned head
Auaunst his body too the waste. Whoo (save he was that stead
Much biggar than he erst had been, and altoogither gray)
Was Acis still. and being turned too water, at this day
In shape of river still he bears his former name away.
The Lady Galat ceast her talk and straight the company brake.
And Neryes daughters parting thence, swam in the gentle lake.
Dame Scylla home ageine returned. (She durst not her betake
Too open sea) and either roamd upon the sandy shore
Stark naakt, or when for weariness she could not walk no more,
She then withdrew her out of sight and gate her too a poole,
And in the water of the same, her heated limbs did cool.
Behold the fortune. Glaucus (whoo then being late before
Transformed in Evvboya I Will upon Anthedon shore,
Was new becomne a dweller in the sea) as he did swim
Along the coast was taken in love at sight of Scylla trim,
And spoke such words as he did think might make her tarry still.
Yet fled she still, and swift for fear she gate her too a hill
That butted on the Sea. right steep and upward sharp did shoot
A loftye top with trees, beneathe was hollow at the foot.
Here Scylla stayed and being sauf by strongnesse of the place,
(Not knowing if he monster were, or God, that did her chase,)
She looked back. And woondring at his color and his hear
With which his shoulders and his back all wholly covered were,
She saw his nether parts were like a fish with tail wrythde round
Who leaning too the nearest Rock, said thus with loud creere sound.
Fair maid, I neither monster am nor cruel savage beast:
But of the sea a God, whoose power and favor is not least.
For neither Protevv in the sea nor Triton have more might
Nor yet the son of Athamas that now Palaemon hight.
Yet once I was a mortal man. But you must know that I
Was given too seawoorkes, and in them me only did apply.
For sumtyme I did draw the drag in which the fishes were,
And sumtyme sitting on the clisses I angled here and there.
There butteth on a fair green mede a bank whereof tone half
Is cloasd with sea, the rest is clad with herbs which never calf,
Nor horned Ox, nor seely sheep, nor shakheard Goat did feed.
The busye Be did never there of flowers sweet smelling speed.
No gladsum garlonds ever there were gathered for the head.
No hand those flowers ever yet with hooked sithe did shred.
I was the first that ever set my foot upon that plot.
Now as I dryde my dropping netts, and laid abroad my lotte,
Too tell how many fishes had bychaunce too net been sent,
Or through their own too light beeleefe on bayted hook been hent:
(The matter seems like a lie, but what auayles too lie?)
As Soon as that my pray had towcht the grass, it by and by
Began too move, and flask their finnes, and swim upon the dry,
As in the Sea. And as I pawsd and woondred at the sight,
My ^raught of fishes euerychone too seaward took their flight,
And leaping from the shore, forsook their newfound master quyght.
I was amazed at the thing: and standing long in dowt,
I sought the cause if any God had brought this same about,
Or else sum iewce of herb. And as I so did musing stand,
What herb (quod I) has such a power? and gathering with my hand
The grass, I bote it with my toothe. My throat had scarcely yet,
Well swallowed down the uncouth iewce, when like an agew fit
I felt mine inwards soodeinly too shake, and with the same,
A love of other nature in my breast with violence came.
And long I could it not resist: but said dear land adeew*
For never shall I haunt thee more. And with that word I thre^*
My body in the sea. The Gods thereof receiving me,
Uouchsaued in their order me installed for too be.
Desyring old Oceanus and Thetis for their sake,
The rest of my mortality away from me too take.
They hallowed me, and having said nine times the holy rym^
That purges all prophanednesse, they charged me that time
Too put my brestbulk underneath a hundred streams. Anon
The brooks from sundry coasts and all the Seas did ride upon
My head. From whence as soon as I returned, by and by
I felt my self far otherwise through all my limbs, than I
Had been before. and in my mind I was another man.
Thus far of all that me befell make just report I can.
Thus far I bear in mind. The rest my mind perceived not.
Then first of all this hory green gray grisild beard I got,
And this same bush of hear which all along the seas I sweep,
And these same mighty shoulders, and these grayish arms, and feet
Coonfounded intoo finned fish. But what avails me
This goodly shape, and of the Gods of sea too loved be?
Or for too be a God my self? if they delyght not thee?
As he was speaking this, and still about too utter more,
Dame Scylla him forsook: whereat he wexing angry sore.
And being quickened with repulse, in rage he took his way
Too Circes Titans daughters Court which full of monsters lay.
Finis Libri decimi tertij.
THE.XIIII. BOOK OF Ouids Metamorphosis.
NOw had the Evvboyan fisherman (whoo lately was becomme
A God of sea too dwell in sea for ay,) already swomme
Past Aetna which upon the face of Giant Typho lies,
Toogither with the pasture of the Cyclops which defyes
Both Plough and harrowe, and by teemes of Oxen sets no store:
An Zancle, and cracked Rhegion which stands a toother shore:
And eeke the rough and shipwrecke sea which being hemmed in
With two main lands on either side, is as a bound betwin
The fruitful Realms of Italy and Sicill. From that place
He cutting through the Tyrrhene sea with both his arms a pace,
Arrived at the grassye hills and at the Palace hye
Of Circe Phoebus imp which full of sundry beasts did lie.
When Glaucus in her presence came, and had her greeted, and
Received freendly welcomming and greeting at her hand,
He said. O Goddess pity me a God I thee desire.
Thou only (if at least thou think me worthy so great hyre)
Can ease this love of mine. No wight does better know than I
The power of herbs, whoo late ago transformed was thereby.
And now too open unto thee of this my greef the ground,
Upon the Italyan shore against Messene walls I found
Fair Scylla. Shame it is too tell how scornful she did take
The gentle words and promises and suit that I did make.
But if that any power at all consist in charms, then let
That sacret mouth of thine cast charms: or if more force be set
In herbs too compass things withal, then use the herbs that have
Most strength in woorking. Neither think, I hither come too crave
A medcine for too heal myself and cure my wounded heart:
I force no end. I would have her be partener of my smart.
But Circe (for no natures are more lightly set on fire
Than such as she is) (whither that the cause of this desire
Were only in herself, or that Dame Venus bearing ay
In mind her fathers deed in once disclosing of her play,
Did stir her here unto) said thus. It were a better way
For thee too fancye such a one whoose will and whole desire
Is bent too thine, and whoo is sindgd with selfsame kind of fire.
Thou woorthye art of suit too thee. and (credit me) thou should
Be wood in deed, if any hope of speeding give thou would.
And therefore dowt not. Only of thy beawtye lyking have.
Lo, I whoo am a Goddess and the imp of Phoebus brave,
Whoo can so much by charms, whoo can so much by herbs, do vow
My self too thee. If I disdeine, disdeine me also thou.
And if I yield, yield thou likewise: and in one only deed
Avenge thy self of twain. Too her entreating thus too speed,
First trees shall grow (quod Glaucus) in the sea, and reeke shall thryue
On tops of hills, ere I (as long as Scylla is alive)
Do change my love. The Goddess wext right wroth: and since she could
Not hurt his person being fallen in love with him, ne would:
She spyghted her that was preferred before her. And upon
Displeasure taken of this repulse, she went her way anon.
And wicked weeds of grisly iewce toogither she did bray,
And in the braying, witching charms she over them did say.
And putting on a russet cloak, she passed through the rowt
Of savage beasts that in her court came fawning round about,
And going unto Rhegion clifte which stands against the shore
Of Zancle, entered by and by the waters that do rore
With violent tides, upon the which she stood as on firm land,
And ran and never wet her feet awhit. There was at hand
A little plash that bowwed like a bow that stands bent,
Where Scylla woonted was too rest herself, and thither went
From rage of sea and air, what time the son amid the sky
Is whotest making shadows short by mounting up on hye.
This plash did Circe then infect against that Scylla came,
And with her poisons which had power most monstrous shapes too frame
Defiled it. She sprincled there the iewce of venymd weeds.
And thryce nine times with witching mouth she softly mumbling, reeds
A charm right dark of uncouth words. No sooner Scylla came
Within this plash, and too the waast had waded in the same,
But that she saw her hinderloynes with barking buggs atteint.
And at the first, not thinking with her body they were meynt
As parts thereof, she started back, and rated them. And sore
She was afraid the eager curres should byght her. But the more
She shonned them, the surer still she was too have them there.
In seeking where her loins, and thyghes, and feet and ancles were,
Chappes like the chappes of Cerberus in stead of them she found.
Naught else was there than cruel curres from belly down too ground.
So underneath misshapen loins and womb remaining sound,
Her mannish mastyes backs were ay within the water drowned.
Her lover Glaucus wept thereat, and Circes bed refusde
That had so passing cruelly her herbs on Scylla used.
But Scylla in that place abode. And for the hate she bore
Too Circe ward, (as soon as meet occasion serude therefore)
She spoyld Ulysses of his mates. And shortly after, she
Had also drowned the Troiane fleet, but that (as yet we see)
She was transformd too rock of stone, which shipm^n warely shonne.
When from this Rock the Troiane fleet by force of Ores had won,
And from Charybdis greedye gulf, and were in manner ready
Too have arryude in Italy, the wynd did rise so heady,
As that it drove them back upon the coast of Affricke. There
The Tyrian Queen (whoo afterward impatiently should bear
The going of this Troiane prince away) did enterteine
Aenaeas in her house, and was right glad of him and feign.
Upon a Pyle made underneath pretense of sacrifyse
She goard herself upon a sword, and in most woeful wise
As she herself had been beguyld: so she beguyled all.
Eftsoone Aenaeas flying from the newly reered wall
Of Carthage in that sandy land, retired back again
Too Sicill, where his faithful friend Acestes reignd. And when
He there had done his sacrifyse, and kept an Obit at
His fathers ^umb, he out of hand did mend his Gallyes that
Dame Iris Iunos messenger had burned up almost.
And sailing thence he kept his course aloof along the coast
Of Aeolye and of Vulcanes Isles the which of brimston smoke.
And passing by the Meremayds rocks, (His Pilot by a s^roke
Of tempest being drowned in sea) he sayld by Prochite, and
Inarime, and (which upon a barreine hill does stand)
The land of Ape I Will, which does take that name of people slye
There dwelling. For the Sire of Gods abhorring utterly
The leawdnesse of the Cercops, and their wilful periurye,
And eeke their guylefull dealing did trans^orme them euery^ho^^
Intoo an euillfauored kind of beast: that being none
They might yet still resemble men. He knit in lesser space
Their members, and he beat me flat their noses too their face,
The which he filled furrowlike with wrinckles every where.
He clad their bodies over all with fallow coulourd hear,
And put them intoo this same I Will too dwell for ever there.
But first he did bereeue them of the use of speech and tongue,
Which they too cursed periurye did use both old and young.
Too chatter hoarcely, and too shreeke, too iabber, and too squeake,
He has them left, and for too moppe and mow, but not too speak.
Aenaeas having past this I Will, and on his right hand left
The town of Naples, and the tumb of Mysen on his left,
Toogither with the fenny grounds: at Cumye landed, and
Went unto longlyvde Cybills house, with whom he went in hand
That he too see his fathers ghost might go by Auerne deep.
She long upon the earth in s^ownd her eyes did fixed keep.
And at the length as soon as that the spryght of prophesye
Was entered her, she raising them did thus ageine reply.
O most renowned wight, of whom the godliness by fire
And valeantnesse is tryde by sword, great things thou do require.
But fear not Troiane. for thou shall be lord of thy desire.
Too see the reverend image of thy dear beeloued sire,
Among the fair Elysian feeldes where godly folk abide,
And all the lowest kingdoomes of the world I will thee guide.
No way too virtue is restreynd. This spoken, she did show
A golden bowgh that in the wood of Proserpine did grow,
And willed him too pull it from the tree. He did obey:
And saw the power of dreadful hell, and where his graundsyres lay
And eeke the aged Ghost of stowt Anchises. Furthermore
He lernd the customs of the land arryvd at late before,
And what adventures should by war betyde him in that place.
From thence retyring up ageine a slow and weery pace,
He did assuage the tediousness by talking with his guide.
For as he in the twylyght dim this dreadful way did ride,
He said: whither present thou thyself a Goddess be.
Or such a one as God does love most deerly, I will thee
For ever as a Goddess take, and will acknowledge me
Thy servant, for saufguyding me the place of death too see,
And for thou from the place of death haste brought me sauf and free.
For which desert, what time I shall atteyne too open air,
I will a temple to thee buyld right sumptuous, large, and fair,
And honor thee with frankincence. The prophetisse did cast
Her eye upon Aenaeas back, and syghing said at last.
I am no Goddess. Neither think thou can with conscience right,
With holy incence honor give too any mortal wight.
But too thentent through ignorance thou err not, I had been
Eternal and of worldly life I should none end have seen,
If that I would my maydenhod on Phoebus have bestowde.
Howbeeit while he stood in hope too have the same, and trowde
Too overcome me with his gifts, thou maid of Cumes (quod he)
Choose what thou will, and of thy wish the owner thou shall be.
I taking full my hand of dust, and showing it him there,
Desired like a fool too live as many years as were
Small graynes of cinder in that heap. I quight forgot too crave
Immediately, the race of all those years in youth too have.
Yet did he grant me also that, upon condition I
Would let him have my maydenhod, which thing I did deny.
And so rejecting Phoebus gift a single life I led.
But now the blessefull time of youth is altoogither fled,
And irksome age with trembling pace is stolen upon my head.
Which long I must endure. For now already as you see
Seven hundred years are come and gone and that the number be
Full matched of the granes of dust, threehundred haruestes mo
I must three hundred vintages see more before I go.
The day will come that length of time shall make my body small,
And little of my withered limbs shall leave or naught at all.
And none shall think that ^uer God was taken in love with me.
Even out of Phoebus knowledge then perchance I grown shall be.
Or at the least that ever he me lov^e he shall deny.
So sore I shall be altered. And then shall no man's eye
Discern me. Only by my voice I shall be known. For why
The fates shall leave me still my voice for folk too know me by.
As Sybill in the vaulted way such talk as this did frame,
The Troiane knight. Aenaeas up at Cumes fro Limbo came,
And having done the sacrifyse accustomd for the same,
He took his journey too the coast which had not yet the name
Received of his nurce. In this same place he found a mate
Of wise Ulysses Macare of Neritus whoo late
Before, had after all his long and tediouse toils, there stayed.
He spying Achemenides (whom late ago afraid
They had among mount Aetnas Cliffs abandond when they fled
From Polypheme:) and woondring for too see he was not dead,
Said thus. O Achemenides* what chance, or rather what
Good God has savde the life of thee? What is the reason that
A barbrous ship bears thee a Greek? or whither saylest thou?
Too him thus, Achemenides his own man freely now
And not forgrowen as one forlorn, nor clad in bristled hyde,
Made answer. Yet ageine I would I should in perrill bide
Of Polypheme, and that I might those chappes of his behold
Beesmeared with the blood of men, but if that I do hold
This ship more dear than all the Realm of wise Ulysses, or
If lesser of Aenaeas I do make account than for
My father. neither (though I did as much as done might be,)
I could enough be thankful for his goodness toward me.
That I still speak and breathe: That I the Sun and heaven do see:
Is his gift. Can I thanklesse then or myndlesse of him be?
That down the round eyed giants throat this soul of mine went not?
And that from henceforth when too dye it ever be my lot
I may be laid in grave, or sure not in the Giants mawe?
What heart had I that time (at least if fear did not withdraw
Both heart and sense) when left behynd, you taking ship I saw?
I would have called after you but that I was afraid
By making outcrye too my to myself too have beewrayd.
For even the noise that you did make did put Ulysses ship
In danger. I did see him from a cragged mountain strippe
A mighty rock, and intoo sea it throw midway and more.
Ageine I saw his giants pawe throw howge big stones great store
As if it were a sling. And sore I feared least your ship
Should drowned by the water be that from the stones did skippe,
Or by the stones themselves, as if my self had been therein.
But when that flight had saved you from death, he did begin
On Aetna syghing up and down too walk: and with his paws
Went groping of the trees among the woods. And forbycause
He could not see, he knocked his shinnes against the rocks each where.
And stretching out his grisly arms (which all beegrymed were
With baken blood) too seaward, he the Greekish nation band,
And said. O if that sum good chance might bring unto my hand
Ulysses or sum mate of his, on whom too wreake mine ire.
Upon whose bowels with my teeth I like a Hawke might tire:
Whose living members might with these my talants teared been.
Whoose blood might bubble down my throat: whose flesh might pant between
My jaws: how light or none at all this losing of mine eye
Would seem? These words and many mo the cruel feend did cry.
A shuddring horror perced me too see his smudged face,
And cruel hands, and in his frunt the foul round eyelesse place,
And monstrous members, and his beard bestowbered with the blood
Of man. Before mine eyes then death the smallest sorrow stood.
I looked every minute too be seized in his pawe.
I looked ever when he should have cramd me in his mawe.
And in my mind I of that time me thought the image saw
When having dingd a doozen of our fellows too the grownd
And lying like a Lion feerce or hunger sterued hownd
Upon them, very eagerly he down his greedy gut
Their bowwels and their limbs yet more than half alive did put,
And with their flesh toogither crasht the bones and maree whyght.
I trembling like an aspen leaf stood sad and bloodlesse quyght.
And in beholding how he fed and belked up again
His bloody vittells at his mouth, and vttred out amayne
The clottred gobbets mixed with wine, I thus surmysde: like lot
Hangs over my head now, and I must also go too pot.
And hyding me for many days, and quaking horribly
At every noise, and dreading death, and wisshing for too dye,
Appeasing hunger with the leaves of trees, and herbs and mast,
Alone, and poor, and footel^sse, and too death and penance cast,
A long time after I espyde this sh^ppe a far at last,
And ronning downward too the sea by fignes did succor seek.
Where fynding grace, this Troianeshippe received me a Greek.
But now I prey thee gentle friend declare thou unto me
Thy Capteines and thy fellows luck that took the sea with thee.
He told him how that Aeolus the son of Hippot, hea
That keeps the wyndes in prison cloce did reign in Tuskane sea,
And how Ulysses having at his hand a noble gift
The wynd enclosde in leather bags, did sail with prosperous drift
nine days toogither: insomuch they came within the sight
Of home: but on the tenth day when the morning began give light,
His fellows being somewhat touched with couetousenesse and spyght.
Supposing that it had been gold, did let the wyndes out quyght.
The which returning whence they came, did drive them back a main
That in the Realm of Aeolus they went a land again.
From thence (quod he) we came unto the ancient Lamyes town
Of which the feerce Antiphates that season ware the crown.
A cowple of my mates and I were sent unto him: and
A mate of mine and I could scarce by flight escape his hand.
The third of us did with his blood embrew the wicked face
Of leawd Antiphate, whoo with sword us flying thence did chase,
And following after with a rowt threw stones and loggs which drowned
Both men and ships. Howbeeit one by chance escaped sound,
Which bare Ulysses and my self. So having lost most part
Of all our dear companions, we with sad and sorry heart
And much complaining, did arryue at yoonder coast which you
May ken far hence. A great way hence (I say) we see it now
But trust me truly over near I saw it once. And thou
Aenaeas Goddess Venus son the iustest knight of all
The Troiane race (for since the war is done, I can not call
thee to) I warn thee get thee far from C^rces dwelling place.
For when our ships arrived there, remembering eft the case
Of cruel king Antiphates, and of that hellish wight
The round eyed giant Polypheme, we had so small delyght
Too visit vncowth places, that we said we would not go.
Then cast we lotts. The lot fell out upon myself as tho,
And Polyte, and Eurylocus, and on Elpenor who
Delyghted tootoomuch in wine, and eyghteene other mo.
All we did go too Circes house. As Soon as we came thither,
And in the portall of the Hall had set our feet toogither,
A thousand Lions woolues and bears did put us in a fear
By meeting us. But none of them was too be feared there.
For none of them could do us harm: but with a gentle look
And following us with fawning feet their wanton tails they shook.
Anon did Damzells welcome us and led us through the hall
(The which was made of marble stone, floor, arches, roof, and wall)
Too Circe. She sat underneath a trauerse in a chair
Aloft right rich and stately, in a chamber large and fair.
She ware a goodly longtreynd gown: and all her rest attire
Was every whit of goldsmithes woork. There sat me also by her
The Seanymphes and her Ladies whoose fine fingers never knew
What ^oozing wool did meene, nor threede from whorled spindle drew,
They sorted herbs, and picking out the flowers that were mixed,
Did put them intoo mawnds, and with indifferent space betwixt,
Did lay the leaves and stalks on heaps according too their hew.
And she herself the woork of them did ouersee and view.
The virtue and the use of them right perfectly she knew,
And in what leaf it lay, and which in mixture would agree.
And so perusing every her^ by g^od aduysement, she
Did wey them out. As Soon as she us entering in did see,
And greeting had both given and taken, she looked cheerfully,
And granting all that we desyrde, commanded by and by
A certain potion too be made of barley parched dry
And wine and honey mixed with cheese. and with the same she slye
Had meynt the iewce of certain herbs which vnespyde did lie
By reason of the sweetness of the drink. We took the cup
Delivered by her wicked hand, and quaft it clearly up
With thirstye throtes. Which done, and that the cursed witch had smit
Our highest hear tippes with her wand, (it is a shame, but yet
I will declare the truth) I wext all rough with bris^led hear,
And could not make complaint with words. In stead of speech I there
Did make a rawghtish grunting, and with groueling face began bear
My visage downward too the ground. I felt a hooked groyne
Too wexen hard upon my mouth, and brawned neck too join
My head and shoulders. And the hands with which I late ago
Had taken up the charmed cup, were turned t^o feet as tho.
Such force there is in Sorcerie. In fine with other mo
That tasted of the selfsame sauce, they shet me in a Stye.
From this missehappe Furilochus alonly scapte. For why
He only would not taste the cup. which had he not fled fro,
He should have been a bristled beast as well as we. And so
Should none have borne Ulysses word of our mischaunce, nor he
Have come too Circe too revenge our harms and set us free.
The peaceprocurer Mercury had given too him a whyght
Fair flower whoose root is black, and of the Gods it Moly hight
Assurde by this and heavenly hestes, he entered Circes bower.
And being bidden for too drink the cup of balefull power,
As Circe was about too stroke her wand upon his hear,
He thrust her back, and put her with his naked sword in fear.
Then fell they too agreement straight, and faith in hand was plyght.
And being made her bedfellowe, he claymed as in right
Of dowrye, for too have his men ageine in perfect plyght.
She sprincled us with better iewce of vncowth herbs, and struck
The awk end of her charmed rod upon our heads, and spoke
Words too the former contrary. The more she charmd, the more
Arose we upward from the ground on which we daarde before.
Our bristles fell away, the ^lift our cloven elees forsook.
Our shoulders did return agein: and next our elbowes took
Our arms and hands their former place. Then weeping we enbrace
Our Lord, and hing about his neck whoo also wept apace.
And not a word we rather spoke than such as might appear
From hearts most thankful too proceed. We tarried their a year
I in that while saw many things, and many things did here.
I marked also this one thing with store of other geere
Which one of Circes four cheef maids (whoose office was always
Upon such hallowes too attend) did secretly bewray
Too me. For in the while my Lord with Circe kept alone,
This maid a yoongmannes image sheawd of fair whyght marble stone
Within a Chauncell. On the head thereof were garlonds store
And eeke a woodspecke. And as I demanded her wherefore
And whoo it was they honored so in holy Church, and why
He bare that bird upon his head: She answeering by and by
Said: learn hereby sir Macare too understand the power
My Lady has, and mark thou well what I shall say this hour.
There reignd erewhyle in Italy one Picus Saturnes son
Whoo loved warlike horse and had delyght too see them run.
He was of feature as ye see. And by this image here
The verry beawtye of the man does lyuelely appear.
His courage matched his personage. And scarcely had he well
Seen twentye years. His countnance did allure the nymphs y^ dwell
Among the Latian hills. The nymphs of fountains and of brooks,
As those that haunted Now called Tyber.
Albula were ravished with his looks
And so were they that Numicke bears, and Anio too, and Alme
That ronneth short, and heady Nar, and Farfar cool and calm.
And all the nymphs that used too haunt Dianas shadye poole,
Or any lakes or meeres near hand, or other waters cool.
But he disdeyning all the rest did set his love upon
A lady whom Venilia bare (so fame reports) on
The stately mountain Palatine by Ianus that does bear
The dowble face. As Soon as that her years for marriage were
Thought able, she pre^erring him before all other men,
Was wedded too this Picus whoo was king of Lavvrents then.
She was in beawtye excellent. but yet in singing, much
More excellent: and thervppon they naamd her Singer. Such
The sweetness of her music was, that she therewith delyghts
The savage beasts, and caused birds too cease their wandering flyghts,
And moved stones and trees, and made the ronning streams too stay.
Now while that she in woman's tune records her pleasant lay
At home, her husband rode abroad upon a lustye horse
Too hunt the Boar, and bare in hand two hunting staves of force.
His cloak was crymzen butned with a golden button fast.
Intoo the selfsame forest eeke was Phoebus daughter past
From those same feeldes that of herself the name of Circe bear,
Too gather vncowth herbs among the fruitful hillocks there.
As Soon as lurking in the shrubbes she did the king espy,
She was a^trawght. Down fell her herbs too ground. And by and by
Through all her bones the flame of love the maree began too frye.
And when she from this forced heat had called her wits again,
She purposde too bewray her mind. But unto him as then
She could not come for swiftness of his horse and for his men
That guarded him o^ every side. Yet shall thou not (quod she)
So shift thee fro my hands although the wynd should carrye thee,
If I do know myself, if all the strength of herbs fail not,
Or if I have not quyght and cleene my charms and spelles forgotte.
In saying these same words, she made the likeness of a Boar
Without a body, causing it too swiftly pass before
King Picus eyes, and for too seem too get him too the wood,
Where for the thickenesse of the trees a horse might do no good.
Immediately the king unawares a who^e pursuit did make
Upon the shadow of his pray, and quikly did forsake
His foming horses sweating back: and following vain wan hope,
Did run a foot among the woods, and through the bushes crope.
Then Circe fell a mumbling spelles, and praying like a witch
Did honor strange and vncowth Gods with vncowth charms, by which
She used too make the moon look dark, and wrappe her fathers head
In watery clouds. And then likewise the heaven was ouerspred
With darkness, and a foggye mist steamd upward from the ground.
And near a man about the king too guard him could be found,
But every man in blind by ways ran scattring in the chase,
Through her inchauntments. At the length she getting time and place,
Said* By those lyghtsum eyes of thine which late have ravished mine,
And by that goodly personage and lovely face of thine,
The which compels me that am a Goddess too enclyne
Too make this humble suit too thee that art a mortal wight,
Assuage my flame, and make this son (whoo by his heavenly sight
Foresees all things) thy fathrinlawe: and hardly hold not scorn
Of Circe whoo by long descent of Titans stock am borne.
Thus much said Circe. He right feerce rejecting her request,
And her, said: whooso ere thou art go set thy heart at rest.
I am not thine, nor will not be. Another holds my heart:
And long God grant she may it hold, that I may never start
Too leawdnesse of a foreign lust from bond of lawful bed,
As long as Ianus daughter my sweet singer is not dead.
Dame Circe having often renewd her suit in vain before,
Said: dearly shall thou by thy scorn. For never shall thou more
Return too Singer. Thou shall learn by proof what one can do
That is provoked, and in love, yea and a woman too.
But Circe is both stird too wrath, and also taken in love,
Yea and a woman. Twyce her fa^e too westward she did move,
And twyce too Eastward. Thryce she laid her rod upon his head.
And therwithall three charms she cast. Away king Picus fled.
And woondring that he fled more swift than ^arst he had been wont,
He saw the feathers on his skin, and at the sodein brunt
Became a bird that haunts the wooddes. whereat he taking spyght,
With angrye bill did job upon hard Oaks with all his might,
And in his mood made hollow holes upon their boughs. The hew
Of Crimzen which was in his cloak, upon his feathers grew.
The gold that was a clasp and did his cloak toogither hold,
Is feathers, and about his neck goes circlewyse like gold.
His servants luring in that while often over all the ground
In vain, and fynding no where of their king no incling, found.
Dame Circe. (For by that time she had made the ay^r sheere,
And suffered both the son and wyndes the mistye steames too clear)
And charging her with matter true, demanded for their king,
And offering force, began their darts and Iauelings for too fling.
She sprincling noysom venim straight and iewce of poisoning might,
Did call toogither Eribus and Chaos, and the night,
And all the feendes of darkness, and with howling out along
Made prayers unto Hecate. Scarce ended was her song,
But that (a woondrous thing too tell) the woods lept from their place
The ground did groan: the trees near hand looked pale in all the chase:
The grass besprent with drops of blood looked red: the stones did seem^
Too roar and bellow hoarce: and dogs too howl and raze extreme:
And all the ground too crawle with snakes black scaald: and ghastly spryghts
Fly whisking up and down. The folk were flayghted at these syghts.
And as they woondring stood amaazd, she strokte her witching wand
Upon their faces. At the touch whereof, there out of hand
Came woondrous shapes of savage beasts upon them all. Not one
Retained still his native shape. The setting son was gone
Beyond the utmost c^ast of Spain, and Singer longd in vain
Too see her husband. Both her folk and people ran again
Through all the woods. And ever as they went, they sent their eyes
Before them for too find him out, but no man him espyes.
Then Singer thought it not enough too weep and tear her hear,
And beat herself (all which she did.) She gate abroad, and there
Raundgd over all the broad wyld feelds like one besyds her wits.
Six nights and full as many days (as fortune led by fitts)
She strayd me over hills and dales, and never tasted rest,
Nor meat, nor drink of all the while. The seventh day, sore oppressed
And tired both with travel and with sorrow, down she sat
Upon cold Tybers bank, and there with tears in moorning rate
She warbling on her greef in tune not shirle nor over hye,
Did make her moan, as does the swan: whoo ready for too dye
Does sing his burial song before. Her maree molt at last
With moorning, and she pynde away: and finally she past
Too lither air. But yet her fame remained in the place.
For why the ancient husbandmen according too the case,
Did name it Singer of the nymph that dyed in the same.
Of such as these are, many things that year by fortune came
Both too my heering and my sight. We we^ing resty then
And sluggs by discontinuance, were commanded yet again
Too go a board and hoyse up sails. And Circe told us all
That long and dowtfull passage and rowgh seas should us befall.
I promis thee those words of hers me thoroughly made afraid:
And therefore hither I me gate, and here I have me stayed.
This was the end of Macars tale. And ere long time was gone,
Aenaeas Nurce was buried in a tumb of marble stone,
And this short verse was set thereon. In this same verry place
My Nurcechyld whom the world does know too be a child of grace
Delivering me Ca^eta quick from burning by the Grayes,
Has burnt me dead with such a fire as justly winnes him praise.
Their Cables from the grassye strond were loozde, and by and by
From Circes slanderous house and from her treasons ^arre they fly.
And making too the thickgrowen groves where through the yellow dust
The shady Tyber intoo sea his gu^^hing stream does thrust,
Aenaeas got the Realm of king Latinus Favvnus son
And eeke his daughter, whom in f^yght by force of arms he won.
He enterprysed war against a Nation feerce and strong.
And Turn was wroth for holding of his wife away by wrong.
Against the Shyre of Latium met all Tyrrhene, and long
With busys car^ hawlt victory by force of arms was sought.
Each party too augment their force by foreign succor wrought.
And many sent the Rutills help, and many came too aid
The Troianes: neither was the good Aenaeas ill apayd
Of going too Euanders town. But Venulus in vain
Too outcast Diomeds city went his succor too obtain.
This Diomed under Davvnus king of Calabrye did found
A mighty town, and with his wife in dowrye hild the ground.
Now when from Turnus, Venulus his message had declaard,
Desyring help: The Actolian knight said none could well be spaard.
And in excuce, he told him how he neither durst be bold
Too pressed his fathers folk too war of whom he had no hold,
Nor any of his countrymen had left as then alive
Too arm. And least ye think (quod he) I do a shift contryue,
Although by vppening of the thing my bitter greef reuyue
I will abide too make a new rehersall. After that
The Greeks had burned Troy and on the ground had laid it flat,
And that the Prince of Narix by his rauishing the maid
In Pallas temple, on us all the penance had displayed
Which he himself deserud alone: Then scattred here and there
And harryed over all the seas, we Greeks were feign too bear
Night, thunder, tempest, wrath of heaven and sea, and last of all
Sore shipwrecke at mount Capharey too mend our harms withal.
And least that me too make too long a process ye might deem
In setting forth our heavy happes, the Greeks might that time seem
Right rewfull even too Priamus. Howbeet Minerua she
That wears armor took me from the waves and saved me.
But from my fathers Realm ageine by violence I was driven.
For Venus bearing still in mind the wound I had her given
Long time before, did woork reuendge. By means whereof such toil
Did toss me on the sea, and on the land I found such broyle
By wars, that in my heart I thought them blist of God whom erst
The violence of the raging sea and hideous wynds had perst,
And whom the wrathful Capharey by shipwrecke did confound:
Often wisshing also I had there among the rest been drowned.
My company now having felt the woorst that sea or war
Could work, did faint, and wished an end of straying out so far.
But Agmon whot of nature and too feerce through slaughters made
Said. What remains sirs through which our patience cannot wade?
What further spyght has Venus yet too woork against us more?
When worse misfortunes may be feared than have been felt before,
Then prayer may aduauntadge men, and vowwing may them boot.
But when the woorst is past of things, then fear is under foot.
And when that bale is hygh^st grown, then boot must next ensew.
Although she here me, and do hate us all (which thing is true)
That serve here under Diomed: Yet set we light her hate.
And dearly it should stand us on too purchase high estate.
With such stowt words did Agmon stir dame Venus unto ire
And raysd ageine her settled grudge. Not many had desire
Too here him talk thus out of square. the most of us that are
His friends rebuk^e him for his words. And as he did prepare
Too answer, both his voice and throat by which his voice should go,
Were small: his hear too feathers turned: his neck was clad as tho
With feathers: so was brist and back. The greater feathers stacke
Upon his arms: and intoo wings his elbowes bowwed back.
The greatest portion of his feet was turned intoo toes.
A hardened bill of horn did grow upon his mouth and noze,
And sharpened at the nether end. His fellows Lycus, I Would,
Rethenor, Nyct, and Abas all stood woondring by his side.
And as they woondred, they receyvd the selfsame shape and hew.
And finally the greater part of all my band up flew,
And clapping with their newmade wings, about the ores did gird.
And if ye do demand the shape of this same dowtfull bird,
Even as they be not verry Swannes: so draw they verry near
The shape of Cygnets whyght. The Elk.
With much a do I settled here,
And with a little remnant of my people do obtain
The drygrownds of my fathrinlaw king Davvnus whoo did reign
In Calabry. ^hus much the son of Oenye said. Anon
Sir Venulus returning from the king of Calydon,
Forsook the coast of Puteoll and the feeldes of Messapie,
In which he saw a darksome den forgrowne with busshes hye*
And watered with a little spring. The halfegoate Pan that hour
Possessed it: but heertoofore it was the fayryes bower.
A shepeherd of Appulia from that country scaard them fur^^.
But afterward recovering heart and hardynesse they durst
Despise him when he chaced them, and with their ^^mble feet
Continewed on their dawncing still in time and measure meet
The shepeherd fownd me fault with them: and with his lowtlike leapes
Did counterfette their minyon dawnce, and rapped out by heaps
A rabble of unsavory taunts even like a country cloyne,
Too which, most leawd and filthy terms of purpose he did join.
And after he had once begone, he could not hold his tongue,
Until that in the timber of a tree his throat was cloong.
For now he is a tree, and by his iewce discern ye may
His manners. For the Olyfwyld does sensibly bewray
By berryes full of bitterness his railing tongue. For ay
The harshnesse of his bitter words the berryes bear away.
Now when the kings Ambassador returned home without
The succor of the Aetolian prince, the Rutills being stout
Made luckelesse war without their help: and much on either side
Was shed of blood. Behold king Turn made burning bronds too glyde
Upon their ships, and they that had escaped water, stood
In fear of fire. The flame had sindgd the pitch, the wax, and wood,
And other things that nourish fire, and ronning up the maste
Caught hold upon the sails, and all the takling began too waste,
The Rowers seats did also smoke: when calling too her mind
That these same ships were pynetrees erst and shaken with the wynd
On Ida mo^nt, the moother of the Gods dame Cybel filld
The air with sound of belles, and noise of shalmes. And as she hilld
The reins that ruled the Lions tame which drew her charyot, She
Said thus. O Turnus all in vain these wicked hands of thee
Do cast this fire. for by myself dispoynted it shall be.
I wilnot let the wasting fire consume these ships which are
A parcel of my forest I Would of which I am most chare.
It thundered as the Goddess spoke, and with the thunder came
A storm of rain and skipping hayle. and soodeyne with the same
The sons of Astrey meeting feerce and feyghting verry sore,
Did trouble both the sea and air and set them on a rore.
Dame Cybel using one of (...) serve her turn that tide,
Did break the Cables at (...) which the Troiane ships did ride,
And bare them pro^e, (...) underneath the water did them drive
The Timber of them so^tning ^urnd (...) ^odyes straight alive.
The stemmes were turned too heads, the (...) too swimming feet and toes,
The sides too ribs, the keele that through the middle gally goes
Became the ridgebone of the back, the sails and tackling, hear:
And intoo arms on either side the sayleyards turned were.
Their hew is duskye as before, and now in shape of maid
They play among the waves of which even now they were afraid.
And being Seanymphes, whereas they were bred in mountains hard,
They haunt for ay the water soft, and never afterward
Had mind too see their natyue soil. But yet forgetting not
How many perils they had felt on sea by lucklesse lot,
They often put their helping hand too ships distressed by wynd,
Unless that any carried Greeks. For bearing still in mind
The burning of the town of Troy, they hate the Greeks by kind.
And therefore of Ulysses ships right glad they were too see
The shiuers. and as glad they were as any glad might be,
Too see Alcinous ships wex hard and turned intoo stone.
These ships thus having gotten life and being turned each one
Too nymphs, a body would have thought the miracle so great
Should intoo Turnus wicked heart sum godly fear have beat,
And made him cease his wilful war. But he did still persist.
And either party had their Gods their quarrel too assist,
And courage also: which as good as Gods might well be thought.
In fine they neither for the Realm nor for the scepter sought,
Nor for the Lady Lauine: but for conquest. And for shame
Too seem too shrink in leaving war, they still prolongd the same.
At length dame Venus saw her son obtain the upper hand
King Turnus fell, and eeke the town of Ardea which did stand
Right strong in high estate as long as Turnus lived. But
As Soon as that Aenaeas sword too death had Turnus put,
The town was set on fire: and from amid the embers flew
A foul which till that present time no person ever knew,
And beete the ashes feercely up with flapping of his wing.
The leanenesse, palenesse, doleful sound, and every other thing
That may express a City sakt, yea and the Cities name
Remained still unto the bird. And now the verrye same
With Hernesewes feathers does bewail the town whereof it came.
And now Aenaeas prowess had compelled all the Gods
And Juno also (whoo with him was most of all at odds)
Too cease their old displeasure quyght. And now he having laid
Good ground whereon the growing wealth of July might be stayed,
Was ripe for heaven. And Venus had great suit already made
Too all the Gods. and cleeping Jove did thus with him persuade.
Dear father whoo have never been vncurtuous unto me,
Now show the greatest courtesy (I pray thee) that may be.
And on my son Aenaeas (whoo a graundchyld unto thee
Has got of my blood) if thou will vouchsafe him awght at all)
Uouchsafe sum Godhead too bestow, although it be but small.
It is enough that once he has already seen the Realm
Of Pluto utter pleasurelesse, and passed Styxis stream.
The Gods assented: neither did Queen Juno then appear
In countnance strange, but did consent with glad and merry cheer.
Then Jove. Aenaeas worthy is a saynct in heaven too be.
Thy wish for whom thou do it wish I grant thee frank and free.
This grant of his made Venus glad. She thankt him for the same.
And glyding through the air upon her yoked doves, she came
Too Lavvrent shore, where clad with reed the river Numicke deep
Too seaward (which is near at hand) with stealing pace does creep.
She bade this river wash away what ever mortal were
In good Aenaeas body, and them under sea too bear.
The horned brook fulfilld her hest, and with his water sheere
Did purge and clenze Aenaeas from his mortal body clear.
The better portion of him did remain unto him sownd.
His moother having hallowed him did noynt his body rownd
With heavenly odours, and did touch his mouth with Ambrosie
The which was mixed with Ne^ar sweet, and made him by and by
A God too whom the Romans give the name of Indiges,
Endeuering with their temples and their altars him too please.
Ascanius with the dowble name from thence began too reign,
In whom the rule of Alba and of Latium did remain.
Next him succeeded Siluius, whoose son Latinus hild
The auncien^ name and scepter which his graundsyre erst did weeld.
The famous Ep^t after this Latinus did succeed.
Then Capys and king Capetus. But Capys was indeed
The formest of the two. From this the scepter of the Realm
Descended unto Tyberine, whoo drowning in the stream
Of Tyber left that name theretoo. This Tyberine begat
Feerce Remulus and Acrota. By chance it happened that
The elder brother Remulus for counterfetting often
The thunder, with a thunderbolt was killed from aloft.
From Acrota whoose stayednesse did pass his brothers skill,
The crown did come too Auentine, whoo in the selfsame hill
In which he reigned buried lies, and left thertoo his name.
The rule of nation Palatine at length too Proca came.
In this Kings reign It may be interpreted Applebee.
Pomona livd. There was not too be found
Among the woodnymphes any one in all the Latian ground
That was so conning for too keep an Ortyard as was she,
Nor none so paynefull too preserve the fruit of every tree.
And thervppon she had her name. She past not for the woods
Nor rivers, but the villages and boughs that bare both buddes
And plentuous fruit. In sted of dart a shredding hook she bare,
With which the ouerlusty boughs she eft away did pare
That spreaded out too far, and eft did make therewith a rift
Too greffe another imp upon the stock within the clift.
And least her trees should die through drought, with water of the springs
She moystech of their sucking roots the little crumpled strings.
This was her love and whole delyght. And as for Venus deeds,
She had no mind at all of them. And forbycause she dreedes
Enforcement by the country folk, she walld her yards about,
Not suffering any man at all too enter in or out.
What have not those same nimble laddes so apt too frisk and dance
The Satyrs done? or what the Pannes that wantonly do praunce,
With borned forheads? and the old Silenus whoo is ay
More youthful than his years? and eeke the feend that scares away
The thieves and robbers with his hook, or with his privy part?
Too win her love? But yet than these a far more constant heart
Had sly Turner.
Vertumnus, though he sped no better than the rest.
O Lord, how often being in a moawers garment dressed,
Bare he in bundells sheaues of corn? and when he so was dyght,
He was the verry pattern of a harvest moawer right.
Often bynding newmade hay about his temples he might seem
A haymaker. Often times in hand made hard with woork extreme
He bare a goade, that men would sweere he had but newly then
Unyoakt his weerye Oxen. Had he taken in hand again
A shredding hook, ye would have thought he had a gardener been,
Or proyner of sum vynes. Or had you him with ladder seen
Upon his neck, a gatherer of fruit ye would him deem.
With sword a soldier, with his rod an Angler he did seem.
And finally in many shapes he sought too find access
Too joy the beawty but by sight, that did his heart oppress.
Moreover, putting on his head a woman's wimple gay,
And staying by a staff, graye hears he forth too sight did lay
Upon his forehead, and did feyne a beldame for too be.
By means whereof he came within her goodly ortyards free.
And woondring at the fruit, said. Much more skill have thou I see
Than all the Nymphs of Albula. Hayle Lady mine, the flower
Unspotted of pure maydenhod in all the world this hour.
And with that word he kissed her a little: but his kiss
Was such as true old women would have never given ywis.
Then sitting down upon a bank, he looked upward at
The branches bent with haruests weight. Against him where he sat
A goodly Elm with glistring grapes did grow: which after he
Had praised, and the vine, likewise that ran upon the tree,
But if (quod he) this Elm without the vine did single stand,
It should have nothing (saving leaves) too be desired: and
Ageine if that the vine which ronnes upon the Elm had not
The tree too lean unto, it should upon the ground ly flat.
Yet art not thou admonisht by example of this tree
Too take a husband, neither do thou pass too married be.
But would too God thou would. Sure Queen Helen never had
Mo ^uters, nor the Lady that did cause the battle mad
Between the halfbrute Centavvres and the Lapythes, nor the wife
Of bold Ulysses whoo was eeke ay fearful of his life,
Than thou should have. For thousands now (eue^ now most chiefly when
Thou seem suitors too abhor) desire thee, both of men,
And Gods and halfgoddes, yea and all the fayryes that do dwell
In Albane hills. But if thou will be wise, and myndest well
Too match thy self, and wilt give ear too this old woman here,
(Too whom thou more than too them all art (trust me) leef and dear,
And more than thou thyself beleevst) the common matches flee,
And choose Vertumnus too thy make. And take thou me too be
His pledge. For more he too himself not known is, than too me.
He roues not like a ronneagate through all the world abroad,
This country heerabout (the which is large) is his abode.
He does not (like a number of these common wooers) cast
His love to every one he sees. Thou art the first and last
That ever he set mind upon. Alonly unto thee
He vows himself as long as life does last. Moreover he
Is youthful, and with beawtye sheene endewd by natures gift,
And aptly intoo any shape his person he can shift.
Thou can not bid him be the thing, (though al things you should name)
But that he fitly and with ease will straight becomme the same.
Besides all this, in all one thing both twain of you delyght,
And of the fruits that you love best the firstlings are his right:
And gladly he receyues thy gifts. But neither couets he
Thy Apples, Plommes, nor other fruits new gathered from the tree,
Nor yet the herbs of pleasant sent that in thy gardynes be:
Nor any other kind of thing in all the world, but thee.
Have mercy on his fervent love, and think himself too crave
Here present by the mouth of me, the thing that he would have.
And fear the God that may revenge: as Venus whoo does hate
Hard hearted folks, and Rhamnuse whoo does either soon or late
Express her wrath with myndfull wreake. And too thentent thou may
The more beware, of many things which time by long delay
Has taught me, I will show thee one which over all the land
Of Cyprus blazed is abroad, which being ryghtly skand
May easly bow thy hardened heart and make it for too yild.
One Iphis borne of low degree by fortune had behild
The Lady Anaxarete descended of the race
Of Tevvcer, and in vewwing her the fire of love a pace
Did spread it self through all his bones. With which he stryuing long,
When reason could not conquer rage because it was too strong,
Came humbly too the Ladies house: and one while laying open
His wretched love before her nurce, besought her by the hope
Of Lady Anaxarete her nurcechylds good success,
She would not be against him in that case of his distress.
Anoother while entreating fair sum friend of hers, he prayed
Him earnestly with careful voice, of furthrance and of aid.
Oftymes he did prefer his suit by gentle letters sent.
Often garlonds moysted with the deawe of tears that from him went
He hanged on her posts. Often times his tender sides he laid
Against the threshold hard, and often in sadness did upbraid
The lock with much ungentleness. The Lady crueller
Than are the rising narrow seas, or falling kiddes, and far
More hard than steel of Noricum, and than the stonny rock
That in the quarrye has his root, did him despise and mock.
Beside her doings mercylesse, of statelynesse and spyght
She adding proud and skornefull words, defrauds the wretched wight
Of verry hope. But Iphis now unable any more
Too bear the torment of his greef, still standing there before
Her gate, spoke these his latest words, well Anaxarete,
Thou have the upper hand. Henceforth thou shall not need too be
Agreeued any more with me. Go triumph hardely:
Go vaunt thy self with joy: go sing the song of victory:
Go put a crown of glittring bay upon thy cruel head.
For why thou have the upper hand, and I am gladly dead.
Well steely hearted well: rejoice. Compeld yet shall thou be
Of sumwhat in me for too have a lyking. Thou shall see
A point wherein thou may me deem most thankful unto thee,
And in the end thou shall confess the great desert of me.
But yet remember that as long as life in me does last,
The care of thee shall never from this heart of mine be cast.
For both the life that I do live in hope of thee, and toother
Which nature gives, shall have end and pass away toogither.
The tidings neither of my death shall come too thee fame.
Myself (I do assure thee) will be bringer of the same.
Myself (I say) will present be that those same cruel eyes
Of thine may feed themselves upon this linelesse corce of mine.
But yet O Gods, (if you behold men's deeds) remember me.
(My tongue will se^ue too pray no more) and cause that I may be.
Longtyme hereafter spoken of: and length the life by fame
The which ye have abridgd in years. In saying of this same
He lifted up his watrye eyes and arms that wexed wan
Too those same stulpes which often he had with garlondes decked ere than,
And fastening on the top thereof a halter thus did say.
Thou cruel and ungodly wight, these are the wreathes that may
Most pleasure thee. And with that word he thrusting in his head,
Even then did turn him toward her as good as being dead,
And wretchedly did totter on the post with strangled throat.
The wicket which his feerefull feet in sprawling maynely smote,
Did make a noise: and flying open bewrayd his doing plain.
The servants shreekt, and lifting up his body, but in vain,
Conveyed him too his moothers house, his father erst was slain.
His moother laid him in her lap, and cleeping in her arms
Her sons cold body, after that she had bewayld her harms
With words and doings mootherlyke, the corce with moorning cheer
Too buryall sadly through the town was borne upon a beer.
The house of Anaxarete by chance was near the way
By which this piteous pomp did pass, and of the doolefull lay
The sound came too the ears of her, whom God already began
Too strike* Yet let us see (quod she) the buryall of this man.
And up the high wide windowde house in saying so, she ran.
Scarce had she well on Iphis looked that on the beer did lie,
But that her eyes were stark: and from her limbs the blood began fly.
In stead thereof came palenesse in. And as she backward was
In mind too go, her feet stacke fast and could not stir. And as
She would have cast her countnance back, she could not do it. And
The stonny hardness which a late did in her stomach stand,
Within a while did ouergrow her whole from sole too crown.
And least you think this geere surmysde, even yet in Salamin town
Of Lady Anaxarete the image stands plain.
The temple also in the which the image does remain,
Is unto Venus consecrate by name of looker out.
And therefore weying well these things, I prey thee look about
Good Lady, and away with pride: and be content too frame
Thy self too him that loves thee and cannot quench his flame.
So neither may the Lentons cold thy budding frutetrees kill
Nor yet the sharp and boystous wyndes thy flowring Gardynes spill.
The God that can upon him take what kind of shape he list
Now having said thus much in vain, omitted too persist
In b^^^ames shape, and shewde himself a lusty gentleman,
Appeering too her cheerfully, even like as Phoebus when
He having ouercomme the clouds that did withstand his might,
Does blaze his brightsum beams agein with fuller heat and light.
He offered force. but now no force was needful in the case.
For why she being caught in love with beawty of his face,
Was wounded then as well as he, and began to yield a pace.
Next Proca reignd Amulius in Avvsonye by wrong.
Till Numitor the ryghtfull heir deposed verry long,
Was by his daughters sons restorde. And on the feastfull day
Of Pale, foundation of the walls of Rome they began too lay.
Soon after Tacye, and the Lords of Sabine stird debate:
And Tarpey for her traytrous deed in opening of the gate
Of Tarpey tower was pressed too death according too desert
With armor heapt upon her head. Then feerce and stowt of heart
The Sabines like too toonglesse woolues without all noise of talk
Assayld the Romans in their sleep, and too the gates began stalk
Which Ilias son had closed fast with locks and bars. But yet
Dame Juno had set open one, and as she opened it
Had made no noise of craking with the hindges, so that none
Perceyud the opening of the gate but Venus allalone.
And she had shet it up, but that it is not lawful too
One God too undo any thing another God has do.
The waternymphes of Avvsonie hild all the grounds about
The Church of Ianus where was store of springs fresh flowing out.
Dame Venus prayed these nymphs of help. And they con^i^ering that
The Goddess did request no more but right, denyde it not.
They opened all their fountain veins and made them flow apace.
Howbeet the passage was not yet too Ianus open face
Forclosed: neither had as yet the water stopped the way.
They put rank brimstone underneath the flowing spring that day,
And eeke with smokye rozen set their veins on fire for ay.
Through force of these and other things, the vapor perced low
Even down unto the verry roots on which the springs did grow.
So that the waters which a late in coldness might compare
Even with the frozen Alps, now whot as burning furnace are.
The two gate posts with sprinkling of the fyry water smoakt.
Whereby the gate beehyghted too the Sabines quyght was choakt
With rising of this fountain strange, until that Marsis knight
Had armed him. Then Romulus did boldly offer fight.
The Roman ground with Sabines and with Romans both were spread.
And with the blood of fathrinlawes which wicked sword had shed
Flowde mixed the blood of sonn^inlawes. Howbeet it seemed best
Too both the parties at the length from battle for too rest,
And not too fight too vttrance: And that Tacye should becoome
Copartner with king Romulus of souereintye in Room.
Within a while king Tacye did: And both the Sabines and
The Romans under Romulus in equal right did stand.
The God of battle putting of his glittring helmet then,
With such like words as these bespake the fire of Gods and men.
The time O father (in as much as now the Roman state
Is wexen strong upon the good foundation laid alate,
Depending on the stay of an^) is comme for thee too make
Thy promis good which thou of me and of thy graundchyld spoke.
Which was too take him from the earth and in the heaven him stay.
Thou once (I marked thy gracious words and bare them well away)
Before a great assembly of the Gods did too me say.
There shall be one whom thou shall raise above the starry sky.
Now let they saying take effect. Jove granting by and by
The air was hid with darksom clouds, and thunder forth did fly,
And lyghtning made the world aghast. Which Mars perceiving too
Be lackye tokens for himself his enterprise too do,
Did take his (...) upon his spear and boldly lept intoo
His bloodye charyot. And he lent his horses with his whippe
A yirking lash, and through the air full smoothely down did ^lippe.
And staying on the woody top of mountain Palatine,
He took away king Romulus whoo there did then defyne
The pryuate caces of his folk unseemly for a king.
And as a leaden peller broad enforced from a ^ling
Is wont too dye amid the sky: even so his mortal flesh
Sank from him down the subtle air. In sted whereof a fresh
And goodly shape more stately and more meet for sacred shryne.
Succeeded, like our Quirin that in stately robe does shine.
Hersilia for her feere as lost, of moorning made none end,
Until Queen Juno did command dame Iris too descend
Upon the Raynebowe down, and thus her message for too do.
O of the Latian country and the Sabine nation too
Thou peerlesse perle of womanhod, most worthy for too be
The wife of such a noble prince as heertoofore was he,
And still too be the wife of him canonized by name,
Of Quirin: cease thy tears. And if thou have desire the same
Thy holy husband for too see, ensew me too the queache
That grows green on Quirins hill, whoose shadows ouerreache
The temple of the Roman King. Dame Iris did obey.
And ^yding by her painted bow, in former words did say
(...) too Hersilia. She scarce lifting up her eyes,
With sober countnance answered. O thou Goddess (for surmyse
I cannot whoo thou art, but yet I well may understand
Thou art a Goddess) leede me O dear Goddess leede me, and
My husband too me show. Whom if the fatal susters three
Will of they: gracious goodness grant me leave but once too see,
I shall account me intoo heaven received for too be.
Immediately with Thavvmants imp too Quirins hill she went.
There glyding from the sky a star straight down too ground was sent,
The sparks of whoose bright blazing beams did burn Hersilias hear.
And with the star the ayre^ did vher hear too heauenward bear.
The buylder of the town of Room receiving straight the same
Between his old acquaynted hands, did alter both her name
And eeke her body, calling her dame Ora. And by this
She jointly with her husband for a Goddess woorshipt is.
Finis Libri decimi quarti.
THE.XV. BOOK OF Ouids Metamorphosis.
A Person in the while was sought sufficient too sustain
The burden of so great a charge, and worthy for too reign
In stead of such a mighty prince. The noble Nume by fame
(Whoo harped then upon the truth before too pass it came)
Appointed too the Empire was. This Numa thought it not
Enough that he the knowledge of the Sabine rites had got.
The deepenesse of the noble wit too greater things was bent,
Too search of things the natures out. The care of this intent
Did cause that he from Curie and his native Country went
With peynfull travel, too the town where Hercules did host.
And asking who it was of Greece that in the Italian coast
Had buylt that town, an aged man well seen in stories old,
Too satisfye his mind therein the process thus him told.
As Hercules enriched with the Spannish kyne did hold
His voyage from the Ocean sea, men say with lucky cut
He came a land on Lacine coast. And while he there did put
His beace too grazing, he himself in Crotons house did rest
The greatest man in all those parts and unto strangers best:
And that he there refresht him of his tedious travel, and
That when he should depart, he said. where now thy house does stand,
Shall in thy childers childrens time a City builded be.
Which words of his have proved true as plainly now we see.
For why there was one Myscelus a Greek, Alemons son,
A person more in favor of the Gods than any one
In those days was. The Hercules.
God that bears the boystous club did stay
Upon him being fast a sleep, and said: go seek straight way
The stonny stream of Aeserie. Thy native soil for ay
Forsake. And sore he threatened him unless he did obey.
The God and sleep departed both toogither. Up did rise
Al^mons son, and in himself did secretly deuyse
Upon this vision. Long his mind strove dowtfull too and fro.
The God had go. His country laws did say he should not go,
And death was made the penalty for him that would do so.
Clear Titan in the Ocean sea had hid his lyghtsomme head,
And duskye night had put up hers most thick with stars bespred.
The selfsame God by Myscelus did seem too stand ef^soone,
Commanding him the selfsame thing that he before had done,
And threatening mo and greater plages unless he did obey.
Then being stricken sore in fear he went about streyghtway
His household from his natyue land too foreign too convey.
A rumor heerevppon did rise through all the town of Arge
And disobedience of the law was laid too his charge.
As Soon as that the case had first been pleaded and the deed
Apparently perceived, so that witness did not need,
Arreyned and ^orlorne too heaven he cast his hands and eyes,
And said: O God whoose labors twelve have purchaste thee the skies,
Assist me I the pray. For thou art author of my crime.
When judgment should be given it was the guyse in ancient time
With whyght stones too acquit the clear, and eeke with black too cast
The giltye. That time also so the heavy sentence past.
The stones were cast unmerciful all black intoo the pot.
But when the stones were powered out too number, there was not
A black among them. All were whyght. And so through Hercles power
A gentle judgment did proceed, and he was quit that hour.
Then gave he thanks too Hercules, and having prosperous blast,
Cut over the Ionian sea, and so by Tarent past
Which Spartanes buylt, and Cybaris, and Neaeth salentine,
And Thurine bay, and Emese, and eeke the pastures fine
Of Calabrye. And having scarce well sought the coasts that lie
Upon the sea, he found the mouth of fatal Aeserye.
Not far from thence, he also found the tumb in which the ground
Did kiuer Crotons holy bones, and in that place did found
The City that was willed him, and gave theretoo the name
Of him that there lay buried. Such original as this same
This City in the Italian coast is said too have by fame.
Here dwelt a man of Samos I Will, who for the hate he had
Too Lordlynesse and Tyranny, though vnconstreynd was glad
Too make himself a bannisht man. And though this person weere
Far distant from the Gods by site of heaven: yet came he near
Too them in mind. And he by sight of soul and reason clear
Behild the things which nature does too fleshly eyes deny.
And when with care most vigilant he had assuredly
Imprinted all things in his heart, he set them openly
Abroad for other folk too learn. He taught his silent sort
(Which woondred at the heavenly words their master did report)
The first fonndation of the world: the cause of every thing:
What nature was: and what was God: whence snow and lyghtning spring:
And whither Jove or else the wynds in breaking clouds do thunder:
What shakes y^ earth: what law ye stars do keep their courses under:
And what soever other thing is hid from common sense.
^e also is the first that did inioyne an abstinence
Too feed of any living thing. He also first of all
Spoke thus: although right lernedly, yet too effect but small.
Ye mortal men forbear too frank your flesh with wicked food.
Ye have both corn and fruits of trees and grapes and herbs right good.
And though that sum be harsh and hard: yet fire may make them well
Both soft and sweet. Ye may have milk, and honny which does smell
Of flowers of time. The lauas earth does yield you plentiously
Most gentle food, and riches too content both mind and ^ye.
There needs no slaughter nor no blood too get your living by.
The beasts do break their fast with flesh: and yet not all beasts neither.
For horses, sheep, and Rotherbeastes too live by grass had lever.
The nature of the beast that does delyght in bloody food,
Is cruel and unmerciful. As Lions feerce of mood,
Armenian Tigers, Bears, and Woolues. Oh what a wickedness
It is too cra^ the mawe with mawe, and frank up flesh with flesh,
And for one living thing too live by killing of another:
As whoo should say, that of so great abundance which our moother
The earth does yield most bountuously, none other might delyght
Thy cruel teethe too chawe upon, than grisly wounds that might
Express the Cyclops guyse? or else as if thou could not stawnche
The hunger of thy greedye gut and evil mannerd pawnche,
Unless thou stroyd sum other wight. But that same ancient age
Which we have naamd the golden world, cleene void of all such rage,
Livd blessedly by fruit of trees and herbs that grow on ground,
And stained not their mouths with blood. Then birds might safe and sound
Fly where they listed in the air. The hare vnscaard of hound
Went pricking over all the feeldes. No angling hook with bayt
Did hang the seely fish that bote mistrusting no deceyt.
All things were void of guylefulnesse: no treason was in trust:
But all was freendshippe love and peace. But after that the lust
Of one (what God so ere he was) disdeyning former fare,
Too cram that cruel croppe of his with fleshmeate did not spare,
He made a way for wickedness. And first of all the knyfe
Was staynd with blood of savage beasts in ridding them of life.
And that had nothing been amiss, if there had been the stay.
For why we grant, without the breach of godliness we may
By death confound the things that seek too take our lives away.
But as too kill them reason was: even so agein their was
No reason why too eat their flesh. This leawdnesse thence did pass
On further still. Whereas there was no sacrifyse beforne,
The Swyne (because with) hoked groyne he wrooted up the corn,
And did deceive the tillmen of their hope next year thereby)
Was deemed worthy by desert in sacrifyse too dye.
The Goat for byghting vynes was slain at Bacchus altar whoo
Wreakes such misdeedes. Their own offense was hurtful to these two.
But what have you poor sheep misdoone a cattle meek and meeld,
Created for too maynteine man, whoose fulsomme duggs do yield
Sweet Nectar, whoo does clothe us with your wool in soft array?
Whoose life does more us benefit than does your death farreway?
What trespass have the Oxen done? a beast without all guyle
Or craft, unhurtful, simple, borne too labor every while?
In faith he is unmindful and unworthy of increace
Of corn, that in his heart can find his tilman too releace
From plowgh, too cut his throat: that in his heart can find (I say)
Those necks with hatchets of too strike, whoose skin is worn away
With labring ay for him: whoo turned so often his land most tough,
Whoo brought so many haruestes home. yet is it not enough
That such a great outrageousenesse committed is. They father
Their wickedness upon the Gods. And falsely they do gather
That in the death of peynfull Ox the highest does delyght.
A sacrifyse unblemished and fairest unto sight,
(For beawtye woorketh them their bane) adornd with garlonds, and
With glittring gold, is cyted at the altar for too stand.
There heeres he words (he wotes not what) y^ which y^ priest does pray,
And on his forehead suffers him between his horns too lay
The ears of corn that he himself has wrought for in the clay,
And stayneth with his blood the knyfe that he himself perchance
Has in the water sheere ere then behild by soodein glaunce.
Immediately they haling out his hartstrings still alive,
And poring on them, seek therein Gods secrets too re^ryue.
Whence commes so greedy appetyte in men, of wicked meat?
And dare ye O ye mortal men adventure thus too eat?
Nay do not (I beseech ye) so. But give good ^are and heed
Too that that I shall warn you of, and trust it as your creed,
That whenever you do eat your Oxen, you deuowre
Your husbandmen. And forasmuch as God this instant hour
Does move my tongue too speak, I will obey his heavenly power.
My God Apollos temple I will set you open, and
Disclose the woondrous heavens themselves, and make you understand
The Oracles and secrets of the Godly majesty.
Great things, and such as wit of man could never yet espy,
And such as have been hidden long, I purpose too descrye.
I mind too leave the earth, and up among the stars too slye.
I mind too leave this grosser place, and in the clouds too fly,
And on stowt Atlas shoulders strong too rest my self on hye,
And looking down from heaven on men that wander here and there
In dreadful fear of death as though they void of reason were,
Too give them exhortation thus: and plainly too vnwynd
The whole discourse of destiny as nature has assignd.
O men amaazd with dread of death, why fear ye Limbo Styx,
And other names of vanity, which are but Poets tricks?
And perrills of another world all false surmysed geere?
For whither fire or length of time consume the bodies here,
Ye well may think that further harms they cannot suffer more.
For souls are free from death. Howbeet, they living evermore
Their former dwellings are receyud and live ageine in new.
For I myself (right well in mind I bear it too be true)
Was in the time of Trojan war Euphorbus Panthevves son
Quyght through whoose heart the deathfull spear of Menelay did run.
I late age in Iunos Church at Argos did behold
And knew the target which I in my left hand there did hold.
Al things do change. But nothing sure does perrish. This same spright
Does fleet, and fisking here and there does swiftly take his flight
From one place too another place, and enters every wight,
Removing out of man too beast, and out of beast too man.
But yet it never perrisheth nor never perrish can.
And even as supple wax with ease receives fygures strange,
And keeps not ay one shape, ne bydes assured ay from change,
And yet continues always wax in substance: So I say
The soul is ay the selfsame thing it was and yet astray
It fleeteth intoo sundry shapes. Therefore least Godliness
Be vanquished by outrageous lust of belly beastlynesse,
Forbear (I speak by prophecy) your kinsfolks ghostes too chase
By slaughter: neither nourish blood with blood in any case.
And since on open sea the wynds do blow my sails apace,
In all the world there is not that that stands at a stay.
Things eb and flow: and every shape is made too pass away.
The time itself continually is fleeting like a brook.
For neither brook nor lyghtsomme time can tarrye still. But look
As every wave dryues other forth, and that that commes behynd
Both thrusts and is thrust itself: Even so the times by kind
Do fly and follow both at once, and evermore renew.
For that that was before is left, and straight there does ensew
Anoother that was never erst. Each twincling of an eye
Does change. We see that after day commes night and darks the sky,
And after night the lyghtsum Sun succeeds orderly.
Like color is not in the heaven when all things weery lie
At midnyght ^ound a sleep, as when the daystarre clear and bright
Commes forth upon his milkwhyght steed. Ageine in other plyght
The morning Pallants daughter fair the messenger of light
Delivers intoo Phoebus hands the world of cleerer hew.
The circle also of the son what ^yme it ryseth new
And when it sets, looks red* but when it mounts most hye,
Then looks it whyght, because that there the nature of the sky
Is better, and from filthye dross of earth does further fly
The image also of the Moon that shyneth ay by night,
Is never of one quantity. For that that gives light
Too day, is lesser than the next that follows, till the full.
And then contrarywyse each day her light away does pull.
What? see thou not how that the year as representing plain
The age of man, departes itself in quarters four? first bayne
And tender in the spring it is, even like a sucking babe.
Then green, and void of strength, and lush, and foggye, is the blade*
And cheeres the husbandman with hope. Then all things flourish gay.
The earth with flowers of sundry hew then seems for too play,
And virtue small or none too herbs there does as yet belong.
The year from spring tide passing forth too summer, wexeth strong,
Becomes like a lusty youth. For in our life through out
There is no time more plentiful, more lusty whote and stout.
Then follows Harvest when the heat of youth grows sumwhat cold,
Ripe, meeld, disposed mean betwixt a yoongman and an old,
And sumwhat sprent with grayish hear. Then ugly winter last
Like age steals on with trembling steps, all bald, or ouercast
With shirle thin hear as whyght as snow. Our bodies also ay
Do alter still from time too time, and never stand at stay.
We shall not be the same we were too day or yisterday.
The day has been we were but seed and only hope of men,
And in our moothers womb we had our dwelling place as then,
Dame Nature put too conning hand and suffered not that we
Within our moothers streyned womb should ay distressod be,
But brought us out too air, and from our prison set us free.
The child newborn lies void of strength. Within a season tho
He wexing fowerfooted lernes like savage beasts too go.
Then sumwhat foltring, and as yet not firm of foot, he stands
By getting sumwhat for too help his sinews in his hands.
From that time growing strong and swift, he passes forth the space
Of youth: and also wearing out his middle age a pace,
Through drooping ages steepye path he ronneth out his race
This age does undermine the strength of former years, and throws
It down. which thing old Milo by example plainly shows.
For when he saw those arms of his (which heeretoofore had been
As strong as ever Hercules in woorking deadly teene
Of biggest beasts) hang flapping down, and naught but empty skin,
He wept. And Helen when she saw her aged wrincles in
A glass wept also: musing in herself what men had seen,
That by two noble princes sons she twyce had ravished been.
Thou time the eater up of things, and age of spyghtfull teene.
Destroy all things. And when that long continuance has them bit,
You leysurely by lingering death consume them every whit.
And these that we call Elements do never stand at stay.
The enterchaunging course of them I will before ye lay.
Give heed thertoo. This endless world conteynes therein I say
Four substances of which all things are gendred. Of these four
The Earth and Water for their mass and weight are sunken lower.
The other cowple Air, and Fire the purer of the twain
Mount up, and naught can keep the^ down. And though there do remain
A space between each one of them: yet every thing is made
Of themsame four, and intoo them at length ageine do fade.
The earth resolving leysurely does melt too water sheere.
The water fined turns too air. The air eeke purged clear
From grossness, spyreth up aloft, and there becomes fire.
From thence in order contrary they back ageine retire.
Fire thickening passes intoo Air, and Air wexing gross,
Returns too water: Water eeke congealing intoo dross,
Becomes earth. No kind of thing keeps ay his shape and hew.
For nature loving ever change repayres one shape a new
Upon another* neither does there perrish aught (trust me)
In all the world, but altring takes new shape. For that which we
Do term by name of being borne, is for too gin too be
Another thing than that it was: And likewise for too dye,
Too cease too be the thing it was. And though that varyably
Things pass perchance from place too place: yet all from whence they came
Returning, do vnperrisshed continue still the same.
But as for in one shape, be sure that nothing long can last.
Even so the ages of the world from gold too Iron past.
Even so have places oftentimes exchaunged their estate.
For I have seen it sea which was substanciall ground alate,
Ageine where sea was, I have seen the same become dry land,
And shelles and scales of Seafish far have lain from any strond.
And in the tops of mountains high old Anchors have been ^ound.
Deep valleys have by watershotte been made of level ground,
And hills by force of gulling often have intoo sea been worn.
Hard gravel ground is sumtyme seen where marris was beforne,
And that that erst did suffer drowght, becomes standing lakes.
Here nature sends new springs out, and there the old in takes.
Full many rivers in the world through earthquakes heretoofore
Have either chaundgd their former course, or dryde and run no more.
So Lycus being swallowed up by gaping of the ground,
A greatway of fro thence is in another channel found.
Even so the river Erasine among the feeldes of Arge
Sinkes onewhyle, and another while ronnes great ageine at large*
Caycus also of the land of Mysia (as men say)
Misliking of his former head, ronnes now another way.
In Sicill also Amasene ronnes sumtyme full and hye,
And sumtyme stopping up his spring, he makes his channel dry.
Men drank the waters of the brook Anigrus heretoofore,
Which now is such that men abhor too towche them any more.
Which commes too pass, (unless we will discredit Poets quyght)
Because the Centaures vanquisshed by Hercules in fight
Did wash their wounds in that same brook. But does not Hypanis
That springs in the Scythian hills, which at his fountain is
Right pleasant, afterward becomme of brackish bitter taste?
Antissa, and Phenycian Tire, and Pharos in time past
Were compast all about with waves: but none of all these three
Is now an I Will. Ageine the town of Levvcas once was free
From sea, and in the ancient time was joined too the land.
But now enuirond round about with water it does stand.
Men say that Sicill also has been joined too Italy
Until the sea consumde the bounds beetweene, and did supply
The room with water. If ye go too seek for Helicee
And Burye which were Cities of Achaia, you shall see
Them hidden under water, and the shipmen yet do show
The walls and steeples of the towns drowned under as they row.
Not far from Pitthey Troyzen is a certain high ground found
All void of trees, which heeretoofore was plain and level ground,
But now a mountain for the wyndes a (woondrous thing too say)
Enclosed in the hollow caves of ground, and seeking way
Too pass therefro, in struggling long too get the open skye^
In vain, (because in all the cave there was no vent whereby
Too issue out,) did stretch the ground and make it swell on hye,
As does a bladder that is blown by mouth, or as the skin
Of horned Goat in bottlewyse when wynd is gotten in.
The swelling of the foresaid place remaynes at this day still,
And by continuance waxing hard is grown a pretye hill.
Of many things that come too mind by heersay, and by skill
Of good experience, I a few will utter too you mo.
What? does not water in his shapes change straungely too and fro:
The well of horned Hammon is at noonetyde passing cold.
At morn and even it wexeth warm. At midnyght none can hold
His hand therein for passing heat. The well of Athamane,
Is said too kindle wood what time the moon is in the wane.
The Cicons have a certain stream which being droonk does bring
Men's bowwelles intoo Marble hard: and whatsoever thing
Is towcht therewith, it turns too stone. And by your bounds behold
The rivers Crathe and Sybaris make yellow hear like gold
And Amber. There are also springs (which thing is far more strange)
Which not the body only, but the mind do also change.
Whoo has not hard of Salmacis that foul and filthye sink?
Or of the lake of Aethyop, which if a man do drink,
He either ronneth mad, or else with woondrous drowzinesse
Forgoeth quyght his memory. Whoo ever does repress
His thirst with drawght of Clitor well, hates wine, and does delyght
In only water: either for because there is a might
Contrary unto warming wine by nature in the well,
Or else because (for so the folk of Arcadye do tell)
Melampus Amythaons son (when he delivered had
King Prae^us daughters by his charms and herbs from being mad,)
Cast intoo that same water all the baggage wherewithal
He purdgd the madness of their mynds. And so it did befall,
That lothsomnesse of wine did in those waters ay remain.
Ageine in Lyncest contrary effect too this does reign.
For who ^o drinks too much thereof, he ^eeleth here and there
As if by quaffing wine no whyt alayd he droonken were.
There is a Lake in Arcadye which Pheney men did name
In ancient time, whoose dowtfulnesse deserves justly blame.
A night times take thou heed of it, for if thou taste the same
A nyghttymes, it will hurt. but if thou drink it in the day
It hurts not. Thus lakes and streams (as well perceive ye may)
Have diverse powers and diversely. Even so the time has been
That Delos which stands steadfast now, on waves was floting seen.
And Galyes have been sore afraid of frusshing by the Isles
Symplegads which toogither dashed upon the sea erewhyles,
But now do stand immovable against both wind and tide.
Mount Aetna with his burning ^ouens of brimstone shall not bide
Ay fyrye: neither was it so for ever erst. For whither
The earth a living creature be, and that too breathe out hither
And thither flame, great store of vents it have in sundry places,
And that it have the power too shift those vents in diverse caces,
Now damming these, now opening those, in moving too and fro:
Or that the whisking wynds restreynd within the earth bylowe,
Do beat the stones against the stones, and other kind of stuff
Of fyrye nature, which do fall on fire with every puff:
As Soon as those same wynds do cease, the caves shall straight be cold.
Or if it be a Rozen mowld that soon of fire takes hold,
Or brimstone mixed with clayish soil on fire does lightly fall:
Undowtedly as soon as that same soil consumed shall
No longer yield the fatty food too feed the fire withal,
And ravening nature shall forgo her woonted nourishment,
Then being able too abide no longer famishment,
For want of sustenance it shall cease his burning. I do find
By fame, that under Charlsis wayne in Pallene are a kind
Of people which by dyuing thryce three times in Triton lake
Becomme all fethred, and the shape of birds upon them take.
The Scythian witches also are reported for too do
The selfsame thing (but hardly I give credit thervntoo)
By smearing poison over all their bodies. But (and if
A man too matters tryde by proof may saufly give belief,)
We see how flesh by lying still a while and ketching heat
Does turn too little living beasts. And yet a further feate,
Go kill an Ox and burye him, (the thing by proof man sees)
And of his rotten flesh will breed the flower gathering Bees,
Which as their father did before, love feeldes exceedingly,
And unto woork in hope of gain their busye limbs apply.
The Hornet is engendered of a lustye buried Steed.
Go pull away the cleas from Crabbes that in the sea do breed,
And burye all the rest in mowld, and of the same will spring
A Scorpion which with writhen tail will threaten for too sting.
The Caterpillars of the feelde the which are wont too weaue
Hoar filmes upon the leaves of trees, their former nature leave,
(Which thing is known too husbandmen) and turn too Butterflyes.
The mud has in it certain seed whereof green frosshes rise.
And first it brings them footelesse forth. Then after, it does frame
Legs apt too swim: and furthermore of purpose that the same
May serve them for too leap a far, their hinder part is much
More longer than their forepart is. The Bearwhelp also which
The Bear has newly littred, is no whelp immediately.
But like an evil favored lump of flesh alive does lie.
The dam by licking shapeth out his members orderly
Of such a syse, as such a piece is able too conceive.
Or mark ye not the Bees of whom our honey we receive,
How that their young ones which do lie within the sixsquare wax
Are limblesse bodies at the first, and after as they wex
In process take both feet and wings? What man would think it true
That Lady Venus simple birds the Dooues of silver hew,
Or Iunos bird that in his tail bears stars, or Jove's stowt knight
The Earne, and every other foul of whatsoever flight,
Could all be hatched out of eggs, unless he did it know?
Sum folk do hold opinion when the backebone which doothe grow
In man, is rotten in the grave, the pith becommes a snake.
Howbeete of other things all these their first beginning take.
One bird there is that does renew itself and as it were
Beget it self continually. The Syrians name it there
A Phoenix. Neither corn nor herbs this Phoenix lives by.
But by the iewce of frankincence and gum of Amomye.
And when that of his life well full fyuehundred years are past,
Upon a Holmerree or upon a Date tree at the last
He makes him with his talants and his hardened bill a nest.
Which when that (...) with Casia sweet and Nardus soft has dressed,
And strowed it with Cynnamom and Myrrha of the best,
He rucketh down upon the same, and in the spyces dies.
Soon after, of the fathers corce men say there does arise
Another little Phoenix which as many years must live
As did his father. He (as soon as age does strength him give
Too bear the burden) from the tree the weyghty nest does lift,
And godlyly his cradle thence and fathers herce does shift.
And flying through the subtle air he gettes too Phoebus town,
And there before the temple door does lay his burden down.
But if that any noueltye worth woondring be in these,
Much rather may we wonder at the Hyen if we please.
Too see how interchaungeably it one while does remain
A female, and another while becomes male again.
The creature also which does live by only air and wynd,
All colors that it leans too does counterfeit by kind.
The Grapegod Bacchus, when he had subdewd the land of Inde,
Did find a spotted beast called Lynx, whoose urine (by report)
By towching of the open air congealeth in such sort,
As that it does becomme a stone. So Coral (which as long
As water hydes it is a shrub and soft) becomes strong
And hard as soon as it does towch the air. The day would end,
And Phoebus panting steedes should in the Ocean deep descend,
Before all alterations I in words could comprehend.
So see we all things chaungeable. One nation gathers strength:
Another wexeth weak: and both do make exchange at length.
So Troy which once was great and strong as well in wealth as men,
And able ten years space too spare such store of blood as then,
Now being bace has nothing left of all her wealth too show,
Save ruins of the ancient works which grass does ouergrowe,
And tumbes wherein their auncetours lie buried on a row.
Once Sparta was a famous town: Great Mycene florisht trim:
Both Athens and Amphions towers in honor once did swim.
A pelting plot is Sparta now: great Mycene lies on ground.
Of Theab the town of Oedipus what have we more than sound?
Of Athens king Pandions town what rests more than name?
Now also of the race of Troy is rising (so says fame)
The City Room, which at the bank of Tyber that does run
Down from the hill of Appennyne) already has begone
With great aduysement for too lay foundation of her state.
This town then changes by increase the form it had alate,
And of the universal world in time to comme shall hold
The souereintye so prophesies and lotts (men say) have told.
And as (I do remember me) what time that Troy decayed,
The prophet Helen Priams son these words ensewing said
Before Aenaeas dowting of his life in weeping plyght:
O Goddess son, believe me (if thou think I have foresyght
Of things too comme) Troy shalnot quyght decay while thou do live.
Both fire and sword shall unto thee thy passage freely give.
Thou must from hence: and Troy with thee convey away in haste,
Until that both thyself and Troy in foreign land be plaast
More freendly than thy native soil. Moreover I foresee,
A City by the offspring of the Trojans buylt shall be,
So great as never in the world the like was seen before
Nor is this present, neither shall be seen for evermore.
A number of most noble peers for many years before
Shall make it strong and puyssant: But he that shall it make
The souereine Lady of the world, by right descent shall take
His first beginning from thy son the little Iule. And when
The earth has had her time of him, the sky and welkin then
Shall have him up for evermore, and heaven shall be his end.
Thus far I (well remember me) did Helens words extend
Too good Aenaeas. And it is a pleasure unto me
The City of my countrymen increasing thus too see:
And that the Grecians victory becommes the Trojans weal.
But least forgetting quyght themselves our horses hap too steal
Beyond the mark: the heaven and all that under heaven is found,
Does alter shape. So does the ground and all that is in ground.
And we that of the world are part (considring how we be
Not only flesh, but also sowles, which may with passage free
Remove them intoo every kind of beast both tame and wyld)
Let live in saufty honestly with slaughter vndefyld,
The bodies which perchance may have the sprits of our brothers,
Our sisters, or our parents, or the spirits of sum others
Alyed too us either by sum freendshippe or sum kin,
Or at the least the souls of men abiding them within.
And let us not Thyestes like thus furnish up our boordes
With bloodye bowels. Oh how leawd example he auoordes?
How wickedly prepares he himself too murder man?
That with a cruel knyfe does cut the throat of Calf, and can
Unmouably give heering too the lowing of the dam?
Or stick the kid that wayleth like the little babe? or eat
The foul that he himself before had often fed with meat?
What wants of utter wickedness in woorking such a feate?
What may he after pass too do? well either let your steeres
Wear out themselves with woork, or else impute their death too years.
Against the wynd and weather cold let Wethers yield ye cotes.
And vdders full of batling milk receive ye of the Goats.
Away with sprindges, snares, and grinnes, away with Risp and net.
Away with guylefull feats: for fowls no lymetwiggs see ye set.
No feared feathers pitche ye up too keep the Reddeere in,
Ne with deceytfull bayted hook seek fishes for too win.
If awght do harm, destroy it. but destroyt and do no more.
Forbear the flesh: and feed your mouths with fitter food therefore.
Men say that Numa furnisshed with such philosophye
As this and like, returned too his native soil, and by
Entreatance was content of Room too take the souereintye.
Right happy in his wife which was a nymph, right happy in
His guydes which were the Muses nine, this Numa did begin
Too teach Religion. by the means whereof he shortly drew
That people unto peace whoo erst of naught but battle knew.
And when through age he ended had his reign and eeke his life,
Through Latium he was moorned for of man and child and wife
As well of high as low degree. His wife forsaking quyght
The City, in vale Aricine did hyde her out of sight,
Among the thickest groves* and there with syghes and playnts did let
The sacrifyse of Diane whom Orestes erst had fet
From Taurica in Chersonese, and in that place had set.
How often ah did the woodnymphes and the waternymphes persuade
Egeria for too cease her moan? what means of comfort made
They? Ah h^w often Theseus son her weeping thus bespake?
O Nymph, thy moorning moderate: thy sorrow sumwhat slake:
Not only thou have cause too heart thy fortune for too take.
Behold like happes of other folks, and this mischaunce of thine
Shall grieve thee less. would God examples (so they were not mine)
Might comfort thee. But mine perchance may comfort thee. If thou
In talk by hap haste heard of one Hippolytus ere now,
That through his fathers light belief, and stepdames craft was slain,
It will a wonder seem too thee, and I shall have much pain
Too make thee too believe the thing. But I am very he.
The daughter of Pasyphae in vain often tempting me
My father chamber too defyle, surmysde me too have sought
The thing that she with all her heart would feign I should have wrought.
And whither it were for fear I should her wickedness bewray,
Or else for spyght because I had so often said her nay,
She chardgd me with her own offense. My father by and by
Condemning me, did banish me his Realm without cause why.
And at my going like a fo did ban me bitterly.
Too Pitthey Troyzen outlawelike my chariot straight took I
My way lay hard upon the shore of Corinth. Soodeinly
The sea did rise, and like a mount the wave did swell on hye,
And seemed howger for too grow in drawing ever nigh,
And roaring clyued in the top. Up starts immediately
A horned bullock from amid the broken wave, and by
The breast did raise him in the air, And at his nosethrills and
His platter mouth did puff out part of sea upon the land.
My servants hearts were sore afraid. But my heart musing ay
Upon my wrongful banishment, did naught at all dismay.
My horses setting up their ears and snorting wexed shye,
And being greatly flayghted with the monster in their eye,
Turned down too sea: and on the rocks my wagon drew. In vain
I stryuing for too hold them back, laid hand upon the reyne
All whyght with ^ome, and haling back lay almost bolt vpryght.
And sure the feercenesse of the steedes had yielded too my might,
But that the whaele that ronneth ay about the Extree round,
Did break by dashing on a stub, and overthrew too ground.
Then from the Charyot I was snatched the brydles being cast
About my limbs. Ye might have seen my sinews sticking fast
Upon the stub: my gu^ts drawn out alive: my members, part
Still left upon the stump, and part forth harryed with the cart:
The crasshing of my broken bones: and with what passing pain
I breathed out my weery ghost. There did not whole remain
One piece of all my corce by which ye might discern as tho
What lump or part it was. For all was wound from top too to.
Now can thou nymph, or dare thou compare thy harms with mine?
Moreover I the lightlesse Realm behild with these same eyne,
And bathde my tattred body in the river Phlegeton.
And had not bright Apollos son his cunning shewde upon.
My body by his surgery, my life had quyght be gone.
Which after I by force of herbs and lee^hecraft had ageine
Receyud by Aes^ulapius means, though Pluto did disdeine,
Then Cynthia (least this gift of hers might work me greater spyght)
Thick clouds did round about me cast. And too thentent I might
Be saufe myself, and harmelessely appear too others sight:
She made me old. And for my face, she left it in such plyght,
That none can know me by my look. And long she dowted whither
Too give me Dele or Crete. At length refusing both toogither,
She plaast me here. And therwithall she bade me give up quyght
The name that of my horses in remembrance put me might.
For whereas erst Horses^aine.
Hippolytus has been thy name (quod she)
I will that Twyce man.
Virbie afterward thy name for ever be.
From that time forth within this wood I keep my residence,
As of the meaner Gods, a God of small magnificence
And here I hyde me underneath my souereine Ladies wing
Obeying humbly too her hest in every kind of thing.
But yet the harms of other folk could nothing help nor boot
Aegerias sorrows too assuage. Down at a mountains foot
She lying melted intoo tears, till Phoebus sister sheene
For pity of her great distress in which she had her seen,
Did turn her too a fountain clear, and melted quyght away
Her members intoo water thin that never should decay.
The strangeness of the thing did make the nymphs astonyed: and
The Lady of Amazons son amaazd thereat did stand,
As when the Tyrrhene Tilman saw in earing of his land
The fatal clod first stir alone without the help of hand,
And by and by forgoing quyght the earthly shape of clod,
Too take the seemly shape of man, and shortly like a God
Too tell of things as then too comme. The Tyrrhenes did him call
By name of Tages. He did teach the Tuskanes first of all
Too guess by searching bulks of beasts what after should befall.
Or like as did king Romulus when soodeinly he found
His lawnce on mountain Palatine fast rooted in the ground,
And bearing leaves, no longer now a weapon but a tree,
Which shadowed such as woondringly came thither for too see.
Or else as Cippus when he in the ronning brook had seen
His horns. For why he saw them, and supposing there had been
No credit too be given unto the glauncing image, he
Put often his fingers too his head, and felt it so too be.
And blaming now no more his eyes, incomming from the chase
With conquest of his foes, he stayed. And lifting up his face
And with his face, his horns too heaven, he said: what ever thing
Is by this wonder meant O Gods, If joyful news it bring
I pray ye let it joyful too my folk and country be:
But if it threaten evil, let the evil light on me.
In saying so, an altar green of clowwers he did frame,
And offered fuming frankincence in fire upon the same,
And powered boawles of wine thereon, and searched therwithall
The quiuering inwards of a sheep too know what should befall.
A Tyrrhene wizard having sought the bowelles, saw therein
Great chaunges and attempts of things then ready too begin,
Which were not plainly manifest. But when that he at last
His eyes from inwards of the beast on Cippus horns had cast,
Hayle king (he said.) For unto thee O Cippus, unto thee,
And too thy horns shall this same place and Room obedyent be.
Abridge delay: and make thou haste too enter at the gates
Which tarrye open for thee. So command the soothfast fates.
Thou shall be king as soon as thou have entered once the town,
And thou and thine for evermore shall wear the royal crown.
With that he stepping back his foot, did turn his frowning face
From Room ward, saying. Far, O far, ye Gods such handsel chase.
More right it were I all my life a bannisht man should be,
Than that the holy Capitol me reigning there should see
Thus much he said: and by and by toogither he did call
The people and the Senators, But yet he first of all
Did hyde his horns with Laurel leaves: and then without the wall*
He standing on a mount the which his men had made of soddes,
And having after ancient guyse made prayer too the Gods
Said: here is one that shall (unless ye bannish him your town
Immediately) be king of Room and wear a royal crown.
What man it is, I will by sign, but not by name bewray.
He has upon his brow two horns. The wizard here does say,
That if he enter Room, you shall like servants him obey.
He might have entered at your gates which open for him lay,
But I did stay him thence. And yet there is not unto me
A nearer friend in all the world. Howbeet forbid him ye
O Romans that he comme not once within your walls. Or if
He have deserved, bynd him fast in fetters like a thief.
Or in this fatal Tyrants death, of fear dispatch your mind.
Such noise as Pynetrees make what time the heady eastern wind
Does whiz amongst them, or as from the sea does far rebound:
Even such among the folk of Room that present was the sound.
Howbeet in that confused roar of fearful folk, did fall
Out one voice asking, whoo is he? And staring therewithal
Upon their foreheads, they did seek the foresaid horns. Again
(quod Cippus) lo, ye have the man for whom ye seek. And then
He pulld (against his peoples will) his garlond from his head,
And showed them the two fair horns that on his brows were spread.
At that the people dassheth down their looks and syghing, is
Right sorye (whoo would think it true?) too see that head of his
Most famous for his good deserts. Yet did they not forget
The honor of his personage, but willingly did set
The Laurel garlond on his head ageine. And by and by
The Senate said. Well Cippus, since until the time thou dye
Thou may not come within these walls, we give thee as much ground
In honor of thee, as a teeme of steeres can plough thee round,
Between the dawning of the day, and shetting in of night.
Moreover on the brazen gate at which this Cippus might
Have entered Room, a pair of horns were graude too represent
His woondrous shape, as of his deed an endless monument.
Ye Muses whoo too Poets are the present springs of grace,
Now show (for you know, neither are you dulld by time or space)
How Aesculapius in the I Will that is in Tyber deep
Among the sacred sayncts of Room had fortune for too creep.
A cruel plage did heertoofore infect the Latian air,
And peoples bodies pyning pale the murreine did appayre.
When tired with the burial of their friends, they did perceive
Themselves no help at man's hand nor by Physic too receive.
Then seeking help from heaven, they sent too Delphos (which does stand
Amid the world) for counsel too be had at Phoebus hand.
Beseeching him with helthfull aid too succor their distress,
And of the mighty City Room the mischeef too redress.
The quiuers which Apollo bright himself was wont too bear,
The Baytrees, and the place itself toogither shaken were.
And by and by the table from the furthest part of all
The Chau^cell spoke these words, which did their hearts with fear appal.
The thing ye Romans seek for here, ye should have sought more ny
Your country. Yea and nearer home go seek it now. Not I
Apollo, but Apollos son is he that must redress
Your sorrows. Take your journey with good handsell of success,
And fetch my son among you. When Apollos hest was told
Among the prudent Senators, they sercht what town did hold
His son, and unto Epidavvre a Gallye for him sent.
As Soon as that th'Ambassadour arrived there they went
Untoo the counsel and the Lords of Greekland: whom they pray
Too have the God the present plages of Romans for too stay,
And for themselves the Oracle of Phoebus forth they lay.
The Counsel were of sundry mynds and could not well agree.
Sum thought that succor in such need denied should not be.
And diverse did persuade too keep their help, and not too send
Their Gods away since they themselves might need them in the end.
While dowtfully they of and on debate this curious case,
The evening twylyght utterly the day away did chase,
And on the world the shadow of the earth had darkness brought.
That night the Lord Ambassador as sleep upon him wrought,
Did dream he saw before him stand the God whose help he sought,
In shape as in his chapel he was woonted for too stand,
With right hand stroking down his berd, and staff in toother hand,
And meekely saying: fear not, I will comme and leave my shryne.
This serpent which does wreath with knottes about this staff of mine
Mark well, and take good heed thereof: that when thou shall it see,
Thou may it know. For intoo it transformed will I be.
But bigger I will be. for I will seem of such a syse,
As may celestial bodies well too turn intoo suffice.
Straight with the voice, the God: and with the voice and God, away
Went sleep: and after sleep was gone ensewed cheerful day.
Next morning having clearly put the fyrye stars too flight,
The Lords not knowing what too do, assembled all foorthryght
Within the sumptuous temple of the God that was required,
And of his mind by heavenly sign sum knowledge they desired.
They scarce had done their prayers, when the God in shape of snake
With loftye crest of gold, began a hissing for too make,
Which was a warning given. And with his presence he did shake
The Altar, shryne, door, marble floor, and roof all laid with gold,
And vauncing up his breast he stayed right stately too behold
Amid the Church, and round about his fyrye eyes he rold.
The sight did fray the people. But the wyuelesse priest (whoose hear
Was trussed in a fair whyght Call) did know the God was there.
And said, behold tiz God, tiz God. As many as be here
Pray both with mouth and mind. O thou our glorious God, appear
Too our beehoofe, and help thy folk that keep thy hallowes right.
The people present woorshipped his Godhead there in sight,
Repeating dowble that the priest did say. the Romans eeke
Devoutly did with Godly voice and heart his ^auour seek.
The God by nodding did consent, and gave assured sign
By shaking of his golden crest that on his head did shine,
And hissed twyce with spirting tongue. Then trayld he down the fine
And glistring greeces of his church. And turning back his eyes,
He looked too his altarward and too his former shryne
And temple, as too take his leave and bid them all fare well
From thence right howge upon the ground (which sweet of flowers did smell
That people strewed in his way,) he passed stately down,
And bending intoo bowghts went through the heart of all the town,
Until that he the bowwing wharf beside the haven took.
Where s^aying, when he had (as seemd) dismissed with gentle look
His train of Chapleynes and the folk that waited on him thither,
He laid him in the Roman ship too sail away toogither.
The ship did feel the burden of his Godhed too the full,
And for the heavy weight of him did after pass more dull.
The Romans being glad of him, and having killd a steer
Upon the shore, vntyde their ropes and cables from the peer.
The lyghtsum wynd did drive the ship. The God auauncing hye,
And leaning with his neck upon the Gallyes side, did lie
And look upon the greenish waves, and cutting easly through
The Ionian sea with little gales of western wynd not rough,
The sixth day morning came upon the coast of Italy.
And passing forth by Iunos Church that mustreth too the eye
Upon the head of Lacine he was carried also by
The rock of Scylley. then he left the land of Calabrye
And rowing softly by the rock Zephyrion, he did draw
Too Celen cliffs the which upon the ryghtsyde have a flawe.
By Romeche and by Cavvlon, and by Narice thence he past,
And from the streyghtes of Sicily gate quyght and clear at last.
Then ran he by the Aeolian Isles and by the metal mine
Of Tempsa, and by Levvcosye, and temprate Pest where fine
And pleasant Roses flourish ay. From thence by Capreas
And Atheney the headlond of Minerua he did pass
Too Surrent, where with gentle vynes the hills be ouerclad,
And by the town of Hercules and Stabye ill bestad
And Naples borne too Idleness, and Cumes where Sybell had
Her temples, and the scalding bathes, and Linterne where grows store
Of masticke trees, and Vulturne which bears sand apace from shore,
And Sinuesse where as Adders are as whyght as any snow,
And Minturne of infected air because it stands so low,
And Caiete where Aeneas did his nurce in tumbe bestow,
And Formy where Antiphates the Lestrigon did keep,
And Trache enuyrond with a fen, and Circes mountain steep:
Too Ancon with the boystous shore. As Soon as that the ship
Arrived here, (for now the sea was rough,) the God let slip
His circles, and in bending bowghts and wallowing waves did glyde
Intoo his fathers temple which was builded there beside
Upon the shore. and when the sea was calm and pacifyde,
The foresaid God of Epidavvre, his fathers Church forsook,
(The lodging of his nearest friend which for a time he took,)
And with his crackling scales did in the sand a furrowe cut,
And taking hold upon the stern did in the Galy put
his head, and rested till he came past Camp and Lauine sands,
And entered Tybers mouth at which the City Ostia stands.
The folk of Room came hither all by heaps both men and wives
And eeke the Nuns that keep the fire of Vesta as their lives,
Too meet the God, and welcomd him with joyful noise. And as
The Gally rowed up the stream, great store of incence was
On altars burnt on both the banks, so that on either side
The fuming of the frankincence the very air did hyde,
And also slain in sacrifyse full many cattle did.
Anon he came too Room the head of all the world: and there
The serpent lifting up himself, began his head too bear
Right up along the maast, upon the top whereof on hye
He looked round about, a meet abiding place too spy
The Tyber does deuyde itself in twain, and does embrace
A little pretye Island (so the people term the place)
From either side whereof the banks are distant equal space.
Apollos Snake descending from the maast conveyed him thither,
And taking eft his heavenly shape, as one repayring hither
Too bring our City healthfulnesse, did end our sorrows quyght.
Although too be a God with us admitted were this wight.
Yet was he borne a forreiner. But Caesar has obteynd.
His Godhead in his native soil and City where he reignd.
Whom peerless both in peace and war, not more his wars up knit
With triumph, nor his great exployts atcheeued by his wit,
Nor yet the great renown that he obteynd so speedely,
Have turned too a blazing star, than did his progeny.
For of the acts of Caesar, none is greater than that he
Left such a son behynd him as Augustus is, too be
His heir. For are they things more hard too ouercomme thy Realm
Of Britain standing in the sea? or up the seuenfold stream
Of Nyle that bears Paperreede victorious ships too row?
Or too rebelliouse Numidye too give an overthrow?
Or Iuba king of Moors, and Pons (which proudely did it bear
Upon the name of Mythridate) too force by sword and spear
Too yield them subjects unto Room? or by his just desert
Too merit many triumphs, and of sum too have his part?
Than such an heir too leave beehynd, in whom the Gods do show
Exceeding favor unto men for that they do bestow
So great a prince upon the world? Now too thentent that he
Should not be borne of mortal seed, the oother was too be
Canonyzed for a God. Which thing when golden Venus see,
(She also saw how dreadful death was for the bishop then
Prepaard, and how conspiracye was wrought by wicked men)
She looked pale. And as the Gods came any in her way,
She said unto them one by one. Behold and see I pray,
With how exceeding eagerness they seek me too betray,
And with what woondrous craft they strive too take my life away,
I meene the thing that only now remains unto me
Of Iule the Trojans race. Must I then only ever be
Thus vexed with undeserved cares? How seems now the pain
Of Diomeds spear of Calydon too wound my hand again?
How seems it me that Troy ageine is lost through ill defense?
How seems my son Aenaeas like a bannisht man, from thence
Too wander far ageine, and on the sea too tossed be,
And war with Turnus for too make? or rather (truth too say)
With Juno? what meene I about harms passed many a day
Against mine offspring, thus too stand? This present fear and woe
Permit me not too think on things now past so long ago.
Ye see how wicked swoordes against my head are whetted. I
Beseech ye keep them from my throat, and set the traitors by
Their purpose. neither suffer you dame Vestaas fire too dye
By murdering of her bishop. Thus went Venus woefully
Complaining over all the heaven, and moovde the Gods thereby.
And for they could not break the strong decrees of destinye,
They showed signs most manifest of sorrow too ensew.
For battles feyghting in the clouds with crasshing armor flew.
And dreadful trumpets sownded in the air, and horns eeke blew,
As warning men before hand of the mischeef that did brew.
And Phoebus also looking dim did cast a drowzy light.
Upon the earth, which seemd likewise too be in sorye plyght.
From underneath amid the stars brands often seemd burning bright
It often rayned drops of blood. The morning star looked blew,
And was bespotted here and there with specks of rusty hew.
The moon had also spots of blood. The Screeche owl sent from hell
Did with her tune unfortunate in every corner yell.
Salt tears from Iuory images in sundry places fell.
And in the Chappells of the Gods was singing heard, and words
Of threatening. Not a sacrifyse one sign of good auoordes.
But great turmoyle too be at hand their har^strings do declare.
And when the beast is ripped up the inwards headless are.
About the Court, and every house, and Churches in the nyhgts
The dogs did howl, and every where appeered ghastly spryghts.
And with an earthquake shaken was the town. Yet could not all
These warnings of the Gods dispoynt the treason that should fall,
Nor ouercomme the destinies. The naked swoordes were brought
Intoo the temple. For no place in all the town was thought
So meet too woork the mischeef in, or for them too commit
The heinous murder, as the Court in which they used too sit
In counsel. Venus then with both her hands her stomach smit,
And was about too hyde him with the clowd in which she hid
Aenaeas, when she from the sword of Diomed did him rid.
Or Paris, when from Menelay she did him saufe convey.
But Jove her father staying her did thus unto her say.
Why daughter mine, will thou alone be stryuing too prevent
Unuanquishable destiny? In faith and if thou went
Thy self intoo the house in which the fatal susters three
Do dwell, thou should there of brass and steel substantial see
The registers of things so strong and massye made too be,
That ^au^ and everlasting, they do neither stand in fear
Of thunder, nor of lyghtning, nor of any ruin there.
The destnyes of thine offspring thou shall there find graven deep
In Adamant. I red them: and in mind I do them keep.
And forbycause thou shall not beiquyght ignorant of all,
I will declare what things I marked herafter too befall.
The man for whom thou make suit, has lived full his time
And having run his race on earth must now too heaven up clyme.
Where thou shall make a God of him ay honored for too be
With temples and with Altars on the earth. Moreover he
That is his heir and bears his name, shall allalone sustain
The burden laid upon his back, and shall our help obtain
His fathers murder too revenge. The town of Mutinye
Beseedged by his power, shall yield. The feelds of Pharsaly
Shall feel him, and Philippos in the Realm of Macedonne
Shall once ageine be staynd with blood. The great Pompeius son
Shall vanquished be by him upon the sea of Sicilye.
The Roman Capteynes wife the Queen of Egypt through her hye
Presumption trusting too her match too much, shall threate in vain
Too make her Canop over our high Capitol too reign.
What should I tell thee of the wyld and barbrous nations that
At both the Oceans dwelling be? The universal plat
Of all the earth inhabited, shall all be his. The sea
Shall unto him obedient be likewise. And when that he
Has stablisht peace in all the world, then shall he set his mind
Too civil matters, vpryght laws by justice for too find,
And by example of himself all others he shall bynd.
Then having care of time too comme, and of posteritye,
A holy wife shall bear too him a son that may supply
His careful charge and bear his name. And lastly in the end
He shall too heaven among the stars his auncetors ascend,
But not before his life by length too drooping age do tend.
and therefore from the murthred corce of Julius Caesar take
^is soul with speed, and of the same a burning cressed make,
That from our heavenly palace he may evermore look down
Upon our royal Capitol and Court within Room town.
He scarcely ended had these words, but Venus out of hand
Amid the Senate house of Room invisible did stand,
And from her Caesar's body took his new expulsed spryght
The which she not permitting too resolve too air quyght,
Did place it in the sky among the stars that glister bright
And as she bare it, she did feel it gather heavenly might,
And for too wexen fyrye. She no sooner let it fly,
But that a goodly shyning star it up a lost did stye
And drew a great way after it bright beams like burning hear.
Whoo looking on his sons good deeds confessed that they were
Far greater than his own, and glad he was too see that he
Excelled him. Although his son in no wise would agree
Too have his deeds preferred before his fathers: yet does fame,
(Whoo ay is free, and bound too no command) withstand the same
And stryuing in that one behalf against his hest and will,
Proceeds too prefer his deeds before his fathers still.
Even so too Agamemnons great renown gives Atreus place
Even so Achilles deeds, the deeds of Peleus do abace.
Even so beyond Aegaeus far does Theseyes prowess go.
And (that I may examples use full matching these) even so
Is Saturn less in fame than Jove. Jove rules the heavenly spheres,
And all the tr^ple shaped world. And our Augustus bears
Dominion over all the earth. They both are fathers: They
Are rulers both. Ye Gods too whom both fire and sword gave way,
What time ye with Aenaeas came from Troy: ye Gods that were
Of mortal men canonyzed: Thou Qui^in whoo did reere
The walls of Room: and Mars whoo wart the valcant Quirins sire
And Vesta of the household Gods of Caesar with thy fire
Most holy: and thou Phoebus whoo with Vesta also art
Of household: and thou Jupiter whoo in the highest part
Of mountain Tarpey haste thy Church: and all ye Gods that may
With conscience sauf by Poets be appealed too: I pray
Let that same day be slow too comme and after I am dead,
In which Augustus (whoo as now of all the world is head)
Quyght giving up the care thereof ascend too heaven for ay
There (absent hence,) to favor such as unto him shall pray.
Now have I brought a woork too end which neither Jove's feerce wrath,
Nor sword, nor fire, nor freating age with all the force it has
Are able too abolish quyght. Let comme that fatal hour
Which (saving of this brittle flesh) has over me no power,
And at his pleasure make an end of mine uncertain time.
Yet shall the better part of me assured be too clyme
Aloft above the starry sky. And all the world shall never
Be able for too quench my name. For look how far so ever
The Roman Empire by the right of conquest shall extend,
So far shall all folk read this woork. And time without all end
(If Poets as by prophecy about the truth may ame)
My life shall everlastingly be lengthened still by fame.
Finis Libri decimi quinti. Laus and honor soli Deo.
IMPRINTED AT LONdon by Willyam Seres dwelling at the west end of Paul's
church, at the sign of the Hedgehogge.


