The fable of Ovid treting of Narcissus, translated out of Latin into Englysh
Mytre, with a moral there unto, very pleasante to read.

M.D.LX.

God resysteth the proud in every place
But unto the humble he gives his grace.
Therefore trust not to riches beuti nor strength
All these be vain, and shall consume at length.
Imprynted at London by Thomas Hackette, and are to be sold at his shop in
Cannynge street, over against the three Cranes.



The prenter to the Book.
GO Little Book do thy Endeavor
to all estates, that vice does refuse,
In the may be learned how to perceuer
sin to abhor virtue to use.
The wise the aucthour will excuse
by cause he inuayeth, against sin and pride,
Who causes many a one, parilously to slide.
In the may the wise learn virtue in deed
In the may the strong manne, of him self know
In the may the rich manne, of him self reed
how to gather his riches, or them to bestow
with most worthy matter in the does flow
who seeks in the for profyt and gain,
Of excellent matter sone shall attain.
The Argument of the fable.
LIreope had a Son by Cephicious named Narcissius, whose contynuaunce of life
Tyricias a prophet, affyrmyd to be long, if the knowledge of him self,
procuryd not the contrary, whose sentence here now Ecco the calling Impe,
from whom Juno had berefte the right use of speech, so loved this Narcyssus,
that through the thought and care that she sustained, for the getting his
good will that ever despised her, she consumed the relykes, of which consumed
Carcas were turned into Stones. The great dysdayne of Narcyssus, herein
Ramusia Straungely revenged, for he heated through hu^tinge by the drinking of
a well, supposing to quence his thruste espied therein the shadow, of his
face, wherewyth he was so rauyshed that having no power to leave his blind
desire for the attaynyng of an impose belytye, there he starued. For the
preperacion, whose buryall the Nymphs, had ordyned souch furnituer as there
unto apperteyned and had. Retornyd to the Solemn, Erthynge and buryall of
such a carcass, they found in sted of the ded Corpis a yelow flower which
with us bears the name of a daffadylly.

The end of the Argument.
LIreope whom once Ciphicious, did embrace,
and raushe i^ his crokid floudes where she was shut from gracs
Did travel and bring forth, when time of berth befell
a child even then who^ love had lyked well,
And him Narcissus named of whom the lot to learn,
if he should number many years, and perfect age discern
The reder of his fate Tiricious yea did say
If that the knowledge of him self, his life did not decay,
Full long a vain pronounce, this seemed till his death,
By furye quaynte did make it good, and unseen lose of brethe
For twentye years and one, Narcissus death escaped
what time no child was seen so fair, nor young man better shapyd,
A number both of men and maids, did him desire,
But bewtye bente with proud dysdayne, had set him so on fire
That nether those whom youth in years, had made his make
Nor pleasant damsels fresh of heue, could with him pleasure take
This man the fearful hearts, inforcynge to his nets
The caulyng nimphe one day, beheld that nether ever lettes
To talk to those that spoke, nor yet has power of speech
Before by Ecco this I mean, the dobbeler of skreeche
A body and no voice, was Ecco yet but how
The blabbe had then none other use of speech, then she has now
The later end to give of every sense or clause,
whereof the wife of Jupiter, was first and chyfe the cause
For that when she did seek, the syllye Imphes to take
that often she knew within the hills, had lodged with her make
This Ecco with a tale, the gods kept so long
that well the Imphes might her escape, but when she saw this wrong
This tongue quod she where with, so often thou dydeste dysceaue
the gods Juno lyttyll use of speech, shall erste receive
And so her thretininges prove, yet Ecco endyth speech
with dobling sound the words she hears, and sends a gain with screch
Thus when Cyphicious Son, the desartes walkinge fast
with wandrynge pace she had espied, her love and on him cast
With stealyng steps, she follows fast her hot desire
and still the nerer that she comes, the hotter is her fire
None other wise then as the nerer fire does lie
to brimstone matters mete to borne to flayme does more apply,
How often oh would she feign, with plesaunte words him glad
and faune on him with prayers sweet, but nature it forbad,
And lets her to begin, but that she does permytte
full priest is Ecco to perform according to her wit,
In lystynge for to hear, some sound his mouth escape
whereto her words she might apply, and him an answer shape.
By chance Narcissus, led from company alone
did say is any here to whom, she answers her a none,
He musyth and amasyd, does look on every side
and caulyng loud come nere he says, whom she byds yeke abide,
Again he looks about, and seeing none that came,
whystlyst thou me quod he, who hard her answer even the same
He stays and not knowing, whose this sound should be
come hither let us mete he said, and let us mete quod she
Then with so good a will, as though she never hard
a sound that lyked her half so well, to answer afterward
And to perform her words, the woods she soon forsook
and to embrace that she desired, about the neck him took
He flies fast away, her foulded arms that sprede
about his neck he cast away, and ever as he flede
Death would I choose, ere thou have power of me quod he
whom she none other answer made, but thou have power of me
and after that with leaves, she hid her shamefast face
within the woods in hollow caves, makes her dwelling place,
Yet love does no whyt more decrese, but with her smarte
agmentith still and watchynge cares, consumyth her wretched heart,
By lenenes eke her skyne is dried, and to ear
her blood consumes, so has she naught, but voice and bones to spare,
Whereof is nothing left, but voice for all her bones
they say as to her lykeste shape, were turned into stones,
And sense the woods has been, her home her self to hyde
from every hill and naught, but sound in her does none abide,
Thus here they other nymphs, of wooddes and waters borne
had he dysceaued, and youngmen yeke, a number had in skorne,
At last with hands lift up, soon to the gods did plain
that so his hap might be, to love and not be loved again,
Whereto it seemed well, Ramusya gave ear
and sought to grant this just request, it after did appear
A spring there was so fair, that stremes like silver had
which nether shepardes hap to find, nor gotes that upward gad
Upon the rocky hyls, nor other kind of best,
with flashyng feet to foul the same, or troble at the least,
Wherein them selves to bathe, no birds had made repare,
nor leffe had fallen from any tree, the water to appear,
About the which the ground had made some herbs to grow
and eke the trees had kept the sun, from coming down so low
Narcyssus theare through heat, and weary hunters game
glad to take rest did lie him down, and fast beheld the same,
And as he thought to drink, his fervent thirst to slake
A dryer far desire him took, by lokyng in the lake
For seeing as he drank, the image of his grace
therewyth he rapt, fell straight in love, with shadow of his face
And museth at him self, with which astonyed cheer,
as image made of marble white, his countenance did apeare,
Like stars he seyth his eyes, and bacchus fyngeres sweet
he thought he had on goulden hears, for Phoebus not unmeet
A neck like yuery white, a mouth with sauoure good
a face with skin as white as snow, well coleryd with blood
All which he wonders at, and that he lyketh well
is even him self that wonder makes, with small advice to dwell
He sees that he does ask, again does him desire
together he does burn him self, and kyndel eke the fire
The well that him dysceaued, how often kyst he in vain
how often there in his arms he dround, in hope for to attain
The neck, that he desired so much to embrace,
and yet himself he could not catch, in that unhappy place
Not knowing what he sees, therewith he is in love
and those same eyes that, error blindes, to error does him move
Ah fool, why do thou seek, the shape that will not bide
nor being has, for turn thy face, away and it will slide
The shadow of thy self, it is that thou do see
and has no substance of it self, but comes and bydes with thee
If thou canste go away, with thee it will depart
yet nether care for meat or sleep, could make him thus astarte
But in that shadow place, beside the well he lies
where he beheld his feigned shape, with discontented eyes
And lifting up those eyes, that his, destruction made
unto the trees that stood about, he raught his arms and said
Has ever love, oh woods delte crueller with man
you know that hyding place, has been to lovers now and than
Now can you call to mind, you that such worlds have last
that ever any pyned so, by love in ages paste.
I see and like it well, but that I like and see
yet find I not such error lo, this love does bring to me
And to increase my grefe, no say nor yrkesome way
no hills nor valeys, with closyd, gates, does say our meting nay
A little water here, does sever us in twain,
he seeks I see, that I desire, to be embraced as feign,
For look how often my lips, I move to kiss the lake
so often he shows his mouth, content, full well the same to take
To touch thee, might full well, a man would think be dime
it is the least of other things, that lovers ought to shine
What so thou be come forth, why doste thou me disseyue
why flyest thou him, that the somuche, desires to receive
My beauty and mine age, truly me thynkes I se
it is not that thou doste mislyke, for nymphs have loved me
Thou promyste to me a hope, I wot not how
with friendly cheer, and to mine arms the same thou do vnbowe
Thou smylest when I laughe, and eke thy trekeling tears
when I do weep I often espy, with sines thy countenance steares
By moving of thy lyppes, and as I ges I learn
thou speak words, the sense whereof, mine ears can not deserne
Even this I am I se, my proper shape I know
with loving of my self, I borne I moan, and bear the glove
What shall I do, and if I ask what shall I crave
abundance brings me want, with me, it is that I would crave
Oh would to God I might, depart my body fro
in him loves this that wyshe is strange, his lyking to for go
But now my strength, through pain is fled, and my years
full sone or like to end, thus death away my youth it bears
Yet death that ends my wooes, to me it is not so sure
He whom I love right feign, I would might live alenger hour
Now to one quod he, together let us dye
In evil estate and to his shape, returns by and by
And with his gusshynge tearys, so up the water starte
his shape that there by darkened was, which when he saw depart
Now whether doste thou go, abide he cried fast
forsake not him so cruelly, his love that on the cast
Though thee I may not touch, my sorrows to assuage
yet may I look, relefe to give unto my wretrhed rage
And whylest he thus torments, he barred all his cheste
before the well with stonye fystes, and beats his naked breast
With a carnacion hue, by strockes thereon did leave
none other wise then apples white, with ruddy sides receive.
Or as the growyng grapes, on sundry clusters strepe
a purpyll coler as we se, or ever they be ripe,
Which as he did espy, within the water clear
no longer could he duere the pain, he saw he suffered there.
But as by fire, to wax ameltyng does ensue
and as by hete the rising sun, consumes the morning due,
So feblyd by love, to waste he does begin
at lenght and quyte consumes, by heat of hydyng fire within,
And nether has he now, hear of red and white
no lyuelynes nor lusty strength, that erst did eyes delight
Nor yet the corpys remaynes, that Ecco once had loved
which tho with angry mind she vewed, to sorrow she was moved,
And look how often alas, out of his mouth did pass
so often again with boundyng words, she cried alas alas,
And when that he his sides, with rechles hands did stryke
she also then was hard to make, a sound lamenting like
Thus lokyng in the well, the last he spoke was this
alas thou ladde to much in vain, beloved of me a mys,
Which self same words again, this Ecco straight did yell
and as Narcissus took his leave, she bad him eke fair well
His head that him abused, under the grass he thraste
and death shut up those eyes, that on there master mused fast
And when he was received, into that hyllye place
he yeke within the ogly stype, beheld his wretched face
The wood and wattrye nymphs, that all his susterne were
bewayles his lot as is there wont, with cuttynge of their hear
Whose waylinge Eccoes sound did mournyng like declare
for grave pomp, a bayre with lyghtes and fire they did prepare
Then body was there none, but growing on the ground
a yelowe flower with lylly leaves, in sted thereof they found.
FINIS. FABVLE.
The moralization of the Fable. in Ovid of Narcissus.
A Tale wherein some wisdom may be found
May be allowed, of such as lies refuse,
Hereon I mean not, that my wit can ground
A matter fytte for all men to use,
The praise hereof I utterly refuse,
And humbly them beseech to read the same,
Me to excuse or by their Judgment blame.
For neither I presume, by youthful years, The vmbelues of ye author.

To claim the skyl that elder folks, do want,
Nor undertake that wyser often fears,
To venture on my spites, then would pante
Right well I know, my wits be all to skante
But I by your correction, mean to try,
If that my head to reason can apply.
I mean to show, according to my wit
That Ouyd by this tale no follye mente To such as inbrase not knolege.

But sought to show, the doings far vnfytte
Of soundrye folk, whom natuer gifts has lent,
In diverse wise to use, with good in tente
And how the bownty torneth to their pain
That lack the knowledge, of so good a gain
Which Ovid now this Poet sure divine
Does color in so wonderful a sort Profitable counsel

That such as twyse, refuse to read a line
With good advice, to make there wit resort
To reasons schole, their Lessons to report
Shall never gather Ouids meaning strange
That wisdom hydeth, with some pleasant change.
His tales do Join, in such a godly wise,
That one does hang upon another end,
As who should say, a man should not despise,
To look before which way his work will bends
And after how he may the same amend
Thus Ovid bydes his readers for to know
The things above as well as those below
The fable that he tretyd of before
Is how that Juno fell in argument
With Jupiter, which after leasuer more
To write at lardge, then time conueniente
For souche a cause have in defferente
But to be short, Tericious was their judge
Whose sentence Juno seemed for to grudge
For she because he said not as she would
Bereft him of his eyes and made him blind
As one unfit to view the world that could
No better Judge unto a woman's mind
Redres where of none Jupiter cold find
But with some honor to releue his woo
Each thing to come he made him surely know.
The for meste proof, where of in this same tale
Lireope, the nymphe receued now
That did demand an answer not to fail
If that her Child, to home her lykinge vow
Even at the first was given him to allow
should not parfite years, and many grow
Yea yea quod, he him self if he not know.
Here as I said, appearith that the end
Desserne the truth of every thing.
Of every tale another does begin
Here likewise may we se the poette, bend
To bid us look his meaning here with in
Supposinge that, there wits be very thin
That will be hold the skabard of the blade
And not the knife wherefore the shethe was made.
For if that Ovids meaning was to wryghte
But how Narcissus, drinkinge of a well
With shade of him self did so delyghte
That there til death he thought to starve and dwell
Both him a fool, a ly in verse to tell
The wise might think, and those that read the same
To be unwise and merit greatier blame.
The torninge of Lycaon to a, God punishes for sin.
beast
Does well declare that to the wickid sort
Full heneous plagis preparid be at least
Of god that to there doings will resort
With Justice hand at home they cannot sport
But if they seek for to withstand his will
They find to work them selves a way to spill.
By saying eke, of Pirha, God preserves the Just.
and her make
Dengalyon from the consuming floude
What else is mente but god a boue does take
An order ever to presarue the good
From peril still, in timis that they be wood
That few or none but souche as god does choose
Can happy live, or them from harm excuse.
And Daphus chaunginge to the laurer grene A praise of verginite.

whose leaves in winter never lost there hue
Does well to us betokin as I wene
That souche as to virgynitie be true
Mortal glory ever shall ensue
And as the laurer lines in winters rage
So shall there praise though death devour there age.
Of Pheton eke Appolles wretched son
That would presume his fathers carte to gyde
Of courage more, A good warning to young people.
then counsel well begone
what may be thought, but souche as will a bide
with small advice not from there will to slide
And do refuse there fathers council suer
There helpeles harmis, unto them selves procuer.
What nedyth me examples to rehearse
Since I do take an other thing in hand
These show that poetties color under verse
Souch wisdom as they can not understand
The head wisdom of the poets.
That lyghtelye list to look on lernynges land
But such as with aduyce, will vewe the same
Shall lessons find thereby, there lives to frame
And now to turn unto the tale I mean
To treat upon when that the dome was read,
Of this Cephicious son, by one that clean
Had lost the sight of all that nature bread
A vain pronounce, it seemed that he sprede
Whose sentence him self, did not know
To perfyght age his life he shall bestow.
Tericias hear whom may we like unto
Happy ar they that do so.
Even such a man, as has no mind to gain
With ryghteus lyppes, that seek no wrong to do
That yield to riches, for no manner of pain
Ne yet the truth in any thing will layne
Which shall as he was blind for Justice sake
Be quyte berefte of all that he can make.
For he that will not Iunose servant be
I mean not now the pleasyng of the stout
And mighty dames that would have all agree
Truth is often shente.
Unto their fancees that they go about
But he I say, and proof does put no doubt
That will not seek the rich foulke to please
Through hate and wrong, has often little ease.
Yet when they lack this use of worldely syghte
That lyttel have they left on earth to see
And that by wrong another has their right
Because to will, there wits would not agree
By loss hereof they got a greater fee
For god of good does give the knowledge more
Then all the gain of earth could the restore.
For where their eyes be cast from worldely wealth
And have respect to things that be a boue
In much more perfect wise the certain health
Shall they dyscerne, The cars of the world leteth virtue.
then souche as have a love
To vain desyers that rise for to remove
And forther be they a byll to a vow
Of hydden things then worldly folk alawe.
But as Teryssus Judgment seemed vain
In the foreredyng of Narcyssus fate The folish people regard no virtue nor good
counsel.

So folyshe folk, from credyt will refrain
Of wysdomes voice, that seldom comes to late
They only mark, the present erthely state
Without regard of any thing at all
What in this life or after may befaule
And yeke again regard how Ovid hear
Of prophecies does show the doughtefulnes Profecies be doughtful to medell
with all.

Whose meaning never plainly does appear
In doughtefull words that has a hid pretense
whereon we guess, but great experience
Full often we find and proving of the same
Does well declare our judgments be by ame
Wherefore we nether ought to make to light we must refer those things ye
passes our knowledge.

By the depining of a skylfull voice
Nor yet presume so fare above our might
As of the certain skanning to rejoice
Of hedden things that reche beyond our choice
For who can surely say it will be so
Or dyssaloue the thing they do not know
Tericyas voice did Pentheus despise
In countynge faulse the things that he foresawe
Yet of his death they guess did seem to wise
Which he for told by his deuininge law
And Pirechus judgment yeke appeared vain
That would presume of dowtfull speech to make
A certain sense the meaning to mystake.
People to take on them yt yt passes there knowledge.
So that herby right well we may regard
what hap they have that work by doughteful guess
To skorninge folk, and yeke the euile reward
That often faulyth the poet does express
Thus two extremes he teachis to redress
And by Narcissus warnith us to be ware
Of the mishap, that pride does still repare
For well Narcissus may betoken here
Souche one as has that other members want
Pride marreth al.
As strength and power a cause of weakers fear
A passing wit above the ingnoraunte
Of beughtie ffayer in riches nothing skante
And to conclude from chief of natuers pack
That has the choice that other thousands lack.
Who being decked with so goodlye gifts
shall have a number that will much requier
Of the acquayntaunce, for the diverse dreftes
Which fancy craves to content desire
But if he have the same a busyd fire
That this Cephicious son did her receive
Exampile take him self he shall desceaue.
A proud heart comes to confucio^.
The man that thinks him self to have no make
Each offered frendeship, streighte, will quite refuse
For so narcissus carid not to take
The feloweship of souch as sought to choose
His company a boue the rest to use
But as by pride he grwe in great disdain
So for reward his end was full of pain.
Whose strength is souche that it can much prevail
Yet cannot say, I am the most of right
Whose heapis of gold, be of foul high a veil
That rich is and bewty be vain.
Yet need not brage, to be the ritchest wight
Whose bewghtie yeke full pleasant is in syghte
Yet has no cause to say a boue the rest
I all dyspice for natuer made me best.
No Cretuer has ever yet been soche
That can justly say, I most excel
God thought here of the pride was very much A notabill exsa^pell for proud
people.

When Lucyfer he cast from heaven to hell
In showynge where presuminge folkys should dwell
None ought to trust to riches or to strength
To power or bewtye, all consumith at length.
The Rich, and proud, To the rich or dysdainfull man.
dysdaynefull welthye man
That Lazarus forbad, the crommes to eat
Which from his board should fall might after ban
His mouche a boundaunce and his dentye meat
Which was the cause of all his torment great
Yet if he could have used well his gain
He lyttel should have had of all his pain.
Now Cressus yeke, Mark this
the welthy king of Lide
Whose soms of goulde were passinge to be toulde
Did se at last his riches would not bide
As Solon said his end that did be houlde
Wherefore we prove, who potteth there trust in gold
Or slypper welthe ar seen in care to dwell
And lose at last, the good they like so well.
Of strength again, No man ought to trust in his own strength.
who will him self auaunce
shall se that conqueste goes not all by might
This David made the Phelystians, to grant
That slew there giaunte Golyas there kinghte
Against the which noman the thought to wyghte
For all his pride yet saw they at the last
Him over throw and ded by Dauydes cast.
Now Sampsons strength that caused all this woo A notabell exsampell for the
hy minded.

I over pas and Miloes might so strange
That could induer a forlonge well to go
And on his back an ox to bear the raung*
For all his might to weke estate did change
When that his strength did bring his latter our
To show the end of might and mortal power
Senacharyb the strong assyryan king
Did put his whole affyaunce in his power
God is ye geuer of vyctorye.
Yet Ezechias, prayers good did bring
His sore destruction in a soden ower
By night the Angel, did his host deuower
With death where by Senacharib, might know
That God full soon, his might could make full low.
Darius flighte, which Ferres over throw
many profitable exsamples.
And Terus slaughter, by the Sicicthian Queen
Be fyttexamples, for to let us know,
That who to power, will put their trust and wene
By only might to vanquyshe, all besene
Of this their purpose oftentimes to feel
When fortune list to turn her happy whele.
Pride is the destroyer of many good gifts.
That bewties babes, must bide the hard prepare
That often is sent, to bate their Iolye chere
Emonge the rest, does Absalon declare
When not wythstanding, all his beauty clear
And eke his fair and yelowe golden hear
Between the bows did hang, till that his foes
With deaths despatche, did ryd him of his wooes.
The transitory things of this world are not to be trustyd.
The sorrows great, of Menelawes wife
Whose beauty fair, so far to se was sought
The wretched end, of Cleopatres life
Whose rich array, was all to derely bought
Does plainly show, that all was vain and naught
Thus riches strength and power, confess we must
With beauty eke, to slypper be to trust.
Again we se, each mortal thing decay
A damage by dyspleasure, has the rich
And bewties blomis, full sone are blown away
The strong by syckenes, feles a feeble stitche
From well to woe, thus by promise pytche
Our time is toste, with such vnsuerties change
As to behold, advice may think full strange.
Yet some there be so pouffed up with pride
And as Narcissus, Disdayn fullnes and orabell vice.
drouned in dysdayne
That light regard they have what will abide
So far un ware of there in suing pain
Of other folk vnreakinge they remain
As tho they thought, who worthy were to be
A mate fulmete, and fellow fite for me.
To whom it happes as to Cephicious son
It chanced her which Ecco did dyspise
The caulinge nimphe which ernist love begone
In hasty sort did end in woeful wise
Not much unlike the vain desyers that rise
By fruteles thoughts to get some folyshe thing
Which harm, or else repentance far will bring.
But by this fable some there be suppose
That Ouyd mente to show the fauinge sort A flaterar is not to be trusted.

Of flattringe folk whose usage is to gloss
With prayers sweet, the men of gretiest, port
And most of welthe to whom the still resort
In hope to get, refusing naught to lie
The end of speech as Ecco they apply.
For if the men by whom they wene to gain No man shall learn the truth of a
flaterar.

shall say me thinks that this is very well
Even very well they answer straight again
As tho advice had bid them so to tell
When very naught they same might, reason spell
The end of every fortunes darlinges voice
Thus they repete with out a forther choice.
Now if a tiraunte say it shall be so
None other thing but so they have to speak
Although it turn a thousand unto woo The condycyons of a flaterar.

The strong may soupe to wrack may goo the weke
So they the Rich, may please they nothing rack
The same, they say, they answer after ward
As though it twice were worthy to be herd.
And lest I seem to ouerskippe the sense
Bocas a writer of this same
Of any wryghter worthy to be known
Whereby the poettes wise and hid pretense
With other wits by travel great, great has sown
To show what good of Ouides seed, is grown
Through my defaute may skanned be a mysse
Upon this fable, Bocase wryghtethe this.
By Ecco which does, spoken words repleate
And else is dome, I feign do understand
That mortaule folk does love with feruente heat
And follows fast, in every plase and land
As things whereon, her being all does stand
And yet the same a number will forsake
And light esteem for folyshe pleasures sake.
Within whose well of shininge, gaye delyghtes
That we may like unto a water could
That slydynge is some time as Bocase, wryghtes
Them selves that is, there glory, they be hold
And are so sure in lust and pleasure could
That rapte therewith not abyll to astarte
From thense they be or from there madness part.
And there at Last, they dye which shame forsook
Fame other good or evil.
That them somoche desired to embrace
Whose life so lost, for little praise did look
Of vertuse voice, that bydes in every place
And byddeth fame to every Cost to chase
There praises great that cause well deserve
Not with there Corpis to let, there name to starve.
But such as, will make light the love, of fame
For Lycorous lust, that lyketh them so well
By good desarties, and rekes for no good name
How much in wit, or beughtie they excel
How strong or rich so ever they shall dwell
There deinty joys, there body name and all
They lose at ones, which death there life, does call.
And if pare happes, that natuer did bestow
More good of them in life then of the rest
And that there by there some remembrance grow
Of natuers bountye, given them for the best
Even like a fadinge flower, this flytinge geste
I may recimbell, which is fresh to day
And yet or night is wetherid clean away.
What Bocas mente thus somewhat have I toulde
The skanninge to of others ges herein Of youthful time ill spent.

I have and will at last at large unfold
But where I left, now first I will begin
To show how much the hastye sort shall win
By there dysdayne, the which Narcissus here
Does represente to me as does appear.
For first who was his bewtye and his shape
There with and notes of others his dysdayne
And then shall mark of his end and his myshape
Who blinded was with his to good a gain
As in a glass shall se the picture plain
Of a full proud and over weninge wyghte
That natures gifts dysdayne to use arighte.
And sithe I have declared here before
What little trust, of right we ought to have
To that, which we receue, for to restore
To him that first our pleasynge treasures gave
To suer to Joy but when he list to crave
The good he sent the same he takyth a way
Or we be ware, our hap so soon decay.
Now will I show that erste I said I would
Of this same talk in some Comparing sort
What I conceue, the which not as I should
If I declare, and that my wits resort
Without the reche of wisdoms sober port
Now of the learned I do crave
And of my Iudgmente here the sense you have
I feign a man, to have a godly wit
The self same years that this Narcissus hade
With like dysdayne of others far vnfytt
And then immagin one that would be glade
With counsel good to cause him for to know
To make his wit both sober wise and sade
That prides reward is to be made full low
And thissame one I, Ecco presuppose
By whom I guess that good advice is mente
Which is full loathe a godly wit to lose
And sorye much to se the same ylspente
She follows him therefore for this intent
To make him mark and well regard the end
Of every thing that he does once intend.
Her nature is not to be full of talk
To such as speak with out ad vise mente.
Not to device, but to advice full well
wordyes ye spring from youthefull thoughts at walk
Not greinge still to reasons sober spelle
The endinge sense whereof she aye does yel
As who should say we ought to regard the cause
And end of speech often spoke with little, pause.
For sithe each wordys and doing ought of right
To be refarred unto some reasons end
With out respect, whereof lyttel might
Our doings rest which to no porpose bend
To sharpiste wits, advice, her love douth send
As fyttiste foulkes, to gain her great good will
If they receive the good, she profers still.
Now how she waves this man, that has this wit
I need not tell, sith Ouyd does declare
But him she follows as she thinks it fit
Tell that she se him, void, of wanton care
To shape an answer then she does prepare
To every cencethat he shall speak or sound
To cause him mark thereof the certain ground.
The end of every sense she repetis
Where by for what he spoke he may deserne To such as give them selves over
to pleasur of vanites

But he that on the veins of pleasuer beatis
His wanton ship without astedye starne
Of good advice shall nothing rack to learn
But her refuse when she would him inbrace
Affection so a way does reasone chase.
So this same man whom nature wit has lent
A virtue great to them that use it well
Advice, Wit well used most needs be profitabell.
perhaps can be content
To hear and lysten what her words can spell
But when he once espies she thinks to dwell
Contenually with him to be his make
Here offrid frendeshipe straight he does forsake.
To live by loss his good he does refuse
Unbrydelyd will oh whether will thou train
This wandering wit that has no power to choose
The reddye way to souche a perfect gain
But as the blind to passage right, does pain
Him self no more then when he goith amiss
To win thy woys asmouche thy travail is.
But why accause I will that may be charmed
By good advice if thou haddeste not dysdayne Pride is a vain thing.

Thy pride, thy pride, has worste of all the harmed
That poufes the up upon presumcions vain
Which makes those, continue, that would be feign
Of thy good will to make thy wits full wise
Whose love thou haste, the proffet to despise.
This wit refusing good advice love
And wandringe fast to wills uncertain reach To such as dysdaynes good
counsayl.

Does let her starne, that sought a way to move
Then happy end that proof does playnelye teach
Is full prepared, dysdaynefull folk to appeache
Whose pride is souche as puttes a way the sight
Of counsel good and every judgment right.
And so advice I leave forsaken quite
As Ecco was for all her great good will
And will declare, wits rash and madd dyspite
Of such a friend neglect for lack of skyll
Whereby he fast procures him self to spill
As one unware, of all his wooes to come
Whose reckles life receueth a wretched dome.
Acareles life thus led in youthful years
A wilful way be seems well to take
So this same wit as wild desyer him steres
Unconstantely, for lust and pleasures sake
From this to that his vain inuenciones wake
Aresteles time in nedeles work does spend
Till that hereof he finds the folyshe, end.
Then werye quite of all this wanton sport
And trustinge much to taste a more stabyll drink
To praise well because he does resort
Whereby mishappe, he rather comes I think
Whose pleasant fare, and sweet delyghtinge drink
Who shall approach will think a thousand year
Till they have seen there, in the water clear.
Which has in it no foul nor oglye syghte
Nor loathsome lokiynge there a bate to stand
The silver streams so shininge be and brighte
As can delyghte the greatest lord in land
The Ladys yeke full fayer with hand in hand
Will fast repare unto this pleasant well
Wherewith advice, I wyshe them all to dwell.
Which for because that wit did quite despise
Now mark his harm, and hard predestenid woo
This well he fast behouldes in musing wise
And lies to drink where more his thirst does grow
A less for that him self he does not know
For there he seethe the image of his grace
His shape and yeke proporcion of his face.
His wits his strength and every other gift
That may be thought a virtue any way
Appears therewith every sondrye shifte
That nature sends to make the carkes gaye
And yeke that Fortune lendes for each assaye
There naught is hid that is worthy praise to pyke
Nor ought is seen, that men might well mislike.
Where on they faster that his eyes be cast
There at the more his marvel does increace
And yeke the more his marvel thus does last
The less he sekes his blind desyer to cease
Which for sith love to put him self in prese
To like the thing that better ware to lack
Then by souche love to bring him self to wrack.
For who so Couettes that he cannot catch
And most aloweth that nedyth most antendes
With so good will, and still desires to watch
Such wretched Joys a corsid, life that spends
As proof does teach unto dystruccion bendes
Delyted so with that he should refuse
And quite for sakinge that he ought to choose.
But of his love such is the blind, respect
And such the sweet, delightinge wretched plighte
That his a veil he blyndelye does neglecte
To help him self as one that has no might
So ravished is he with the pleasinge sight
Of that to him which little pleasure gaynes
Unless we count the wynning good of pains.
For in this well to well he vewes the form
Of every gift, and grace that nature gave
To him for that he chefelye should perform
With good, much good, his good thereby to save
Yet be his good, as sure is euel to have
He gaynis the loss that other never feel
Which have not wene such welthe by fortunes whele.
And why because he demes not as he ought
Each virtue lyketh value of the same
There be to many such.
His face, the best that ever was wrought
And shape he thinks deserves no manner blame
By wit he wennes full wyunderus things to frame
And what he has he thinks all the best
Besyds him self dispicinge all the rest.
All though in deed, he nether be so fayer
So well proporsmid, nor so suerlye wise
Ne yet in strength, be abyll to compayre
With half the number that he did dyspise
A boue them al he thinks him self to prise,
Which over weninge, wins him all his woo
A simpyll gain I count, that hurtes me so.
For rapte so fast, through his abused eyes
To such as flatter the^ selves
Even on him self, whereof he does delighte
With in this well no fautes he ever spies
Whereby him self he any way might spite
But as each face appearithe, fair and quyte
Though it be foul with in the flatringe glass
This lyinge lake, shows every gift to pass.
Whereto he straight consentes by Judgment blind
And grauntes to have as much as seems, and more
So easy lo, self love is now to kind
So some is had, so sweet agreuous sore
So glade he is to keep his harmis in store
So much desirous for to abide his woo
And yeke so loathe his mischefe to for goo.
Which causith this, because of natuere all
Be pleased well, well of them selves to here
And yet the wise, with good advice will call
Unto them selves if they, deserve to bear
The praysys great which seem so true and clear
By others mouths which ever taulke the best
Of them they se, in good estate to rest.
Now wit that wantes all that wisdom wills
The wise to have is void of this respect
For what he has he thinks it greatly skylles
But what he is, the whylst he does neglecte
Thus Joy to have, so mouche does him infecte
That care to be, so good as he appears
He quite forsakes, so blyndely love him bleres.
Through which he losythe every verteous strength
And lackes the skyl, so godly gifts to use
So every good does turn to bade at length
And he consumes, him self that does abuse
This lot is sent to him that will refuse
Aduices love, to light on prayseth well
Where till he starve he still delytes to dwell.
To starve I mean, the good he has to lose
To which I think him self he suer does bind
That of him self more good does presuppose
By lokinge in this present well so blind
Them in him self a wiser man can find
For who does covet him self of wyser skole
Then deeds him show, does prove him self a fool.
Who thinks he has more then he does posses
In this not only is dysseued quite
But has so much of that he has the less
Of wit I mean, wherein who shall delyghte
More then he ought him self does this dyspite
Un wittinge clean, the more he thinks he has
Even by somoche, has less as Plato says.
So he that demes, Such as thinks them selves wise and yet ar folysh.
his wit a boue the rest
So much the less, then others, has here by
And he that thinks, his one of all the best
The worste of all it reason will replye
Al though the same he never can epsy
Because he trusts the lyinge well of praise
Whereby his wit and all he has decays.
For sith, the well of praise, as well concistes
Upon the springes of unadvised talk
As of the voice of wisdom, that resistes
The speches of foolys, whose tongues a wrye will walk
Besides the pathe, of reasons, gidinge balke
It may welbe that such them selves dysseaue
As of untruth, a certain truths conseue.
Thus what has made, this wit to starve we se
We must not trust our own wits best.
Self love the very hid consuming sore
Of godly wits, that else could well agree
To every sense of wisdoms present lore
And now to show the very cause wherefore
They lose the strength of this so good a gain
And leave advice, forsothe it is dysdayne.
This enuius hear, dysdayne, this dayntie, thing
When it begins to harbor, in thy breast
Of any man this harm it first does bring
Contempt of those in better state, that rest
Then he is in, that counts to be best
So that his faults, who feign would have him know
And by his friend he countes him as his foe.
Then of contemptes procedyth, hautye pride
The contemptes of virtue comes by pride.
The which who gettes shall never lyghtely leave
So great an euel so fast as seen to bide
Even to the best when it begins to cleue
That honor, wit, or any gift receue
This of dysdayne, contempt, whereof procedes
The poison pride, this same self love that bredes.
All dysdayne full folks are compared unto Narcyssus.
Wherefore hereby I may conclude, a right
That as contempt, did cause Narcissus quayle
So by dysdayne each wyghte, does lose his might
And every virtue through thissame, does fail
As well Narcissus proves in this same tale
Who lost through love each thing he most did like
For his dysdayn who worse revenge could pike.
Can greter woo to any man betide
Then that to lose wherein he most delites
No suer and yet to syrcuyte and pride
This is the Just revenge, that still requites
There great dysdayne, and al there oulde dispites
To lack of that, at last they like so well
Which want abundance, makes with them to dwell.
This sense is strange, This is worthy to be marked.
and yet as true as quainte
That plenty should be cause of greter, lack
A man in health can never, lyghtlye faynte
The haypye man no missery does smacke
The Rich, by riches, feles no nedye, wrack
Again who sittes in honors shyningchare
Is far enough from wretched peoples share.
And what can hap, thus harm the happy man
Or can such wealth, A true saying.
there master bring to woo
Can honors, forse there honors them to ban
Can all this good so grieve us thus what no
Yes yes alas it proves often so
Of agis paste exaumpils never ground
Of these our days to many may be found.
Be therefore al these godly gifts to blame
Because they come to wrack that them possess Honor and Riches by gods good
gifts.

Na to be rich it is no manner shame
Ne honor hurtis that helps to redres
The wronged foulke whom rigor does oppres
Nor ought is euel whereof the rightefull use
Who shall observe may have a Just excuse.
But this abundance who shall evil abuse
And quite forget from whence these virtues flow Be ware of a busynge honor
and riches.

The good they have thereby they quite refuse
And every gift unto agrefe shall grow
Mysuse of good thus them shall over throw
Even as Minarnais pipis that Marcias found
Misused him harmed with swetenes of the sound.
This Marcias, was a boisterous country man
The pleasant pipes of pallase once he found
The which to blow as soon as he began
Even of them selves did give so sweet a sound
That better thought he not a boue the ground
Where in he strayghte did take so great a pride
As though his mouth did al, this musyke gyde.
Through which the musys with there armonye
He thought could not so sweet a sound prepare
And eke Appollo god of melodye
He may dys(...)de down from his shininge chare
Also with him presuminge to compare
Full well content to lose his life if he
Made not his pypes more swetely to agree.
Then musikes god who saying all his pride
Him first did far excel in conning play
And then to make him by his couenaunte, bide
He made the skyn, of all his body flaye
An evil reward for this his vain assaye
Un happy gift that gyues no better gain
Nay folyshe man, that gydes it to thye pain.
Good gifts mysse used.
So that heareby I gather every gift
Misusyde may harm the honors of the same
And though to some, that natures bountye lift
A grace where of a another shall be lame
This godly gefte, is not a white to blame
Although their honors through the same shall quayle
The rightefull use, that lack, of souche a veil.
For if so be, that Marcias had known
That of him self, not all his conning came
He nether would have striuen to have blown
Ne yet presumed to venture for the game
With him that was the aucther of the same
If he had known how, well to use this gain
He it might well have kept and not been flayne.
But who can know, that will dysdayne to learn
And who can learn that reckes not to be taught
So well to use his welthe who can deserne That desdain is the destroyer of the
wisdom.

That this dysdayne, this vename, great, has caughte
This same made Marcias, that he never raught
To know of whom his melodye did rise
This made Narcissus, Ecco yeke dyspise.
And to conclude this causyde, wit forsake
Advice whose lack, did lose him all his gain
For look even as Narcissus by the lake
His beughtie lost by bewtyes sore dysdayne
And that his profet purcheste, all his pain
So wit, that has dysdayne, shall so presume
That through his wit, his wit shall clean consume.
Wherefore, this vice, that every vartue marres
That private weal, A good wyshe of ye Aucther.
conuerts to preuate woo
That each degree, there rightefull duty bares
Who redyth, this tale, I wish, so well might know
That in there hearts, no sede thereof might grow
Where of each, wighte deuoide, by good advise
May ryghtely use there gifts of greatiste prise.
Thus have you hard the simpill sense
That I have gatherid by my simple wit
Of Ouides tale, whose wise and hid pretense
Though as I should parhappes I have not hirre
Yet as I could and as I thought it fit
I have declared, what I can conseue
Full glade to learn, what wiser folk parceaue
And now to keep my couenaunte and proceed Fysius a writer of the same.

Of others Iugementes, to declare the fecte
Of thissame tale, Ficius wrytes in deed
A wise oppinion not to be neglecte
Of souche asseme, to be of reasons sect
The which I would not skip emonge the rest
Least his Inuencion, some may think the best.
A rash man's mind, that has no skyl says he
By this Narcissus very well is mente
His proper shape, that has no power to se
That is the proper, office which is sent
Unto the mind, by no mean can conuente
To se and mark, as each man ought of right
And to perform according to there might.
But as Narcissus, only did desyer
His shadow in the water to embrace
So this same mind does nothing else requier
Of brittil bewtye, but to mark the case
That in the body has the bydinge place
Which only is the shadow of the mind
As it might know in case it were not blind.
Thus mind, thus naught desyringe, but his shade
That is the beutie in the carcass frail
Not being abyl to deserne the trade
The which it ought of right for to assail
Hereby forsakes, quite the one a veil
And losyth both his proper shape herein
And yeke his shadow has no power to win.
For every mind, becoms the bodies man
In so louinge it, it self, does quite despise
The boddys use, and yet it no way can
Enjoy and have according to the guise
And order due that natuer does device
But thus does both the bodies use mystake
And of it self the office true forsake.
Better it is to have the mind garnished with virtue then a folyshe bodi bewtyful
The office of the mind, is to have power
Upon the body, and to order well
The bodies office yeke in every hour
It is of the mind to learn the perfect skyll
The vain desyers that rise, him by to kill
Whereby the mind does keep his perfect strength
And yeke the body vanquishe lost at length.
Now where the mind is drowned with desire
Of such delyghtis as to the body long
The boddye then most needs consume with fire
Of raginge lusts a boute the same that thronge
So that the mind, is cause of both there wrong
To put it self, out of the proper place
And bring the body, to so euel a case.
For thus the mind, that ought of right, The mi^d being replenyshed with
evil brings body and soul to confusion
to be
The teacher of the body to do well
Does make the same to every evil agree
Procuringe that it should of right expel
Whereby in both, a mouinge blind does dwell
Even as within Narcyssus did remain
That through his shadow to be soche again.
And as Narcissus, never could attain The reward of such as give the^
selves to vain pleasurs.

His shadow which he wisshed for so fast
And that his love did led him to his pain
Even so this mind that reasons bonds has paste
It self and from, the proper place has casts
Shall never gain that it does most desyer
Such is to folly still the folowinge hire.
For though it Covet much, a safe estate
And seek it self to plant in perfect plighte
Yet this desyer, prosedyth all to late
When will is bente, to love vain delight
Whose rash regard descerns not black from white
Who would be well, works other wise
Of being well, the suertie does despise.
And when this mind, has wroughte somoche amiss
Thus blindely from his perfect, place to fall
We most nedys grant a kind of death it is
A thing divine, and perfect, to be thrall
Unto the carcas most corrupt of all
When this immortal mind, shall seek to serve
Each mortal thing, his virtue needs must sterue.
This is the meaning of Ficius sense
That in this wise one Plato does wryghte
And now to show, the learned men's pretense
With Ouides tale the reders to delyghte
Two there were that somewhat did indits
Of this same fable, which I will declare
Least any writer I may seem to spare.
The one hereof, asence divine, does make
No fool he semethe, that walls has to name
And english man, which thus does undertake
For sowles behoufe, to deskant on this same
There by says he a number much to blame
That as Narcissus, lettes there bewty quale
Because they quite misuse there good avail.
For diverse which in bewty, much excel
Either inshape that in the bodies gift
In knowledge else which in the mind, does dwell
Or to conclude in riches, which is lift
To sundry men by fortunes hydynge shyft
Before the same so puffed up with pride
That all, to base, they think with them to bide.
What then, to this what is the due reward
Forsooth these derlynges with their great dysdayne
within the well of worldly wealth, regard
This same apperaunce of their blysfull gain
Which lastith not, but as the shadow, vain
Does pass a way, even so does come to go
Each thing we have the use affyrmeth so.
Now in this well the apperaunce of their state
Does them so please and eke so well content
That seeing it they nothing else awaite
The naught can low they nothing can consent
To praise or like but all to this intent
Them selves, full far above the rest advance
And still to glory of here happy chance
Thus through this glory of there life to much
The chefeste life, the life of souls the lose
There blind desyer and fond regard is soche
Them selves in all this danger, for to close
This English writer hear of does thus suppose
The other now whom Italye did bread
As follows wrytes, to them that shall yet read.
In Greece there was a passinge fayer young man A Learnyd man of Italye a writer
of ye same

Whose beutye brought him unto such a pride
That through thessame unto such dysdayne he ran
As but him self he none could well a bide
But counted other all as vile beside
Through which his end was wretchedly to dye
With in the woods to starve and there to lie.
And whereas Oued, does hereof affirm
That this Narcissus, Man's life is like a flowere.
was traunsformed at last
Into a flower, he only does confirm
That youth and bewghte, come and soon be paste
Even as the flower, that wetherithe full fast
And for by cause, in wodes the nymphs do dwell
His death bewaylyd of them does Ovid tell.
Again where the poet does a vow
That this Narcissus dyed by a lake
It may well be, by cause he did a low
None fette or worthy to become his make
But every man despysing, did for sake
That some of hatrid and of malice fell
For his dysdayne did drown him in a well.
Thus much this same Italyan writer here
Does find as true, his wryghtinges do proffes
So it may well be all that wrote appear
Of this same fable other more or less
That still dysdayne does cause the greter distres
Of every good that natuers bounty gyues
To each estate, upon the yearthe that lives.
Wherefore who has, no sparckel of this vice
Are like to kendel in them selves no flame
Of any euel but still by good advice
Shall so them selves and all there doings frame
As shall at all deserve no manner blame
Who wantes this vice thereby shall chefely stay
To every evil the very reddy way.
Thus have you hard what has been thought
By soundry foulke, of thissame Ouides tale
Where by I prove that al herin have sought
To show that Ovid wryt for good a vale
Declaringe how they lykest ar to quayle
That greatyst store of any good receive
The ryghtfull use thereof and least perceue.
To much posses so that it is no praise
But things possessed, ryghtfully to use
For each possescion, by and by decays
And such as by possescinge shall abuse
All they posses, with shame, shall sone refuse
Wherefore the most, ar worthy to posses
Whose spotless deeds, the rychest use express.
And thus my simpel travail I commend
Unto every one, prayinge you to take
The same in worth and when more years shall send
More wit and yeke more knowledge shall a wake
Such labors like I mean not to forsake
As knows god who keep us always
Save and defend us from all decay.
Quod. TH.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London by Thomas Hackette, and are to be sold at his shop in
Cannynge street over against the three Cranes.


