portrait of Sir Thomas Overbury SIR THOMAS OVERBURY.


The Bloody downfall Of Adultery. Murder, Ambition,
At the end of which are added Westons, and Mistress Turners last Tears, shed
for the Murder of Sir Thomas Ouerbury poisoned in the Tower; who for the fact,
suffered deserved execution at Tiburne the 14. of November last. 1615.

Mercy Sweet Jesus.

Printed at London for R. H. and are to be sold at his shop at the Cardinals
Hat without Newgate.

The Bloody downfall of Adultery, Murder, and Ambition, presented in a black
seane of Gods just Judgments in revenge of the Inocent blood lately shed in
this KINGDOM.
LOoking lately into the customs of this age, and coniecturing the inward
affections of men, I gather that the world is the house of confusion, and the
inhabitants thereof set upon mischief, for the seven Cappitall sins are
grown to such a custom, that our eyes want no alurements to bewitch, our
ears no perswaysions to seduce, nor our senses no subtlety to affect: Which
seazing on the hearts of men, have brought fourth many pernicious children, to
the hurt of Nature, some like centaures, begotten of clouds: as Ambition, some
like Serpents nurrished in dunghils, as Sensuallity, some like Vapors, raised
up to be consumed as Flattery, and such like, generally all dangerous and full
of trouble: therefore is it (in the sense of man) most fitting to have the
painting taken off from these foul faces, the couers pulled off from these
cups of Poison, and the covert of this bed of Serpents ripped up, that we may
discern what has long time been hidden cunningly.

The first that presents himself upon our stage; will we call Ambition,
catching at nothing but Stars, climing only for Greatness, this is he,
that cunningly can invent strattagems to his own over throw, giving Pens
occation to wright Tragedies, if he rise from obscurity, (as many have done)
he laboreth to be skillful in those things, which are most pleasing to the
greater Sort, and tolerable among the commons: His study is for praise, and
not for virtue: His looks like Mansolus roumbe, fair and comely without, but
within, nothing but rotten bones, and corrupt practisses, his aparrell
increases with his Fortune, and as worldly affairs direct him, so suteth he
both fashions and affections, in his studdy he affects singularity, and is
proud in being author of a new stratagem: if he chance to come into the eye of
the World, he then creepes into the favor of some great Peersonage, in
feeding whose humors (to relieve his wants) makes intrusion into some heritage,
and matcheth not according to his birth, but to the increase of his fortune,
and by that means, by hook or crook, he atayneth to some place in the
Court: Then begins he with gifts to win hearts, by feigned humillity to a
void hatred, by offices of friendship, to bind his equals, by cunning
insinuations to work his superiors, by which means he is held to be
worthily a Statesman: being grown to this step higher, the authority likes
him not, without the style, wherein if any cross him, look for poison in his
cup, or conspiracy in his walks, yea so pestilent is his nature, that (like
fire raked up in embers) he never shows but to consume, both himself and
others: if he perceive any that by ripe Judgment conceiteth his courses, with
him he joins, as if he sought his only protection under the wing of his
Glory, but the very truth is, he has no other intent but this, to clip the
wings of his renown for fear, he fly beyond him, if the nature of the
Nobleman whom he enuieth be gentle, he brings him in fear, either of his
servants in his household, or his familliars that love his honor, or else some
mislike bewixt his Prince and him, sworn and confirmed by flatteries and
intelligences, till the noble loses either his land, authoitie, or place, and
he attain both his style and promotion: yet play he never so cunningly,
such uncertain honors beget daily dangers, and makes him careless of his
souls prosperity: For then there enters into his mind a delightful sin
called curiosity, by which to make him more able in other mischiefs, he gives
intertainment to witches and charmers, and consorts himself with novel
mongers, and strange inuenters of banquets, to set lust on fire, and that can
devise confections to besot youth with luxury, that for an irefull man can
work strange reuenges, for a fearful, a strong tower to keep him in: to be
excellent at poisons, to kill lingringly, like the Italian: But again to our
purpose, to the Ambitius man there is commonly belonging a rustic troup, of
Flaterers, Bauds, A dulterers, Soothers, and such like, that hating al virtue
makes sin seem pleasing, which works in the flexable heart such a sweet
defire of forbidden pleasures, that it even surfets and grows sickes, with
excess, Lust and Adultery I mean, which I discribe in this manner, it is the
most insolent of all things, it troubles the mind and takes away the empire of
liberty, it confounds memory, kills providence, and treads down good council.
offends not he the law, that takes possession of another man's free hold, and
makes a common of his neighbors enclosure, Adulterers I say have no spirits
to goodness, nor will they be by any council moved to godliness, for their
felicity is in the surfets of the flesh, and the pleasures thereof bring
nothing but too dear repentance, the Adulterer spights him most that examines
his proceedings, and plots his overthrow that does but touch his infirmities,
Oh! what an enemy is it to Virtue, the only wrake of wealth, and plain high
way to poverty. The Adulterer is so blinded in heart, and so hardened withal,
that he can hardly look up toward Heaven to behold Gods just Judgments: yea
so just and sure they are, that in all ages this vile sin has been severely
punished, as by the example of Judas, justice on Thamat, David's Adultery with
Vrias Wife, punished in his Son Absolon, thousands of men died in the fields
of Moab for this fault, threescore thousand of the children of Israel were put
to the sword for the rauishing only a Leuits Wife, of all sins it is in nature
the most odious, and brings with it the greatest shame unto mankind: it is a
sin that has made the Earth drunk with blood, to the confusion of many
Towns and Cities, Sodom and Gomorah were consumed with fire for Incest and
Adultery: Troy a proud City made a plow-land for the same sin: It was the
only adulteries of the French that caused a massaker of fourscore thousand,
by the ringing of one bell: Let not the Strumpits eye, says one of the sages
of Greece, shine upon the countenance of young men, least with the Basaliske,
it pearce unto the death: for her malice is as lightning, and more ragine then
the she Bear, upon her attends malicious hatred, whose felicity is only to
rejoice at the harms of others, giving more affliction to them that are most
troubled with affliction, where if any offend her, she admitts no
reconciliation, but lives as a partial Judge in her own cause, if she hears
the advancement of virtue then grows she pensive, and if she want credit
amongst the mighty then falls she working with the meaner sort, she smiles
not upon any man but to be tray him, nor give him countenance but to undo
him, nor contriue, any stratagems without Murder, nor dwells by any neighbor
but to hurt him, and if she be but crossed in her will, she ever frets her
self away in anger, and after in Hate and Malice becomes infamous, for her
love is a minet, but her spite euerlassing, her hand being once dipped in
mischief, she never walks abroad but in suspicion, fearing to be accused by
Virtue, and still lives in dread of her good Fortune, yet by nature is she
such, that she has courage enough to adventure on any sin, an Ambitious
woman shows her self to be a troublesome disturber of the world, powerful
to make small things great, and great, monstrous, envy by nature is grieved at
the Prosperity of others, he enuyeth the Great in that he cannot Equal them,
he enuieth the weak, dreading they should compare themselves with him: he
enuyeth his Equals because they should not become his Companions: in
Kingdoms, Commonwealths, Princes Courts and Ambitious men's Houses he is
still working, no Man hunteth after Honor but he affronts him, only the
miserable man he enuies not, because (being kept in Prison) he fears not
his risings, yet has he a scorn over him: Machiuell knowing the venom of
this vice, gave his son this last and not least instruction: that he should
not be envious, but to do (says he) such deeds that others may envy thee,
for to be envied is the token of good desert, but to be envious the sign of a
foolish nature, which verefies the saying of Marcus Tullius the Orator, that
the most flourishing fortune is most envied at: But now to be more familiar in
my Discourse, where Ambition, Adultery, Pride, Envy, Malice, and such like
Capital Sins have set in foot, there cannot chose but follow Mnrder and
confusion, and where the foundation is laid with blood, there can be a
building but of small continuance, but where Honors have a true beginning, a
ground of virtue springing up by noble deserts, continued by Wisdom and
maintained with Care, there cannot choose but follow a fruitful harvest, and a
plentiful Winter: contrariwise to obtain sudden Honors begets Pride and
Vaineglory, Pride and Vainglory are the cherishers of Envy and Malice, Envy
and Malice the Nurses of Bloodshed and Murder, in which whosoever dippeth but
the tippe of his singer, gives to his Soul a scarlet siaine, which never can
be cleared until the dissolution of the Body, and then well are they that can
wash it away with the true tears of repentance.

Brittle is that greatness that fades in a moment, and vain the joy that is
unwisely lost, he that has a sudden rise and can wisely stand, is a most
happy Worldling, but he that forgets himself on the Pinnacle of prosperity is
besotted with arrogance: therefore let him that hunts for honors in Princes
Courts, wander in an even passage, for dangerous are the proceedings and
business of a Statesman, take this for an example: suppose that a young man from
the lowest ebb of worldly chance have the advancement of greatness laid upon
his shoulders, will it not for a time seem a heavy burden, and a great
trouble to his new transformed fortunes? will not the pride of his heart swell
to a full Sea; even ready to burst over the banks of his Honourgiuer? Then
rightly may the Picture of Ingratitude be imprinted in his forefront; playing
the Viper to his high fortunes first beginner.

Being thus entitled with State Offices, has he not many soothers in sin,
personages of base condition attending him, hemming him round with persuasions
of self conceit, which for a need will venture their lives to gain him the
commands of his will: what becomes of such follies, but a sorrowful
repentance, and no recovery. All you that have your hearts pierced with sad
considerations, take this for a remembrance of grief, that is: That when a
Woman of noble Parentage, placed on the mountain of smiling chance, having the
dignity of Greatness shining on her forehead, should humble her self to base
conditions, giving her whole mind to malicious hatred, secret consents of
iniquity, selfewill and wicked proceedings, never pacify till the end of
damned performances. Oh was not this Woman created for a deep sorrow to her
Aliance, a great grief unto her Country, and a foul stain unto her own
reputation? Is it not also a lamentable example, for a Gentleman of good birth
and calling, placed in dignity, in high office and charge for his Country, to
give way by consent to a bloody stratagem, and for fear of the displeasures of
Greatness intangles himself in the snares of reproach? will not this also be a
continual remembrance to his posterity, and a bar of disgrace branding the
coat Arms of his house, to have the common course of justice pass upon him
in the eye of the multitude. Is it not also great pity that for want of grace
some of a servile (yet an observing condition) should from the golden mean of
low estate wait at the elbow of Greatness, and bring fuel to their fire of
iniquity, wherein at the length they themselves are likewise consumed. Oh,
wherefore should simplicity thus blind up their eyes of vunderstanding, to be
thus the instruments of such dangerous drifts, that aims at nothing but grudge
and malice? if with Solons saying, they had sealed up their hearts, Remember
the end, this had never been: then how are they led away with amiss, that
having the gifts of art and experience, the secrets of the simples of Physic,
ordained by God for man's good use, should by the Devil and them be converted
thus to malignant purposes, if the fear of God had shined in their hearts, it
would have been a light to have led them from all those dark practices, which
has now spotted the foreheads of their reputations with the marks of black
infamy, shame cannot choose but be the reward of such enterprisers, that for
the favors of Greatness, will dip their hands in the blood of Innocents, and
enen as it were work against nature: Oh more then savage minded Creatures, in
the very deepenesse of your black and bloody immaginations, (imboldened by
whomsoever) this might have been your Memento, in which I conclude, that
strange and wonderful are Gods indgements, that in these fore-passed
stratagems have shined in great glory, say you then, that blood innocently
shed, is laid up in Heavens Treasury, not one drop of it can be lost, but
lent out to Usury: water poured forth, sinkes down quietly into the earth, but
blood spilt on the ground, sprinkles up to the Firmament, Murder is wide
mouthed, and will not let GOD rest till he grant revenge, not only the blood
of the slaughtered, but the soul of the Innocent assending to his throne,
crying out and exclaiming for Justice, which (the Lord be praised) has been,
and will be carefully followed by the learned and worthy Magistrates of this
Kingdom, whom the Lord God prosper and protect in all their proceedings, to
which let all true hearts say. Amen.

FINIS.
Mistress Turners Tears, for the Murder of Sir Thomas Ouerbury who was poisoned
in the Tower of London.
1
IF ever Tears fell from a Wretches eyes,
I am that Creature: waves on waves do rise,
So fast, and swel so high they drown my soul,
In her own Crimes as numberless as foul.
2
Oh had my Cradle been my sudden Grave,
In Peace my Soul had slept, which is a slave
Now both to sin and shame: I had not then
Been of God hated and so scornd of Men
3
Unhappy was the Womb that lent me breath,
Would it had bin the Charnell-house of Death,
Had I bin stifled there, then had my slight
To Heaven bin like a Doves, with wings more white.
4
O would to God the Day when I was borne,
Had from the Calender of time been torn,
Where now it stands accursed, and does bear
The mark of a most fatal Character.
5
Many a Widow reading there my name,
Will curse it, and the leaf that holds the same,
Children as yet unborn, coming to spell,
Will take it for a Furies name in Hell.
6
And casting by the Book no more will read,
But only learn to heap upon my head
VVishes of mischief though in Grave I lie,
For to confound me everlastingly.
7
But leaving this, let my sad Story tell,
Both from what height I fall, and how I fell:
That though time present does not moan my state
Yet times to come may pity my hard fate.
8
My birth was fair, my bringing up was good,
My days were golden in my widow hood,
And might have been so still, but climbers hye,
Beyond their reach must down, and so do I.
9
Plenty and I at board together state,
I fed with Dives drank in ritchest plate:
Wore rich attires, tasted all worldly pleasure,
But never had care to hoord up head'nly treasure
10
With Eve I might have lived in Paradise,
But that a Serpent did my Soul entice
To touch forbidden fruit, which relished well
In chewing, but being down it smelt of Hell.
11
It Was not one only Apple to devour,
For which I longed: my hunger gaped at more,
At a whole tree I looked: it was a Tree,
Me thought the goodliest mortal eyes could see.
12
This Tree I climbed, and as I plucked it grew,
Still fresh and fresh, the boughs were ever new;
The branches ever green, bushy and fair,
It seemed the Darling both of sun and air.
13
But when my Soul looked up with open eyes,
I saw the top bough brauing even the skies:
When the root stuck in Hell, where looking in
I knew it then to be the tree of sin.
14
And though my Conscience told me I should fall,
If that I leand to: nothing could appall
My settled resolution, I would on,
Though still before me stood damnation.
15
From this I plucked the gilded fruit of pride,
Like Queen-apples they showed, for every side
Was ruddy and alluring, but (what trust
Is in vain earth) being to^cht they turn to dust.
16
From this I sucked Enchantments which drink well,
And luscious sweet, yet proved the milk of hell,
Hence did I gather poisonous drugges to kill
Such as withstood my friends, or crossed my will.
17
Lust often lay within my widdowed sheets,
And taught me how to taste unbidden sweetes,
And that toward hell I might go one step further
The last and worst I went into was murder.
18
O crying sin, which smothered nere so deep,
In caves, which silent night her self does keep,
Bound up in darkness, like the steeme of Hell
which none can pierce, yet the blaack deed to tell.
19
Even graves of dead men rotten long ago
Will open wide: Vengeance walks often slow
To our weak sight, but when to Strike it stands,
On Heavens high Tower, it has 3 1000. hands.
20
The Almighties Arrows fly both sure and strong
And where they hit great Oaks fall all along,
No hidden mark but stands within his eic,
And that he cleaues, when forth his wrath does fly.
21
Witness my self and others, who desying,
The busiest searching Sunbeam from discrying:
Where Villainy lay lurking, wrapd in clouds,
so safe we thought as dead men in their shrouds
22
When to Man's Sense it was as imposible,
Mountains to move, as find a tongue durst tell
Our buried plots, See they are rent and torn,
By Gods least finger; and we left in Scorn.
23
Our maskes pluckd off our faces now appear,
Such as they are indeed, not as they were,
Plain on our brows are our close mischiefs writ
Who most did hide, now most discover it.
24
The Wolves are caught in snares; the shepherd now,
Knows that a Lamb was flain, by whom and how,
The blood of whom by cruel friend so spilt,
Flows like a Sea, yet washes off no guilt.
25
If any ask me, why I was so led,
And why so near to hell I ventured,
I was bewitched, for what I did behold,
Was a most bitter Pill, but wrapped in gold.
26
That liquorish bait enticed me take it down,
As wholesome Physic, but (with sha^e) it is known
No poison can so soon destroy the Soul,
The outside glorious, but the inside foul.
27
O Gold! thou glittering devil that confouridest
The Richest, Fairest, Strongest, wisest, Soundest,
Would God, as He to Indians is unknown,
That so their Droffy God were theirs Alone.
28
Souls would not tumble then so fast to Hell,
Nor of my Fall should I this Story tell,
Terror to Soul and Body, had not heaven,
To Sins more high and horrid, pardon given.
29
Pardon of thee (sweet Jesus) then I crave,
What thou have Bought and Paid for dearly Save
Men let me beg forgiveness from you too,
Because I did more then my Sex should do.
30
And you of Modest dames that be are the note,
And my black Name quite from your tables blot,
As I am lost, so let my fault I crave,
And write Oblivion on my wretched Grave.
31
You Fathers whom of Children I bereave,
You Children whom of Parents I deceive,
You Wives whom Husband les my Guilt does make,
Forgive me All: of All this Leave I take.
32
Heaven frowns to look upon me and my Sin,
Earth trembles that by her I fed have bin:
My very breath poisons the Air abont me,
Hell only is within me, and without me.
33
Yet in despite of Hell, from Heaven comes down,
Mercy I see holding a glorious Crown,
Of immortality over my faint head,
Jesus in that and thee I Am Comforted.
34
Strengthen my weak heart, Death is fearful grim,
One finger of thy Hand can vanquish him,
Give to my fleeting Soul a prosperous gaile;
That I to Blessed Jerusalem may Sail.
FINIS.
A Prayer made by Mistress Turner, the night before her Suffering Death.
With Mary Magdalene, I kneel (O Jesus) at thy feet, which I wash with the
tears of a penitential bleeding heart, dry them up again with the Sighs of
my afflicted Soul, O my sweet Savior what precious blood did thou pay in
ransom to fetch my Soul out of everlasting Death and Hell? And how (for a
golden bribe) have I sold that love of thine, and my own Salvation? I am
undone for ever, for since I could speak the Name of God, or his blessed
Son, I did nener speak or do any thing that was worthy of Heaven. What have
I not been, that in the world is Evil, and what is now in me, that I dare
call Good? My youth was Licentious, my Age wicked, my Latter days offensive
and odious to God and Man. Yet notwithstanding (Heavenly Father) Since my
Repentant Soul comes crying to Thee for Mercy, as before my Sins cried to
Heaven for Vengeance: bow down I beseech thee thine care: dry up my Sorrows
with thy beams of Grace. I have not known thee, nor never reguarded thy
Sacred word, yet (O Lord) shut me not out of Heaven, because it is a broken,
wounded, and oppressed heart that knocks at thy gates of Pity. Let not my
name be blooted out of thy book of Life, but set the Seal on my forehead,
that I may be known to be one of Thine. I defire not to live in this World (of
which I am weary, as that is of me) but only in thy Kingdom: to the intent I
may change my bloody garments, for a roabe of Immortality: Comfort me in my
Combat of Death, take despair from mine cies, see an Angel to guard me, Help
me, Strengthen me, Hasten me to my home, and let that dwelling be with thee
for ever and ever. I come dear Redeemer, I come, into thy blessed Hands I
commend my Spirit.

Master VVestons Tears, for the Murder of Sir Thomas Ouerbury who was poisoned
in the Tower of London.
GOD of my Soul and Body, have mercy upon me: the one I have cast way by my
folly, and the other is likely to perish in thy Fury, unless in thy great
mercy thou Save it. My Sins are deep Seas to drown me; I am swallowed up
in the bottomless Gulf of my own transgressions. With Caine I have been a
Murderer, and with Judas a Betrayer of the Innocent. My body is a Slave to
Satan, and my wretched Soul is deuowred up by Hell. Black have bin my
thoughts, and blacker, are my deeds. I have been the Devils instrument, and
am now become the Scorn of Men, a Serpent upon earth, and an Outcast from
Heaven. What therefore can become of me (miserable Catiffe;) if I look up to
my Redeemer, to him I am an Arch Traitor, if upon Earth, it is drowned with
Blood of my shedding, if into Hell, there I see my Conscience, burning in the
Brimstone lake. God of my Soul and Body have mercy therefore upon me, Save
me, O save me, or else I perish for ever, I die for ever in the world to come,
unless (sweet Lord) thou catchest my repentant Soul in thine Arms; O save
me, save me, save me.

FINIS.
REaders
you that are desirous to see the Reward of the Adulterer and the Adulteress,
paid by Gods own hand: there is a little Table, called the Spectacles, where
you may Read them more at Large.


