^VIDS ^^^OICAL ^^ISTLES, ^nglished BY (...) Sherburne. G

^^^^^ur tenues -- LONDON Printed by E.G. for W. Cook, at his shop in
Holborne, near Furnivalle Inn 16^^.

W. Marshall. sculpsit.
engraved title page

OVIDS HEROICAL EPISTLES, ENGLISHED BY John Sherburne. Gent.

Conamur tenues -- LONDON, Printed by E. G. for William Cook, and are to be
sold at his shop in Holborne, near Furnivalls Inn. 1639.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL SIR EDWARD BASH, Knight, etc. One of the Chamberlaines
of his Maties Exchequer.
THat I have thus chosen patron, and by a dedication singled you, know Sir, it
is an act not enterpriz'd without consulted thoughts: I often leveld, and you
still became my mark: For if we bear (as indeed we should,) a thankful
commemoration, even of all by-respects, how much more then ought we to intend
the maine, and more immediate? Had my choice been made otherwise I should have
swerved Ab officio; and there is a grateful remembrance rests in me, which
would have prompted me I had done amiss. Large courtesies, ask large
acknowledgements. Many there are, who by endeavors of this kind, have sought
to render satisfaction for benefits received: but no such construction must be
made of mine; whose utmost end and scope, is only to show you the ready will I
bear to do you service. And if you shall vouchsafe to esteem them, but as
the shadows, of what I desire to demonstrate by more real effects; you have
then took the hight of my intentions. The subject I confess somewhat too
light for your ear: often conversant in more serious studies. wherefore it is
taught a becoming distance; nor is it to harbor least hope of your perusal,
until you have taken truce with time, and mean to pass it with variety:
then if you shall read, it may perhaps not displease you. My errors in the
performance, (some being necessarily incident to humanity,) I submit unto your
censure: which I know will be like your self; mild, and candid. I had rather
be imputed ignorant, then ungrateful. Receive then (Noble Sir) these first
fruits of my pen; a present (I ingenuously acknowledge) far beneath your
merits: yet, how much the less that is in quality, so much the more shall be
your praise in the acceptance: and you shall for ever bind me to be, as well
in act, as word

Your servant, I. SHERBVRNE.

The Preface. Scribimus indocti, doctique Poemaesa passim.
IT was the complaint of old; yet never could it more justly be taken up then
now: In this Papirivorous Age, wherein that Scripturientum Pruritus, does every
where, so more then abundantly reign; the swarming issues of whose petulant
brains, have induced such a nauseousnes, and utter loathing of the Muses
banquets, as it is a thing almost past hope, to find an unperverted pallat. The
very Title of a Poem even startled at, and the work itself, to some scarce
less odious then a Libel. So great a mischief has licentious scribbling,
brought on that more excellent kind of writing. But this I leave unto the
satyrist. And that I may not be thought censoriously arrogant to blame that
act in others, which I may seem my self to have committed; the Judicious
Reader may be pleased to take notice, that no vain desire of praise, nor giddy
humor to be seen in print, has thus brought me into public view. But an
humble, and modest hope, of rectifying the wrongs our Author has sustained
through the rude attempts of a too-too busy pen: And although this was the
chief and sole cause of this publication (the work having a long time lain by
me:) yet will I not say, that herein I have wrought an actual performance of
the same; But the success thereof, I leave to the censure of the conferring
Reader. I am not ignorant of a sort of curious ones, that look for wonders
from a translation: when indeed they ought rather to check, and limit their
expectation: far different is the case with one who in his course exspatiates
at random, and with another, who is forced to tread the steps of a
forerunner. Yet if they will vouchsafe to come without prejudicate, and
peremptory opinions; they may herein meet with a strictness (such as is
requisite) in the words, and a respective care toward the meaning of our
Author; a sweetness too, as much as could conveniently be attained; having
throughout observed a verse for verse traduction. For although in the Latin
Elegiacke, that same In pedibus vitium be Causa decoris; Yet through the often
close of the Pentameter, the genuine, sweet, and fluent statelines of the
English Decasyllable, is much enerved. To plead my pains in the translation,
were a thing which I will not, nor cannot do: since I never made it other then
my recreation, my sport. Though indeed the work is such as might well deserve
both a knowing, and a laboring Quill; and which that seldom erring critique,
Scaliger has thought good thus to censure. Epistolae omnium (Ovidii) librorum
politissimae, nam and sententiae sunt illustres facilitas, and composita, and
numeri Poetici. If through my unskilful copying I have any ways impaired the
worth and luster of the principal; so as it may now seem unworthy of those
Elogies; yet through kind acceptance of this my first draught, and a friendly
advertisement I shall hereafter endeavor to render it somewhat agreeable. For
as I shall contemn, and neglect, whatsoever proceeds from ignorance and
detraction: so again, shall I always be most ready (as Polyclete of old with
his more curious pieces) to amend whatsoever the judicious censurer shall think
worthy the correcting pensil.

To his loving brother M. John Sherburn on his Translation of OVIDS Heroical
Epistles.
Were thou like those whose works and selves; depend
For praise, on the fond largess of some friend;
My verse might here a welcome room obtain:
Which now perhaps, will name of flattery gain.
It Is hard to write when praises may offend;
And such my fate were, should I here commend.
I am too near. Yet know thy pains shall live;
What I cannot, others thy work will give:
Thy work which shall to aftertimes endure
Against Sciolists, and Zoilists secure.
Ed. Sherburne.

Ejusdem in interpretem, and opus HEXASTICON.
ANglia, quos meritis, ingrata negavit honores
Roma, iterum Publi, reddidit alma, tuis.
Ecce ut conversa florent tua carmina lingua!
Nec minus haec dederint, quam decus illa tibi.
Romanos fertur Cantare Britannia Versus:
Discet at Angliacos Roma superba modos.
E. S.

To his worthy friend M. John Sherburne.
INgenious Ovid, these heroic lays,
Thou did not chant with Cipresse crowned, but bays.
Being Phoebus sweetest swan in Tybers streams,
Hatched by his heat, eternized by his beams.
No Tyrants spleen had exiled thee as yet,
Had exild thee; that is, Romes choycest wit.
Smooth as thy fortune ran thy happy lines,
Sweet as thy Cupids tresses, lovers twines.
Soft as the lips of Venu^ Mars his greet,
White as dame Iunos wrists, or T^etis feet.
Thy quill was either plucked from Paphian doves,
Or from the wings of him who darts out loves.
And thine, my friend, Thalia did he send
From the same pinions; with this one commend,
That thou should vindicate thy Bard; being pent
In a far worse then Tomos banishment.
You have releast him, this your fame shall be:
Caesar check-mate, reverst is thy decree.
Edm. Colman.

ERRATA.
Page 18. lin. 14. far unnat^ral re^d incestuous. p. 29. l. 29. for owe read
give. p. 32. l. 17. for she read slye. p. 35. l. 12. for Mace read Mate. p.
36. l. 9. for Lemnian deeds read Lemnian's deed. ^tem l. 10. for s^nds read
lends. p. 61. l. 18. for this read thus. p. 62. l. 7. for this read thus. Item
l. 29. for me read we. p. 85. l. 1. for Troy read Greece. p. 97. l. 16. for
then read the. p. 102. l. 30. for hop read hap. for weight read wight. p. 105.
l. 8. for the read thee. p. 107. l. 20. for woeful read irefull. p. 108. l. 3.
for waves read gales. p. 111. l. 2. for the read to. Item l. 27. for these read
thee. p. 115. l. 29. for subtle, read supple. p. 118. l. 17. for heaven
re-iuspheard, read heaven-inspheard. p. 119. l. 6. for lovely read lonely. Item
l. 20. for some read fame. Item l. 31. for sail read fail p. 122. l. 17. for
So read G^^.

THE ARGUMENT of PENELOPE'S Epistle to ULYSSES.
THe Grecians intending to revenge the Rape of Helen, having prepared a
powerful Army, in which most of the Achaian Princes adventured themselves:
Ulysses the son of Laertes, and Anticlea, lately married to the fair
Penelope, and has to be so soon divorc't from her embraces, to shun
employment feigned himself mad: but was discovered by Palamedes, and forced
with the rest to imbarke for Troy. After many valiant actions, the ten years
war, and final destruction of the City; returning homewards he was (through
the malice of Minerva) severed from the fleet, and as many years wandered on
unknown seas, whose absence much grieved the chaste Penelope, who now
solicited with a troop of lascivious suitors, whom with her deluding web
she still delayed, moved with doubts both of her husbands love, and welfare,
her young Sons danger through this riotous rout, Laertes old age, and many
other urging accidents, she wrote this Epistle to her long absent Lord.

TO thee Ulysses, that too long do stay,
Sends thy dear wife: write not, but come thy way.
Troy's now destroyed that Grecian maids did grutch,
Scarce Priam and his town was worth so much.
Would God, (when first to Lacedamon bound)
Th'adultrer had i'th'angry waves been drowned.
In no cold bed I matelesse then had lain,
Nor of days slow pac't hours should thus complain,
No spindle then my widdowed hands should tire,
Whilst I to spend nights tedious watch desire.
When feared not I'worse then indeed things were!
True love is always filld with anxious fear,
Often I suppose fierce Trojans thee assail;
And Hectors name but heard, I straight grow pale.
Of young Antilochus by Hector slain
If any tell, his fate procures my pain,
Or stout Patroclus fall in feigned dress,
Often weep I, doubting of thy wiles Success
That Lycian lance Tlepolem's blood did warm
My care's renewed through his dismal harm.
Lastly, whosore among'st the Argives fell:
My heart in coldness does the Ice excel.
But Hymen my chaste love did not despise,
My spouse is safe, and Troy in ashes lies.
The Greek peers are returned, the altars smoke,
And to the Gods are given the spoils they took.
Each nymph to her safe spouse, glad gifts does bring*
And they to them, the Trojan fates do sing,
Old men and mayds admiring silence keep,
And th'longing wife hangs at the tellers lip.
Some set at table tell their wars annoy,
And in a little wine, depaint whole Troy,
Here Simois flowed, there lies Sigeian land,
Here did old Priams stately Palace stand,
Here pitched Achilles Tents, Ulysses there:
Here did torn Hector, the swift horses scare.
Whats'ere was done, unto thy son (whom we
Had sent to seek thee) Nestor told, he me.
How Rhesus and how Dolon both were slain,
This in his sleep, that by deceitful train.
Dar'dst thou that too too much thine own do slight
Enter the Thracian camp in shade of night?
And slay so many helped by one alone,
Far, far more wary thou were one day known,
How my heart beat when first I heard men say
Through troops thou stol'st the Ismorian horse away!
What boots it me that Troy's by you or'ethrowne
That now there is soil, where was a wall of stone?
If I as when it stood, do still remain,
And thou thy self do from my bed abstain?
Troy's down to some, to me alone it stands,
Although with ox the victor plow those lands:
Well rip'ned corn now grows where once Troy stood;
And ^h' ground Luxuriats with Phrygian blood.
Half buried bones of men, by crooked plowes
Are torn, and grass on ruined houses grows:
Yet thou art absent, nor will it let me know
Where thou abid'st, or why thou lingrest so.
Whose're his wandering vessel puts to shore,
He still goes thence, of thee asked over and over,
And from my hands receives (if thee he see)
A letter, to deliver unto thee.
I sent to Pylon ancient Nestors seat,
But I from Pylon no sure news could get.
From thence to Sparta: Sparta could not tell
Where thou abod'st, or in what place did dwell.
Oh that Apollo's walls did yet remain,
(But I am angry with that wish again)
Then should I know, and wars should only fear,
Then should I meet with partners in my care.
What I should fear I know not, fear yet do,
And a broad path lies open to my woe.
What dangers are on land, or else on sea,
I deem them causes of thy stay to be.
Thus whilst I care, what lust in thee does move?
Thou may be taken with some foreign love,
To whom perhaps thou jeer'st thy rusticke wife,
How she at spinning spends her homely life.
But I Am deceived: hence idle thoughts away!
And thou that may return, O do not stay.
My father urges me again to wed,
And blames thy long absentment from my bed.
But let him chide, I Am thine; whilst fates lend life
Penelope will be Ulysses wife.
Yet he, by my mild prayers, and speeches kind,
At length was pleased, and calmed his angry mind.
Luxurious troops of Suitors to me come,
From Zazinth, Samos, and Dulichium.
And uncontrol'd in thine own palace reign,
Wasting (our stay, our life) thy well got gain,
Pysander, Medon, and stern ^olybus,
Greedy Eurimachus, and Antinous,
With many more, what need I here recite?
All whom thou feedstiwith purchase of thy fight.
Poor Ire, Melanthius, both thy store do wast;
And are among those that work thy loss, the last.
We are but three in all, thy wife for one,
Laertes old, Telemachus thy son;
Who late, through their vile plot, was almost slain,
Whilst he to Pylon would his way have taken.
But heavens be pleased, and to my wish incline;
That he my eyes may close, and close up thine.
For this the Heards-man, Swin-heard, old Nurce too
Withearnest vows, and fervent prayers do sue.
Feeble Laertes, as unapt through age,
Amongst his foes no rule, no sway can wage.
Telemachus in time may grow more strong,
He should be guarded by thee now he is young,
I have no force to drive my foes from home,
Oh thou, that art our only safeguard, come.
Thou have a son, (long may thou have I pray,)
Should now be trained up in his father's way,
Think on La^rtes, whose dim shrunk eyes thou
Ought to close, he even bears his last days now.
Nay I, who when thou went youths dress did wear,
At thy return, shall old, and crazed appear.
THE ARGUMENT OF PHILLIS her EPISTLE to DEMOTHOON.
DEmophoon the son of Theseus and Phaedra, returning homewards from the Trojan
wars, was by adverse storms driven on the Thracian shores; where he was
to^ally entertained both at Board and Bed, by Phillis, daughter of Lycurgus and
Crustumena, King and Queen of Thrace: with whom, after be had a while
remained, hearing of the death of Mnestheus, the deposer of his father, he went
to take possession of his rea^me of Athens. Yet with vows and prowises to
return unto her within the space of one mo^eth. B^t being detained past the
appoyn^ed time, with sundry b^sinesses of a distracted kingdom, be gave
occasion unto Phillis, impatient of delays, and griefs, to write unto him
this Epi^^le: wherein she conjures him to be mindful of his promise, and to
return to her as her just and vowed husband; which if ^ee refuse, she
desperately concludes by death to vindicate the wrongs done unto her maiden
Chastity.

THine Hostess R^odop^ian Phillis, thee
Blames absent past thy promised time to be.
Soon as the Moons horns met in a full round,
Thouswor'st again to anchor on my ground.
Four times sh'hath been in the full, four in the waine,
Yet seas bring no Actean ships again.
If you will but count the time, as lovers do,
You Will find my plaint comes not too soon to you.
Long did I hope: for slowly we believe
Ill haps, which now too sore my soul does grieve.
Often to my self I Have ly'd for thee, often thought
The winds thy swollen sails back again had brought.
Often Theseus cursed, as one that caused thy stay,
And yet perhaps he hindered not thy way.
Often feared, to Haebrus whilst you bent your course,
Your Bark might suffer in the foaming sourse.
Often for thy health have I with bended keees,
And spice-flam'd Altars, prayed to th'Deities.
Often seeing winds with heavens and seas agreed;
I Have said, if he be well, he will come with speed.
Lastly, whats'ere might hasting loves restrain,
I thought: nay, I was witty stays to feign.
Yet thee, the witnest powers no whit do sway;
Nor come, as took with love of me, thy way.
Both winds, and sails thou gav'st unto the wind,
Thy words want faith, thy sails returne^ find.
What have I done, save rashly loved thee pray?
And through that crime, I have deserved thy stay.
One fault I had, that thee received untrue,
And yet that fault has worth and merit due.
Where Is now thy vows, thy faith, hands joined to hand?
And th'God with thy false mouth so often profaned?
Where Is Hymen now, both pledge and surety too
Of our blessed match, that should e're long ensue?
First by the sea, with winds tossed to and fro,
Through which thou often had gone, were then to go.
Next by thy Grandsire (if thou did not faigne
Him too) thou swor'st, that does moved seas restrain.
By Venus, by loves Torches and his Bow,
Weapons that have procured me all this woe,
By Juno, that takes charge of married wights,
And by the Taper bearing Goddess rites.
If each of these wronged powers should venge on thee
Their wrath, thou could not bear their cruelty.
Nay, that the keele with which I was forsook,
Might able be, I rig'd thy ships late broke,
And gave thee Oars that thou might plow the main
Thus wounds, by mine own weapons I sustain.
Thy flattering words thy Gods thy kindred all,
Within the compass of my faith did fall.
Trusted thy tears; can tears be said to feign?
Even those had craft, and when thou would, would rain,
What needed there so many pledges be
Between us? half might soon have captived me.
Nor that in need I helped thee, am I moov'd
This should the sum of my rash love have proved
But foully thee in bed to entertain.
And there to dally causes all my pain,
The night before that would it had been my last
Phyllis might then have honest died and chaste.
My hopes were better 'cause I thought I might
Through this deserve thee, and that hope's but right.
To wrong an easy maid, no praise can prove;
My simpleness did well deserve thy love.
A lover, and a maid, have thou betrayed;
Heavens grant that this, thy chiefest praise be said.
In Athens when thy statue shall be placed,
And thy great Father before his spoils so graced,
When Scyron, and Procrustes, shall be read,
The Mimtaure, and Scinis conquered,
Thobes wan by war, the Centaures bick'ring,
And knocked at Palace of the shady King:
Among these, shall stand thy Image, with this Style.
This, this is he who Phyllis did beguile.
Of all thy fathers facts thou bear in mind
But one of Ariadne left behind,
What he condemned that thou esteem'st as rare;
And only of thy fathers fraud, art heir.
But she (nor spite I it) has a better mate,
And drawn by harnest tigers rides in state.
The once scorned Thracians now my bed despise,
'Cause before them I did a stranger prize.
Whilst some cry out, let her to Athens go;
There Is those can rule the warlike Thrace we trow.
The end still crowns the act: may his intent
Be crossed yet, that still judges from the event.
For should to come to me but cross the flood,
They Will say again I sought my countries good,
But I have not, yet thou nor to my court
Or Bystons glassie streams do make resort.
Thy gestures in my mind still fixed be,
Which thou did use when first thou wentst from me,
How dar'dst thou then embrace me so, and join
Such long-breathed kisses, with these lips of mine?
And with my tears, thy moist tears mix, and wail
As loath to part, thy too too prosperous gale,
And to me say, now ready to be gone,
Phyllis, see thou expect thy Demophon.
Shall I expect thee that wilt nere again
Return, or ships denied unto my Maine?
And yet I do: oh, come to me though late,
That thy vowed faith may prove but false in dare.
What wish I wretch? perhaps some strange maid thee
Retains, and love, that lightly favors me,
Thou have forgot thy Phyllis sure; if thou
But ask'st who I am, or from whence would know:
Why I am she, Demophoon that same friend,
In need that did thee board, and harbor lend,
Whose wealth did thine increase, who to thee poor
Gave many gifts, and would have given far more,
Who yielded thee Lycurgus spacious land,
A rule unsitting for a woman's hand,
As far as Rhodope, and Haemus goes,
And sacred Haebrus with his soft streams flows.
Whose chaster Zone thou to unloose had power,
And Virgin bud to crop (disastrous hour)
Tysiphone did howl those rites among,
And th'ominous owl screecht our sad marriage song.
Alecto there crowned with her snakes did stand,
The rapers light with her sepulchroll brand,
Often to the Rocks and sedgie shores I hie,
And view the vastle as with a wandering eye,
Often in the day, often in the starry night,
I look what winds against stubborn waves do fight,
What sails so ere from far I coming see,
I deem them straight my household Gods to be.
Down then I run, spite of resisting waves,
Far as the sea with streams the moist shore laves,
But nearer they, the worser I remain,
I faint and fall down midst my following train.
A Bay there is, that like a bent bow lies,
Whose farthest points in rugged horns do rise.
From thence my self I meant to have thrown and will,
Since me thou have thus deceived perform it still,
May yielding streams me to thy shores convay,
And uninter'd me may thine eyes survay.
Then though then adamant thou harder be,
Thoult say, would thus thou had not followed me.
Often have I thought by poyscous, draughts to dye,
Or by a sword to act ^y Tragedy.
Or 'bout my neck that did it self bequeath
To thy false arms a fatal cord to wreath,
With mature death i will recompense my wrong,
Nor in the choice thereof will dally long.
And that thou may be known as th'cause I Will have
This, or the like inscription on my grave.
Demophoon Phyllis guest did Phyllis kill,
He gave the cause, she th'^and, that wrought the ill.
THE ARGUMENT OF BRISEIS, her Epistle to ACHILLES.
THe Grecians at their arrival in Phrygia, besieged and took most of the
adjoining Cities near to Troy, amongst which the City Lyrnesses was utterly
razed by Achilles, from whence he brought captive with him, amongst others of
the noblest Damsels, Astinome, the daughter of Chryses, the Priest of Apollo
Smintheus; and Hippodamia, the daughter of Briseis: both which were afterward
called by their fathers names. Chryses by lot fell to Agamemnon, Briseis to
Achilles. But Agamemnon to allay the raging plague inflicted on the host by
Apollo, for the contempt offered to his Priest, was warned to deliver Chriseis
back to her father. In li^w of whom, he took Briseis from Achilles; which
injury he so beynously brooked, that with implacable wrath he forsook the
camp, vowing never more to take arms again Troy, or meddle in his country
qu^rrell, though solicited by Agamemnon with large gifts, and even Briseis
herself, both which be obstinately refused. Which when the sad-sould Bryseis
did perceive, with all the womanish Oratorie her grieved thoughts would afford
her, she thus at length adventured to write unto the valiant Greek.

THE lines thou read'st from ravished Briseis came,
whose rude hand scarce can Greekish letters frame.
What blots soever thou see, my tears did make,
And yet those tears the weight of words partake.
If of my Lord, and Spouse, it lawful be
For to complain, I Will then complain of thee.
That I was given to the King, alas!
Was not thy fault, yet in some sort it was.
For being sent for, I without delay,
Was rendered them, a partner of their way.
Each on each others face casting their eye,
Wondered in silence where our Love did lie.
Well could I have deferred, nay loved my stay;
Not one kiss gave I when I went away:
But tears like floods I shed, and hair displayed
I rent, again deeming me captive made.
Often thought I from my watchful guard to fly,
But that I feared the scouting enemy,
Lest in the night they me might apprehend,
And as a gift to Priams daughters send.
But being promised, I must go; yet thou
Alas neglect'st me, and thine ire's grown slow.
For parting, stout Pairoclus in mine ear
Whispered, why weep'st? thou shall not stay long there.
Yet thou not seek'st me, but withstand'st the same.
Go now and purchase an hot lovers name.
Ajax and Phoenix to thee came, the one
Thy cousin, the other thy companion.
With these La^tes son, who each by turn,
With prayers and gifts, did plead for my return.
Twice ten braffe Caldrons shining wondrous bright,
And seven stools equal both in art and weight.
To these ten talents of the purest gold,
And twice six horses, spirited and bold.
And what might well be spared, a beauteous train beside
Of Lesbian damsels, that were lately taken
Amongst which (but thou need'st none) there came
One of Atrides daughters for thy bride.
And is it like thou e're would me reprive,
That wilt not take now, what thou then should give?
Ah me, what fatal crime of mine could move
Against me thy scorn, how have I lost thy love?
Will fortune the distressed still disease?
Nor will a gentler gale my woes appease,
Lyrnessian walls I saw by thee or'ethrowne,
Whereof my self no slender part did own.
Three near allied to me by blood, by death,
There fell, amongst which my mother lost her breath.
I saw (his soul disseiz'd through many a wound)
My husbands bloudyed corpse distaine the ground.
Yet all these lost I had amends in thee,
For thou were husband, brother Lord, to me.
By Azure Thetis ample deep's bright power
Thou swor'st my bondage should my weal procure,
To wit that I with all my dowre, high prized,
Should by Achilles be contemned, despised,
Besides it is famed, how with the rising morn
Thou Wilt hoyse thy sails and leave me here forlorn.
Which news no sooner did mine ears arrest,
Then blood, and soul fled from my fainting breast,
Wilt go? to whom wilt wretched me bequeath,
Who to my woes shall any comfort breath.
First may I swallowed be in earths dark womb,
Or by some missive thunder find my doom,
E're without me seas froth with Pythian Oar,
Or I behind thy ships e're quit the shore,
If thoult return thy native home to see,
I shall no burden to thy vessel be.
Not as thy wife, but captive I Will be seen,
To wait on thee, I have a hand can spin,
May amongst the Achaian Nymphs the fairest maid
Be wise to thee and in thy bed be laid:
One that grave Peleus might not seem to shun,
Whom Nereus might for his great grandchild own.
Poor humble I my work will only mind,
And threads from distaffe on my spindle wind.
Only I pray let not thy wife afflict
My sufferance; she I fear, will be too strict,
Nor let her yet my scattered tresses tear,
But gently say this once was mine, forbear.
Yet so thou scorn'st me not i will bear't and more,
The fear of that alas torments me sore,
What would Atrides does repent the ill,
And sadned Greece lies prostrate at thy will.
Oh thou that conquerest others curb thine ire.
See how stout Hector does thy Grecians tire,
Take up thine arms; but first resume thy love,
And force thy foes thy vengefull wrath to prove.
For me 'twas moved, oh let it cease for me:
May I thy cause, and end of sorrow be.
Nor think it scorn to yield unto my prayer,
Oenides took arms to please his fair.
I often have heard it, thou do know it and how
His life his mother to hel's powers did vow.
Fierce was he in the wars, yet he laid by
His arms and did his country help deny,
Whom Ata^anta moov'd, oh happy she,
But my slight words las of no moment be.
Nor think I much at it, I never was thought
Thy wife but to thy bed as servant brought.
Once me a captive Lady called said I,
That name's a burden to captivity.
Now by my husbands half toomb'd bones I swear,
Of whom I still a reverend thought do bear,
By my three brothers sacred souls, who well,
For their loved country with their Country sell,
By both our heads we often have joined as one,
And by thy sword, too dearly to me known,
That since my parture Agamemnon knew,
No bed of mine, forsake me as 't is true.
Should I ask thee that question, could deny
That thou with any, save with me, did lie?
The Grecians think thou mourn'dst, but thee soft strains
Delight, thy love thee in her lap retains.
If any ask why thou denyest to fight,
Warr's harsh, but night, and music breed delight.
It Is safer far to sport with amorous fire,
Or nimbly warble on thy Thracian lyre,
Then for to wield a shield, or shake a spear,
Or on thy smooth hair heavy Helmet bear.
Thee once far better deeds then these did please,
And thou did love fame got by war, not ease.
Were only stout when I was captive made?
Or with my country, did thy courage fade?
The Gods forbid, oh may thou one day hide
Thy Pelian javeline in stern Hectors side.
Ye Greeks, send me as legate to my Lord,
I with my words sweet kisses will afford.
Not Phaenix shall, not sly Ulysses too,
Nor Teucers brother plead as I will do.
It Is much his neck to embrace with these known arms
And with my powerful eye, to tie loves charms.
Though then the Sea less merciful thou be,
I mute, my speaking tears shall work on thee.
Nay now even now (so may thy aged sire
Be blessed with years, and Pyrrhus fame acquire)
Be mindful of me, nor (whilst ire bears sway)
Consume thy Briseis through thy long delay.
But if thy love convert to hate, whom thou
Forcest without thee live, to fate make bow.
And so thou do: my limbs and color fade,
Yet hope of thee my parting soul has staid.
Of which deprived unto my spouse I Will hie,
And brothers, worthy act to cause me die!
But why thus bid'st me die? oh! rather kill
Me with thine own hands, I Have some blood left still.
And let that sword, which had not Pallas stayed,
Had pierced Atrides breast, my breast invade.
No rather spare my life, and to thy friend,
Contribute that thou to thy foe did lend,
Oh let the proud Neptun an Troy afford
Thee foes and matter for thy Warlike sword,
And whether that thou mean to part, or stay,
As my just Lord, command me come away.
THE ARGUMENT of PHAEDRA'S Epistle to Hippolytus.
THESEUS, the son of Aegeus having escaped the Labyrinth, and returning
homewards with his adjutrix A^iadne, axd her sister Phaedra, the d^u^^^ers of
Minos, King of Creet, in the way he to^cted at the Island of Naxos; where he
leaves Ariadu^, and with Phaedra (whom he af^e wards mar^^a) (...) away. But
in process of time Theseu, being a^s^^t) Phaedra falls in love with
Hippolytus, the son of ^^heseus by Hippolita, Queen ^f the Amazon^. But ^eem
love rather with manly actions, and Dia^^^'s sports, than with women, often
frequenting the solitary woods, herest her of all means to sp^ake unto him.
The wily stepuame resolves to write: and laying all motherly modeslie aside,
stung with unnatural lust, attempts the bashful youth with this insinuating
Epistle.

THe health she wants, except the same thou lend
Phaedra to the A^azonian youth does send.
Pray read my letter, how can it annoy?
Perhaps there is in it, that may cause thy joy.
By these are secrets borne through seas and land,
And one foe reads what comes from the others hand.
Thrice did I strive to speak, thrice my weak tongue
Faild me; and in my mouth my words still hung.
Often I with shame did mix my love, too light:
But what I blushed to speak, love bad me write.
What love commands, we ought not to despise,
Who rules and awes the powerful Deities.
He first to me in doubt to write, did say,
Phaedra, write on, thy love he shall obey.
Aid me great Love, and as thou rul'st in me,
So cause in him a mutual sympathy.
By no base sin I Will break my marriage vows,
My fame, should thou enquire, no stain yet knows.
Love comes more heavy through its sloth: I hide
Within me flames, my breast does wounds abide.
As the first yoke the tender Heifer pains,
As new backed Colt the curbing hit disdaines:
So rude, so rawly love's by me endured,
Nor is my mind to the new load inured.
Full hard in giddy youth we learn loves Art,
But in our riper years, with pain and smart.
^ly fames first sacrifice shall be to thee,
And both of us alike will guilty be.
It Is something from fraught boughs ripe fruit to cull,
And budding rose with nimble hand to pull.
Yet though my life has hitherto been chaste,
Nor by impurer spots, or taints defaced;
I grieve not, since I noble love embrace,
A foul adulterer makes his sin more base.
Should Juno yield to me her thunderer,
I before Jove would Hippolite prefer.
Nay, trust me, I do now delight in new
And unknown sports, wild beasts in chase pursue.
No goddess now but Delia pleases me,
Graced with her Bow, I love, I like, as thee.
Dark groves I visit, Dear to toils constrain,
And cheer my full-mouthed hounds over empty plain.
The tremulous dart, with arm advanced, I shake,
Or on the grassie ground, repose do take.
And often in winged chariots while I ride,
With curbing raines the swift-heeld coursers guide.
Now like th 'Eleides whom fury fil^,
Or those who Tymbrels ring on Ida's hills.
Or like to them whom the strange uncouth sight
Of Driad's, or the horned Fawnes affright,
I madly run: for when my fury's ceast,
They tell me all: close fires do scortch my b^east.
Perhaps by Fate we thus to love are bent,
And Venus tribute seeks from the whole descent.
First Jove of fair Europa made a rape,
(For thence we spring) through Bulls assumed shape:
My mother doting too on such a beast,
Foully her burden and her crime encreast.
Faithless Aegides by a clew of thread,
And through my sisters aid, his prison fled.
And lo! lest I should seem degenerate,
Alike I yield unto my kindreds fate.
It is ordained our love thus cross should prove,
I thee, thy father did my sister love.
By thee, and Theseu^, are two sisters won,
Erect two Trophies of our house alone.
What time that I unto Eleusis went,
Would Gnossian land had kept me from the intent.
Oh! then it was (though thou before did please)
Fierce love my quiet members did disease.
White were thy garments, chaplets crowned thy head,
And modest redness did thy cheeks o're-spread.
That visage which to others harsh did seem,
I for a stout and valiant look did deem.
I hate your youths in womanish attires,
A manly feature little dress requires.
Thee that thy sternnesse, hairs so loosly placed,
And dust-soyld cheeks became, and sweetly graced.
When thou with rains do cause thy Courser bound,
I'dmire to see thee nimbly ride the round.
Or when with ablearme thou throwst the dart,
Mine eyes are fixed on thy agile art.
Or when thy hunting Pole thou take, with bright
Steel tipped: whats'ere thou do does please my sight.
Thy harshnesse to the ridged woods bequeath:
Nor is it fit for thee I suffer death.
Why so in Cynthia's sports do so delight,
And take from Venus all her due, her right?
"What wants successive rest, can never endure:
"This cheeres the limbs, and does new strength procure.
Mark thou thy Delia's arms, her shafts, and Bow;
Which should it still stand bent, would limber grow.
Famous was Cephalus in woods: much game
Fell by his hands inevitable aim.
Yet he Aurora loved: who often would come
To sport with him in aged Tythons room.
Adonis often, and Cytherea fair,
Under some Oaks large shade, the grass did bear.
Oenides did Atalanta love;
And by his spoils did his affection prove.
Let us at length be numbered then with these;
Take love away, and th'woods must needs displease.
I Will thy companion be, and follow over
Dark rockie groves, nor fear the tusked Bore.
Two Seas their waves do against Isthmos rear:
And the small earth dothboth their battries hear.
There in Traezena we will together reign,
I now for this my native soil disdain.
Theseus is hence, long may he keep away,
The young Perithous him forsooth does stay.
Whom (except we against truth opposers be)
He before Phaedra does prefer, or thee.
Nor have I felt his injuries alone,
But both of us his wrongs have largely known.
My brothers bones, with his three knotted Mace,
He broke; and left my sister in diff^esse.
The chiefest amongst the Axe-arm'd mayds brought forth
Thee to the world, a parent full of worth.
Yet her the cruel Theseus slew; nor was
So great a son's brave-mother safe, alas!
And that before marriage, lest thou might perchance
Obtain his kingdom as inheritance.
Brothers thou had by me too: which not I,
I do protest, but he enforced to dye.
And may she oh! thou fairest, that does mind
To hinder thee, death in her labor find.
Why now do reverence thy fathers bed,
Which he himself disclaimes, and thence is fled?
Let not vain names aff^ight thy manly mind,
'Cause I thy step dame am to thee so kind.
That needless piety was in Satarnes time
Esteemed: but future years shall called a crime.
Saturne's now gone, with him his laws decay:
And Jove the world now rules; then love obey.
Who has ordained that just, which does delight,
And brothers may with sisters join as right.
That kindreds chaine^ the surer linked, whose bands
Venus herself tie, with conjugall hands.
Nor need we cloak our love, we will thrive from thence,
Our kindreds name shall smother our offense.
If our embraces should be seen, each shall
Commend, and me a courteous stepdame call,
Nor need'st thou in the dark to open my gate,
Or gull my Porterin thy coming late.
We in one house did, in one house will live,
Thou gav'st known kisses, shall known kisses give.
With me thou shall be safe, and freely seen
Laid in my bed, nay praised for this thy sin.
Oh! then delay not, but let us straightway join.
So may love spare thy breast, which scorcheth mine.
Thou see I scorn not humbly to entreat.
Where Is now my pride become, my speeches great!
I once resolved not for to yield at all,
(If in our loves we ought resolved may call.)
Yet lo! my princely arms are raised to thee,
Alas! lovers know not what things fitting be!
Foyld shame has fled his colors: oh! thou fair,
Grant my just suit, and to be coy forbear.
What though my father rule a farre-stretcht sea,
And thunder-darting Jove great Grand-sire be?
What though my Grand-sire's front's empall'd with rays:
Who in his purple chariot guides the days?
Nobility submits to love: incline
To pity then; if not for me, for mine.
I for my dow^e possess Crect, Jove's loved land:
There my whole Court shall be at thy command.
My mother moved a Savage Bull: will thou
Then fierce and stubborn beasts, more cruel grow?
For Veuus sake, thy Phaedr^ not disdain:
So may thou love, and still be loved again.
So may Diana aid thee at thy will;
So may the woods yield store of game to kill.
So love the Satyrs, and each turall Pane,
So may the Boar fall by thy Iaveline slain.
So may the Nymphs, though thou to maids art cursed
Bring thee cool streams to quench thy burning thirst.
To these I add my tears, do thou surmise
(And read) to see them falling from mine eyes.
THE ARGUMENT of OENONE'S Epistle to PARIS.
HEcuba the wise of Priam, being with child of Paris, dreamed that she was
brought to bed of a Firebrand: Priam consults with his prophet: who answers,
that the child she went with, should prove the fatal instrument of Troy's
destruction. No sooner was it borne, then Priam commands it to be exposed to
the mercy of wild beasts. But the mother secretly conveyes it to mount Ida,
there to be soslered by the shepherds, where (grown to man's estate) he fell
in love with the Nymph Oenone, and married her. Not long after, made judge in
that contention of the goddesses, about the golden apple: and for his judgment
on Venus side, being by her promised the fairest of women, at length known and
acknowledged by his father; he sailed into Greece, and from thence brought
with him Helena, the wife of Menclaus. Of which when Oenone heard, troubled at
his unexpected change, she wrote unto him this following Epistle, wherein she
indevours to recall him to her love again, lays open the perils that are like
to ensue on this his rape. And lastly, persuades him to send back Helen, and
take her again, in whose love she affirms her only joy, nay lise consists.

TO Paris hers, though hers alas! he scorn
To be; from Ida sends a Nymph for lorne.
Do read? or thy new wife forbids? yet do,
No Mycenaan hand these letters drew.
Oenene famed through Phrygian woods and plains,
Paris, so thou permit, of thee complains,
What power? what god did our chaste loves disjoyne?
Or what is my fault I should not still be thine?
"Ills justly merited we lightly bear,
But those that come desertlesse, heavy are.
Thou were not then so great when first I wooed
Thee for my spouse, the offspring of a flood.
Who now Priamides (forsooth) art proved,
Servant thou were, as servant thee I loved,
Often in the shade we both our flocks have fed,
Whilst leaves and grass, affoorded us a bed,
Often we on straw, on hay we often did rest,
The hoary frost in homely Cot deprest.
Who now shall show thee lawnds for game most fit?
And caves where wild beasts with their young do sit?
Often have I helped to spread thy nets distained,
And over the tops of hills thy cheered hounds trained
Each Beech my name carved out by thee does bear;
And thy Oenone is read every where.
As they increase, so spreads my name along;
Grow, grow, and rise a witness of my wrong.
Close by a purling silverie brook, there grows
A Poplar, which of me fresh record shows.
Long may thou live, I pray, live happy years,
That in thy rind this carved Dystich bears.
When Paris lives, and does Oenone shun,
Shall Xanthus streams back to their f^untaines run.
Xanthus recoyle, flow streams unto your head,
Paris the false is from Oexone fled.
That day my sat produced, that day did prove
The frosty winter of our changed love.
When for thy judgment, Venus, loves proud Dame,
And Pallas (armed more comely) naked came.
Which when thou toldst to me, my timorous breast,
And limbs, were with a gelid sear oppressed.
The aged I consul^ with, they reply
And thence aver, some ominous ill was nie.
Straight was there timber for'd, a Fleet prepared,
And brimmed vessels on the blew seas reared.
Yet wept'st thou parting: do not this deny:
(On thy last love the greatest shame does lie.)
Thou wept'st (I say) and saw my tears abound;
Whilst both like sad, did tears with tears confound.
Not so the Elme's incircled by the Vine,
As was my neck claspt by those arms of thine.
How often did faigne the wind contrary stood?
Though smiling, thy companions saw 'twas good.
H^w often thy numbered kisses did retell?
How loath was thy sad tongue to say, Farewell!
An easy gale thy hoyst sails filled: all over
Seas froath'd with labor of thy nimble Oar.
I, whilst I could, thy flying vessel viewed:
And the dry sands with falling tears imbrew'd.
Invok't the green Nereides, that e're long
Thou might return, to wit, unto my wrong.
Alas thee my prayers to others use brought home,
And for a harlot did I kind become.
A mount there is, that over-lookes the seas,
Securely scorning waves vain batteries.
Hence I thy ship viewed, as I gazing stood:
For joy I Would almost leapt into the slood.
But when I saw a purple streamer shine
On the carved stern, I feared 'twas none of thine.
The ship's now nearer, and to shore applied,
A female face with trembling heart I spied.
That not enough (oh my stupiditie!)
The lustful dame did in thy bosom lie.
Then I my garments rent, my barebreasts beat:
And tore my cheeks, with brackish tears repleat.
The sacred Ida with my force chings filled.
And thence, unto my home, moist tears distilled.
May Hellen so weep, robbed of hapless love,
And what sh'hath made me suffer, may she prove.
Now home thou bringst one, who has basely fled
The sweet contentments of a lawful bed.
Yet when a Swains poor life thou did embrace,
None then thy wife, save chaste Oenone was.
It Is not thy wealth, or palace, moves me ought:
Nor strive I to be Priams daughter thought.
Though Priam need not think himself reviled
In me; or Hecub scorn me for her child.
I worthy am, and might a Princess be:
Well with my hands a Scepter would agree.
Nor scorn me, since with thee, on Beech leaves spread
I lay: I Am fitter for a purple bed.
Lastly, my love is safe; no wars disease
Thy rest, no vengefull vessels furrow seas.
Hellen is su'd for with infestive Arms,
And brings a dowry only great in harms.
Whether't be fit she be returned or no,
Thy brothers, or Polydamas will show,
Ask Priam's, ask Antenors grave advice,
Whose long experienced age has made them wise.
It Is base a rape before thy ^ountries love
To prize: just arms her husbands wrongs do move,
Nor can her faithful warrant, who so soon
With ease was to thy strange embraces won:
As young Atrides wailes his harder fate,
By foreign love wronged in his nuptial state.
Which thou shall one day do: no Art can be
Sufficient to regaine lost chastity.
Say she love thee, so did she Atreus son;
Who now lies matelesse in his bed alone.
Thrice happy Hectors fair Andromache,
As she by him, should I be loved by thee,
But thou far lighter art than leaves when dry,
Which before each easy gale diffusely fly.
Less weight, less constancy in thee is borne,
Than in the slender Sun-parcht ears of corn.
Thy sister once, with hairs that loosly hung,
Thus in prophetic raptures to me sung.
What do Oenone? why on sands do thou
Sow seeds? and shores with gainlesse oxen plow?
A Greekish heyfer, which shall thee, thy home,
And country spoil (yet fate defend) does come.
With speed, the obscene vessel sink, what store
Alas! of Phrygrand blood it brings to shore!
This said, her handmaids her with ^rew: my hair
Like stubborn bristles, stood on end for fear.
Ah wretch, too true a prophet were to me,
Behold that heyfer in my bounds lives free.
What though she beauteous be, she is yet unchaste,
And fled from home, a strange guests love embraced.
What Theseus 'twas I know not; but before,
One Theseus named, her from her country bore.
And can thou her thus ransomed, chaste surmise?
My love alas! in this has made me wise.
Call it a rape, do, owe thy crime that name:
Sure she that was so often raped, liked the same.
Oenone though forsook, does chaste remain,
Though thine own laws thou ought to sustain.
Me nimble Satyrs did in troops frequent,
Whilst woods concealed me from their bad intent.
Me horned Faunus, crowned with wreathes of Pine,
Did over Idaean hills to search incline.
Me Troy's great Champion loved, and he alone,
He only, did possess my virgin Throne.
And that by force, yet not without torn hair,
And scornful scarres left on his face so fair.
Nor gold, nor precious gemmes did I require:
It Is base to prostitute the corpse for hire.
Yet he his physic did to me impart,
And taught my ruder hands his helpful Art.
What powerful herb, or healing plant does grow,
Its secret virtues, and effects I know.
Woes me, that love no powerful herb can cure!
That stored with Art, I should in Art be poor!
Even Phoebus did Phaerean Oxen feed,
And inly wounded with my flames, did bleed.
And yet the help, no simple-bearing field,
Nor th'unshornegod can give; thou, thou, can yield.
Thou can, I say, and oughtst: a virgin spare:
I with the Greeks, against thee no Arms do bear.
But thine I am: from childhood linked to thee:
And whilst I live, thine wish, thine pray to be.
THE ARGUMENT OF HIPSYPHILE'S Epistle to Jason.
PElias being told by the Oracle, that he should then be near his death,
when as at the sacrifice of Neptune he should see a youth coming toward him
with one foot bare; Jason happening to have lost his shoe in the mudef the River
Avaurus, whilst he hasted to the Cerem my, and observed by his uncle, was by
him (both to secure, and prolong his reign) animated, to sail unto Colchos,
to setch th^nce the goiden Fleet. The ambitious Jason condescends to the
adventure, and forthwith building him a ship, (which of (...) the Architect's
name, he called Argo) together with the slower of the Grecian youth, commits
himself unto the sea: by the way he touched at the Island of Lemnos; where
Hipsyphile ( who alone in the massacre of the men, by the women of that
country; had saved her father Thoas) then reigned: by whom he was courteously
entertained: where having slay'd for the space of two years (Hipsyphile left
with child) by the insligation of his companions, he proceeded in his
expedition, and shortly arrived at Colchos; where Medea favoring (Mars his
brass boov'd Oxen, and the watchful Dragon overcome) he was made moster both
of the golden Fleece, and her: with whom he secretly sailed from thence, and
landed in Thessaly. Hipsyphile hearing of his return, in this her following
Epistle, she first congratulates his fortune, then blames his remissness in not
writing unto her, inveighs against Medea, and (urged with memomorie of her
undeserved wrongs) concludes with execrable curses against them both.

FAme sings, that thou unto Thessa^ia's shore
Artsafe returned, rich in thy fleeced Ore.
I gratulate thy health, though 'thad been good
By thine own hands I this had understood.
Perhaps when thou did to my kingdom mindo
To come, thou were withstood by adverse wind.
And yet though winds were cross, it would have been
Small charge, to have sent a greeting to thy Queen.
Why first did fame, and not thy letters, show
How Mars his Bulls, tamed, drew the hated plow?
How from sown seeds a race of Soldiers grew:
In whose spilt blood, thou did no hand imbrew.
How the she Dragon charmed, did sleep obey,
Whilst thence his golden charge thou bor'st away.
Oh blessed me! if to incredulous wights
I could but say, it is true, so Jason writes.
But why do I at thy neglect repine?
I have enough so I may still be thine.
It Is famed, a barbarous witch with thee is come.
And made thy beds sole partner in my room.
"Love lightly credits: yet may I be said
Thee fondly rash, of feigned crimes t'upbrayd.
Late from Haemonia one unto me came,
Who scarce within my doors, when I exclame
Lives, lives, my Jason: who with down cast eyes,
Fixed steadfast on the earth, no word replies.
Forth then I leapt, my vesture rent, and said,
Oh! lives he, or in his; is my death made?
He lives said he: to which I made him swear,
And scarcely could believe him, yet through fear
Revived somewhat; I of thy facts domand:
Who told how Mars his Oxen plowd the land:
How from sown serpents teeth there straight arose
A dreadful host of ready harnest foes.
Which earth born race slain through their own debate,
Fulfild the limits of their one days fate.
And of the Serpent foyld, then ask again:
Whilst fear and hope strange faiths in me maintain.
Thus whilst he talked, and did each thing display,
He somewhat closely did my wrongs bewray.
Where Is now thy plighted faith? thy vows? ah vile!
And torch more fit to have light my funeral pile,
Yet knew'st me not by stealth: for Juno there,
And Rose-crown'd Hymen, at my nuptials were.
Nor Juno, nor yet Hymen, were at hand,
But dire Erynnis bore the ominous brand.
With Myniae why dealt I? Tritonian Pine?
Or why did Typhis to my shores incline?
Here was no golden Fleeced Ram, nor here
The old Aceta's stately mansions were.
At first I meant (but fate did it deny)
Hence with a feminine band to force thee fly:
(For Lemnian Ladies too too-well have fought:
With such a guard I should have safety sought.
But thee no sooner saw I, then I loved:
Two springs, two winters, here thou staid'st unmoved:
The third year come; when thou must needs away,
With intermingled tears thou thus did say,
"My Dear, I must be gone (so gods decree)
"Thine I go hence, thine will I ever be.
"And may thy wombs blessed bur then live, we prove
"To it each happy parents, full of love.
This said, thy treacherous eyes straight ruined a shore:
And well I mind it, thou could speak no more.
Thou were the last that did the ship ascend,
That scuds, fresh gales did hollow sails extend:
And furrowing keele, the bluish billows tore:
I to the seas still gazed, thou to the shore.
Close by, a tower there stood, to which I flew,
Whilst tears my bosom, and my face embrew.
Through them I looked: and my souls favoring eye
Did seem beyond its wonted space to spy:
Add my chaste prayers, and many a fear-mixt vow,
All which (thee safe) must be performed now.
But what? shall I vows for Medea pay?
My heart to grief, my love to rage gives way.
Shall I bear gifts to th'Temple for thy loss?
Shall sacrifices fall for such a cross?
Still feared I, lest thy Father should have chose,
And entertained a Grecian maid thy spouse:
The Greeks I feared, a harlot breeds my woe,
And wounds are given me by an unknown foe.
In faee, nor merits can she please; by charms,
Herbs by dire sickle cropped, she works thy harms.
She from her sphere to draw the Moon essays,
And in dark clouds t'obscure the Suns bright rays;
She streams, and headlong torrents makes to stand,
And woods, and mountains moves at her command.
Over graves she wanders with disheveled hairs,
And from warm piles the half-burnt bones she bears.
The absent curses, waxen models frames;
And with sharp pins their tortured livers maimes.
And thus (which, would I knew not) she makes sure
Her love; which form and virtue should procure.
And can this wretch embrace? join breast to breast?
And in the silent night securely rest?
But as the Bulls, and Serpent by her Art
She tamed; so has she wrought, so won thy Heart.
Besides, to thy achievements she her name
Does add, and is a blot unto thy fame:
Whilst some of Pelias faction do give out,
Charms wrought thy deeds, believed too amongst the rout.
And say, not Lsoa, but Medea bore
The rich Phryxean Fleece from Colchian shore.
Thy parents both do this thy match withstand,
By thee brought home from Hyperborean strand:
Let her from Tanais, Scythian fennes, the wide
Phasis, her native soil, a Mace provide.
Inconstant thou! more light than springtide Airel
Why do thy words no weight of promise bear?
Mine thou wentst hence, again why came not mine?
I thine was going, coming still am thine.
If high descent, great blood, thy mind can bend,
I from Minoan Thoas do descend.
Bac^h^s my grandsire is, whose star-crownd Bride
With rays excells each lesser sign beside.
Lemnos shall be my Dowre, a fruitful land;
And with all these, thou shall my self command.
Who now am brought to bed, (thy heart with joy
Possess) the author sweetened my annoy.
Blessed in my number too: for me the chaste
Lucina with a double birth has graced.
Who like their father are in face, and smile,
Save that they want their fathers fraud, and guile.
These two, as Legates, I to thee had sent,
Had not their cruel stepdame changed m'intent.
I feared Medea: (worse than stepdame) she
Has hands still pressed to all impiety.
She that could her own brothers limbs dis-joyne,
Would she have spared, think thou, these babes of mine?
Yet her (oh charmed madam) thou do far
Before thine own Hipsyphile prefer.
She first knew thee in an adult'rate bed,
But with chaste souls did we each other wed.
My sire I saved, hers she betrayed to ill:
She Colchos fled: my Lemnos holds me still.
But what need this? if bad the good ore-come,
And she in crimes rich only, joys my room.
I blame, but not the Lemnian deeds admire,
For g^^^fe sends arms unto distracted ire.
Suppose (which should have been) cross winds had bore
False thee, and thy companions on my shore.
And I to have met thee with my double birth,
Could not have hid thee in the yawning earth?
With what face me or them could thou have seen?
Of what strange death, wretch, had thou worthy been?
And yet by me thou had been safe, and free;
Not for thy worth, but love that dwells in me.
But with her blood I would my face have died,
And thine, through charms, which she has me denied.
I to Medea would Medea be;
(And if the gods will to just prayers agree)
As I lament, so may she mourn, so grieve,
And her own laws with pain enough perceive.
As with two children spouselesse left am I,
Like fate may she with spouse and children try.
Nor ill-got goods long keep, but basely lose,
And banished, range the world without repose.
As to her brother, and her Sire proved she,
Such to her spouse and children may she be.
Seas and earth past, let her attempt the sky,
Poo^e, in despair, and by self slaughter d^e.
Thus wronged Thbantias prays; both man and wife,
Live in a cursed bed, a wretched life.
THE ARGUMENT OF DIDO her EPISTLE to AENEAS.
AFter the destruction of Troy, Aeneas the son of Anchises, and Venus, (having
freed his children, house hold gods, and aged father from the flames) prepared
a fleet, and committed himself to the sea, in quest of Latium: by tempests he
was driven on the coasts of Lybia: where (if we may rely on the authority of
Virgil) both he and his companions were courteously entertained by Dido,
daughter of Belus, K^^g^o Tire, who had fled thither to avoid the cruelty of
her brother Hiarbas, the inhumane murderer of her beloved husband Sichaeus,
Priest of Hercules. Not long stayed he with her, ere Mercury was sent to
admonish him, and urge him on to his intended journey. The wretched Dido having
with many persuasions endeavored to restrain him from this his hoted purpose;
but seeing both them, and her love lightly regarded, oppressed with grief, even
unto death, she wrote this her sarewell Epistle to the relentlesse Heroc.

SO when fates call, near to Meanders spring,
Midst the moist sedge, the snowy Swan does sing.
Not that by words I hope thou may be moved,
I write: I know by th'gods that is disapproved.
But since my fame, pure mind, and body chaste,
I thus have lost, it is light my words to wast.
Art then resolved to leave thy Dido here?
Shall one wind hence thy sails and promise bear?
And will thou with thy ships unloose thy vow?
And Latium seek, but where thou do not know?
Does new built Carthage, nor the rising wall,
Or kingdom given thee, move thee not at all?
Deeds done thou fliest, undone thou seekst, and 'bout
The world thou wilt go, to find a strange land out.
Which when thou find'st, therein who will let thee live?
Or who their fields to unknown folks will give?
Another love, and Dido thou wilt go seek,
And plight more troths, which thou again may break.
When like to Carthage will thou build a Town?
And on such people from thy Towers look down?
Should these succeed, and nothing cross thy vow,
Where will thou sinde a wife shall love thee so?
Like to a sulphurous Taper I consume,
Or Incense wasting in the sacred fume.
Aeneas still fixed before my wakefull eyes:
On him in days, in nights my fancy lies.
That thanklesse wretch, that scorned my gifts, and me,
Whom I might want, if I my good could see.
Yet him I hate not, though he mean but ill:
But his untruth bewail, and love more still.
Oh Venus spare thy daughter: and thou Love,
Let thy false brother, thy sweet warfare prove.
Or else let him I once did love, (nor now
Do I disdain't) at least not scorn me though.
But I Am deceived, deluded, now I find,
For he quite differs from his mothers mind.
Thee stones, and rocks, and oaks on mountains bred,
And savadge beasts brought forth, and fostered.
Or else the sea, through which (though waves say nay)
Adventurous man, thou meanst to force thy way.
Where fliest? see storms withstand thee: but for me
They do conspire: how Eurus swells the sea!
For what to thee l'de rather owe, let me
To winds be bound; far, far, more just than thee.
Nor would I thou (vile wretch that weigh'st not these)
Should meet thy ruin on the forrag'd seas.
At a dear rare thou do thy hatred buy,
If to shun me thou think it slight to dye.
Winds straight will'lye, and seas their rage restrain,
And Triton scud about the watery plain.
Oh that with winds thy mind were changed, and sure
It will; oxcept than Oak you are more obdure.
What would did thou not know feas rage? that thou
Having so often tried wilt trust them now.
Though thou put forth from out a calmed bay,
yet the vast deep may yield thee much dismay.
Besides seas favor no perfidious men,
But sharply plague them for so foul a sin.
Chiefly when love is wronged, 'cause loves great dame
They say, from Cytherean billows came:
Yet lost I, fear lest thou that caused my woe,
Should be destroyed, or seas entombe my foe.
No live: for so I may revenged be;
And men shall say, thou wroughtst my Tragedy.
Suppose thou were (yet be this Omen vain)
Seaz'd with a storm: how would thy mind remain?
Straight would occur thy false tongues perjurie,
And Dido by thy fraud constraind to dye.
Thy wronged wifes shape shall to thy sight repair,
Sad, and all bloody, with dishevelled hair.
Then would thou say, these, these, deserved be,
And think what thunder falls, should light on thee.
A while to seas, and thine own ire give way:
Good will thy stay be, safer too thy way.
And though not me, Jesus spare; since thou
Have in my death's dire title coin enough.
What has Ascanius, or thy gods deserved?
Shall waves devour them, late from flames preserved?
But thou, vile wretch, for all the oaths thou swor'st,
Nor gods, nor father, on thy shoulders bor'st.
All, all, were lies; nor did with me begin,
Nor fell I first in thy deceitful gin.
A^^'st for Creusa? know vile wretch, that she
Died in despair, alone forsook by thee.
This me thou toldst, and it my tears did move,
My pain far lesser than my crime shall prove.
Nor that the gods do hate thee, can I doubt,
Seven years on lands, on seas, thou roam'st about.
Then I received thee, on my borders thrown,
And gave a kingdom to thee, yet scarce known.
Oh would with these I had contented bin!
Or were the mention silenc't of my sin.
That day wherein the thick descending rain
Forced us to take one cave, first caused my pain.
A voice I heard, and thought the Nymphs did sing,
But they were Imps fore told my ruining.
On me wronged faith I did Sichaeus owe,
Take vengeance; unto whom with shame I go.
His statue, shrin'd in Marble have I made,
Which leavie boughs, and snowy fleeces shade.
And that, me thought, I heard, four times to say,
With trembling voice, Eliza, come away.
I come, I come, thy once vowed wife, though now
My shameful deed does make my speed more slow.
Forgive me pray, the author of the same
Was one that might extenuate my blame.
His heavenly mother, and his pious load
Of father, gave me hopes of his abode.
And though I erred, yet my intents were good,
Nor would it irke me, had his frail faith stood.
But as my life at first was ill begun;
So does the tenor of the same hold on.
My husband fell, at holy Altar slain,
And from that deed, accru'd my brothers gain.
My spouse dear ashes, and my country I
Exi^'d left: forced by following foes to fly.
The seas and brother escaped, amongst strangers brought,
There I the land I gave to thee, first bought.
I built a City, raised wide walls without,
Envied by all the neighboring towns about.
Straight wars arose, with which I was beset,
E're I rude gates, or arms could ready get.
A thousand Suitors did me like, and woe,
Complaining that I loved they knew not who*
Why yeeld'st me not unto Hiarba's hands?
I Will give my Arms, up to thy cursed commands.
Besides my brothers hands would be embrew'd
As well in mine, as in my husbands blood.
Lay by thy Relics, by thy touch profaned,
"Vile is the service of an impious hand.
Rather than thou their worshipper shoul'dst be,
'Twere better they from flames had never escaped free.
Perhaps thy Dido's left with child, and part
Of thee rests in my womb, as well as heart.
The babe shall join in its sad mothers fall,
So shall thou cause th'unborne child's funeral.
Iulus brother, with me wretch, shall dye:
And one self pain, two bodies shall destroy.
But th'god bids go: would he had barred thy way.
Nor Trojans e're had trod on Tyrian Bay.
Through him thou thus by adverse storms art crossed,
And thy de^re time, on rapid streams is lost.
If Hector lived, and Troy now stood again,
Thou Would scarce go seek it to endure such pain.
Not Simcis, but Ty^^^'s sought by thee,
Where when thou come, thou wilt but a stranger be.
And whilst that it obscure, and hidden lies,
Thou Wilt scarce attain it, save with aged eyes.
Oh rather take for Dowre, (doubts laid aside)
These people, and Pigmilions wealthy pride!
With prosperous luck place Troy in Tyrian land:
And as a King, rule, govern, and command.
If thou wish war, or that Iulus feign
Would vaunt it with a proud triumphant train:
'Cause naught shall want, we I find a foe to wound
This place with peace, this does with Arme^ abound.
Now by thy Father, and thy Brothers how,
And by thy gods, fellows in flight, and woe.
(So may Troyes remnant still victorious be;
And may a period to thy perils see.
So may Ascanius years with joy increase,
And old Anchis^, bones still rest in peace.)
Spare thou the house, that offers to be thine!
What fault, save love, can thou object as mine?
From Phthian, nor Mycenean land came I;
Nor did my spouse, or sire, thy peace deny.
If thou disdain'st me for thy wife, I Will be
Thine hostess: any thing, to live with thee.
I know the waves on Afric shores that play,
Sometimes they give, sometimes deny men way.
When winds are calm, then hoyse thy sails, you see
Thy ships now moored in the harbor be.
Let me observe thy tide, and time, to go:
Nor shall thou stay then, though thy self wish so.
Thy wearied mates ask rest to free their care,
And thy torn Fleet craves yet some small repair.
By my deserts, or thee what more I owe,
And by my hopes of marriage, do not go.
Stay whilst the seas are calm, or else my love,
That I may learn my heavier Fate to prove.
If not: by death I vow to right my wrong,
Nor shall thou cruel be against me long.
Oh! that my writing posture thou could spy:
Upon my lap the Da^dan sword does lie.
Whilst on the blade, tears from my pale cheeks slide,
Which shall in stead of tears, with blood be died.
How well thy gifts do with my fate agree!
At easy rate thou'st built a Tomb for me.
Nor does my breast now first endure a wound:
For elder scarres of love, may there be found.
Dear sister A^^e, that knew'st my amorous play,
Shall thy last duties to my ashes pay.
Nor will I then Sichaeus wife be sed,
But on my Marble shall this verse be read.
The cause and sword that Dido slew, alone
Aeneas gave; but the hand she used, her own.
THE ARGUMENT OF HERMIONE'S Epistle to Orestes.
HErmione the daughter of Menelaus and Helena, was by her Grandsire Tyndarus (
in the absence of her father, then at the w^rres of Troy) betrothed to Orestes,
the son of Agamemnon and Clytemnestra. But Achilles being slain, and Pyrrhus
succeeding, at their return from Troy, her father (ignorant of the former
contract) gave her in marriage unto Pyrrhus: who by force took her to his bed.
Of whose unjust proceeding she h^rd complains to her Orestes, urging him in
to attempt her rescue, with examples), and the possibility of her freedom:
concluding with an irreconciliable hatred against her tyrannizing Lord, and a
constant resolution to l^ve the votary, or dye the sacrifice of her first
chosen lover.

TO thee my Spouse, and Cousin, once I write,
Now Cousin only, robbed of husbands right.
Me Pyrrhus stout, true image of his sire,
Vuniustly keeps unto himself entire.
What might be done, I did, his force to quail;
Nor more could an effeminate hand prevail.
Pyrrhus, said I, what do? more love afford,
I can revenge, and know I have a Lord:
But he more deaf than seas, no whit forbeares,
But dragges me home by my disordred hairs.
What worse could I have done, had Sparta's soil,
And Grecian mayds, been to the foes a spoil?
Far better used Achaia Hectors fair,
When Danaish fires did Phrygian wealth impair.
But dear Orestes, if a care of me
In thee remain, thine own from bondage free.
If any stole thy cattle, would thou go
To rescue them, and for thy wife be slow?
Let Menelaus thy example be:
Who moved just arms, his ravished wife to free.
If he at home content had idly slept,
The Trojan swain fair Hellen still had kept.
Thou need'st prepare no fleet, no arms, or store
Of men, come thou thy self, I wish no more.
Though so I might be rescued: it is no shame
To war in the defense of wedlockes fame.
Atreus to both of us was grandsire, so
If not my husband, you are my cousin though.
As spouse thy wife, cousin thy cousin mind;
These double names a double duty bind.
My Grandsire, (then my guardian) did assign,
And with my liking me for ever thine;
My father, after, me to Pyrrhus gave:
My grandsire though, as chief'st, most right should have.
When thee I married, none I wronged: if I
Should Pyrrhus marry, thee I harm thereby.
My father sure will pardon this our love,
Since he himself the winged gods shafts did prove.
The love he suffered, he will to us afford:
Th'examp^e of my mother does accord.
What he to her was, you are to me: of old
What the Dardanian guest, is Pyrrhus bold.
What though he vaunt the deeds his fire did do?
Thou well can boast th'atchievements thine did too
Tantalides tho great Achilles lead,
A Soldier this, of Captains that the head.
Pelops, and Pelops sire, were kin to thee:
Count, and thy self from love the fifth will be.
Nor wantst thou heart, dire arms thou bor'st, it is true,
How could do less? 'twas she thy Father slew.
Would juster quarrels had thy courage proved,
And yet by thee they were not raised, nor moved.
Though thou did cause Aegistus blood to stain
The floor, as did before thy Father slain.
Which deed (thy praise) Pyrrhus thy crime implies,
Yet still endures my person before his eyes.
My face, and mind, swell with disdainful ire;
And my breast burns with a suppressed sire.
Before my face shall thou upbraided be?
Nor force, nor Arms have I to fight for thee.
But weep I can, and so my griefs allay,
Whilst ceares like rivers, on my breast make way.
The'e, these, alone I have, these forth I power;
My cheeks are wet with a contin^all shower.
Nor could our Ancestors this fate escape:
Each Nymph of Tantal's line, is borne a rape.
No tales will I of Milkie Swan unfold,
Nor love descending in a shower of gold.
Or how where Isthwos does two seas divide,
Hyppodamie on waxen wheels did ride.
Fair Tyndaris by Theseus long detained,
By Amyclaean brethren was regained.
Next by Idean ghuest, from home convay'd,
Argolick hands she armed unto her aid:
I scarce remember't, yet remember do;
How each breast then was filled with fear and woe.
Both Grandsire, Sister, Brother, all shed tears,
And Leda her own live in vokt with prayers.
Nay I, with hairs as then not long, yet torn,
Exclaimed dear mother, leave thou me forlorn?
Who now lest my descen^ I should gainsay,
Behold to Pyrrhus am become a prey.
Had great Athilles escaped Apollos bow;
His sons rash deed he would have blamed, I know.
It never pleased him, nor would if he had lived,
A mournful wife should be of spouse deprived.
What fault of mine did angry heavens incense?
What star withstands me with dire influence?
Young I my Mother lost, my Sire waged war;
And though both lived, to me both strangers were.
No babbling speeches in my blooming years
Of mine (dear mother) did delight thine ears.
Nor threw I 'bout thy neck mine arms abroad,
Nor sat I in thy lap, a grateful load,
No care of clothing me, did vex thy head,
Nor did thou lead me to my marriage bed.
Though thee at thy return I met, I vow,
A mothers face in thee I did not know.
But by thy beauty thee for Hellen took:
Nay thou though seen, yet for thy child did look.
One comfort yet Orestes was, and he
Except he fight, will be debarred from me.
Th'unmanly Pyrrhus me retains a thrall,
This is the good I Have gained by Iliums fall.
When Phoebus from on high his beams displayes,
A gentler ease my pensive grief allayes.
But when the nights black mantle's spread, and I
Upon my sad and loathed bed doely,
In stead of sleep, tears from mine eyes do spring,
And far off from him, as a foe I fling.
Often grown unmindfull through distractive cares
His Scyrian limbs I Have touched at unawares.
Which when perceived, the hated corpse I fly,
And deem my hands to be defiled thereby.
Orestes often for Pyrrhus I miscall,
And love the error of my tongue withal.
By our unhappy race, by Jove I pray,
Who seas, vast earth, and heavens with power does sway.
By thy sires bones, my uncles, which by thee
Beneath their marble well revenged be;
Either my breath, may I to death resign,
Or once again become for ever thine.
THE ARGUMENT OF DEIANIRA'S Epistle to Hercules.
HErcules the son of Tupiter and Alcmena, after the conquest of many tedious
labors imposed on him by Euristheus, and the spiteful Juno: at length having
slain Eurytus, King of Oechalia, and den o^shed the City, he took captive
his daughter Iole, form ly promised him in marriage, and again dexied him by
her father, with whom be retired into Eubaea: and there as fondly doted on her,
as be had for merly done on the Lydian Omphale. Mean time Deianeira, daughter
of Oeneus king of Calydon, hearing of his unlook't for, and unmanly actions,
wrote this her following Epistle unto him: wheriu she endeavors by the mention
of his f^^mer glorious enterprise, to recall him from his lawless love. But
whilst she was yet writing, news was brought unto her of the violent pains
her Hercules sustained, caused by the shirt she sent him, dipped in the blood of
the Contaure Nestus, credulously by her supposed to have had the power to
regaine her husbands languishing affection toward her. Much troubled at the
sad event, she abou^s to purge herself of guilt: and to instance a real
example of her love to him, vows to lay violent hands upon herself, and so
sums up her Epistle with a tragical conclusion.

OEchalia won I joy, yet grieve withal,
That victor thou, should to the vanquished fall.
Swift fame to Grecian towns report has brought
Of deeds that scarce can worthy thine be thought.
How he, whom Juno, nor her endless toil,
Could quail, has taken by Iole the foil.
This would Euristheus, this the Thunderers wife,
Who glories in this blemish of thy life.
Sure you are not he, to th'framing of whose might,
Could not suffice the pleasures of a night.
Thee Venus more than Juno harms; her spleen
Has raised thy fame, by this t'hath ruined been.
Behold the world by thee with soft peace crowned,
As far as ambient seas wide earth surround.
To thee both earth, and seas, their quiet owe,
Both Phoebu^ houses do thy merits know,
Heaven thou upheld'st; shall once hold thee; lent'st aid
To weary Atlas, with his load over laid.
But what mong'st these, save shame do thou obtain,
If thus with lust thy former deeds thou stain?
Wast thee when young (of love then worthy known)
Whom men report to have slain two snakes alone.
Far better did begin than end; ah me!
How much that child, this man do disagree!
Whom savage beasts, whom Sthenele^an foe,
Nor Juno could overcome, does love overthrow.
Yet am I thought well matched, 'cause Jove to mee's
Father in law, and husband Hercules.
As different Steeres to draw do ill accord,
So a mean wife joined to a greater Lord.
No honor, but a burden it is to me,
If well thou wilt match, match in thine own degree.
To me my spouse a stranger is, wild beasts
And monsters, he with daily force infests.
Whilst I am busied with chaste prayers at home,
Lest by his direful foes he be overcome.
Amongst Serpents, Boares, and Lions angry paws
I Am tossed, on him me thinks dogs feast their jaws.
Beasts intrailes idle dreams of careful night,
And ominous fancies do my mind affright.
Each flickering breath of fame I catch at: fear,
And hope, like rule, like sway in me do bear.
Thy mother's absent, and lamenteth now
She pleased a God: thy Sire, and Hyllus too.
Eur^stheus, that fell Juno's wrath does move,
Enough I feel; too long her ire does prove.
But this is small, strange love thou add'st to these,
By thee each one may mother be that please.
Not Auge in Parthenian vale defiled,
Nor the base births of Astydamia mild
Will I relate: nor the Teuthrantian Quire,
Of which from thee none did a maid retire.
That recent crime does me the most upbraid,
By which to Lynus I am step-dame made.
Meander, that in one redoubled course
So often flows, and rowles his wheeling sourse,
Has seen about thy neck a golden chain,
That once did heavens fair starry vault sustain.
Ah! did not shame, about thine arms t'enfold
Rich bracelets, set with glittring gemmes and gold?
Those arms, by which the Nemaean Lion died,
Whose bristled skin in triumph graced thy side.
Dare thou (more worthy far of Poplar twine)
With a quaint tire crown those harsh hairs of thine?
Did thou not blush, when in effeminate guise,
Meonian zone did thy vast wast comprize?
Thou thoughtst not sure of Diomedes then,
Who fed his pampred Steeds with flesh of men.
So dressed, had thee the fell Busiris seen,
He would have scorned by thee to have conquered been.
Let bold Antaeus loose those amorous bands.
Lest he too grieve, to have fallen by womanish hands.
It Is said, thou amongst Ionian maids did set,
And balely spin, fearing thy mistress threat.
Nor do refrain t'apply thy conquering hand
To Osier maunds, and like a Spinstresse stand.
Gross threads thou draw'st with thy unweldy thumb,
And yield'st thy fair faced dame thy daily sum.
How often have thou through boistrous fingers stroke
Thy course-spun-threads, nay even thy spindle broke?
And then for fear of rod, and mistress too,
Laid prostrate at her feet, for mercy sue.
Besides, which most of all thy glory soyles,
Thou brag'st and boast'st of thy, triumphant spoils.
How in thy render years with generous spright,
Thou overcam'st two horrid snakes in fight.
And the Tegaean Bore, that wrought such ills,
On Cypresse-bearing Erimonthus hills.
Nor spar'^st t^ou Diomedes door. nayld head,
Nor Steeds with humane flesh (dire dainties) fed.
The triform'd Geryon. Natures prodigy,
Large herds possessing, does thy tale supply.
Nor silent lies the triple-headed hound,
Whose ugly jaws black hissing snakes surround.
The fertile serpent, she whose numerous store
Encreast, and still grew rich by being poor.
Antaeus, with torn jaws, the ponderous weight
Of thy broad side, thou do at large relate.
And troops ill trusting to their double force,
Which thou over steep ^hessalian hills did course.
and could thou clad in soft Sydonian veil,
Tell these, and shame not cause thy tongue to fail:
Whilst with thine arms the Jardan nymph adornes
Her self, an^ makes them trophies of thy scorns.
Go now and blaze thy facts, thy glory scan,
It Is she that is now become the abler man.
To whom so sarre inferior thou art grown,
As you are more great than those thou have overthrown
To her thy fame, worth, actions, for feit are.
Give way: for she is thy praises lawful heir.
Oh shame! thy harsh, and shaggy Lions hide,
Now vailes a woman's smooth, and nicer side.
Thou art deceived: those spoils no Lions be,
But thine, the beast thou over came; she thee.
Nay she that scarce could distaffe rule before,
Now bears thy shafts dipped in Lernaean gore.
Teaching her hands to wield thy club (grown bold)
And in her glass does thy famed Arms behold.
All this I heard, yet scarce did credit fame,
Till through mine ears sly grief my heart o'recame.
But now mine eyes the harlot have espied,
And such my grief is, I no more can hide.
Nor her conceal'st thou from me, but i^ spite
Bring'st through the City, to upbraid my sight.
Not with loose hairs, beneath a captives fate,
By her vaild face, confessing her estate.
But most conspicuous in embroidered gold:
In such as Phrygia once did thee behold.
And looks so stately on the following train,
As though the razed Oechdlia stood again.
Perhaps poor me divorc't, thou meanst that she,
A harlots name laid by, thy wife shall be.
And guilty Hymen shall the hands combine
Of Eurytaean Iole with thine.
My mind's astonished at the ominous ill,
My hands faint, cold does all my members fill.
Yet once, and with chaste fires, thou me did love,
And in my cause did twice thy courage prove.
Achelous sad his fronts rent ruins bore,
And shrunk his maimed brow 'twixt the reedy shore.
The Contaure Nessus by thy shafts was slain,
And with his crimson gore the streams did stain.
But wretchl what write I ^ Fame report has spread,
The shirt I sent thee, has thy torment bred.
Ah me! what has my rash love forced me try,
Why impious Deianeira doubt'st to dye?
Shall flames thy husbands flesh on Oeta rive;
And thou the cause of such an ill survive?
What shall I do that to the world may prove
I was thy wife, my death shall show my love.
And thou, dear brother, shall in me descry
A sister, Deianeira, straightway dye.
Oh cursed house! the kingdom Agrius holds,
Deserted Oeneus feeble age enfolds.
One brother banished, strayes in foreign land.
The Other died, living in his fatal brand.
My mother fell by direful steel: then why
O impious Deianeira doubt'st to dye?
Yet by our nuptial rites I thee require,
Not to surmise I did thy death conspire.
For when thy shafts had pierced the Centaures breast,
This blood, says he, is with loves power possessed.
A shirt I sent, dipped in the poisonous dye,
Why impious Deianeira doubt'st to dye?
And now my Father, Gorge, and native soil,
Dear brother, banished into sad exile:
And thou, the latter light, mine eyes shall view,
My spouse (oh that thou were) and child adieu.
THE ARGUMENT OF ARIADNE'S Epistle to THESEUS.
MInos, King of Creet, having by sharp war revenged the death of his son
Androgeus, murdered by the Athenians, enforced them yet (as tribute) to send
him every ninth year, seven youths, and as many virgins; which be cast into
the Labyrinth, to be devoured of the Minotaur. The lot at length fell on
Theseus; who being thrown into the den, nevertheless by the aid of Ariadne,
slew the Monster, and by a clew of thread which she gave him, returned safe
from out the prison. With whom, and her sister Phaedra, he makes escape, and
arrives at Naxus. Where Bacchus warnes him to leave his beauteous rape Ariadne.
Night came, and she fast bound in sleeps soft fet^ers, with Phaedra he sayls
away, and forsakes the innocent vi^g^n: who when awaked, and seeing herself so
foully betrayed; distracted, with pi^tifull exclamations, she ranges the shore
to and fro: At length, more calm, she writes, and fills her teare-dropt paper
with many sad complaints, and earnestly requests him again to come unto her.

MOre kind than thee, all kind of beasts I see,
To none wors trusted, could I have bin tha^ thee
The lines thou read'st, I send thee from that shore,
Whence without me, filled sails thy vessel bore.
Where sleep, and thou with it combined, betrayed
(Hard hearted man, vile deed) an harmless maid.
'Twas 'bout the time when silver dew first falls,
And warbling birds perch in their leavie stalls.
Not full awake, nor sleeping, toward thy place
My arms I stretched, my Theseus to embrace.
But there was none: again mine arms are thrown
About the still warm couch, but there was none.
Fear sleep exiled: affright I rose, and sled
With speed, my now unhappy widowed bed:
Forthwith my bosom does with strokes resound,
Tearing my locks, through sleep, unloos'd, unbound.
'Twas moonlight, and I looked if I could spy
Ought save the shore, but naught else sees mine eye.
Now here, now there, I randisordred ways,
Whilst the deep sands my virgin feet o're-layes.
Then crying out on Theseus, all around
The hollow murmuring rocks thy name resound.
Still as I called, the place the same still said,
As 'twould have lent my woes a mutual aid.
A mount there was, on which few shrubs did grow,
Now a steep rock, fret with the waves below.
Up which I crawld: my mind lent force: and thence,
With wandering sight survay the seas immense.
And there (forev'n the winds were harsh to me)
Thy strouting sails filld with fresh gales, I see.
Either I saw't, or if I thought but so,
I Am sure half dead, more cold I was than snow.
But grief would not permit me languish^ long:
On Theseus I exclaim with high-rais'd tongue,
Whither, ah! whither flyest? vile wretch, retreat;
Turn back thy ship, it has not yet its freight.
Where words were wanting, there a blow supplies,
Each word with strokes weas mixed, each stroke with cries.
And though thou heard'st not yet thou needs must see
My out-stretcht arms gave ample signs to thee.
Upon a wand a milk white veil I hung,
T'admonish thee of thy neglect, my wrong.
And now th'wert out of sight: and I to tears
Now thawd: which grief had froz'n before, and fears.
What better office could mine eyes have done,
Than weep my woes, when thou their aim were gone?
Or with loose hairs I run, like those that be
Possessed by the Ogygian Deity.
Or viewing seas set on a rock alone;
More stone-like seem, than that I set upon.
Often to the bed I run, that did contain
Us both, though not restore us both again.
And (as I may) thy steps with mine I trace,
And hug in steed of thee, thy lukewarm place.
I lay me down, the bed with tears bedew,
And cry, two pressed thee, oh! restore thou two!
Both hither came, why went not both away?
False bed! where, where is my souls best part? oh say.
What shall I do? the land untild does lie,
No deeds of man, of beasts no deed I spy.
On all sides seas the earth surround: no where
A Forth-bound ship, or Pilot does appear.
Suppose I had both ships, and mates at will,
My country shuts me out, I Am helpless still.
Though I should safely sail on smooth-calm'd sea,
And winds my friends, I should an exile be.
No more dear Creet, which hundred Cities crown,
Shall I behold: to Jove an infant known.
For both my father, and my native soil,
(Dear names) betrayed I by my treacherous wile.
When, lest the Labyrinth should prove thy tomb,
I gave thee threads to guide thee through each room.
When, by the dangers that thou did decline,
Thou swor'st, whilst living, I should still be thine.
Behold, I live, yet am not thine: if she
Can live, that is slain by false man's perjurie
Wretch! would by that dire Mace I'had died, which slew
My brother, then thy vow had still been true.
What I must suffer, not so much I mind,
As what poor souls forsook, like me, may find.
A thousand forms of death my fancy press,
And death it self then th'feare thereof's fa^re less.
Now here, now there, me thinks I coming see
Fierce wolves, to glut their appetite on me.
Perhaps this Isle bright-crested Lions breeds,
Who knows if it the swifter Tiger feeds.
And seas may send forth monsters too beside,
Who shall forbid the sword to pierce my side.
Or that I be not thral'd in captive band,
Or spin forth harsher threads with servile hand:
Whose Sire is Minos, mother Phoebus seed,
And what is more, who once was thine decreed.
If sens, or far-stretcht shores mine eye survayes,
Much me the seas, much me the land dismayes.
If heaven, the gods, celestial signs, I fear;
Thus left a prey for ravenous beasts to tear.
If men inhabit it, in them there is danger:
My wrongs have taught me not to trust a stranger;
Would that Androgeu^ lived, or that thy fate
Cecropian soil, thou had bought at cheaper rate.
Nor had thou, perjured Theseus, done to death
That Monster, man above, and beast beneath.
Would thee I never had given that cunning twine,
By which those abstruse vaults thou did decline,
Nor marvel I that thee strange conquest crowned,
And than the Cretan monster strewed the ground.
His horns could not have harmed thee: safe enuffe,
Thou Had bin unarmed: for even thy breast was proof.
There flints, there adamants thou bor'st, nay there
What them does pass, thou did a Theseus bear.
Dire sleep, why did you vainly me surprise?
Nor in eternal night compresse mine eyes.
Ye cruel winds, that too-too ready were,
Th'officious blasts to blow me into tears.
Cruel the hand me and my brother slew,
And plighted faith (that empty name) untrue.
Sleep, winds, and faith, their plots against me laid;
And by three means, one Virgin was betrayed.
Shall I, not dying then, with latest light
Behold my mothers tears? none close my fight?
And must my spirit flit through unknown air:
Nor friendly hands annoint my limbs with care?
But on my untomb'd bones must sea-fowle feed?
Are these the fun'rall rites my merits plead
When thou to Athens art returned, and when
Raised high with honor amongst thy contrymen;
Thou shall relate the double monster slain,
And stony vaults cut out in doubtful train.
Pray tell my story too: I must not be
Left out o'th'catalogue of deeds done by thee.
Nor Aethra, nor Aegeus, parents were
To thee: thee flintie rocks, thee stones did bear.
Oh! that thine eyes me from the ship had seen!
That sight to move thee had sufficient been.
Nay now, though not with eyes, with mind conceave
And see, how to a wave-beat rock I cleave.
Behold in mournful sort, my scattred hairs,
And garments heavy (as with rain) with tears.
Like corn with north winds shook, I quaking stand,
The lines I write, marred by my trembling hand.
By no deserts (since ill they sped) I sue
To thee: no thanks unto my deeds be due,
Yet I no pain was, though no cause to thee
Of safety: then be not deaths cause to me
These hands, now faint with beating to disease
My breast, to thee I stretch ore ampleseas,
These hairs that yet are left, to thee I spread,
By these tears pray, tears for thy actions shed:
Turn back thy ship, turn with the changing wind,
Though I am dead, collect my bones you find.
THE ARGUMENT of CANACE'S Epistle to MACAREVS.
MAcareus and Canace, son and daughter to Aeolus, beyond the bounds of
natural affection, incestuously loved each other. In fine, Canace is brought
^o bed. The nurse secretly conveyes the child; which now at the door exclaims:
is heard by Aeolus, who detecting the crime, moved wi^h rage and sha^e against
so hideous a fact, commands it to be exposed unto the fury of wild beasts. To
Canace he sends asword, and would that she should expiate her crime by death:
which she accordingly intends. Yet before the a^^ as prologue to her Tragedy,
she writes unto herbrother (who before had taken Sanctuary at Delphos) this
her fate condoling Epistle.

IF any blots in these my lines appear,
They by their mistress murder caused were.
This hand a pen, that does a sword comprise,
And in my lap the limber paper lies.
This is my posture whilst to thee I write:
This my obdurate parent I delight.
Whom I now wish were present; that so he
Might my ends author, and spectator be.
And far more fierce than his own winds (dire show)
With tearlesse cheeks, my gaping wounds review.
It Is much'mongst boistrous winds still verst to be;
Just with his peoples nature does he gree.
The South, the West, and Northern winds he school^;
And Eurus with his stubborn wings he rules.
He over his winds, but not his wrath bears sway:
And his less Realm, to his greater vice gives way.
What boots it me, by Grandsires raised to skies,
To reckon powerful Jove amongst my allies?
If this, in trembling hand, sad gift, I bear,
This ominous steel, (di^e motive of my fear)
Oh Macareu! the day that us conjoined
In one, would it fate for my last had signed.
To me, why more than brother did thou prove?
To thee, why more than sister showd I love?
I burnt with hidden fires: nor yet did know
What God within me did indame me so.
Pale grew my cheeks, leanness my limbs consumed,
And my forced stomach little meat assumed.
My sleeps were broken, each night seemed a year,
Of sigh't I, when no cause there did appear,
Nor why I did it, could a reason move.
Knew not what lovers were, and yet did love.
My nurse, with aged mind, the ill first spied;
And Canace, thou art in love, she cried.
I blush^: and in my bosom cast mine eyes,
Sufficient signs did from my silence rise.
And now my wombes foul load began to increase,
And th'growing burden did my limbs disease.
What herbs, what medicines did my Nurse not try!
And with her bold, and ready hand apply;
(Which me alone did from thy knowledge hide)
To force the clinging infant from my side!
But that alas! too quick withstood her Art,
And all the help her Physic could impart.
Nine Moons were past he tenth with silver bright
Steeds drawn, unto the world now showed her light.
When sudden gripes cause my unwonted pain:
Unapt the throes of childbirth to sustain;
I straight cried out, and will thou then unfold
Thy crimes (says she) and did my mouth withold.
What should I do? pain urged me to exclaim:
But fear, my nurse, and shame, forbad the same.
My groans I then'supprest, and words forbear:
Fore't as I lay to drink each falling tear.
Death was at hand, Lucina chaste denied
All help; and then thad been a sin to have died:
When thou (laid by me with torn hair) did join,
And cherish my cold dying breast with thine.
And saydst, dear sister live, oh! live my joy!
Nor in one body do thou two destroy.
Let hope revive thee, thou shall once be said
His wife, by whom thou art a mother made.
Trust me, half dead, I at thy words revived:
And was at once of crime and load deprived.
Why at my birth does joy thy heart surprise?
When 'tmust be hid ('las) from my fathers eyes.
The busy Nurse, with Olive branches round,
And gentle fillet^ the poor infant bound.
A sacrifice she faign'd, and loud did pray:
My father and the people gave her way.
When near the door the child cries out, and bears
Its own sad message to my fathers ears.
The babe he caught: and feigned rites espies:
The Palace rung with his incensed cries.
As gentle gales cause trembling seas to quake,
As sof^ southwindes light Aspen leaves do shake:
So might they have seen my quiv'ting limbs with fear:
To move the bed, that did my burden bear:
When in he rusht; prool liming my disgrace:
And scarce withheld his hands from off my face.
I blushing, answered in dumb tears alone:
Through gelid fear my tongue was speechless grown
The child he then comman ^s be made a pray
To beasts, or laid in some untroden way.
Which straight cried out: as if (poor soul) it knew
Its Grandsires wrath, and did for mercy sue.
What heart I then had, I to censure leave,
Which, brother, you may by your own conceave.
When fore mine eyes my ravished child was borne,
To be by mountain wolves in pieces torn.
My father gone, I (filled with black despair)
Beat my barred breast, and bloodlesse cheeks did tear.
When soon a sad faced guard appears, and bears
This harsh unwelcome message to mine ears.
Eole to thee this sword (then gave it) sends:
And bids by merit know to what it tends.
We know, said I: well shall this sword be tried:
My fathers gifts I Will in my bosom hide.
And meanst thou thus to grace my nuptial hour?
And raise thy daughters wealth by such a Dowre?
Mocked Hymen, hence thy bridal Tapers take,
And nimbly these detested roofes forsake.
You Furies with your brands to me retire,
That from you flame^ may spring my funeral fire.
And may ye (Sisters) mindful of my state,
All better marry, moved by better fate.
What has my poor child done? by what offense,
Could that scarce borne its grandsires wrath incense?
Alas! he could not merit death: no, he
(Innocuous) for my crimes, must punished be.
Oh! son, thy mothers grief and wild beasts pray!
Untimely raped hence, on thy births (cursed) day!
Thou wretched pledge of my unluckie love!
One day thy first, one day thy last did prove.
I was not suffered to embalme with tears
Thy corpse, or on thy tomb to strew my hairs.
Not one cold kiss I from thy lips received;
But am of thee by savadge beasts bereaved.
Dear soul! I soon my self will follow thee,
Nor mother long, nor childlesse will I be.
And thou, oh brother! hoped for but in vain,
Collect thy child's small relliques that remain,
And with its mother place them in one tomb;
Let one cold urn (though straight) lend both a room.
Forget me not, but let me have thy tear;
Nor lover thou, thy lovers body fear.
Thy dying sister, last request, I pray
Perform: whilst I my Fathers will obey.
THE ARGUMENT of MEDEA'S Epistle to JASON.
Jason being arrived at Colchos then in his flourishing and vigorous youth, and
adorned with all the exquisite accomplishments of form and behavior; was by
Medea, daughter of Aeta, king of Colchos no sooner seen, then fancyed, and by
her (upon promise of Marriage) aided in the effecting his designs with whom,
(together with the golden fleece,) he makes a difficult escape and lands in
Thessaly. There she reduces feeble Aeson to fresh and lusty youth. There she
persuades Pelias his daughters to let out their Fathers blood; whose veins she
promised again to fill with ^outhfull heat, but deceitfully left them guilty
of Parricide In the end (for these, and other more heinous crimes by her
committed) Jason cast her off; and takes to wife Creusa, daughter of Creon king
of Corinth, upon which the furioufly enraged Medea, wrote this her complaining,
suing and menacing Epistle unto him.

WHat time I Queen of Colchos did impart
To thee my help, when thou implor'dst my Art;
The Sisters, that do Mortals fates dispense,
Should have unwound my thread of life, and sense.
Well might Medea then have died: what breath
Since that I Have drawn, has been a pain, a death.
Ah mel why ere by youthful arms from Greece,
Came Pelian keele to fetch the Phrygian Fleece?
Why e're at Colches, was thy Argos viewed?
Why e're drunk Grecian troops of Phasian flood?
Why more than ought, pleased me thy golden hair?
Thy tongues false grace, and sweetness, feature rare?
No doubt (since strange the ship that touched our shore
And in her men bold, and resolved bore)
Th'ungratefull Jason had unphysickt, run
On Bulls flamed breath, or on their horns had gone.
Or sown his seeds, and foes as many seen:
And Tiller so, of tillage slain had been.
How much deceit (vile wretch) with thee had died!
And how much ill had been to me denied!
It Is some delight t'upbraid ungrateful men:
That means I Will use, and so revenge again.
When hither first thou stee^'dst with doubtful helm,
And first set'st foot within my fathers realm:
There I was then, what here is this Bride of thine 3
How rich was hers, so rich a Sire was mine.
This, Ephyre, did with double seas command;
That, snowie Scythia, and the Ponticke strand.
The youthful Greeks A^e^^ entertaines,
Embroydred couches hold the following trains.
There first I saw, first knew thee who thou were;
That time did prove first ruin of my heart.
I saw and perished, burnt as before some shrine,
Or sacred Altar does a torch of Pine.
Fair was thy hew, and me my fate drew on:
Mine eyes quite dazeled, by thine eyes bright Sun.
Which soon thou spy'dst: for who can love conceal?
That does it self by its own flames reveal.
Mean time the king (hard task) commands that thou
The Bulls stiff necks should yoke to th'unfelt plow.
Mars's Bulls they were, dreadful at more than horn:
Their very breath, a fire, within them borne.
Brasse-hoov'd: their nostrils armed too with the same:
Like Tunnels, black with the evapored flame.
Besides the seed which men for corn would yield,
Thou were enjoined to sow in furrowed field.
Who with born blades would straight have sought thy foil,
A thanklesse crop to recompense thy toil.
Thy last attempt, was by some charm to keep
The wakefull dragon in a powerful sleep.
Thus spoke Aeetes: when with heavy look
Each ^ose; and th'boord the purple beds forsook.
How far then pray was thy Creusa's dowre?
And Creons daughter, Creon great in power.
Sad thou wentst thence: whom I with eyes pursue.
Bedewed with tears, and softly bad adieu.
Deep wounded to my careful couch I went,
And what of night remained, in tears I spent.
The dreadful Bulls, the balefull seed, the sly,
And sleeplesse Dragon, still before mine eye.
Here love there fear, and fear encreast my flame:
With th'rising Sun to me my fister came.
Where, with torn hairs, and on my face she found
Me sadly lying, with my tears all drowned.
She help for th'Miniae ask't; what she did crave,
The same, to the Aesonian youth we gave.
A grove there is, with spreading oaks thick sprayes
All gloomy dark: nor pierced by Phoebus rays.
Wherein stands Dia^'s Phane, at least did stand,
Her golden image wrought by barbarous hand.
Perhaps with me that is too forgot: but there
We came: when thus thou 'ganst to speak me fair,
"Fortune to thee has given the power, and will
"Of all my hopes: thou can both save and kill.
"Suffice that power: (if such a power can please.)
"Yet I preserved, thy fame shall more increase.
"By these my ills, which thou may help, I pray;
"By thy descent, and Grandsire, king of day.
"By triple Dians sacred mystery,
"And by what gods soever here worshipped be.
"Fair virgin pity me, oh pity mine!
"By thy deserts chain me for ever thine.
"And so a Grecian you not scorn in mind,
"(But whence should I expect the gods so kind?
"Sooner my soul shall flit to empty air,
"Than I enjoy a spouse but thee (breast fair)
"Be witness she who swayes the Geniall band,
"And th'goddesse in whose Temple now we stand.
These, or the least of these, a simple maid
Might soon have moved, hands joined with hands to aid.
Besides thy tears I saw, does guile there dwell?
Thus was I won, thus by thy falsehood fe^l.
Safe thou the brasse-hoov'd Bulls did yoke, and tear
The solid earth with thy directed share.
Sowd'st it with Serpents teeth, in stead of corn:
Whence straight a ready armed so was born.
As I, who gave the medicine, yet for fear
Grew pale, to see a troop such weapons bear.
Until that earth-borne race, in their own blood,
(A horrid deed) their hostile hands embrew'd.
The Dragon then came on, with hissing sound;
And crackling scales, his wreathed breast swept the ground.
Where was thy dowrythen, thy royal bride.
And Istbmos that does double seas divide?
'Twas I alone, even I, who now am thought
So barbarous, hurtful, poor, a thing of naught:
That with charmed sleeps, closed up his burning eyes,
And sately purchased thee thy golden prize.
My Sire, and country I betrayed, forsook,
And what mighthap in exile under took.
My virgin-treasure made a thiefes base prey:
From mother, and loved sister fled away.
But thee, dear brother, fled I not: oh! here
My hand, and letter faint, and fail, for fear.
What it dared do, it now dares scarce to write:
So, so, with thee, should I have died by right.
Norfear'd I: (for me then what fear could seize?)
Stained with fresh guilt, t'embarke on dangerous seas.
Where be the gods? why suffered we not there?
Thou for deceit, for my credulous ear.
Oh! would those justling Isles had met: between
Which, our pasht bones, with thine might mixed have been.
Or Scylla sent us to her barking den;
Scylla, that ought to plague ungrateful men.
O^ had that whirlepoole, raging gulf, our graves
Afforded us, in her Trinacrian waves.
But safe, and victor to Aemonia thou
Art come; and to thy gods paid Fleece, and vow.
What need I Pelias daughters here relate,
Harmfull in pity, and their fathers fate?
Though others blame, thou needs must praise me still,
For whom so often I was urged to ill.
And dar'dst thou yet (oh had I words in woe)
Dar'dst thou from Aesons house, to bid me go?
Yet. charged, I went: my children both with me,
And what forsakes me never, love of thee.
But to mine ears when chanted Hymen came,
And kindled tapers, shone with dazzling flame:
When lowd-breath'd Shalmes, your Hymencals sang,
To me more harsh than warlike Trumpets clang,)
Much, much I feared, though not so great an ill.
My breast with heart-benumming cold grew chill.
The people ran, and Hymen, Hy^^en cry:
The more my woe, how much the noise more nie.
My servants wept, yet strove to hide their tears:
For willing who would tell such ills, such fears?
Nor would my self have known it: but (too true)
(As known) my mind within me heavy grew.
When of my boys the youngest, who before
Earnest to see, stood at the outn ost door:
Hence mother, hence, my father comes, he cried,
And clothed in gold, drawn by chaind steeds does ride
I straight with vesture rent, invade my breast;
Nor was my face free from my hands arrest.
Once thought I to have snatched amid the press,
The rosy chaplets from thy braided Tresse.
Scarce I forbore (dressed as I was) to cry
He Is mine, and scarce from laying hands on thee.
Wronged Sire rejoice, ye Colchians too, and boast
These said infernals of my brothers ghost.
For sooke (my Country, Kingdom lost before)
Even by my Spouse, to me all these, and more.
Serpents I overcame, and Bulls so fell,
Yet one poor man alas! I cannot quell.
And I, who raging fires by Art put by,
Mine own close flames, I can by no means fly.
Me now my charms, my spells, my simples fail,
The goddess now, nor Hecate ought avail.
The day's unpleasant, and the nights of rest
Devoyd: no gentle slumbers stroke my breast.
I who mine own cannot, the Serpents eyes
Yet closed: mine Art others, not me supplies.
The limbs I saved, an harlot now retains,
And reapes the fruit of my solicitous pains,
Whilst thou, perhaps, unto thy nice-fond fair
Boasting, to please her more inquisitive ear,
Vent^st against my face and manners crimes at will.
She laughs, and jeeres at my defective ill.
We I, let her laugh; high throned in Tyrion dye.
She once shall weep, and flames as scorching try.
Whilst fire, whilst sword, whilst deadly poisons be,
No foe Medea has, shall e're escape free.
Yet to thy heart, if prayers can passage find,
Lend ears to words, far, far, beneath my mind.
I am thy suppliant now, who oftwer't mine:
And prostra^e before thy feet my limbs decline.
Though I seem vile, yet for my births sake hear,
Full hard their stepdame will they find, I fear.
Ah! too-too much they thee resemble, who
Often as I view, tears do mine eyes bedew.
Now by the gods, and by my grandsires fire,
My merits, Babes, dear pledges, I require.
Restore thy bed, for which I all did flee:
And to thy words add faith, and help to me.
Against nor men, nor Bulls, I crave thy aid,
Nor that the Dragon should asleep be laid:
For thee alone, whom I deserved, I sue.
By whom a parent, I was parent too.
Demand'st a Dowre? I in that dreadful field,
Thou plow'dst for golden fleece, a dowre did yield.
That Fleece my dowry was; the which, if I
Should ask again, thou woul^st again deny.
Thou safe, art it: and Grecian youth beside:
Go now, and weigh with these, Sisyphian pride.
That thou do live, e^^oy'st that spouse of thine;
And that thou now can be ingrate, is mine.
Whom e're't be long, I will -- But to foretell
The pains what boots? wrath with high threats does swel.
Where rage shall lead, I Will follow, and 't may be
Thou may lament, as I, to have trusted thee.
The God that rules my breast, behold these ends:
I know not what great act my mind intends.
THE ARGUMENT OF LAODAMIA'S Epistle to PROTESILAVS.
PRotefilaus with the rest of the Greeks, sailing for Troy, through tempest
was driven into, and a long while detained in Port Aulis. Which Laodamia
understanding, wrote unto him this Epistle: wherein she bewayles his absence,
relates unto him her nightly troubled dreams, puts him in mind of the Oracle,
which had pronounced that he who first landed on the Trojan strand, should
perish by the sword: and implores his care both of himself and her. Thi^ was
the subject of her lines: Thus she begun.

TO thee thy Laodamia health does send:
And wishes where'tis sent, 'tmay thither tend
It Is famed in Aulis, that you wind-bound lie:
Ah! where were winds when thou from me did fly
Then stubborn waves should have thine oars withstoo^
(...) aging seas had at that time been good.
More Risses, charges more, to thee my dear
I then had given, and more had told thine ear.
But headlong were thou hurryed hence; pressed gales
By saylors wished, not me, straight sweld thy sails.
A wind for seamen fit, not those that loved:
Too soon was I from thy loved arms removed.
Lame were my words from faultring tongue that fell;
Scarce brought I forth that sadder word, Farewell.
The winds blew stiff, and ample sayls did stretch:
And now th'wert past mine eyes discerning reach.
Yet whilst I might (dear sight) I strongly viewd;
And thy departing eyes with mine pursued.
But when nor fleeting sails I saw, nor thee;
Nor ought but th'uncouth sea was left to see,
With thee my light too fled: and all around
Beset with sudden darkness, fell to ground.
Whom scarce thy father, nor Acaslus old,
Or mother could revive with water cold.
A pious deed, yet fruitless did they try:
Why did they not permit me then to die?
Together with my life my griefs I found:
And lawful love my loyal breast did wound.
No care have I to brayd my curious Tresse,
Or cloth my limbs in an embroydred dress,
Like those the horned god strikes with viny spear,
Where fury leads, I run; now here, now there.
Phylacean matrons to me come, and cry
Put on thy royal robes Laodamie.
Shall I wear garments of a Tyrian stain?
And thou fierce wars at Iliums walls sustain?
I braid my locks, and thou an helmet wear?
I gentle robes, thou stubborn armor bear?
No (as I may) attired like thee I Will go:
And parallel thy warfare in my woe.
Thou fatally-faire Paris, may thou prove
As bad a foe in fight, as guest in love.
Would Helens face thou had not liked, or she,
(Though seen) might never so have fancied thee.
And thou that toyl'st thy ravished wife to fre^
To some how sad a Victor will thou be!
The gods from us the ominous chance remove:
May my sase spouse yield up his arms to Jove.
But yet at thought of that dire war, in streams,
Tears flow, like snow, thawed by the midday beams.
Troy, Xant, I Would, Simois, Tenedos, when heard,
Are names that in their sounds are to be feared.
Nor would h'have dared a rape, but that he knew
To keep it won: and what his strength could do.
It Is famed he came in glittring gold clothed over;
As one that on his back Troyes riches bore.
Well stored with ships, and men, wars fuel; and
Almost his Empire under his command.
Those troops which had the power to vanquish thee
Hellen, I fear to us may noxious be.
One, Hector, but who it is, I do not know,
Paris reports, deals with a deadly blow.
Him fly, if care of me in thee do rest:
Still bear his name engraved in thy mindful breast.
And as from him, so from the rest still flee,
And think all there so many Hectors be.
And say, whens'ere thou do to fight prepare,
My Laodamia willed me to forbear.
If Troy must needs fall by a Grecian foe,
Without thy wounds, O let it find its woe.
Let Menelaus fight, and strive t'obtaine
From Paris, that which Paris took again.
And foil in arms whom he in cause o're-throwes,
Wives must be sought, though midst a thousand foes.
Thy cause far different is, fight thou to escape:
And safe retreat unto thy Ladies lap.
Ye Dardans amongst so many, spare me one:
Nor cause my blood from out his body run.
Alas! he is none of those with glittring sword
Can combat, or stern breast to foes afford.
He better may, whom bridal flames do move:
Let others fight, let Protesilaus love.
And him I feign would have called back: my will
Served well; though tongue (for Omen bad) stood still.
When from thy fathers gates thou went toward Troy
Th'obnoxious threshold did thy foot annoy.
I saw't, and sighed: and murmuring soft did say,
Be this a sign of thy return, I pray.
These I relate, to quail thy adventrous mind:
But do thou cause my fears may turn to wind.
Besides, by fate he doomed to death does stand,
Who first of Greeks sets foot on Trojan strand.
And cursed is she first wailes her slaughtred love:
Grant heavens in this thou may a coward prove.
Amongst thousand ships let thine the thousandth be:
And last of all disturb the troubled sea.
Be thou the last from out the ship does come:
The land thou seek'st, is not thy native home.
At thy return then ply't, with sails and oar;
And strive with nimble steps t'attain the shore.
Whether the Sun be set, or beams displayes,
Thou art my care, my grief, in nights, in days.
But most in nights; a time for such most sweet,
Whose wide-stretcht arms their wished embracements meet.
Vain dreams I catch at, lonely laid at ease,
And whilst I want true joys, even false joys please.
But why pale-hew'd do thou so often appear?
And seem with sad complaints to strike mine ear?
With which affright, I shades of night invoke,
Nor wants an Altar my appeasing smoke.
Incense, and tears, I offer on each shrine;
Which sparkling blaze, like flames, by powr'd-on-wine.
When shall I thee again embrace? and lie
Languishing, raped in loves sweet ecstasy.
Or when both joined in sportfull bed will thou
The splendid actions of thy warefare show?
Which whilst thou telst, though me they joy to hear,
Mixed kisses shall thou give, mixed kisses bear.
By these sweet pauses words more graceful be:
By such delays the tongue becomes more free.
But when the sea I mind, the winds, and Troy,
Sollicitous fear does all my hopes destroy.
Besides, your wind-bou^d navy much dismayes
My thoghts, through adverse streams you force your ways.
Who against the wind would seek his home? yet you
Fly from't, and though the seas forbid, you will through.
Ev'n' Neptunes self debarres you from his Town:
Men whither rush you? to your homes each one.
Where fly ye Greeks? hark how the winds say no?
Not chance, but heaven has wild you must not go.
But why divine I? Omens hence: and may
Soft-breathing gales afford you prosperous way.
The Trojan dames I envy, that can stand
And see their slaughtred friends, their foes at hand,
The new made wife, her husbands head will there
Claspe in an helm, and give him Arms to bear.
Arms will she give, and with those Arms a kiss:
An office unto both of equal bliss.
And ush'ring forth her spouse with charge of love,
Command him haste, and yield his Arms to love.
He mindful of her charge, and recent doom,
Will wisely fight, and have an eye toward home.
When she at his return his helm and shield
Will loose, and rest in her warm bosom yield.
But I in doubt still live, and fear makes me
Think all that might, already done to be.
Yet in strange coasts whilst thou stern Arms do bear,
In lively wax have I thy visage here.
That do I court, to that words only due
To thee I give, and kind embraces too.
Trust me it is more than what it seems to be:
Had it a voice, each one would swear 'twere thee.
That view I, that for real spouse retain,
And plain to that, as it could speak again.
By thy return, and corpse (dear Saints to me)
And by our minds and wedlockes paritie.
By thy loved head (which decked with silver hair
May I behold, and safe brought home) I swear.
Where thou commandst I Will follow, whether thou
Or living art, or what I fear far more.
This charge my letters utmost clause shall be,
Look to thy self, and have a care of me.
THE ARGUMENT OF HIPERMNESTRA'S Epistle to Linus.
DAnaus the son of Belus, had by sundry wives fistie daughters; his brother
Aegyptus had as many sons: betwixt these Aegyptus desires wedlock. But Danaus
(foretold by the Oracle, that his sonne-in-law should bereave him of his life)
to avoid the match, sails to Argos. This contempt his brother storms at: and
forthwith sends his sons with an Army, and strictly charge them, never to
return unto him, but either with the head of Danaus, or his daughters for
their wives. Danaus by s^ege is compelled to yield unto his brothers suit. But
the virgins were commanded by their father, on the marriage night, (with
weapons for that purpose given them) to destroy their husbands: which they all
(excepting Hypermnestra) performed. But she awaked hers, and counseld him to
take his slight. The morning come, Danaus finds the deed perpetrated by all
save Hypermnestra: whom he most cruelly caused to be cast into prison: whence
beneath her loading gyves, she writes unto her saved spouse this Epistle,
entreating him either to rescue her from her miserable bondage, or if death
should be her lot, to take care for her sepulture.

TO thee, (that amongst so many did decline
Their wives dire steel) sends Hypermnestra thine.
Chained in strong gyves, am I in prison pent;
Being good, to mee's a cause of punishment.
And since no sword against thy throat I raised,
I Am guilty made: which done, I'had then bin praised*
Then so to have pleased, thus let me guilty be:
The^'s none can grieve, to have hands from bloodshed free.
Me let my sire with fire I never wronged,
Consume, or lights to nuptial rites belonged.
Or take with sword, which ill he gave, my life;
That th'death the husband escaped, may seize the wife.
Yet shall he never force my tongue to tell
I do repent; it irkes not to have done well.
Let Danaus, let my sisters, mourn their ill:
Such sad events, such actions follow still.
My heart at thought of that black blood-stained night,
Yet quakes; and fear forbids my hand to write.
She that her husbands death should have drawn on,
Even shakes to write of murder never done.
Yet I Will essay: when dubious glimmering light
Had made days evening, and the morn of night.
To the Pelasgians stately towers we came,
To his armed guests does Egypt welcome frame.
On every side gold-garnisht lamps did shine,
And impious fumes smok't on th'indiffrent shrine.
The people Hymen chaunt, who shunnes their cry,
And angry Juno did her Argos fly.
Behold the wine-gorg'd youths with clamors round,
Their balmy locks with fragrant chaplets crowned:
To bridal beds (their funeral piles) address:
And fatal Down with death-doom'd bodies press.
And now with wine and sleep ore-load they lay:
The peaceful town to silent rest gave way.
When round about, me thought, the groans there flue
Of slaughtred-men, and what I thought, was true.
My blood straight faild: heat fled my limbs: and I
Upon my new-try'd bed did trembling lie.
As, moved by Zephyre, shake light ears of corn,
A^ poplar leaves by aires cool breath are borne:
Even so; or more, shook I; thou lay'dst secure:
The wine thou drank'st, had soporiferous power.
My fears exiled through my stern sires command,
I rose; and graspt the blade in quivering hand.
It Is truth I speak: the steel I thrice upheld,
Which thrice together with mine arm rebeld.
Yet, by my fathers charge, still urged and made
Bold, on thy guiltless throat the sword I laid.
But fear, and pity, my attempts withstood.
And my chaste hand abhorred that deed of blood.
My robes I rent, my dangling Tresses wrung:
And these few words breathed forth with murmuring tongue.
"Thy fathers cruel Hyp^rmnestra, tend
"His will: thine husband to his brothers send.
"But I a virgin am, and mild thereto:
"With such dire tools weak hands have naught to do.
"What though? take heart, and with joint courage run
"With thy bold sisters, who by this have done.
"No, if this hand could act a murderous deed,
"Stained with its mistress gore, it then should bleed.
"How 'cause they hold there uncles realm, have they
"Offended; since with strangers 'tmust away?
"Suppose they death deserve, yet what is my ill?
"What have I done, I may not good be still?
"What Is sword, or warlike weapons unto me!
"Soft wool, and distaffe far more sitting be.
T^us^: and with my plaints tears flowd withal:
Which from mine eyes down on thy lim^s did fall.
Whilst thou to embrace, threwst, thy drunk arms around.
They Would almost by my sword received a wound.
But I that feared my sire, his men, and day,
With these my words chased thy dull sleep away.
Rise Lynus, rise, thou sole-surviving wight:
Have, or with thee 'twill prove e^ernall night.
Affright thou startled'st up, sleep fled: dismayed
Within my hand thou view'dst the dreadful blade.
Asking the cause; whilst night serve, fly said I,
Whilst night yet served, thou fledst, and I stayed by.
And now it was morn, when Danaus came to see
His slaughtred sons, the sum proved short by thee.
Ill brooks he that escape of death in one,
And grieves more acts of bloodshed were not done.
Straight from my father by my Tresses trayld,
(Is this Loves meed?) was I to prison haild.
Since first fair Io to a Cow was turned,
And thencet'a goddess, Juno's ire has burned.
Alas! it is pain enough for her poor soul
To lowgh; nor satisfy her I^ves control.
On banks of liquid Sire she stood alone;
And views large horns which erst were not her own.
And as to speak she strove, she lowgh'd: afraid
Of her strange form, and at her voice dismayed.
Wretch whither fliest? and why in streams that fleet,
Admirst thy self, and numbrest so thy feet?
Thou whom once Juno feared, who scorn'dst her rage,
With leaves and sedges do thine hunger swage.
Cool springs thou drink'st, 'maz'd at thy form thou star'st,
Fearing the Arms should hurt thee which thou bear.
And who the mighty Jove did please e'rewhile,
Once rich, lie naked on the naked soil.
By seas, lands, kindred streams, thou wild did stray:
Seas, lands, and kindred streams do yield thee way.
What is thy cause of flight, why roam'st thou so?
Alas, thou can not these thy looks forgo!
What thou still fliest thou followest, and (too true)
Thou leadst thy self, and do thy self pursue.
At length where seven-mouth'd Nil^ to seas does run,
She changed her beasts, and human shape put on.
But what need these gray headed tales, when lo^^
My years afford as ample theames of woe.
My sire, and uncle hoth wage war; and we
Far from our home, and kingdom banished be.
Whilst cruel he does realm and scepter sway,
And needy we, with needy sire do stray.
The remnant of my brothers left, is small;
Whom I bewail, with those that wrought their fall.
In brothers, sisters, equal loss I bear:
And for both parts let fall my pitying tear.
Lo! 'cause thou liv'st, am I reserved for pain,
If virtue thus, what would my guilt sustain?
Who late to hundred kin, was nere ally
With one poor Brother living, now must dye.
But thou dear Ly^us, if a care or thought
Of me rests in thee; or my gifts think ought;
Or lend me help, or death; if I expire
By stealth convey my corpse to funeral fire.
And ^ombe my bones embalmed in many a tear*
And let my Marble this brief Distych bear.
(An barshreward of love) the death before
She saved her Spouse from, Hypermnestra bore.
More would I write, but that the ponderous chains
My hands o're-load, and fear my force restraines.
THE ARGUMENT of PARIS his Epistle to HELLEN.
PAris sailing to Troy, as Ambassador to mediate for the restoring of his Aunt
Hesione, was royally received by Menelaus: who im^ediately after his arrival
sails to Creet, to dispose of his dead fathers goods. His absence gave
occasion to the young Prince to solicit his wife: The better to win her to his
l^re, be writes unto her this artificial Epistle: wherein with admiration he
extolls her heautie, makes deep profession of his loves vaunts of his stately
k^ndred, promises largely, and endeavors all that he may, to incline his
beauteous hostess to yield unto his suite.

HEalth to the beauteous Hellen, Paris sends,
Whose only health upon thy love depends.
What shall I speak? or need my flames no tongue?
My love already known but too too long.
Though I could wish it hid, till time might rear
And set our joys beyond the reach of fear.
But ill I cloak it: who loves fire can hide?
That by its proper flames is still descried.
If yet thou doubtst what may my meaning prove,
Thou have my mind in these few words, I love.
Pardon confession then, and with such grace
Read thou the rest, as may become thy faces.
I joy to think my lines received by thee:
And hope persuades me once so I shall be.
Which Loves fair mother perfect; nor in vain
May I for thee, through her, this task sustain.
For (that thou may not ignorantly sin)
With heavens advice I did this act begin.
The prize is great, yet but my due I crave:
Thee for my spouse bright Cytherea gave.
She guide, Sigaean shores I left, and 'ssay
In Phereclean keele my dangerous way.
She calmed the waves, and gave me prosperous gales:
Nor marvel, sea borne she, on seas prevails.
As seas she calmed, so may she calm my breast,
And bring my wishes to their wished rest.
My flames with me I brought, not found them here;
They, they, the causes of my journey were.
For me nor storms, nor error, hither brought,
Of purpose I Tanarian port have sought.
Nor think me hither stored with wares to tend;
The goods I have the favo'ring gods defend.
Nor yet your Grecian cities to survay,
Since mine own realms are far more rich than they,
Thee, thee I seek, whom golden Venus grace
Betrothed me, wished for er'e I knew thy face.
Thee mine Idaa saw, before mine eyes,
When Fame had first drawn thine effigies.
Nor let it yet thy strange amazement prove,
That loves swift darts from far have caused me love.
The fates have willed it: and lest their decree
Thou break, receive these truths I Will tell to thee.
When in my mothers womb detained I lay.
She now full gone, and at the expected day
Dreamed that in stead of a wisht-birth, there came
From her unburthend womb, a mighty flame.
Affright she rose, and unto Priam told
The same, which he does to his Priest unfold:
Who answers Paris sires should Ilion burn:
Which I to these my flames of love do turn.
My form and haughty mind, though I might seem
Plebeian, showed I came of noble stem.
A place in Ida's shady vales, unknown
To most there is; with spreading Holmes ore-growne.
Where never bleating sheep, cliffe-climbing goat,
Nor bellowing ox ere filled his greedy throat.
Here whilst I leaned my self unto a tree,
Dardanian seas, and lofty towers to see,
The trampled earth me thought began to move:
(It Is truth I speak, truth that thou wilt scarce approve)
When (borne with winged speed) before mine eye
Stood th'neece of Atlas, and fair Plione.
(What lawful was to see be lawful told)
Within his hand he held a rod of gold.
When straight bright Venus, Pallas, heavens great Queen
All gently lighted on the verdant green.
Amazed I stood, my hairs stiffe-rais'd a bide:
When cast off fear the winged Herald cried,
You Are here a judge of beauty, stay and tell,
Which of these three does in rich form excel.
And adds Jove's charge thereto: which soon as said,
His way unseen through empty air he made.
My mind now roused, and somewhat bolder grown,
I feared not to survay them one by one.
All worthy seemed t'orecome, but yet I feared
The glory could not amongst them all be shared.
For one in looks did far surpass the rest;
As her thy self for Loves fair Queen had guest.
So great a strife there was to overcome,
As with large gifts each sought to buy my doom.
Jove's wife a realm, Pallas does virtue boast,
As I twixt great, and good, was almost lost.
When Venus smiling said, let not the sense
Of these possess thee, filled with harsh suspense.
I Will give thee love, to thy embraces won,
Shall the fair Leda's more fair daughter run.
This said for gifts, and form, the chief approved;
Triumphant to her heavenly sphere she moved.
Mean while (my fortune now more prosperous grown)
By certain signs I Priams son am known.
Received, the Court with joy was filled, and all
In Troy, that day still keep a festival.
As I seek thee, so mayds sought me, though vain,
Whose labored wish thou may alone attain.
Great Princes daughters, nobles liked me well,
In nymphs a care, and love of me did dwell.
Whose births and forms were both despised by me,
When once I entertained a hope of thee.
Thee in the day my fancy viewes: in night
Thee my delicious dreams present my sight.
Present what would, that absent thus did please?
I burnt, though far the sire that did me seize.
Nor more to hope would I endebted be,
But meant t'obtaine my wishes through the sea.
Straight Trojan Pines by Phrygian Axe were feld:
And all trees else for shipping useful held.
Sceepe Gargarus was robbed of woody crown,
And store of Timber Ida sent me down:
Strong Oaks for ships substantial keeles were laid,
Whose ample sides were with crook'd ribs arayd.
Saile-yards, tall masts, and sails on them we place,
And carved gods our painted vessels grace.
But in the ship in which I sought my joy,
Stood my loves surery; Venus and her boy.
My navy now past Arts last laboring hand,
Straight (onward) for Aegean seas I stand.
My sire and mother both did urge my stay,
And strove to hinder my intended way.
My sister too with hairs all loosely dressed,
Even when our sayls for lucky gales were pressed.
Where fly'st she cried: thou wilt bring back flames with thee
Thou know not what a fire thou seekst through sea.
And true she spoke; those very fires are found,
And scorching love my tender breast does wound.
The Port I quit, and helped by furth'ring wind,
Unto thy shores, Oebalian nymph, enclyn'd.
Thy spouse received me kindly: nor was this
Done but by purpose of the Deities.
And whats'oere rare, or conspicuous be,
Or worth the sight in Sparta, showed to me.
But I, whose fancy still on thee did lie,
Could let no other object greet mine eye.
Whom when I saw, amazed I stood; unwares
I felt my heart to fage with new-sprung cares.
Such looks as I remember't, such a grace,
When she my judgment sought, had Cypris face.
Had thou with her in that quaint strife been seen,
Fair Venus palm still in suspense had been.
Large Elogies it is true, there rumoured be,
Nor is there land that is ignorant of thee.
In Phrygia none, none from the Suns up rise,
With thee for beauty bears an equal prize.
Yet trust me, all thy praise to truth gives place;
Fame has been almost envious against thy face.
More here I find, than she ere promised, by
Thy real form, thy fame does conquered lie.
Nor without cause th'all-knowing Theseus loved,
And worthy him, thee for a rape approved.
Whilst in the Cirque (thy countries custom then)
Thou naked sport'st thy self midst naked men.
That thee he forced I like: restored admire:
So good a prey did constant guard require.
First from my bloudied trunk should part my head,
E're thou should have been ravished from my bed.
Should ere these hands of mine thy limbs forgo?
Or living let thee leave my bosom so?
And if restored, I something yet had taken,
Nor wholly should have Venus idly layne.
Or I thy virgin fruit had cropped: or what
Might have been took without the loss of that.
Yield then to Paris, and his firm love try:
Whose flames, in funer all flames shall only dye.
Thee I preferred before a kingdoms state,
Proffered to me by Juno but of late.
And so I might thine I vorie neck embrace,
Virtue (though Pallas gift) was thought but base.
When the three Power disclosed on Ida's hill,
Their naked beauties to my censuring skill.
Yet grieve I not, nor think my choice is ill:
My mind stands fixed unto my first vote still.
This only boon (oh! wot thy all this toil!)
Of thee I crave, give not my hopes the foil.
No base-borne wretch it is that sues to thee,
Nor shall my wife with loss of credit be.
If thou inquire, thou wilt find that Jove's our kin,
Electra too, besides the rest between.
My Sire rules Asia, than the which there is found
No land more rich, almost without a bound.
There shall innumerous Cities, roofes of gold,
And temples that become their gods behold.
There Troy thou wilt see, and Turrets that aspire
On walls, first raised by the Phaebeian Lyre.
What need I here the populous crowd relate?
The land's scare able to sustain its weight.
Troy's dames will meet thee in a thronging train,
Scarce will the streets the Phrygian wives contain.
How often thou'st call Achaia poor, and bare!
When each house here is worth a City there.
Yet let not Sparta be contemn'^ by me,
The land you are borne in needs must happy be.
Yet Sparta's small, thou worthy pomp and grace:
That place does suit but ill to such a face.
A face that should in various dress be dight,
And each day revell in a new delight.
When thou our men's attire thus rich do see,
What habit (think thou) will the women's be?
O be not coy then, nor a Trojan scorn
For spouse, fair nymph, in famed Therapnae borne.
He was a Trojan, and our kin, who now
Allays Joves Nectar with his cooling snow.
A Trojan Tython was, yet rapt away
By her who gives night bounds, and birth to day.
A Trojan he, with whom Loves dame is said
To Have dally'd often in the Idaean shade.
Nor do I think Atrides even by thee,
For years, and form, would be compared with me.
No father-in-law we bring, to cause the Son
From his dire banquets with scared Steeds to run.
No gransire stained with slaughter of his kin,
That gives to seas a Title through his sin.
No Ancestor of ours in Stygian lake
Gapes at vain fruit, midst streams, nor thirst can slake
But why these vants? if their ally thy bed
Possess, Jove's forced to be this houses head.
That vile unworthy wretch (oh shameful spite)
Freely enjoyes thy sweet embrace all night.
By me, except at board, thou scarce art spied,
In which short space I pain enough abide.
Such feasts I wish may to my foes redound,
As I often meet with when the Table's crowned.
I hate my entertainment, loathe't, when I
Behold that clown on thy fair neck to lie.
And fretting vex, (but what need this be known?)
When thy choice limbs he wraps within his gown.
If (killing sight) ye do to kiss begin,
To bar my sight I hold the cup between.
At each close hug mine eyes to ground I throw,
My meat within my mouth does irksome grow.
Often have I sighed, and noted too the while
(Fair wanton) from my sighs, to spring thy smile.
Often I with wine have sought to quench my flame,
But that, like fire, in fire, more fierce became.
To shun such sights, with head reverst I Have layne,
Yet hope of thee called back mine eyes again.
What shall I do? they are a grief to see,
Yet greater grief to lose the sight of thee.
Well as I may I cloak these flames of mine,
Yet even dissembled love does clearly shine.
To thee alas! full we I my wounds are known,
And would to God they were to thee alone.
How-oft, tears issuing, have I turned awry,
Lest he should see, and ask the reason why?
How often have! some amorous tale begun,
Still gazing till my whole discourse were done?
And in feigned names bewrayd my love to thee:
It Is I that lover am, it is I am he.
Often, that I so more lavishly might prate,
Have I become a drunken counterfeit.
Once I remember thy loose garments fell,
And to mine eyes did thy nak't breast reveal.
Breasts that for white, with new-falne snow contest,
Pure milk, or Jove when he thy mother pressed.
And ravished with a sight did so excel,
The wreathed goblet from my fingers fell.
If thou thy daughter kiss, I not refrain,
But with a kiss take that kiss off again.
Supinely laid often sung of ancient love,
And by a beck some secret sign would move.
Late I essayd by flattring words to woe
The help of Clymene, and Aethra too.
Who answered in the dialect of fear,
And left me in the midst of all my prayer.
Would heaven would thee some combats prize decree.
That so thou might become the victors fee.
Then, as Hippomenes Allanta bore
From all the suitors foyld in race before;
And as to Phrygia Hippodomia came:
So like a Queen should thou have done the same.
As fierce Alcides rent Achelous horn,
(For thy embrace fair Deianira borne.)
With like effect my courage should take course,
And show thou were sole subject of my force.
But now naught rests for me, but to entreat
Or humbly (so thou please) to kiss thy feet.
Oh thou! thy brothers only glorious grace!
And, but that kin, well worthy Jove's embrace.
Or may I bear thee to Sygaean strand,
Or be entombed here in Taenarian land.
With no slight scarres my breast is touched; but sound
Rooted in inmost marrow, lies my wound.
And right (I mind) Cassandra spoke when she
Said that an heavenly shaft should light on me.
Cease then to scorn a fore-driv'n lover; so
May to thy wish the gods propitious grow.
Much could I say, to tell my tale outright,
Receive me to thy bed in silent night.
What art ashamed? do blush at it? and dread
To violate the bond of lawful bed?
Ah! foolish wretch; nay rusticke may I say,
Think such a face can e're want sins Allay.
Or change thy face, or mind, one needs must be,
"Chaste life and beauty seldom can agree.
Jove joys in stealths. Venus the same does love,
Such sports as these, gave thee a sire of Jove.
It Is strange, if any force in love do last,
That Jove's, and Leda's daughter, should be chaste.
Then live thou chaste, when thee my Troy shall see;
And may thou know no other crimes but me.
Now lets do that which marriage hour shall mend.
If Venus did not vainly things pretend.
And this, though not his words, his deeds exhort:
H'hath left his home, lest he should spoil our sport.
He could not have picked out a time more fit
To visit Creet: oh man of monstrous wit!
Nay when he went, says he, I charge you bear
To this my Trojan guest, respectfull care.
Yet thou neglect'st thy husbands kind request,
Nor have a care of thy commended guest.
And can thou think this brainlesse wretch to be
One that does thoroughly prize thy form, or thee?
No, no, he skills them not; for did he know
He never would trust them with a stranger so.
Though thee my love nor words do move, yet see
We Are urged unto't by opportunity.
We were stark fools, more void than he of sense,
Should so secure a time pass idly hence.
With his own hands he gave me unto thee,
Pray use the honest man's simplicity!
In empty bed thou these long nights do lie,
In empty bed so lie, (yet rest not) I.
Let mutual joys us to each other join,
Oh night! that wilt the clearest day outshine!
Then would I swear by all the gods that be,
And tie my self in sacred bands to thee.
Then (if my steadfast faith do prove but true)
I Will make thee quickly wish my countries view.
If fear or shame possess thee, lest thy fame
Suffer in following me, I Will bear the blame.
Thy brothers deeds, and Theseus I pursue,
Nor can be moved with types more near, or true.
Thee Theseus rapt, the two Leucippa they;
And I Will the fourth be numbered in the fray.
My Fleet's at hand, well manned, with armed array,
Whilst O ares, and wind, shall wing us out our way.
Queen-like shall ride through each Dardanian town,
Whilst the rowt think some goddess is come down.
Wheres'ere thou tread'st, shall odorous sents abound,
And slaughtred Victims strew the bloudied ground.
My brothers, sisters, mother, sire shall bring
Ilians, all Troy to thee their Offering.
Alas! I Have scarce spoke ought of what shall be:
More than these lines can tell, thou there shall see.
Nor fear being raped fierce war should us pursue,
Or that all Greece should raise its force thereto.
Pray who amongst former rapes did arms regaine?
Believed, all fears are in this case but vain.
Orythia fair the Thracians forced from far,
And yet Bistonion coasts were free from war.
Jason Medea in Tritonian keele,
Convay'd, nor felt Thessalia Colchos steel.
He who raped thee, raped Phaedra; no Alarmes
Made Minos yet, nor raised his Creet to Arms.
"Terror in these exceeds the danger still;
"Things to be feared, to over-feare, is ill.
Yet, so thou please, suppose a war ensue:
Know I have force, and wounding weapons too.
Nor is my Asia less in bounds, or force,
Than Greece, a land well stored with men and horse.
Nor yet Atrides Paris ought exceeds
In manly courage, or in warlike deeds.
Even but a boy, from slaughtred foes I gained
My by-driv'n heard; and thence my name attained.
Even but a boy, I men in fight ore-threw;
Deiphobus, Ilioneus too.
Nor think in hand-fight I have only Art,
Full well from far, is fixed my thirled dart.
Nor can thou say, his youth did these fulfill,
Nor furnish thy Atrides with my skill.
Grant these, yet Hector cannot his brother be:
Who stands in stead of numerous troops to me.
Thou know me not, nor what is my strength: no^ yet
What kind of man thou for thy spouse shall get.
Or by no war thou shall be sought in fine,
Or Doricke camps shall yield in Arms to mine.
Nor think I much to war for such a wife:
Such great rewards may well maintain a strife,
Nay thou, should the whole world contend for thee;
To times eternal, fresh in fame shall be.
Then (gods still favoring) boldly leave the land.
And with full faith, my plighted vows demand.
THE ARGUMENT OF HELLENS Epistle to PARIS.
HEllen having received and read the Trojans letter, with much indignation
reprehends and tannts her wanton guest, and (for the better maintaining of her
honor) labors to confute, and withstand his reason^ and persuasions: yet so,
that amidst her slighting, her disdains, there appeared some glimmering ^f her
affection: With cunning a long time she discourses: sometimes she speaks him
fair, then che^kes his hope; now pro^ises, agai^e e^ies, now believes him,
anon she doubts. Till ^t ^ength sh^^n part condescends to his desires; and
advises him in the further pros^cution o^ his suit, not by letter to solicit
her, but to impart b^t mind to Aethra and Clymene, her companions both, and of
counsel with her in this design.

SInce these thy lines have thus abused my sight,
The glory of an answer seems not slight.
And dar^^st thou then, then laws of nostage broke,
A spoused wives firm vowed faith provoke?
Was it for this, that tossed on boistrous seas,
Taenarian port at length did yield thee ease?
For this, that though thou came from regions far,
Our palace gates did not thine entrance bar?
That thou such wrong for my desert should show?
Thou that thus came, were thou a guest, or foe?
I doubt not but my just complaint by thee
Will be esteemed full of rustieitie.
Rude let me seem, so not devoyd of shame:
And so my life knows no foul blot, nor blame.
Although my face no sad-fain'd look does hear,
Though on my front no wrinkled brow I wear:
Yet my fame's clear, I Have lived without a stain:
No letcher yet of me could boast his gain.
Which makes me more to wonder, what gave head
To thy rash boldness, thus to hope my bed.
With me, because once Theseus made a escape,
Am I deemed worthy of a second rape?
Had I been won, the fault on me might lie;
But being forced, what save to nill could I?
Nor did he yet attain the fruit he sought:
And except fear it self, I suffered naught.
A kiss or so, struggling with much ado
The wretch obtained, but never could further go.
With these thy vileness would not sated be:
But heavens were kind, he was not like to thee.
Untouched he let me go: his mild intent
Lessened his crime: nay th'youth did sure repent.
Theseus repents that Paris might ensue!
For fear my fame should not be blazed enough.
Yet I Am not wrath (a lover who can chide?)
If these thy flames no feigned slights do hide.
And that I doubt: not 'cause my faith is small,
Or that my face I do mistrust at all;
But 'cause belief is often a woman's woe,
And men's words want of faith a gtaine or two.
Let others sin: though rarea chaste wife be,
Who shall forbid that rare one to be me?
Because my mother seemed soon won, from thence
Do think I Will yield unto the like offense?
My mother may a just excuse assume
For her misdeeds; th adulterer lurk't in plume.
I cannot say I knew not: nor call in
An error to lend shadow to my sin.
By th'authour well did she her crime redeem:
But by what Jove, shall I pray happy seem?
Thou vauntst thy stock, kin, many a Princely name,
This house in worth is of sufficient fame.
Jove, Atreus Grandsire, Tantall's, Pelops. I
And the Tyndarian Off spring here pass by.
Laeda gives Jove my sire, who credulous soul
Took to her bosom a deceitful foul.
Go now, and brag thy Troy's original,
Aged Priam, and Laomedon withal:
Both whom I reverence: yet know from thee
Jove's removed five, from me but one degree.
And though Troy's scepters bear a potent sway,
Yet do I think ours are no less than they.
Grant it in wealth, in men, the upper hand;
Yet ne'rethelesse it is but a barbarous land.
Such ample gifts thy rich-vein'd lines do move,
As even may tempt a goddess unto love.
But would I now to pass shames bounds begin;
It Is thou should be my greatest cause of sin.
Or I would blameless lead my life still true,
Or rather thee than all thy gifts pursue.
As them I scorn not, so the best I take
Those, which the giver still does precious make.
But most thy love, thy toil I prize: for me
That thy strong hopes should tempt the wide stretched sea.
Full well at board (though with dissembling show
I cloak the same) I note the tricks you ^oe.
Sometimes thou view'st me with a wanton eye,
Whose bold fixed gaze turns my chaste sight awry.
Sometimes thou sight'st; then take my cup, and where
Thou saw me drink, thou straightwaies drinkst just there.
How often with fingers, and with speaking brow,
Have I observed thee secret signs to show?
Often feared I lest my husband should have seen,
And blushed in that they have not closer been.
Often to my self in whispers would I say,
This wretch is shameless; nor from truth did stray.
Often have I read, writ on the board above
in wine, my name; and underneath't, I love.
Yet seemed to slight it with averted eye:
Which, now, ah me! my self has learned to cry.
If sin I would, with such sweet slights as these,
Thou both my heart, my self, and all might ceaze.
Nor wants thou, I confess, a beauteous face,
That might a virgin win to thy embrace.
Guiltless by thee yet others happy prove:
Then e're my fame be foyld by foreign love.
Learn then by me to want what is fair with ease:
"It Is virtue to abstain from things that please.
How many think have wished thy wish their prize?
Has Paris only the discerning eyes?
Thou see not more, but (bold) do more essay;
Nor have more heart, but far more front than they.
Would with swift keele thou then had reached our
When thousand suitors soght my virgin flower. shore
Once seen, of thousands thou the first had bin;
My husband needs must pardon me herein.
To things possessed thou come, to tasted joys:
And (slow) another what thou seek'st, enjoyes.
Yet as I wish to be thy wife, so know
Not against my will A rides holds me now.
Cease then my breast with winning words to move,
Nor seek to hurt whom thou pretendst to love.
What lot chance gave me, let me keep the same;
Nor wear the spoil of my defiled shame.
But Venus me betrothed thee, when on I Would
Three naked powers to thee themselves applied:
A kingdom one, the other a warlike name,
And me the third, did for thy wife proclaim.
I scarce believe such heavenly wights should come,
And prostitute their beauty to thy doom.
Grant this for truth, yet that needs false must be,
Where I am said to be thy judgments fee.
Nor am I so self proud, my self to deem
So high-priz'd in a goddesses esteem.
'T^s enough my beauty humane eyes approve;
That Venus praised it shows her spite, not love.
Yet I not doubt, but like those praises; why
What my heart longs for, should my tongue deny?
Nor think it much thou were believed so ill;
"In things of weight our faith is tardy still.
My chief joy's then't'have pleased fair Venus eyes,
Next, to have seemed to thee the greatest prize:
And that dame Juno's ( Hellens beauty heard)
And Pallas gifts were not by thee preferred.
So I thy virtue, I thy kingdom prove,
Steeled were my heart, should I not lend thee love.
But steeled I am not, yet to love decline
Him whom I think can hardly e're be mine.
Why should I seek to plough the thirsty sands,
Or follow hope which even the place withstands?
I Am rude to Venus thefts: nor e're as yet
(Heavens witness!) gulled my spouse, by any slight.
That now my words I write in Tablets, know
'T's a task they nere before did undergo.
Happy who use it; I unskilled therein,
Think all paths rough, that lead me to the sin.
Even fear's a plague; abasht, me thinks I see
All eyes (as wondering) set at gaze on me.
Nor think I false; I Have heard th'ill-murm'ring rout:
And Aethra told me what they late gave out.
Dissemble then: unless thou'ldst quit thy suite.
But why desist? dissemble, thou can do it.
Sport; but yet close: greater, not greatest sway
W'enjoy, in that Atrides is away.
Who now from hence to distant coasts is gone,
Urgent, and just; was the occasion.
I, when he once made doubt to go indeed,
Said go my dear, and make return with speed.
Pleased with the omen, me he kissed: and see
Of house, my state, and guest, you have care says he.
Scarce held I laughter; striving which to stay,
Save, Sir I shall, I not one word could say.
Forthwith, winds fair, his sails for Greece he set.
But think not therefore all things lawful yet.
So is he hence, that gone, he guards me here:
Know not that kings far-stretching arms do bear?
Fame too, annoys us, for the more you praise
My face, the more his jealous fears you raise.
What was my pleasure, now is mine hurt become,
Better't had been if fame had still been dombe.
Nor wonder that alone I Am left with thee:
He Is confident of my integrity.
He doubts my face, but trusts my life; secure
My faith, my beauty makes him fears endure.
Thou warn'st me not to let time slip nor slight
A hop so fit, caused by this simple weight.
I would, and fear: my wills not yet exact,
And my mind staggers in a dubious tract.
My spouse is hence, thou matelesse lie at ease,
Thy beauty me, my beauty thee does please
Long nights with long discourse we entertain:
Thou gentle, sweet, one house does both contain.
May I not live if all things plead not sin,
I know not yet what strange fear holds me in.
What ill thou fu'st would thou could well constrain,
Then might thou soon shake off my coy disdain.
Often wrongs to some have been commodious held:
How blessed were I, could I be so compelled!
Yet whilst it is young, let us rather quench desire:
Small flames by sprinkled water soon expire,
And strangers love is frail and erres as they,
And when thou think it sure then flies away.
This Thoas, this did Minos daughter prove,
Who both embraced, and rew'd their lawless love;
Nay thou (false man) though long time loved, art said
To Have left Oenon^, that desertfull maid.
Nor can thy self deny't: and know that we
Had care to enquire all that we could of thee.
Though thou in love would constant fain prevail,
Thou can not see thy Phrygians pressed for sail,
Whilst we confer, when hoped for night shall come,
Straight blows a wind that serves to bear thee home.
And in mid course of our delightful play,
Our joy shall cease, and love with winds away.
Shall I then go and see praised Troy, be known
Daughter in law to great Laomedon?
No, no, I weigh fame more than so: that she
Should each where trumpet forth mine Obloquie.
What might my Sparta think of me, or what
All Greece, or Asia, or thy Troy to that?
What might old Priam, and thy mother say,
Thy brothers, and thy sisters tool pray?
Nay thou, how can me faithful hope, nor find
Thine own example crucify thy mind?
Whos'ere from far enters Troy's harbor, he
Will cause thy doubt, and by anxietie.
How often in age wilt me adultresse call?
Forgetful thou the ^uthour were of all.
Thou my faul^s cause and blamer wilt become:
E're that earth hide me in a darksome tomb.
But I shall I^^an wealth enjoy, rich dyesse,
And gifts far larger than thy promises.
Robes rarely wrought, and weeds of Ty^ian dye;
Huge heaps of glittering gold shall greet mine eye.
Pardon me Sir: I count not gifts so dear;
I know not how that land may treat me there.
If wronged, in Phrygia who will my wrongs correct?
Whence shall I Sires, whence brothers aid expect?
Large vows false Jason to Medea past,
Yet she is expulst from Aesons house at last.
No Aeta there, to whom she might return,
No mother, there no sister was to mourn.
The like I fear not though, no more did she:
"Hope's often deceived through it is own Augurie.
The Ships now tossed upon the billowie Maine,
At leaving Port, found it a glass like plain.
That brand much frights me, which with fiery glean^
Vsher'd thy birthday in thy mothers dream.
And those prophetic Sawes which have foretold
Pelasgian flames should Iliums Towers enfold.
And as fair Venus favors thee, alone
'Cause she two Trophies, by thy judgment won:
So fear I those, (if thy report be true)
Whose claim was consur'd and condemned by you.
Nay, should I go, I Am sure wars rage to feel:
And our loves passage must be forced through steel.
Could Hippodimia in her cause compel
Thracians and Centaures, to a war so fell?
And think my spouse, Brothers, and Sire, will show,
Moved with a wrath more just, themselves more slow?
Though thou for valor do so largely vie,
Trust me, thy face does give thy words the lie.
More fit for Venus thou, than Mars would prove.
Let Champions fight, but Paris only love.
Let Hector you so praise, supply thy room.
The loves sweet warfare better would become.
Which I my self would try, could I but grow
More bold, or wise, and Maids, if wife, will do.
Perhaps e're long I may more gentle be,
(Shame laid aside) and yield my hands to thee.
That thou do urge a private conference,
I'guesse your talk, and what you mean from thence*
But you are too quick, thy crop's but in the blade,
Perhaps 'tmay prove commodious to have stayed.
Thus far my letter shows my minds disease,
Here cease this work, here my tired hand take case.
What rests we will by Clymene confer,
And Aethra, each my Mate, and Counselor.
THE ARGUMENT of LEANDERS Epistle to HERO.
AT Sestos, a maritime village in Europe, direlt the fair and lovely Hero:
entirely affected by Leander, a noble youth, and dwelling on the opposite shore
in Abydos, a village of Asia, to whom he nightly acustomed to swim through the
Hellespont, and to return back again at break of day. At length the seas
with boisterous winds incenst, debard Leander of his wonted passage. Seven
nights were past, since the earnest lover had seen his Hero's face. By chance,
a hold and fea^ less Mariner puts forth for Sestos: by whom he sends unto her
this his following Epistle: wherein he recomforts her hopes, protests his
faithful love, complains against the stormy tide, and vows (despite of
rigorous seas) to swim to her at last; and put his life unto a hazard, rather
than be debard the sight of her, in whose love he averres, remains his only
bliss.

HEslth unto Hero does Leander send;
Which he had rather bring, would seas rage end.
Were the gods kind, and to my love agreed,
With eyes unwilling thou these lines should read.
But they are not: why do they my wishes stay?
Nor suffer me to run my wonted way.
The heavens thou see pitch-blacke, with winds the seas
Incenc'd: by ships scarce to be past with ease,
Save one, (and he too hold) by whom we sent
Our lines to thee, from shore his journey bent.
I was imbarking too; but whilst w'had been
Weighing anchor, all Abydos would have seen:
Nor could I (as before) my parents blind,
Nay th'love we would have hid, would then have shined.
Forthwith I writ, and said, blessed letter go,
A friendly welcome will her hand bestow.
Perhaps to kiss thee with her rosy lips,
Whilst the signed wax with Iv'rie teeth she rips.
This softly said unto my self: the rest
Was to my paper by my hand expressed.
That hand, I wish might rather swim than write,
And bear me through th'accuslom'd waves with might.
More fitting far to clap the smooth browd flood,
Yet now 'tmay serve to make me understood.
It Is now seven nights (to me a year and more)
Since the hoarse sea with troubled waves did rore.
In all this space, if one soft sleep did swage
My breast, may feas hold on their woeful rage.
Sad setting on some rock thy shores I see,
Present in mind where body cannot be.
Besides mine eyes unto thy tower addressed,
Thy lights do spy, or seem to spy at least.
Thrice I my garments on dry sands did lay,
Thrice naked did attempt my dangerous way.
But seas my youthful enterprise withstood,
And over-whelmd me in the adverse flood.
And thou of all the swift-wing'd winds the worst,
Why thus with me do wage a war so cursed?
Against me (stern wretch) not seas, thou rav'st, ok me!
What would, if love had nere been known to thee!
Cold as thou art, thou can not yet deny,
But in Actaan flames thou once did fry.
And should one then have barred the acry way
To thy loves thefts, how would have brookt it pray?
Oh spare me then, and thy rough ways appease,
So favor thee the kind Hippo^ades.
But all is in vain, he murmurs against my prayers;
And the moved waves not calmes, but higher reares.
Would me, Cree^s Artist, would his wings assign!
Although the lcarian shore does nie adjoyne.
I Would suffer all; so wings my corpse might bear,
And leaving water, cut the liquid air.
Mean time, whilst all things hinder, seas, and wind,
My first loves stealths I will recall to mind.
'Twas night ('it is still my joy to think) when I
A lover, first my fathers gares did fly.
Straight casting off my clothes, and fear with these,
I plunged my self into the sparkling seas.
The moon affoorded me her trembling rays,
As an officious partner in my ways.
Her viewd, I said, bright virgin aid my will,
And to thy mind revoke the Latmean hill.
Endimion keeps soft temper in thy heart:
Thy friendly face to these my stealths convert.
Thou, though a goddess, did a mortal woe:
And she is a goddess whom I now pursue.
I pass her virtues, worthy breast, divine!
Scarce does such form, say in a goddess shine.
Set Venus and thy self aside, and she
The Nonesuch is; be thine own Judge e, and see.
How much (when as thy self with silver ray
Appear'st) dimne stars unto thy fire give way.
So much more fair, than a^l that fair we find
Is she; do doubt? troth then thy fight's but blind.
Such words I spoke, or not unlike to these,
A lustill (...) I past the yielding seas.
The radiant Moon, with beam of glistering light
Tinseld the ways; and made a day of night.
No noise was heard, (all calmly quiet) lave
The mu^mures which the moved waters gave.
The Ha^c^ons only mindful that remain
Of Ceyx loss, notes sadly sweet did strain.
Mine arms now ty'rd with forcing way along.
Unto the summit of the waves I sprung.
And spying light far off, my fires said I
Burn there, that place contains my deity.
When straight fresh force supplied my wasted store,
And seas seemed fame more gentle than before.
Nor freezing streams annoy: for love (behold)
Had armed me with a medicine against the cold.
The nearer still I to thy shores drew nie,
More apt to swim, and far more brisk was I.
But thou once seen, unto my mind new force
Thou gav'st, and madst'st me abler in my course.
Then I by swimming strove to please thine eye,
And threw mine arms to be discerned on hie.
Scarce from the seas could thee thy nurse restrain.
Nor did deceiveme, I perceived it plain.
Nor could she so withold thee, though she strave,
But that thy foot was drenched in the wave.
Arrived, thine arms and kisses crowned my rest:
Kisses that gods might swim for, and be blessed
Thine own fair shoulders, of rich robes did bare,
To furnish me, and dry'dst my wave wet hair.
The rest the night, we, and thy tower do know,
And that bright lamp, whose light did guide me through.
As soon that nights delights may numbered be,
As can the weeds of the Hellespontick sea.
The least the space, did for our loves remain,
The more our care, it might not pa^^e in vain.
And now morns herald Luciser began rise,
And fresh Aurora to unmaske the skies.
O how our hudled kisses walked, and how
Waild we nights shortness, and wished day more slow!
At length (harsh news) warnd by thy nurse, thy tower
I left, and hyed me to the uncouth shore.
Both parting, wept; I to the virgins sea
Went; whilst I might, still looking back on thee.
Trust me, me thinks when I to thee do come,
I seem to swim, but shipwrackt going home.
Nay more, in all my tedious course to thee,
The way proves plain, backward a cliffie sea.
Ill pleased return I to my country still,
And mine own home detaines me against my will.
Our soul, are linkt, why are our corpse dis-joynd?
Why holds not both one land, since both one mind?
Thee let Abydos, Sestos me contain;
My land likes thee, thine pleases me again.
Why am I vexed when boyst'rous billows move?
Cannot winds blow, but 'tmust my hindrance prove?
The crooked Dolphins know my love; not one
Small fish there swims, to whom I am unknown.
By me a path is opened in the waves,
Like that which by a wheel, pressed earth receives.
I once complaind of that my toil, but now
That by the winds I am debard it so.
The Hellespont with frothy waves does foame,
And ships are scarce safe in their harbor home.
Nor do I think 'twas with more fury swayd,
When first 'twas christened by the drowned maid.
Poor Helles loss has stigmatized its fame,
'Tmay well spare me, 'thath a sufficient name.
I envy Phryxus fate; who backed with ease,
A gold-fleec't Ram, and fasely past these seas.
But I, no sheeps help, nor a ships implore,
Were the streams such, that I might swim the shore.
No Art I Would crave, so swimming were but free,
My self the ship, pilot, and oars would be.
Nor will I either Bear for guidance chose,
My love scorns all such common stars as those.
Others Andromads, the crown of gold,
And the North gilding Parasis behold.
Yet neither Perseus, Jove's, nor Bacchus love,
In doubtful way, I for my guides approve.
Another star more sure than these, have I,
That marked, my love shall never sail awry.
That s^^n, I soon could pass the Colchian shore,
Or utmost trackes of the Thessalian Oar.
Palaemons self I could out-swim by od,
Or him whom the strange herb transformd a god.
Often in this task my wearied arms do shrink,
And scarce are heaved above the warers brinke.
But when I say, Cheer up, ye shall embrace
My Hero's neck, your toils reward, and grace.
They straight recover strength, and forward tend
Like horse, that from Elean bounds we send.
Thus I my scorching flames reserve, and you
Fair heavenly maid, with servent zeal pursue.
Well worthy heaven indeed, on earth yet stay:
Or draw me out unto the gods away.
Hence it is, that these so seldom I enjoy,
And hence that iroubled seas my mind annoy.
What though the sea's but small that parts us? since
As well that bars us, as one more immense.
As lief had I in the utmost world remain,
As thus to live, and love, and hope in vain.
The nearer thee, slames ceise my heart more near:
My hope's still great, though small effects appear.
My hands even touch my bliss, which oft-times I
Lament with tears, to miss, yet be so nie.
Like Tantall midst chin-kissing streams I stand,
And catch at dangling fruit, which mocks my hand.
And must I not enjoy thee, but when sea
Gives way? No winter see me blessed with thee?
Since naught less firm, than winds and waves we find;
Must all my hopes, still rest on waves, and wind?
If thus in Summer, what will be the seas
When the Bear reigns, the Goat, the Pleiades?
I know not yet my boldness; but I fear,
Love then will force me to a desperate share.
And, lest thou think the time I promise vain,
E're long I Will give a pledge shall make it plain.
Let seas a while their boystrous rage pursue.
E're long spite them, I Will force my passage through.
Or happy boldness shall my safety prove,
Or death lend rest unto my anxious love.
If dead; I wish 'tmay be my luckier doom,
That my wrackt limbs unto thy shores may come.
I know thou wilt weep, embrace me too withal,
And say, thou were sole author of my fall.
Perhaps this Omen does offend thine ear,
And in this part my lines unpleasing are.
Cease thy fond fear: that seas prove gentle, join
Thy fervent prayers, with zealous vows of mine.
Small space will serve to waft me to thy shore;
Once there, let winter to the utmost ^ore.
A fitting harbor for my keele lies there,
Nor can my bark ride safer any where.
Let Boreas keep me, I shall love my stay,
Fearful to stir, and slow to go away.
Nor rail against deafer waves, nor yet laments
Seas are not pliant, to a swimmers bent.
Let winds detain me and thy tender arms,
And may I be withheld with double charms,
When storms shall cease, I mean to try my skill;
Be sure (my dear) thy light be ready still,
Mean time, for me, lodge these my lines with you,
Which heavens vouchsafe I nay with speed pursue.
THE ARGUMENT OF HERO'S Epistle to LEANDER.
HEro having received the Epistle of her amorous Leander, re-answers it with
terms of mutual affection: desires his company, exclaimes against the seas,
is zealous of his slay, rejects that conceit, tells him her dream. And lastly,
admonishes him not to come, except in a peaceful and a gentle tide.

THe health thou send'st in words, that I indeed
May have (Leander) come thy self with speed.
All stays are irksome that my joys remove:
Pardon me pray, I do not slightly love.
Our flames are equal, but far short of thee
Am I in strength; men's spirits the ablest be.
As maids limbs, so their minds, are weak and faint:
I dye, except thou come without rostraint.
You men, in various pastimes time may spend,
Your minds to tillage, or to hunting bend.
Sometimes in the Court, now in the cirque again,
Or with your nimble Coursers scour the plain.
Now birds with nets, now fish deceive with line,
Or wash away the tedious hours with wine.
Though less myflames, these sports I could not prove;
Naught rests for me to do, but only love.
And that I do, and with more carnest might
Than thou wilt believe I can, my sole delight!
Or with my nurse I sit, and talk of thee,
And wonder what thy cause of stay should be.
Or seeing winds to swell the justling tide,
In thine own terms, the spiteful waves I chide.
Or when the enraged seas more calm become,
I say thou may, but yet thou will not come.
Whilst thus I wail, salt tears do drown mine eyes:
Which with her trembling hand my old nurse dries.
Often search I if on shore thy steps appear,
As though the sands could still th'impressions bear.
Often I enquire, that I thy health may know,
Who from Abydos comes, or who does go.
What need I tell how often I kissed over
The clothes thou lefts behind thee on the shore?
Day past and nights more friendly hour drawn nigh,
When glitting stars have spangled all the sky:
On my towers top a watchful torch I place:
The sign that guides thee in thy wonted race.
Then slender threads, with thirled spindle weave;
And by that womanish art slow time deceave.
Ask'st what my talk in all this space may be?
My whole discourse is only framed of thee.
Nurse, do thou think my joy's come forth of door?
Do any watch him, and he fear the more?
Say, are his garments off? does he annoint
As yet with subtle oil, each curious joint?
When straight she nods; not that she minds my love,
But sleep alas, her aged head does move.
Then by and by alowd I cry, now, now,
He swims, and's arms does midst the billows throw.
And ere a thread or two I scarce have spun,
Fain would I know if half thy course were done.
Then look I forth again, and softly pray
That prosperous gales may give thee easy way.
Sometimes a voice we hear; and think all be,
The noyses, that forerunne the approach of thee.
Thus when the nights most it kesome space is past,
Slye sleep invades my wearyed eyes at last.
Then, though unwilling here thou sleep'st with me;
Present, although thou would not present be.
Sometimes me thinks I see thee swimming nigh,
Then that thine arms upon my shoulders lie.
Now for to cloth thy limbs with waves oppressed;
Or hug thee, laid upon my warmer breast.
Much more beside, which I forbear to tell;
I shame to speak't, though done they liked me well.
Oh! yet these joys but transitory be!
For still with sleep, thou fliest away from me.
Let us at length, our selves more firmly chain,
And let our joys be real, and not vain.
Why have I past so often the widdowed night?
Why (slow) so long art absent from my sight?
It Is true the seas are rough and boistrous now,
But yet last night far gentler gales did blow.
Why letst that slip? why fear'dst not future doom?
Why lost so good a means, and thou not come?
Though straight thou mee^'st as fit a time to pass,
Ye^ 'cause 'twas sooner, that the better was.
Seas fickle state is changed in an hour,
A willing have will quickly waft thee over,
Once here, thou shall not need to grieve I trow,
Locked in mine arms, no storms shall work thy woe
Then I with joy should hear the winds and then
Wish seas might never more be calm again.
But whence pray comes it, that the seas you fear
Now, which once scorned and contemned were?
For well I mind, when first to me you came,
The stream was near as rough as is this same.
When I cried out, do not so desperate be:
Least that thy courage be bewayld by me.
Whence springs this feare-where are thy bold thoughts fled?
Where he that not a thousand seas did dread?
Yet still be thus then desprate as before;
And stay till thou may safely reach the shore.
So thou't the same, and as thou writ'st do love.
And so thy flames do no cold embers prove.
Yet not so much the hindering winds I fear,
As least thy love like to the winds should err.
Or east thou think thy danger pass the gain;
Or me too small a purchase for thy pain.
Often I my Country doubt: or least there be
Too great an ods betwixt thy self and me.
Yet could I well bear this, so thou incline
To no base love with any concubine.
So no strange arms thy softer neck enfold:
Nor new found love, prescribe an end to old.
First let me dye, then by such base wounds bleed:
And may my fate outstrip so foul a deed.
Not that thy self or any new sprung fame
Has given me cause of grief I writ this same.
But cause I fear (who ere secure did love?)
The place the absent often to fear does move.
Thrice happy they who present do enjoy,
And know their crimes; whom false ones not annoy.
As well forged crimes, as true, my mind do strike:
Error, and fear, in me cause griefs alike.
Oh that thould'st come! or winds or father may
(No woman) be the cause of this thy stay.
Which should I hear my death from grief would grow:
And much thou wilt sin, if thou should kill me so.
But thou will not; and all in vain I fear,
Fierce winter is the cause thou come not here.
Ah! how the shores with batt'ring waves resound!
Days light within a watery cloud yes drowned.
Sure good Nephele, Helles loss deplores:
Whilst waves with her, do (breaking) weep in showrs.
Or else her stepdame plagues this noxious sea,
Lately transformed a watery deity.
This place befriends no mayds, for hence did grow
Poor H^lles death; and here I suffer too.
But Neptune, if thy former flames thou mind,
Me thinks no love should be impeacht by wind.
If bright Amimone, and Tyro be
No lying fables of thy love, and thee
Halcyone, and Iphim^din fair,
Medusa, then without her snakie hair:
Laodice, Celaeno heaven re-inspheard;
And many more, whose names I often have heard.
All these, and more, as Poets sing, would join
In am'or ous sports, their softer sides to thine.
Why then do thou, who often loves power did try,
Seas wonted passage through thy rage deny?
Cruel forbear; and in the wide seas reign!
Small is the stream that parts these lands in twain.
T'infest great ships were for thy state more meet;
Or fiercely to assault some mighty fleet,
What praise to thee can from a drowned youth rise?
Each petty lake would scorn so poor a prize.
It Is true he is high, and nobly borne, yet he
Descends from no Vlyssian progeny.
Cease then; save two in one: for though he swim
Alone; yet lies my hope, my life, in him.
Mean while my taper (for by one I write)
Crackles, a sign some prosperous luck should light.
Forthwith my nurse wine in the fire does power:
Then drinks, and cries next morn we shall be more.
Come through the seas and make us more by one,
Oh thou beloved of my heart alone!
Come to thy camp then that thy love do fly:
In empty bed why do I lovely lie?
Thou need'st not fear; love aids the bold essay:
The sea borne Goddess will the seas allay.
Often I my self could even attempt the sea;
But that these waves men's friends not women's be.
Elle why when Phryxus first did pass the same,
Did H^lle only give the flood a name?
Perhaps your strength for to return you fear.
And that you scarce the double task should bear.
In mid-sea then let us together meet:
And with sweet kisses there, each other greet.
That done turn back again, though this be small,
Yet is it better far then naught at all.
Would God our bashful shame, or timorous love
Might yield to some, and known, and open prove.
Ill joined (in us) is love with shame, 'twixt these
My choice I doubt; this seemly, that does please.
As soon as Jason reached the Colchian shore,
Away with him the Phasi^n Dame he bore.
No sooner Paris Lacedaemon eyes,
But he returns, blessed with his beauteous prize.
Often as thou comst as often thou leau'st thy love
Behind; and swimm'st, when ships can hardly move.
But yet thou victor of the seas, so care,
So scorn its rage, as scorning still to fear.
Often well wrought vessels in the flood do sail,
And think thine arms can past their oars prevail?
Where thou desir'st, stout seamen fear to tend:
In such attempts wrackt ships have found their end.
I would not yet persuade, what I advise:
And may thy courage, 'bove my counsels rise.
So thou in satetie come; and on my breast
At last, thy wave dividing arms do rest.
Yet still as I convert mine eyes to seas,
A chilling cold my daunted heart does seize.
No less I me troubled with my dream last night,
Though expiated since with sacred rite.
In dawne of day, my Taper almost out:
(A time when dreams are most devoyd of doubt.)
From out my fingers fell my twisted thread,
And toward my pillow I enclyn'd my head.
When straight, me thought I really did see
A Dol hin, swimming in the windy sea.
Whom, when the waves on soking sands had tossed,
At once the wretch both life, and water lost.
Its meaning much I dread: scorn not my dreams:
Nor do thou venture save in quiet streams.
If not thy self, at least yet pity me:
Whose only well fare is deriv' from thee.
There Is hope e're long 'twill prove a peaceful tide;
Then thou the waves with earnest breast divide.
Mean time, cause seas do hinder thee thy way,
Let these my lines, assuage thy lingering stay.
THE ARGUMENT OF Acontius his Epistle to Cydippe.
AContius happening to be present at the sacrifice of Diana in Delos, to whose
Temple many virgins did resort, amongst the rest espies (and was surprised with
the love of) Cydippe, a damsel of noble parentage. But considering the
disparitie of his birth, durst not adventure openly to woo her. Wherefore on a
fair and goodly apple he writes his device, and subtly entraps her in this
rhyme: By Dian's mysticke rites I vow to thee,
That I thy consort, and thy spouse will be.


The fruit he trolls unto her: Cydippe takes it up, and reads: and unawares bet
oaths her self unto him. For what vows soever were made in the presence of
Diana, were to be observed, and not revoked. Her father after this (ignorant of
his daughters contract) promises her in marriage to another. Mean while
Cydippe is taken with a violent Fever. Acontius lays hold on the occasion;
and labors to induce in her a belief, that this sickness was inflicted on
her by Diana, for delaying to fulfill her promise. And sirives to render him,
to whom her f^ther had affy'd her, od ous in her thoughts, by persuading her
sh^e could by no means attain her health, unless she utterly reject him.

Fear not; no more thou to thy love shall swear,
'T's enough for me, that you once promised were.
Peruse my lines; so from thy limbs may part
That pain, made mine, by thy enduring smart.
Why blush you? (for I deem a crimson stain
Now dies your cheeks, as carst in Dians fane.)
Wedlock, and plighted faith, no crimes, I move,
Nor as adultrer, but just spouse I love.
Call but to mind the words ingrav'd that stand
IN th'fruit, by me thrown to thy virgin-hand.
There thou shall find thy promise to my plea,
Except with words, thy faith forgotten be.
And that I feared, Dians incenst, yet thou,
And not the goddess, should have marked thy vow.
Nay, now the like I fear, but more; for lo
Through lingering stay, thy flames augmented grow.
So does my love, which never yet was small,
Fed by the hopes thou gav'st, and time withal.
Thou gav'st me hope, my love gave faith to thee,
Thou can not ( Dian witness) this deny.
She present was, and noted every word,
And with moved tresse did her assent afford.
So then, report thou were by fraud betrayed;
Whilst love, the cause of my deceit be said.
What drift had I, save to be joined with thee?
This thou do blame, may our atonement be.
Nor nature me, nor art, has subtle made,
Trust me (fair soul) thou taughtst me first this trade.
If ought our art, ingenuous love, not I
Prevaild: and did the knot so firmly tie.
He the words prompted, I the charm did frame,
And crafty, through consulted love, became
Be I termed subtle, and this deed bear style
Of craft: if what we love, to win, be guile.
Behold again I send; entreaties write,
Complain again, here is another slight.
If what I love, I hurt, I shall so ever:
Thee I must seek, and seeking still persever.
Others by sword their fancied loves have sought,
And shall a witty letter be my fault?
Would god, more snares I could invent for thee,
That thy vowed faith might on no side escape free.
There rests a thousand ways, in one we wade:
My love shall suffer nothing unessayd.
Thou shall be captived, though thou now art free,
Gods know the event, but thou shall captived be.
Though some, thou can not all those nets evade,
Which love for thee, more than thou think, has laid.
If arts will not avail, then arms we will move,
And to my longing bosom force thy love.
I not the fact of Paris reprehend,
Nor any such, who so have sought their end.
Nay I, (but I forbear) though death ensues
Thy rape, we will meet it, before I thee will loose.
Were thou less fair, I should more calmly sue,
Thy beauty makes me I thus boldly woo.
Thou, and those eyes, to which bright stars appear,
Like foyles, of these my flames first causers were:
Thy golden hairs, neck which pure white does grace,
And arms, which oh! may once my limbs embrace
Thy graceful looks, not coy, yet blushing fair,
And feer, which may with Thetis self compare.
Blessed, could I praise the rest; sure they agree
All, in a sweet proportioned symmetrie.
No marvel then, if by such form constrained
I would of thee, a verbal pledge have gained.
Whilst by our Art you say you captive are
Why do you not the laws of captived be are
I Will suffer envy, so I may obtain,
Why should the fruit, from such a crime be taken?
His love Achilles forced, his Telamon,
Yet they to love their ravishers were won.
Accuse me do: be angry too, and coy,
So I may thee, though angry, but enjoy.
I that first caused it, will thy wrath allay,
If thou'st but give me never so little way:
Weeping before thy face let me a pear,
And at each word I speak, let fall a tear.
Like slaves that fear severer chastisement,
My hands unto thy feet for mercy bent.
Why am I absent blamed? assume thy right;
Command me as a Mrs: plead in sight
Then though thou proudly tear my hair, or raze
In scornful manner with thy nails my face;
I Will suffer all, and only fearful stand
Lest my rude body hurt thy tender hand.
Thou need'st not chains on me, or fettets try,
Thy love will me, stronger than fetters cie.
As thou shall say (when once thy wrath is spent)
How firm is he in love? how patient?
And vow, when how I suffer, thou shall see,
Who serves so well, sure shall my servant be.
Why am I guilt esse, then condemned through hate,
My just cause lost, wanting an advocate?
The verse love bade me write, is all my blame,
Nor can object ought else against my fame.
With me yet Delia ought not couzin'd be:
Keep promise then with her, if not with me.
She saw thee when intrapt thou blush'st: was there,
And laid thy words up in her mindful ear.
Forbid it heavens! yet there is none than she
More fierce against those that scorn her deity.
Witness the Boar she sent, unknown to none:
Althea no less cruel to her son.
Witness Actaeon, changed t'a Heart, and made
A prey for those, that erst on wild beasts Prayed.
Proud Niobe, whose corpse in marble pent,
In Migdon stands, a weeping monument.
Ah me! Cydippe I the truth restrain,
Lest in my cause, thou think I idly feign.
Yet speak I must: this is it (trust me) why
At point of marriage thou thus sick do lie.
The goddess seeks thy good, not perjurie.
And would, by saving of thy says, save thee.
Hence it is, as often you with your oath dispense,
That she as often does punish your offense.
Cease then, t'incense the stern Virag^es ire;
Whose wrath if thou'st obey, will soon expire.
Preserve those tender limbs from Fevers free,
Oh spare that face, to be enjoyed by me.
Spare, spare those looks, made for our loves delight,
And cheeks inameld with pure red and white.
Who seeks our loves contracted to dis join,
May he, as I, for thy affliction pine.
I know not which my greatest cross would prove,
To see thee sick, or made another love.
Sometimes I vex, and think I cause thy pain,
So that thou grief do through my craft sustain.
And wish upon my head thy perjury
Might light, and thou from punishment be free.
Often I with troubled thoughts about thy gare
Make needless walks, to understand thy state.
And foll'wing of thy man or maid entreat
By stealth, to know how thou do sleep, or eat.
Woes me, I not the Doctors room supply!
Nor fitting on thy bed, thy pulse do try;
But more unhappy whilst I being hence,
He Is there, whom I do chiefly wish from thence.
He takes thee by the hand; and sets by thee
A hated person to the gods, and me.
Whilst on thy beating vein his thumb he holds,
And by that means thy whiter arms infolds.
Thy breast often touches, perhaps kisses too,
A blessed reward, and far beyond his due.
Pray who to reap our harvest gave thee leave?
Or showed thee how thou might our hopes deceive?
Those breasts thou feel'st, kisses thou take, are mine,
Wretch! from her body take those hands of thine.
Remove thy hands, she is mine; should do the same,
Henceforth, thou wilt merit an adultrers name.
Choose one whom none can claim, one that is free.
To tell you true, this only is for me.
Believ'st me not? the contract hear, or let
Her read it, lest thou think it counterfeit.
Be gone: to thee this can no harbor lend;
What right can thou t'anothers bed pretend?
Suppose thou promised were she should be thine;
Yet is thy cause far, far, unlike to mine.
I by her self, byh'r sire you promised were.
But to her self, than father she is more near.
Her sire thee promised, but she swore to me:
He men attested, she a Deitle.
He but of word, she breach of oath does fear,
Of these, think which the greatest sin will bear?
Last to discern't, to the event but look,
He Is well in health, she is with sickness struck.
Then in our minds unequal strifes we bear,
Nor is our hope alike, unlike our fear.
Indifferent thou: Repulse my death would prove:
In present I (what you perhaps may) love:
If care of equity, or right you weigh,
You needs must to my lawful flames give way.
Since then thy love ^njustly he does sue,
What good Cydippe will my letter do?
It Is he thy pain, and Dians hate has wrought,
Bar him thy house, if thou will wise be thought.
He did the hazard of thy life procure;
Would he that caused them might thy pains endure.
Him if thou leave, nor love whom Dian hates,
We both shall then enjoy our healthful states.
Fear not, thou shall enjoy thy health sweet maid,
But conscious Dian must be first obayd.
Not in a sacrifice the gods delight:
But in a faith that is sincere, and right.
Some fire, and launcing, for their health sustain,
And bitter potions take, to ease their pain.
Thou need'st not these, only ahy oath observe,
And me, thy self, and pl^ghted faith preserve.
For thy past fault, thy ignorance may plead,
That to the written pledge thou took'st no heed.
Now thou art warned by me, and this event.
Which thou still suffer'st striving to prevent.
Say thou escape this sickness! thou wilt be made
In childbed yet t'intreat Lucina's aid.
When she shall hear, and ponder on thy prayer,
She Will ask whose father to the child you bear.
Vow'st thou? she knows thy vows are false. Wilt swear?
In that she knows the gods abused are.
Not for my self (far greater griefs I find)
It Is for thy life, cares thus perplex my mind.
Why do thy parents mourn to see thee ill?
Whilst witless of the cause thou keep'st them still.
And why? go, make it to thy mother known:
Thou need'st not be ashamed of what thou'st done.
In order all explain; first, how whilst you
To Dian offered, we acquainted grew.
Where (if you marked) when thee I once did spy,
I on thy features fixed my steadfast eye.
And gazing thus (a note that love does tell)
My loosned vesture from my shoulders fell.
Then how a rolling apple did appear,
That words compact in subtle verse did bear.
Which since in Dians presence they were read,
Have bound thy faith not to be forfeited.
And that the meaning she may know more plain,
As once thou did, so read them now again.
Then will she say, O marry him alone,
Whom heavens have joined to thee; he, he is my son.
Who e're since Dian's pleased, I am content,
Thus if a mother, will she give consent.
If who I am to know, she questions move,
Tell her I Am he the goddess did approve.
Famed for Corycian Nymphs: Cea, an I Will
Which the Aegean seas from lands exile,
My country is: if blood, or noble name
You weigh, from no base parentage I came.
We wealth possess, and manners without crime,
And love, than which noght ampler speaks me thine.
And such a husband (if thou could have got)
Had thou not sworn, yet sure thou might have sought.
This sleeping Phoehe did to me indite,
This waking love commanded me to write.
As I already loves fierce darts have found,
Take heed least thee D^aua's arrows wound.
Our safetie's joined, pity thy self, and me:
Why stick'st to both, at once an help to be?
Which if obtained: when the loud signalls strain,
And votive blood shall Delian Altars stain.
The likeness of that happy fruit I Will frame
In gold; and write these verses on the same.
By this, thus much Acontius intimates,
What here is writ, was ratified by Fates.
Lest I too long, on thy weak patience dwell,
I bid thee (in my wonted style) farewell.
THE ARGUMENT of CYDIPPE'S Epistle to ACONTIUS.
CYdippe having received Acontius Epistle, and by that means understanding,,
that her flcknesse happened unto her through Diana's wrath, conceived against
her for not observing heroath; she intend, (though against her parents will)
to yield unto Acontius his desire, rather than endure a further torment: and
withal craves his assistance in the appeasing of the goadesses ire.

AFraid, I silent read thy lines, lest I
Again were forced to swear unwittingly,
And sure I had been once more ensnared; but thou
Confessest my engaged faith's enough.
Scaree had I read, save (had I stubborn been)
I deemed 'twould have increast the goddess spleen^
Whats'ere I do, or offer, yet still she
Is more propitious to thy cause, than me.
As thou hop'st faith; (then her own Hippolite
To thee more kind) she vindicates thy right.
A maid me thinks should virgins years befriend;
Which now, I fear lest she too soon will and.
No outward Symptom shows my grief; and I
Wearied past help of any med'cinelye.
Think but how weak I am, when I scarce these
Can w^ite^ or turn me in my bed with ease.
Often fear I, save my nurse, least any spy
Our letters enterchanging colloquie.
She (that I safe may write) the doors does keep,
And to my health enquirers, says, I sleep.
But when the time has been too long delayed,
And sleep no more can our excuse be made:
When one whom she must needs admit she spies,
She spits, or by some sign prevents surprise.
Then hastily I leave my words half framed,
My wary letter in my bosom crammed.
Then straight I take them forth, and write, you see
How great a toil thou art become to me!
Which trust me thou but ill deserve: yet know,
My goodness, shall thy merits, far outgoe.
For thee, through thy deceit, have I this pain
So often endured; and do as yet sustain.
This gain accrues my beauty through thy praise,
And now it is hurtful that I once did please.
Would God as one deformed thou me had feen!
Vselesse to me then physickes help had been.
Praised now I suffer; by your strifes betrayed,
And what was late my good, my hurt is made.
Whilst thoult be chief, nor he a second will,
Thou his desires, he thine, does hinder still.
My self like to a ship, which to the maine
The northwind drives, forced back by tides again.
When to my friends the longed day arrives,
In my parcht limbs excessive fervor strives.
And at the point of marriage oh my fare,
At my sad doors, death, and the suries wait.
Ashamed I fear (though I from guilt am free)
Least wrathful Gods might be displeasd with me.
Some hold this accidental, some mantaine
The heavens for me did not this man ordain.
Others, that I (to set thee free from blame,)
By veneficious arts have caused the same.
The cause is hid, griefs open; you procure
Devoyd of peace stern strifes; but I endure.
I Will tell thee now, slight not my plainer style,
If thus thy love, how will thy envy spoil?
If what thou love thou hurt'st, then love thy foe:
But wish my ruin, and preserve me so.
Or thou regard'st not her thou hop'st for thine,
Whom thou relentlesse, sufferst thus to pine:
Or if in vain thou do on Dian call,
Why braggest? with her thou have no grace at all.
What s'ere thou talk, thou will not calm her yet,
Thou can not do it, thou me, she thee, does slight.
Would never, (at least would it not then had been)
I Delos in Aegean seas had seen.
Ill launcht my vessel on the wayward sea,
Cursed hour, in which our purpose found decree.
With what foot went I? with what ominous fare,
Did I unto my painted barque repair?
Twice adverse winds did flat my swelling sails,
Fond wretch I lie, those, those, were prosperous gales,
Fair prosperous gales, that did me backward force,
And sought to hinder my intended course,
And would they had persisted still the same!
But folly it is the wavering winds to blame.
Moved with its fame I Delos longd to view:
And deemed my ship with lazy canvas flew.
How often the sluggish oars I chid? the sails
I thought too scant, to take in speeding gales.
Now Tenon, Micone, and Andron past,
White Delos cliffes appeard in sight at last.
Which seen far off; why flyest thou me, I cried?
As erst, still float'st thou, on the wandering tide?
I land, and day now lent a dying gleame:
And Phoebus 'gan t'unyoke his purple teame.
Which, soon as called to the next mornes uprise,
To comb my l^ckes my careful mother hies.
With rings my hands, my head with gold she trims;
And with rich vestures she adornes my limbs.
Then issuing forth to th'Island deities,
We wines, and odorous incense sacrifice.
And whilst my mother does the'Altars stain
With votive blood; burns th'entrails of the slain:
My busy nurse leads me another way.
And wondering, through the sacred place we stray.
We walked the spacious Tarras, and there viewd
The gifts of Kings, and images that stood.
W'admir'd the horn-built Altar, and no less
The tree that helped Latona in distress.
And what besides (for I not all do bear
In mind, nor list to tell) in Del^^ were
And here thou first behedst me, and from thence
Sought'st to be^uile my easy innocence.
Back to Diana's high raised phane we w^n^:
Then that, what place could have more safety lent?
Straight rowls a fruit that did these verses bear:
(Woes me, how near was I again to swear^^)
Which soon my nurse took up: lo here, she sed;
Where I thy craft, thou famous Poet read.
The name of marriage heard, with shame abasht,
My virgin cheeks with glowing blushes flasht.
Mine eyes fast fixed upon my bosom bent:
Mine eyes the ministe's of thy intent!
Bad man, why joy'st? what glory have thou wone,
Or praise, that thus a virgin have undone?
Armed with no Axe stood I, nor moon-like shields,
As Penthesilea in the Trojan fields.
No Belt imbost with Amazonian gold
Lost I, as did Hyppolita of old.
Why so exults thou of this slight? that I
Poor soul, am captived by thy treachery?
As me, an apple did Atlanta ceaze,
You Are now become a new Hippomenes.
Better'thad been thou had the boy obay'd,
Whom thou report'st with burning shafts arayd.
By honest means, not fraud, thy hope to have sought,
I should have been entreated, and not caught.
Why did not so profess thy love, so sue,
As we might even have done the like to you?
Why us would rather have enforced than won,
If we might yield upon condition?
What now avails hy formal oath that I
Reading, for witness called a Deity?
'Twas with my tongue I swore, not with my mind;
And that alone an oath can strictly bind.
The mind confirms: all bonds do serve for naught,
Nor can avail, without consenting thought.
If e're to thee, my self I promised,
Then take the dues of thy betrothed bed.
But if what then I spoke, my heart deny,
You but on uneffectuall words rely.
I swore nor, only did the words repeat:
Thou must not be my Spouse at such a rate.
Cheat other a so; more oaths, more apples send,
If these avail, some misers riches rend.
Make Kings their Empires, and their Crowns resign,
And cause whats'ere the world contains, be thine.
Trust me, far greater you than Dian are,
If that thy words such ample power do bear.
Yet when I thus have said, thus firm denied,
And have my breach of promise justified:
I must confess I fear Diana's ire;
And deem from thence, proceeds my scorching fire
Else, why as often as Nuptials are addressed,
Languish my limbs, with deadly pain oppressed?
Thrice Hymen's cheerful noise mine ears did greet,
Thrice he my threshold fled with nimble feer.
Scarce could he make his kindled taper blaze,
Which scarce, though shook, a duskie flame would raise.
Often precious sweets his rose crowned hairs bedew,
Often clothes himself in Roabes of saffron hue.
Approacht; when cries, and dread of death he hears,
Things far from him, and hateful to his cares:
From his sad front his curious garland tears,
And wipes the unguents from his liquid hairs.
A shamed midst sadness to rejoice alone,
As in his cheeks, his garments die was shown.
Whilst feeble me my scorching fevers pain,
Scarce can my limb my or'espread clothes sustain.
Whilst over me my grieved parents mourn,
And deaths dire brand for Hymen's torch does burn.
Oh spare thy patient quiver bearing maid!
And lend thy health-restoring brothers aid.
It Is shame for thee, he deadly ills should cure,
And thou the title of my death endure.
Did ever I, unwarily mistook,
Behold thee bathing in the shady brook?
Were not thy altars still by me adorned;
Was e're thy mother, by my mother scorned?
Faulty in nothing but in this alone,
In an unluckie distich skillfull grown.
And thou Acontius (if you truly love)
Thy offerings bring my hurt my help may prove.
Oh why should she our plighted loves dis-joyn,
Who late seemed angry cause I was not thine?
Whilst yet I live, thou well may hope: then why
Me does she life, and thee thine hope deny?
Think not that he to whom I am assyd;
Has to my sickly limbs his 'hands applied.
True he sets by that is all he is favored;
But still is mindful of my virgin bed.
Nor do I know what ^^^ughts of me he bears;
For often his che^ke^ he baths with falling tears.
Bashfully courts me, seldom takes a kiss;
And with a timorous voice he calls me his.
Nor mervaile I if he perceave my scorn:
Still when he comes; away from him I turn.
Speak not, with eyes shut, seem to sleep; and when
My hand he touches, pull it back again.
He sighs, and mourns, and inly grieves to see,
With him I causlesse should offended be.
When thou more justly, since thou joy do show;
And pleasure take in my revealed woe,
(Could I but use my tongue) my spite should bear;
And have my scorn, that thus have wrought mysnare,
Thou writst that thou might come to see me here:
Far off thou art, yet hurt'st sufficient there.
Often why thou were Acontius named I muse,
Thou have a sting can wounds from far infuse,
Scarce am I yet recovered of the blow,
Which thy slye rhyme, did like a dart bestow.
Why would thou hither come? thou can but see
(Thy double spoil) awretched coarse of me.
My flesh consumed, face of a bloodlesse hue.
Such as I once did in thy apple view.
No rosy red in pallid cheeks appears,
Such form, a new-wrought Marble statue bears.
Such is the silvers hue which often we see
In banquets pale with chilling waters be.
Should see me now, thou would denie'twere I,
And say this not deserves our art to try.
Nay send me back my plighted faith for fear.
And pray that Dian would forget it clear.
Perhaps procure me to unsweare again;
And wilt anew, contrary letter feign.
Yet ne'rethelesse would God (as thou do sue)
Thou did thy loves tormented limbs but view.
Though harder be thy breast then steel, yet sure
Thou would a pardon for my fault procure.
And know to learn how we might this decline,
We Have sought the fate foretelling Delphieke shrine.
And he (I know not, but) as rumor says,
Complains of breach of a recorded faith.
This th'God, the prophet and my verse have said:
Thou see thy vote does want no verses aid.
Whence comes this grace? unless some lines by thee
Late from'd, have caught the Gods, as well as me.
Since then the Gods thou'st taken, I them ensue;
And willing yield my conquered self thy due.
My heedlesse vow I to my mother showed,
Who much perplexed with eyes dejected stood,
The rest care thou for: I have done I fea^e,
In writing thus, more then a maid should dare.
Enough my limbs are tired with this my quill,
And my sick hand no farther duty will.
What, (save my longing love with thee to dwell)
Rests there for me to write? but bid farewell.
THE ARGUMENT OF SAPPHO'S Epistle unto PHAO.
PHaon, a Lesbian youth, of an exquisite and admirable feature, had allured the
eyes and hearts of most of the women in Mitylen: amongst which, none affected
him with such a desperate love, as Sapho: a famous Poetresse, who lived about
the time of Tarquinius Priscus, admired even by Plato himself, for her
excellent numbers. Phao happens to sail into Sicilie, at whose departure, the
loveenrag'd Sappho becomes almost distract; deeming herself to be disdained by
him: she resolves to cast herself from Leucate, a promontor^e of Epirus, into
the sea, and so to extinguish her hopeless fl^mes. Yet before she did attempt
it, she thought good to write unto him, and strives by all the means her wit
could suggest unto her, to recall him back again: she lays open her griefs,
relates their former pleasures: and lastly, desires him if he be resolved to
forsake his Sappho, at least by his cruel letter to make known his mind unto
her.

Soon as thou saw my letter, did thou know
If 'twere my right hands character, or no?
Or if the authors name thou had not seen,
Could not have told whence this short work had been?
Perhaps thou wilt muse, why in this sadder verse
I write, since I in Lyricke aires converse.
My love is to be wept; no Barbit strains
Suit with my tears; but Elegies soft veins.
Like to a field, whose dried corn on fire,
The East wind fannes, I burn with hot desire.
Typhaean Aetna now detaineth thee,
Yet grent as Aetna's flames remains with me.
No verse that I to well disposed strings
May set (the work of care freed thoughts) there springs.
Nor Dryad's, nor Pyerian mayds, now me,
At all delight, nor once loved Lesbian fry.
Vile's Amython, vile Cydno too the white,
Vile Althis, once most grateful in my sight.
And hundreds more with whom my sins are known:
Thou (wretch) of all partak'st the love alone.
Thou have a face, and years too, fit for play:
Oh treacherous face that stol'st mine eyes away!
Take Harp, and Bow, and thou wilt Apollo be,
Take horns, and Bacchus will be like to thee.
Phoebus loved Daphne, Bacchus Gnossis too,
Yet neither she, nor she, sweet Lyricks knew.
But me the Muses smooth vain'd numbers teach,
And my name's sung far as the world does reach.
Nor winnes Alceus (fellow both of Lyre,
And country) more, though in his subject higher.
Though nature has denied me beauty, yet,
My want of beauty I repay with wit.
I am but low, but my famed name, and skill,
Are tall, and do the worlds vaste regions fill.
And though not fair; Andromeda, it is known,
Did please her Perseus, yet a tawny brown.
Often Doves do join with birds of diffrent hue,
And the gay Iay, does the black Turtle woo.
If (save thy like) thou think none worthy thee;
None such (alas!) none such shall ever be.
Yet when thou readst my lines, I then seemed fair,
And none like me, became my words would swear.
And whilst I sung (we lovers all things mind:)
Thou on my lips did amorous kisses bind.
Both them, and each part else did please thee well:
But chiefly, when to loves choice sports we fell.
My wantonness did much increase thy joy,
My nimble motion, and words apt for toy:
And that sweet languor in the which I lay,
When we had acted our delicious play.
Sicilian maids are now thy prey I see,
Lesbos adieu, I Will be of Sicilie.
You Nisean dames; fair daughters that excel,
The wandering youth from out your bounds expel.
Nor let his lies beguile your faiths, my cares
Have often heard that, which now to you he swears.
And thou who celebrat'st Sican^an hills,
Bright Erycine, redress thy Poets ills.
Will Fortune still be cruel, and hold on
In that harsh course to me she has begun.
My tender youth had scarcely seen six years,
E're I my parents bones embalmed with tears.
My needy brother with a strumpets love
Overcome, base loss, with baser shame does prove.
Turned Pyrat, plowes with oars and sayls the maine,
And ill-lost goods as badly seeks again.
Who, cause I blamed the wretched course he run,
Now hates me: this the thanks my freeness won.
And least my woes might some appeasement find,
My wanton daughter wounds with cares my mind.
Thou art, the last cause of my plaints, with gales
Contrary still, m'unhappy vessel sails.
Behold my once kemb'd tresses rudely placed,
Nor are, my fingers with bright Jewels graced.
My garments vile: no gold adornes my hairs:
Nor do my locks smell of Arabian tears.
Whom should I strive to please, now in distress,
Since he is away, who caused my neater dress?
My tender breast each gentle dart does wound,
And that I still love, still some cause is found.
The fatal Sisters sure at first decreed,
To spin my life forth with so cross a thread.
Or else my studies do the course maintain;
And soft Thalia rules my love sick brain.
Nor marvel if a smooth-chind youth does move
My heart; and years, that man in man might love.
Often feared I lest Aurora thee should ceaze,
Who had; but that 'twould her first love displease.
Should Phoebe, that sees all things, thee but spy,
Phaon in long lived slumbers cast, should lie.
Venus to heaven had carried thee; but she
Nor without cause, feared Mars might dote on thee.
Oh! thou nor boy, nor yet full man, life's prime!
Oh! thou sole grace, and glory of thy time,
Into my bosom come; alas! I of thee
Love beg not, but that thou wilt be Iov'd by me.
Whilst thus I write, tears from my eye springs rain;
Do thou behold how they my letter stain.
If thou must needs have gone, yet't had been well
Had thou but said, dear Lesbian maid farewell.
But thou took'st with thee, nor my kiss, nor tear,
Little feared I the grief that now I bear.
Save wrong, I nothing have of thine, nor move
(Thou weigh'st them not) the pledges of my love.
No charge I gave thee when thou wentst away,
Nor would; but such, Remember me, I pray.
By love, that never quits this breast of mine,
I swear, and by the thrice-three maids divine,
That when they told me thou were gone away,
Nor tears to shed, nor words I had to say.
Mine eyes were dried, tongue dumb (through cares distraught,
And fears) my breast with chilling cold was fraught.
My griefs asswag'd, yet did I not forbear
To beat my breast, and wail with scatt'red hair.
Much like some mother, (whom sad rage inspires)
That bears her child unto its funeral fires.
Charaxus pleasure takes in this my woe,
And jeering jets before me to and fro.
And (which more shame adds to my grief, and me)
Asks why I weep, thy daughter lives, says he.
Ah! shame and love agree not: all the rout
Viewed me with breasts torn bare; and thronged about.
Thou, thou, my care art; thee my dreams display:
Dreams that make nights far brighter than the day.
There thee I meet, though thou far hence remain.
(But oh! these joys are transitory vain.)
Often think I that thine arms my neck enclose,
And on thy shoulders that I mine impose.
I know thy tongue-kisse thou were wont to give,
And with like pleasure from my lips receive.
Sometimes I dally, words (as real) speak;
And have my tongue still to my sense awake.
The rest I shame to speak, or write, though me
They pleased being done: who live not but with thee.
But when bright Ploebus shows his ruddy rays,
(With them all else) I curse my dreams short stays.
Dark groves and caves I seek, as if their fight
Could help me, conscious once of our delight*
Thither distraught, like those Erictho bears
I run, with careless and disheveled hairs.
The hanging vaults with T^phus clothed I see,
Which like Migdotian marble seem to me.
The wood I find, wherein we often have made
Our hearby bed, whose leaves did lend us shade.
But there (of them, and me the Lord) thy face
I miss, thou were the Dowry of the place.
I knew the flowers, on which we often did rest;
And grass declining by our burdens pressed.
I lay me down, there where thy shape appears;
But first the grateful herbs do drink my tears.
Each leavelesse bow a kind of grief retains,
And no birds on them, vent their warbling strains:
Only the Daulian bird, her woes to quail,
Chants out sad notes: and Itys does bewail.
Itys the Bird, Sappho forsaken love,
Laments; whilst all things else soft slumbers prove.
A purling spring there is, than glass more clear,
Sacred, some think a god inhabites there.
Ore which a watery Lotos boughs extends;
Alone a grove: cool turfes, the green earth lends.
Here as I lay, in brackish tears half drowned;
A Naid stands before me on the ground,
And thus began: Since fires unequal breed
Thy scorching pain, unto Ambracia speed.
There Phoebus from on high, the deep does face:
Actaeum, some, Leucadia call the place,
Deucalion thence, enraged with Pyrrha's love,
Iumpt down, and safe the under waves did prove.
Forthwith changed love, fled the detained breast
Of drencht Deucalion; and his fires surceast.
This place that virtue keeps, straight thither go;
And fear not from the rock thy self to throw.
This said, it vanished: I affrighted rose,
Whilst my pale face with flushing tears ore-flowes.
Fair Nymph I go: nor will I slow appear:
Far from distracted love be abject fear.
Worst chance will better this; Air underset
My prone descending corpse, my load's not great.
And thou O Love, thy wings afford! lest all
Should curse Leucadia's streams, through this my fall.
There, Phoebus, will I consecrate to thee
My Lyre, on which some such like verse shall be.
Sappho to thee her Harp ^ssignes (last care)
In which, with thee, she bore an equal share.
Ah! why should wretched me to Actia send,
Since by thy coming thou my griefs might end!
More wholesome than those waters thou may be;
And for thy form, Apollo unto me.
Can thou then seas, and rocks, far more obdure;
I dead, the title of my death endure.
Ah how much better were, my breast with thine
Should meet, than perish in the weltring brine?
That breast (oh Phaou!) which thou often did praise
For form, and wit's divinely sparkling rays.
Oh that my once famed Rhetoric moved my quil!
But 'l as! my wit now stoops to every ill.
My verse first power now fruitless is become,
My speaking quill, and harp for grief are dumb.
You Lesbian matrons and you younger Quire,
You Lesbians, often named on Aeolian Lyre.
And you who caused my loves more shameful doom;
No more in numbers to my music come.
Phaon, has all that did to please incline;
Wretch that I am, I Would almost called him mine.
Bring him, and then your Poet comes again:
He dulls, and he revives my spritefull brain.
Do prayers prevail? and his stern mind orsway?
Or bear the winds my idle words away?
Oh! that the winds which mock my words would swel
Thy sails, a work that would become thee well.
If thou intend'st return, (for we prepare
Vowed gifts for thee) with speed redress my care.
Put forth: the wave-born Queen the seas will still;
And prosperous goles thy wisht-for sails shall fill.
Cupid himself shall steer thy course nor fail
Nimbly to hoyse, and to take in each sail.
If from thy Sappho thou resolv'st to fly,
(In whom thou wilt find no cause thereof does lie)
At least let thy harsh letter send me word,
To end my life in the Lencadian foord.
FINIS.

