OUIDS METAMORPHOSIS Translated Grammatically, and also according to the
propriety of our English tongue, so far as Grammar and the verse will well
bear.

Written chiefly for the good of Schools, to be used according to the
directions in the Preface to the painful Schoolmasters, and more fully in
the book called Ludus Literarius, or the Grammar-schoole, Chap. 8.

ET VSQVE AD NVBES VERITAS TVA
printer's or publisher's device

LONDON Printed by Humfrey Lownes, for Thomas Man, dwelling at the sign of the
Talbot in Paternoster row. 1618.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, EDWARD, Lord Denny, Baron of Waltham.
WHereas (right noble Lord) I have been much, and am daily called upon for the
performance of my promise in my Grammar-schoole, concerning the Gra^maticall
translating of our lower school Authors, and that by those who have made due
trial, and found by good experience the benefit of such like translations; I
have presumed, to send forth unto them this Essay, under your Lordships
patronage, not only for your Lordships most honorable affection to some unto
whom God has very nearly linked me, and your undeserved favor unto my self,
but more specially for your singular courtesy, and desire of the advancement of
all good learning, which being conjoined do so-much grace true Nobility. The
rather also have I done this, for that full assurance which God has given me,
of a rich blessing to accompany the right use of these translations for the
general good of schools. And first, for all the ruder places of the Land,
wherein there is not any thing usually to be found, which may afford the least
content or comfort to parents, children, or any other. Chiefly, for the poor
ignorant countries of Ireland and Wales; of the good whereof we ought to be
careful as well as of our own: unto which I have principally bent my thoughts
in all my Grammatical-translations of our inferior classical schoole-authors.
For that as in all such places, so especially in those barbarous countries, the
hope of the Church of God is to comp rimarily out of the grammar-schools, by
reducing them first unto ciuility thorough the means of schools of good
learning planted amongst them in every quarter; Add, quod ingenuas didicisse
fideliter arts, Emollit mores, nec sinit esse feros. Ovid.
whereby their savage and wild conditions may be changed into more humanity;
according to the right judgment of our Poet, which the experience of all ages
has confirmed.

To which purpose, what can be imagined to be more effectual, then if together
with the Latin tongue they shall attain withal unto our own Language, and
both get and keep the Latin far more easily and surely in each respect, by
the means of these translations, without any inconvenience. Yet have I not so
writtten them for our ruder places alone, but that even our head
Grammar-schooles may sundry ways receive their benefit by them, and make their
profitable use of them for their great furtherance for Grammar, true sense and
meaning of the Authors, propriety, purity of style, and variety of phrase, both
in our own and the Latin tongue, and in many other things; especially, when
the Lord shall be pleased that they may be brought to that perfection, which
we hope and pray for, daily laboring and striving thereunto. As for evils and
inconveniences of such Grammatical translations surmised by some who never saw
any true trial of them, nor ever considered of them aright, what can they be?
when the scholars that use them are caused to seek out according to their
rules, and to render a reason even of every word why it must be so, and not
otherwise. But for all imagined evils by such like translations, I have fully
answered in my Ludus literarius, in the eight chapter, and in my other
translations; and have moreover there given directions for the right use of
them; as I shall here also more fully in the Preface to the Reader, and for
the benefit hereof. Concerning the matter of this book, I need not commend it
unto your Lordship, or unto any other: Because, as I can never sufficiently
admire the divine wisdom (that I may so speak) of Tully in his Offices, in
prescribing most moral duties amongst men, as if he had been directed by the
sacred Scriptures; so nor here the rare understanding of this our Poet, in
setting forth unto us the creation in that wonderful manner, and so alluding
to the Flood, as if he had seen and read that part of holy story in Genesis.
Also for the Latin and style used in it, who knows not, that as in all Ouids
works, so chiefly in his Metamorphosis his singular wit and eloquence do
appear: that we may truly say, that never heathen Poet wrote more sweetly in
such an easy and flowing vein, than he in this.

Thus desiring through the assistance of our blessed God to creep forward by
little and little in accomplishing my promised service to our Grammar-schooles,
which I have so much longed for, and wherein he has been hitherto showing his
power in my weakness, and is still with me graciously, humbly craving pardon
I commend your Lordshippe with your honorable and worthy Lady unto his
heavenly Majesty, who looks not as man, but accepts the upright heart, and
the labor according unto the same, and rest

Your Honors in all Christian affection and service, I. B.

To the painful Schoolmaster, desirous to reap the fruits of his labors,
and to see the blessing of the Lord, by the new means and helps which he
affords daily.
IF you desire to find the benefit, and reap the fruit of this, and the like
Grammatical translations with me, without inconvenience, do these things; at
least make trial that you may be able to judge truly hereof.

1. Cause all your scholars, who take construction to be very perfect in the
rule of construing, as it is set down in the Ludus Literarius Chapt. 8. or
more shortly in the Posing of the Accidence.

2. To be able to say perfectly without book, or to turn unto presently any of
the rules of Grammar which are usually learned.

3. For taking of their lectures, direct them in this manner following, and see
that they can do it.

1. That one of the two Seniors of the form which is to use the help hereof,
having the translation, do in all more hard places read unto the rest of the
form either the lecture in English first, as it is translated, or at least the
brief sum and sense of it out of the inmost columns, over against the
translation of the lecture, to give them some light and understanding of the
meaning of it.

2. That one or both of the Seniors looking upon the translation together with
the Author in Latin, cause the rest, each in his order, first to read his
piece, and in reading to observe all things according to the direction in the
said rule of construing, and then to construe and give a reason according to
the same rule, why it must be so construed, and not otherwise. And where any
stick or go amiss, varying from the translation, to recall them to the rule,
demanding of them what the rule teaches to be taken first, and what in the
next place; so to help them by the translation, where none of their fellows
can find it out, to give both Grammar, sense and variety of phrase in English,
according to the text in the translation and to the third column compared
together, by the help of the marks.

Thirdly, when they have construed twice or thrice over, and that the very
lowest and worst can construe, that they cause them likewise to parse according
as they construed, viz. each his piece, giving the reasons of every word.

Fourthly, afterward let them direct them to be able to give each thing
observed in the uttermost column for notation, history or otherwise. And this
for taking their lectures.

Secondly, for preparing their lectures herein;

First, cause each to study and make their lectures perfect by the help of the
translation and their Grammar, to be able, so soon as they shall be called to
say, First, to deliver the English, secondly, the Latin both in prose and
verse, viz. first, in a pure Latin style in prose, and then turning that into
the Poets verse. Which practice will be both a good help for making Latin,
and also a most plain way to enter them in making a verse. And afterward to
be able to construe and parse without book, rendering a reason of every thing;
to give the phrases, to vary them, and to do whatsoever the translation
directs unto. Thus let them do in all the Authors thus translated, so far as
the Author and translation afford them help.

Secondly, Cause them at their leisure, often to construe over amongst themselves
all which they have learned in the Author, the two seniors only, or one of
them directing the rest by the translation that they construe truly. And
especially make them to construe it often out of the translation, looking only on
it, each his piece, all the rest looking upon their Latin books: which will be
a help to cause them to keep all most perfectly, and chiefly if they observe
phrase and difculty as they proceed. And much more if they be warned to
construe them often over, privately at home, and sometimes be examined of a
sudden in several places.

By these means (unless daily experience can deceive) these translations will
prove worthy the accept^nce and use of our chief Schools; when hereby all
the middle forms of the school may both take and each ways prepare their
own lectures of themselves, at least with very little help or trouble of the
master; and that as profitably and surely in every respect, as if the master
gave, or heard the giving of them himself: when they are caused hereby to
search out and give a reason of each word why it must be so construed, parsed,
and used in that place, that the master ordinarily shall need but only to
examine them, when they are prepared. Thus to avoid not only that common toil
to the Master in giving each lecture, but also that he may save all that time
which is so spent, to employ much of it with his highest forms in the chief
Authors Latin or Greek in giving their lectures, or hearing them to take
their own lectures of themselves, for their greater furtherance and better
fitting for the University, and likewise for the credit of the school, and in
examining and posing, which is the best quickner of their wits, and spur to
all good learning. Hereby, moreover* shall the children be fitted with
understanding and judgment, how many ways to make their benefit of their
Authors. Or else that the Master may bestow the more time and pains, amongst
the lowest and first forms, for the better entering and grounding of them,
which being rightly performed makes all their proceeding afterward full of
certainty and pleasant delight. In this one thing (and that by means of these
helps, there may be many more of a form, and every one able to prepare his
own lecture, and also that all of them may so easily and surely by often
repetitions, and their own private pains keep all which they have learned) I
find so great gain without loss, in redeeming so much time to be employed
upon other most necessary uses in the school, yea so much freedom from many
occasions of coffeehouse and ouer-wearying my self, and so sweet an
allurement to provoke the children to study of themselves with contention and
delight, as that it makes me bold to commend the use of them to all of this
function, that they may be partakers of the same comforts. To omit the sundry
other benefits; and namely for beating out the right sense, and Grammar rule in
each place, with propriety in our own tongue, so much as I have been yet able
in my streights of time. Give them not overmuch at a time, but that they may
learn all so perfectly as that what they have learned may be a schoolmasters
to that which follows, and make experiment hereof: for this Essay and the
many defects and slips in it, let the difficulty in this kind of translating
(to frame it each way both for Grammar propriety purity, variety, and to fit
it to the childrens capacities in every respect and meet to all the intended
purposes without inconvenience and that in my continual employment in my
calling) plead for me. I doubt not but all they who have or shall make trial
of it, (as some learned have done) will favorably accept it. Afford me your
help in showing how to amend it, directing your Letters to the Printer to be
delivered, and future editions shall God willing send it forth more perfectly,
with all the rest. In the mean time desiring still an increase of your love
and prayers for finishing my work, I commend you to him, whose this and all my
labors are; and shall rest yours as his goodness shall vouchsafe mercy.

Contents of the Columns.
The inmost columns contain the sum of the history, which is to be first read
and understood.

The second contain the Grammatical translation made plain and easy
according to the propriety and purity of our own tongue so far as Grammar will
well bear.

The third have variety first of Grammatical construction, where the English
is over harsh to be placed in the translation, noted with an Asteriske, or
little star thus (*); and secondly variety of other phrases better to
express the meaning, directed by an (r).

The fourth shows the resolving of sundry difficulties in allusions and the
like, for better understanding of the Author, with some more obscure
notations, tropes and other necessary points of learning.

THE FIRST BOOK of the Metamorphosis signifies a change of one likeness or
shape into another, of (...), whereof comes (...) transformo, and (...)
transformatio. Some books have of the metamorphosis or transformation in the
singular number, others of the transformations in the plural, it is all one in
effect; one sort speaking of the whole work in general, the other of the
particular changes.
Metamorphosis.
Changes.
Transformations of P. Ovid.
Ouidius Naso.
The Exordium [or entrance] into the whole work. Here first is set down the
Exordium or entrance into this work, contained in these 4 first verses. Which
consists of two parts, viz. a Proposition, and an Invocation.

MY [My] mind carries [me] viz. desires.
desire is I intend, or I am purposed or determined.
to speak of Forms changed into new bodies, for bodies changed into new forms,
by a figure most common amongst the Poets called Hypallage.
Forms or shapes changed into new bodies.
bodies changed into new shapes. This is usual with the Poets, to begin with
the invocation of those Gods which they thought to be the principal authors
and directors of the matters whereof they writ.
O [ye] Gods (for even ye have changed those shapes) and no other,
O [ye] Gods, 1. The proposition shows the authors intent, which is to set
down a continued history of the first creation of all things, and the change of
them after.
Aspirare] signifies to blow prosperously unto. A metaphor taken from the
winds blowing fitly upon the sails of a ship, so f^rthering it in sailing.
Favor ye etc.
favor my Aspire ye unto, or blow ye unto, viz. Prosper ye, or give good
success unto.
enterprises: 2. The invocation of the Gods is to prosper this attempt: And
that first, because this transformation was their work alone. Secondly, for
that his desire is to draw out the story in a continued verse, even unto his
own times, and to make each fable to arise and depend every one upon another.
Beginnings or attempts.
(for Ye, and none other.
even ye have changed the^) and draw ye out a Perpetual, viz. so continued as
no transformation is omitted, but every one fitly knit unto another, that one
fable might seem to rise of another.
continued verse from the first Creation of the world.
beginning of the world [euen] until my times.

FABLE I.
Of the Chaos, or of the first and most admirable Metamorphosis, viz. of the
forming or fashioning all things out of the Chaos: and first of the 4. Elements
made out of it. This Ovid teaches to be the order of the creation, according
to the Poets, as they had received of the ancicients, who it is most like had
scene or heard of the sacred scriptures. Which although it be not in all things
agreeable to the scriptures, yet in many things comes very ne^re thereunto.

BEfore the Seas.
Sea, and Earths or lands.
earth, and Coelum quasi varj^sy. deribus coelatum, or q. (...) ^concau^tate.
The outward cir^cu^fere^ce wherein are the Sun, moon, and stars called the
firmament or heaven.
Heaven, One one^y.
which covers al things, Before Heaven or ear^h were maue there was but one
form or fashion of all things.


There was one Countenance shape or f^shion.
form O^ nature viz. of all natural things, wh^r^ of nature is the au^hour.
Met. efficientis, for nature is thus described, Vis quaedam qua omnia (...)
of nature in All the world.
the whole world:

Which form or countenance.
Which they called Chaos signifies hiatus, ^ gaping, of (...) The Poets mean
by it a confused heap or lump, which they hold to have been eternal and
that out of it God formed all things, contrary to the Scriptures, which teach
that God made this first, and then all things out of it by his word aloue. They
seem herein to allude to that which is Genesis 1. ver. 1. 2 That in the beginning
God created the Heaven, and the earth, and the earth was without form and
void, and darkness was upon the face of the deep etc. yet missing in the
chief, that God created first the very lump or mass.
Men termed or the ancients called.
Chaos, This the ancients called Chaos.
[which was] An impolished and undigested mass or a greatness without
distinction or order
a rude and confused Lump.
heap, Which was a confused heap without all order.


Neither [was there] any thing but a Sluggish or heavy and immooueable without
all art
lumpish weight, And nothing but a dead and immovable lump without all art.
and Contrary or repagnant.
disagreeing Those seeds were chiefly the four^ Elements, called the first
bodies of which all things consist.
^eeds of things not well joined, Yet having the seeds of all things heaped up
together in it.
Seeds viz. the beginings of all things disagreeing among themselves, heaped
or confused in the same place, or in the Chaos.
heaped up together in the same.

No Titan] son to Coel^m, and Vesta, viz. to the heaven and the earth.
Sun gave light as yet to the world; There was as yet no Sun to give light to
the world.


Neither The new move repaired.
did the moon repaired ^er new horns.
. the new Phoebe, sister to Phoebus the Sun so called o^ (...) (...) because
or their brightness.
Moon Renew or restore.
repair her horns by increasing. Nor Moon to change and increase.


Neither.
Neither did the earth peized, etc. hang in the air
Nor yet the The earth alone of all the Elements remains immooueable, and is
therefore called the center of the world, because it is in the midst of all
the elements unto which all things desc^nd.
earth Weighed by her etc. or stayed up.
p^ized with her Proper.
own Weights.
weight, Nor earth hanging equally of it self in the midst of the air.
did hang in the air Poured about or compassing it about.
compassed about [it] nether The sea had reach^d or stretched out.
had the Amphitrite the wife of Neptune, here put for the Sea. Met* Effic.
sea reached out her arms by the long Brinke or shore.
bank of the Earths or lands.
earth. Neither any sea reaching along by the banks of the earth.


And also.
And likewise in what [part] There was.
was earth, All parts of the world were mingled and confused in one.
there was also both sea and sly.
. air*

So the earth was Unsettled or moveable.
unstable, The earth was unstable.
the water Not possible or fit to be swomme in.
not to be swomme in. The water not to be swomme in.


The air was Needing or wanting light.
without light, The air without light.
The own form [or shape] did remain to nothing, or to none of the four
Elements.
nothing had the proper form. Nothing had the right shape.


Contrary qualities were in the same subject, which now cannot be in the same
manner.
And Another thing stood against other [things]
one thing was contrary to others.
was against others: One thing hindered another.
because in one body. For that all things did strive together in the Chaos.


Cold things did Strive or contend.
fight with Hot things.
hot, Cold with hot.
Moist things [did fight] with dry things.
moist with dry. Moist with dry.


Soft things, Soft things with hard.
Heavy with light.
[did fight] with Hard things.
hard Weighty or heavy things.
things, having weight Did strive with things.
with things without weight. Thus much concerning the Chaos: Now the Poet
shows the the first general change how the four Elements were made out of
this, and by whom, and so all things out of them.


This he speaks either acccording to the opinion of those Philosophers, who
thought nature to be superior to God, and more mighty then he, as it is in
the 9. Book. Or [ et] may be taken for ^d est, melior natura, viz. God that
better nature, so the words following import, that he divided, etc.
God and a better nature Ended or brake or determined.
took away this Contention.
strife. That God the best nature took away this strife.


For he Cut away or parted in sunder.
divided the Earths.
earth from heaven and the Waters.
water from the earth. Dividing the earth from heaven, and the waters from the
earth.


And Severed or distinguished.
separated the Pure clear, bright, free from corruption.
liquid Heaven.
sky from the The thick air wherein the clouds and rain are bred.
Thick or gross.
foggie air. The pure sky from the foggy air.


Which after He rouled out.
he had tumbled out, And having separated these forth of the Chaos,
and Exempted.
taken from the Blind or disordered.
confused Lump or Chaos.
heap. He bound each of them in their own proper place, and settled them in a
quiet peace.


He bound [the^] being Dissociate in [their] places or severed a sunder.
separate in Places.
place, with a Agreeable.
quiet peace.

The fire.
The fiery Force or strength.
power of the heaven Bowing downward.
bending downward, The fire or fiery power of the heaven bending downward and
lightest, in the highest place.
and without weight, Appeared.
shined out, and chose it self a place In the highest part of all.
in the Chief.
highest tower.

The air is next to it in lightness, The air next to it in lightness and
place.
and in place.

The earth [is] more Gross and heavy.
solid then these, The solid earth pressed down with the weight of it self,
and drawing all heavy things unto it, in the lowest place.
and The earth is said to draw all heavy things, because al heavy things do
naturally descend to it.
has drawn The great and heavy parts out of the Chaos, or all weighty things.
the great Elements [with it.]

Ovid does not ^ssigne the third place to the earth, but the lowest, as being
the heau^est, and drawing down al^ heavy things unto it, and so the water,
compassing it about.
And is pressed down with the heaviness of it self. The water flowing upon
and compassing the uttermost parts of the earth in the third.
The water flowing about it

Has possessed The utmost parts of the earth flowing upon it, in many places
compassing it about, not covering it all.
the utmost [places] and kept in The earth.
the so^^e globe.

FABLE II.
Of the full and perfect forming and fashioning of the 4. chief parts of the
world, and the adorning each of them with their proper creatures, more
specially of the creation of man last, to be Lord of all.

So when he which of the Gods soever he was.
. WHen Here the Poet making ^s though he was ignorant which of the Gods it
was, which divided the four Elements, intimates that it was some greater and
more mighty the^ those which the common sort took for Gods.
he, In this Chapter the Poet shows that God having thus divided the Chaos
into parts
which soever of the Gods he was, Cut, or has cut, or separated.
had divided the Set in order.
heap so disposed, and Reduced or brought ba^ke, viz. dig^steit.
brought it Being cut*
divided into parts. First he made the earth round like a globe.


In the beginning.
First of all He winded round, or made round the earth
he made the earth round To the fashion or shape or like to.
after the fashion of a great Orb or bowl.
globe, That it might be.
least that it should not be Equal or round, and of like weight.
even On every side.
of every part. That it might be equal on each side.


Then he poured abroad Pretum is any narrow sea, where (...) to boil a
seruend^ o^ as ^ome w^^^ a ^remendo.
The mediterranean seas.
the narrow seas, Then he poured abroad the seas.
and commanded them To begin to swell or to rage.
to swell with the Violent, vehement or fierce winds.
whirling winds, Commanding them to swell with the winds.
and to compass about the shores of the earth Gone about, or compassed in, or
h^med in,
environed [ By those seas.
thereby.] To inuirone the earth.


He added also
Moreover he added Springs.
fountains, and Unmeasurable standing waters or fennes.
huge standing ponds and Pooles ^^eres, or deep places, a^wa^es full of water.
lakes; After he made fountains, and the great standing waters, as lakes, and
fennes.


And he Compassed in, or compassed about.
girt in the rivers Turning downewardes.,
running downwards Also rivers kept in with crooked banks.
with Thwart, or winding, or sidelong banks.
crooked banks.

Which [riuers.]
Which being Diverse or separate.
distant in places, Which being distant in places one from another,
are Swallowed up.
supped up partly of [the earth] it self. Are some of them swallowed up of the
earth.


Partly do they Run.
come into the sea, Others of them run into the Sea.
and being received [there] As in a field, or in a more large place of waters.
in a field Where they have more liberty as in a large field.


Where there is more liberty or room for them.
Of more free water, they Dash against.
beat upon the shoares For banks.
instead of banks. And shores insteade of banks.


He commanded also the Plain fields.
champaine fields to be Next hereunto he stretched out the champaine fields.
Extended or stretched out, to lie even all abroad.
stretched abroad, the A valley is properly the hollow between two hills.
Vales or dales.
valleies to Descend.
settle downward, Making the valleys to descend.


He commanded the woods.
The woods to be covered with A leaf, viz. with boughs of trees.
leaves, The woods to be covered with leaves.
the Stony hills to arise; or rocks.
craggie mountains to ascend. Mountains and rocks to ascend.


And as two Zona signifies both the part of the body which is gi^t, and the
girdle it self which girdeth it.
Girdles or circles.
zones Cut.
divide the heaven on the Coelius Rhodiginus shows out of Cleomedes, a
notable expounder of the ^ifficulties of the Poets, that antica, or the
forepart of the heavens is the West, whither the heavens tu^ne, quoniam illuc
annuit mundus; so the hinder part toward the East, from whence it is carried
toward the West; and thereupon the left part toward the South, the right
toward the North. Like as it is if we stand with our face towa^des the West.
right part, H^e likewise divided the he^uens into five zones or p^rts; two on
the right hand, two on the left, and the burning zone in the midst.
and So many, or even so many.
as many more on the Left [part.]
left, The fifth [zone.]
the fifth is more Hot or scorching.
burning Then these four.
then those:

So the Care.
providence of God has Divided.
distinguished The earth compassed about within those zones or circles.
the burden included, He divided likewise the earth into five climates
proportionable to the five zones in the heavens.
By the same number of five, viz has divided the earth into so many parts.
by the same number; and even so many Cuts, diu^sions, circles, or regions.
climates are Pressed or stamped.
set in the earth.

Of which climates that etc.
Whereof, Whereof that which is in the midst is not habitable for heat.
The fifth which is the middle, is more hot and scor^hing then the rest, for the
nee^en^sse of the Sun passing over it twice in the year.
that which is In the midst.
the middle is Thus the ancients thought, but our trau^llers find it otherw^se.
not habitable for heat:

High.
Deep snow covers Two [^limates of those c^^mates.]
two [of them:] The two uttermost are extremely cold.
And he has set even so many between both or either of them.
and also he placed as many more between those two. The two middle, viz.
between the cold and hot of either side, temperate, of an equal mixture of hot
and cold.


And has given [them] A temper.
a te^perature, The flame.
Having mingled or tempered them of hot and cold.
heat being mixed [in them] with cold.

The air hangs over Those climates.
these, Which is heavier then the fire by so much, by how much it is light^^
the^ the weight of the earth, [and] then the weight of the matter.
which is so much heavier then the fire, The air hangs over these, which is so
much heavier then the fir^, as the water is lighter then the earth.
Pondus leuius.
as the Pondere leuior.
weight of the water is lighter then the weight of the earth.

He has commanded both the little clouds [to stay] there, and the great
clouds to stay there.
There he has commanded both the Fogs or mists.
little and great clouds to Stand or abide.
stay, In the air he has placed both the little clouds, viz. fogs and mists,
and also the great.
and the thunders About to move or able to terrify men's minds or the hearts of
men.
to move Humane minds.
men's hearts. The terrible thunder.


And together with the Lightnings.
lightning, All winds are cold by nature.
the winds making the Colds.
cold, Lightning. Winds.


And also.
Moreover, He also limited the winds, that they should not have free liberty
of the air.
the Framer.
maker of the world has not Suffered or granted
permitted to these,
the air to be used of these The air to be had or to have the air, viz. free
liberty of the air.
every where: All abroad.
there It is resisted scarcely to them now, viz. things can hardly abide the
violence of them now.
there is scarcely any wi^hstanding of the^ now, For that they are so boystrous,
that they hardly can be resisted:


Although every of them has but his own region, or quarter.
Whenas every one of the^ rules his own blasts in a diverse Tract, coast, or
quarter.
region. Although he have restrained every one of them to his own part and
region.


But that they tear in pieces the world, or butcher the world, or destroy it.
But [that] they would rear the world in pieces: Epiphonem^.
the discord of [those] brethren is so great. Because they would otherwise
tear the world in pieces, thorough the vehemen^y of the discord between them.


Eurus (...) quod ab orient flat. It is called Vulturnus, by a similitude from
the fierce flying of the Vultur.
The East-winde Went back or departed.
betook it self unto the The Sun rising.
morning, and to the Nabathaean kingdoms.
kingdoms of Nabathaea is a part of Ar^bia-foelix, between the Persian Sea,
and the red Sea.
Nabathaea. The East Wind he has limited to the Sun rising, viz. to all
those parts toward the Sun rising.


And to Persia a Country in the East part of Asia.
Persia, and to the Ridges or tops of the hills, subject or lying toward the
mountains lying under morning beams.
the Sun rising.

The evening and the shoares which wax warm by the Sun setting* The warm
West-winde to the Sun setting, viz. to all those parts toward it.


Are next unto the Zephyrus (...), a ferenda satis omnibus vita, of refreshing
and qui^kning all things sown.
West-wind: the horrible Boreas (...), of the noise which ^t makes: or (...),
a nutrimento, because it especially nou^sheth the body, making it healthful.
North Wind has Gone into.
invaded Scythia, The boystrous North wind to the parts toward the north
^ole, or the Charles waine.
and The seven flow Oxen, or the seven stars, called the Charles waine.
the parts lying under the North pole. The moist South-winde to the contrary
parts.


The contrary P^rt of the e^rth
earth Does wax wet.
is wet with continual clouds and Or by the rainie South.
from the rainy Auster q. hauster ab hauriend a aqua, because it is commonly
rainie.
south. Over these he set the liquid sky without all weight or earthly
substance.


He He has imposed or set.
placed over these The liquide sky.
the Ether, may be taken here for the Element of the (...), (...) ^b ardendo
(...), ^ semper currendo.
sky being pure, and And wanting weight.
without all heaviness, neither having Any thing of earthly dregs or settling.
any terrene substance. These were scarcely thus separated and settled, but the
stars,


He had separated or distingu^shed scarcely.
Scarcely had He, viz. God.
he thus severed all things in [their] Settled and vnchang^^ble.
certain bounds, Which before had lain hid, kept-in in the Chaos,


When as the Signs consisting of many stars* as Aries, T^uru^ etc.
stars, Which have lain hid long.
which had long lain hid Kept under that they could not shine.
pressed under that same The Chaos.
mass, began to Shine bright in every part of heaven.
glister in the whole heaven. Began to glitter in all parts of the heaven.


[And] least any region should be Deprived or void of.
destitute of Her, viz. proper and belonging to them.
their own living creatures. And lest any region or part of the world should
be destitute of her huing creatures, He set in each of them several kinds.


The He follows their opinion who hold the stars to be living, and the
fained Gods living creatures.
stars and the Forms [or shapes] of the Gods, viz. the imagined Gods of the
heathens.
Gods do Hold, or have.
possess Heaven.
the heavenly Solum] is taken for whatsoever does sustain other things, as the
earth does the creatures upon it. q sol dum.
soil. The stars and Gods in the heavens.


The Waves.
waters have Given place to, yielded themselves, or fallen to the lot of.
befallen to be inhabited of the Shining.
bright fishes. Fishes in the waters.
The earth Received the beasts for her creatures.
took the Ferae] quod toto corpore ferantur. They are properly wild beasts,
here for all kinds by Synec spec.
The wild beasts.
beasts, the The air is called mooueable, because it is easily driven hither
and thither.
moveable air [Tooke or receiued] the birds to abide chiefly in it.
the birds. Beasts in the earth.
Birds in the air.
Man is said to be a holy living creature, and partaker of a high mind,
because he alone is partaker of reason: having some acknowledgement of the Lord
by nature. For this high mind does signify reason enlightened with the
knowledge of God, and of the law of nature.
A living creature more holy then These, viz. beasts, fishes and birds
these and more capeable of A high or deep mind, viz. of a profound memory and
great wit.
a divine Understanding or reason.
mind. And finally whereas there was as yet lacking a creature more holy, and
of a more divine ^nderstanding,


Man through reason has the use and benefit of all the creatures, making all
so to serve him.
And which might Have the government of the rest.
rule over The rest of the creatures.
the rest Was lacking as yet.
was as yet lacking. Which might rule over the rest,


Man Is.
was Bred.
borne: Man was made: but whereof, by whom, or how, he shows it to be
uncertain amongst the Poets.
We are not to marvel if the Poet profess his ignorance in the creation of
man.
whether That [chiefe] workman or framer of things, viz. God
that maker of [all] things, the Original or fountain, viz the cause or author.
beginning of The world after the Chaos.
the better world made him of divine seed; Whether that God which had made all
the other creatures framed him of divine seed;


Or whether the earth Fresh or new.
newly made, Or whether of the new earth, retaining still the seeds of heaven,
whereunto it was so near of kin.
and lately Drawn asunder, or divided.
separated from the high sky retained the seeds of the heaven, [being] Near
unto it by kin, as coming out of the same masses or framed together.
kin unto [it.]

Which [earth] being mixed.
mingled with river Waters.
water He who was sowe^ [or begotten, or descended] of Iaphet.
Prometheus the Son of Iapeto] by Iapetus is thought to be meant Iaphet, the
son of Noah, whom antiquity accounted a holy man, and of the number of the
heavenly; like as they account his sons whom the Poets call Titans, to be more
ancient then mankind. And amongst them, one of them was called Prometheus, a
prouidentia, because he was prudent and provident above the rest.
Iaphet, Being mingled with water.
Prometheus the Son of Iaphet.


This Prometheus is celebrated to have been the framer of man, either because
wisdom is only belonging to man, or because man was made by singular
counsel above the other creatures; or else for that he was the first that
instructed men in the knowledge of the creation, especially of man kind, how
God made him to his image, and so as the knowledge of God and all divine
understanding came from him.
Has fashioned [or framed] unto the image [or likeness.
Formed according to the image of the Gods Governing all things.
ruling all things. Formed him according to the image of the Gods who govern
all things.


And whereas The other living creatures.
the rest of the living creatures Do look upon or behold the earth.
do look to the earth Prone or inclining downward, or groueling.
downward, And made him such a one, that whereas the rest of the creat^res
look downwards toward the earth,


This shape of man after this sort, shows to what end he was created, to wit,
to the acknowledgment of God and the contemplation of heavenly things; which
appertains to no other of the creatures.
He gave to man Mouth [ viz. a countenance] looking upward or high.
a lofty countenance, and commanded him to See or look to.
behold the heaven, He gave him a lofty countenance to look upward,
and to lift up his Countenances erect to the signs or stars.
face upward to the skies. And commanded him to behold the heavens.


So the earth which Was.
had been Even now.
but presently before Rude.
unwrought and without Image, frame or shape.
form, Thus finally for a conclusion hereof he shows that the earth which
had been so lately before framed out of the Chaos, was both brought into form
and also men made out of it; out of whose diverse conditions follow the four
diverse ages of the world.


Being Converted or turned.
chanchanged put upon it the unknown Figures.
shapes of men.

FABLE III.
This fable of the four ages seems to be an imitation of the History in the
second Ch^pter of Daniel, concerning the image which Nebuchadnezzar saw in his
dream, which was of four sorts, expounded of the four Monarchs, here applied
to the four ages of the world.
Of the four ages of the world, v. z. the Golden, Silver, Brazen, and Iron
ages: and first of the golden age. In this Fable Ovid declares how mankind
increasing the world degenerated, waxing wors^ and worse by little and little
until the flood, which God brought to purge it withal, which that the Poets
might signify, they fained this Metamorphosis of ages, before the flood.


The first age is said to have been golden, both in regard of the nature and
goodness of men then, and also for the easiness of their living and quietness,
in regard of the rest which followed.
THe golden Time.
age is Begun or made of the manners of men.
sown first: which Loved or maintained.
observed Faith and right, viz. faithful and just dealing, honesty.
fidelity and upright dealing, With no revenger, or none being to revenge, viz.
without any punishment or judge.
without any revenger, The first whereof in regard of the rest was a golden age,
as he shows how.
of the own accord with out Laws.
law. This observed faithfulness and upright dealing without any compulsion.
That there was neither punishment, nor fear, nor yet any law.


Punishment and fear were away.
There was no punishment nor fear: Nor bonds threatening the neck were bound
in brass, viz. laws engraven in brass.
. nor Laws were engraven in brass, that they might endure long, and hanged up
or fastened upon the walls, that they might be publicly read of all.
threatening words were bound in fixed brass: neither yet The suppliant company
did fear, viz. prisoners or offenders humbly prostrate on their knees.
did the suppliant company fear the Mouths.
face of their Judge: None feared the face of the Judge, for that there was not
any malefactor.
but they were Secure and safe from all injury.
safe without judge. But all lived in security, without any execution of
Justice.


The Pine not yet cut out etc.
The The ship made of Pine tree. Met. M^t.
Pine cut out of her mountains, There was then no Navigations.
had not yet Gone down.
descended into the Moist waters.
liquid waves, that she might Visit.
go to see the Peregrinus, ^ p^ragrando.
Unknown, or far off.
st^aunge Orb, or compass of the world, viz. foraine Countries.
world; No ships nor sailing.


And Men.
mortal [men] Had known.
knew no Shoares.
coasts Besides their own.
but their own. Men knew no countries but their own.


Praeceps fossa, vnde se quis praecipitem dare possit.
Steep. down ditches.
Deep trenches Compassed not the towns as yet.
did not as yet compass about the Oppidum, ab open dand^ in bell^ periculis.
towns. There were no wars. No fortifications of Towns by ditches, walls, or
the like.


[There was] not a Trumpet etc.
There was no Trumpet of straight [brasse] [There were] not horns of bended or
bowed brass, viz. horsemen Trumpets or Cornets.
no horns of bended brass. No instruments of war, as Trumpets, Cornets, or
such like.


Not helmets.
No helmets, not a sword. No Helmets, nor Swords.
There was not any sword point.
The secure Nations.
The nations living Without care or fear.
securely did Finish.
follow continually their Soft ease, viz. quiet and easy labors, or sweet
pleasures.
pleasant ease, without Help, or need of the soldier, viz. without war.
Miles vel a mill, vel quod minime mollis, (...)
use of the soldier. All Countries lived at their ease in quiet security,
without any need of soldier.


Also the earth it self [as yet] Without tillage.
free and untouched with the Any instrument wherewith to cut the earth.
harrowe, The earth brought forth all things of it self without any tillage or
husbandry.
nor Wounded or broken up.
cut with any Plought.
Shares, Gave
yielded all things by it self, viz. without any husbandry.
of it self.

And they being content with meats Created, no man compelling.
prepared without any labor, The people were content with that which the earth
brought forth without any labor.


Gathered The young, or fruit of the Arbute or Service tree.
Seruice-berries and Mountain straw-berries.
Straw-berries Straw-berries,
growing in the mountains, They lived on Seruice-berries,


And Hawe-berries or berries growing on the hawthorne.
Hawes, Hawes,
and also Mulberries.
bramble-berries Bramble-berries.
sticking in the Hard, viz. sharp.
rough Thickets.
bushie places:

And [likewise] Mast of the Oak.
Acornes Acornes, and other kind of fruits.
which Had fallen.
fell from the Oaks dedicated to Jupiter.
broad spreading tree of Jupiter. The Spring was continual, without any varying
the times of the year, pleasant with warm West winds, which caused the
flowers to spring up without seeds.


There was an eternal spring, viz. no varying of times.
The spring was continual, and the The West winds being pleasing, mild, quiet
or calm, with warm blasts.
. The West winds being pleasing, mild, quiet or calm, with warm blasts.
pleasant West Winds continually blowing, or airs.
winds Brought forth.
cherisht the flowers Growing of themselves.
bred without seed, With [their] warm blasts.

Afterward or by and by.
Forthwith also the Unhusbanded.
untilled earth Bare.
brought forth Corn.
fruits: The earth fruitful with all kinds of fruits of it self.


Neither the field renewed, husbanded, etc.
The field not renewed Waxed white or h^arie.
was white with (r) full Heavy.
ears of corn. That the fields were laden with Corn, without any renewing or
husbandry.


Now ran the rivers of milk, etc.
Now Awnes or beards of corn put for the whole ear.
Floods, or rivers of milk [went.]
rivers of milk, now the rivers of Drink of the Gods, or most pleasant wines.
Nectar Did go, or went.
ran. The rivers ran with milk and Nectar,


And yellow Honeyes.
honey Distilled.
dropped down From every tree.
from the green holme. And honey dropped from the trees.

And so he concludes the fable of the Golden age.




FAB. IIII.
Of the other three ages, viz. the Silver, Brazen, and Iron ages: and first of
the silver age, wherein Jupiter contracted that perpetual spring, dividing the
year into four parts.

For the occasion of this Fable of Saturn sent into hell, Sabine thinks it
to have been taken from the profundity of the air: because Saturn is the
highest and farthest removed from the earth of all the Planets, and that the
wonderful height of the air is called Tartarus.
[But] Jupiter contracted the times of the ancient spring after that Saturn
being sent into dark hell, the world was under Jupiter, etc.
AFter that Saturnus quasi satur annis ob aetatem immenjam.
Saturn being sent into the dark hell, viz. Saturn being dead, or after the
death of Saturn, for they who dye are said to be sent into hell.
Saturn was sent into the dark Tartarus a (...), quia ibi omnia contarbata
and confusa.
dungeons of hell, In this Fable Ovid being to speak of the other three ages,
shows that after the golden age, wherein Saturn reigned, followed the silver
age, in which Jupiter his son reigned.


The world was Under the government of Jupiter.
under Jupiter is said to have been the son of Saturn, and Ops, and borne at
the same birth. That he expelled his Father out of the Kingdom of Creete.
That he was valiant and wise, whereupon, after his death, he was honored for a
God, and called Father and King of Gods.
Jupiter, and the silver Issue [of spring or progeny] came in or entered in.
age Came under or came in, or entered in.
succeeded, This silver age he describes,


Worse then gold, more Better.
precious then the Deep yellow, er red shining brass.
yellowe Brass. 1. To have beeue worse then the former golden age, but more
precious then the br^zen age which followed.


[This] Jupiter Shortened, or drew in and abridged.
contracted the times Of that continual spring which was in the golden age.
of the ancient spring. 2. That this Jupiter now reigning contracted the
ancient spring.


And he Exacted or finished, viz. divided or measured.
digested the year by Four measures of times or parts, every one consisting
of three months.
four spaces, by Winters and Heats of the weather.
Summers, and Autumns or Haruests, are called unequal, because they are more
unconstant, sometimes hot, sometimes cold.
unequal.
inconstant autumns, and The spring is said to be short, in regard of the
ancient spring in the golden age.
a short spring. Dividing the year into four parts, viz. Winter, Summer,
Autumn, and Spring.


Then first the air being Scorched.
burnt with Dry heat, viz. fervent or vehement heat, drying all things.
drying heat, 3. That then first the air began to be scorched with the heat
in Summer.


Glowed like a coal, or waxed hot.
Began to glowe, and the Ise bound with the winds hanged.
ise hanged being Frozen, viz. the North-winde, and other cold winds.
congealed with the (r) winds. And the waters to be frozen with the winds in
Winter.


Then [men] first Went under, or went into.
got into houses Caves [or holes of the earth, dennes] have been.
caves were [their] House.
houses, 4. That now men began first to seek them houses, to save themselves in
from the violence of the weather.


And thick Fushes.
shrubs, and Windings tied with barks of trees, viz. hurdles made of rods.
rods Joined with a bark, viz. tied or bound together.
tied with pillings of trees. That their houses were at the first but dens of
the earth, thick shrubs and hurdles.


Then first Ceres, daughter to Saturn and Ops, is said to have first devised
sowing of corn, which before grew wild, for which she was honored as a
Goddess.
Ceres seeds, or seeds belonging to Ceres.
the seed corn Are overwhelmed.
was covered With long furrows.
in long furrows, and the Oxen.
bullocks groned being pressed with the yoke. Then first the sowing of Corn and
husbandry was invented.


The brazen age being the third succeeded after that.
The third Offspring.
age being made of brass succeeded after Brazen.
that, After the silver age succeeded the brazen age, worse then it:


More cruel in That silver age.
disposition, Wherein men waxed more cruel in disposition, and more forward to
war and bloodshed.
and more Wits.
forward to Horrid a arma q. horrorem incutientia.
Ready.
dreadful Horrible or bloody.
wars; Yet this was not so wicked, as that which followed.


Yet not Arms or weapons.
mischievous. The last [age] Wicked, ungracious.
Is [made of] etc.
is of hard iron. Then in the last place he declares how the last age of all
succeeded, which he calls the iron age, for that it seemed to be made of Iron.
Wherein all kind of wickedness burst forth, modesty, truth and fidelity, viz.
all virtue and honesty departed.


[And] forthwith an age of a worse metal burst forth into all villainy.
Forthwith all Mischief or villainy not to be spoken of.
wickedness Brake out.
burst into an Time.
age of a worse Vein or Mine.
metal.

Modesty.
Shamefastness and truth and Faithfulness or faithful dealing.
fidelity fled away.

Into the place Of which, viz. shamefastness and truth etc.
whereof Both frauds and guiles, and lying in wayt privily, and violence and a
wicked desire of having came under, or entered in.
there came both fraud and deceit, And in place thereof succeeded all kind of
vice, as deceit, treachery, violence, and wicked covetousness.


And also treachery, and Force.
violence, and Here is a brief description of covetousness, which is therefore
called a wicked desire of getting or having riches, because it inforceth man to
all kind of wickedness, and makes him wicked, whence it is called the mother
of all evils.
a wicked Love of having.
desire of getting.

The Mariner Gave.
hoisted up the Sails to the winds, Neither had he known them well as yet,
viz. he knew not the violence or danger of the winds, or how to preserve
himself.
although he yet knew the^ not well: and the Keeles or bottoms of the ships
for the whole ships.
Ships.
Keeles Which had Stood long, viz. whilst the trees growed there.
stood long in the high mountains Leaped up and down, or daunced,
bounsed With or amongst the unknown waves.
in the unknown Floods.
waves. And then the Mariner for greediness of gain durst venture himself to
the raging seas, though he neither knew winds nor seas.


Also the wary Measurer of grounds.
Suruaier Marked out.
bounded [his] ground with a long Bound, frontier, or ditch.
limite, Then men began to measure and bound out their grounds,
being common before, as the Lights.
light of the Sun, and of the air. Which before time had been as common as
the sun or the air.


Neither only the rich ground Was required for, viz. corn was sought for of
the ground.
was asked corn, Then also men began to seek for corn, and all manner of
nourishment of the earth by husbandry.
and due Nourishments.
nourishment, But it is gone of men into the bowels of etc. viz. men dug
deep for riches.
but men went into the bowels of the earth. And then they dug into the depth
of the earth for gold and silver, and all kind of metal.


And Opes.] Riches are said to have the name of Ops, Saturnes daughter, by
which the earth is signified, out of which all riches are gotten.
riches which [The earth] or God or nature had laid low in the earth.
it had Laid almost as low as hell.
hid deep, and Stirrers up of many evils.
put unto the Stigian shades, are dug out, being the (r) prouocations of
evils. Whence riches the prouocations of all mischiefs were got out of the
earth.


And now Hurtful iron had come forth, etc.
hurtful Weapons made of iron.
iron, and gold Nocentius.] Gold is said to be more hurtful then iron,
because most heinous and shameful wickednesses are committed to get gold.
more hurtful then iron came abroad, war comes forth, which Pugnat vtroque]
These are as it were the sinnowes of war: these (chiefly gold) carry away the
victory.
fights With weapons and with gold.
with them both. Then also was iron found out, whereof swords and other weapons
of war are made, and then came gold abroad, far more hurtful then iron. And
finally war which is managed with them both.


And Smites together.
shakes his Rustling, viz, ringing or making a noise.
rattling armor with a bloody hand. Which war is described by the rattling of
armor, and sheading of blood.


It is lived of that which is snatched [or which is gotten by rapine.]
Men live of rapine, The host is not safe from [his] guest, viz. from all
danger by his guest.
. the guest [is] not safe from his host. Then men began to live by rapine, That
the guest could not be safe from his Host.


The father in law [is not safe] from [his] son in law, Nor the father in
law from the son in law.
and the Favor, viz. love, or true affection.
agreement of brethren is Seldom seen.
rare. And that it was rare to see brethren to agree.


The man.
The husband Hangs or houereth over.
watches for the Destruction.
death of [his] wife, The husband seeking the death of the wife; the wife, of
her husband.
She [houereth] for the destruction.
she of [her] husband.

The Cruel toward their step-children.
terrible step-mothers do Prepare.
mingle Aconitum is a very venomous herb, first bred (as Poets feign) of the
frothing of the dog of hell amongst the rocks or crags.
Pale or wan.
black Poison, making black.
wolfbane. The step-mothers cruelly practicing the death of their step-children
by poison, and all other wicked devices.


The Son Inquires of diuiners, sorcerers, mathematicians, and the like.
Inquires.
Inquires how long his Father shall live.
pries into his Fathers years before his day. The son inquiring and seeking by
magical and wicked arts, how long his Father should live.


Godliness lies overcome [of vngodlinesse] or trampled underfoot.
Piety lies overcome, Then began all true goldlinesse to be trodden under
foot.
and the virgin Astraea) is said by some to have been the daughter of
Astraeus, a most just Prince, for whose equity she was called Justice, and is
said to have been taken into heaven, and is placed in the Zodiac, and called
Virgo.
Astraea.
Justice, the last of the heavenly Virtues or heaven dwellers.
inhabitants, left the earth Wet with slaughter.
imbrued in blood. Then Justice which before had been untouched betook her
self into heaven, leaving the earth imbrued in blood.


FABLE V.
Of the fight of the Giants.
Of the battle which the Giants prepared against the Gods. In this Fable the
Poet shows, that the earth thus defiled, and justice gone of it.


ANd least the high Sky.
heaven should be more Safe.
secure then the earth, Least the heaven should be more secure then the earth,


Men] say.
They say that Gigantes.] Giants were properly men of huge bodies, said to be
the Sons of the the earth, without father, having serpents feet. But these
indeed were wicked men, desp^si^g the Lord, and so said to go about to drive
God out of heaven.
Giants to have affected, viz. vehemently desired, or set upon.
Giants did Affectare.] Signifies to desire something vehemently, which a man
cannot attain unto.
affect The heavenly kingdom.
the kingdom of heaven, Men say that Giants began to affect the very kingdom
of heaven it self, to subdue it, and rule in it, having driven out the Gods.


And To have built up.
built up mountains Carried together.
heaped up unto the high skies. And to this end and purpose to have heaped
mountains one upon another, whereby they might climb up into heaven.


Then Jupiter.
the Almighty Father Brake in pieces Olympus with his thunderbolt, sent down.
sending down his thunderbolt, brake in pieces Olympus is a most high hill of
Macedonia.
Olympus, and Cast down, or dashed in pieces, Pelion lying under Ossa.
smit out Pelion and Ossa, are known mountains of Thessalie.
Pelion lying under Ossa. 2. How Jupiter the King of heaven, with his
thunderbolts brake down and dashed those hills in pieces.


When as their Horrible, or direful, or terrible.
cruel bodies lay overwhelmed with their own Greatness.
vast weight, And with them overwhelmed the direful bodies of those monsters.
Which bodies of theirs thus crushed with the weight of the hills, and of their
own vastness,


Men say the earth besprinkled [or imbrued] with much blood of her sons, to
have waxed wet, and to have animated [or given life to] the warm blood.
They say that the earth waxed wet being dashed with much blood of [her] sons,
Imbrued the earth with their blood.
and that it animated the warm blood. 3. How the earth thus soked with that
warm blood gave life thereunto.


And least no monuments of their progeny should remain; And thereupon, least
no monument of those Giants should remain,


This blood turned into the shapes of men, and not of Apes (as some thought)
for that they were such contemners of the Gods, so violent and greedy of blood,
which Apes are not.
[It] to have turned into the face [or shape] of men.
That it turned [it] into the shape of men: That the earth so steeped and
animated with their blood, turned into the shapes of men.
But also that.
and moreover that that same Stock, race, or lineage. Propago is properly the
flock of an old Vine, out of which many young shutes come.
offspring [was] a contemner of the Gods, Which offspring of theirs proved also
contemners of the Gods, and most cruel and bloudily minded,
and most greedy of cruel slaughter.

And was violent: That any might know them to have been bred of blood.
that Any one might know.
you might know it to be bred of blood.

FAB. VI.
Of Lycaon turned into a Walfe. This cruelty of theirs is showed by the example
of Lycaon, whom Jupiter turned into a Wolf for his bloody tyranny in this
manner.

WHICH things After that.
when Father Saturnius, viz. Jupiter, Saturnes son.
Jupiter saw From the top of heaven.
from his high Tower. That when Jupiter from his high throane beheld this their
cruelty, he gave a deep groan.


He fetched a sigh or deep groan.
He sighs: and Relating or showing, or often thinking of.
reuoluing in his mind, And pondering or reuoluing with himself the cruelty
practiced by Lycaon at his table, in setting men's flesh before his guests, the
fact being lately committed, and not yet divulged,
the Filthy.
Shameful fact at Lycaona table.
odious banquets of Lycaon king of Arcadia, and son to Pelasgus, is reported
not only to have killed his guests, but also to have used to set them at his
banquets before other strangers to be eaten: which when Jupiter had found by
experience, he both burnt his house, and turned him into a Wolf. Some think
that this was fained, for that Lycaon did sacrifice a child upon the Altar of
Jupiter. Lycaon of (...) signifying a Wolf.
Lycaons Table, not yet Made known, or spread abroad.
divulged, Because the fact was not yet made known.
the fact being Fresh, viz. newly committed.
new;

He conceiueth in his mind Exceeding great angers.
very great indignation Worthy of Jupiter.
beseeming Jupiter. He first conceived high indignation, beseeming his Majesty.


And calls a council [of the Gods:] And forthwith called a council of the
Gods, who came immediately to consult hereof.
They came without delay.
no delay Did hold.
withheld the^ being called.

The milky circle*
There is A way aloft.
a lofty way Manifest, viz.
Shining brightly.
Here first the Poet takes occasion to set out the way to Jupiters Court.
apparent The heaven being clear.
in a clear heaven. 1. That it is aloft, and apparent to all in a clear heaven.


It has the name Lactea, viz. the milky [way] or Lactea has the name.
It is called Lactea [or milky] Of all other circles in heaven, it alone may be
seen with the eyes.
Notoriously known, or easy to be noted and known.
notable by the very whiteness. 2. That it is called via lactea, notable for
shining whiteness.


This [way] is the journey for the gods to the roofes of the great thunderer,
viz. Jupiter, or the journey for the Gods, etc.
This way the Gods go unto the Palace of great Jupiter, 3. That the Gods go
that way to Jupiters house.


4. That on both sides of this way are the houses of all the other greater
Gods, as Mars, Mercury, etc. continually frequented, and their gates standing
ever open.
And to [his royall] house. The Courts before the houses.
The Courts of the Nobilium.] These were called the greater Gods of the heathen,
as Mars, Apollo, Neptune, Mercury, etc.
noble Gods are frequented With open gates.
the gates standing ever open, on the right hand, and on the left.

The inferior sort.
The common sort [of the gods] Have their dwelling.
inhabiteth Diverse, or separate in places.
distant in places: 5. That the multitude of their lesser or inferior Gods have
their houses further distant from it. But the chief of the gods have their
houses in the front of that way.
The mighty heaven dwellers.
the potent And the famous, or noble.
and glorious heavenly peers Have set their houses from the front, or rather
toward the forepart of the via lactea.
have placed their houses in the front.

Hic locus.] The Poet seems to allude to the Palace of Rome, wherein the
Emperors and chief ^eeres had th^^ houses thus placed. Palatium was one of
the (...) of Rome, where were most stately buildings of the Emperors, whence
all such are called Palatia of mons palat^nus.
This is the place which If boldness may be given [or graunted] to my words.
if I may speak boldly, 6. That such is the state of that way, that the Poet
protests that he would not be afraid to call it the very palace of heaven.


I cannot, viz. I would not be afraid.
I need not fear To have called.
to call the Palace of the great heaven.

Therefore where.
Then when the Gods sat In their inner room paued with marble stone.
in a Marble inner room, After this description of the way whereby the Gods
came to Jupiters house, and that they were now set in an inner room, paued
with Marble,


He being higher in place, That Jupiter placed in his throane above them all,
and leaning upon his Iuory Scepter, shaked first the terrible locks of his
head, with which he made both Earth, Sea, and Heaven to tremble.
and leaning upon his Iuorie Sceptro.] The Scepter is a staff which Kings used
to lean upon. It is chiefly attributed to Jupiter, the King of Gods and men.
Sceptrum (...) hoc est, ab innitendo, because Kings standing used to lean upon
their Scepters.
Scepter, Moved [or shook] both thrice and four times.
shook often the terrible Bush of hair or locks, viz. hair.
bush of his head, wherewth he Makes to quake.
moved [both] the earth, Sea, and The stars or signs of heaven, viz. the whole
heaven.
Heaven.

And then he loosed [or opened] his disdaining mouths in such manner.
And after he spoke thus with great indignation. And after that spoke with
great indignation.


Jupiters Oration to the Gods, wherein he shows that all mankind was worthy
to be destroyed, since the very Gods themselves were not free from their
trecheries and outrage; When as Lycaon was not afraid to lay hands upon Jupiter
himself, being the father both of Gods and men. He makes them also
attentive, setting forth both the heinousness of the thing, and his own care
for their safety.
I have not been.
I was not more Doubtful or troubled.
careful for the kingdom of the world at that time In which.
wherein Where is set out Jupiters Oration to the Gods, in which he labors
first to make them attentive, by his care of the world, and of preserving the
Gods that yet remained in the earth. And this by comparison.
every one of The ^^ants are (...) to have (...) fe^t for the^^ ^lish d^^^ces,
and a hundredth hands for their violence.
the snake-footed [giants] Prepared [himselfe] to cast on his hundredth arms to
heaven, taken or surprised.
was ready to lay [their] hundredth Arms.
hands upon The Gods dwelling in heaven.
the heaven Being captive, viz. taken, subdued, or conquered.
which they endeavored to surprise. That he was not more careful for the
kingdoms of the world at that time when the Giants sought to invade and
conquer heaven.


For although [that] enemy was cruel, Because although that was a cruel
enemy, viz. the Giants, yet that war depended but only upon the Giants as
upon one body, and so he had to do but only with the^, to destroy them. But
now, that he must be enforced to destroy all mankind in the whole world, all
being becomne corrupt and rebellious against him, so far as sea and earth
extended.
yet that war depended of One body [of the Giants] that is, one kindred or
stock.
one body and of one Offspring of the Giants.
beginning.

The manner how Magistrates should proceed in punishing, even as the Chirurgian
with limbs past cure.
Now [All] the mortal kind is to be destroyed of me.
I am to destroy [all] mankind What way.
as far as the Nereus a God of the Sea, put for the Ocean Sea, compassing the
world.
Nereus sounds about, viz. makes a noise about with his waves.
Ocean roareth about the whole world: This he binds by the solemn oath of
the Gods, viz. swearing by the infernal rivers running from the Stygian grove,
viz. by Styx.
He swears by Styx the river of hell, as the Gods used to do, for that they
feared to deceive the God thereof.
I swear by the Floods beneath.
infernal rivers, Sliding.
running under the earth from The wood hanging over the river Styx.
the Stygian grove,

This was the reason why the Consuls of Rome had a bunch of rods tied unto an
Axe carried before them, to signify that less offenses are to be corrected
with rods, but that wickedness that cannot be helped is to be utterly cut off.
All things.
All means [are] Before.
first to be Tried.
assayed, That howsoever all means were to be tried first for preventing
hereof, yet fith all mankind was becomn now as an incurable and a desperate
wound, they were all to be cut off, for fear of corrupting that one part,
which yet remained sound.
but The wound that cannot be cured.
the incurable wound is to be cut off with the Sword point.
sword, lest the Sencere, viz. whole and vncorrupt.
sound part Be drawn to [a like corruption]
be corrupted.

These were worthy Nobles which were accounted greater then men, yet less then
Gods.
There are to me half Gods, there are rural divine powers.
I have half Gods, For that he had yet in the earth half Gods, and country
Gods, as Faunes, Nymphs, Satyrs, gods of the woods and mountains.
I have country Gods, These Faunes are supposed to have been some kind of
Baboons, Munkies, and the like, which the poor people seeing but seldom
thought to be Gods. For they are reported to have been little dwarfes, with
crooked Noses, hairy bodies, Goats feet, and some of them having two horns.
These used often to dance, with other such like wanton gestures.
Faunes, Satyrs, and Syluanes were accounted country Gods.
Faunes, and Nymphs, were supposed Goddesses, and they of sundry sorts,
according to the places which they are said to inhabit.
Nymphs, and Satyrs, and also Syluans, which inhabit the mountains.

Whom because we do not as yet Count worthy.
vouchsafe the honor of heaven, Whom because he did not yet vouchsafe the
honor of heaven to dwell there, yet he would have them to inhabit the earth
which he had given them, quietly and safely.


[Yet] At least.
certainly let us suffer them to inhabit the Earths, lands, or Countries.
earth, Sabine makes a doubt of it, whether they were men or devils.
which we have given them.

O ye Gods inhabiting the heavens.
supernall Gods, Then turning his speech more specially unto the Gods there
present, asks of them whether they think that those other half Gods, and
the rest, could possibly be safe in the earth, when as Lycaon durst plot
mischief even against himself, the great God, having the thunderbolt in his
hand, to be avenged of all his enemies, and who was chief of all the Gods,
having all of them under him, even these themselves.
do ye believe that they can be safe enough.

When Lycaon a (...)* (...)
Lyeaon The occasion or the Fable of Lycaons cruelty is thought by some to be
this, that having ordained games for trial of masteres (in a hill called
Lycaeus,) unto Jupiter, whom he therefore called Jupiter Lycaeus; he there
first offered an infant unto Jupiter upon his Altar which cruelty made him
notorious and odious to all, as eating man's fies^* and so entertaining
Jupiter.. Others think it to be for murdering one of the hostages of the
Molossians, and offering him in sacrifice to Jupiter; and so deuo^^ing them as
sheep, the Poets feign him to be turned into a Wolf, alluding to his name.
Known or noted for, or famous for it.
notorious for cruelty, has Built, [ viz. contrived or practised] treacherre
[or treason.]
plotted mischief Tome.
[euen] against This is thought to be spoken in favor of Augustus Caesar, who
escaped the treachery against him; Not of Julius Caesar, who was so murdered.
me, The name of the Romans was becomne famous, by the worthy acts of Julius and
Augustus Caesar, which was sought to be extinguished in Augustus Caesar, so
conspired against to be murdered cruelly, as Julius Caesar had been before.
who both Have and rule.
possess and govern the Thunderbolt.
lightning Who do possess and rule you.
and [euen] you [yourselues.]

They all Require earnestly with ardent [or feruent] studies [him] being bold
to enterprise such things.
fretted together, Hereupon the Poet shows the effect of his speech, how they
all stormed, asking earnestly for him who durst attempt this.
and viz. they asked for him to be punished.
earnestly ask with vehement desire for him who durst do such things. Then sets
out the manner of their murmuring by a fit similitude: That like as when
certain wicked conspiratours sought to extinguish the famous name of the
Romans, by murdering Augustus Caesar, as they had done Julius Caesar before,
all mankind was astonished with the terror of the sudden fear, and the
whole world did dread exceedingly, so did they disdain.
So.
Even so as when [that] wicked Hand, viz. a company of wicked conspiratours.
band Does cruelly rage.
raged furiously to extinguish The Roman name in the Coesarian blood.
the name of the Romans in the blood of the Caesar's.

[All] mankind was Amazed.
astonished with so great a terror of [such] a sudden Ruin [or utter
ouerthrow] [intended or ready to have been executed].
downfall, and the whole world Was horribly afraid, or trembled with fear.
did dread exceedingly.

The religion and love of thy people of Rome, who avenged the conspiracy
against thee, is no less acceptable to thee, then the indignation of the Gods
was to Jupiter, for the intendment against him.

This shows, the former to be meant of Augustus Caesar.


Neither (oh Augustus) [is] the piety of thy [ Subjects of Rome.
Romans] less Acceptable.
pleasing unto thee Afterward, turning his speech to the Emperor Augustus,
shows Jupiters acceptance hereof, that this love and piety of the Romans,
for being avenged on those conspiratours, was no less pleasing to Augustus
himself, then that was to Jupiter.


Then that Has been.
was to Jupiter; who after that he had repressed the murmr of the Gods The
Poet expresses the gesture of them who command or cause a silence.
With voice.
with [his] speech and hand; And then how Jupiter staid the murmr of the
Gods, inioyning them silence both by his speech and hand: and how all of them
kept silence.
They all held their peace.
all of the^ kept silence.

After the Clamor.
noise was Hushed.
stayed, And after that the noise was repressed by his gravity, that Jupiter
spoke to them all again, quieting them in this manner. That, that bloody
Lycaon had pa^ed dearly for it, and therefore that they should not be any
further careful, nor fre^ themselves about it:
being repressed by the gravity of the Jupiter their governor.
Regent,

Jupiter again brake off the silence with this speech.

That bloody Lycaon.
He indeed has Paid the punishment, viz. he has dearly bought it.
paid for it, Dismiss ye [or let goe] this care of requiring him to be
punished.
let this care pass.

Notwithstanding, And to give them full content, he relates unto them both the
horrible fact which Lycaon had committed* and how he took vengeance of him.
I will teach what [was] admitted [or committed] [and] what the vengeance is.
I will show what a horrible fact he committed, and what Punishment for revenge.
vengeance I took of him.

This seems to be a plain allusion unto that speech of GOD which he uses
to Abraham, before the destruction of Sodom, Genesit 18. 20. 21. and so Genes.
11. 5 concerning the builders of Babell, and an imitation thereof.
The Cry of the sins.
infamy of the Age* viz of the people of this age or time.
time had Touched.
comne to our ears: Herein he sets down first the occasion thereof, viz. how
the general cry of the wickedness of that age had comne to his ears.


Which I Coveting or earnestly wishing.
desiring [to be] false, And secondly, how he (wishing the cry to be false)
came down from heaven to try it.
Do slide down.
descend from the highest heaven.

And [though I be the great] GOD [yet] I Compass about.
view the earth Under a humane shape, viz. in the likeness of a man.
under the shape of a man. That thus, though he was the great God, yet he did
view the earth in the likeness of a man.


It is a long delay.
It is too long To number or reckon up.
to tell, Here he aggrauates the sin of all mankind, that it were too long
to tell how much wickedness he found every where, that it was greater then
the cry.
how much wickedness is found every where: the Report or cry.
infamy it self Has been.
was less then The wickedness it self.
the truth. And that to the end to search out that notorious and abominable
cruelty reported of Lycaon, he passed through Arcadia, going over Menalus that
famous hill of Arcadia, notable and horrible with wild beasts, and so over
Lycaeus and Cyllenus.


I had Gone over.
passed Menalus is a City, and famous mountain of Arcadia, named of Menalus
the son of Arcas.
Menalus being Horrible, or very fearful to cause horror.
dreadful With.
for the Cruel wild beasts.
dens of wild beasts.

And the Places full of Pine-trees.
Pinegroues of cold Lycaeus, And the hill Cyllenus.
with Cyllenus a mountain of Arcadia, dedicated to Mercury. As Lycaeus is a
mountain there, dedicated to Pan.
Cyllenus.

And then, or from hence.
Afterward I enter into the Seats, or habitations.
seat and Vnhospital roofes, viz. place unmeet for hospitality.
barbarous house of The cruel King of Arcadia, viz. Lycaon,
the Arcadian Cruel Kings in Ouids time were called tyrants, which had formerly
been called kings.
tyrant, And how afterward he came to the seat and the very house of the tyrant
Lycaon himself.


When the late twilight drew on the night.
When as now Crepuseulum is taken for the twilight, either in the evening or
morning, when it is doubtful whether it be day or night, of creperus,
signifying doubtful.
it drew toward night. In the shutting in of the evening.


I gave signs [or tokens.]
I signified A God to have comne.
that a Deum may seem here to be taken for Jupiter, the great God, viz. father
of Gods and men.
God was comne, and the Common people.
common sort Had begun.
began To adore and worship me.
to pray: And caused notice to be given, that the great God was comne.

Whereupon the common sort having yet some fear, began to fall to prayer.


[but] Lycaon at In the first [place.]
first Scoffs, or laughes at.
derides [their] godly prayers. But that Lycaon first derides their prayers.


I will prove says he, by and by, by an open difference, or a manifest peril
or experiment.
By and by, Secondly, glories that he will make an experiment, to try whether
he was a God or no, or but a mortal creature, and that he would make that
past all doubt.
quoth he, I will try by a plain experience, He would make it plain whether
he was a God, or no, thus; because if he was a God he could not be killed.
whether he be a God or a mortal [man.] Neither the truth shall be doubtful,
or to be doubted of.
Neither shall the truth be any more to be doubted of.

[So] he prepares to Kill or dispatch.
destroy me being heavy with sleep in the night, And thirdly, prepares for
the murdering of him, viz. of Jupiter himself, by an unexpected death, to
catch him being heavy with sleep in the night, and so this only experiment of
the truth would please him.
by A death not thought of.
an unexpected death. This experience of the truth pleases him.

Neither is he content therewith, Fourthly, that he not yet content herewith,
presently cuts the throat of one of the Hostages sent to him from the
Molossians.
[but] he cuts the throat of one of the Pledges, viz. men sent to him for
performance of promises.
Hostages sent From the Nation of the Molossians.
from the Molossi were a people of Epeirus, of whom Lycaon, having ouercomne
them in war, took Hostages, one whereof he killed that he might set him
before Jupiter to banquet with.
Molossians.

And so He partly mollified [or boiled soft] [his] limbs half dead, with hot
water.
he did partly sees his joints being but half dead, And of him causes part
to be sod, and part roasted, and so to be set before him.
[and] partly Roasted [them] with fire put under [or put to them.]
roasted them.

Which Together.
so soon as he had set To the tables.
upon the table; But as soon as ever these dainties were set before him upon
the table, he forthwith turned upon that cruel tyrants held his house, meet
for such a master, and consumed it to ashes with revenging fire.
I ouerturned the roofes, being meet houses with revenging flame upon the
master.
I ouerturned upon the Masters head, The house or household Gods worthy of
revenging fire.
. with a revenging flame his houses, being worthy [to be burnt.]

Lycaon.
He Affrighted with the burning of his house.
being terrified flies away: And then how the wretch being terrified fled
away, and getting all alone into desert woods,
and getting the Silence or quietness.
The woods.
solitariness of the country,

He Howleth wonderfully like a Wolf.
howleth out, Howleth out like a Wolf:
and Assateth in vain to speak.
indeauoureth to speak, And endeavoring to speak, but not able, runs mad
with fury.
but all in vain: Lyeaon was driven into madness because he could not speak.
His mouth gathers a furious woodnesse from that time.
from that [time] he runs mad: And instead of men falls upon beasts,
devouring them as he was formerly wont to devour men.
and uses his greedy desire of [his] accustomed slaughter upon Beasts instead
of men.
beasts, and Like as when he was a man.
now also does he Rejoice.
delight In sheading blood.
in blood. And so still delights in blood.


Lycaon is fained to be turned into a Wolf, because he was so given over to
greedy covetousness, that he lived of spoil as a Wolf.

Thus are all ravenous and cruel oppressors, Wolves in the shapes of men.


His Clothes or apparel.
garments Go away, or vanish.
are turned into Rough or great hair.
hairs, His garments were turned into hair, [his] arms into legs.
[his] arms [Grow forth, or are changed.]
into legs.

He is made a Wolf, So that he becomes in all things a Wolf; yet keeping
still the prints of his old shape.
and [yet] he keeps the prints of his old shape.

There is [to him] the same grainesse.
He has the same Hoarines or white gray color.
graynesse, Having the same hoary grainesse.
the same Violence or fierceness.
grimnesse of [his] Countenance.
looks. The same grimnesse of his looks.


The same eyes do shine [to him] there is the same image of cruelty, or
fierceness.
The same gloring of his eyes; The same gloring of his eyes; and the very same
picture of cruelty.
the same picture of cruelty.

FAB. VII.
Of the general deluge, and destruction of the world thereby, for the ouerflow
of iniquity, After that the Poet had set out the wickedness of the time in
this horrible fact of Lycaon, and the vengeance which Jupiter took of him for
the same, he proceeds to declare that all the world, being likewise filled
with cruelty, Jupiter fully resolves to destroy all in like manner.
and the repairing the same again.
ONe house Has fallen, or is fallen.
is overthrown; but not one house alone has been worthy To be overthrown.
to perish: Erynuis is taken for a Fury of hell, delighting in discord and
war, and a taker of vengeance on such especially as are impious against their
parents.
Cruel fury raigns what [way] the earth lies open, viz. every where.
cruelty reigns through all the world. That although this one house was
overthrown, yet it was not one house alone that had deserved it, but even all
mankind was worthy to perish.


You may think [them] to swear to horrible wickedness.
A man would think that all men had bound themselves by oath to commit all
kind of mischief.
You would think that all men had sworn together to commit all horrible
wickedness. Because cruelty so reigned every where, that a man would have
thought that all sorts had conspired and bound themselves by oath, to commit
all horrible wickedness.


All of them let them give the punishment etc.
Let them have all according to their deseruings.
Let all of them More quickly.
presently abide the punishment which they And therefore he decrees to deal
with the^ all, in taking vengeance according to their desert.
have deserved To suffer.
to endure, So my sentence [or decree] stands.
[for] so I have Determined.
decreed. And this is the determination of his sentence, which he will not
revoke.


This seems to be an allusion to the manner of the Senators of Rome, in
giving their sentences or voices.
Part [of them] approve the Sayings.
speech of Jupiter by voice, Hereupon all the rest of the Gods approve of
Jupiters decree.

Some by speech setting him on,


and Put unto pricks or goads.
put spurs unto him [thus] Chafing, discontented, or full of indignation.
moved: Others by their assents agreeing thereunto.
others fulfill [their] parts By giving their assent, or assenting.
with [their] assents.

Yet notwithstanding They all take to heart the loss of mankind.
the Destruction.
loss of mankind is a grief unto [them] all, Yet here the Gods make sundry
doubts concerning this matter. And first they are all troubled for this utter
destruction of mankind. And then demand what the form and condition of the
world should be, being utterly dispeopled, and deprived of mortal men.
and They demand of Jupiter.
they ask, What the fashion of the earth shall be, being deprived [or
destitute.]
what should be.
shall be the form of the earth being deprived of mortal [men.] Who should do
them any worship or service?
Who should worship or do any honor unto them.
who should bring Incense or sacrifice.
Frankincense unto their Altars: Whether he thus prepared a way to deliver the
earth to the wild beasts, to be wasted by them?
whether he [thus] prepare To give over the earth to be wasted with wild
beasts.
to deliver to the wild beasts the earth to be Dispeopled, or wasted.
destroyed?

The King of the Gods forbids them, asking such like things to fear.
Jupiter bids them asking such like things, To all which Jupiter giving
answer, first for the general, bids them not to fear: for that he would have
a care of all these things.
not to Tremble.
fear, For [hee said] the rest [or other matters] to be afterward a care to
him.
for that he would have a care of all other matters, and promises [ [To be.]
that there should be] an Issue or generation.
offspring unlike unto the former people, And for mankind, that he would
raise up another offspring far unlike this former, which he would destroy,
and of a more admirable beginning, viz. by changing even very stones into men
and women, as follows after.
of a Maruailous original, stock or birth, viz. By changing stones into men and
women, as follows after.
wonderful beginning.

And even now was he About.
ready to Scatter or spread, or throw abroad.
disperse his Thunderbolts.
lightnings upon The whole earths.
all the earth: And here he was ready to have scattered his lightnings, and
thrown his thunderbolts thoroughout all the earth;


But he feared, But that he feared least hereby the very heavens should be
set on fire, by so many fires every where under them.
least bechance the holy Sky.
heaven should Conceive [or catch] the flames.
catch the flame From so many, etc.
by so many fires Upon the earth.
[vnder it] and the whole The Axletree about which the heaven is said to be
turned, put for the whole heaven.
Axletree.
heaven should Begin to burn.
be set on fire.

He also Calls to mind.
remembers that Fatum, according to the Stoics, is the decreed order of
things, whereby the world is governed necessarily.
To be in the destinies or fates.
it was decreed, And withal remembered that it was decreed, that such a
destruction by fire should come in the end of the world.
A time to be present.
that the time should come,

In which [time] the sea, in which, the earth and palace [or court] of heaven
being catched [by fires] must burn.
Wherein the sea, For that the time should come wherein earth, sea, and heavens
being set on fire should burn, and the whole frame of the world should be
dissolved.
earth, and Palace of heaven being set on fire, should burn, and the Huge
mass [or building] of the world so full of work, [or that cost so much labour]
must labor [or faint.]
curious frame of the world should be dissolved.

[His] Darts.
thunderbolts Framed, forged, or hammered.
made by the hands of the The Cyclopians are said to have been Jupiters Smiths
which make him thu^derbolts. They were gia^ts of Sicily, having but one eye,
and that in the midst of their forehead.
Cyclopians are Laid aside to be reserved against the last destruction by
fire.
laid up. Hereupon he lays up his thunderbolts forged by his Smiths the
Cyclopians.


A Diverse.
It pleases him to have a punishment contrary to that by fire, viz. by water.
contrary punishment pleases [him] to destroy The mortal kind.
all mankind By water.
under the water; And resolves of a contrary destruction, viz. To destroy all
mankind with a flood of waters: and that chiefly by sending down a mighty
rain from every part of heaven.
and to send down Great showers or sudden storms of rain out of all the
heaven.
mighty rain from every part of heaven.

[And To that end.
therefore] he forthwith shuts up the Aquile, the Northwinde is so called,
because he comes flying boystrously as an Eagle.
North-winde in the Eolian caves.
caves of Eolus, is fained to be the son of Jupiter by Acesta^ and he is
said to be the GOD of the winds, because being Prince of Eolie, he found out
much the reason of the winds, and by certain signs to foretell what winds
would blow, and so was thought to have the winds at command.
Eolia. And to this purpose he presently shuts up the North-winde in the caves
of the country of Eolia, where Eolus rules them.


And Whatsoever other blasts.
all other winds which Put to flight, or cause to fly away.
drive away the clouds Spread over.
brought in; And likewise all other winds which drive away the clouds, and the
rain.


And he sends out the South-winde. And instead of them sends abroad the
south-winde, the principal procurer of rain.


The South-winde is thus described, because it is commonly wet.
The South-winde flies abroad The winds are said to have wings, for the
swiftness of them.
with wet wings, Which is described thus, for the more easy understanding the
rainie nature of it.


Having covered his terrible, etc. or being covered in respect of his
countenance, or as concerning his countenance. Since.
Having his terrible countenance covered with Pitchy darkness, viz. black
clouds.
darkness as black as pitch. 1. That he comes flying with wet wings.
2. That he has his countenance terrible and covered with darkness as black
as pit^h.


[His] beard [is] Heavy or full.
laden with Huge showers or storms.
abundance of rain, 3. That his beard is laden with rain, and that rain
flows from his hoarie locks, all bedeawed.
the Wave.
water flows from his White with deaw.
hoarie Hairs.
locks.

Little clouds sit in [his] forehead, 4. That in his forehead sit little
clouds, his feathers, bosom, and all distill like deaw.
both [his] feathers and bosom Drop down as the deaw or send down a deaw.
distill like deawe.

And as he Pressed the clouds hanging far and wide, with his hand.
wringed with his hand the clouds hanging all abroad; 5. That he wrings the
clouds in his hand.


Fragor is the noise of things broken, ^frango.
There followed a crash.
A crash is made, Whereupon follows immediately a wonderful crash, and the
rain powers down abundantly from the sky.
and Dense or thick storms.
huge showers are poured down from the Heaven.
sky.

Iris, the raine-bowe is said to be the messenger of Juno and sometimes of
Jupiter, because appearing after dry weather, she is said to foreshow showers,
and after rain fair weather, ab (...), dico.
The rainebowe The messenger of Juno having put on diverse colors.
Iunoes messenger She is said to be arrayed with diverse colors for the sundry
colors of it, made in the clouds by the reflection of the beams of the Sun
or Moon.
being arrayed with diverse colors, And lastly how the raine-bowe which is said
to be the messenger of Juno, arrayed in her sundry colors, gathers water
likewise, and ministers rain unto the clouds.
Receives or gathers within it self.
conceiueth waters, and Brings nourishment unto the clouds, viz. water to fill
thi^.
affoordeth matter unto the clouds. Then is set down the effect of all these;
that by the violence of the mighty rain,


The standing corn Are cast thrown down.
is beaten down, The standing corn is beaten down every where.
And the vows lie deplored [or bewailed, or desperate] to the husbandmen.
and the Vota, may be taken for their corn, which they had begged with many
vows and prayers.
hopes of the husbandmen lie altogether desperate: And all the hope and labor
of the husbandman utterly perishes.
and also the labor of the long year Made vain, [or becomne vain and
fruitlesse] perishes.
being frustrate perishes utterly. And besides all these, the Poet shows,
that for the increasing and furthering of this destruction by waters,


Neither yet The anger of Jupiter is content.
is the anger of Jupiter content To power down waters only from heaven.
with his own heaven; Jupiter in his wrath not content only to send down rain
from heaven in this manner, Procures moreover his brother Neptune the God of
the seas and waters to help him with his forces.
but [His] azure [or skie-coloured] brother, viz. Neptune God of the sea.
[his] azure colored brother Neptune, helps him With the forces of his waves.
with [his] aiding waves.

Neptune.
He calls together The rivers.
the Gods of the Amnis ab ambiendo. Varro.
rivers: How Neptune forthwith calls together all the Gods of the rivers.
who after that they Have entered the roofes of their Tyrant.
entered the house of their Tyrant is sometimes taken in the good part for a
good King, ruling justly for the good of the subjects.
Tyrant, viz. Neptune.
King; we Must not.
are not now, To whom so soon as ever they were entered his Palace, and comne
into his presence, he speaks to this purpose,
quoth he, That he was not now to use any long exhortation: but that they all
presently send out their forces,
to use any long exhortation: power out your forces: That they open the
fountains of their rivers,
open [your] Houses, viz. the fountains which are said to be the houses of the
rivers, or rather of the Gods thereof.
fountains, [for] so there is need; and The great dam [or heap of earth
keeping in the water] being removed out of the way.
having removed all hindrances, Remove all hindrances which might keep in
their waters,

And give a free liberty to all their streams.


Send ye in.
Give liberty to all your great rivers to ouerflowe.
give the whole Habenas.] A metaphor from horses which are stayed with bridles.
raines to [al] your streams.

Neptune had no sooner commanded but these return.
Neptune.
He had [thus] commanded. And then follows their obedience, and readiness,
that Neptune had no sooner given this command, but that they all straight
return.


The Gods of the rivers return.
These return, and Unloose the mouths to their fountains.
set open the mouths of their fountains. Set open the mouths of the
fountains of their rivers.


And [so] The great rivers or streams.
they are Rouled.
tumbled into the sea With an vnbride. led course, or outragiously.
with a most violent course. Whereby the waters flow out with all violence,
and are rolled toward the sea in an outrageous manner.


As the thunderbolt is ascribed to Jupiter, so a three-forked Mace to Neptune,
wherewith he smiting the earth makes it to tremble, and so the earthquake,
which is said to be made by the bursting of vapors, or waters out of the earth.
Neptune.
He himself [also] smit the earth with his three-forked Mace; And moreover,
how Neptune also himself smites the earth with his three-forked mace.
But it, viz. the earth.
so that it

Quaked exceedingly.
Trembled, Whereupon it trembles exceedingly, and presently by the quaking
thereof sets open all the passages of the waters, and springs within it.
and Made to lie wide open the ways.
set open the passages of the water With her motion or trembling.
in the moving [thereof.]

The Great rivers flowing wide and far.
floudes running all abroad, And hereby the floods run all abroad, and rush
thorough the champaine fields.
do rush through the open fields.

And Snatch away, or whirle away.
Carry away with all violence.
carry away with violence All manner of trees.
Groves of trees.
groves of trees, together with the Sown fields.
Sown Corn.
sown corn, and also cattle, Cattle.
and men, and Roofes of houses.
Men.
houses; Houses.
and [all] The inward places of their houses where they worshipped their Gods,
and so their household Gods also. Here it is taken for all places of worship, as
Churches, Chapels, etc.
the places of the worship of their Gods, Churches and Chapels.
together with their sacred things. Household Gods, with all their sacred things.


If any house remained Not cast down by the force of the waters.
If any house remained standing by the strength of it,
vncast down, and could Resist.
withstand so great an evil: yet the Wave.
Yet the water still increases till it cover the tops thereof.
water Being above it.
being higher covers the The top of the house was called Culmen, a culmo,
because they were wont to be thacked with straw.
top Of this.
thereof; and the towers lie hid being Pressed, or co^ered.
So that the highest Towers are covered and overwhelmed under the vast waters.
overwhelmed under the Gurges, signifies properly any deep gulf or whirling
place in a river.
Gulf, or deep waters.
vast waters.

There was no difference between sea and land, all was like a Sea.
And that there was no difference between sea and land.
And now the sea and Earth.
land had no difference;

The sea covered all
But all things were maine sea.
All things were Po^tus the sea called Pontus Euxinus here put for the sea in
general.
sea, Also the shoares were wanting, viz. no shoares did appear.
even the very shoares were wanting to the sea. No shores appearing any where.
Then follows that lamentable sight,


This [man]
That one gets up into a hill to save himself.
One man Occupies, or possesses, viz. takes a hill.
gets up into a hill, another sits in a The boat is called crooked, because
both the forepart and hinderpart are so commonly, and other parts of it.
Another sits in a boat to preserve life,
crooked boat:

And Draws [or guideth] his rudders there, or thither.
Rowing where he had plowed but hard before.
roweth there, where he had plowed of late.

Another [man.]
And sailing over not only standing Corn, but also tops of Villages
overflowed,
He sails Upon.
over the standing corn, or the [Ouer] the tops.
top of A Village drowned
a drowned farm: He, viz. another man.
That now they might catch fish sitting in the tops of trees.
another catches fish in the top of an Elm.

The iron which the Mariners cast down into the sea by a cab^e to stay their
ships.
The anchors of their ships are fastened in the green medows instead of the
bottom of the sea.
The Anchor is fastened in the green medowe, So fortune carried it, or would
have it, or so it happened.
as it fell out:

Or the crooked The Keeles or bottomes of the ships put for the whole ships.
Ships.
The keeles of their ships floate over the vineyards, lying drowned under them.
keeles Go over the vineyards.
do cover the Places set with Vines.
vineyards lying under them.

And where Even now or a little before.
And where of late Go^tes and other cattle did feed.
of late the Nimble.
slender Goats Have cropped grass.
did feed;

There now.
There sea-calues and other like Monsters of the sea do wallow now.
There the Filthy and great.
ill-fauoured sea-calues do now Wallowe.
lay their bodies.

Nereides. sea Nymphs so called of Nereus their father.
The sea Nymphs.
The very sea-nymphs do wonder to see the groves, Cities, and houses under
the water.
The nymphs of the sea do wonder at the groves, and Cities, and houses under
the water: also the Dolphins Hold or possess the woods.
The great Dolphines and other huge fishes of the sea dwell, as birds in the
woods,
abide in the woods, and Do often run in, to the high branches.
Swim up and down amongst the boughs of the trees,
do run up and down amongst the thick boughs, and beat upon The Oaks tossed
with the waters.
And beat in their swimming against the Oaks tossed in the waters.
the tossed Oaks.

The Wolf swimmeth amongst the sheep; The Wolves and Lions swim amongst the
sheep.
the water carries the Brown or weefill colored.
tawnie colored Lions.

The water Carries.
Neither does their wonderful swiftness help the Tigres,
bears away the The force of the wild Bore, who is carried with so great
violence against the hunter, that he may seem to have the very power of the
thunderbolt, or lightning.
The Tigre is a be^^^ of wonderful (...) nesse.
Nor fierceness the Bore, though his violent rage be like the thunderbolt.
Tigres, neither does the This may be understood also of the (...) of the
Bore, wherewith he smites and (...) like a thunderbolt.
force of the thu^derbolt [help] the Bore.

Neither.
Nor yet the light legs ought avail the Stagge.
Nor yet do the swift legs Profit.
avail the Heart.
Stag being Taken away.
carried away [with the waters.]

All sorts of birds, or more specially the Swallow, which in flight most
wand^rs up and down.
The poor bird having long wandered up and down with weary wings, yet at
length falls into the sea, finding no place at all for rest or succor.
The bird likewise wandering with weary wings falls down into the Sea, The
earths being sought long where she may stand or stay.
having long sought the earth where she might rest.

The unmeasurable liberty.
The outrageous waters covered all the lesser hills.
The outrageous swelling of the Sea had Overwhelmed the lesser hills.
covered the Tum^lus a tumor^.
hills.

And The great and unusual waters.
And new surges still arising, beat upon the tops of the highest mountains.
the (r) new waves Beat against.
beat upon the tops of the mountains.

The greatest part [of men] is Snatched away.
Finally, for mankind, the greatest part thereof is violently whirled and
carried quite away by the waters.
whirled away violently by the water: They who escaped drowning, perished with
hunger.
whom the water spared,

Those long Long fastings do tame [or subdue] them with a helpelesse [or
succourlesse] living.
And if any bechance escape the violence of the waters, yet they languish away
with long fasting, and utterly perish for want of food.
fasting does overcome thorough lack of Sustenance.
Here the Poet having thus showed the general destruction of all things by
this deluge, proceeds now to show how only Deucalion and Pyrrha, were
preserved, by whom mankind was repaired; and first sets down the place
where they were preserved viz. in the mountain Parnassus, in the country of
Phocis: which Phocis is described that it did lie between the Aonians and
Acteans, seuering them. 2. That it was a f^uitfull land whilst it remained a
land.
food.

Here follows a description of the mountain Parnassus. in the top whereof
Deucalion and Pyrrha were preserved, by whom after mankind was repaired.
Some make this an Hypallage. That the Aonians separate Phocis from the Acteans
or Athenians, according to the tables of the Geographers.
Phocis a fruitful land, whilst it was a land, etc. seuereth.
Phocis Separateth, or divides.
seuereth the Boetians.
Aonians from the Athenean fields, or fields of Act where Athens stood, or
the country of Attica.
Actean fields.

Which was.
[It was] a fruitful Country.
land whilst it Has been, or was.
remained a land, But [it was] a part of the sea at that time, and etc.
but at that time,

A part of the sea and a Large or spacious.
But that at this time it was all overflowed and like unto the maine sea.
broad field of sudden waters.

Where the mountain Parnassus being high, with two tops.
. 3. That in this country stood the hill Parnassus, which is also described
Where the mount Named Parnassus.
Parnassus by name, A high hill.
1. By the height, that it did seem to reach almost to the stars.
reaches almost unto the Seeks or goes up unto the stars, or ascends.
stars, 2. By the tops. That it had two tops, the height whereof went above the
clouds.
with two tops, and Celestial signs or skies.
goes above the clouds with his Goes beyond.
And only this mountain remained uncovered of the waters, by reason of the
height.
height.

This seems to be a plain al^usion to the resting of the Arc of Noah, upon
the mountain of Ararat.
Top.
Whenas Deucalion being carried in a little Where, or here where Deucalion.
How Deucalion and Pyrrha his wife, carried in a little ship, stayed here upon
this mountain.
ship Boat or Lighter.
With the consort or companion of his bed, or bed fellow.
Ratis is most properly a Lighter, made of pieces of timber, pioned together,
whereon hay or other like things are dragged or drawn with horses on Rivers.
together with his wife, Sticked here.
stayed here, for the sea had covered the rest;

They adore Nymphs of Coryceus.
. And how first when they were comne to land; in token of their thankfulness,
and to pacify and obtain the favor and help of the Gods, they adored the
Nymphs and Gods of that mountain, to whom it was consecrat^ed.
He adoreth the Coryceus is a cave in the hill Parnassus, dedicated to the
Nymphs.
(r) Corycidane Nymphs, and the Divine powers of the mountain, viz. Apollo,
B^cchus, and the Muses to which Parnassus was consecrated.
Gods of the Mountain,

And Themis Jupiters sister' (of whom he begat Minerua) Goddess of Justice,
commanding men to ask nothing of the Gods, but that which was lawful and
meet, whereof she had her name of (...) sas or iustum.
Themis the foret^ller of the secrets of the destinies.
Themis the destinieteller, And especially Themis the Goddess of Justice, who
at that time was Lady and president of the Oracles, and gave answers unto them
who sought for help, or to know secrets of the Gods, as Apollo did after.
who at that time Themis is (...) to be the chief geuetr our of the Oracles*
viz of Religion, (...) reason which is in (...) does teach all sons that there
is a God, and that this God is of due to be worshipped: and does maintain this
opinion, being engraven in the minds of men, by the general consent of all
Nations; as Tully says. vid. Sabin.
Held the Oracles, or gave answer concerning the destinies as Apollo did after.
gave answers from the Gods.

There was not any man better then he.
Here the Poet sets out first that holiness and integrity of these two
parties who were thus preserved by who^ mankind was so repaired, to whom also
the Gods had such respect.
There was not a better man then he, Nor more loving equity or justice.
or one that more loved equity; or any one More reuerencing the Gods [or a
more devout worshipper of the Gods.]
That there were not any better in the earth then they, nor any more just or
more devout, and more true worshippers of God.
that more reverenced the Gods then she.

After that Jupiter sees The globe or compass of the earth.
And secondly, that hereupon Jupiter, seeing the world thus overflowed as a
pond.
the world To stand all overflowed as a fen.
to stand as a pond with Waters standing all abroad as in a fen.
liquide fens,

And one only man to remain Of so many thousands even now.
. And only one man and one woman to be left alive of all the world, and all
alone;
of so many Thousand men.
thousands,

And only one woman to be remaining of so many thousands,

Both of them Innocent.
And these two both of them most harmless creatures, and most devout
worshippers of God:
harmless, both Worshippers of the divine power or God.
devout worshippers of God;

He Cast asunder, severed or scattered.
He in compassion disperseth the clouds;
dispersed the clouds, and Great showers [or tempestuous weather] being
removed with the Northwinde.
And drives away the rain with the Northwinde.
having removed the mighty rain with the The Northwinde scatters the
clouds, and brings fair weather.
Northwinde,

He shows both the Lands.
And so begins to clear both the heaven and the earth by removing the
clouds from the skies, and the waters from off the face of the earth, that
both heaven and earth might be seen to one another.
earth To heaven, and the sky to the lands, viz, the waters which had covered
all being removed.
unto the heavens, and the heavens unto the earth.

Neither does the Anger viz. viclent ouerflowing.
He abateth also the rage of the seas.
rage of the sea Remain or abide.
continue:

And also the triple poynted [or three-forked] dart being laid away, [or being
put to it] the sea asswageth [or calmeth] the waters.
His brother Neptune also, who had so helped in increasing the flood, he
lays aside his triple-forked Mace,
And also Neptune Using his three-forked Mace.
. having laid aside The three-forked Mace is ascribed to Neptune, as is thought
of some, for the three parts of the world which the Ocean sea compasses about,
and for that in places near the sea are often earthquakes, and inund^^ons with
the e^^thquake: and thereupon is Neptune (...) to smite the earth with his
three-forked mace, as before.
his three -- forked Mace, Asswageth the waters.
asswageth the waters: Calls forth his Trumpetour Triton.
and calls forth [that] Sky colored, or Sea colored.
azure colored Triton [his Trumpeter] appearing above The deep [Sea.]
Who straight appears upon the sea,
the deep, and Covered upon his shoulders, or in respect of his shoulders.
Synec.
Having upon him a robe of a native purple color.
having his shoulders covered with A purple robe.
a native Murex is a shellfish, of the blood whereof purple color is made,
here put for the color it self, or a robe dyed with that color.
purple color; and commands him to Triton is a sea monster, like unto a man in
the upper part, and in the nether part like unto a fish; he is of a sky color,
and has a shel like unto the great Cockle. He is f^ned to be Neptunes
Trumpeter, who by a sound can assuage the seas. And the reason thereof is,
because he both sounds loud in a shell, and when he is heard, or appears,
he then foresheweth a calm to follow.
Him he commands to sound a retreit to the floods and streams, therewith to
recall them all.
blow with [his] sounding shell, and now to recall the Waves and floods.
floudes and streams A sign being given [that they may return,] or a retreit
being sounded.
by [this] sign given unto them.

Tritons Trumpet described.
Triton.
A hollow Trumpet is taken to him, [or of him.]
He forthwith takes his Trumpet.
He takes unto himself [his] hollow Trumpet writhe^ Into wideness or a
broad compass.
wider and wider, Which increases from the lowest top [or mouth, or poynt] like
the sharp end of a top.]
which waxes bigger like unto a top from the very smallest end.

[His] trumpet [I say is taken]
Which so soon as he had set unto his bedeawed mouth, and that it felt his
blast,
[His] trumpet [I say] which So soon as it began to be blown [or to sound.]
so soon as it conceiueth the Air or wind.
blast in the midst of the sea, Fills with the Voice.
It filled with the sound of it all the shores lying under the whole heaven.
sound [all] the shoares lying under Both Phoebus, viz. the sun rising and
setting, or both East and West, or all between the East and West, and so under
the whole heaven.
compass of the Sun.

Then also After that.
so soon (r) as it touched the Mouths of the God, viz. of Triton.
mouth of the God Triton had set the trumpet unto his mouth, distilling with his
wet beard.
distilling like the deawe with his wet beard, and being Blown in, sang.
blown, sounded the commanded retreits,

It was heard To all, viz. by and throughout all the waters.
So that it was heard of all the waters, both in the land and sea.
of all the waves both of land and sea.

And of what Waves.
And so soon as ever it was heard of them, it forthwith repressed the^ all;
waters soever it was heard, it [forthwith] repressed them all.

And now has the Sea [his] Shore.
That immediately the Sea comes within the shores again.
shoares [again;] the channel Takes or receives, or keeps within the
compass of it.
contains the full Streams.
The rivers return and run within their channels.
rivers.

The floudes Are diminished, and not so deep.
All the floudes do settle down; and as it were, little hills begin to appear.
settle down, [and] the little hills do seem to Go forth, or they do appear.
come forth.

The ground arises, The ground arises, waxing broader.
places Wax greater and broader as the waters diminish.
do increase, the Waves.
The waters fall, waxing narrower.
waters decreasing.

Also the woods show their naked tops after a long season.
So that after a long time, the woods begin to show their naked tops;
And after a long (...) in foeminino vsi(...) pro tempore.
time the woods show their Uncovered, and without leaves.
naked tops, and Hold.
Having still the mud hanging in their boughs.
keep the mud left In their Bough, branch, or leaf.
boughs.

The globe or compass of the earth, or upper face,
And finally the world is restored again, that the face of the earth does all
appear.
The world is to be seen again.
was restored: which after that Deucalion saw Open, viz. empty of man and beast.
Which when Deucalion saw how it was empty, and desolate, and silent,
it made bare,

And also the Left alone, or desolate of man and beast.
desolate Earths.
earth To do [or keepe] deep silences.
to be altogether silent, he speaks thus unto Pyrtha, He speaks thus unto
Pyrrha with the tears arising in his eyes.
the tears Risen, or arising.
standing [in his eyes.]

A patheticall speech, and full of affection, whereby Deucalion indeauoureth to
bind Pyrrha mere firmly unto him; and to move her to consult for the repair
of mankind.
Deucalion and Pyrrha were brethrens children: for Iatheth as they say had two
sons, Prometheus, of whom came Deucalion, and Epimetheus, of whom was Pyrrha.
And so he calls her sister in most kind sort, for that near bond, and after
the ancient manner.
Oh my sister, my dearest wife, oh woman only left alive,
Oh sister, oh [my] wife, oh the only woman Suruiuour of all womankinde.
remaining alive,

Whom the common stock and Original of cosingermans, descended from two
brethren, viz. Prometheus, and Epimetheus.
Whom so near a descent, even from the same Grandfather, and afterward the
marriage bed, and now also these very present dangers have thus joined together:
descent from the same Grandfather, and afterward the Marriage.
bed has joined unto me, Now the very dangers do join.
and now also these very dangers do join together:

We two are the whole company of [all] the lands, Thou see that we two are
all the company that are left alive in all the world.
which soever The setting and rising [of the Sun] do see.
the West and East do see; the Sea Has possessed the rest.
The sea having utterly swept away all other living creatures.
has Caetera animant^^a.
all other living creatures.

Moreover, And moreover, that this stay of our life is very uncertain.
this Trust or stay.
confidence of our life is not yet Certain.
And how every little cloud does now terrify our hearts.
sure enough; now Even the clouds.
even the very clouds do terrify [our] mind.

Oh [woman] to be pitied, what mind could be to thee now, if thou had
been
Oh poor soul, what a heart would thou now have had, if thou had escaped
alone without me?
Ah poor soul to be pitied, what a heart should thou now have had, if
thou had been Delivered from the destinies without me?
preserved alone without me? Snatched from the fates.
How should thou have been able to have endured this fear?
how could thou alone By what means.
endure [this] fear? Bear the fear.
By whom comforting [couldst thou endure these] griefs?
Whom should thou have had to have comforted thee in thy griefs?
by whose comfort [couldest thou abide these] griefs?

For why? I my self, As for my self (my dearest wife) if the sea had taken
thee away, I would certainly have followed thee, and it should have had me
too.
(my [deare] wife believe me) if the Sea had thee Also, viz. in like manner as
the rest of the creatures.
likewise, would follow thee, and the sea should have me too.

Prometheus (^s is said before) formed the earth unto the image of man, and put
into it a heavenly soul.
And for mankind, that is thus destroyed, oh would to God I were able to
repair it, by my ancient Father Prometheus skill, and to infu^e souls as he
did into the formed earth.
Oh that I were able to Renew, or restore again.
repair the people by my Fathers Arts.
skill, and To power in.
infuse souls into The earth being formed [or framed] viz. into the shapes of
men.
the formed earth.

Now [all] The mortal kind.
For now all mankind remains in us two.
mankind remains in us twain.

[For] so it has Seemed good to.
pleased the Gods, So it has been the good pleasure of the Gods.
and we remain Only patterns.
And we remain the only patterns of the same.
samples of men.

He had spoken.
And thus Deucalion ended his speech.
He had thus made an end of his speech, The Poet having thus lively set out
the emphaticall speech of Deucalion, concerning the restoring of mankind,
proceeds to show the effects which followed.
and they [both] wept.

It pleased [them].
Then they thought it good to pray unto the heavenly Divine power.
How they both wept.
God, and to seek his aid by the Sacrae sortes] were taken for such answers
and prophecies as were drawn out by lot, and were known by the lots.
And thought this the only means for effecting hereof;
sacred Lots.
First, to pray to the heavenly God, and to seek his aid herein by the sacred
Oracles.
Oracles.

There is no delay.
They made no longer delay: They go unto.
And secondly, how they made no longer stay, but went both together forthwith
to the river Cephisus, a river hard by, flowing out of the bottom of the hill
where they were.
And there, though the water thereof was not yet clear, but only gotten in,
and running within the channel,
they go together to The Cephisidan waters.
the waters of Cephisus is a river flowing out of the bottom of Parnass^s,
^neer unto which the temple of Themis stood.
Cephisus.

And not as yet liquide, viz. clear or pure [but muddy]
Although not* clear as yet, but now [onely] Keeping within their channels or
known banks.
cutting the known fordes.

And then so soon as they have bedeawed [or sprinkled] the liquors tasted [or
drawn up.]
Yet they sprinkled of the same upon their clothes and heads.
From thence so soon as they had sprinkled the waters lightly touched

To their garments and head.
Upon their clothes and head, They go.
And thence turned presently unto the Temple of the sacred Goddess Themis,
which stood near thereunto.
they turn their steps unto the Delubrum, is coniectured to be of Deus (vt
candelabrum, a candela) a place where any God was worshipped: or of diluendo,
because the Heathens used to sprinkle them before they prayed or worshipped in
them.
Place of worship, or chapel.
Temple of the sacred Themis.
Goddess, the Tops of which were foul [or filthy or ouergrowen.]
roof whereof of The roof whereof was all, as ouergrowen with moss, filthy
and loathsome,
was loathsome with filthy moss, and The altars of Themis.
[her] Altars stood without Fires.
And her Altars stood without fire.
fire.

As they have touched.
As Soon as they touched the Steps, or greeces.
And thirdly, how as soon as they touched the stairs of the temple, both of
them fell down humbly upon their faces,
stairs of the Temple, both of them Lies down, or falls down.
fall down,

Groueling, or flat on their faces.
Humbly upon the ground, and Being in great fear.
And trembling kiss the stones thereof.
trembling, Gave kisses to the cold stone.
And finally thus they make their prayer unto Themis:
kissed the cold Stones of the stairs.
stone.

And thus they spoke: If the Gods,
If the Gods can be ouercomn by the prayers of the just, if they can be
appeased and their anger assuaged,
divine powers being ouercomne With just prayers, viz. with prayers of just men.
with the prayers of the just, Wax mild, or do relent.
begin to be appeased again: if the anger of the Gods be Bowed, viz. can be
moved, or pacified.
assuaged,

Oh Themis tell [vs] by what Art, viz. skill o^ r means.
Oh Themis tell us by what means the loss of our kind may be repaired, and
help (Ogracious Goddess) for the restoring of all things again.
device the loss of our Stock or kindred, viz. mankind.
kind Is repairable, or is to be repaired, or may be repaired, or restored.
may be repaired; and oh most Gentle or gracious.
mild [Goddes] Bring help to, or relieve, or renew,
bring [som] help to The things drowned.
mankind being thus destroyed.

The Goddess is moved [at their prayers] and Gave a lot, viz. an answer from
the Oracle.
Hereupon the Goddess is moved with compassion at their prayers, and gives
them this answer;
gives [them] [this] answer, Depart ye out of the Temple.
Depart ye out of the temple;

And Hide.
Cover your heads, and let your garments loose.
cover your Head.
heads, And unloose your garments being girt, or slack them.
and withal unloose your garments,

And [then] And then cast the bones of your great mother behind your backs.
cast the bones of [your] great Parent or grandmother.
mother behind your back.

They were amazed long, viz. wondering what the answer should mean.
At this strange answer they stood both amazed long;
They stood amazed long; but Pyrrha the former brake the silences with her
voice, viz. spoke first.
But Pyrrha breaking off the silence first, refuses to obey this commandment
of the Goddess,
Pyrrha breaks off the silence first, and refuses to obey the Hest.
commandment of the Goddess.

And Prays with a fearful mouth.
Beseeching her with a trembling voice, that she would pardon her therein, for
not doing as she commanded, for that she feared exceedingly to hurt her
mothers soul; by casting of her bones in such manner behind her back.
beseeches [her] with a tre^bling voice, That she may give pardon to her.
that [she] would pardon her, And.
for that she fears exceedingly

To hurt [her] Mothers shadows or ghosts.
mothers ghost, Her bones being [so] cast or hurled.
by casting of her bones.

In the mean time they Repeat with themselves, viz. meditate.
And yet in the mean time, they both of them often repeat, and seriously can
between themselves the words of the Oracle, which were so obscure with secret
mysteries.
repeat and Roll often, or toss in examining and pondering in their minds.
scan between themselves the words of the Lot being given.
answer which was given being obscure with Blind.
dark Holes* or secret and hidden things.
mysteries.

Prometheus and Fo^metheus, are (...) to have bee^e breth^en, sons of ^aphet,
as (...) said. Prometheus signifies one who is vi^, following reason, and so
takes advice before, or providing before, of (...) and (...) consi^ium.
Epimetheus, one following sense and reason foolish, taking counsel after the
deed.
And then begins Deucalion to comfort his dear wife with these sweet words;
And then Prome^hides, Prometheus son, viz. Deu^a^ion the son of Prometheus.
Deucalion comforts Epimethides, viz. Pyrrha, Epimetheus daughter.
Pyrrha [his wife] with these Pleasing or gentle words.
sweet words:

And either.
Either (quoth he) my judgment deceives me much,
Either, quoth he, Our cunning [or wit] is deceitful to us, or the depth is
hid from us.
our judgment deceives us;

Or the Oracles are godly.
Or the answer of the Goddess is holy, and persuades us to no such impiety
at all, much less to such as the words may import.
answers are holy, and Command.
Persuade no wickedness or unlawful thing.
persuade us to no impiety.

The great mother is The earth is rightly called the great mother, for that all
things in it both li^ing, and without, life are bred of it, and for that it
nourishes all living things, and receives all things, dying, as into the
bosom of it.
I suppose that by the great mother is meant the earth, and by the bones the
stones in the body thereof.
the earth: I suppose the stones in the body of the earth to be called bones;
And that we are commanded to cast those stones behind our backs.
we are commanded to cast these behind our backs.

Although Titania a name of Pyrrha, niece or grandchilde to Iaphet, the son of
Titan, who was the Son of Coelum and Vesta.
Titania is.
Now although Pyrrha was much moved at this conjecture of her husband; and
both of them hoped well it might be so;
Pyrrha be moved by this Divination or interpretation.
conjecture of her husband;

Yet [Their] hope is in doubt, viz. they hope doubtfully, or distrusting.
Yet they were still doubtful, and both distrust in some sort the heavenly
Oracle.
their hope is doubtful, and still both of them distrust the heavenly
Admonition or counsel.
Notwithstanding thus they begin to reason with themselves;
Oracle: but what shall it hurt [them] To try.
What can it hurt us to make a trial hereof?
to make a trial?

They depart and Veil.
Thereupon they depart, and as they were enjoined,
cover [their] Head.
They cover their heads,
heads, and Let loose [their] coats.
Loose their garments,
vngirde their garments,

And Send.
Cast stones behind their backs.
cast the This is thought to be fained thereupon, that Deucalion a King of
Thessalie, after a great ^oud, wherewith all Greece is said to have been
overflowed, is reported to have instructed the rude and savage people, and to
have framed them by good laws to put away their fierce, hard and intractable
natures: and so to have caused them to leave the stony rocks and caves wherein
they then lived, casting them as it were behind their backs, and to have
gathered into companies, and built them Cities.
stones commanded behind their Footsteps.
backs.

The stones (who can believe this but that anquitie Has witnessed it.
And forthwith the stones (a matter incredible, but that antiquity does give
certain testimony unto it)
is witness?)

Began to Put away.
Begin to lay away their natural hardness.
lay away [their] hardness, and their Rigor, sturdiness or roughness.
Or rather it is fained of the Poets only to signify the deprauation or
perverseness of soul and body, or of man's nature.
stiffness,

And to be Made soft.
To soften by little and little,
softened By delay.
by little and little, and being softened To lead.
And to take a shape.
to take a shape.

Straightway, whenas.
Yea so, as some shape of man begins to appear;
By and by They have increased or waxed bigger.
they increased And a softer nature happened unto them.
and received a softer nature, As.
that some shape of man May.
might be seen, So.
Although not very manifest at the first,
though not Manifest or apparent enough.
[very] manifest, but as [an image made] of Marble newly begun,

Not exact [or perfect] enough.
Yet like images wrought in marble when they are newly begunn^, only rough
hewn, and not finished:
Not yet finished, and most like Rude or rough.
And most like unto impolished pictures.
impolished Signs, viz. images or statues roughly hewn.
pictures.

Yet what part of them was moist with any Moisture.
And what part of the stones was moist and earthy,
juice,

And also earthy, That is turned into flesh and blood.
is turned into Flesh.
the use of the body:

What thing, or what part.
What is solid and cannot be bowed, The solid parts into bones.
is changed into bones.

What [part] has been.
What was Even now.
lately a vein, The veins of the stones into veins of the body.
remained under the same name.

And so the stones sent by the hands of the man, drew the face of men in a
short time by the divine power of the Gods.
And [so] in a short space by the power of the Gods, And thus in a short space,
through the mighty power of the Gods.
the stones

Sent,
Cast by the hands Of Deucalion.
of the man, The stones cast by the hands of the man are made men.
Received the proportion and nature of men.
took the shape of men.

And the woman Is.
was repaired By the stones which the woman cast behind her.
by the woman's casting [of stones behind her.] And those cast by the hands of
the woman are made women.


Thereupon we are a hard kind and Having such experience [or pro^fe] of
labors, or so able to endure toil and hardness.
so experienced in labors. Whereupon it is com^e to pass, that we are so hard
a kind.


And [thereby] do give Documents or demonstration.
experiments Hence it is said to be that the Graecians call the people (...)
of (...), a s^o^e.
Of what original we are bred, viz. whereof we are made.
from whence we have had our beginning. And do give continual experiments
from whence we have had our beginning, even from stones.


FAB. VIII.
Of the restoring of the Creatures, by the sliminesse of the earth and
warmenesse of the Sun, and the killing of The serpent or dragon.
the By the Python or dragon bred after the flood, of the moist earth, is meant
the ^otten, noisome and pestilent vapors, which were caused by the inundation
and general deluge, until they were consumed by the beams of the Sun,
signified by Apoll^es shaf^s.
Python bred amongst them, by Apolloes shafts, in the remembrance whereof the
Pythian games were ordained.

That living creatures may (...) the moist (...) warm by the heat of the
Sun, he shows that Egypt is a witness; where, after the inundation of
Nilus, the clo^^ are changed into diverse shapes of living creatures by the
power of the s^nne.


THe earth brought In this Fable the Poet proceeds to show the repairing of
the rest of the creat^res.
forth Other living creatures.
the rest of the living creatures, These are here inserted by the Poet, not
only to show the restoring of the rest of the creatures, but also for the more
fit knitting hereto of the next fable of Daphne turned into a Laurel.
in diverse Forms.
shapes of it own Nature.
accord, 1. How mankind being thus restored, the earth brought forth the rest
of the living creatures, of all sorts, and that of it own accord.

And secondly, the means and manner thereof.

That so soon as the moist earth began to wax warm by the heat of the sun.

And especially the mud in fennie places,


after that the old Humor or moist earth.
moisture Waxed thoroughly warm, or very hot.
began to be thoroughly warm From.
by the Fire.
fervent heat of the sun; and also the mud and the moist fennes

Have swelled.
Began to swel with heat, Began to swell by the heat thereof,

The seeds of all things being in the same earth,


and the fruitful seeds of [all] things

Being nourished In the earth ministering life.
in the Quickening.
lively soil as in the Belly.
womb of [their] mother, And nourished in that lively soil, as in the womb
of their mother,


Increased, Increased, and took sundry shapes by little and little.
and took some Face or form.
shape By delaying, staying or tarrying, or by little and little.
by continuance of time. This he declares by a similitude, and an instance of
the like in Egypt, by the means of the river Nilus.


Even as when Nilus is thought to be so named, (...) nouum lutum, new clay or
mud, because it ouerflowing every year, carries with it new mud, whereby the
fields are manured and made exceeding fruitful, and whereof these creatures
are said to be bred.
Nilus, Having seven streams or currents.
which flows into the sea by 7 mouths, That even as when Nilus that great
river of Egypt, running into the Sea by seven streams, has overflowed their
fields, and is returned again within his banks,
has Forsaken.
left the Wet fields.
fields all wet, And has restored his floods to the ancient channel.
and brought again [his] Floods or current.
streams into his ancient Alueo Synaeresis.
channel, Channel or watercourse.


And the New mud or slime, or moist earth.
fresh mud has waxen very hot by the The sun is specially so called athere^
^idus, because of the heat and influence of it above the rest of the stars.
Fiery sign or star.
heavenly Sun, And that the fresh mud left behind it, has waxen warm by the
beams and influence of the sun.


The Tillers [of the ground or husbandmen]
plowmen The clods being turned over.
turning over the clods do find very many living creatures; The husbandmen as
they plowe and turn over the clods, do find very many living creatures caused
thereby.
and They see in these.
amongst these they see some only begun, And amongst the same, some they see
only begun to be formed, according to the short time they have had to be bred
in.
By the very space of breeding, viz. according to the time of their breeding.
according to the short space of [their] breeding, Some imperfect, and as it
were cut off by the shoulders.
some imperfect, and Cut short, viz. wanting shoulders or heads.
cut off by their shoulders: And ofttimes they behold one part of the same
creature living, another part thereof still remaining a very lump of earth
altogether without shape or form.
And one part often times lives in the same body.
and often times in the same body one part lives, another part Is.
remains Unformed or vnsha^e^^a^th.
rude earth.

Because Where, or when as.
so soon as both the moisture and heat have Taken.
received A right mixed proportion.
a temper, Then he sets down the reason hereof: for that so soon as
moisture and heat have once received a right temper or mixture, they straight
conceive, and so of these two are all things bred.
they conceive, and all things Do arise.
are bred of these Moisture and heat.
two.

And whereas fire is a fighter [or aduersary] to the water, a moist vapor does
create all things.
And although the fire be contrary to water, And that although fire be
contrary to water yet a moist vapor, wherein moisture and native heat are
rightly mixed, does breed all things, and such a disagreeing concord is fit for
increase of al young things.
Heat and moisture separate, do naturally disagree: but being mixed together
rightly, they agree well, and are most apt for breeding all things.
yet Viz. moisture and heat mixed.
a moist Heat or warmenesse.
vapor does breed all things, and a disagreeing concord is fit Create, make, or
fashion.
for increase.

Therefore For young ones, or things to be bred, or brought forth.
so soon as the earth being Where, or when as.
slimie by the late flood, Afterward he comes to apply th^s, to prove the
truth of the manner of the repairing of all things.
waxed warm by the heavenly Muddy, dirtie, ^^ay^ie.
Suns, viz. the continual shining and beams thereof.
Sun, and by the High heat, or pearcing deep.
heat from above, That even in like sort so soon as the earth being all muddy
and slimie by the late ouerflowing, began to wax thoroughly warm by the Sun
beams and heavenly influence,


It brought forth innumerable Shapes.
kinds, It brought forth innumerable kinds of living creatures.
and partly Represented.
restored again the ancient Figures.
forms, Partly restoring again the ancient sorts which had been formerly;
partly Bred or fashioned.
created new Misshapen things.
monsters. And partly creating new monsters which had never been before.


It indeed Would not.
was unwilling [to breed Them.
such,] And that, howsoever it was utterly unwilling to breed such mishape^ and
ugly creatures,
But oh thou greatest serpent, it begot thee then also.
but yet it bred Apostrophe.
thee also at that time, Yet at the very same time it brought forth that huge
deformed dragon, called the Python.
oh thou By the Python is meant the abundance of pestilent vapors caused by
the deluge (as is said before): it has the name of (...), putre^acio, because
they were bred of the rottenness of the earth, consumed by the beams coming
from the circle of the sun, as from a bow, Vid. Sup.
most huge By the Python is meant the abundance of pestilent vapors caused by
the deluge (as is said before): it has the name of (...), putre^acio, because
they were bred of the rottenness of the earth, consumed by the beams coming
from the circle of the sun, as from a bow, Vid. Sup.
Python; and [thou] Oh unknown serpent.
serpent being unknown [formerly] wast a terror to the New.
new-bred people: Which having been altogether unknown before, became a terror
unto that new-bred people, for that his body covered such a space and compass
of the mount where he lay.
thou Heldest or occupiedst.
coueredst So great a compass of the mount Parnassus, where thou wast formed.
such a space of the mountain.

Apollo was painted with a bow and quiver. By him war meant the Sun which
destroys all noisome vapors with his beams, as with arrows.
The God holding the bow.
Apollo killed this Serpent being Heavy.
laden with a thousand Darts
shafts, His quiver almost drawen^out [or spent] viz. emptied.
having almost spent his Now this great and mighty serpent Apollo slew, with a
thousand shafts, until he had almost spent his whole quiver upon him,
although he had never used those before, unless against Bucks and Does.
whole quiver, although [he had] never used such like Darts.
weapons before, except In [killing] dear.
amongst Bucks and D^es.
Dear, and swift Wild Gotes.
Roes; His poison being poured out through [or by] his black wounds.
so that his poison was shed out [by the^] through Here seems to be an
Hypallage, the black wounds for the black poison running out of his wounds; or
else it may be properly, because poison makes the part which is poisoned to be
black.
black wounds. Yet he so pierced him with these, that all his black and deadly
poison powered out, and so was shed by the wounds made thereby.


And lest that Ancientnesse or time.
long continuance of time might blot out the Fame.
famous memory Of this staying of this dragon.
of [this] work; And lest that by tract of time, the memory of this famous
victory and happy work should utterly perish;


He instituted games [to be] sacred in a famous contention, [or trial of
masteries.]
He ordained sacred games with a renowned strift for masteries. Apollo ordained
sacred games to be renowned for the strift and contention for masteries, which
were to be ever used therein.

And these games to be called the Pythian games, according to the name of this
monstrous Python thus ouercomne, for a perpetual remembrance thereof.

And in these games moreover, that whosoever did the best and got the mastery,
at what strift or contention soeeuer in wrestling, running, or any other way,
should receive this honor to be crowned with a crown or garland made of the
branches of the Escule^ree, in honor of Apollo.




Being called Pythia.
Which games were called the Pythia were plays made in the honor of Apollo
for slaying the Python.
Pythian games, by the name of the Ouercomne, conquered or vanquished.
subdued serpent.

In these games.
Here What young man or youth soever
which-soeuer of the young men Had ouercomne [or got the mastery or victory.]
overcame by hand, or By feet.
feet, or wheel, Took.
received A crown or garland made of the branches of the Escule tree in honor
of the victory.
the honor of an Esculus is a t^ee bearing m^st almost as big as the mast of
the Oak, and having leaves bigger. It was so named of Esca, and so honored
because in old time they did eat of the fruit thereof.
Escule branch.

The Laurel tree was not yet.
As yet there was no Bay Tree.
Laurel, The reason also hereof, that these garlands were made of the Escule
tree, was this,

For that as yet there was no Laurel tree sprung up.

And therefore Apollo compassed about the temples of his head comely with long
locks, with writhen branches plucked from any kind of tree.


and [therefore] This is here fi^ly brought in to make a way to the next
Metamorphosis, how Daphne was turned into a Laurel, and so to tie this fable
fitly to that which goes before. Thus is Apollo painted.
Phoebus is an Epithet of Apollo, proper to the Sun, siguifying pure, for the
brightness of the sun.
Phoebus did compass about or gird.
Apollo did adorn His comely head.
the temples of his head being decent with long hair, [With a crown or garland
made] of any kind of tree.
[wth branches plucked] from any tree.

FAB. IX.
This Fable shows the power of love, that even Apollo, God of wisdom was
ouercomne thereby: And also the reward of chastity in chaste Daphne, turned into
a Laurel, always green.
Of Daphne turned into a Laurel tree. The Poet intending here to set down the
power of love, that it prevails with the most renoun'd, and withal the
reward of chastity, descends unto this next Fable, how Apollo who had slain
the dragon, was yet ouercomn with the love of Daphne, and how she for her
chastity was turned into a Laurel. And to this end shows,


The first love of Phoebus [was] Daphne, etc.
Peneian Daphne.
Daphne signifies a Laurel or Bay Tree, of (...), because when a leaf or
branch of it is burned, it seems to send forth a voice by cracking.
DAphne It is fained to be the daughter of Peneus, because the banks thereof
are full of Bay-trees.
the of the Peneus a river in Thessaly, running between Ossa and Olympus.
Peneus, [was] the first love of Phoebus.
Apollo: 1. That Daphne, Peneus daughter, was the first love of Apollo.
Which [loue.]
which not Ignorant lot, or hap, or chance, or unskillful fortune which has no
choice of things.
Blind fortune gave [vnto him] but The great indignation of the God of love.
the cruel anger of Cupid, God of love, son of Jupiter and Venus, or as some
say, of Mars and Venus, a cupidine, of the carnal desire which he is said to
work.
Cupid. 2. The means whereby he fell in love with her. That it was not by
fortune, but through the anger of Cupid God of love, and that upon this
occasion;


Delius.] Apollo is so called of the Island Delos, wherein he and Diana are said
to have been borne.
Apollo being proud The serpent lately ouercomne, had seen this [Cupid]
bending the horns, [or tips of his bowe] the string being brought to it [or
drawn up to it.]
of his late subduing of the serpent, That Apollo being proud of his late
conquest in killing the Python,
saw this [ Cupid] bending his The bow and arrows, and also the firebrand
are attributed to Cupid, to express the wonderful power of love, because love
is more pearcing then either iron or fire; yea, more burning, for that love
burns a far off, whereas fire burns only things touching it, or near unto
it.
bow: Seeing Cupid bend his bow, disdainfully scoffed at him,


And he had said, O wanton boy, what is to thee with these valiant weapons?
And what (quoth he) Calling him wanton boy,
thou wanton boy have thou to do with these warlike weapons? And demanding of
him what he did with those warlike weapons:
These things which thou carriest do become, viz this bow and arrows.
this furniture which thou bear becomes our shoulders; Because that kind of
furniture, would rather become his shoulders.


Who are able To give sure wounds to the wild beast, to give wounds to the
enemy.
without missing to wound the wild beasts, For that he was able not only to
smite wild beasts with them, but even to wound the enemy.
to wound also the enemy; Which he demonstrateth by a notable instance,
who lately Made prostrate or flewe.
beat down with innumerable shafts the Swollon or proud.
swelling As that he had so lately beat down with his shafts, and killed that
ugly serpent, which was so huge, that he covered many acres of ground, with his
belly full of poison.
Python, Pressing.
covering so many An acre of ground was so much as a yoke of Oxen could well
plow in a day.
acres of ground with [his] Belly full of poison.
pestilent belly.

Be thou content.
Content thou thy self to Provoke [or stir vp] with thy firebrand.
Irrito, to stir up: Irrito, to make vain.
kindle with thy Fax, viz. a firebrand is ascribed to Cupid, whereby the minds
of youth are inflamed with love.
brand, Thereupon Apollo advises him, to content himself,
I know not what Loves, viz. wanton, sorry, or unbeseeming men.
Thus he speaks to Cupid in contempt.
light loves, To kindle with his brand some silly loves, and not to meddle with
his praises.
Neither arrogate, claim, or challenge to thy self our praises.
and meddle not with our praises.

The son of Venus.
Cupid answered This [ Apollo.]
him; But Cupid answers him:
Oh Apollo.
Phoebus, That howsoever that bow of his whereof he so gloried, was able to
smite all living creatures; yet his bow was able to wound even him being a God.
Let thy bow smite all things.
be it so that Cupids bow and shafts more pearcing then Apolloes.
thy bow Fastens or shootes through.
smites all living creatures (quoth he) [yet] Thou can not escape mine.
my bow shall smite thee: And therefore look how much all living creatures
were inferior to God, so much should Apolloes glory be unto his.
and By how much.
how much all living creatures Do yield or give place.
are inferior to God, Thy glory is less then ours [by so much.]
[so much] is Thy glory in shooting.
thy glory less then ours.

[Thus] he spoke, Having thus spoken, fluttering with his wings, he flewe
forthwith unto the shady top of Parnassus mount.
and The air being dashed with his wings smitten together,
fluttering with his wings,

[Hee] not flow stood on the shadie tower.
He stood forthwith upon the shady top of Parnassus.

And Cupid is said to be armed with different shafts, viz. sharp and blunt,
golden and leady: The reason is, for that all are not affected after one manner
in love: one loves more fervently then another; and sometimes one loves the
other most vehemently, the other no whit affected, or disliking all love, or
else those especially who are so inamoured with them; as here it fell out
between Apollo and Daphne.
drew Out of his quiver bearing shafts [or full of shafts.]
forth of his quiver two Darts.
arrows And there standing, he drew two arrows out of his quiver;


Of Contrarre.
diverse Works or effects.
operations: Those also of diverse qualities.
This drives [or chaseth] away, the other makes love.
the one drives away [loue] the other causes it.

That which Makes.
causes [loue] is Golden.
of gold, The one of them causing love, having a sharp head, and all of gold.
and Shines.
glittereth with a sharp Point.
head.

That which Drives away love.
drives it away, is Without point.
blunt, The other abating and driving away love, being of Cane filled with
lead, and having a blunt head.
and has lead Under the cane whereof that shaft is made.
under a reed.

Cupid.
The God fixed This blunt shaft.
this in Daphne, Peneus daughter.
the Nymph Peneis: This leadeu shaft he fixed in Daphne,
but He hurt [or wounded] Apolloes marrow through his bones smitten through with
the other.
he pierced the very marrow of Apollo through his bones, But the other he shot
into Apollo, pearcing his very marrow through his bones.
with the other.

Apollo.
The one [of them] Loves.
falls in love forthwith: So that Apollo begins forthwith to be inflamed with
love.
Daphne.
the other flies The name.
the very name of a lover; Daphne cannot endure to hear of love, or the name
of a lover.


Rejoicing [or delighting herself.]
Solacing herself in the Hiding places [dens or caues] of the woods.
thick woods, But contrarily solaceth her self to live in the woods; and with
the skins of wild beasts which she killed.
and in the Cases.
skins of the Taken wild beasts.
wild beasts which she took, Becoming therein a follower of chaste Diana
living unmarried.
and becomes an Being an emulatour or follower.
imitatour of Unwedded [or rejoicing in perpetual virginity.]
unmarried Phoebe.
Diana,

A hairelate [or headband] did keep in her hairs, being put without law, viz.
without any curious setting or tricking.
Some expound it she had only a coife upon her head; which seems contrary to
that after Et leuis impulsos vetro dabat aurae capillos, Et Spectat inornatos
collo pendere capillos. Here also is showed how Daphne became an imitatour of
Diana, that she neglected the tumming up of her head, and despised all men.
She had only her head fillited up with a ribband. Only tied her hair
together without any other curiosity.


Many sought Her love.
her: So as although many suitors sought her love, yet she despised them all.
[but] she [Was] against [or turned away from] them, seeking [or her weers.]
despised all [her] suitors;

[And] Impatient.
being vnpatie^t [to hear of mariage] without a husband, And being male
content, living all alone without a husband, ranging the vnwayed woods,
she Vieweth.
rangeth the vnwaied woods.

Neither Does she care what Hymen, what love, what marriages are.
regards she Hymen is taken both for the god of marriage, the marriage, and the
bridal or wedding song, viz. used to be sung at marriages.
the bridal song, Neither regarded marriage nor love.
what love, or what marriage Means.
is.

Often times [her] Peneus.
father said: Although her father often times challenged and urged her,
Daughter thou owe me a son in law.
thou owe me a son in law [my] daughter.

[Her] father said often times, That she ought him a son in law, and nephews;
[my] daughter thou owe me nephews.

She hating the Bridal solemnities or marriage songs, viz. marriage.
marriage Teda is properly the middle or heart of the Pine tree, which being
kindled through the fatness in it, burns like a taper or torch.

The tapers used at marriages are put here for marriage, because as Plutarch
says, they were wont to carry five burning tapers before the new married
parties.


tapers as a Fault or blot.
crime, Yet she still disliking and detesting marriage as a crime.


Pouring over her beautiful countenance ouercast with a shamefast red, viz.
having her comely countenance ouercast with a modest blush. Synec.
Blushing modestly, At length blushing modestly,


And cleaving [or hanging] on the neck of her father with fauning arms.
And foulding about [her] fathers neck with [her] Fauning arms are put for the
arms of her, fauning. Hypallage.
fauning arms, And foulding her arms about her fathers neck, Makes this
humble request unto him:


Said, That he would grant unto her to enjoy perpetual virginity,
Give.
grant me [my] dearest father To live a perpetual virgin or maid.
to enjoy perpetual virginity: Like as Dianaes father had granted unto her
before.
[Her] father gave this before unto Diana, viz. Jupiter, Dianaes father.
Dianas father gave this to her before. Whereunto her father answers, that
he could consent;

But that yet her beauty hindered that desire of hers.


Her father.
He indeed Obeys or yields.
consents, Peneus her father answers her thus tenderly.
but [yet] [quoth hee] this comeliness [of thine] Hinders [or denies] thee to
live a virgin.
forbids thee to be [that] which thou Wishest.
requirest, And thy form does repugne thy vow.
and thy beauty is repugnant to thy desire.

Phoebus loves and desires the marriages of Daphne, being seen.
This is the speech and relation of Ovid.
Apollo falls presently in love with Daphne, But Apollo presently falls in love
with her so soon as ever he sees her, and desires to marry her.
and as soon as he sees her he desires to marry her:

And what he desires, And as he is inamoured with her: so he hops and
persuades himself to obtain her; although his Oracle deceiues himself.
he hops for: And.
but yet his own Predictions, or foretelling to himself.
oracles do deceive him.

And as the light Hame, or straw.
stubble Are burnt.
is Adoleo is properly to burn sweet things.
wholly set on fire, And here the Poet sets out the vehemence of his love by a
double similitude.
when The awnes or beards of the corn are taken away [or reaped]
the Arista is properly the own or beard of the ear, put for the whole ear
of corn, and that for the corn in it. Metalepsis.
ears are taken away.

As [dry] hedges burn with Torches or firebrands.
brands which Travelers in the dark nights are wont to carry torches or
firebrands of some fat wood with them, to light them, which at the appearing of
the day they cast out of their hands carelessely near hedges, or wheresoever
it happens.
the Passenger or way fairing man.
traveler bechance That even as the stubble is burnt, when the corn is taken
away, or as the hedges are set on fire by brands carelessly left by the
traveler, toward the breaking of the day:


Either Moved, or carried, or laid.
held too near [the^], or left, now Under or about the light [comming.]
about the breaking of the day:

So Apollo.
the God Went away into flames, viz. with the love of Daphne.
is all inflamed, So was the God wholly inflamed.
so He is burnt in his whole breast.
is his whole heart set on fire, and [thus] he nourishes his Vain, whereof he
could look for no fruit or pleasure.
barren love with hoping [still.] And nourished his barren love with increased
hopes.


He Beholds.
sees her Not adorned, or curiously set.
vntricked Hairs.
hair to hang About her neck, or upon her neck.
in her neck. Here also the Poet declares the means whereby his love was thus
kindled more and more.


And what if they Be kemmed, or dressed up, or finely set out.
were trimd? That her very hair, although untrimmed, did exceedingly please
him; and therefore how much more would it, thought he, if it were set out.
quoth he: he sees [her] eyes Shining or glistering with fire.
glistering like the stars: So her eyes glistering like the stars,
he beholds [her] Oscula ab os, seems here to be taken for her little mouth;
which especially commends a virgin.
Her lips,
lips, which it was not sufficient for him to see: He expresses the conditions
of elegant lovers, who thus commend all things in their loves.
Brachia seem to be taken here for the upper part of the arm from the elbow
to the shoulder, as lacertus for the nether part; though they are more usually
taken contrarily.
he praises her fingers and her hands. And fingers, Hands,


And also arms, Arms and wrists bare above the midst.
and wrists being bare More then a middle part, or the half.
above the midst.

If any things lie hid, he thinks [them] better or more excellent.
What other parts are covered, And therefore he thought those parts which were
covered to be far more comely.
he thinks more beautiful; But she flees away swifter then the wind.
she flees swifter then the light wind; Neither would she stay, though he
called her back by most kind and loving words, in this tender sort;
neither stayed she at these words Of [ Apollo] calling her back.
of [him] recalling her.

I pray thee nymph Peneis stay.
Oh nymph Peneis stay, Oh Nymph Peneis stay, I pray thee: I do not pursue thee
as being thine enemy, like as thou do flee from me.
I pray [thee] I do not pursue thee Being an enemy.
[as] an enemy.

Oh nymph stay.
Stay, oh Nymph: [for] so The Yewe lamb.
the Lamb does fly the Wolf, Stay on Nymph, thou fliest from me even as the
lamb does fly the Wolf; and as the Hind flees from the Lion.
so the Hind [flies fro^] the Lion.

So the Pigeons fly the Eagle with [their] A trembling [or flittering] pen or
fether.
tre^bling wings. Or the Pigeons fly the Eagle with their trembling wings.


All [liuing creatures] fleet.
Every [of the^ flie] their enemies; Every one of them flying from their
enemies rage:
[but] Love is the cause to me of following [thee.]
love is the cause of my following of thee. But love is the cause why I thus
follow thee.


Alas, how would it grieve my heart if thou should fall, etc.
[Ah] me wretch, Then after in most lovely manner pitying her simplicity and
danger, still proceeds to stay her by aduising her to take heed,
[beware] thou fall not Prone or groue^ing forward.
on the face, That she fell not on her face with haste,
or That.
lest the Briars or pricks.
thorns May note, or mark, or prick.
should scratch [thy] legs unworthy to be hurt, Nor scratched herself amongst
the thorns; and so he should be the cause of her grief,
and I be the cause Of grief [hurt, or smart] to thee.
of thy grief.

The places Where.
which [way] thou Runnest.
hastest are Sharp or prickie.
rough, For that the places whither she so hasted from him were rough,
run I pray [thee] more Leasurely, or softly.
moderately, And so persuades her to run more moderately; and he would follow
more leasurely after her.
and Inhibite or abate.
stay thy flight; I my self will Follow after thee, or pursue thee.
follow on thee more Moderately.
leasurely. And also to bethink herself well, who it was that now did seek
her love, and to whom she might give content.


Yet Inquire whom thou please, or gin^st content to.
take advice, whom thou may please: That he was not some vplandish clown;
I am not an inhabitour of the mountain, [or a rude fellow dwelling among the
hills or crags.]
I am no vplandish man.

I am not a shepherd. Nor a fieldman tending herds or flocks.
I do not attend [or keepe] here, being slouen like [or vnhandsome] herds of
great cattle or flocks of less [as sheep.]
I do not here clownishly tend Armentum was taken for a company of a cattle, as
was sit to help some way in war (...) the work thereof: grex, for a company
of less cattle, as of goats, swine, or sheep.
herds or flocks. That she indeed knew not from whom she fled, and therefore
she fled from him.
Oh thou rash [maide] thou know not.
Thou know not, oh unadvised soul, thou know not

Whom thou fliest, And then does the Poet most artificially set out Apollo
wooing of her, and alluring her by mentioning his power, descent, knowledge and
inventions.
and For that cause thou fliest.
therefore fliest thou [me.] Delphi, a city and people of Boetia by Parnassus,
where the Oracle of Apollo was.
The Delphian land [or the City Delphos] is mine, [or serves me.]
Delphos is mine,

And Claros is said to be a City of Lycia, dedicated to Apollo, where also was
an Oracle of Apollo.
Claros and Tenedos a city of Lycia, or as some say of Pamphilia, under the
protection of Apollo.
Tenedos, That for his greatness he was Lord of Delphos, Claros, Tenedos,
and The palace [or kingly place] at Patera serves me.
the court of Patera was also a city of Lycia, so called of Patarus the son
of Apollo and Lycia, where Apollo was specially worshipped, whence he is also
called Pataraeus Apollo.
Patera honors me. And the palace of Patera: Being specially worshipped in
all these places.


Jupiter is [my] Progenitour or begetter.
father: And for his descent, that Jupiter was his father.
By me its known.
Its Lies open [or is made manifest.]
known by me both what shall be, For his knowledge, that he was the God of
wisdom, that by him alone, and by his Oracle were all things known, both
past, present, and to come.
and has been, and [now] is: Apollo is fained to be the inuentour of music,
to commend the dignity thereof, as being invented by God, not by man.
Verses agree to strings or instruments by me, viz. I am the God or inuentour
of music, harmony, or melody.
songs consort unto the instruments by me. For his inventions, that he was the
God of music, and inuentour thereof.


And so of shooting, for the sun beams so directly descending upon the
earth, and destroying all noisome vapors.
Our shaft indeed is sure: So the God of artilery or shooting.
but yet [there is] Viz. Cupid^ dart of love, whereby he wounds all.
one surer shaft then Our [shaft,]
ours, Howsoever; Cupid had one surer shaft then his, with which be had so
wounded his heart with love.
That wounded my heart thus with love, which before was free from all affection
thereof.
which has made [these] wounds in [my] empty breast.

Apollo is fained also to be inuentour of physic, because by the power of the
sun all herbs do flourish, whereof is special use in physic for the
health of man.
I am the God and inuentour of physic and surgerie.
Physic is my invention; And finally, that he was the God of physic; for
that physic was his invention.
and I am called The bringer of help and aid.
the helper through the world: And he was counted the chief helper of all
through the world.
the power of herbs Is from me, [or does proceed from my gift.]
is also subject unto us. That all herbs had their virtue and power from him.


Alas for me! And yet he complains of this love,
Daphne, viz. the Laurel, is fained to be thus loved by Apollo, both for the
special use thereof in physic, and also that the Bay-trees are so pleasant
for students.
That love Is curable, or able to be cured by no herbs.
cannot be cured by any Means.
herbs. That it could not be cured by any herbs, nor by all his skill.


Neither the arts do profit the Master, which profit all.
Nor that the arts can do [their] Inuentour or author.
Lord any good, That those arts which were able to cure all others, could do
their Lord no good at all.
which help all [others.]

But [the Nymph] Penels fled from [ Apollo] being about to speak more things.
[him] as he would have But yet notwithstanding all this speech and labor of
the God, the Poet shows how the Nymph still fled more fearfully from him,
and left him with his speech yet imperfect, and not fully uttered.
spoken more, With a fearful course.
Timido cursu. Hypallage, pro cursu timide.
with a trembling pase, and left his words imperfect with himself.

And also.
And then also seemed she Decent.
comely, And how in her flight she continually seemed more fair in his eyes.
the winds Made naked or bare [her] bodies.
made her body bare,

And The winds meeting [her] shaked [or blew] her garments, being against them,
or contrary to them.
the meeting blasts did toss her garments which were against them. For that the
winds, wauing her garments as she ran, uncovered some part of her body.


And the light wind [or ayre] gave her hairs driven behind her [or
backewards.]
And likewise every light puff did blow her hair behind her. And every
light puff of air did toss her hair behind her.


[Her] beauty Is.
was increased by [her] Running, viz. her running made her seem more beautiful.
flight: So that her beauty still increased by her flight.
But for that.
but because the Young.
youthful God Abides not.
indures not any longer To lose his flatteries [or fawning words.]
to spend his pleasing words: And how thereupon Apollo being youthful could
endure no longer so to spend his pleasing words;
and That.
as Cupid himself.
love it self Admonished.
inciteth But as his love incited him, so he made the faster after her.
[him,] This speed and strift of both these two Ovid sets out by a most
lively similitude, taken from the running of the gray hound and the Hare.
the follows her steps His pase being sent forth [or hastened] viz. swiftly.
with his pase more hastened.

As when the gray hound Has seen.
sees the Hare in the Empty or open field.
champain field, That even as when the Greyhound pursues the Hare in the
champaine field, he strains at him with all his footemanship, the Hare as
fast to save his life.
and The dog.
he Seeks [or stretcheth] at the prey with his feet [or running.]
strains at [his] prey by [his] footmanship, He safety.
the Hare Runs for his life.
[seekes] safety.

The greyhound.
The one Like [to one] as it were ready to clean to [the other] viz. close to
the hare, ready to gather him up.
as cleaching the other, The Greyhound as at the back of the Hare
hopes ever and anon to hold [him] and strains his Footsteps or prints of his
feet.
steps His nose being thrust forth to latch the hare between his teeth.
with his snout thrust out. Hopes ever and anon to bear him away,
Straining his steps, and thrusting out his snout to catch him.


The hare.
The other is in Ambiguity doubtfulnesse.
doubt, The poor Hare is always in doubt whether he be catched, or no; and
yet still hardly scapes out of the Greyhounds mouth, and from between his
teeth.
whether he be caught and Is snatched from the very bitings.
is [still] delivered out of [his] very teeth, and Leaves the touching mouths.
scapes the mouth which touched him.

So the God [is] and the virgin is.
So is Apollo and the Maid; So was Apollo and the Nymph.
He [is] swift in hope, viz. hoping to catch her, she for fear of being
catched.
he swift in hope, He swift through hope,
she for fear. And she for fear.


Yet he which Pursues.
follows after being helped by the Pens or feathers.
wings of Cupid.
love, Yet that Apollo was more swift.
For that he was helped forward by Cupids wings.


Is the swifter.
Is more swift, And therefore denied her any rest;
and Will not let her rest.
denies [her any] rest, and Hangs over the back of her fleeing.
hangs even over her back, Being ever hard at her back,
as she was thus fleeing away; And with his very breathing blows her hairs
into her neck, so that she feels his breath.
And blows upon her hair, being dispersed about her neck, or through her
hairs into her neck.
. and blows her scattered hair into her neck.

Her strength being spent, she waxed very pale.
[But] when her strength was spent, Whereupon the Poet shows that her strength
was clean spent.
she waxed wondrous pale: And that so she waxed wondrous pale,
and being ouercomne by the Toil or wearisomnesse.
labor of [her] Quick or hasty course.
speedy flight, And how then being utterly ouercomne with the violence of her
running,
Beholding the Peneian waves, viz. the river Peneus, her father.
looking to the waters of Peneus. She looked unto her father Peneus streams,


Oh father, Crying unto him to help her,
help, If that the rivers had any such divine power, as to be able to succor
her.
quoth she, if [ye] Streams.
rivers have [any] Power of the gods to help.
divine power.

O earth, And after prays unto the earth (since that upon it she had too much
pleased the fancies of others)
quoth she, wherein I have overmuch delighted others with my beauty.
I have pleased over much, Gape, viz. to swallow me up.
open [and receive me], That it would open it mouth and receive her quick, or
at least destroy that shape of hers, which had been the cause of her misery,
by changing it into some other form.
or destroy This figure by changing [it] which makes that I be hurt.
this shape, by changing of it, which causes me to be hurt. That this prayer
of hers was scarcely ended,


[Her] prayer scarcely ended, or she had scarce made an end of this prayer.
[This] prayer scarcely ended, But a senseless benummednesse fell upon her,
A heavy drowsinesse [or senselessenesse] occupies [or possesseth] her joints
or limbs, or sinews.
her joints waxed stark. That her joints waxed stiff;


The Praecordia, signifies properly the fleshy skin called Diaphragma, or the
midriffe separating the heart and lungs from the stomach, liver, and other
bowels: quod cordi praetendantur: but here it is taken for all the inward parts.
Soft.
tender Entrails.
parts about her heart, Her heart, and all her tender inward parts were
compassed about with a thin rind;
are Compassed about or girt in.
girt about with a thin bark.

Her hairs Are changed.
[grow forth] into A leaf.
leaves, Her hairs were turned into leaves;
her arms grow into Branches.
boughs. Her arms grown forth into great boughs;


[Her] foot Even now so swift cleaues [or stickes] with slow roots, viz. her
feet were changed into roots.
ere while so swift, Her feet which even now were so swift, into roots, sticking
fast in the earth.
sticks [in the earth] with immooueable roots:

Her faces [or countenance] have a top.
[Her] countenance becomes the top [of the Laurell] Her beautiful countenance
is turned into the top of the Laurel.
There is in it only a fresh green color.
one shining brightness remains In her, or in it.
therein. And one only fresh green color remaining on her continually.


The Laurel hereupon is said to have been dedicated to Apollo.
And [now] Phoebus, an epithet of Apollo, or the Sun, and signifies pure,
because the Sun is pure from all grosnesse or corruption.
Phoebus loves this [tree:] And hereupon Apollo loves this tree, as he did
Daphne before.
and laying his right hand upon the Stock.
body of the tree, And putting his right hand upon the body of it:


He feels as-yet her breast to tremble under the new bark: viz. her heart to
part or beat.
He still perceiues her heart to beat under the new rind: He still perceiues
her heart to beat under the new bark.


And embracing the branches, And embracing the branches of it with his arms,
as [her] Members or limbs.
body, with [his] arms,

He gives kisses to the wood, yet the wood fled back from the kisses, [or
writhed away from them.]
He profereth kisses to the tree; He proffered to kiss the tree,
but it writhed back from them, But it writhed away from him.


To whom the GOD [thus spake]; And finally how the God honored it with this
graceful speech;
But [yet] since that thou can not be my wife, That since it could not now be
his wife, which he had so much desired, it should surely be his tree. That he
would wear it as an ornament both about his head, his harp, and quiver.
Certainly thou shall be my tree.
thou shall surely be my tree: The Poet elegantly numbers up those things
which are commonly adorned with a laurel bough: as, the bush of hair,
instruments and quiuers, which properly belong unto Apollo.
Oh* Laurel tree [our] lock [or bush of hair,] [our] harpes, our, quiuers,
shall have thee always [as an ornament] or thou shall ever serve to adorn
these.
Oh Laurel tree, [our] bush of hair, [our] instruments, our quiuers shall
Enjoy or wear thee.
have thee ever [for an ornament.] And so it should always serve to adorn all
these.


The Emperors in their triumphs ware a crown of Laurel. The soldiers used
to follow the^, singing [ triumphe] to triumph.
Thou shall be present to the joyful Captains.
Thou shall be an ornament to the joyful Emperors.
Captains, And that moreover the conquering Emperors should ever in their
triumphs wear a crown of Laurel, when as they went unto the Capitol in Rome
with solemn pomp, having all their soldiers following them, crying (...)
triumph, Triumph, Triumph.
when as the merry voice [of the souldiers] shall sing the triumph, and The
chief place in Rome, or the palace of the City of Rome.
the Capitol shall see the Solemn sights or shows going in great length
attending upon, or following them.
long pompes.

Before the posts which stand before the gates of the Emperors palace in Rome,
was set an Oak between two Laurels, to signify that the safety of the common
wealth was to be preserved by the virtue and felicity of the Emperors. The
Laurel was a sign of victory and triumph, the Oak of a Citizen preserved.
Whereupon they whosoever had gotten any famous victory, where carried unto the
Capitol, wearing a Laurel branch or crown; and he who had preserved a Citizen
from the enemy, with a coronet made of Oak. Sab.
Thou shall Ward or watch.
stand even as a most faithful keeper at the Royal posts, viz. before Augustus
palace door.
Emperors posts before the doors, And also that the Laurel tree should stand as
a faithful keeper, before the posts which are set before the gates of the
Emperors houses; to wit thus, an Oak directly before the gate with a Laurel
on either side.
and shall defend The Oak set before the Emperors posts between two Laurel
trees.
the middle Oak.

And as my head is [euer] youthful with Uncut.
vnpouled Hairs.
hair, And finally, that as his head was always youthful, with his hair
vnpouled; so it should have this perpetual honor, to have the branches ever
green, with flourishing leaves.


Thou in like manner always bear This honor, that thou shall be ever green.
the perpetual honors of [thy] Leaf.
leaves.

Apollo had [thus] ended [his speech] the Laurel Nodded unto [or inclined, or
bowed unto him.]
assented with [her] boughs so lately made, And thus Apollo having ended his
speech,
and seemed to have Tossed.
moved [her] top even as [her] head. The Laurel gave her assent, by moving and
inclining her top, as it were, moving her head toward him.


FINIS.

