THE COPY OF A LETTER SENT FROM PARIS TO THE REVEREND FATHERS of the Society
of JESUS, who live in England.

CONTAINING An Answer to the calumniations of the Anti-Coton against the same
Society in general, and Fa. COTON in particular.

Joan. 8. Veritas liberabit vos. The truth will deliver you.

JOHN MORRIS.

Permissu Superiorum. Anno M.DC.XI.

THE PRINTER TO THE READER.
HAVING had this Copy imparted unto me by a very good friend, I would not
(gentle Reader) deprive thee of the pleasure and profit, which thou may reap
thereby; especially since that the contents thereof be no other, but such, as
are already published in print. For which cause also I doubt not, but that the
Reverend Fathers, to whom it is directed, will take this my labor in good
part: hoping that it will be no less pleasing to them, then to others. And it
may be, that this printed Copy may come sooner to their hands, then the Letter
it self; at least it will save them some labor, which otherwise they could
not easily have excused, for the satisfaction of such, as no doubt would be
desirous to have a sight of this discourse; which as thou will see by the
perusing thereof, is an exact and complete confutation of the Anti-Coton.

And that nothing may be wanting, I have thought good to follow my friends
advise, and to tell thee briefly in this my Preface, that the Translator of the
Anti-Coton into English has showed himself no less false and foolish, then
the French Author thereof. For he will needs take upon him to add Fa. Becanus
to those which the other alleges in proof, that the Society teaches it to
be lawful for particular men to kill Princes, because he names Fa. Mariana
among the rest; whereas it is manifest, that Fa. Becanus expressly affirms
in that place, that a Tyrant in respect of his government only, cannot be
flayne by any. And this he affirms to be the doctrine of the whole Society,
yea and of Fa. Mariana also; though he afterward varieth from the rest in the
explication of some particular points, as thou may see in this Letter, which
I present unto thee.

That likewise, which the same Translator produces out of Fa. Gregory de
Valentia is no better, since that this Father expressly affirms, that only
the Commonwealth may restrain and impugn such a Tyrant: which is not to
range him as the Translatour says, in the Catalogue of common murderers and
thieves whom not only the Commonwealth it self, but every particular
Magistrate and officer may apprehend and punish.

And this shall suffice at this time: for I will not enter into that other
discourse, upon what occasion the Canon of the Council of Constance against
Tyrannides was enacted. Certain it is, Art. 15. and 17. Wickliff. in fine
Council. Constant.
that Wickliffe and Husse affirmed, That there was no authority in civil
Lords and Princes, when they were in mortal sin: and, that the people might
at their pleasure, and according to their judgment, correct and punish them, if
they did offend. But I will detayne thee no longer from the Letter it self.

TO THE REVEREND FATHERS OF THE SOCIETY OF JESUS, who live in England.
REVEREND and my dearest Fathers, I hope you think me not so ungrateful, as
to be unmindful of the great charity and kindness, which in diverse occasions
I have received from many, if not from all of you: and therefore am bound not
only to honor your Order in general (which is common to all Catholics) but
also to reverence and gratify your persons in particular; as one who desires
to enter into the number of your most especial friends and children. Since my
coming into these parts (which as you know is not long) I have still been
seeking for a fit occasion to send unto you, but partly the difficulty of the
times, and much more my want of means has hindered me. Now I mean (God
willing) to overcome both; and to send you some notes taken out of a French
Book, written by one of your Fathers in defense of them all, and namely of F.
Coton, who as you know, was lately most bitterly inueighed against, by a
namelesse adversary in a book called Anti-Coto^; which as I have understood,
was also translated and published in English. I do not send you the French
book it self, because I know not, whether all of you understand that language
or no: and besides I am more then half persuaded, that you shall see it
shortly in English; though neither my leisure be so great, nor my French so
good, as to set upon it. Wherefore I write this only by the way of news; and
yet I mean at least to touch all the matters of most importance. And to that
end have thought it best to propose unto my self this method: first to treat
of that which belongs to doctrine. Secondly to bring the solutions to the
personal objections against your Fathers in general. Thirdly to come to
Father Coto^ in particular. Fourthly to say a word of the Hugonots doctrine and
proceedings. Fifthly to add certain observations, which in this book are
proposed to the French Catholics, and to me seem no less necessary for our
English. And lastly to conclude with some part of that which this book
contains in the commendation of the Society, together with my authors
challeng to the Hugonots, and his supplication to the Queen Regent, for the
clearing of all calumniations.

But first of all I must tell you, that hitherto we can hear no news of the
Author of the Anti-Coto^; and it is generally thought, he will not be so good
as his word, to manifest himself upon the coming forth of this answer. He is
commonly supposed to be an Hugonot, and some interpret those 3. letters P.D. C.
to signify Pasteur de Charanton, which is the Minister of a place nigh to
Paris. The dedication of that Book to the Queen Regent was ill taken, though,
as my Author well notes, page 6.
it is no new thing for Caluinists, to make Catholic Princes seem to favor
their heresies; for which cause Calvin himself dedicated his Institutions to
King Francis the first, and Beza placed the picture of his Majesty's Mother of
happy memory, among his renowned personages. But how displeasing and
distasteful this Pamphlet was to the Queen Regent, and her whole Counsel may
appear in part, by the punishment inflicted upon one Antony Ioalin, Page 310.
prior. edit
as is to be seen in the sentence of his condemnation; by which he was
adjudged to be brought forth in his shirt, and to kneel bareheaded with a rope
about his neck, houlding a torch of two pound weight in his hand, and kneeling
in this manner to tell and declare with a loud and intelligible voice, that he
had maliciously and wickedly cast about in many places of this City (of Paris)
certain printed papers and leaves, taken out of a pernicious and malign
book, entitled the Anti-coto^, to trouble the quiet of the said City, and to
raise tumults and seditions: and that he should ask pardon of God, the King
and his Magistrates. After which the said leaves and papers were to be torn
and rent before his face; and he is further prohibited and forbidden to commit
the like offense again, under pain of death; and was presently banished out
of the Kingdom of France for the space of five years. And by this occasion,
there is in the same decree, strait charge and order given to all Printers,
Bookebinders, and Bookesellers under strict and severe penalties, not to print,
bind, sell, or receive any books without due priuiledg and allowance, to the
end, that all such injurious and scandalous books may be suppressed. The whole
condemnation is put down at large, in the later end of this my Authors
Treatise: who also shows (as we shall see in part) with what reason all this
was done: since that this Pamphlet contained more then 300. Page 11. and 13.
lies, about 200. slanders, to omit the rest, which belong either to heresy,
treason, or sacrilege.

And thus much of the Anti-Coton in general: but because I understand, that
together with it came forth in English a Supplication of the University in
Paris, for the preventing of the Jesuits etc. I think it not amiss to tell
you, before I go any further, that all that discourse was feigned by some
Hugonot, or other enemy of your Order. For the whole University has disclaimed
from it, as appears by the decree following which I will set down in Latin
for your selves, and translate it also into English, to save you a labor, if
you think good to impart it to any other. Thus then it is: DECRETVM D.
RECTORIS and Dominorum Deputatorum Vniuersitatis Parisiensis.
CVm aliquos incerti and ignoti Authoris quemdam libellum, aliquot ab hinc
diebus nomine Academiae Parisiensis euulgasse accepissemus: Nos Rector
Academiae super ea re conuocatis Superiorum facultatum Decanis, and Nationum
Procuratoribus, ac sententiam rogatis, praedictum libellum falso Academiae
nomine editum, improbauimus: nec non omnes alios, si qui forte posthac inscio
Rectore, and inconsulta Academia in lucem prodeant. Datum in Congregatione D.
Rectoris and DD. Deputatorum habita in Collegio Sorbonae Caluico, die 16.
Septembris Anno 1610.

Signatum Du Val.

A DECREE OF THE REctor and Deputies of the University of Paris.
HAVING understood that some have published these days past a certain little
Book of an uncertain and unknown Author, under the name of the University of
Paris: We the Rector of the University having called together the Deanes of
the Superior facultyes, and the Procurators of Nations, and asked them their
opinion, have rejected the said little book, falsely set forth in the name of
the University, as also all others, if any chance to be published hereafter
without the Rectors knowledge, and the Universities consent. Dated in the
Congregation of the Rector, and Deputyes held in the College of the
Sorbone-Calui, the 16. of September. 1610.

Signed Du Val.



CONCERNING THE Doctrine of the Society impugned by the Anti-Coton.. I.
IT were in vain to relate largely unto you, what is declared in this book
concerning your doctrine; and therefore it shall be sufficient to touch briefly
some things of more note. Wherefore I find 3. points called in question by
Anti-Coton, and answered or declared by this Father. First concerning the
killing of Princes under the title of Tyrants. Secondly about the secresy of
Confession. And thirdly of Equivocation. In all which he protests in general,
that the Society holds no other doctrine, then the whole universal and
Catholic Church maintayneth, and offers to subscribe to that, which the
University of Paris, and all other Catholic Universities shall decree and
declare, to be true and sound doctrine. But to descend to particularityes, and
rehearse unto you in a word, what he answers to the objections of Anti-Coton:
De Principe cap. 15. page 29.
first he shows, that Fa. Ribadencyra in no sort approves the action of
James Clement who slew King Henry the 3. of France: but only refers the
permission thereof to the just judgment of God. Secondly he declares, that
Clarus Bonarscius speaks only of such Tyrants, Amphitheat. lib. 1. c. 12.
page 31.
as are intruders and usurpers, and no lawful Princes. Thirdly he proves
manifestly, that Card. Bellarmine is egregiously calumniated by the Anti-Coton,
since that he affirms, that he never read nor heard, Apolog. cap. 13. page 32.
that Particides and Assassinats had hope of everlasting life promised them, if
they endeavor to kill Kings. Fourthly he discovers the false inference,
Instruct. Sacerd. l. 1. c. 13.
which Anti-Coton makes out of Card. Tolet; and conuinceth, that the contrary
follows out of his doctrine. For since that he teaches, that an
excommunicate person loses not his jurisdiction, page 36. and 37.
but only the exercise thereof (as his words show, being truly alleged, which
they were not by Anti-Coton) it follows manifestly, that such an one has the
same authority and jurisdiction, which he had before, and therefore cannot be
slain for want of it. Fifthly he affirms, that it is very foolish to
infer, that subjects may kill their Princes, though they were absolved from
their allegiance, more then any other, to whom they never did swear any
allegiance or fidelity at all.

The sixth Author objected by Anti-Coton, Mariana.
is Mariana himself; whom my Author does not wholly excuse: but yet shows,
page 38.
that he deserves not so much blame, as the Protestants and Hugonots would
make me^ believe; for he submits his opinion, not only to the Censure of the
Church, but of any other. He remitteth not the matter to judgment of any
particular subject or other man, to declare who is a Tyrant, but requires
necessarily a public voice, and a common judgment. And whereas many others have
written much more dangerously, then Mariana, yet the Protestants do not so
much as name them; which plainly shows, that their hatred is not so much
against the doctrine it self, as against the man; and this in respect of his
Order; which indeed is one of the chiefest adversaries which heresy has.

In aphorism. v. Clericus page 52.
In the seventh place comes Emanuel S^, who only denies, that the rebellion
of a clergy man against a King is (properly) to be called treason, though it be
a greater sin (as my author affirms) who also notes, that because the words
of this learned Author were obscure by reason of their breuity, they were
corrected in the last edition. Lib. 1. de Clericis cap. 18.
Eighthly Card. Bellarmine is brought in again, but wholly against his meaning,
since that (as my author declares) he teaches, that clergy men are exempt by
Gods law only in Ecclesiastical affairs: Page 53.
and that they are bound to obey the temporal Princes directive laws, and are
exempted from the coactiue, by the Princes themselves, and by the Popes: though
not in all cases. I omit his carping at the word (profane) which the Cardinal
uses once, Page 185.
instead of (lay) because the emphasis and force of his speech and argument did
so require: as likewise, that he affirms, that Kingdoms are only humane
Institutions, and of the law of nations; by which he only signifies, that
they are not immediately instituted and ordained by God.

Page 78.
The last objection, which the Anti-Coton brings against your doctrine in this
first point, is taken out of your rules, or rather out of the Epistle of
Blessed Father Ignatius, which commonly goes printed with them; in which he
wills you to take the commandment of your Superior, as it were the voice of
Christ. To which my Author answers, that if he had read that which follows
in the same place, he should have found that S. Paul gave the same counsel to
all secular servants, in these words: Servants be obedient to your Lords,
according to the flesh, with fear and trembling, in the simplicity of your
heart, as to Christ: not serving to the eye, as it were pleasing men, but as the
servants of Christ, doing the will of God from the heart, with a good will
serving, as to our Lord, and not to men. And for the other clause, which is
alleged out of the same Epistle, where your B. Father exhorts you, to obey
your Superiors without any search or inquiry; my Author recites one place out
of the same Epistle, and another out of your Constitutions, where there is an
express exception made, that you must not obey your Superiors in any thing,
that is sin; though S. Paul thought it not necessary, to explicate that
circumstance, which is allway necessarily to be understood and supposed.

And thus it is plain, that Princes are in no danger by this means; except
any will move that question, which Anti-Coton was not ashamed to ask: whether
the Jesuits were bound to obey their Superiors, Page 175.
if they should command them to lay violent hands upon the King? To which my
Author answers, that this is an uncivil demand, and morally impossible, and
therefore unworthy to be proposed by any honest man to such as are religious:
and yet he adds, that though the Superior should command this a thousand
times, he were not to be obeyed, but to be accused and denounced to the
Magistrate. Thus you see, how frivolous the objections of Anti-Coton are in
this point. Instruct. Sacerd. p, 87. and seq. l. 5. c. 6. n. 16. and 17.
But my Author not content to have answered them all thus particulerly,
alleges diverse places out of the authors of the Society to show the contrary:
as Card. Tolet, who teaches that no man by his own authority may kill any
other, and much loss a King, To. 3. disp. 5. q. 8. punct. 3. Salm. to. 13. in
illa verba Omnis aenima etc. Leon. Less. l. 2. de just. and iure cap. 9 etc.
Inst. moral. part. 2. lib. 12. c. 5. De just. commut. tract. 3. disp. 6. n. ^.
how wicked soever he be, yea though his government were altogether
tyrannical. And the same is affirmed and proved by F. Gregory of Valentia,
Salmeron, and Leonardus Lessius: and finally F. AZor goes further, teaching,
that no tyrant, though he be an usurper, can be slain in this manner: which he
does not only prove by the authority of the Council of Constance, and by
reason; but also alleges F. Jews Molina another of your Society for the
same, and answers to the contrary arguments. And finally this my author
brings a prohibition of your most Reverend F. General, for any of the
Society, under great penaltyes, to teach, that it is lawful, cuicumque
personae, quocumque praetextu Tyrannidis, Reges aut Principes occidere; for any
to kill Kings or Princes, under any pretense of Tyranny. And this shall
suffice for this first doctrine.

Concerning the second, there is not much to be said, for there neither is, not
can be any thing objected against your Fathers about the secret of Confession,
which is not common to all other Catholic Doctors. For which cause my Author
wills Anti-Coton to inform himself of the opinion of the Sorbon, which he
alleges; and if he finds it to be different from that of Bellarmine, and
that any Doctor either of the Sorbon, page 34.
or of any other University have written otherwise, he may boldly condemn him,
with all the Jesuits. Wherefore I will pass over this point, with only reciting
the answer of Rauaillac the Assassinat to the Commissaries, when they told him,
that he was so much the more miserable, if he had taken that wicked act in hand
without the counsel or knowledge of any: to which he replied; page 153.
that the cause why he declared not this his pernicious intention to any
Priest, was, because he was certainly persuaded, that if he had manifested his
purpose conceived against the King, it had been the Priests duty to have seized
upon his person, and to have delivered him into the Magistrates hands, because
they are bound to reveal such secrets, as concern the public good. And this
was the occasion that he would never open it to any, fearing least he should
have been as soon put to death for the will, as for the fact it self. Out of
which my Author infers, that they provide very evil for the safety of
their Princes, who make the common people believe, that their Confessors must
reveal their co^fessions, if they co^teine any thing belonging to treason; for
by this means they take away one of the greatest hindrances of such impious
designs. And if we join to this, the earnest endeavor of those, who will
needs persuade the people, that the Jesuits and many other Catholic doctors
do hold it lawful, for every private man to kill his Prince, if he esteem
him to be a tyrant; it is not easy to conceive what more forcible persuasions
can be used by any to encourage Assassinats to undertake such execrable
attempts. And thus much shall suffice for this second point.

The third of Equiuocatio^ is discussed more largely by my Author: but yet
very pithily, and as briefly as the matter would permit: and therefore I shall
not omit much of his whole discourse. Wherefore first he answers an objection
made against F. Andreas Eudemon-Ioannes Cydonius, Page 56. and seq.
whom the Anti-Coton foolishly calls by another name, and affirms, that he
has very lately written a book, wherein he maintayneth stiffly, that it is
lawful to deceive the Judges in judgment by Equivocation: which (says my
Author) is most false. For contrariwise he teaches, that it is never lawful
to Equivocate in judgment, but that all must answer according to his intention
that asks iuridically: and consequently, that it is never lawful to lie,
because a lie is naturally opposite to truth, and to God who is the life, and
the way, and the truth it self. And for this cause he declares the manner,
how a man may answer without offending God, when he is not bound to answer
him that exceeds his authority, and asks against reason. Of which they take
no great care, who believe in themselves, and endeavor to persuade others,
that lying, slandering, and all other sins are remitted, before they be
committed, and that the Kingdom of heaven can no more be denied us, then to
Jesus Christ himself: and that for our sins (says John Calvin lib. 4. Inst.
cap. 17.. 2.) we can be no more condemned then he.

But to discover better the deprauation of this passage of Eudemon-Ioannes, we
must compare this man's translation accompanied with his lying commentary, with
the text it self. Eudemon Ioannes writes thus: Cum quis nullis justice
indicijs in ius vocatur, quia nemo tenetur seipsum magistratui prodere, idque
lex naturae satis docet etc. this Calumniator translateth: when any is drawn
into question under an unjust judgment, because no man is bound to denounce
himself to the Magistrate etc. which is a manifest corruption and deprauation,
and cannot be excused from malice, if it be not by the latin of Accursius, to
which he appealeth in another place: for who ever heard, that nullis justice
indicijs, does signify, under an unjust judgment, instead of saying, without
any probable conjectures? which the Doctors otherwise call a semi-plene
probation, or half entyre. And from this fine antecedent proceeds the note
and observation, which he draws out afterward, saying: Here note, that he
styles the judgment of the Kings of England exercised against English Jesuits,
an unjust jurisdiction, as if they were not bound to appear before them: for
this is familiar with him, to insert and weaue one lie within another.

After this he answers another objection taken out of that famous and learned
Canonist Martinus Azpilcueta commonly called Nauar, because he was of that
Country: which Anti-Coton mistaking, calls him very foolishly Martinus
Nauarrus Aspilcueta a Spaniard, placing his Country betwixt his Christen-name,
and his Syr-name: and besides adds, that he came out of the same school,
whereas he was a graduate, before the Society began. But the chiefest folly
joined with malice appears in this; that Anti-Coton charge this pious
Casuist to have said, that it is lawful for a man to disse^ble, that he is a
Catholic; Q. 13. in c. Humanae aures 22. q. 5. p. 203. impress. Venet. 1601.
which he most expressly denies in these words: Ex hoc proximo corollario
inferri, peccare mortaliter eum qui dissimulat se ore Catholicum, licet cord
confiteatur se esse talem; that, he sins mortally, who dissembleth him self
a Catholic in word, though in heart he confesses him self to be one.

I omit the rest, and come to the three propositions in which my Author
comprehends all that Divinity teaches concerning this point. 1. As often as
any either Regular or Secular is demanded iuridically, he is bound in
conscience to answer sincerely without ambiguity, and according to the sense
of him who demands. 2. The use of such ambiguityes or equivocations, before
any whosoever, without necessity, or evident vtility, is always a sin, as a
thing repugnant to humane society. To which Card. Tolet adds, that if any
swear of his own accord, without constraynt, he must use words in the common
signification, and to do otherwise, is a mortal sin. 3. When one is asked by
them, who have no authority to do it, he is not bound to answer according to
their intention, when some inconvenience would follow, or some notable good
should be hindered. The lawyers also teach that no man is bound to denounce
himself; and that there is no heed to be taken to him, who will cast away
himself, as being against the law of nature, which is the first of all laws.
The answer, which S. Athanasius made to them, who pursued him, causing his
boat to return to the City, is memorable in this matter: and that of Saint
Francis, which Nauar mentions, is not to be contemned, whatsoever they say,
who make no great account of the doctrine of Equivocations, because they have
no great scruple to lie.

In confirmation of this doctrine thus explicated, Eudemon-Ioannes alleges
not only Syluester and Nauar, Lib. cont. mendac. c. 10. lib. ^2. cont. Faust.
Manich. c. 34. and seq. and lib. 1. in Genesis c. 26. 2. Poster. q. 69. a. 1. c.
2. Hom. 14. in Marc. and 78. in Matt. canon. 26. in eumd. and lib. 9. de
Trinit. 3. part. q. 10. art. 2. Marc. 13.
as this Deceiuer would make men believe, but S. Augustine in 3. places; in the
last whereof he brings in proof of a just Equivocation, the example of
Abraham, who called Sara his sister, although she were his wife, which he
would not have to be known: and the same is confirmed by S. Thomas. He
brings also S. Chrysostom, S. Hilary and S. Thomas, who expound in this
sense the words of our Lord, when he said to his Apostles, that no man knew the
day of judgment, no not the Angels in heaven, nor the Son, but the Father.
He alleges also S. Gregory, who observes that this doctrine was taught by
God himself, when Samuel excused himself from performing the commandment,
which was given him to go and annoint David King of Israel: How shall I go,
for Saul will hear of it, and will kill me? And our Lord said: A calf of the
heard shall thou take in thy hand, and shall say: I am come to immolate unto
our Lord: where we see, as S. Gregory observes, that God appointed him to
cover, and hide his design with words and actions different from the
intention, with which Saul would demand him.

To these might be added diverse examples which my author produces of Jacob,
David, Raphael, Genesis 27.24. 1. Reg. 21.13. Tob. 5.15. Luc. 2.46. Mat. 24.36.
Io. 2.19. Luc. 24.28.
and our Savior himself not once but often. But I will not weary you with
needless repetitions of such things, as you know already. Wherefore I will
conclude this whole paragraph, only noting what is answered to Anti-Coton, who
charge Eudemon-Ioannes and Syluester, that by judgment, which is not true,
but usurped upon those who are not subjects, they mean the judgment of civil
Magistrates upon Clergy men, and principally upon Jesuits, who are not subject
so much as to Bishops. To this my Author answers; that these words conteyne
a double collusion. For both Jesuits are subject to Bishops in the same manner,
that all other Religious men are; and Clergymen whether they be regular or
secular, are subject to all directive laws, and to the coactiue also in
certain enormous cases, which are called (privileged) of which sort are all
treasons, and consequently they are subject also to the Magistrates, who have
the administration and execution of them. And to this effect my Author
answering to the eight dema^d of Anti-Coton, Page 176.
which was: Whether a Jesuit being accused of treason, and kept prisoner
thereupon, may lawfully use Equivocation in his answer? says, that hitherto no
Jesuit has been truly accused of any such crime, nor by Gods assistance shall
ever be hereafter. But if such a case should happen, neither he, nor any other
could lawfully use Equivocation, answering those, who should demand them
iuridically.

THE SOLVTIONS TO the personal objections against the Fathers of the Society..
II.
MY meaning is in this Paragraph, briefly to collect all objections against the
Society, whether they be general or particular, only excepting those against
F. Coton, which are so many as that they may better be produced severally by
themselves. Only I think it needless to say any thing concerning English
affairs, so well known to you, and wherein it seems the writer of this has
not had so full information as might have been wished; and I would not also
willingly insert any thing, which might offend his Majesty or the State,
especially because I know, that this is your desire also: and no doubt you have
seen F. Eudemon-Ioannes his book, which co^teineth much more, then I can
relate out of this. Wherefore omitting this I will relate the rest, in the same
order that I find the^ recited, because my leisure will not permit me to put
them into any other method. I will also chiefly insist upon those, as were
fathered by Anti-Coton upon particular authors, for the other being affirmed
without proof, need no other answer but a bare denial; especially since we
see, that this silence could not proceed from want of will, or from respect to
any, since that in these other calumniations the greatest personages in France
are named.

First then my Author affirms, Page 39.
that the heretics of France give out, that Mariana induced Rauaillac to give
that unfortunate, and execrable blow, and that he knew the book all by heart.
To which he replyeth, and will reply an hundredth and an hundredth times, under
pain of loosing both honor and life that Rauaillac did never see, read, nor
hear the name of Mariana, if it were not, when he was demanded whether he had
read him or not, and he answered, no: and that he knew not who he was, witness
the Reverend Fa. M. Coeffeteau: Coeffeteau
witness also the verbal process it self; yea my author adds, that though
Rauaillac had read this book, yet it is most false, that Mariana teaches the
murder, which this unfortunate parricide committed: yea in some sort it might
have bin wished, that Rauaillac had read Mariana; if he could have understood
him: for Mariana teaches manifestly and expressly (as F. Gretzerus shows)
that a lawful Prince cannot be slain by any particular man, by his private
authority, saying nothing in that point otherwise then the Council of
Constance, and the Decrees of Sorbon. But his error was afterward, when he
determined the public judgment to the approbation of the learned, although in
this also he has limited his opinion to the case of necessity, and to the
common voice, and under this condition, that the said publik judgment cannot be
had by other means. In which fearing notwithstanding, and perceiving in some
sort, that he was gone too far, he submits himself not only to the
censure of the Church, but also to the judgment of any other.

Moreover there can be no other reason given, why no sovereign Prince has
taken exception against him hitherto, but because he speaks only of Tyrants,
in the number of which they esteem not themselves to be. And the Inquisition
of Spain, which otherwise is very rigorous, and the Pope himself, who as a
temporal Prince should be as much interessed as others, have not hitherto
thought, that he deserved any further censure. Finally my Author notes, how
falsely and maliciously Anti-Coton slandereth Mariana, making him to mean by
the judicial sentence, the deposition made by the Pope; and by the approbation
of learned men, the counsel of the Jesuits: of whom Mariana makes no
mention; and neither the Pope, nor the Jesuits are once named throughout those
two Chapters, which treat of this matter.

The next objection of Anti-Coton is not worth the reciting, for your Reverend
F. General and the Visitour also, who gave leave that the book of F. Mariana
should be printed, cannot be blamed at all, since that F. General committed
the matter to the Visitours and Prouincials, as he uses in such occasions: and
he had no reason to use any particular diligence concerning this book, before
he had notice thereof: which as he testifies by his letter to the Provincial
Congregation of France, was only after the book was printed and published, at
which time he gave order presently for the correcting and suppressing thereof.
And this seems one chief cause, why it was never reprinted by any Catholic,
and had been long since extinguished, had not some Protestants been more
diligent and busy, then they needed. The Visitour also was not to examine the
book in particular, but to commit it to three learned men, who partly by the
authority and learning of F. Mariana, and partly by the limitations and
moderations which he uses, might be induced to give their consent; but to
these three, my author opposes 30. or 40. who allowed the 13. or 14. books of
the Society, wherein the contrary doctrine is taught.

The next calumniation against your Fathers is, Page 42.
that they reign in Rome. To which my Author answers, that this lying
slander is injurious to the Cardinals, and his Holiness himself, whom
together with the Jesuits he would make odious to all Ecclesiastical persons.
And besides every man knows, that the Mr. of the sacred Palace, to whom the
censure of books belongs, is of S. Dominicks Order. To this we may join
another, which follows a little after; that your Fathers in France are in
publik hatred or disgrace; Page 44.
which my Author affirms to be false, if by public hatred he understand not
the charitable affection, which the Hugonots bear them, who (if they were
hated by others so much) should not need to take so great pains, to invent and
publish slanderous libels against them, without intermission, velut agmine
facto. But the truth is that both King and Queen do honor them with
particular affection, together with all the Princes and Great men of the
Court, as also the rest of the Nobility, and three parts of the whole Sat,
besides 30. thousand Scholars whose parents cannot be fewer.

But let us hear more. There are alive at this day (says Anti-Coton) in Paris
above 2. Page 48.
thousand witnesses, who will testify, that James Clement ordinarily freque^ted
the Jesuits, and that some of them accompanied him even to the town ditch,
when he went out of Paris to give the blow: But my Author answers the
improbability and absurdity of this calumniation; because there was no sense,
that the Jesuits should show themselves in that manner, as well for their own
safety, as not to bring the other into question. Secondly the Court of
Parliament may seem to have been very negligent, if among 2. thousand
witnesses, they could not get one to discover the accomplices. Thirdly this
calumniator himself may justly be called in question, why he did not bring
forth these witnesses sooner. That which follows of Pope Sixtus 5. his
speech, and concerning Guignard, is affirmed without proof, and some things of
most importance are plain falsifications, and grounded only upon flying and
vulgar reports, as would appear, if the process it self might be seen. Of
which sort that also seems to be of his being placed among the martyrs of the
Society, since that (as my Author testifies) he is not so much as in those
catalogues which were printed at Rome.

Wherefore these and such other fraudulent and malicious inventions are
sufficiently confuted by that, which is certain; that the Fathers of the
Society forsake father and mother, leaving their riches, and hopes of
preferment, go to the Indies and new found land; are used and loved by the
greatest Princes of the world, honored in Italy, France, Spain, Polonia,
Germany, Aethiopia, Iaponia, China; where they have very many Colleges, and
are exceedingly desired in all places, being esteemed one of the chiefest
vpholders of the faith, sent by Gods providence in the same time that Luther
and Calvin apostated; and therefore no marvel, though they be so hated by
Heretics, and persecuted by all Schismatikes. I shall not need to tell the
Reader, how falsely the book entitled De iusta abdicatione Henrici 3. is
insinuated to be written by a Jesuit; since that it is manifest, that they had
nothing to do with it, no more then with that other of Franciscus Verona
Constantinus, who wrote the Apology for John Chastell.

Anti-Coton writes page 28. that F. Fronton du Duc, had affirmed to Monsieur
Cazaubon, that, Page 72.
it were better that all Kings should be slain, then that one Confession
should be revealed. All which notwithstanding is convinced of falsity by a
letter written by Monsieur Cazaubon himself to the same Father in these
words: Quod scribis de Anti-Cotono, ego vero palam dixi apud multos, auctorem
libri, quisquis ille sit, parum sibi, cum illa scriberet, cauisse, quod me non
adierit: si fecisset, numquam dixisset ea te mihi dixisse, quae profecto non
dixisti. Concerning that, which you write of Anti-Coton, I have openly said
before many, that the Author of that book, whosoever he be, provided not well
for himself, when he wrote so, in not repayring to me: which if he had done,
he would never have said, that you said those things to me, which certeynly
you said not.

Page 106.
I will not omit that frivolous objection, that before the Society was in the
world, no man had ever heard, that the lives of Kings were assaulted under the
shadow of Religion; which my Author deservedly calls an outrageous and
injurious lie, joined with a manifest contradiction; for if he speak absolutely
of violent death, can he be ignorant, that the Caesar's, Neroes, Domitians dyed
such? Has he never read the history of that Country, in which they be recited
(an horrible, detestable, and lamentable thing) by dozens? Did not the
Satyricall Poet write long since, as the meanest scholars know, Ad generum
Cereris sine caede and sanguine pauci
Descendunt Reges, and sicca morte Tyranni?


And if he understands it of the pretext of religion, and conscience, is not
this a cloak, that is now worn out, having bin used so much? Is not this the
pretext, under which all factious and rebellious spirits have ever covered
their reuolutions, rebellions and murders? Is not this also to contradict
himself, having in the beginning of his Libell told us, that Jews Duke of
Orleans brother to King Charles the 6. was slain by John Duke of Burgundy, and
this murder defended by John Petit under the color of conscience?

But let him understand it as he will (says my Author) we return it upon him,
and say truly, that before Calvin preached at Geneua and others of his sect at
Rochell, Nimes, and Mont-auban, no man had heard tell either of the conspiracy
of Amboyse for the treason of Meaux; nor the surprising of Orleans, Bourges,
Lions and of so many other Cittyes: nor of the battles of Moncontour, Iarnac,
and S. Denis, or of so many Lance-knights and Reystres called into France
against France; and this against the State, under the shadow of religion, and
by those, who call themselves the Reformers of the world. Whereas the Society is
no more cause of that, which is objected, then the other Religious Orders,
which came into France a little before, or in the same time, or a little after
it. We may likewise say, that before the Apostles began to follow our Savior,
there was no speech of the treason of Judas, and yet it follows not from
hence, that S. Peter and S. John are to be blamed. Must the concurrence of
times communicate all the sins which are committed, to all that are then
alive? If this reason were of force, we should by the same, attribute to the
Fathers the perfection of al mechanical arts, and warlike exployts, of Policy,
Philosophy and Divinity etc. which have flourished since the Society began. As
therefore this would be a great presu^ption in them to attribute these things
unto themselves so likewise it is an intolerable malice in others to impute
unto the^ those infamous atte^pts. I will not go forward (as my Author does) to
confute this fellows fooleries, who compares France to the temple of Adonis,
the Jesuits to Lions and Tigers, and Spain to a desert or wilderness, out of
which they should come.

Wherefore omitting this, and coming to his particular objections, my Author
shows at large out of Fa. Richeome, how improbable it is, that any of the
Society were of Chastels Council, since than no force of torment could ever
bring that young man to confess any such matter, which no doubt God would have
brought to light, how obstinate soever the offe^der had bin, if they had bin
faulty. Anti-Coton also falsifieth the Registers of the Court, making them to
affirm, that Chastell had studied Divinity under F. Gueret; whereas that Father
at that time had not heard one year of Divinity himself. He affirms
likewise out of the same, that Chastell had confessed his being in a chamber of
meditations, painted round about with devils; whereas there was never any such
chamber at all, as they can testify who visited the College, and among an
hundredth thousand Scholars which the Society has had in France, no one can be
produced, that ever did see any such Chamber. And what can be more desired to
show the innocence of the Society, then that F. Gueret himself, who was
thought most guilty, was sent back being cleared by the Court, after both
ordinary and extraordinary examinations?

As for their expulsion, which notwithstanding ensued heerupon, and the Pyramid
which was erected to their disgrace, my Author says, that he will not say with
some, that it proceeded from the sway of the time: nor with others, Pyramidem
Rex stare vetat, ne quaerito causam,
Indicta causa pulsus and ordo fuit:


But he will only say, that he had rather yield to the judgment of the Court,
then censure it: and that there cannot too much rigor be used, to make the
crime of treason detestable. And he adds, that the King himself had a
different judgment from this Calumniator, when treating of their Institute, and
discoursing of the vtility thereof, he said in presence of the Lord Condestable,
and many others, who may remember it: that if the Jesuits had known him sooner,
they would have loved him sooner, and if he had known the^ sooner, he would
have reestablished the^ sooner. And another time, that if he were to be a
Religious-man and live a contemplative life, he would be a Carthusian: and if
he were to live religiously in the world, and employ himself in action, he
would be a Jesuit. This was at Bourgfontaine, in the presence of Monsieur du
Perron Lord de la Guette, and after of his privy Counsel, a personage whom
his Majesty honored with a singular goodwill, together with a great
estimation of his judgment and wisdom.

Much more might be said to this purpose, there being as many proofs of this
great Princes good opinion of the Society, as there have bin Panegyrikes and
Apologyes heard made by him for this Order; yet my author contenteth himsefe
with a piece of a letter written by his Majesty to the Mayor and Magistrates of
Rochell in these words: Chers and bienaimeZ, ayant experimente en plusieurs
villes de nostre Royaume la probite, suffisance and modesty des Peers Jesuits,
lesquels en leurs moeurs, doctrine and commune conversation, font veoir, qu'ils
n'ont rien deuant les yeux que l'honneur de Dieu: Nous auons trouue bon
d'enuoyer en nostre ville de la Rochelle pour y prescher, le Pere Seguiran,
Predicateur de leur Compagnie, reuestu de toutes les qualiteZ, qui peuuent
render un homme digne de cette charge. En date du 17. de Septembre 1606. sign
HENRY, and plus bas, Ruze.

Dear and well-beloved, having experienced in many Cittyes of our Kingdom the
virtue, sufficiency and modesty of the Fathers of the Society, who in their
behavior, learning and common conversation do declare that they have nothing
before their eyes but the honor of God: We have thought good to send to our
City of Rochell to preach, F. Seguiran a Preacher of their Society, endued
with all the qualityes, which may make a man worthy of this charge or office
etc. Dated the 17. of Septembre 1606. signed HENRY, and underneath, Ruze.

Now (says my Author) who is so blind, that sees not, or so wicked that
grants not, that this only judgment ought to be of more force, then all the
calumniations of the world? For this was written after he had heard a thousand
times, in a manner, all the evil of the Society which is said at this day, and
after he had exactly and carefully made trial of them.

For conclusion of this point, I must not omit to tell you, that the decree
against Chastel was not absolutely censured at Rome, Page 42.
as Anti-Coton obiecteth: for the late king was certified by letters from
thence, that they censured nothing belonging to the fact, which they detested
as much as any in France; but that which they censured, was a clause of the
Decree defining and determining, what was heresy, which appertains not to
the Parliament of Paris, but to the Church of God, and the chief Pastor
thereof.

Thus much for Chastell: after whom Anti-Coton returns to one Barriere, who
intended to have murdered the late King before he was admitted to the Crown
by Paris and other Cittyes. And it seems, Page 116.
that he imparted this his design among others to F. Varade Rector of the
College of the Society at Paris: which City being at that time in war with
his Majesty, the Father could not by any means give advise: and yet my Author
does not altogether excuse him in this as his Majesty himself seemed to do,
causing him to be warned, that he should depart from Paris, when he was to come
thither, and never calling him in question for it afterward. This is the most,
that can be probably believed against this Father. For the rest, which
Anti-Coton affirms, of his persuading and adiuring Barriere by the Sacraments
of Confession and Communion, conteyneth many absurdities, contradictions and
falsifications, as my Author shows: and it is certain, that the R. Father
Seraphin Banqui, who went to his Majesty expressly to discover this plot,
avouched, that Barriere himself had told him, that a Father of the Society at
Lions affirmed, that he could not enterprise the killing of the King without
damning himself. And his Majesty himself often testified, that he had first
word of that attempt from one of the Fathers.

That which follows of the Jesuits running from chamber to chamber crying:
Page 119.
Surgefrater, agitur de religione; Rise brother, our Religion is in danger; is
evidently convinced to be false by the circumstance of the time, since it is
said to have been betwixt 8. and 9. of the clock at night, when the Jesuits use
not to be in bed. And besides, if it had bin true, what could Anti-Coton or any
other calumniator have made of it? But he wants matter, which makes him go
to the gra^mer scholars, and accuse them for making compositions against the
King, before he was admitted, in time of the league, which may very well be
true in part; but it is false, that after the reduction of Paris to the Kings
obedience, there was any such matter, and much less, that any was forbidden to
pray for him: but many are yet living, who can testify, that there was earnest
prayer made for his prosperity, and in particular the R. Father Clement du Puy,
their Provincial in the Province of France ordained, that the Pensioners of
the college of Clermo^t, who were about 200. should every day in the morning
say the prayer, Quaesumus omnipotens Deus, vt famulus tuus Henricus Rex noster
etc.

Page 121.
All the objections, which are made against Alexander Hayus a scottish Father,
appear sufficiently to be fictions, by his delivery out of prison; as likewise
that which he adds of the Fathers sending children into far countries,
since that he whom he names, dealt with no Jesuit, (for the party charged as
the seducer, was not of the Society at that time.) That which follows were of
more importance, if it were true; and therefore no marvel though it be so
evidently co^uinced of falsehood. Anti-Coton brings the Duke of Sully for a
witness, that this Noble man himself persuading the late King not to recall
the Jesuits, was answered by him, Give me then security for my life; which my
author, not without cause, calls a slander died in crimson. For the said
Duke has testified, both before the Queen herself, and the Lord Chancellor,
and the Lord Villeroy, and many others, and in particular to F. Coton, that he
remembers nothing of that, which the Anti-Coton makes him say to the King, or
the King to him.

After some other objections concerning England, Page 123.
which I am resolved to omit, at length he comes to the Reverend Father
Baldwin now in the Tower, and is not afraid to affirm, that he had some
intelligence with Francis Rauaillac, who (says he) had been in Flanders
somewhat before his cursed enterprise. Whereas my Author shows, that Rauaillac
was particulerly asked, whether he had been at Bruxels; to which he answered:
that he was never out of the Kingdom, and that he knew not where Bruxels was.

From England he goes to Polonia, affirming, page 124.
that the Jesuits have persuaded that King to use such violence, that he has
been in danger to loose his Kingdom: which my Author calls a manifest
falshod, for Polonia was never in the memory of man so prosperous; nor ever
King more beloved, and respected, or more peaceable in his Estates; yea he has
entered into Moscouia, where at this present he obteyneth very great victories.
And as for Sweden, every man knows, that his uncle Charles withholdeth it
against all right and justice, not in respect of the Jesuits, about whom there
was never any question; but by reason of the Dukes heresy and ambition:
showing by his proceeding (which is most certain) that out of the Catholic
Church there is no true faith at all.

Ibidem.
That which follows of Transiluania is a mere fiction; neither can he produce
any such letter, as he feigneth of the Baron of Zerotin; neither were the
Fathers ever suspected of any conspiracy against that Prince; yea F. Alfonsus
Carillo was his Confessarius, until he sent home the Lady Catherine of
Austria, and did put his cosen Balthazar Battorius to death. And at this
present al (besides the heretics) do much desire that the Fathers of the
Society may return to Coluswar, otherwise called Claudiopolis, and to Fayrwar
otherwise called Alba-Iulia. By all which this slander is made manifest, but by
nothing more, the^ by that, which is added, of putting one of the Fathers to
death; for never any heard of any such, besides F. Martin Laterna Confessarius
to King Steven Battorius, who being sent by his Majesty into Transiluania, was
taken upon the sea, and put to death by the Pirates of Duke Charles, who
styleth himself King of Sweden. Because this calumniator could find no color
to charge the Society with any thing against the house of Austria, he takes a
new course, and will needs give the reason thereof to be, because their
General is a Spaniard, to whom they vow blind obedience. Page 78. 81. and 125.
But my Author shows, that it is false, that the Generals of the Society are
always Spaniards, as appears by the last, who was of Liege; and although this
who is now, be a Neapolitan; yet he is of the noble house of Aquauiua, son to
the Duke of Atri, Uncle to the Cardinal Aquauiua now living; which family has
always been esteemed to favor the French. It is also untrue, that in the Society
the first vows are made to F. General, but immediately to the Superiors of
that place, which in France are Frenchmen, who cannot be thought less
faithful to their King, then the Spaniardes to theirs: and how their vow of
obedience is to be understood, has bin already declared.

There remains yet Venice, Page 126.
concerning which Anti-Coto^ charge the Jesuits to have been the beginners of
the last troubles betwixt that Commo^-wealth and the Pope: whereas it is
manifest out of the books of Friar Paul and the rest of that crew, that the
cause of those difficulties were, for that his Holiness would not permit the
real libertyes, and personal immunities of the Church to be infringed and
violated: for which cause he had imposed a local and personal interdict upon
that State. Neither did the Fathers of the Society proceed any further, then
the Capuchins and Theatins, who took it not to belong to them, to censure the
Popes proceedinges, but rather to obey his Decrees, until the Commonwealth
had made their remonstrations, and supplications to his Holiness. And whereas
this calumniator adds, that the Jesuits wrought against the Commonwealth at
Rome; my Author shows, that the late King of France (in all men's judgments) a
most judicious Prince, commanded the proofs of this, and other objections to
be examined; but nothing could be gotten, but silence, as that renowned Prelate
the Cardinal of Ioycuse, to whom this whole affair was committed by his
Majesty, can witness.

Finally the Society can be no more blamed for having legacies and lands in
that State, then in any other, or then all other Religious Orders: Yea, if we
speak of their house in Venice it self, it was not capable of any rent, or
land whatsoever. And here my Author has just cause to wish all men to inform
themselves thoroughly of the truth before they give ear to the calumniations
and falls reports which the enemies of the Society are wont to raise. This
(says he) was the lesson, which our great Henry gave to all those, whom he
saw ill affected unto them, saying often. That it was sufficient to know the
Jesuits, for to love, esteem, and defend them. In so much, as all the Princes
and great Lords of France can testify, that they have often heard him speak
of the Society with such great affection, and such honorable commendation, as
could be given to any Religious Order.

Having thus wandered up and down foreign Countries, Page 128.
this Libeller returns home to France, and for conclusion of his second
Chapter heapeth up ten lies in one narration, concerning the erection of a
College of the Society in Orleans. First, that they sent one of their Fathers
to preach in that City the time of Lent; whereas it is manifest, that this
provision of Preachers belongs to the Bishops themselves; and besides he
mistaketh Lent for Aduent. Secondly he affirms, that the Citizens were not
well content, nor satisfied with the Fathers preaching; whereas it is certain,
that his Auditory was very great, and his sermons much applauded; in so much,
that he could hardly excuse himself from preaching the next Lent also,
although there was another very eloquent, and learned man appointed. Thirdly
(says Anti-Coton) in steed of studying, this Fa. busied his brains in
searching out and intertayning such, as had yet in their hearts any remainder
of the old leven of the league. This is a most malicious lie, and such an one,
as only the Hugonots will believe, whom the late King called the leaguers of
his time. And the truth is, that the Father was always ordinarily either in
the Church, or else in his chamber, as those of the Lord Bishops of Orleans
house, where he had his lodging, will testify. Fourthly (says this
calumniator) this Jesuit gave out, that it was the Kings will, that they
should be established in that City; whereas the King had dispatched his Letters
Pate^ts to this purpose above four months before, and had sent them to the
Lord Bishop, and Mounsieur Decures. Fifthly he says, that the Jesuits talk
was of driving out the Monks of S. Sampson, that they might get their Church.
But my Author answers, that this treaty was in the behalf of the Reverent
Fathers of S. Francis of Paula his Order, commonly called Minims or Bon-homs,
and that all was done with due and lawful circumstances, and with consent of
the parties: and if afterward some desired, that it might be employed for a
College of the Society, it was with the same conditions. Sixthly, like unto this
is that which follows of displacing Monsieur the Mareshall of Chastres
Governor of that City etc. for there was no such matter. Seue^thly, he
adds, that the Fathers used much importunity with the King to this effect:
whereas it was his Majesty's own motion to prefer Orleans before Chartres,
because he thought that a College would be more profitable in that City, in
respect of certain families, which were reported to have changed their
Religion not long before. Eighthly, the next lie is, that his Majesty granted
this College under condition, that the Citizens should be brought to give
their consent: whereas in deed, there is no such word in the Patents, which are
absolute, with commendation of the Society, and testimony of the good, which
their Colleges cause in all parts. Ninthly he brings in one Touruile an
Advocate, proving that in France a man could not love the King and the Jesuits
both: but this is altogether false, and it would prove, that neither the
Cittyes, and Parlaments, which have received, and do willingly retain the
Society, should love their King; yea that the late King loved not himself,
since that he showed the^ such extraordinary kindness and favors, founding the^
Colleges in diverse places at his own charges, and resolving to place them in
all the principal Cities of his Kingdom. Finally he concludes, that all the
Citizens concurred jointly in the same opinion, co^cluding, that the Society
should not be admitted: whereas indeed they were neither all of one opinion, nor
gave an absolute denial; but only excused themselves for want of means,
offering to receive them willingly, if his Majesty would provide for them.
Neither is it probable, that they would answer otherwise, unless we should
measure them by the Hugonots, who possessed that City in former times. And
thus we see, that my Author had reason to affirm, that Anti-Coton must needs
be very shameless, since that he calumniateth so impudently; and ill
habituated, since he does it so often: and finally of little talent, since he
does it so folishly.

In his third Chapter Anti-Coton goes about to show, Page 145.
that the Fathers of the Society were guilty of the murder of the late King of
France, which is so incredible a calumniation, and so easily convinced by many
testimonies, and circumstances, that it is a wonder how any could be so
impudent, as to avouch so manifest an untruth: but yet let us examine, at least
so much as may carry any color of truth, of which sort, that which he
affirms of Fa. Comelet is not; and the words of Fa. Hardy are wrested to a
wrong sense, for he only affirmed, that Princes were subject to death and other
casualties, as well as meaner men.

In like manner that which he brings against Fa. Gontier is only proved by
the testimony of a dead man, or else by such a witness, as openly gives him
the lie, I mean Monsieur de la Grange Secretary to the Prince of Condie, and
the matter is clear in it self: for he makes Fa. Rector at Perigeus, where
those words should be spoken, Fa. Saphore, which is altogether false.
Monsieur de Guron, whom he sta^dereth to have dealt with the Preachers in
Paris, that they should preach seditious doctrine, is a very virtuous and
devout gentleman, and will maintain against him and all the world, that this is
a mere slander: yea the Duke of Sully avouches, that it is most false, that
ever the Curates of Paris came with any complaint to him, either in this, or
any other matter. And if Monsieur de Guron had given any such seditious
discourses, they would have been published, as well as others of less importance.

But above all, the falsitie of this calumniation appears, in that he makes
the late King not only to dissemble the matter, but also to reward the chief
malefactor by making (as he says) F. Gontier his Preacher, and giving him a
pension: both which are also most false. For this Father was no more the Kings
Preacher afterward, then he had been before. And as for the pension, not only
he, but Fa. Coton himself never had any, it being against the institute of the
Society, that any of them should take any thing in recompense of the exercise
of their function, and much less, that any of them in particular should have
any rent, revenue, or pension. True it is, that the late King esteemed highly
the rare qualities, and excellent talents of F. Gontier, and especially his
great zeal, courage, and constancy in Gods cause: and all that ever the Lord
Mareshall Dernano said of him, was; that he could have desired, that the
remonstrances made before his Majesty at S. Geruas, had been in camera
charitatis, as his words were, witness the Queen Regent her self, who was
present and heard them.

Page 147.
Thus much for Fa. Gontier: after who^ Anti-Coton comes to Fa. Aubigny, and is
not ashamed to avouch that Rauaillac justified unto this Father, that he had
told him in confession of his intention to give a great stroke, showing him the
knife, having an Heart engraue^ upon it; whereas the Registers of the Court it
self do witness, that Rauaillac being demanded about F. de Aubigny, answered,
that he came to him one day after Mass in the month of January, he being in
the Church, and that he declared unto him certain visions: and he deposed,
that the said Father answered him, that he should make no account of them,
fearing least his head were crazed; willing him to say his beads, and that if
he had any thing to say to the King, he should go to some Noble man to procure
audience. Upon which the said Father and he being confronted the eighteenth of
May, he charged him not with any other thing, only adding, that the Father had
bidden him to have care of his brain, and to eat some good broathes, that he
might be able to sleep. And the day before, the Judges having enquired of him,
whether he had not demanded of F. de Aubigny, if he ought not to confess such
visions, as exceeded the common course, and namely about killing Kings: the
said offender answered, noe. Being demanded, whether he had no other speech
with him, and if he never saw him but that time: he likewise answered, noe.
Being demanded again, when the Father was present, why he went rather to him
then to any other: he answered; Because he had understood, that this Father was
a friend to the brother of a certain Religious Woman.

Besides at other times being urged by the Judges to declare those, who had any
way assisted him in this crime, or to whom he had imparted his purpose: his
answer was, that since his being in prison many had provoked him to make this
acknowledgment, and in particular the Lord Archbishop of Aix: but he was never
moved by any, neither did ever any speak with him of any such matter. And the
27. of May his sentence being pronounced, and he exhorted to prevent the
torment by confessing the accomplices, he took it upon his soul, that neither
man, nor woman, or any other besides himself knew of it. And being laid upon
the torment, he beseeched God with a loud voice to have pity of his soul, and
to pardon his offense; but yet not otherwise, then if he had not concealed any
thing. Which he often repeated afterward under the oath, which he had made unto
God and the Court. And before he was delivered to the Doctors, he likewise
said, that he was not so miserable to retain any thing: if he had not declared
it already: knowing well, that he could not obtain that mercy of God which he
expected, if he should conceal any thing, and that he would not have endured
the torment inflicted upon him, if he had known any thing more. And being in
the hands of M. Gamache and M. Filsacke Doctors of the Sorbon, he gave them
leave to reveal his Confession, and to print it also; that it might be made
known to all, which the said Doctors declared to be: That none but he had
given the blow, that he had not been entreated, solicited, nor induced by any,
neither had he imparted the matter to any. He acknowledged that he had
committed a great fault, for which he hoped mercy at Gods hands, it being
greater then his sin, but that he would not expect any, if he had concealed
any thing. And finally, immediately before his execution, he confirmed with an
oath, that he had discovered all, and that not any in the world had induced
him, nor he spoken, or imparted the matter to others. And he always persisted
saying the same in the midst of his torments: yea after he had been drawn
half an hour with horses, he notwithstanding perseuered in this denial.

That which Anti-Coton says of the Preachers, Page 150.
who might seem to have moved him, is a mere fiction: for he never made
mention of them, but when he affirmed, that if he were so much forsaken by God,
as to die without declaring his co^plices, he would not think to be saved, nor
that there was any paradise for him: because says he, Abyssus abyssum inuocat,
as he had learned of the Preachers, and therefore this would be to double his
offense. Besides if he had blamed the Preachers, as Anti-Coton affirms; he
could not mean those of Paris, since that it appears by his confession, that
he departed from Angoulesme the last time but one of his being there, 13. days
before Christmas, and returned again before Lent: since that, he confessed and
communicated at Angoulesme the first sunday in Lent, and did not set forward
from thence to Paris, until Easter day; and came not to Paris until a week
after: by which it appears, that he was not in Paris in the time either of
Aduent, or Lent. And finally this accusation belongs no more to the Jesuits,
then to all other Preachers, and may be applied by a Calumniator to any of them
in particular.

It were but a folly to stand upon that report, Page 158.
which he affirms to have been of the Kings death at Prage and Bruxells a
week or fortnight before it happned. For to omit the like examples, which my
Author produces, who sees not, that such rumors use to run upon diverse
occasions? though indeed the letters which Anti-Coton alleges from Prage to
this effect, are feigned, as the son of him to who^ they were said to be
written, testifies. The Provost of Petiuiers affirmed by this Calumniator to
have been in faction a Jesuit, Page 160.
does not any way belong to them; and was as devout, as Anti-Coton himself
seems to be, not having been at Confession for the space of eight years.

Page 161.
The smiling countenance, which this slaunderer attributes to the Fathers, were
indeed true tears, as those, to whom they imparted their griefs, can
testify: and when they were presented by Monsieur de la Varanne, who was
commanded by the Queen her self to bring them, F. Coton who spoke in all
their names, was interrupted with his own and the other Fathers sighs and
tears.

It is also false, which some give out, that a principal personage, and
officer should will them when they went to Fleche (to carry the Kings heart) not
to forget the tooth which Chastell had struck out some years before. For the
Fathers did not so much as see, or speak with that personage, and he was to
wise to let any such words escape him. No less foolish, and false is the next
objection concerning the Fathers being absent from the Kings Funeral, as
appears by the certification which follows: I the underwritten do certify
those, to whom it appertains, that the Fathers of the Society residing in
Paris, came together to S. Germain of Auxerois, which was the place appointed
for the orders of Religion to meet in, the day of the Funeral of the late
King, the great Henry the fourth, and presented themselves to me, that they
might have a place among the rest of those, who assisted in the Funerals: which
was denied the^, least it might cause confusion, since they were not inserted
in my roll, because it is not their custom to assist in such actions any more
then the Carthusians and Celestines. Which when the said Fathers had
understood, they went to the Louure, and into the Hall, where the body with his
partraiture lay, and there they sprinkled holy water upon it, and prayed for
the soul of his Majesty. Dated in Paris the 29. of September, 1610. Guiot
Rhodes Great Master of the Ceremonies of France.

There remains yet the objection of Monsieur the Mareshall of Chastres, Page
164.
General of the forces sent from France to Cleues, whom Anti-Coton affirms
to have been diswaded from that journey by the Jesuits. But this Nobleman has
discharged them fully and plainly from this calumniation in the presence of the
Queen Regent, the Earl of Soissons, and of all the Court; and besides has
given the Fathers a testimony to the contrary under his own hand. Thus this
Calumniator ends his third Chapter, and in the fourth I find nothing to this
purpose.

In the fifth he inueigheth chiefly against F. Coton in particular, Page 243.
only at the later end he has an objection or two concerning the riches and
want of learning of the Society in France. To which my Author answers
briefly, that excepting the College of Fleche which was founded and endowed by
the late King, there is not any house in all France, in which every one may
have allotted twenty pounds for his expenses by the year, accompting not only
their meat, drink, and apparel, but also their Libraries, Infirmaries,
Sacristies, Viaticums, intertayning of strangers and other public charges. In
proof whereof, and for prevention of this slander, Fa. Coton has given a
note of all the goods, which the Society has in France, to the Lo.
Chancellor, the Lo. of Sully and the Secretaries of Estate, granting and
yiedling all that is not specified in that Roll, to any that can find it out.
And whereas Anti-Coton speaks of above an hundred thousand Crowns in rent,
procured by the Society in the space of seven or eight years since their
Reuocation: My Author in his own and the rest of the Fathers names, makes a
free gift and donation to him of all, that shall be found to belong to the
Society in France, surmounting the sum of fifty thousand, upon this
condition, that he will supply so much, as wants to make up that sum. And
as for the Nouiship in the Suburbs of S. Germain, within the precincts whereof
Anti-Coton says a pretty Town might stand: the truth is, that the whole house,
courts, and gardens are not above 30. fadome square.

Page 247.
Finally he concludes his whole railing discourse with telling us, that the
Fathers of the Society are ignorant persons, and will overthrow learning, and
is not ashamed to charge the Lord Cardinal Peron, as Author of this slander.
But it were a folly to say any thing in the disproof thereof, the whole world
being witness to the contrary, which would far sooner approve that encomium
of the Lo. Abbot of Tiron, who as Monsieur Yueteaux the Kings master reports,
was wont to say, that Imperium litterarum est penes Iesuitas. The empire of
learning is among the Jesuits. And the concourse of scholars to their Schools
does testify the same, which this foolish fellow would persuade men to proceed
from not taking any thing, either for washing or for candles: as though the
flower of the nobility would be moved with such toys: and this could be a
motive for so many Parents, as in time of the Fathers absence from France, sent
their children to their Schools in other Countries.

For conclusion of this Paragraph it will not be amiss to note, how falsely
Anti-Coton in his Epistle Dedicatory to the Queen Regent, avouches these his
calumniatio^s of the Society, to be the testimony of her Majesty's highest
Courts of Justice, the consent of the greatest part of her Clergy, and among
them, even of the Sacred Faculty of Divinity, and in a word the common
universal outcry of all her people. For it appears by that, which has been
said, that this is so far from being true, that no one honest, or civil man
can be produced for the proof of any one of these slanders. And besides my
Author notes, that the Registers, and proceedinges of the Court convince the
contrary. Page 21.
To which he adds the funeral orations of Monsieur d'Angeres, Monsieur de
Ries, and Monsieur d' Air: the attestations of Monsieur de Paris: Page 309.
the deputation which the Clergy has lately made in the person of my Lo.
Archbishop of Ambrun for the assistance of the reestablishment of the College
of Clermont: the assembly of the Doctors of the Sorbone the 23. of August, and
those of the two Faculties of Physic, and the Cannon Law in the month of
September following, the year 1610. in which they agreed that the Fathers of
the Society should teach with them in Paris, being incorporated to the
University. Page 306.
All which we might finally confirm with the Letters Pate^ts of this King; for
the establishing of all that, which his Father granted in favor of the Society.

THE SOLVTIONS OF the objections against Fa. Coton in particular.. III.
HITHERTO we have seen what Anti-Coton was able to say against the Society in
general: now we come to F. Coton in particular, against whom this malicious
mate shows exceeding great spite and malice; but with no more truth nor
probability, then we have found hitherto. Page 134.
And first he charge him with certain interrogations made to a certain
possessed person, which he affirms that the Father himself had written in a
ticket, and through oversight had given them to Monsieur Gillot a Counselour,
in a book which he had lent him: But my Author conuinceth this calu^niation to
be false by many reasons. For first the exorcismes of this maid were public,
and before many at S. Victor, at S. Genouefa, and at S. Nicolas du Chardonet,
and therefore there would not want witness of these interrogations, if there had
been any such. Secondly it is denied, that ever Monsieur Gillot lent any book
to F. Coton, neither does the Father remember, that ever he saw him, and much
less is it likely that he had any familiarity with him, especially having
often heard, that he had always showed himself an earnest enemy to the Society,
though without all cause. Thirdly when this fable was told the late King by a
Noble man of the pretended reformed Religion, the said Father offered to give
another writing of his own hand, that it might be confronted with that ticket,
which notwithstanding would not be accepted. And Monsieur du Perron one of the
Kings privy Counsel having considered the ticket attentively, maintained that
it was not Fa. Cotons hand, from whom he had seen and received many letters.
Fourthly these false witnesses are at variance among themselves, for some of
them make these interrogations mount to the number of 30. 40. 50. 60. and more,
as may be seen in diverse printed copies; others make the^ to be fewer, and
Anti-Coton himself has not only not specified more then 5. but also by
calling the paper wherein they were written, a ticket, shows that they could
not be many more, and therefore no marvel, though the late King used to jest
at the matter, saying: that it would prove like the library of Madame de Mont
pensier.

And that which is added, that Fa. Coton went to these exorcismes moved with
curiosity, is as false; for he was oftener then once commanded by the Queen,
who dealt with the Lo. Bishop of Paris to that end; and yet the Fa. yielded
not, before he had represented some difficulties, which he found in the matter.
By which it appears, that he was not drawn by any curiosity, and much less
by any familiarity he had with spirits, as this impudent Fellow is not ashamed
to suspect; and upon these foolish suspicions to make very odious illatio^s
against him, which redound no less to the injury of the late King, as my
Author shows. But that there was no such curiosity, familiarity, nor
interrogations, might be proved by the Pastors and Religious me^ of the places,
where these exorcismes were made. To whom we may add Monsieur Forget a Doctor
of Sorbo^, and many Princes and Lords of the Court, to omit the rest. And
finally the Lord Bishop of Paris knows, that Monsieur de Laual was Catholic,
before Fa. Coto^s going to these exorcismes; and therefore it is incredible,
that the Fa. would demand what should be the issue of his conversion, which
notwithstanding Anti-Coton sets down in the first place.

Page 140.
The next objection concerning the Spaniard, who should come addressed to Fa.
Coton, with intention to kill the King; is such an impudent, and incredible
slander, that it deserves no answer, since that it is against all reason and
sense, that Fa. Coton, or any other of his coat should consent to the death of
him, who had been so great a favorer and promotor of their whole Order. And
besides Monsieur de Lomenye Secretary of Estate, and in particular of the
Kingdom of Nauar and of Bearne, has testified in the presence of the Lord
Bishops of Mascon, and Sisteron, that all the letters of Monsieur de la Forze
Lieutena^t for the King in Bearne passed through his hands, and that he never
saw any such matter in them, out of which notwithstanding, this calumniation is
only avouched.

Thirdly Anti-Coton obiecteth, that F. Coton had written the late Kings
Confession into Spain, Page 142.
and for that cause was in disgrace the space of 6. weeks: And that the young
King, who now is, hearing thereof, said to the Father, that he would tell him
nothing, because he would write it into Spain, as he had done his Fathers
Confession. But first noe man ever perceived, that Fa. Coton was in disgrace
with the late King for the space of 6. hours, neither were it any way
probable, that his Majesty would have continued to confess unto him, until
his dying day, if he had either known, or suspected any such matter. True it
is, that F. Coton himself requested the King oftentimes to make choice of
another Confessarius, and in particular of the Lo. Archbishop of Ambrun, by
reason of his great virtue, and singular piety, using the help of his brother
also to that end: but his Majesty answered him twice, that he would never take
any other. And surely it is strange to see, how this Calumniator is not ashamed
to accuse Fa. Coton now of revealing the Kings Confession, no more then he was
before to charge Fa. Fronton with a speech which might seem too strict and
rigorous in this point. As for that of the young King, the Queen herself has
taken the pains to make inquiry, being astonished to hear so strange a
report. And she has found the truth to be, that his Majesty never heard of
any such matter, and much less used any such words to Fa. Coton, who retayneth
the same place now, which he had before in his Fathers time.

Fourthly this Calumniator adds, Page 150.
that Fa. Coton having obtained leave to speak with Rauaillac in prison, bid
him take heed, least he did accuse the innocent, fearing least he would accuse
the Jesuits. But first Fa. Coton went not to the prison of his own accord, but
by the Queens commandment, as all the Court knows. Secondly he used no such
words to Rauaillac, but that unfortunate wretch complaining, that they would
make him accuse either the Jesuits, or the Princes to who^ he had never
imparted his design; the Fa. replied in these words: Thou deceauest thy
self, none would have thee to accuse the innocent, but every one desires that
thou should say the truth. And as thou should be in the way of damnation,
by accusing the innocent: so likewise thou shall be in the same case, unless
thou reuealest the culpable. Thou must tell the truth, if thou desire to see
his face who has said; I am the way, the truth, and the life. And of this are
witnesses all, that were present at that time, who can also testify (which
this Calumniator was loath to speak of) that the miserable Parricide was moved
by Fa. Cotons speeches to acknowledge his fault, which he had not done till
then; and to shed abundant tears, desiring to have a Confessarius, by which
occasion the Fa. said unto him: If thou had imparted thy tentation to a good
Confessarius, he would have used the same reasons and persuasions to thee which
thou have heard of me: he would have made thee to have known thy sin, and
have persuaded thee to have given it over. To which the poor wretch answered:
To whom would you have had me gone to Confession? he would have accused me,
and caused my death. Thou deceauest thy self (said the Father) a prudent
Confessarius would have diuerted thee from this heinous crime, he would have
put the life of the King in security, and thine also.

Now we come to the last Chapter of Anti-Coto^: for I think not any thing which
he says in his fourth Chapter concerning Fa. Cotons book, worth the noting,
unless I should tell you of that lie and slander, wherein he avouches, that
the King commanded F. Coton to write against F. Mariana; Page 43.
which my Author denies, and disproueth at large in the beginning of his
book: wherefore omitting this, let us come to that objection concerning his
living in the Court, Page 223.
which he says is a scandal to the whole Church, being a thing contrary, not
only to the Institution of all Monks, but particulerly to the Rules of the
Jesuits. And Cardinal Tolet houlds it for a general truth, that a Religious
person, who lives in the Court is excommunicate, albeit he has leave of his
Superior.

To which my Author answers, that in the third Article of the Societies
establishment in France, approved by the late King, his Counsel, and Court of
Parliament; it is ordained, that those of the Society shall have ordinarily one
of their Order about the King, and he must be a Frenchman, with sufficient
authority to serve his Majesty as a Preacher, and to inform him of their
proceedings, as occasion shall be offered. Wherefore if F. Coton should depart
from the Court, another of the same Society must necessarily come in his place.
Secondly my Author says, that the Fathers of the Society are no monks; yea
their Institute and functions are altogether different from those, which a
solitary life requires; and to this end, he alleges the second and third
Rule of the Su^mary of your Constitutions: The end of this Society is to attend
with Gods grace, not only to their own salvation and perfection, but also with
the same grace to employ themselves with all their forces, to the salvation and
perfection of their neighbors. And a little after: It is proper to our
vocation to pass into diverse countries, and to live in any place of the world,
where Gods greater service, and the help of souls is hoped for. According to
which (says my Author) we have seen, and by Gods help shall see, what great
fruit the Society has produced in the conversion of Infidels, in the
reduction of heretics, and the instruction of Catholics. And this is that
(says he) which Monsieur the Prince answered very wisely not long since to
one, who would have disgusted him with the Jesuits. These people (said he)
carry the faith thither, where it is not, and maintain it, where it is; for
which cause I will always love them.

After this my Author shows at large, how many that were Monks, have left
their Cloistres for the good of souls. As for example S. Basil, and S.
Gregory, S. Augustine and S. Hierome, S. Remigius and S. Martin, S. Augustine
of England and his four Companions sent thither by S. Gregory the Great; S.
Lambert and S. Kilian, S. Wilfrid, S. Willebrord, and S. Svvitbert; so that
though Fa. Coton were a Monk, yet he might well be excused by these examples,
noe less then those four of the same Society, which accompany the King of
Poland, one of them being his Confessarius, and another his Preacher; as also
the Confessarius to the Queen of Spain, to the Duke of Bauaria, to the
Dutchesses of Mantua, and Lorayn; and finally to the Archduke Matthias, now
King of Hungary. Neither do there want examples of other Religious orders in
the same kind; for the Confessarius of the Queen Regent is of S. Augustines
order: the King of Spain and the Archduke of Flanders use to confess to
Religious men of S. Dominicks, and the Infanta to one of S. Francis, to omit
the rest.

As for the Authority of Cardinal Tolet, Instr. Sacerd. l. 1. c. 40.
which he obiecteth against F. Cotons being in the Court, my Author answers,
that in the place by him alleged, there is noe such matter. But yet I have
been a little more curious to see, if I could find, upon what ground Anti-Coton
could gather any such doctrine out of that learned Cardinal; and I have found,
that it is a manifest falsification. For in the Chapter immediately going
before, Monks and Chano^ Regulars, Cap. 39.
not having administration, which presume to go to the Courts of Princes, for
the harm of their Monasteries or Prelates, are said to incur excommunication.
But for declaration thereof, Tolet presently notes out of the Gloss upon that
text of Canon law, Clement, Nem agro de stat. Monach, Quia vero.
where this excommunication is expressed, that two things are required for
those Monks and Chano^ Regulars to incur this censure. First, that they enter
into the Court. Secondly, that they enter with this mind, whether they have
their Prelates leave or not. Now then this Calumniator should have showed, that
F. Coton had any such intention, from which he is so free, that the only naming
of that condition would have cleared him of all such suspicions; which
Anti-Coton seemed to forsee, and therefore falsified the Cardinals authority.

The other personal imputations against F. Coton are either most impudent
lies, without all show of truth, or else mere suspicions, grounded upon such
co^iectures as any indifferent man would rather interpret to the Fathers
commendation. Page 229. 240. 241.
Such are the objections, which are taken out of his letter to a very devout
and religious woman, and his Book of devotion dedicated to the Queen her
self. And it is sufficient for confutation of all these slanders, that there
cannot be any one produced, or named in the whole Court who will testify any
the least misdemeanour of him: for if there were any such, it is not likely,
that he, who has not spared the king himself, would pass them over in
silence, or leaving the Court would run to Auignion and Languedoc to find
matter. Which notwithstanding he does with so evil success, that the whole
Cittyes have joined and given their testimony against him: and not only they,
but even the Abbot of Boys whom he presumed to father his calumniation upon,
has openly disclaimed and disproued him. For thus he writes in a
testification, which he sent to F. Coton himself: Page 231.
I the underwritten do testify, that I was in Auignion all the time, that the
Reverend Fa. Coton of the Society of Jesus remained there, and I never heard
any say, that he committed any thing contrary to the dignity, and quality of
his profession; which I affirm of that in particular, whereof the Anti-Coton
accuses him. And because I am made the Author of so manifest a slander, I say
freely, that I know no such matter, and that I have always known the said
Reverend F. Coton to be a venerable, and good Religious man. In testimony
whereof, I have written and subscribed this my present deposition at Paris in my
study, this Vigill of S. Denis Martyr 1610.

The Abbot of Boys Oliuier.

And have sealed it with my seal.

After this, follow in my Author 4. Page 232. and seq.
other attestations of the Vicar General, the Clergy, and the Consuls of
Auignion, and also of the Bishop of Orange, all which do testify, that they
knew Fa. Coto^ all the time of his being in that Cytty, and that there was
never any such matter, as the Anti-Coton charge him withal; but
contrariwise, that they all received great contentment, edification and benefit
by his learned Sermons, and other pious and holy endeauours. All which
attestations were afterward examined, and approved by the Kings Notaries in
Paris.

To the like effect is the Attestation of above 30. Page 312.
of the most principal persons in Languedoc, and especially in the City of
Nimes; all which do testify, that both the public, Page 317.
and private actions of Fa. Coton did all way tend to the honor and glory of
God, and the edification and comfort of others: and that he always behaved
himself very piously, religiously, and charitably, as well in his Sermons,
Exhortations and Catechismes, as also in visiting the sick, assisting the
afflicted, and comforting the poor: in so much, that by his means,
instruction, learning, and good life (after Gods grace) the faith, devotion,
charity, and other virtues of the Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman Religion
have been increased, and augmented in the same City; in which the continuance
of civil wars had caused some diminution, and decrease. And that they never
heard, nor understood any suspicion of any evil, sca^dalous, or culpable
behavior in the person, or actions of the said Reverend Fa. Coton: Yea they
add, that by his public Sermons, and private counsels and admonitions, he
maintained, confirmed, and conserved that City in peace, amity, and fraternall
society; and stirred up a holy emulation to do good one to another, without
partiality, or distinction; and by good examples, and mutual courtesies to
bury the memory of civil wars, and the exacerbations, and offenses, which the
injury of former times might have caused.

Much more might be said in justification, and commendation of Fa. Coton, by
declaring his virtuous education from his very childhood, Page 222.
of which there be many eye witnesses in Paris it self. At the age of
eighteen years he entered into the Society, where my Author protests hefore
God and his Angels, that he has been accounted always, and without exception,
one of the best Religious men of his Order. But I will conclude with the
praise, which the late King was wont to give him, often affirming, that Fa.
Coton was the most humble, Page 241.
and modest spirit, that ever he knew: which commendation Monsieur du Perron
Lord of Guette, and a privy Counselour will witness, that he heard of his
Majesty the last Easter before his death. And the truth is, that if he were
otherwise, he could never have continued in the Court with such estimation, and
good will of the Princes, and principal personages. For as Monsieur de la
Forze told him one day before the King, Page 221.
he had need to take heed, how he did walk, for if he should chance to
stumble, there would not want those, that would take him up.

A BRIEF NOTE Of the doctrine, and proceedings of Anti-Coton and other
Hugonots.. IIII.
BY occasion of the objections and calumniations, which Anti-Coton has heaped
together against the Society, my Author has been enforced to touch something
in the same kind against him and his fellow- Hugonots: but yet with such
modesty, and moderation, that he has not intermedled with any their personal
crimes, but only with such errors, as are committed in this book which he
answers, or belong to those points of doctrine, which are imputed, and
objected against the Society, that is, concerning Equivocation, and the killing
of Kings. For the third of the secrecy of Confession appertains not to the^,
who are professed enemies to that holy Sacrament. And if some in England be
content sometimes to take any such mattter upon them, yet they do it not with
any obligation, or observation of secrecy, as the world knows.

Wherefore let us briefly see, what my Author declares concerning their
practice, and doctrine in the other two points. First then, he demands of the
Hugonots, Page 67.
whether they never made show to agree with the Lutherans, to the end they
might the more easily impugn Catholics. Secondly, he tells them, that they
would seem to accommodate themselves to the Protestants in England,
notwithstanding they mislike so greatly their Church-gouernment; their giving
of Orders, and Confirmation; their celebrating the Feasts of Lord and Savior,
of the Blessed Virgin his Mother, of the Apostles and first Martyrs; their
using the sign of the Cross; their saying the Canonical hours; the
retayning Priestly ornaments, and the like. Thirdly, he shows, how Theodore
Beza the year 1556. affirmed in his Confession of Faith (to draw the Lutherans
to his sect) that the body of our Savior was vere and realiter, truly and
really, in the Supper; adding that the Churches of Switzerland, and of Geneua
did believe the same: and nevertheless when he did see himself contradicted,
and refused by the Zuinglians, his answer was, that he spoke not of the Lords
supper, which is celebrated upon earth, but of that, which shall be in heaven,
Lib. 4. Instit c. 1.. 2 In paruo Catechis. Lib. 4. Instit. c. 1.. 4. Lib. 4.
Instit. c 16.. 24. and 25. etc. 1. 7. Lib. 3. Instit. c. 2.. 16.17. and 18.
where our Savior will be present vere and realiter. Fourthly Calvin in one
place acknowledges two Churches, the one visible and the other invisible. And
in another place, he admits only the invisible which comprehends the
elect. Fifthly, the same Calvin in one place denies, that any man can be saved
out of the visible Church: and in another affirms, that the children of the
faithful which die without Baptism may be saved, although they be out of the
Church. Sixthly, he wills Anti-Coton to make these two propositions of Calvin
agree: Every faithful man is assured by the certainty of faith, that he is
just, and that his sins are forgiven him; and that he who has not this
certainety, is not a faithful man. And this other: Ibidem.
No man knows assuredly, whether he has true faith, or no: and every man may
be deceived in this. Lib. 3. Inst c. 13.. 5.
Seauenthly, the same Calvin affirms in one place; That concerning
Justification, Faith is wholly passive. In Antid. Council. Trid. sess. 6. can. 9.
and 11. Lib. de ve ra reform. Eccles. In Antid. Council. In conse^s. de re
Sacrament. In 1. Cor. cap. 11.
And in another; That faith justifies, and is the true cause of Justification.
Eighthly, in one place he says; That we are never reconciled to God, but that
together we receive inherent Justice. And in another. I maintain (says he)
that it is false, that justice is either a quality, or habit, which remains
in us. Ninthly, the same Calvin in one place says: that it is necessary for
our Lords Body to be as far separated from us, as heaven is distant from the
earth. And in another: I conclude (says he) that the Body of Jesus Christ is
given unto us really (as they say) in the supper. Where we must note (says my
Author) that he does not only say, that we take the body, which he might
interpret, by faith: but, that it is given us, which cannot be understood, but
of the present reality, and real presence.

Thus much for Calvin, in whom and in the rest, which have hitherto been spoken
of, there is so much the more difficulty, because all the examples produced are
in matters of faith, in which none but heretics hold it lawful to
equivocate. Now my Author comes to Anti-Coto^, and charge him with
dissimulatio^, Page 69.
because under the color of impugning the Jesuits doctrine concerning Tyrants,
the Secret of Confession, Equivocation, Obedience due to the Pope, or in
particular by Religious men to Bishops, their Generals, and others Superiors,
he impugneth the common belief of the Church. Likewise, he accuses him of
feigning at the least, when citing Siluester, Nauar, and Eudemon-Ioannes, like
a Calumniator, to make his Reader believe, that this was the doctrine of the
Jesuits only, he has concealed many other both ancient, and modern Authors,
who teach the same, and are alleged by the three which he names. Thirdly he
conuinceth him of double, and manifest malice, when in the citation of
Siluester, Accusatio 5. quaest. 13. he omitteth as well in the latin in his
margent, as in french in his text one of his principal reasons contained in
these words: Quia eo casu, cum non sit eius subditus, non tenetur dicere
veritatem ad eius intentionem: Because in that case, since he is not his
subject, he is not bound to say the truth according to his intention: which
words followed immediately after those, which the calumniator alleged.
Fourthly, he asks him, whether it be not to equivocate, dissemble and
deceive, to call himself a Catholic, being an Hugonot? Fifthly, he charge
him which imputing the death of the late King to Fa. Mariana, whereas he knew
himself in his conscience, that this was very false. Which may likewise be said
of all his objections, and calumniations against Fa. Coton, and the other
Fathers of the Society. And finally, that of the supplication to the Queen
Regent in the name of the university of Paris, can be no less, as appears by
the decree, which I related in the beginning.

In the other point, concerning the murdering and killing of Princes, Page 192.
my Author is much more large, reciting very particulerly, and amply the
opinions of diverse Hugonots to that effect. But I will only touch briefly some
few assertions of theirs. Page 192. In appellat. ad Nobilit. populumque Scot.
Impress. Geneu. Page 196. In Daniel. 6. v. 22.
Wherefore first John Knox openly and boldly affirms, that the Nobility,
Judges, and people of England ought not only to have resisted, and impugned
Queen Mary, but also to have put her to death, together with her Priests,
and all those who assisted her, so soon as they began to suppress the
Gospel of Christ: (that is, the Hugonots Religion.) And Calvin himself
spares not to say, that earthly Princes are deprived of their power, when they
rise against God, yea that they are unworthy to be accounted men, and that
their subjects ought rather to spit in their faces, then to obey the^ (all
which he declares manifestly to be meant of Catholic Princes.) Peter Martyr
supposes, Page 201. In 1. Reg. c. 26. v. 12. Page 202. In libro cui titulus,
Vindiciae co^tr. Tyrannos. Page 215. In System. discipl. politicae, li. 11. c.
28.
that a man may be sure that he is impelled by Gods spirit to kill a Tyrant.
Beza, or Stephanus Iunius Brutus gives the people good leave to join with the
Nobility, or the greater part of the^, yea with any one of them, to put down a
King whom they manifestly hold to be a Tyra^t, even as if God himself had
invited them to undertake that war. And with him agrees Bartholomaeus
Kermanus auouching, That the Subjects may betake themselves to one Noble man,
when the rest conspire with a Tyrant; yea he adds, that if there be none of
the Nobility, who has care of his Country, the Subjects may choose
themselves a Captain, for the suppressing of Tyranny. Page 215. In politica
cap. 14.
Ioannes Arthusius says in a manner as much, teaching that the people ought to
resist a Tyrant so long, as he impugneth the Commonwealth by words, deeds,
subtilty, or craft; doing, speaking, or practicing any thing contrary to his
covenant: and this in such sort, that they may deprive and dispossess such a
Tyrant of his office, and administration: yea, if they cannot otherwise defend
themselves against his violence, that they may kill him, and appoint another in
his place.

Of the same opinion was Wickliffe in times past, as appears by the Council
of Constance which deserves more credit, Page 189.
then a thousand Anti-Cotons, who against all reason, would now after so many
years make us believe, that all those worthy Prelates, and learned men did
either slander, or mistake that wicked heretic. Neither is the excuse which
he brings for him any better, saying; that he was not present in the Council
to defend himself: as though this had either been necessary, or possible,
Wickliff being dead in England 30. years before, and his books burnt for
heresy.

Page 205. 206.
I have reserved Buchanan to the last place, both because his speeches are most
plain, and peremptory in this point; and also for that Anti-Coton takes upon
him to excuse him more, then any other. He therefore is not afraid to account
Tyrants in the number of wolves and other hurtful beasts, Lib. de iure regni
apud Scotos.
which whosoever mantayneth, hurts himself and others: whosoever murdereth,
does a benefit not only to himself, but to all others in public; and if he
might make a law, he would deal with them, as the Romans did with monsters,
commanding them to be carried into deserts, or to be drowned in the maine sea
far from land; yea he would appoint rewards to be given to those, who should
kill them, not only by all the people in general, but by every one in
particular, no less then to those, who kill wolves and bears, or take their
whelps. And afterward he says expressly: That it is lawful for every one of
the people to kill a Tyrant, and that this is the opinion of almost all
nations. I omit the rest and come to the defense, which Anti-Coton makes for
Buchanan.

First then he excuses him, Page 190.
because he was no Divine: But my Author shows, that he endeauoreth to prove
his opinion out of Scripture, which the Hugonots hold to be easy, and that
every one may understand it. Besides, that there be few Ministers either in
Scotland, or France, better learned then Buchanan, either in divine or humane
litterature, as may in part be gathered by his Paraphrase upon the Psalms, to
which Beza (who was no small fool among them) could not come nigh. And finally
the Lords of Scotland would never have chosen this man to instruct their
Prince, unless they had been persuaded that he had been able (according to the
principles of their Religion) to have taught the people their duty to the same
Prince. The other excuse, which Anti-Coton makes, that Buchanan prescribed no
Rules in this matter, is not worth the mentioning; since that it appears to
be most false by that little, which I have alleged out of his large discourses
to the same effect.

This shall suffice for the Hugonots in general: and if I would endeavor to
recount all the heresies, errors, and others faults contained in the
Anti-Coton, I should be to tedious. Wherefore it shall be sufficient to note some
few particulers, which declare him to be neither a good Catholic as he would
seem, Page 249.
nor yet a good Subject. As first, when he makes a division betwixt Roman and
French Catholics, to sow sedition and schism, as though no good subject could
be a good Catholic. Secondly he shows great ignorance, or rather some worse
affection, when he cannot, or rather will not understand, how God the Father
loved, and approved the event of his Son our Saviors death caused by the
Jews malice, which was the Redemption of our souls. Lastly he calumniateth
and slaundereth the Pope, and Council of Constance, as we have seen.

Concerning the late King he shows his little respect toward him, in
affirming, that there was no vigor of spirit remaining in his time, and in
making him to establish the Society in France for timidity and fear; though it
were against the good of his estate. And indeed all the malice, which this
fellow shows against Fa. Coton in particular, and the Society in general
redoundeth to the disgrace of the King himself; since that he conuersed with
them so familiarly, loved them so entirely, esteemed them so highly, and in all
occasions employed them so willingly. Neither does Anti-Cotons affection seem
to be any better to the young King, whom he is not afraid to slander publikly,
making him say that which he never thought. And as for the Queen Regent, and
the present Government, he bears them as little respect, controlling them,
and prescribing laws unto them, disposing of persons at his pleasure, putting
away some, and retaining others against her Majesty's mind: yea calling in
doubt, whether her proceedings may stand with the safety of the present King
her sons life, or without holding her Subjects in continual allarmes, and
defiance one of another. By this we may easily guess, how he proceeds with
inferior persons, reprehending the Decrees, Sentences and Judgments of the
sovereign Courts, and in effect charging those of the Parliament of Paris with
high Treason; since that they have freed the Jesuits, whom this Calumniator
will needs make guilty of the late Kings death.

I omit the falsification of that Courts Registers, as we have seen. The
Doctors of Sorbon have their part also, being accused to teach doctrine
different from that of the Catholic Church, and to put up such supplications
to the Queen, as the University it self has publicly disclaymed. Finally
this libell is so fraught with lies, and slanders, that many upon sight
thereof have protested, that although they had no other proofs, either divine,
or humane to discover the pretended reformed Religion of the Hugonots to be a
pure and most impure heresy, they would judge it to be so by the manner of this
book, and of the like: since that it is composed of nothing, but
calumniations, slanders and deceipts, sparing neither Princes, Nobility, nor
Counsel, no not so much as the Ladies of the Court, or Maids of Honor,
though never so virtuous, if they be opposite to them in Religion.

CERTAIN Observations, and Instructions, for the Catholics in France, which
may easily be applied to those in England.. V.
THERE remains now that I tell you, what aduises my Author gives to his
Catholics in France, for the better avoiding and preventing the danger of
incurring and falling into the cunning sleights, and hidden snares of the
Hugonots, which he reduces to 16. heads, and dilateth amply upon some of
them. I will only, as hitherto, set down the substance, as being mindful to
whom I write.

Page 260. and seq.
Wherefore, his first observation is, that as hertofore the Hugonots have
endeavored to overthrow the state under the shadow of Religion: so now they
seek to take away Religion under the pretext of the state; as the Jews did in
the time of our Savior, who neglected their spiritual profit, not to
endaunger their temporal interest, and by that means finally lost both the
one, and the other.

The second observation is, that the Hugonots knowing very well, that the
doctrine of the Society is in all points the same with that of the Church:
have devised this plot to beguile Catholics, by seeking to make the Societyes
doctrine odious, and inueighing only against them; hoping by that means, when
it shall appear that the doctrine of the Church is the same, they may prevail
against that also.

The third observation is, that now in the time of the Kings minority, the
Hugonots cause all the worst books, which have been set forth for these 30.
years to be printed anew, without making any mention of any answer given to
them by Catholics; allwaies moving the same questions, without desire, that
the truth should come to light.

The fourth observation is, that the Hugonots labor to persuade the people,
that the Pope has always been an enemy to the Crown of France: whereas indeed
the French Kings are preferred before others in the Court of Rome, being
called the eldest sons of the Church, and their Ambassador takes place
before others. By the name of King absolutely, without addition, is meant the
King of France. The Popes granted for a time a priuiledg to these Kings to
confirm their election: they have given Indulgences to such, as pray for them:
they have exempted them from the excommunication of any Bishop of their Realm,
and permitted them to receive the B. Sacrament under both kinds the day of
their consecration, and when they prepare themselves to dye, for their Viaticum.

The fifth observation is, that the Hugonots use falsely to affirm that the
Popes take to themselves power and authority to change and dispose of Kingdoms
at their fancy and pleasure, which is most false.

The sixth, that the Hugonots would persuade the world, that some Catholics are
Roman, and some Royal, whereas all good Catholics are both; the one in respect
of their Religion, and the other in regard of their affection to the State. And
experience has allwaies showed, that those who are most respective to the
Church, are likewise most assured to their Prince.

The seventh, that the Hugonots give out, that those who defend the Popes
Authority, retain still some old leaven of the league; which are most
dangerous speeches, contrary to former decrees, and sufficient to renew old
soars: not unlike to that other Calu^niation, by which the same Hugonots use
to apply that which the ancient Fathers, and the Scripture it self has
spoken of Rome while it was Pagan, under the persecution of Nero and his
successors, to the same City as it is Christian, and to the Sea Apostolik,
with intent to make the Pope and Cardinals odious or contemptible.

The eight, the Hugonots to curry favor with Prelates, the Doctors of Sorbo^,
the Curates and other Ecclesiastical men, and to incite them against the
Society, make a show of praising them; telling some, that the Society does not
love them, nor yield them obedience; and others, that the Fathers contemn
them, speak ill of the^, and will swallow up the University, if they be let
alone. Whereas the Society is so far from being separated from the Clergy and
the Prelates of France, that they are beloved, and maintained by all, and
specially by the five Cardinals, and nine Archbishops which my Author names;
and almost by all the Bishops without exception; yelding unto them all due
obedience, submission, and fidelity. But these devises of sowing discord is noe
new matter in the Church of God, as my Author shows by many examples

The nynth, when any Catholic sets forth a book impugning heresy, the
heretics seek presently to discredit the Author by all manner of inventions.
And to divert the Reader, they spread abroad many little libels, sonets,
anagrams, and such other toys. Thirdly, when this will not serve, instead of
answering, and defending themselves; they go on in repeating their old
objections and arguments, as though nothing had been said unto them; adding
only some new calumniations after the manner of all former heretics.

The tenth, they carp at every word and syllable, where they can espy the least
advantage in any Catholic Authors writing; and of this we have a notable
example in a book lately published by F. Coton himself; in which commending
the Kings of France, and showing their rare privileges, he uses these words:
Our Kings in France; where presently the Hugonots took hold of that particle
in, and would make the simpler sort believe, tha Fa. Coton had only affirmed,
that their Kings had those privileges in France it self; whereas it is evident,
that those words (in France) have not refere^ce to the privileges, but to the
Kings themselves. And besides my Author shows, that he could not speak
properly in any other manner, because to say (our Kings of France) is noe very
good French: and if he had only said (our Kings) it had been to general, and
might have been wrested by a malicious Adversary to other Kings, as well as to
those of France.

The eleventh; the same carping humor, which they use in misinterpreting and
wresting to a contrary sense the writings of Catholics, they practice no
less in calumniating their actions. As for example; whereas Fa. Coton was
beloved by the late King: they say that he had bewitched him. He was his
Confessarius: that is, in their interpretation, a flatterer. He was his
Preacher: that is, he praised him. The King heard him willingly so many years:
that is (say they) he kept others back. He esteemed his spirit, wisdom and
eloquence: that is (in their opinion) F. Coton spoke ill of all, and murmured
against others. The King would have him with him at his meals, in his Coach,
and when he went to walk: this they interpret, that the Father intruded
himself every where. The King did willingly see his writings, and read
sometimes a Manual of Prayers, which he dedicated to the Queen: this (say
they) was to flatter God, and to bring him a sleep with words that savor of
his queen. The King took pleasure in his discourses, and proposed to him
diverse questions: out of which they infer, that the Father was a man of
incredible impude^cy. The King did willingly see him at al times, and in all
places, as well after so many years, as in the beginning; which they call, to
be tied to the Kings girdle, and to assiege his spirit. The King denied him
nothing, that he demanded: the cause whereof (in their judgment) was, because
he would take no denial. The King was very beneficial to the Society, as well
in respect of the affection, which he bare to the whole Order in general, as
in regard of Fa. Coton in particular: which they would have to be by reason of
F. Cotons extorsion and importunity. The King founded them Colleges, and gave
them means to live: for which cause they compare the Society to a Canker,
which always gains ground. The K. permits them to have a Nouitiate in the
Suburbs of S. Germain: by which they understand an enclosure wherein a City may
stand. The Society have more Scholars then others have: the cause thereof (say
they) is, for that they take nothing for washing and candles. Their Sermons are
frequented with great concourse: because (in their interpretation) they seduce
the people, and preach sedition. Many go to them for the resolution of their
doubts, or to confess their sins: the reason of this (say they) is because
they get whole inheritances into their hands. They are beloved of the Princes:
which these men calumniate, saying, that Fa. Coton makes himself their
fellow. They are mantained by the Nobility, Parliament, and other Magistrates of
France: for which cause the Hugonots say, that they have their Scholars, and
disciples in all places. They are sent by God to repress heresy: these men
answer, that France was Catholic before the Jesuits were in the world (they
say not, that France was not so infected with heresy before themselves.) They
are learned, and skillful in all languages, and sciences: for this cause in the
judgment of some (that is of the ignorant or malicious) they will destroy
learning. They are virtuous, and for all that the heretics have raised,
invented, and published against them, they could never prove any thing
hitherto: and therefore are enforced to say, that they dissemble, and to call
them hypocrites. Finally they esteem that which is white, black; that which
is sweet, sower; and that which is good and commendable in the opinion of
others, is naught and detestable in theirs.

The twelueth deceit which the Hugonots use is, to call those seditious which
answer them, and to calumniate such, as maintain the accused; terrifying
their friends, and reprehending them, as though they were the occasion of all
the inconuenie^ces, which come by seditious writings. And in this many
Catholics are much misled being unacquainted with the humor of heretics, who
like to their Master the Devil, use to fawn and yield to those who are at
defiance with them, and resist them manfully: but assault those fiercely, whom
they see moderate, or fearful. Which was the cause, that the ancient Fathers
S. Justin, Tertullian S. Athanasius, S. Chrysostom, S. Hierome, S. Tho. of
Aquin, and S. Bonauenture wrote so many learned and earnest Apologies in the
defense of Christian Religion, and Religious orders. And surely it is very
strange, that any should think much at the answers of the innocent party,
having been provoked by so many false calu^niations and bitter inuectiues. Of
which we need go no further for an example, then to that, which passed in
Paris, before F. Coton wrote his Declaratorie Epistle.

The thirteenth is, that so soon as any Minister has set forth a book
fraught with lies, deceipts, and slanders: it serves for many other to write
upon the same subject, with any little alteration or addition. And of this my
Author produces many examples both of former times, and at this present. For
after the Anti-Coton, came out diverse other Pamphlets here in Paris to the same
purpose, which my Author briefly examineth in 5. or 6. leaves. But I find
nothing worth the mentioning, except I should tell you, that they rail
bitterly against a certain Gentleman called Monsieur de Courbouzen Montgomery
a man of great valor, wisdom, and desert, who has lately forsaken the
Hugonots after long disputations with them, insomuch that none of them dare
encounter with him any more. But he glories and esteems it a great honor to
be thus abused, and hated by Gods enymies.

The fourteenth observation, which my Author makes, is that the sins and
transgressions of the Hugonots ought not to be so little esteemed among
Catholics; so that when they eat flesh in Lent, laugh at the holy Sacrifice
of Mass, rail at the Pope, break Images, or tear pictures, burn Relics,
taking the Reliquaries to themselves, and commit such other abuses incide^t to
their deformed Religion, many make light of it, and in a manner think it
lawful for them to do these things, because they are Hugonots; whereas the
truth is, that an Heretic sins more in comitting these things, then if he
were a Catholic. Which appears plainly in the sin of Rebellion and Treason,
where he who not only reuolteth against his King but maintayneth also that his
Rebellion is just, seking to draw others after him, and teaching that all those
are in evil estate who will not join with him in that wicked action,
commits a far greater offense, then another, who falls into the same
crime, but acknowledges his fault, accuses himself from time to time, seeks
not to persuade any, and finally does nothing, but of mere frailty.

The fifteenth devise of the Hugonots is, to charge those who defend the
Jesuits of being addicted to the Spaniard. For which cause my Author takes
upon him to examine the ground of this deceiptfull objection. Wherefore (says
he) if this proceeds from being Jesuits; the Society began in France, in the
College of S. Barbara, which is in the University of Paris. If it be in
respect of their being Religious men, every man sees, that there are many
other besides them. If in respect of France, they in that Country are
Frenchmen, and there is no reason, why a Frenchman, should not love his
nation, as well as any Spaniard does his, or as well, as the Portughese,
German, Italian, English, those of Iaponia and Peru do theirs. If in regard of
the three Religious vows, they are common to all Religious orders, even to the
Knights of Malta. If in respect of the fourth, which is peculiar to them; that
belongs less to the Spaniards, the^ to the Antipodes: for it concerns only
their missions among Infidells, and the conversion of other lost Souls. If
this imputation be laid upon their Rules; they are commanded by one of them
expressly to love, and respect all Nations in our Lord, always giving the chief
place every man to his own, as the rule of well-ordered charity does require.
If their functions be objected, these are as profitable, and more necessary in
France, then in Spain: neither can any of them be attributed rather to Spain,
then to any other Nation: besides that many other principal persons do preach,
teach, and confess, who notwithstanding are not accounted Spaniards. If the
reason be, for that the Society has one General: the Carthusians, and the
Dominicans have but one during his life in like manner. If because he is not a
Frenchman, those of other Orders are no Frenchmen neither. If because he is a
Neapolitan, son to the Duke of Atri, and great Uncle to the Duke who now is:
he is not therefore a Spaniard. Yea his most noble house has been always
allied to those of France, witness the Countess of Chasteau-Vilain his Niece.
If they object, that heretofore the Society has had Spanish Generals: since
the time of B. F. Ignatius, who was the first, and of Nauar; there have been
but four, two Spaniards, Fa. Laynes, and Fa. Borgia, who before had been Duke
of Gandia; the third Fa. Euerard Mercurian who was borne in Liege; and Fa.
Claudius Aquauiua who now lives, and is an Italian, as has been said. But
supposing, that they had all been Spaniardes, that they were so still, and
should be so hereafter: were this any greater cause for Frenchmen to complain
of the Society, then Spaniards, Italians, and other Nations have to be grieved,
that there be three Generals of diverse Orders in one only Province of France.

But perhaps they will say, that the King of Spain is a great benefactor of
the Society: notwithstanding the truth is, that neither this King, nor his
Father, nor any of his Predecessors, Kings of Spain did ever found one
College for the Society. And if any will suspect, that at least he allows
some pensions; the contrary is manifest. For since that the Society refuses
any recompense for their labors and functions; it can much less admit any
pension. And noe man alive is able to prove, that ever any French Father
received a penny from the King of Spain. Finally, no man can deny, but that
the late King Henry the fourth favored the Society exceedingly, bestowed great
benefits upon them, had great confidence in them, and obliged them in all
respects to love him: so that it is hard to say, whether of the two
calumniations chiefly contained, and inculcated in the Anti-Coton, be greater;
That the Society teaches any doctrine different from that of the Catholic
Church: or, That they should have any hand in the late Kings death.

Lastly, my Author shows, that there is noe cause, why Spaniards should be so
odious to Frenchmen, since that they are good Christians and Catholics, as well
as other Nations, and there is now no war, but peace betwixt these two
nations, sending their mutual Ambassadors one to another, calling one another
brethren, their Subjects having free traffic among themselves. And if this
hatred arises from any thing that is past, there want not the like occasions
with others, who notwithstanding are not thus inueighed against, nor ought to
be, although they differ also in Religion. Wherefore this can proceed from no
other ground but from the malice of the Devil himself, who is the Father of
all division, and sees very well, that the good and quiet of the Catholic
Church depends in great part of the union betwixt these two puissant Nations.

A BRIEF Relation of F. Cotons, and the Societies proceedings; together with
a Challenge to the Hugonots, and a Supplication to the Queen Regent.. VI.
FOr conclusion of this whole discourse, I have reserved these three points,
which my Author handles upon different occasions, and in diverse places. First
then, concerning Fa. Coton, he says that he is a Christian, a Catholic, a
Priest, a Religious man, who goes to Confession, and has celebrated the holy
Sacrifice of the Mass every day for these eighteen years, he has been of
the Society 27. years and more, in which he has studied Rhetoric,
Philosophy, Divinity, the languages, and Mathematiks: and since he has also
taught Humanity, Rhetoric, and moral Divinity, and preached in many of the
most principal Cittyes of the Realm: He has often disputed both by word and
writing with diverse Ministers, and other Hugonots. He has assisted in the
conversion of many, especially in three Provinces, and that in great number;
and since his being at the Court, he has labored in the reduction of the
Earls de Lauall, de Castelnau, de Mainuille, de Vassan, de Chaumont, and many
other: he was sent for thither by the late King, when he thought nothing less,
being at that time in Auignion: his conversation, his learning and his manner
of life were so agreeable, and pleasing to his Majesty, and his Counsel, that
he did not only retain him at the Court, and in his retinue: but also made
him his Preacher, and afterward his ordinary Confessarius. His sermons,
discourses and proceedings were so far from being tedious to the late King,
that he desired to have him always in his sight and company, in so much that
he made choice of him to hear the general Confession of his whole life; and
did always upon every occasion praise, honor, and commend him, defending him
against all his adversaries. The whole Court will testify, that nothing was
ever observed in his manners, or doctrine, which might offend or scandalize any.

When he was healed and recovered of the blow, or stab, which was given him, it
pleased his Majesty to say unto him: You had never a better blow, for the world
has discovered the love which I bear you, and I have seen what affection the
world bears you. And another time upon another occasion he said: Fa. Coton
speaks well of all the world, he is never heard to speak ill of any.
Moreover Fa. Coton is known to have refused Bishoprics, and Arch-Bishopricks,
for which cause his Matie told him once, that if he were Pope, he would oblige
him to accept of them. But the Father declared unto him, how this was repugnant
to the Institute of the Society, and to the particular vows, which he himself
had made, and that nothing had done more harm to Religious Orders, then the
desire to have offices, or Benefices. Which answer pleased his Matie so much,
that he reapeated it often, and before diverse. And this is that which
confounds the detractors of the Society, when they are demanded Cui bono,
should these Fathers be so wicked and unnatural? For, if they do it for
pleasure, they might enjoy it more freely, more lawfully, and in far greater
abundance in the world, remaining in their commodious, and many times noble
houses, which they leave to enter into Religion. If it be for profit, there is
not any College in France, which is able to spend twenty pounds a man, as
has been said. And if any will endeavor to prove the contrary, he shall have
the overplus for his labor. If they do it for honors: they renounce them all
by a particular vow, by which they are bound under mortal sin not to admit,
or receive any dignity, but by force and constraint, being commanded by him,
who has authority to do it.

What therefore can remayn, why they should aba^don father, mother, kinsfolks,
country, goods, honors, dignities, hopes, yea and their life it self, which
they expose not only among Infidels, and barbarous nations, but (which I
esteem more painful) among heretics, and bad Catholics, with whom they must
continually encounter and combat? Which in respect of the Catholics is very
strange, since that they cannot deny, but that the Fathers teach the youth
passing well both in manners and learning. 2. They preach the word of God with
satisfaction, and contentment of all Nations in Europ. 3. They carry it to the
Antipodes in Asia, Africa, America, to both East and West Indies. 4. They
defend it against heretics with continual danger of their lives in England,
Scotland, Constantinople, and in all other places, where their assistance may
be a comfort to afflicted Catholics. 5. They hear Confessions, administering
that Sacrament exactly. 6. They visit the sick. 7. They help the^ that dye. 8.
They go to the Prisons. 9. They teach the Catechism, or Christian doctrine.
10. They introduce the frequentation of Sacraments. 11. They neither preach,
confess, teach, nor exhort, but by the consent of the Bishop in the diocese
where they reside. 12. When they are incorporated into any University, as they
are at Tholose, Bordeaux, Reims, Caen, Bourges, Cahors, Poictiers, they observe
the laws of the said Universities, acknowledging the Rectors, and performing
exactly whatsoever is ordained. 13. They have among them many men of rare
qualities, and the greatest part very well borne. 14. They have at this present
30000. scholars, and in time past have had more the^ two hundred thousand in
their Classes, whom they have taught, and do teach to fear and serve God, and
above all to keep themselves from mortal sin, by the means of often
confessing, and frequent receiving, binding them all without exception to do
this every month. 15. And among all this great number of scholars, there has
not one been fond to have complained of any least word spoken unto the^, which
might tend to any immodestie, but they will all testify, that one of the
chiefest cares which the Society has, is to preserve them in Angelical
purity and integrity, so much as may be. 16. One of their Society through
extreme frailty and exceeding great temptation, became a Minister among the
Hugonots in France: of whom there has been inquiry made, whether the lives of
the Jesuits be wicked and impure, whether they have intelligence, and
correspondence with foreign Nations, whether they be hypocrites, and in a
word, whether they be such, as the Anti-Coto^ has since described them? To all
which he answered, No; and that all is false. 17. Their life is not monastical
nor secret, they live and converse with all men, they are seen every day
preaching, confessing, disputing, and discoursing. Now then who ever heard the^
swear, braule, blaspheme, detract, speak wantonly induce to evil, or seduce
any? If this Calumniator has reported any such thing, where are his proofs?
18. Their books in all manner of sciences, and in all la^guages are to be seen
in all places, and are esteemed by all such as have not the reformed spirit of
contradiction. 19. Kings and Princes use them for the guiding of their souls.
20. The Popes have approved their Institute, and the Council of Trent has
confirmed it. What can be said to these proofs? Are they conjectures,
suspicions, or rash judgments? Is it necessary to beg the pen of Ministers,
to make a demonstration? Oh how far is this age from the conditions of true
charity, which are, 1. neither to think, 2. nor to judge, 3. nor to speak, 4.
nor to listen to evil of any; 5. but to interrupt such talk; 6. or if this
cannot be, to excuse the action. 7. If not this, at least the intention: 8. or
attribute it to passiion: 9. and if there be no other excuse, at least
exaggerate the tentation: 10. and always say, that if God did not help us, we
should do worse.

By this which has been said, it appears what reason my Author has to tell
the Hugonots, that they should do more wisely to desist from these
calumniations against the Society, especially among Catholics, to whom by
this means they discover the irreligion of their Religion, and make them see
that their pretense is not to conserve the flock of Christ, but to discredit
their Doctors, impose silence to their Preachers, and deprive the youth of
their good, and faithful Instructors. They perceive well enough, that the
quarrel is not only with Jesuits, though they be the capital enemies of their
deformation; but their meaning is to set upon all Religious Orders, and the
whole Clergy, and having prevailed against some, they will undertake the
residue, as they did at Antwerp. But to assault them altogether were to
painful, hard, and impossible a matter. Wherefore they would divide, and weaken
them, and so cut of one after another; as Themistocles discomfited the Army of
Artaxerxes, containing above a million of Soldiers, intercepting them troop
by troop in the strait of Hellespont. Or as their brethren did in England,
drawing to their party at the beginning the Bishops and secular Clergy, under
pretense that Religious men belonged not to the Hierarchy of the Church; and
that Christianity was before them; and that the splendor of these Regular
Orders seemed to obscure the dignity of Cathedral Churches, and divert the
people from their Parishes etc. And by these fraudulent devises the Abbyes
being thus put down, and the Monks turned out, and some of them also put to
death for denying the Kings Supremacy; the aforesaid brethren informed the
Nobility, that the great riches, which the Church enjoyed, were given by their
Ancestors; and that there could no better course be taken in this great
disorder of the Popedom, and in this licentious and voluptuous prodigality of
the Bishops, then to reduce all things to their beginning, and to render these
Ecclesiastical goods to the houses, out of which they first came. And in this
manner Scotland was deprived of Religious me^ Priests, Curates, Chanons,
Abbots, and Bishops: which also had been brought to pass in England, if the
Puritans might have prevailed: The spirit of their M. Calvin being impatient of
all Superiority, and Ecclesiastical Hierarchy.

Moreover my Author tells the Hugonots, that by their persecutions they
establish the Society more and more: for they are esteemed so much the more
profitable, as by them they are described unprofitable; and so much the more
necessary, as they account them harmfull. And the like is of others, who are no
heretics; for every man observes, that those who persecute the Society, are
neither the deuoutest, nor the best Catholics of the world; which might easily
appear, if they be Churchmen, by inquiring whether they say their Breuiarie or
not; and if they be lay, by marking, whether they frequent the Sacraments, not
to say any more.

To all which we may add, that the Hugonots have been heard say in their most
secret Conuenticles, that if they overthrow not the Jesuits, the Jesuits will
overthrow them; that is, their pretended Religion; which is the cause, that
they set upon the Society more fiercely, then upon some others, on whom
notwithstanding they might probably take as great hold. For my Author says,
that he cannot believe, that they are more zealous of the State, then of their
Religion; and therefore there must needs be some enigma, equivocation, and
mystical understanding in this great, fierce, and terrible persecution, which
they have resolved in their night-assemblees against the Society. But he
bids them do their worst, which will be the best for them, since that they
are men, who have nothing either to loose, or gain in this world, but only the
service of God, and the salvation of souls.

Wherefore they, who will have, and use them in this sort, may; and they who
will not, may send them to China, and Mogor, where the harvest is plentiful.
And if nothing else did hold them in Europe, but pleasure or profit, they would
long since have departed of their own accord: for they are not so kindly
dealt withal, that they have any great cause to please themselves according to
sense; but their contentments, yea (I may say) their delights are crosses,
tribulations, slanders, persecutions, and especially, when they come from
Anti-Cotons, and their associats, enemies of the Catholic faith. They are
never more content, then in such discontentments; never more strong, then when
they are thus weakened: never more united to God, then when they are cast of,
and separated from this kind of people. All their affliction consists in the
offense committed by their enemies against God; in the harm, which Catholics
receive; and in the loss of the Hugonots souls: Souls, for which they would
expose their bodies, and lives a thousand times.

Notwithstanding they make no great account, nor have any great apprehension of
the Hugonots attempts: they know, what they can do, of what weight and value
they are: it is all but threats and menaces, which they use most, when they
tremble for fear. Caluins spirit is insolent in prosperity, deicted in
adversity; and of it above all the spirits in the world, we may truly say: that
he threatens who is much afraid. They know also, that it is proper to God, to
defend and maintain that, which the Devil impugneth, as they have experienced
by their return into France. For in exchange of 9. or 10. years of absence
from that part of the Country which belonged to the Parliament of Paris, they
have since, not only been reestablished there, but also established in the
whole Kingdom, with more augmentation and increase, then their continual stay
could have produced in an hundred years. So true it is, that God recompenseth
with usury, whatsoever is done or suffered for his sake.

Wherefore they have reason not only to hope, but also to be certainly
persuaded, that unless God should retire himself from France for their
sins, Page 302.
the Society shall hereafter be employed and esteemed in this Kingdom more then
it has been hitherto: and that in regard of this storm, after which (as is to
be hoped) will shortly succeed a quiet calm; especially under the government
of so wise a Queen, whom God has chosen like another Debora, during the
minority of this Great and Little King her Son, and their Master, under the
shadow of her Royal protection, the Religious men of this Society so much
enuyed by the wicked, and persecuted by those who know it not, will always
breath the same air of devotion toward God, and of inviolable fidelity
toward their Majesty's: requiring one only grace for all the humble services,
which they desire to yield them; and it is, that when they shall be accused in
common, or in particular, either in manners, or doctrine; it will please them
to ordain, that most exact inquisition be made, to chastise them, if they be
culpable; or to punish the accusers, if they be found innocent.

And because the Author, or Authors of the Anti-Coton are obliged both
voluntarily by their own word, and necessarily by the quality of the crime of
calumniation to tell, and declare their names and qualities; they beseech her
Majesty, that it will please her to command, that if within 8. days they do
not manifest themselves, all the rigors and penalties, which Gods and man's law
prescribes and inioyneth against Calumniators, may be used against them: and
that she would appoint to this end, that extraordinary search, and inquiry may
be made. And in case, that they freely name and discover themselves, my Author
in the name of all the Fathers, and particulerly of Fa. Coton, prostrateth
himself at her Majesty's feet, beseeching her by all the extension of graces,
and power which God has given her, to accord, that Justice may be done as well
of Fa. Coton, as of all the rest, if the Calu^niators shall verify, and make
good that which they have said; and of them reciprocally, if for want of proof,
they shall be found convinced of imposture, or slander. And he tells her
Majesty, that this is a matter of no small importance, and therefore she will
be pleased, not to attribute this their humble request to importunity. For it
belongs to the service of God, who has interest in their functions, if they
be such, as they are described. The good of her Majesty's people does also
require the same: for they ought not allway to live in this hesitation, but
must be cleared from the sinister impressions, which they may have conceived by
reading these infamous lybells.

The reputation likewise of the late King, her Maiestyes dear spouse, the
great Henry, their Lord and good Master, is engaged herein; which is stained
with the calumniations, that are imposed upon him, whom his Majesty did not
only choose, love, and favor; but honor also with the office of his
Preacher, and ordinary Confessarius. Likewise her Majesty her self has part
herein, since that she imployeth Fa. Coton in the same charges and offices
about her son, which he exercised for his Father. The honor of the Lords of
the Counsel is touched also, since that they ought to represent unto her
Majesty the evils and dangers, which ensue by the Societyes stay in France,
if they be such, as they are accused to be.

Finally it imports Fa. Coton much, who certainly has not deserved to be
handled in this sort, Innoce^cie is the sister of truth: truth is syrnamed the
daughter of God, and God himself is called the God of truth, by whose love my
Author beseeches her Majesty, that she will cause the truth to appear, that
it may deliver them: and they will beseech him so much the more, that he will
be pleased to increase his graces in her Majesty, to make her Regency
peaceable, the wills of her Subjects united, and the Scepter of the King her
Son happy, and of long continuance.

The Conclusion.
THVS I have run over the whole answer to the Anti-Coton. And though I have
omitted many things of good importance, yet I fear, least in some I may seem
to have been too tedious, especially writing to you (my Reverend and dearest
Fathers) to whom I may justly suppose, that neither these Calumniations of your
Society, nor the solutions or answers can be strange or new. But I hope you
will pardon my prolixitie, and accept of my good will: and hereafter in like
occasions, I shall learn to be more wary. For which cause I will omit all
other relations, though this City of Paris be no less fertile in this kind,
then London it self. For I suppose you know long ere this, how the Treatise of
Cardinal Bellarmine, De potestate Su^mi Pontificis in temporalibus, aduersus
Gulielmu^ Barclaiu^, was prohibited by this Parliament of Paris the 26. day of
November last past, and that this Decree of theirs was recalled four days
after by the King himself in his Counsel, assisted by the Queen Regent his
Mother, the Prince of Conde, and Earl of Soissons, Princes of the blood, the
Duke of Maienne, the Lord Chancellor, the duke of Espernon, of Lauardin, and
Boisdaulphin Mareshall of France, Admiral, and great Master of the horse in
France, giving large Commission for the Execution of this his Decree and
reuocation to al Baylifs, Sherifes, Prouosts, and Judges, their Leiutenants,
and other his Majesty's Justices and Officers to whom it might appertain, as
appears by the Decree it self, and the Commission dated in Paris the last day
of November, in the year 1610. and of his Majesty's Reign the first.

By the King in his Counsel.

Signed Delomenie.

And with this I will humbly take my leave, wishing you all happiness, and
desiring sometime to be partaker of your holy Sacrifices and Prayers. And so I
ever rest

Your Fatherhoods most assuredly to command. F. G.
From Paris this 20. of February 1611.
THE CONTENTS OF the aforesaid Letter.
. I. Concerning the Doctrine of the Society impugned by the Anti-Coton. page
12.. II. The Solutions to the personal objections against the Fathers of the
Society. page 22.. III. The Solutions of the objections against Fa. Coton in
particular. page 50.. IIII. A brief note of the doctrine, and proceedings of
Anti-Coton and other Hugonots. page 61.. V. Certain Observations, and
Instructions, for the Catholics in France, which may easily be applied to
those in England. page 70.. VI. A Brief Relation of Fa. Cotons, and the
Societies proceedings; together with a Challenge to the Hugonots, and a
Supplication to the Queen Regent. page 81.
FINIS.

