THE MIND OF THE FRONTISPEECE, And Argument of this WORK.
FIre, Air, Earth, Water, all the Opposites
That throue in (...), powrefull (...) unites;
And from their Discord drew this Harmony
That smiles in (...): who, with ravished eye,
Affects his owne-made ^eauties. But, our Will,
(...), and ^ow^es ^raserble, the skill
Of ^allas orders; who the Mind attires
With all Hero^^^ Virtues ^ This aspires
(...) same and (...); by her noble Guide
Eternized, and well-nigh Deifi'd.
But who forsake that fair Intelligence,
To follow Passion, and voluptuous Sense;
That shun the Path and ^oyles of Hercules:
Such, charmed by (...) luxury, and case,
(...) deforme: 'twixt whom, so great an ods;
That these are held for Beasts, and those for Gods.
PHO^BVS APOLLO (s^red Poesy)
Thus (...) for in the anci^nt Fables he
The (...) all P^^losophie.
(...) some appear
(...) teach us how to bear
(...) loy, Grief, Hope, and Fea^e.
These (...) hose excite;
These (...) those from Vice affright*
All (...) with Delight.
The (...) and those that (...),
(...) not by his Compass, sa^le.
OVID'S METAMORPHOSIS Englished by G S

London Printed by Robert Young are to be sold by J. Grismond 1628

AD A^HE^A VIRTUES EX^LIS OR^^ DOCVITQVAE AMORE (...) ONTUR CUNCTA

AFFIGIT HVMO DIVINAE PART^VLAM AV^^E.



To the most High and Mighty Prince CHARLES, King of Great Britain, France,
and IRELAND.
SIR,
YOur Gracious acceptance of the first fruits of my Travels, when You were our
Hope, as now our Happiness; has actua^ea both Will and Power to the finishing
of this Piece: being limn'd by that imperfect light which was snatched from the
hours of night and repose. For the day was not mine, but dedicated to the
service of your Great Father, and you^ self: which, had it proved as fortunate
as faithful, in me, and others more worthy; we had hoped, ere many reares had
turned about, to have presented You with a rich and wel-peopled Kingdom; from
whence now, with my self, I only bring this Composure:

Inter victrices Hederam tibi serpere Laurus.
It needs more than a single denization, being a double Stranger. Sprung from
the stock of the ancient Romans; but bred in the New-world, of the rudeness
whereof it cannot but participate; especially having War^es and Tumults to
bring it to light in stead of the Muses. But how ever imperfect, Your ^auour is
able to supply; and to make it worthy of life, if you judge it not unworthy of
your Royal Patronage. Long may you live to be, as you are, the Delight and
Glory of your People: and slowly, yet surely, exchange your mortal Diadem for
an immortal. So wishes.

Your Majesty's most humble Servant, GEORGE SANDYS.

THE LIFE OF OVID.
PVBLIVS OVIDIVS NASO, descended of the ancient Family of the Nasones, who had
preserved the dignity of Roman Knights from the first original of that Order,
was borne at Sulmo, a City of the Peligni, on the 14. of the Calends of April,
in the Consul-ships of Hircius and Pansa, both slain at the battle of Mutina
against Marcus Antonius. While yet a boy, his quick wit and ready apprehension
gave his parents an assurance of a future excellency: in so much as his father
Lucius sent him to Rome (together with his brother, a year elder than he, and
borne on the same day) to be instructed by Plotius Grippus, that Art might
perfect the accomplishments of nature. In his first of youth he was much
addicted unto poetry, wherein he had (...) grace and natural facility* But
continually reproved by his father for following so unprofitable a (...) with
an ill will he forsook the pleasant walks of the Muses to travel in the
rugged paths of the Law, under (...) and Porcius Lairo; of whose ^^^quence and
learning he was a great Admirer. Neither attained he the^ in to a vulgar
commendation; being (...) by Marcus Annaeus Sene^a among the principal Orators
of those times. His prose was no other than dissolved verse: his speech witty,
brief, and powerful in persuasion. Having past through diverse offices of
Judicature, and now ready to assume the habit of a Senator: his elder brother
and father being dead, impatient of toil, and the clamours of litigious
Assemblies, he retired himself from all public affairs to affected vacancie
and his former abandoned studies. Yet such was the mutual affection between
him and Varro, that he accepted of Command, and served under him in the wars of
Asia: from whence he returned by Athens, where he made his abode, until he
had attained to the perfection of that language. He was of a mean stature,
slender of body, spare of diet; and, it not too amorous, every way temperate.
He drunk no wine but what was much alayed with water: An Abhorrer of unnatural
Lusts, from which it should seem that age was not innocent: neat in apparel;
of a free, affable, and courtly behavior; whereby he acquired the friendship
of many, such as were great in learning and nobility; among whom not a few of
Consular dignity: and so honored by diverse, that they wore his picture in
rings cut in precious stones. A great Admirer, and as much admired, of the
excellent Poets of those times, with whom he was most familiar and intimate.
Being persuaded by some of them to leave out three verses of those many which
he had written, he gave his consent, so that of all he might except three
only: whereupon they privately writ those which they would have him abolish,
and he on the other side those which he excepted, when both their papers, being
shown, presented the same verses, the first and second recorded by Pedo
Albinovanus, who was one of the arbiters, Semi bouemque virum, semi ^irumque
bouem.
Sedg lidum Borean, egelidumque Notu^.
whereby it appears that his admirable wit did not want an answerable
judgment in suppressing the liberty of his verse, had he not affected it. An
ample patrimony he had in the territories of Sulmo; with a house and a temple
in the city, where now stands the Church of Sancta Maria de Tumba; and where
now stands the Church of Sancta Maria de Consolatione he had an other in Rome,
not far from the Capitol; with pleasant Hort-yards between the ways of
Flaminia and Claudia, wherein he was accustomed to recreate himself with his
Muses. He had had three wives: whereof the first being given him in his youth,
as neither worthy nor profitable, soon after (according to the custom of the
Romans) he divorced: nor lived he long with the second, although nobly borne,
and of behavior inculpable. The chastity and beauty of the third he often
extolleth; whom he instructed in poetry, and to his death entirely affected.
Neither was her affection inferior to his; living all the time of his
banishment like a sorrowful widow; and continuing to the end exemplarie
faithful. But in this euery-way happy condition, when his age required ease,
and now about to employ his beloved vacancie in the reniew and polishing of his
former labors, he was banished, or rather con^ined to Tomos (a city of
Sarmatia bordering on the Euxine Sea) by Augustus Caesar, on the fourth of the
Ides of December, and in the one and fiftieth year of his age, to the general
grief of his friends and acquaintance; who sailed into Thrace in a ship of his
own, and by land performed the rest of his voyage. The cause of this his so
cruel and deplored exile is rather coniectured than certainly known. Most
agree that it was for his too much familiarity with Iulia the daughter of
Augustus, masked under the name of Corinna. Others, that he had unfortunately
seen the incest of Caesar: which may be insinuated, in, that he complains of
his error, and compares himself to Actaeon. But the pretended occasion was for
his composing of the Art of Love, as intolerably lascivious, and corrupting
good manners. A pretense I may call it, since unlikely it is that he should
banish him in his age for what he writ when hardly a man, and after so long a
conniuance. Yet Augustus, either to conceal his own crime or his daughters,
would have it so thought: neither would Ov (...) reneale the true cause, lest
he should further exasperate his displeasure. After he had long in vain
solicited his repea^e by the mediation of Germanicus Caesar, and others that
were near unto the Emperor; or at least to be removed to a more temperate
Clime; his hopes (as he writes) forsaking the earth with Augustus, he dyed at
Tomos in the fifth year of the reign of Tiberius; having lived seven years
in banishment. As Tibullus and he were borne in one day, so he and Liuie dyed
on an other; that his birth and death might be nobly accompanied. He had so
won the barbarous Get's with his humanity and generous actions (having also
written a book in their language) that they honored him in his life with
triumphant garlands, and celebrated his funerals with universal sorrow;
erecting his tomb before the gates of their city, hard by a lake which
retains his name to this day. His sepulcher was found in the year, MDVIII.
with a magnificent couerture presenting this Epitaph.

FATYM NECESSITATIS LEX.
Here ^es that ^iu ag Po^t, by the rage
C^g^ear Augustus banished from Rome:
Who (...) his cou^^ (...) sought to intere^ b^ Age;
But vai^ly, Fate has lodged him in this tomb.
Isabella Queen of Hungary, in the year MDXL. showed to Bargaeu^ a pen of
silver, found not long before under certain ruins, with this inscription;
OVIDII NASONIS CALAMVS: which she highly esteemed, and preserved as a sacred
relic. Of the books which he writ, since most of them are extant among us, I
will only recite these following verses of Anga'u^ Politianus.

1 From times first birth be chants the change of things 2 ^^e stanies of (...)
in ^legiacks sings, 3 (...) lbis he insnares, 4 (...) with ^ouers cares, 5
(...) deplores his sad exile, 6 (...) Roman Festiuals com^th, 7 (...) unknown
to Latin ears, 8 (...) glide in heauely spheres, 9 (...) igran mickr^mes, 10
(...) climes, 11. (...) abuse the times,
Yet leaves he out the Remedy of Love, a legitimate Poem (except he make it an
appendix to the Art) and his Consolation to Liuia for the death of Drusus:
which Seneca has excerped and sprinkled among his several Cons^lations. Among
such a multiplicitie of arguments our gentle Poet did never write a virulent
verse, but only against Cormficus; (maskt under the name of Ibis) who
solicited his wi^e in his absence, and labored against the repeal of his
banishment. Concerning his Metamorphosis, it should seem that he therein
imitated Parthenius of Chios, who writ on the same argument: as the Latin Poets
even generally borrowed their inventions from the Grecian Magazins. I will
conclude with that himself has written of this Poem, wherein I have employed
my vacant hours: with what success, I leave to the censure of others, which
perhaps may prou^ less rigid than my own.

I thank your love: Trist ^lib^. Elegia. 6.
my verse far liueber then
My picture show me; wherefore those peruse:
My verse, which sing the charged shapes of men
Though lest vnpersect by my banished Muse.
Departing, these I sadly with my hand
I^ to the fire, with other riches, threw.
Her son so Thestias burning in his brand,
A better sister than a mother grew:
So I, what should not perish with me, cast
Those brokes, my issue; in the sunerall flame:
In that I did my Muse and verse distaste;
Or that as yet unpolished and lame.
But since I could not so destroy them quite;
I or sundry copies it should scene there be:
Now may they live, nor lazily delight
The generous header; put in mind of me.
Yet they with patience can by none be read,
That know not how they uncorrected stand:
Snatched from the forge, are thoroughly anuiled;
Deprived of my last life-giuing hand.
For praise I pardon crave: though highly graced
If, Reader, they be not despisd by thee:
Yet in the front be these six verses placed;
if with thy liking it at least agree.
Who me^ts this Orpl an-volume, poor in worth
Within your (...) charlorage afford.
In wi^ne are fauo^r, ^et by him set sorth;
(...) ^sht from lie uncrell of his Iod.
The (...) which presents it is wae defect,
At plea^ure with a friendly hand correct.
OVID DEFENDED.
SInce diverse, only witty in reproouing, have profaned our Poet with their
fastidious censures: we, to vindicate his worth from detraction, and prouent
preiudicacie, have here revived a few of those infinite testimonies, which the
cleerest indgements of all Ages have given him. I will begin with the censure
of that accurate Orator MARCUS ANNaeVS SENECA, Controu. 10.
One of his frequent and admiring Auditors. NASO had a constant, becoming, and
amiable wit. His Prose appeared no other than dissolved Verses: And a little
after. Of his words no Prodigal, except in his Verse: wherein, he was not
ignorant of the fault, but affected it: and often would say, that a
Molemisse-became not a beautiful face, but made it more lovely. Amongst the
excellent of his time, we may esteem V^ULEIVS PATERCVLVS, Hist. lib. 2.
Who writes thus in his history. It is almost (...) S. HIEROME; In Ose cap ^
Semiramis, of whom they report many wonders, erected the walls of Babylon; as
^es^tisiss that renowned Poet in the fourth book of his Metamorphosis. Nor is
he forgot by S. AUGUSTINE. De Curs^ De^
And Naso, that excellent Poet. Now descend we to those, whom later times have
preferred for learning and indgement. Thus sings the high praised ANGEIVS
POLITIANVS. In Natricia.
It Is do by all, wa^trer (...), whom Sulmo bore,
The (...) Tyber honored more,
Than has soul ^x le thee desam'd, O Rome!
From Geuck (...) (alas!) but I alse in tomb.
Perhaps (...) serve thy Augustus spies
To loike o^ Iu^ia (...) friendly eyes.
ERASMUS crowns him with the perfection of Eloquence. (...).
And the Censurer of all Poets, JULIUS CaeSAR SCALIGER, (...)
thus writes, when he comes to censure our Author. But now we arrive where
the height of wit, and sharpness of judgment, are both to be exerciz'd, For,
who can commend OVID sufficiently? much less, who dares reprehend him?
Notwithstanding, I will say something; not in way of detraction, but that we
also may be able to grow with his greatness. Then speaking of his
Metamorphosis. Books deserving a more fortunate Author; that from his last
hand they might have had their perfection: which he himself bewaileth in
luculent Verses. Yet are there, in these, well-nigh an infinite number, which
the wit of an other, I believe, could never have equaled. And thus exclaimes
against Caesar in the person of OVID.

Tyrant, In Heroibus
with me I would thou badst begun:
Nor thy black slaughters had my fate fore-run.
If my licentious Youth incenst thee so;
Thy own condemns thee: into exile go.
Thy Cabinets are stained with horrid deeds;
And thy soul guilt all monstrous names exceeds.
Divine wit, innocence, nor yet my tongue,
Next to Apollo's could prevent my wrong.
I smoeth'd the old Poets with my fluent vain;
And taught the New a far more numerous strain.
When thee I praised then from the truth I sweru'd
And banishment for that alone deserved.
(...) can he said to transcend him. What should I say of that singular, and
well-nigh divine contexture of Fable with Fable? so surpassing, that nothing
can be spoken or done, more artificially, more excellently; or, indeed, more
gracefully. Who handling such diversity of matter, so cunningly weaues them
together, that all appear but one Series. Planudes, well knowing that Greece
had not a Poem so abounding with delight and beauty, translated it into that
language. What should I say more? All Arts, which Antiquity knew, are here so
fully delineated, that a number, expert in both tongues, of prime understanding
and judgments, admire it beyond all expression. The first that writ a
Commentary on this book (whereof fifty thousand were vented, and that in his
life time) was RAPHAEL REGIVS: In praesar. Comment.
Who thus in his Preface. There is nothing appertaining to the knowledge and
glory of war, whereof we have not famous examples in the Metamorphosis of
OVID; (not to speak of stratagems, nor the Orations of Commanders) described
with such efficacy and eloquence, that often, in reading, you will imagine
your self imbroiled in their conflicts. Neither shall you find any Author,
from whom, a civil life may gather better instruction. IACOBVS MICYLLVS. In
Principio Additionum.
Hardly shall you find a Poem, which flows with greater facility. For what
should I speak of Learning? Herein, so great, so various, and abstruse; that
many places have neither been explained, nor yet understood; no, not by the
most knowing: requiring rather a resolution from the Delian Oracle, etc.

Let the ingenuous, that affect not error, now rectify their own by the
judgments of these. But, incurable Critics, who war about words, and gail
the sound to feed on their sores, as not desiring their sanitie, I forbear to
dissuade, and deliver them up to the censure of Agrippa.

QVOD OLIM FACIEBAT VOTVM GERMANI^O OVIDIVS, IDEM AVGVSTISS^MO CAROLO
Interpretis sui nomine ^acu^nt OVIDIANI MANES.
EXcipe pacato, Caesa^ Brittannice, vultu
^^oc ^pus, (...) tim d^ dirige nauis ^ter.
Officioqus, l^uem non au^ ^^atu^ honorem,
Hu^ (...) dexter ades.
H^^c ^e da plac^^um d^deris in carmine vires:
Ingenium vnitu statque caditque tuo.
Pag^a^ (...) docte sub^tur^ mo^etur
Principis, vt Clar^o missa legenda De^.
OVID'S METAMORPHOSIS. The first Book.
THE ARGUMENT.
THe World, formed out of Chaos. Man is made.
The Ages change. The Giants Heaven invade.
Earth turns their blou^ to men Ioue's flames confound
L^caon, now a Wolf* The World is drowned,
Mankind, cast stones restore. All quickening Earth
Renews the rest, and gives new Monsters birth.
Apollo, Python kills; hart-wounded, loves
Lust-flying Daph^e: She a Laurel proves.
Jove, (...) made a Cow, to mask foul deeds.
Hermes, a Heards-man. Syri^x, changed to Reeds.
Dead Argus eyes adorn the Peacock's train.
The Cow, to I^, love transform's again.
OF forms, to other bodies changed, I sing.
Assist, you Gods (from you these wonders spring.)
And, from the Worlds first fabric to these times*
Deduce my never discontinued Rymes.
The Sea, the Earth, al-couering Heaven vnfram'd,
One face had nature, which they Chaos named:
An undigested lump; a barren load,
Where iarr^ing seeds of things ill-ioyn'd abode.
No Titan yet the World with light adornes;
Nor waxing Phoebe filled her waned horns:
Nor hung the selfe-poiz'd Earth in thin Air placed;
Nor Amphitrite the vast shore embraced.
With Earth, was Air and Sea: the Earth unstable,
The Air was dark, the Sea vn-nauigable:
No certain form to any one assigned:
This that resists. For, in one body joined,
The Cold and Hot, the Dry and Humid fight:
The Soft and Hard, the Heavy with the Light.
But God, the better Nature, this decides:
Who Earth from Heaven, the Sea from earth diuides:
And purer Heaven extracts from grosser Air.
All which unfolded by his prudent care
From that blind Mass; the happily dis-ioyn'd
With strifelesse* peace he to their seats confined.
Forthwith vp-sprung the quick and waightlesse Fire,
Whose flames unto the highest Arch aspire:
The next, in leuitie and place, is Air:
Gross Elements to thicker Earth repair
Selfe-clog'd with weight: the Waters, flowing round,
Possess the last, and solid Tellus bound.
What God soever this division wrought,
And every part to due proportion brought;
First, lest the Earth unequal should app^are,
He turned it round, in figure of a Sphere;
Then Seas diffused; commanding them to rore
With ruffling Winds, and give the Land a shore.
To those h^ adds Springs, Ponds, Lakes immense;
And Rivers, whom their winding borders fence:
Of these, not few Earth's thirsty jaws devour;
The rest, their streams into the Ocean pour;
When, in that liquid Plain, with freer wave,
The fomy Cliffs, in stead of Banks, they laue:
Bids Trees increase to Woods, the Plains extend,
The rocky Mountains rise, and Vales descend.
Two equal Zones, on either side, dispose
The measured Heavens; a fifth, more hot than those.
^s many Lines th'included Globe divide:
^th'midst insufferable beams reside;
^now clothes the other two: the temperate hold
Twixt these their seats, the heat well mixed with cold.
As Earth, as Water, upper Air out-waighs;
^o much does Air Fire's lighter balance raise.
^here, he commands the changing Clouds to stray;
^here, thundering terrors mortal minds dismay;
And with the Lightning, Winds ingendring Snow:
Yet not permitted every way to blow;
Who hardly now to tear the World refrain
^So Brothers jar!) though^ they divided reign.
^o Persis and Sabaea, Eurus flies;
Whose fruits perfume the blushing Mornes vp-rise:
^ext to the Evening, and the Coast the glowes
^ith setting Phoebus, flowery Zeph'rus blows:
(...) Scythia horrid Boreas holds his reign,
^eneath Boots and the frozen Waine:
The Land to this opposed, does Auster steep
With fruitful showrs, and clouds which ever weep.
^boue all these he placed the liquid Skies;
Which, void of earthly dregs, did highest rise.
Scarce had he all thus orderly disposed;
When As the Stars their radiant heads disclosed
(^ Long (...) in Night) and shone through all the sky.
Then, that no place should vnpossessed lie,
^right Constellations, and fair-figured Gods,
^n heavenly Mansions fixed their blessed abodes:
The glittering Fishes to the Floods repair;
The Beasts to Earth, the Birds resort to Air.
The nobler Creature, with a mind possessed,
Was wanting yet, that should command the rest.
That Maker, the best World's original,
Either (...) fram^d of see Celestial;
Or Earth, which late he did from Heaven divide,
Some sacred seeds retayn'd, to Heaven allied:
Which with the living stream Prometheus mixed;
And in that artificial structure fixed
The form of all the all-ruling Deities.
And where as others see with downe-cast eyes,
He with a lofty look did Man^indue,
And bade him Heavens transcendent glories view.
So, that rude Clay, which had no form before,
Thus changed, of Man the unknown figure bore.
The Golden Age was first; which vncompeld,
And without rule, in Faith and Truth excelled.
As then* there was nor punishment nor fear;
Nor threatening Laws in brass prescribed were;
Nor suppliant crouching pris^ners shook to see
Their ^^grie Judge: but, all was safe and free.
To visit other Worlds, no wounded Pine
Did yet from Hills to faithless Seas decline.
Then, vnambitious Mortals knew no more,
But their own Countrie's Nature-bounded shore.
Nor Swords, nor Arms were yet: no trenches round
Besieged Iownes, nor stri^^efull Trumpets sound:
The Soldier, of no v^e. In firm content
And harmless ease, their happy days were spent.
The yet-free (...) did of her own accord
(Vntoin^^ wit vploughs) all sorts of fruit afford.
Content with Natures vn-enforced food,
They gather Wildings, Strawb'ries of the Wood,
^owre Cornels, what upon the Bramble grows,
And Acorns, which Ioue's spreading Oak bestows.
^Twas always Spring: warm Zophyrus sweetly blew
On smiling Flowers, which without setting grew.
^orth-with the Earth corn, unmanured, bears;
And every year renewes her golden Ears:
With Milk and Nectar were the Rivers filled;
And yellow Honey from green Elms distilled.
But, after Saturn was thrown down to Hell,
^ue ruled; and then the Silver Age befell:
^ore base than Gold, and yet than Brass more pure.
^ue changed the Spring (which always did endure)
^o Winter, Summer, Autumn hot and cold:
^he shortened Springs the yea^'s fourth-part uphold,
^hen, first the glowing Air with feruor burned:
^he Rain to ycicles by bleake winds turned.
^en houses built; late housed in Caves profound,
(...) plashed Bowres, and Sheds with O^iers bound.
^hen, first was Corn into long furrows thrown:
and Oxen under heau^e yokes did (...)
Next unto this succeeds the Brazen Age;
^orse natured, prompt to horrid^warre, ^^^rage:
(...) yet nor wicked. Stubborn Yr'^ the (...).
^hen, blushlesse Crimes, which all degrees su^past,
^he World surround. Shame, Truth, and Faith depart.
^^aud enters, ignorant in no bad Art.
^^rce, Treason, and the wicked Love of gayn.
their sails, those winds, which yet they knew not, strayn:
and ships, which long on loft^^ Mountains stood,
^hen plowed the vnpractiz'd bosom of the Flood.
The Ground, as common erst as Light, or Air,
By limit-giuing Geometric they share.
Nor with rich Earth's just nourishments content,
For treasure they her secret entrails rent;
The powerful Evil, which all power inuades,
By her well hid, and wrapped in Stygian shades.
Cursed Steel, more cursed Gold she now forth brought:
And bloody-handed War, who with both fought.
All live by spoil. The Host his Guest betrays;
Sons, Father-in-lawes: 'twixt Brethren love decays.
Wives husbands, husbands wives attempt to kill:
And cruel Step-mothers pale poisons fill.
The Son his Fathers hasty death desires:
Foild Piety, trod under foot, expires.
Astraa, last of all the heavenly birth,
Affrighted leaves the blood-defiled Earth.
And that the Heavens their safety might suspect,
The Giants now celestial Thrones affect;
Who to the skies congested Mountains rear.
Then Jove with thunder did Olympus tear;
Steep Pelion from under Ossa thrown.
With their own weight their monstrous bodies gro^e;
And with her Childrens blood the Earth imbrued:
Which she, scarce thoroughly cold, with life iudu'd;
And gave thereto, t'vphold her Stock, the face
And form of Man; a God-contemning Race,
Greedy of slaughter, not to be withstood;
Such, as well shows, that they were borne of blood.
Which when from Heaven Saturnius did behold;
He sigh't; reuoluing what was yet untold,
Of fell Lycao^'s late ihhumane feast.
Just anger, worthy Jove, inflamed his breast.
A Synod called, the summoned appear.
There is a way, well seen when skies be clear,
Tho Milkie named: by this, the Gods resort
Unto The Almighty Thunderers high Court.
With euer-open doors, on either hand,
Of nobler Deities the Houses stand:
The Vulgar dwell dispersed: the Chief and Great
In front of all, their shining Mansions seat.
This glorious Roof I would not doubt to call,
Had I but boldness lent me, Heauen's White Hall.
All set on Marble seats; He, leaning on
His Iuory Scepter, in a higher Throne,
Did twice or thrice his dreadful Tresses shake:
The Earth, the Sea, the Stars (though fixed) quake;
Then thus, inflamed with indignation, spoke:
I was not more perplexed in that sad Time,
For this Worlds Monarchy, when bold to clime,
The Serpent-footed Giants durst invade,
And would on Heaven their hundred-hands have laid.
Though fierce the Foe, yet did that War depend
But of one Body, and had soon an end.
Now all the race of man I must confound,
Where-euer Ner^us walks his wauy Round:
And this I vow by those infernal Floods,
Which slowly glide through silent Stygian woods.
All cures first sought; such parts as health reject
Must be cut off, least they the sound infect.
Our Demigods, Nymphs, Syluans, Satyrs, Faunes,
Who haunt clear Springs, high Mountayns, Woods, and Lawnes
(On whom since yet we please not to bestow
Celestial dwellings) must subsist below.
Think you, you Gods, they can in safety rest,
When me (of lightning, and of you possessed,
Who both at our Imperial pleasure sway)
The stern Lycaon practiced to betray?
All bluster, and in rage the wretch demand.
So, when bold Treason sought, with impious hand,
By Caesar's blood t'out-race the Roman name;
Mankind, and all the World's affrighted Frame,
Astonished at so great a ruin, shook.
Nor thine, for Thee, less thought, Augustus, took,
Than they for Jove. He, when he had suppressed
Their murmur, thus proceeded to the rest.
He has his punishment; remit that care:
The manner how, I will in brief declare*
The Times accused, (but as I hoped belied)
To try, I down from steep Olympus slide.
A God, transformed like one of humane birth,
I wandered through the many-peopl'd Earth.
'Twere long to tell, what crimes of every sort
Swarmed in all parts: the truth exceeds report.
Now past den-dreadfull Maenalus confines,
Cyl^ene, cold Lycaeus clad with Pines,
There where the Arcadians dwell, when Doubtfull-light
Drew on the deawy Chariot of the Night,
I entered his vnhospitable Court.
The better Vulgar to their prayers resort,
When I by signs had shown a Gods repayr.
Lyca^n first derides their zealous prayer;
Then said, We straight the undoubted truth will try,
Whether he be immortal, or may die.
In dead of night, when all was whist and still,
Me, in my sleep, he purposes to kill.
Nor with so foul an enterprise content,
An Hostage murders, from Molo^sus sent:
Part of his seuer'd scarce-dead lims he boyles;
An other part on hissing Embers broils;
This set before me, I the house ore-turn'd
With vengefull flames, which round about him burned.
He, frighted, to the silent Desert flies;
There howles, and speech with lost endeavor ^ries.
His selfe-like jaws still grin: more than for food
He slaughters beasts, and yet delights in blood.
His arms to thighs, his clothes to bristles changed;
A Wolf; not much from his first form estranged:
So horie hair'd; his looks so full of rape;
So fiery eyed; so terrible his shape.
One house that fate, which all deserve, sustaines:
For, through the World the fierce Eri^^ys reigns.
You Would think they had conspired to sinn^* But, all
Shall swiftly by deserved vengeance fall.
Ioue's words apart approve, and his intent
Exasperate: the rest give their consent.
Yet all for Man's destruction grieved appear;
And ask what form the widowed Earth shall bear?
Who shall with odours their cold Altars feast:
Must Earth be only by wild beasts possess?
The King of Gods re-comforts their despair;
And bids them impose on him that care:
Who promised, by a strange original
Of better people, to supply their fall.
And now about to let his lightning fly,
He feared lest so much flame should catch the sky,
And burn heavens Axeltree. Besides, by doom,
Of certain Ea^e, he knew the time shoul'd come,
When Sea, Earth, ravished Heaven, the curio^s Frames
Of this World's mass, should shrink in purging flame.
He therefore those Cyclopean darts reiects;
And different-natur'd punishments elects:
To open all the Floodgates of the sky,
And Man by inundation to destroy.
Rough Boreas in Aeollan prison laid,
And those dry blasts which gathered Clouds invade;
Out flies the South, with dropping wings; who shrouds
His terrible aspect in pitchy clouds.
His white hair streams, his swollen Beard big with showers;
Mists bind his brows, Rain from his bosom poures.
As with his hands the hanging clouds he crushed;
They roared, and down in showers together rusht.
All-colour'd Iris, Juno's messenger,
To weeping Clouds does nourishment confer.
The Corn is lodged, the Husbandmen despair;
Their long years labor lost, with all their care.
Jove, not content with his aethereall rages.
His Brother's auxiliaric floods ingages.
The Streams conuented; It Is too late to use
Much speech, said Neptune; all your powers effuse;
Your doors vnbarre, remove what-ere restraines
Your liberal Waves, and give them the full raynes.
Thus charged, they return; their Springs, unfold;
And to the Sea with headlong fury rol'd.
He with his Trident strikes the Earth: She shakes;
And way for Water by her motion makes.
Through open fields now rush the spreading Floods;
And hurry with them Cattle, People, Woods,
Houses, and Temples with their Gods enclosed.
What such a force, vn-ouerthrowne, opposed,
The higher-swelling Water quite deuoures;
Which hides the aspiring tops of swallowed towers.
Now Land and Sea no different visage bore:
For, all was Sea, nor had the Sea a shore.
He, takes a Hill: He, in a Boat deplores;
And, where He lately plowed, now strikes his Oars.
Over Corn, over drowned Villages He sails:
He, from high Elmes entangled Fishes hales.
In Fields they anchor cast, as Chance did guide:
And Ships the vnder-lying Vineyards hide.
Where Mountayne-louing Goats did lately graze,
The Sea-calfe now his ugly body lays.
Groves, Cities, Temples, covered by the Deep,
The Nymphs admire, in woods the Delphins keep,
And chase about the boughs; the Wolf does swim
Amongst the Sheep: the Lion (now not grim)
And Tygres tread the Waves. Swift feet no more
Avail the Heart; nor wounding tuskes the Bore.
The wandering Birds, hid Earth long sought in vain,
With weary wings descend into the Main.
Licentious Seas over drowned Hills now fret:
And unknown surges Ayerie Mountains beat.
The Waves the greater part devour: the rest,
Death, with long-wanted sustenance, oppressed.
The Land of Phocis, fruitful when a Land,
Diuides A^nia from the Actaean strand;
But now a part of the insulting Main,
Of sudden-swelling waters a vast Plain,
There, his two heads Parnassus does extend
To touched Stars; whose tops the Clouds transcend.
On this Deucalion's little Boat was thrown:
With him, his Wife; the rest all ouer-flowne.
Corycian Nymphs, and Hill-gods he adores;
And Themis, then oraculous, implores.
None was there better, none more just than He:
And none more reuerenc't the Gods than She.
Jove, when he saw that all a Lake was grown,
And of so many thousand men but one;
One, of so many thousand women, left;
Both guiltless, pious both; of all bereft;
The clouds (now chac't by Boreas) from him throws:
And Earth to Heaven, Heaven unto Earth he shows.
Nor Seas persist to rage: their awful Guide
The wild waves calmes, his Trident laid aside;
And calls blew Triton, riding on the Deep
(Whosoever mantle Nature did in purple steep)
And bids him his lowd-sounding shell inspire,
And give the Floods a signal to retire.
He his wreathed trumpet takes (as given in charge)
That from the turning bottom grows more large:
To which when he gives breath, it is heard by all,
From farre-vprising Phoebus to his Fall.
When this the watery Deity had set
To his large mouth, and sounded a retreat;
All Floods it heard, that Earth or Ocean knew:
And all the Floods, that heard the same, withdrew.
Seas now have shores; full streams their channels keep:
They sink, and hills above the waters peep.
Earth re-ascends: as waves decrease, so grow
The forms of things, and late-hid figures show.
And after a long day, the trees extend
Their bared tops; with mud their branches bend.
The World's restored. Which when in such a state,
So deadly silent, and so desolate,
Deucalion saw: with tears which might have made
An other Flood, he thus to Pyrrha said.
O Sister! O my Wife! the poor Remains
Of all thy Sex; which all, in one, contains!
Whom humane Nature, one paternall Line,
Then one chaste Bed, and now like dangers join!
Of what the Sun beholds from East to West,
We two are all: the Sea intombs the rest.
Nor yet can we of life be confident;
The threatening clouds strange terrors still present.
O what a heart would thou have had, if Fate
Had taken me from thee, and prolonged thy date!
So wild a fear, such sorrows, so forlorn
And comfortless, how could thou have borne!
If Seas had sucked thee in, I would have followed
My Wife in death, and Sea should me have swallowed.
O would I could my Father's cunning use!
And souls into well-modul'd Clay infuse!
Now, all our mortal Race we two contain;
And but a pattern of Mankind remain.
This said, both wept: both, prayers to heaven address;
And seek the Oracle in their distress.
Forthwith descending to Cephisus Flood,
Which in known banks now ran, though thick with mud;
They on their heads and garments water throw;
And to the Temple of the Goddess go;
At that time all defiled with moss and mire;
The unfrequented Altar without fire.
Then, humbly on their faces prostrate laid,
And kissing the cold stones, with fear thus prayed.
If Powers divine to just desires consent,
And Angry Gods do in the end relent;
Say, Themis, how shall we ou^ Race repair?
O, help the drowned in Water and Despair!
The Goddess, with compassion moved replied;
Go from my Temple: both your faces hide;
Let Garments all unbraced loosely flow;
And your Great-Parents bones behind you throw.
Amazed! first Pyrrha silence breaks, and said;
By me the Goddess must not be obay'd;
And, trembling, pardon craves: Her Mothers ghost
She fears would suffer, if her bones were tossed.
Meane-while they ponder and reiterate
The words proceeding from ambiguous Fate.
Then, Promethides, Epimethida
Thus recollecteth; lost in her dismay:
Or we the Oracle misse-vnderstand
(The righteous Gods no wicked thing command)
Or Earth is our Great-Mother: and the stones,
Therein contained, I take to be her bones.
These, sure, are those we should behind us throw.
Although Titania thought it might be so,
Yet she misse-doubts. Both with weak faith rely
On ayding Heaven. What hurt was it to try?
Departing with heads veiled and clothes vnbrac't,
Commanded stones they over their shoulders cast.
Did not Antiquity avouch the same,
Who would beleeu't! the stones less hard became.
And as their natural hardness them forsook;
So by degrees they Man's dimensions took;
And gentler-natur'd grew, as they increast:
And, yet not manifestly Man expressed;
But, like rough hewne' rude marble Statues stand,
That want the Workemans last life-giuing hand.
The Earthy parts, and what had any juice,
Were both converted to the body's use.
The unflexible and solid, turn to bones:
The veins remain, that were when they were stones.
Those, thrown by Man, the for ome of men indue:
And those were Women, which the Woman threw.
Hence we, a hardy Race, inured to pain:
Our Actions our Original explain.
All other creatures took their numerous birth.
And figures, from the voluntary Earth.
When that old humor with the Sun did sweat,
And slimy Marshes grew big with heat;
The pregnant Seeds, as from their Mothers womb,
From quickening Earth both growth and form assume.
So, when seven chanel'd Nile forsakes the Plain,
When ancient bounds retiring streams contain,
And late-left slime aethereall feruours burn,
Men various creatures with the gleabe vp-turne:
Of those, some in their very time of birth;
Some lame; and others half alive, half earth.
For, Heat and Moisture, when they temperate grow,
Forthwith conceive; and life on things bestow.
From striving Fire and Water all proceed;
Discording Concord ever apt to breed.
So, Earth by that late Deluge muddy grown,
When on her lap reflecting Titan shone,
Produced a World of forms; restored the late;
And other unknown Monsters did create.
Huge Python, thee, against her will, she bred;
A Serpent, whom the newborn People dread;
Whose bulk did like a moving Mountain show.
Behold! the God that bears the Silver Bow
(Till then, inured to strike the flying Dear,
(...) Their happy Selves, and longs to taste their bliss:
Admires her fingers, hands, her arms halfe-bare;
And Parts unseen conceiues to be more rare.
Swifter than following Winds, away she runs;
And him, for all this his entreaty, shuns.
Stay Nymph, I pray thee stay; I am no Fo:
So Lambs from Wolves, Hearts fly from Lions so;
So from the Eagle springs the trembling Dove:
They, from their deaths: but my pursuit is Love.
Wo's me, if thou should fall, or thorns should race
Thy tender legs, whilst I enforce the chase!
These roughs are craggy: moderate thy haste,
And trust me, I will not pursue so fast.
Yet know, who't is you please: No Mountanere,
No homebred Clown; nor keep I Cattle here.
From whom thou fly^st thou know not (silly fool!)
And therefore fly'st thou. I in Delphos rule.
I^nian Claros, Lycian Patara,
And Sea-girt Tenedos do me obey.
Jove is my Father. What shall be, has been,
Or is; by my instructiue rays is seen.
Immortal Verse from our invention springs;
And how to strike the well concording-strings.
My shafts hit sure: yet He one surer found,
Who in my empty bosom made this wound.
Of herbs I found the virtue; and through all
The World they Me the great Physician call.
Aye me, that herbs can Love no cure afford!
That Arts, relieuing all, should fail their Lord!
More had he said, when she, with nimble dread,
From him, and his vnfinisht court-ship fled.
How graceful then! the Wind that obuious blew,
Too much betrayed her to his amorous view;
And played the Wanton with her fluent hair,
Her Beauty, by her flight, appeared more rare.
No more the God will his entreaties loose;
But, urged by Love, with all his force pursues.
As when a Hare the speedy Gray-hound spies;
His feet for prey, she hers for safety plyes;
Now bears he up; now, now he hopes to fetch her;
And, with his snowt extended, strains to catch her*
Not knowing whether caught or no, she slips.
Out of his wide-stretcht jaws, and touching lips.
The God and Virgin in such strife appear:
He, quickened by his hope; She, by her fear,
But, the Pursuer does more nimble prove:
Enabled by the industrious wings of love.
Nor gives he time to breathe: now at her heels,
His breath upon her dangling hair she feels.
Clean spent, and fainting, her affrighted blood
Forsakes her cheeks. She cries unto the Flood.
Help Father, if your streams contain a Power*
May Earth, for too well pleasing, me devour:
Or, by transforming, O destroy this shape,
That thus betrays me to undoing rape.
Forthwith, a numnesse all her lims possessed;
And slender filmes her softer sides inuest.
Hair into leaves, her Arms to branches grow:
And late swift feet, now roots, are less than slow.
Her graceful head a leauy top sustaines:
One beauty throughout all her form remains.
Still Phoebus loves. He handles the new Plant;
And feels her Heart within the bark to pant:
Embraced the bole, as he would her have done
(...) As ignorant of what she more than feared.
Jove faynes (her importunity to shift)
Her borne of Earth. Saturnia begs the gift.
What should he do? be cruel to his Love;
Or by denying her, suspicion move?
Shame that persuades; and Love does this dissuade*
But, stronger Love Shame under foot had laid;
Yet doubts, if he should such a thing deny
His Wife and Sister, 't would the fraud descry.
Obtayn'd; not forthwith fear the Goddess left;
Distrusting Jove, and jealous of his theft,
Until delivered to Argus guard.
A hundred eyes his head's large circuit starr'd;
Whereof, by turns, at once two only slept;
The other watched, and still their Stations kept.
Which way so-ere he stands, he Io^ spies:
Io^, behind him, was before his eyes.
By day, she grazed abroad: Sol under ground,
He housed her, in unworthy halter bound.
On leaves of Tress, and bitter herbs she fed.
Poor soul! the Earth, not always green, her bed;
And of the Torrent drinks. With hands Vp-heau'd
She thought to beg for pity: how deceived!
Who lowed, when she began to make her moan;
And trembled at the voice which was her own.
Unto the banks of Inachus she strayed;
Her Fathers banks, where she so often had played:
Beholding in his stream her horned head,
She starts; and from her self, selfe-frighted, fled.
Her Sisters, nor old Inachus, her knew:
Which way so-ere they went, she would pursue,
And suffer them to stroke her; and does move
Their wonder with her strange expressed love.
He brought her Grass: She gently lickt his hands,
And kissed his palms; nor, longer, tears withstands.
And had she then had words, she had displayed
Her Name, her Fortunes, and implored his aid.
For words, she letters with her foot impressed
Upon the Sand, which her sad change professed.
Wo's me! cried Inachus: his arms he throws
About her snowy Neck. O, woe of woes!
Art thou my daughter, throughout all the Round
Of Earth so sought; that now, unsought, art found!
Less was thy loss: less was my misery.
Dumb wretch (alas!) thou can not make reply:
Yet, as thou can thou do: thy lowings speak,
And deop-fetcht sighs that from thy bosom break.
I, ignorant, prepared thy marriage bed:
My hopes, a Sonne-in-law, and Nephews fed.
Now, from the Heard, thy issue must descend:
Nor can the length of time my sorrows end;
Accursed in that a God. Deaths sweet relief
Hard fates deny to my immortal grief.
This said: his Daughter (in that shape beloved)
The Star-ey'd Argus far from thence removed;
When, mounted on a hill, the wary Spy
Suruayes the Playnes that round about him lie.
The King of Gods those sorrows she endured:
Could brook no longer, by his fault procured:
But, calls his son, of fulgent Pleias bred;
Commanding him to cut off Argus head.
He wings his heels, puts on his Felt, and takes
His drowsy Rod; the Tower of Jove forsakes;
And, winding stoops to Earth. The changed God
His Hat and Wings lays by; retaynes his Rod:
With which he drives his Gotes (like one that feeds
The bearded Heard) and sings this slender Reeds.
Much taken with that Art, before unknown,
Come, sit by me, said Argus, on this stone.
No place affords better Pastorage,
Or shelter from the Suns offensive rage.
Pleased Atlantiades does him obey;
And with discourse protracts the speedy Day:
Then, singing to his Pipes soft melody,
Endeavors to subdue each wakefull eye.
The Herds-man strives to conquer urgent sleep:
Though seized on half, the other half do keep
Obseruant watch. He asks who did invent
(With that, he yawn'd) that late-found Instrument.
Then, thus the God his charmed ears inclines:
Amongst the Hamadryd's and Nonacrines
(On cold Arcadian Hills) for beauty famed,
A Naias dwelt; the Nymphs, her Syrinx named.
Who often deceived the Satyrs that pursued,
The rural Gods, and th^se whom woods include:
In exercises, and in chaste desire,
Diana like: and such in her attire.
You either in each other might behold:
Her Bow was Horn; Diana's was of Gold:
Yet often mistook. ^ar crowned with Pines, returning
From steep Lyeaus, saw her; and, Ioue-burning,
Thus said: Fair Virgin, grant a Gods request;
And be his Wife. She would not hear the rest;
But fled from the despised as from her shame,
Till to smooth ^adon's sandy banks she came*
There stopped; implores the liquid Sisters aid,
To change her shape, and pity a fore't Maid.
^an, when he thought he had his Syrinx claspt
Between his arms, Reeds for her body graspt.
He sighs: they, stirred therewith, report again
^ mournful sound, like one that did complain.
^apt with the music; Yet, O sweet (said he)
Together ever thus converse will we.
Then, of unequal wax-ioyn'd Reeds he framed
This seuen-fold Pipe: of her 'twas Syrinx named.
The sly Cyllenius, thus discoursing, spies
^ow leaden sleep had seal'd-vp all his eyes.
Then, silent, with his Magic rod he strokes
Their languisht lights, which sounder sleep prouokes,
And with his Fawchion lops his nodding head:
Whose blood besmeared the hoarie Rock with red.
^here lies he; of so many lights, the light
^ut forth: his hundred eyes set in one night,
^et, that those starry jewels might remain,
^turnia fixed them in her Peacocks train.
Inslam'd with anger, and impatient haste,
Before sad ^o^s eyes and thoughts she placed
Erynnis Snakes, and through the World does drive
The conscience-stung affrighted Fugitive.
Thou, Nile, to her long toil an end did yield.
Approaching thee, she on thy margent kneeled;
Her looks (such as she had) to heaven vp-throwes:
With tears, sighs, sounds (expressing worldlesse woes)
^hee seemed Jove to accuse, as too ingrate,
And to implore an end of her hard fate.
^e clips his Wife; and her entreats to free
^he unjustly plagued. Be confident (said he)
^hee never more shall cause thy grief, or fear:
His vow he bids the Stygian Waters hear.
Appeased; the Nymph recouer'd her first look;
Sofaire, so sweet! the hair her skin forsook:
Her horns decrease: large eyes, wide jaws, contract:
Shoulders and hands again become exact:
Her hooues to nails diminish: nothing now
But that pure White, retaynes she of the Cow.
Then, on her feet her body she erects
Now borne by two. Her self she yet suspects;
Nor dares to speak alowd, lest she should hear
Her self to low; but softly tries with fear.
Now, thee, a Goddess, is adored by those
That linen wear, where sacred Nilus flows.
Hence sprung Ioue's Epaphus, no less divine;
Whose Temples next unto his Mother's join.
Equal in years, nor equal spirit wants
The Sunne-got Phacton: who proudly vants
Of his high Parentatge; nor will give place.
Inachides puts on him this disgrace:
Fool, thou thy Mother trusts in things unknown;
And of a Father boasts that is not thy own.
Vexed Phaeton blushed: his shame his rage repels:
Who straight to Clymene the slander tells:
And Mother, said he, to your grieses increase;
I free, and late so fiery, held my peace;
Ashamed that such a tainture should be laid
Upon my blood, that could not be gayn-said.
But, if I be descended from above;
Give proof thereof, and this reproach remove.
Then hangs about her neck: by her own Head,
By Merope's, her Sisters nuptial bed,
Inn eats her to produce some certain gage,
That might assure his questioned parentage.
Moved with her sons entreaty, more inflamed
With indignation to be so defamed,
She casts her arms to heaven: and looking on
His radiant Orb, thus said: I swear my son,
By yo^ fair Taper, that so bright appears
With far-proiected beams; who sees, and hears:
That Sun whom thou behold'st, who light and hear
Affords the informed World, did thee beget.
If not, may he to me deny his sight:
And to my eyes let this be his last light.
Nor far-remoued does his Palace stand;
His first-vprise confines upon our Land:
If that thy heart do serve thee, thither go;
And there thy Father, of thy Father, know.
Hereat, joyed Phacton enlightened grew;
Whose towering thoughts no less than Heaven pursew.
His Aethiopia past, and Ind which fries
With burning beams, he climes the Sun's vprise.
OVID'S METRAMORPHOSIS. The second Book.
THE ARGUMENT.
RAsh Phaeton fires the World His sisters mourn
Hu Tragedy; who into Poplars turn;
Their tears to Amber; Cygnus, to a Swan.
Jove, Phoebe-like, Calisto found a Man.
Her, Juno made a Bear: She, and her son,
Advanced stars, that still the Ocean shun.
Coronis, now a Crow, sties Neptune's fright,
Nictimine is made the Bird of Night.
The too-officious Raven, late so fair,
Is plumed with black. Ocyroe grows a Mare.
Phoebus, a Heardsman: Mercury, twice such;
Who turns betraying Battus into Tuch.
Envious A glauros, to a Statue, full
Of her minde's spots. Love Jove conuerts to a (...).
SOl's lofty Palace on high Pillars raised,
Shone all with gold, and stones that flame-like blaae'
The roof of Iuory, divinely decked:
The two-leau'd siluer-doores bright rays project.
The workmanship more admiration craved:
For, curious Musciber had there ingrau'd
The Land-imbracing Sea, the orbed Ground,
The arched Heavens. Blew Gods the billows crowned;
Shape-changing P^oteus, Triton shrill; the tall
Big-brawn'd Aegeon mounted on a Whale.
Gray Doris, and her daughters, heauenly-faire:
Some sit on Rocks, and dry their Sea-greene hair;
Some seem upon the dancing Waves to glide;
Others on bac^s of crooked ^ishes ride:
Amongst them all, no two appear the same;
Nor de^^e, more than sisters well became.
The Earth had saluage Beasts, Men, Cities, Woods,
Nymphs, Satyrs, rural Gods, and crystal Floods:
Above all these, Heauen's radiant image shines,
On both sides decked with six refulgent Signs.
To this, bold Phaeton made his ascent;
And to his doubted Father's presence bent;
Yet forced to stand aloose: for, mortal sight
Could not induret' approach so pure a light.
Sol clothed in purple, sits upon a Throne,
Which clearly with tralucent Emralds shone.
With equall-raigning Hours, on either hand,
The Days, the Months, the Years, the Ages stand:
The fragrant Spring with flowrie chaplet crowned:
Wheat ears, the brows of naked Summer bound:
Rich A^^^^mn smeared with crushed Lyaeus blood;
New, h^^y-headed Winter quiuering stood.
Much daunted at these sacred novelties,
The fear ^full Youth all-seeing Phoebus, spies;
Who said, What hither drew thee Phaeton,
Who art, and wo^ thily, my dearest Son?
He thus replied: O thou refulgent t Light,
Who all the World teioyeest with thy sight!
O Father if allowed to use that name,
Nor C^ymens by thee disguise her shame;
Produce some sign, that may my birth approve,
And from my thoughts these wretched doubts remove.
He, from his brows, his shining rays displac't;
And, bidding him draw-neere, his neck embraced.
By merit, as by birth, to thee is due
That name, said he; and Clymene was true.
To clear all doubts; ask what thou will, and take
Thy granted wish. Bear witness thou dark Lake,
The oath of Gods, unto our eyes unknown.
These words no sooner from his lips were flowne,
But he demands his Chariot, and the sway
Of his hot Steeds, to guide the winged Day.
The God repents him of the oath he made;
And, shaking his illustrious Tresses, said:
Thy tongue has made mine err, thy birth unblessed.
O, would I could break promise! this request,
I must confess, I only would deny:
And yet, dissuade I may. Thy death does lie
Within thy wish. What Is so desired by thee,
Can neither with thy strength nor youth agree.
Too great intentions set thy thoughts on fire.
Thou, mortal, do no mortal thing desire;
Through ignorance, affecting more than they
Dare undertake, who in Olympus sway.
Though each himself approve; except me, none
Is able to supply my burning Throne.
Not that dread Thunderer, who rules above,
Can drive these wheels: and who more great than Jove?
Steep is the first ascent; which in the prime
Of springing Day, fresh Horses hardly clime.
At Noone, through highest skies their course they bear:
Whence Sea and Land even We behold with fear.
Then down the Hill of Heaven they scour amain
With desperate speed, and need a steady reign;
That Thetis, in whose wauy bowres I lie,
Each evening dreads my downfall from the sky.
Besides; the Heavens are daily hurried round,
That (...) the Statres, to other motions bound.
Against this violence, my way I force,
And counter-^un their all-(...)-bearing course.
My Chariot had: can thy sraile strength ascend
The obuious Poles, and with their force contend?
No G^oues, no Cities, fraught with Gods, expect;
N^^ maeble Fanes, with wealthy offerings decked.
Through saluage shapes, and dangers lies thy way:
Which could thou keep, and by no error stray,
Between the Bulls sharp horns yet must thou go;
By him that draws the strong Aemonian bow;
The deathfull Scorpion's far-out-bending claws;
The shorter Crab's; the roaring Lyon's jaws.
Nor easy is it those fiery Steeds to tame:
Who from their mouths and nosthrils vomit flame.
They, heated, hardly of my rule admit;
But, headstrong, struggle with the hated bit.
Then, lest my bounty, which would save, should kill,
Beware, and whilst, thou may, reform thy will.
A sign thou crau'st, that might confirm thee mine:
I, by dehorting, give a certain sign;
Approved a Father, by Paternall fear:
Book on my looks, and read my sorrows there.
O, would thou could descend into my breast;
And apprechend my vexed Souls unrest!
And lastly, all the wealthy World behold,
Of all that Heaven enrich, rich seas infold,
Or on the pregnant-bosom'd Earth remain,
Ask what thou will; and no repulse sustain.
To this alone, I give a forced consent:
No honor, but a true-nam'd punishment.
Thou, for a blessing, beg'st the worst of harms.
Why hang'st thou on my neck with fawning arms?
Distrust not; we have sworn: but ask, and take
What thou can wish: yet, wiser wishes make.
In vain dehorted; he, his promise claym'd;
With glory of so great a charge inflamed.
The wilful Youth then lingering Phoebus brought
To his bright Chariot, by Vulcan wrought.
The Beam and Axeltree of massy gold;
On Silver Spokes the golden Fellies rol'd:
Rich Gems and Crysolites the Harness decked;
Which, Phoebus beams, with equal light, reflect,
Whilst this, admiring Phaeton suruayes,
The wakefull Morning from the East displayes
Her purple doors, and odoriferous bed,
With plenty of deaw-dropping Roses spread.
Clear Luciser the flying Stars does chase;
And, after all the rest, resignes his place.
When Titan saw the Dawning ruddy grew,
And how the Moon her silver horns withdrew:
He bade the light-foot Hours, without delay
To ioyn his Steeds. The Goddesses obey:
Who, from their lofty Mangers, forthwith led
His fiery Horses, with Ambrosou fed.
With sacred Oil anointed by his Sire,
Of virtue to repulse the rage of fire,
He crown's him with his Rays; Then, thus began
With doubled sighs, which following woes fore-tan.
Let not thy Father still advise in vain.
Son, spare the whip, and strongly use the reign.
They, of their own accord will run too fast.
It Is hard, to moderate a flying haste.
Nor drive along the five directer Lines.
A broad and beaten path obliquely winds,
Contented with three Zones: which does avoid
The distant Poles: the track thy wheels will guide.
Descend thou not too low, nor mount too high;
That temperate warmth may heaven and earth supply.
A lofty course will heaven with fire infest;
A lowely, earth: the safer Mean is best.
Nor to the folded Snake thy Chariot guide:
Nor to the Altar on the other side:
Between these drive. The rest I leave to Fate;
Who better prove, than thou, to thy own state.
But, while I speak, behold, the humid Night
Beyond the Hesperian Vales has taken her flight.
Aurora's splendour re-inthrone's the Day:
We are expected, nor can longer stay.
Take up the reigns, or, while thou may, refuse;
And no^ my Chariot, but my counsel use;
While on a firm foundation thou do stand,
Not yet postest of thy ill-wisht Command.
Let me the World with usual influence cheer:
And view that light which is unsafe to bear.
The generous and gallant Pha^ton,
All courage, vaut's into the blazing Throne:
Glad of the reigns, nor doubtful of his skill;
And gives his Father thanks against his will.
Mean while, the Suns swift Horses, hot Pyro^us,
Strong Aethon, fiery Phlego^, bright E^us,
Neighing alowd, inflame the Air with heat;
And, with their thundering hooues, the barriers beat.
Which when hospitious Thetis once withdrew,
(Who nothing of her Nephew's danger knew)
And gave them scope; they mount the ample sky,
And cut the obuious Clouds with feet that fly.
Who, raised with plumed pinions, leave behind
The glowing East, and slower Easterne-winde.
But, Phoebus Horses could not feel that freight:
The Chariot wanted the accustomed weight.
And as vnballac't ships are rockt and tossed
With tumbling Waves, and in their steerage lost:
So, through the Air the lighter Chariot reeles;
And ioults, as empty, upon iumping Wheels.
Which when they found, the beaten path they shun;
And, straggling, out of all subjection run.
He knows not how to turn, nor knows the way;
Or had he known, yet would not they obey.
The cold, now hot, Triones sought in vain
To quench their heat in the forbidden Maine.
The Serpent, next unto the frozen Pole,
Benumbed, and hurtlesse, now began to roll
With actual heat; and long forgotten ire
Resumes, together with aethereall fire.
It Is said, that thou Bo^tes ranst away,
Though slow, though thee thy heavy Waine did stay.
But, when from top of all the arched sky,
Unhappy Pha^ton the Earth did eye:
Pale sudden fear vn-nerves his quaking thighs;
And, in so great a light, benights his eyes.
He wished those Steeds unknown; unknown his birth;
His suit vngranted: now he couets earth;
To be the son of scorned Merope.
Rapt as a ship upon the high-wrought Sea,
By saluage tempests chac't; which in despair
The Pilot leaves to the Gods, and Prayer.
What should he do? much of the heaven behind;
Much more before: both measured in his mind.
The neuer-to-be entered West suruay's;
And then the East. Lost in his own amaze,
And ignorance, he can nor hold the reigns,
Nor let them go; nor knows his Horses names:
But stares on terror-striking skies (possessed
By Beasts and Monsters) with a panting breast.
There is a place, in which the Scorpion bends
His compast claws; who through two Signs extends.
Whom* when the Youth beheld, stew^d in black sweat
Of poison, and with turn'd-vp tail to threat
A mortal wound; pale fear his senses struck,
And slackned reigns let us fall, from hands that shook.
They, when they felt them on their backs to lie,
With vn-controlled error scour the sky
Through unknown ayrie Regions; and tread
The way which their disordred fury led.
Up to the fixed Stars their course they take;
And stranger Spheres with smoking Chariot rake:
Now clime^ now, by sleep Praecipies descend:
And near Earth their wandering race extend.
To (...) brother's Steeds beneath her own
The Moon admires! the Clouds like Comets shone.
Inuading fire the upper Earth assayl^d;
All chapt and con^d; her pregnant juice exhaled.
Trees seed there ruin: Grass, gray headed turns:
And (...), by that which did produce it, burns.
But this was nothing. Cities with their Towers,
Realms with their People, funeral fire deuoures.
The Mountayns blaze: High Athos, but too high;
Fount-fruitfull Ida, never till then dry;
Oete, old ^molus, and Cilician Taurus
Muse-haunted A^licon, Oeagrian Aemus.
Loud Eetna roreth with her doubled fires:
Parnassus groans beneath two flaming spires.
Steep Othrys, Cynthus, Eryx, Mimas, glowe;
And Rhodope, no longer clothed with snow.
The Phrygian Dindyma, in cinders mourns:
Cold Caucasus in frosty Scythia burns.
High Mycale, divine Cythaeron, wast;
Pindus, and Ossa once on Pelion cast,
More great Olympus (which before did shine)
The ayrie Alps, and cloudie Appenine.
Then Phaeton beheld on every side
The World on fire, nor could such heat abide;
And, at his deadly-drie and gasping jaws,
The scalding Air, as from a furnace, draws;
His Chariot, redder than the fire it bore;
And, being mortal, could endure no more
Such clouds of ashes, and eiected coals.
Muffled in smoke which round about him rowles,
He knows not where he is, nor what succeeds;
Dragged at the pleasure of his frantic Steeds.
Men say, the AEthiopians then grew swart;
Their blood exhaled to the outward part.
A sandy Desert Lybia then became,
Her full veins emptied by the thirsty flame.
With hair unbound and torn, the Nymphs, distraught,
Bewail their Springs* Boe^tia Dirce sought;
Argos, ^^ymone: Ephyre, fair
Pirene mist: Nor streams securer are.
Great Tanais in boiling channel fumes;
T^uthr aman Cayeus with heat consumes;
Ismenus, old, ^eneus, Erymanthus,
Yellow Lycorn ^as; to be twice-burnt, Zanthus.
Moeand^r, running in a turning maze,
Mygdonian Melas, and Euro^as blaze,
Euphrates, late inuesting Babylon;
Orontes, Phasis, Ister, Thermodon,
Ganges, Alp^^^s, Sperchius lately cold,
And Tagus flowing with dissolved gold.
The Swans, that ravished with their melody
(...) banks, now in Cayster fry.
To farthest Earth affrighted Nilus fled;
And there concealed his yet vnfound-out head,
Whil^st his seven dustie channels streamlesse lie.
Ismarian Hebrus, Strymon now are dry.
Hesp^rian streams, Rhene, Rhodanus, the Po,
And Scepter destinated Tyber glow.
Earth cracks: to Hell the hated light descends;
And frighted Pluto, with his Queen, offends.
The Ocean shrinks, and leaves a field of Sand;
Where new discovered Rocks, and Mountains stand,
That multiply the scattred Cyclades,
Late covered with the deep and awful Seas,
The Fishes to the bottom diue: nor dare
The sportlesse Dolphins tempt the sultrie Air.
Long boyl^d alive, the m^nstrous ^hocae die,
And on the brine with turn' d-vp bellies lie.
With (...) and her daughters, Ner^us raues;
Who hide themselves beneath the scalding waves.
Thrice wrathful Neptune his bold arm vp-held
Above the Floods: whom thrice the fire repel'd.
Yet foodfull Tellus with the Ocean bound,
Amidst the Seas, and Fountains now unfound
(Selfe-hid within the womb where they were bred)
Neck-high aduanceth her all-bearing head.
(Her parched forehead shaddowed with her hand)
And, shaking, shook what-euer on her stand:
Wherewith, a little shrunk into her breast,
Her sacred tongue her sorrows thus expressed:
If such thy will, and I deserve the same,
Thou chief of Gods, why sleeps thy vengefull flame?
Be It by Thy fire, if I in fire must fry:
The Author lessens the calamity.
But, whilst I strive to utter this, I choke.
View my singed hair, mine eyes half-out with smoke!
The sparkling cinders on my vissage thrown!
Is this my recompense? the favor shown
For all my service? for the fruit I have borne?
That thus I am with plough and harrowes torn?
Wrought-out through-out the year? that man and beast
Sustain with food? and you with incense feast?
But, say I merit ruin, and thy hate:
What has thy brother done (by equal Fate
Elected to the wauy Monarchy),
That Seas should sink, and from thy presence fly?
If neither he, nor I thy pity move,
Pity thy Heaven. Behold! the Poles above
At either end do fume: and should they burn,
Thy habitation would to ruin turn.
Distressed Atlas shoulders shrink with pain,
And scarce the glowing Axeltree sustain.
If Sea, if Earth, if Heaven shall fall by fire,
Then all of us to Chaos must retire.
O! quench these flames: the miserable state
Of things relieve, before it be too-late.
This said, her voice her parched tongue forsook,
Nor longer could the smothering vapors brook;
But, down into her-selfe withdrew her head,
Near to the infernal Cauerns of the Dead.
Jove calls the Gods to witness, and who lent
The strayning Chariot; should not he prevent,
That All would perish by one destiny;
Then mounts the highest Turret of the sky,
From thence inured to cloud the spacefull Earth,
And give the flame fore-running thunder birth.
But, there, for wasted clouds he sought in vain,
To shade or cool the scorched Earth with rain.
He thunders; and, with hands that connot err,
Hurls lightning at the audacious Charioter.
Him struck he from his seat, breath from his breast,
Both at one blow, and ^lames with flames suppressed.
The frighted horses, plunging several ways,
Break all their tire: to whom the bit obayes;
The reigns, torn beam, cracked spokes, dispersed abroad,
Scotcht Heaven was with the Chariots ruins strow'd.
But, soule^lesse ^ha^ton, with blazing hair,
Shot he^-long through a long descent of Air;
As when a falling star glides through the sky,
Of seems to fall to the deceived eye.
Whom great Eridanus (far from his place
Of birth) received, and quenched his flagrant face:
Whose Nymphs interred him in his Mothers womb;
And fixed this Epitaph upon his Tomb*
Here Pha^ton lies: who though he could not guide
His Fathers Steeds, in high attempts he died.
Phoebus with grief withdrew. One day did run
About the World, they say, without the Sun,
Which flamie funerals illuminate;
That good, derived from a wretched Fate.
When (...) had said what could be said
In such a grief; halfe-soul'd, in black arrayed,
She fills the Earth she wanders through, with groans,
First seeking his dead corpse, and then his bones.
Interred in foreign Lands she found the last:
Her feeble-lims upon the place she cast,
And bathed his name in tears, and strictly pressed
The carved Marble with her bared breast.
Nor less the H^liades lament; who shead
From drowned eyes vain offerings to the dead:
Who with remorselesse hands their bosoms tear;
And wayling, call on him that cannot hear.
With joined horns four Moons their orbs had filled,
Since they their customarie plaints vpheld:
When Pha^t^usa, thinking to have cast
Her self on Earth, cried, ah! my feet stick fast!
Lamp^tie, pressing to her sisters aid,
As suddenly with fixed roots was stayed.
A third, about to have torn her scattered hair,
Tore-off the leaves which on her crown the bare.
This, grieueth at her stiff and senseless thighs:
She, that her stretcht-out arms in branches rise.
And whil^st with wonder they themselves behold,
The creeping bark their tender parts infold;
Then, by degrees, their bellies, breasts, and all
Except their mouths; which on their mother call.
What should she do? but run to that, to this,
As fury drove; and snatch a parting kiss?
But yet, not so suffiz'd, she strove to take
Them, from themselves, and down the branches brake:
From whence, as from a wound, pure blood did glide.
O pity, Mother! (still the wounded cried)
Nor (...) us in our Trees! O! now adieu!
With that, the bark their lips together drew.
From these clear dropping trees, tears yearly ^low:
They, hardened by the Sun, to Amber grow;
Which, on the moysture-giuing River spent,
To Roman Ladies, as his gift, is sent.
Sthen^^an Cygnus at that time was there,
Akin to Phaeton; in love, more near.
He, leaving State (who in Liguria reigned,
Which Cities great and populous contayn'd)
Filled with complaints the Riuer-chiding floods,
The sedgie banks, and late augmented Woods.
At length, his voice grew small: white plume contends
In whiteness with his hair: his neck ascends.
Red films unite his toes: arms turn to wings:
His mouth, a flat blunt bill, that sadly sings.
Beco^^e a Swan, remembering how unjust
(...) lightning was, nor Heaven, nor him will trust.
Whom Lakes and Ponds (detesting fire) delight;
And ^lo^ds, to Flames in nature opposite.
The woeful Father to dead Pha^ton,
Him (...) neglecting (all his luster gone,
As when eclipst) day, light, his own life hates;
And (...) grief, with anger aggrauates.
Ret^^ing to illuminate the Earth.
^^ough, too much my toil! born with the birth
Of Time; (as restless;) without end, regard,
Or honor: recompenc't with this reward!
Some other now may on my Chariot sit.
If all of you confess your selves unfit;
Let ^oue ascend: that he (when he shall try)
At length may lay his murdering thunder by.
Then will ^e find, that he, who could not guide
Those fire-hoou'd Steeds, deserved not to have died.
The Gods stand round about him, and request
That endless Night might not the World inuest.
Even ^oue excused his lightning, and entreats:
Which, like a King, he intermixed with threats.
Displeased Phoeb^^, hardly reconciled,
Takes-vp his Steeds, as yet with horror wild.
On whom he vents his spleen: and, though they run,
He ^ashes, and vpbraids them with his Son.
The Thunderer then walks the ample Round
Of Heavens high walls, to search if all were sound.
When finding nothing there by fire decayed;
He Earth, and humane industries suruay'd.
Arcadia chiefly exerciz'd his cares;
There, Springs and streams, that durst not run, repaire's;
The Fields with grass, the Trees with leaves indue's,
And withered Woods with vanished Shades renew's.
Often passing to and fro, a Nonacrine
The God inflamed; her beauty, more divine!
'Twas not her Art to spin, nor with much care
And fine variety to trick her hair;
But, with a zone, her looser garments bound,
And her rude tresses in a fillet wound:
Now armed with a Dart, now with a Bow:
A Squire of Phoebe's. Moenalus did know
None more in grace, of all her Virgin throng:
But, Favorites in fouo^ last not long.
The parted Day in equal balance held,
A Wood she entered, as yet never feld.
There from her shoulders she her Quiver takes,
Vnbends her Bow; and, tired with hunting, makes
The flowry-mantled Earth her happy bed;
And on her painted Quiver lays her head.
When Jove the Nymph without a guard did see
In such a positure; This stealth, said he,
My Wife shall never know: or, say she did;
Who, ah, who would not for her sake be chid!
Dia^a's shape and habit them indew'd,
He said; My Huntresse, where have thou pursew'd
This morning's chase? She, rising, made reply;
Harle Power, more great than Jove (though Jove stood by)
In my esteem -- He smiled: and gladly heard
Himself, by her, before Himself preferred;
And kissed. His kisses too intemperate grow;
Not such as Maids on Maidens do bestow.
His strict imbracements her narration stayed;
And, by his crime, his own deceit betrayed.
She did what Woman could to force her Fate:
(Would (...) saw! it would her spleen abate)
Although, as much as Woman could, she strove;
What Woman, or, who can contend with Jove!
The Victor hies him to th'aethereall States.
The Woods, as guilty of her wrongs, she hates;
Almost forgetting, as from thence she flung,
Her Quiver, and the Bow which by it hung.
High (...) with her train
Now en^ing, pleased with the quarry slain,
Beheld, and called her: called upon, she fled;
And in her semblance Jupiter does dread.
But, when she saw the attending Nymphs appear;
She troops amongst them, and diuerts her fear.
Ah, how our faults are in our faces read!
With eyes scarce ever raised, she hangs the head:
Nor perks she now, as she was wont to do,
By Cynthia's side, nor leads the starry crew.
Though mute she be, her violated shame
Selfe-guiltie blushes silently proclaim.
But that a Maid, Diana the ill hid
Had soon espied: they say, her fly Nymphs did.
Nine Crescents now had made their Orbs complete;
When, faint with labor, and her brothers heat,
She takes the shades; close by the murmuring
And filuer current of a fruitful Spring.
The place much praised the stream as cool as clear
Her fair feet glads. No Spies, said she, be here:
Here will we our disrobed bodies dip.
Calisto blushed: the rest their fair lims strip.
And her perforce vncloth'd, that sought delays;
Who, with her body, her offense displayes.
They, all abasht, yet loath to have it spied,
Striving her belly with their hands to hide;
Auant, said Cynthia; get thee from our train;
Nor, with thy lims, this sacred Fountain stayne.
This knew the Matron of the Thunderer;
Whose thoughts, to fitter times, revenge defer:
Nor long delaye's; for, Arcas (which more scorn
And grief prouok't) was of the Lady borne.
Beheld with ire, which turned her eyes to flame;
Must thou be fruitful too, to blaze my shame,
(...) From thence, those stars, the price of whordome, drive;
Nor let th'impure in your pure Surges diue.
They both assent. Her Peacocks to the skies
Their Goddess draw; late stuck with Argus eyes.
Thou too, thou prating Raven, turned as late
From white to black, by well-deserued Fate.
(The spotless silver ^oue was not more white,
Nor Swans which in the running brooks delight:
Nor yet that vigilant Foul, whose gaggling shall
Her e after free th'attempted Capitol.)
Thy tongue, thy tell-tale tongue did thee undo:
And what was white, is now of sable hew.
The Palm, Coronis, of Lariss^, bare
From all the Aemonian Dames for matchless fair.
Who dearly, Delphian, was beloved by thee;
As long as chaste, or from detection free.
But, Phoebus Bird her scapes did soon descrie:
Nor could they charm th'inexorable Spy:
Whom, flying to his Lord, the Crow pursewes
(As talka^iue as he) to know the news;
And, knowing, said: Thy self thou do engage
By thanklesse service: slight not my pr^sage.
Know what I was, and am: through all my time
My actions sift: thou wilt find my faith my crime.
For, Pallas, on a day, in chest composed
Of At^ick Osiars, privately enclosed
Her Erichtho^us (whom no Woman bare)
Committed to the custody and care
Of three fair Virgin Nymphs, that daughters were
To prudent Cecrops, who two shapes did bear:
Nor told what it contayn'd; but, charged that they
Her secrets should not to themselves betray.
These from an Elm I (vnespy'd) espy.
Fair Hearse and Pandrosa faithfully
Perform their charge. Aglauros then did call
Her fearful sisters, and vntyes with-all
The wicker Cabinet; whose twigs contain
An infant, raised on a Dragon's train.
This, I may Goddess told; and for reward,
Am now cashiered from Minerua's Guard,
The Bird of Night preferred. Beware by me:
Nor too officiously tell all you see.
Perhaps, you think, I to that place aspired
Without her grace: vnsought-to, or desired:
Should you ask Pallas, and her anger by;
Though more than angry, this she would deny.
Me had King Coron^us, great in fame.
Through happy Phocis, by a royal Dame.
Rich suitors I (despise me not) had store:
My beauty wrackt me. Walking on the shore,
As leasurely as now I use to go,
Cold Neptune saw me, and with lust did glowe.
The time, his prayr's and praises spent in vain;
What would not yield, he offers to constrain;
And follows me that fled. The harder strand
Behind me left: and tired with yielding sand,
To Gods and Men I cry. No humane aid
Was then at hand: a Maid releeues a Maid.
For, as to heaven my trembling arms I threw;
My arms cole-black with houering feathers grew.
My Robe I from my shoulders thought to throw:
But, that was plume, and to my skin did grow.
With hands to beat my naked breast, I try:
But, neither breast to beat, nor hands, had I.
Running, in sand I sunk not as before;
But, me the scarce-toucht Earth, vnburden'd bore.
Forthwith, I lightly through the Air ascend;
And on Minerua, without blame, attend.
But, what was this; when she, whose wicked deeds
Vnwoman'd her, in our lost grace succeeds?
For, know (no more than through all Lesbos spread)
Nyctimene defiled her Fathers bed.
Though now a Bird; yet, full of guilt, the sight,
The Day, she shuns, and masks her shame in Night.
About her, all our winged troops repair;
And, with inuectiues, chase her through the Air.
To her, the Raven: Mischief thee surprise
For staying me. Vain Omen's I despise;
Then, forward flew; and told the hurtful truth
Of lost Coronis, and the Aemonian Youth.
The Harp drops from his hand: and from his head
The Laurel fell: his cheerful color fled.
Transported with his rage, his bow he took,
And with incuitable arrow struck
That breast, which he so often to his had joined:
She shreeks; and from the deadly wound does wind
The biting steel, pursued with streams of blood,
That bathed her pure white in a crimson Flood:
And said; Though this be dew, yet Phoebus, I
Might first have teemed: now, two in one must die*
She faints: forced life in her blood's torrent swims:
And stifning cold benums her senseless lims.
His cruelty, to her he loved, too late,
He now repents, and himself does hate,
Who lent an ear, whom rage could so incense:
He hates his Bird, by whom he knew the offense;
He hates his Art, his Quiver, and his Bow;
Then, takes her up, and all his skill does show.
But (ah!) too late to vanquish Fate he tries;
And surgerie, without success, applies.
Which when he saw, and saw the funeral pyle
Prepared to devour so dear a spoil;
Since no celestial eye may shed a tear,
He fetched a groan, that made Earth groan to hear:
And now vncar'd-for odours powered upon her;
And undue death with all due rites does honor.
But, Phoebus, not enduring that his seed
(And that by her) the greedy Fire should feed,
Snatched it both from her womb, and from the flame;
And to the two-shap't Chiron brought the same.
The white-plum'd Raven, who reward expects,
He turns to black; and for his truth reiects.
It pleased the Halfe-horse to be so employed;
Who in his honorable trouble joyed.
Behold: the Centaur's daughter with red hair,
Whom formerly the Nymph Caricle bare
By the swift River, and Ocy^oe named;
Who had her Father's healthful Art disclaym'd,
To sing the depth of Fates: Now, when her breast
Was by the prophesying rage possessed,
And that th'included God inflamed her mind;
Beholding of the Babe, she thus diuin'd:
Health giver to the World, grow Infant, grow;
To whom mortality so much shall owe.
^led Souls thou shall restore to their aboads;
and once against the pleasure of the Gods.
^o do the like, thy Grand-sires flames deny:
and thou, begotten by a God, must die.
Thou, of a bloodlesse corpse, a God shall be:
And Nature twice shall be renewed in thee.
And you, dear Father, not a Mortal now;
To whom the Fates eternity allow;
Shall wish to die, then when your wound shall smart
With Serpents blood, and slight your helpless Art.
Relenting Fates will pity you with death,
Against their Law, and stop your groaning breath.
Not all yet said, her sighs in storms arise;
And ill-aboding tears burst from her eyes.
Then, thus: My Fates prevent me: lo, they tie
My faltering tongue; and farther speech deny.
Alas! these Arts not of that value be,
That they should draw the wrath of Heaven on me!
O, rather would I nothing had fore-knowne!
My looks seem now not humane, nor my own.
I long to feed on grass: I long to run
About the spacious fields. Woe's me, undone!
Into a Mare (my kindred's shape) I grow:
Yet, why throughout? my Father but half so.
The end of her complaint you scarce could hear
To understand: her words confused were.
Forthwith, nor words, nor neighings, she expressed;
Her voice yet more inclining to the beast:
Then, neigh'd outright. Within a little space,
Her down-thrust arms upon the Meadow pase.
Her fingers ^oyne* one hoose five nails unite:
Her head and neck enlarge, not now upright:
Her trayling garment to a train extends:
Her dangling hair upon her crest descends:
Her voice and shape at once transformed became:
And to the Prodigy they give a name.
Old Chiron weeps; and Phoebus, vainly cries
On thee to change the changelesse Destinies.
Admit thou could: thee, from thy self expelled,
Then Elis, and Messenian pastures held.
It was the time when, clothed in Neat-herds weeds,
Thou play'dst upon unequal seuen-fold Reeds:
Whilst thee thy Pipe delights, whilst cares of love
Thy soul possess, and other cares remove;
Without a guard the Pylian Oxen stray:
Observed by the crafty son of May,
Forthwith he secretly conueighs them thence,
In vntract Woods concealing his offense.
None saw but Battus, in that Country bred;
Who wealthy Neleus famous horses fed.
Him only he misdoubts: then, (t'ane apart)
Stranger, said Mercury, what ere thou art;
If any for this Herd by chance inquire,
Conceal thy knowledge: and receive, for hire,
This white-hair'd Cow. He took her, and replied,
Be safe; thy theft shall sooner be discry'd
By yonder stone, than me; and showed a stone.
Ioue's son departs, and straight returns unknown
(A seeming Clown in form and voice) who said:
Saw thou no cattle through these fields conuay'd?
Detect the the^t; in their recovery join:
And, lo, this Hecfer, with her Bull, is thine.
He (the reward redoubled) answered: There
Beneath those hills, beneath those hills they were.
Then, Hermes, laughing loud; What, knave, I say,
Me to my self; me to my self betray?
Then, to a Touchstone turned his perjured breast;
Whose nature now is in that name expressed.
(...) She might not enter), and the dark door struck
With her bright lance; which straight in sunder broke.
There saw she Envy lapping Vipers blood;
And feeding on their flesh, her vices food:
And, having seen her, turn'd-away her eyes.
The Catiffe slowly from the ground does rise
(Her halfe-deuoured Serpents laid-aside)
And forward creeps with a lazy stride.
Viewing her form so fair; her arms, so bright;
She gron'd, and sigh't at such a cheerful sight.
Her body more than meger; pale her hew;
Her teeth all rusty; still she looks askew;
Her breast with gall, her tongue with poison sweld:
She only laughed, when she sad sights beheld.
Her euer-waking cares exiled soft sleep:
Who looks on good success, with eyes that w^ep:
Repining, pines: who, wounding others, bleeds:
And on her self reuengeth her misdeeds.
Although Tritonia did the Hag detest;
Yet briefly thus her pleasure she expressed:
Aglauros, one of the Cecropides,
Do thou infest with thy accursed disease.
This said; the hasty Goddess does advance
Her body, with her earth-repelling lance.
Enuic pursues her with a wicked eye,
Much grieved at her preuayling industry.
Wrapped in dark clouds, which way so ere she turns,
The Corn she lodges, flowery pastures burns,
Crops what grows high; Towns, Nations, with her breath
Pollutes; and Virtue persecutes to death*
When she the fair Athenian towers beheld,
Which so in wealth, in learned Arts excelled,
And feastfull Peace; to cry she scarce forbeares,
In that she saw no argument for tears.
When she Aglaur^s lodging entered had,
She gladly executes what Pallas bade:
Her cancred hand upon her breast she laid,
And crooked thorns into her heart conuay'd,
And breathed in banefull poison; which she sheads
Into her bones, and through her liver spreads.
And that her envy might not want a cause:
The God in his diuinest form she draws:
And with it, sets before her wounded eyes
Her happy sister, and their nuptial joys:
Augmenting all. These secret woes excite,
And gnaw her soul. She sighs all day, all night;
And with a slow infection melts away,
Like Ice before the Suns uncertain ray.
Fair Herse's happy state such heart-burne breeds
In her black bosom, as when spiny weeds
Are set on fire: which without flame consume:
And seem (so small their heat) to burn with fume.
Often she resolves to die, such sights to shun:
Often, by disclosing, to have both undone.
Now sits she on the threshold, to prevent
The Gods access; who with lost blandishment,
And his best Art, persuades. Quoth she; forbear,
I cannot be removed, if you stay here.
I to this bargain, he replied will stand;
The door then forces with his figured wand.
Striving to rise, to second her debate,
Her hips could not remove, pressed with dull weight.
Again she struggled to have stood on end:
But those v^^supple sinews would not bend.
(...) OVID'S METAMORPHOSIS. The third Book.
THE ARGUMENT.
Armed troops from Dragons late-sowne teeth arise.
By his own Hounds the Heart Actaeon dies.
Juno, a Beldame. Semele does fry
In wished embraces. Bacehus from Ioue's thigh
Takes second birth. The wise Tiresias twice
Does change his sex. Scorned Echo pines to a voice:
Selfe-lou'd Narcissus to a Daffadill.
Bacchus, a Boy. The Tyrrhen's ship stands still,
With Iuy mor'd. Strange shapes the Sailors fright:
Who Dolphines turn, and still in ships delight.
ANd now the God ariuing with his Rape
At sacred Creet, resumes his heavenly shape
The King his son to seek his daughter sent,
Fore-doomed to perpetual banishment,
Except his fortune to his wish succeed:
How pious, and how impious in one deed!
Earth wandred-through ( Ioue's thefts who can exquire?)
He shuns his Country, and his Fathers ire:
With Phoebus Oracle consults, to know
What Land the Fates intended to bestow.
Who, thus: In desert fields observe a Cow,
Yet never yoa^t, nor servile to the plow.
Follow her slow conduct, and where she shall
Repose, there build: the place Boeotia call.
Scarce Cadmus from Castalian Cave descended,
When he a Hecfer saw, by no man tended,
Her neck vngall'd with groaning servitude.
The God adored, he foot by foot pursew'd.
Cephisus flood, and Panope now past,
She made a stand; to heaven her forehead cast,
With lofty horns most exquisitely fair;
Then, with repeated lowings filled the Air:
Looks back upon the company sheeled;
And, kneeling, makes the tender grass her bed.
Thanksgiving Cadmus kift the unknown ground;
The stranger fields and hills saluting round.
About to sacrifice to heauen's high King,
He sends for water from the living Spring.
A Wood there was, which never Axe did hew;
In it, a Cave, where Reeds and Osiers grew,
Rooft with a rugged Arch by Nature wrought;
With pregnant waters plentifully fraught.
The lurking Snake of Mars this Hold possessed;
Bright scaled, and shining with a golden crest;
His bulk with poison swollen; fire-red his eyes:
Three darting tongues, three ranks of teeth comprise.
This fatal Well th'vnlucky Tyrians found;
Who with their down-let Pitcher, raised a sound.
With that, the Serpent his blew head extends;
And suffering Air with horrid hisses rends.
The water from them fell: their color fled:
Who all, astonished, shook with sudden dread.
He wreaths his scaly foldes into a heap;
And fetched a compass with a mighty leap:
Then, bolt-vpright his monstrous length displayes
More than half way; and all the Woods suruayes.
Whose body, when all seen, no less appears,
Than that, which parts the two Celestial Bears.
Whether the Tyrians sought to fight, or fly,
Or whether they through fear could neither try;
Some crash the 'twixt his jaws; some claspt to death;
Some kills with poison; others with his breath.
And now the Sun the shortest shadows made;
Then, Cadmus, wondering why his servants stayed
Their footsteps trac't. A hide the Hero's wore,
Which late he from a slaughtred Lion tore:
His Arms a dart, a bright steele-pointed Spear;
And such a mind as could not stoop to fear.
When he the Wood had entered, and there viewed
The bodies of the slain with blood imbrew'd;
The Insulting victor quenching his dire thirst
At their sucked wounds; he sigh't, as heart would burst:
Then said, I will revenge, O faithful Mates,
Your murders, or accompany your Fates.
With that, he lifts up a mighty stone,
which with a more than manly force was thrown.
What would have battered down the strongest wall,
And shiuered towers, does give no wound at all.
The hardness of his skin, and scales that grow
Upon his armed back, repel the blow.
And yet that strong defense could not so well
The vigor of his thrilling Dart repel;
Which through his winding back a passage rends:
There sticks: the steel into his guts descends.
Rabid with anguish, hoe retorts his look
Upon the wound, and then the iaueling took
Between his teeth; it every way does wind:
At length, tugged out, yet leaves the head behind.
His rage increast with his augmenting pains:
And his thick-panting throat swells with full veins.
A cold white froth surrounds his poisonous jaws:
On thundering Earth his trayling scales he draws:
Who from his black and Stygian maw eiect's
A blasting breath, which all the grass infects.
His body, now he circularly bends;
Forthwith into a monstrous length extends:
Then rusheth on, like showr-incensed Floods;
And with his breast ore-beares the obuious Woods.
The Prince gave way; who with the Lyon's spoil
Sustayn'd the assault; and fore't a quick recoyle,
His Lance fixed in his jaws. What could not feel,
He madly wounds; and bites the biting steel.
The inuenom'd gore; which from his palate bled,
Conuerts the grass into a duskie red:
Yet, slight the hurt, in that the Snake withdrew;
And so, by yielding, did the force subdew.
Till Agenorides the steel imbrew'd
In his wide throat, and still his thrust pursew'd;
Until an Oak his back-retrait with-stood:
There, he his neck transsixt: with it, the Wood.
The Tree bends with a burden so unknown;
And, lashed, by the Serpents tail, does groan.
While he suruay'd the hugeness of his foe,
This voice he heard (from whence he did not know)
Why is that Serpent so admired by thee?
Agenor's son, a Serpent thou shall be.
He speechless grew: pale fear repeld his blood;
And now vncurled hair like bristles stood.
Behold! man's Fautresse, Pallas (from the sky
Descending to his needful aid) stood by:
Who bade him in the turn'd-vp surrowes throw
The Serpents teeth; that future men might grow.
He, as commanded, plowed the patient Earth:
And therein sowed the seeds of humane birth.
Lo (past belief!) the Clods began to move:
And tops of Lances first appeared above:
Then, Helmets, nodding with their plumed Crefts;
Forthwith, refulgent Pouldrons, plated Breasts;
Hands, with offensive weapons charged, insew:
And Target-bearing troops of Men vp-grew.
So in our Theater's solemnities,
When they the Arras raise, the Figures rise:
Before the rest, their faces first appear;
By little and by little then they rear
Their bodies, with a measure-keeping hand,
Until their feet upon the border stand.
Bold Cadmus, though much daunted at the sight
Of such an Host, addressed him to the fight.
Forbear (a newborn Soldier cried)to engage
Thy better fortune in our civil rage!
With that, he on his earth-bread brother flew:
At whom, a deadly dart another threw.
Nor he that killed him, long suruiucs his death;
But, through wide wounds expires his infant breath.
Slaughter, with equal fury, runs through all:
And by uncivil civil blows they fall.
The new-sprung Youth, who hardly life possessed,
Now panting, kick their Mother's bloody breast:
But five suruiu'd: of whom, Echion one;
His Arms to Earth by Pallas counsel thrown,
He craves the love he offers. All accord
As Brothers should, and what they take afford.
Sidonian Cadmus these assist, to build
His lofty walls; the Oracle fulfild.
Now flourisht Thebes: now did thy exile prove
In show a blessing; those that rule in love
And war, thy Nuptials with their daughter grace:
By such a Wife to have so fair a race;
So many sons and daughters; nephews too
(The pledges of their peaceful beds) insew;
And they now grown to excellence and power.
But, Man must censured be by his last hour:
Whom truly we can never happy call,
Before his death, and closing funeral.
In this thy every way so prosperous state,
Thy first misse-hap sprung from thy Nephew's fate,
Whose brows unnatural branches ill adorn;
By his ungrateful dogs in pieces torn.
Yet fortune did offend in him; not he:
For, what offense may in an error be?
With purple blood, slain Dear the Hills imbrew:
And now high Noon the shades of things withdrew;
While East and West the equal Sun partake:
Thus, then Hyantius to his Partners spoke,
That trod the Mazes of the pathlesse Wood:
My Friends our nets and iauelins reake with blood:
Enough has been the fortune of this day:
To morrow, when Aurora shall display
Her rosy cheeks, we may our sports renew.
Now I hoebu, with inflaming eye does view
The crannyed Earth: here let our labor end:
Take up your toils. They gladly condescend.
A vale there was with Pines and Cypress crowned,
Gargaphie called; for Dian's love renowned.
A shady Cave possessed the inward part,
Not wrought by hands; there, Nature witty Art
Did counterfeit: a native Arch she drew,
With Pumice and light Topases, that grew.
A bubbling Spring, with streams as clear as glass
Ran chiding by, enclosed with matted grass.
The weary Huntresse usually here laues
Her Virgin lims, more pure than those pure waves.
And now her Bow, her Iau'lin, and her Quiver;
Does to a Nymph, one of her Squires, deliver:
Her light impouerisht Robes another held:
Her Buskins two untie. The better skilled
If menian Crocale, her long hair wound
In pleited-wreathes: yet was her own unbound.
Neat Hyale, Niphe, Rhanis, Psecas (still
Employed) and Phiale the Lauers fill.
While here Titania bathed (as was her guise)
Lo Cadmus Nephew, tired with exercise,
And wandering through the Woods, approcht this Grove
With satall steps, so Destiny him drove!
Entering the Cave with skipping Springs bedeaw'd:
The Nymphs, all naked, when a Man they viewed,
Clapped their resounding breasts, and filled the Wood
With sudden shreeks: like Iuory pales they stood
About their Goddess: but she, far more tall,
By head and shoulders ouer-tops them all.
Such as that color, which the Clouds adorns,
Shot by the Sunne-beam's; or the rosy Morn's:
Such flusht in Dians cheeks, being naked taken.
And though inuiron'd by her Virgin train,
She side-long turns, looks back, and wished her bow:
Yet, what she had, she in his face does throw.
With vengefull Waters sptinkled; to her rage
These words she adds, which future Fate presage:
Now, tell how thou have seen me disarray'd;
Tell if thou can: I give thee leave. This said,
She to his neck and ears new length imparts;
This Browe the antlers of long-liuing Hearts:
His legs and feet with arms and hands supplied;
And clothed his body in a spotted hide.
To this, fear added. Autonocius flies,
And wonders at the swiftness of his thighs.
But, when his looks he in the River viewed,
He would have cried, Woe's me! no words insew'd:
His words were groans. He frets, with galling tears,
Checks not his own; yet his own mind he bears.
What should he do? Go home? or in the Wood
For ever lurk? Fear, this; shame that withstood.
While thus he doubts, his Dogs their Master view:
Black-foot and Tracer, opening first, pursew:
Sure Tracer, Gnossus; Black-foot Sparta bare.
Then all fell in, more swift than forced Air:
Spy, hauener, ^li^e-clif^e; these Arcadia bred:
Strong Fawn-bane, Whirlwind, eager Follow-dread;
Hunter, for sent; for speed, Flight went before;
Flerce Saluage, lately ganched by a Bore;
Greedy, with her two whelps; grim Wolf-got Ranger;
Stout Shepherd, late preserving flocks from danger;
Gaunt Catch, whose race from Sicyonia came;
(...) Courser, Blab; rash Tiger never tame;
Blanch, Mourner, Royster, Wolf surpassing strong;
And Tempest, able to continue long:
Swift, with his brother Churl, a Cyprian hound;
Bold Snatch, whose sable brows a white star cround;
Cole shag-hair'd Rug, and Light-foot wondrous fleet,
Bred of a Spartan Bitch, his Sire of ^reet;
White-tooth, and Ring-wood (others not to express.)
Over Rocks, over Crags, over Cliffs that want access,
Through straightened ways, and where there was no way,
The well-mouth'd hounds pursue the princely prey.
Where often he wont to follow, now he flies;
Flies from his family! in thought he cries,
I am Actaeon, servants, know your Lord!
Thoughts wanted words. High skies the noise record.
First, Collier pincht him by the haunch: in flung
Fierce Kill-deare; Hill-bred on his shoulder hung.
These came forth last; but crossed a nearer way
A-thwart the hills. While thus their Lord they stay,
In rush the rest, who gripe him with their phangs.
Now is no room for wounds. Groans speak his pangs,
Though not with humane voice, unlike a Heart:
In whose laments the known Rocks bear a part.
Pitched on his knees, like one who pity craves,
His silent looks, instead of Arms, he waves.
With usual showts their Dogs the Hunters cheer;
And seek, and call Actaeon. He (too near!)
Made answer by mute motions, blamed of all
For being absent at his present fall.
Present he was, that absent would have been;
Nor would his cruel hounds have felt, but seen.
Their snowts they in his body bathe; and tear
Their Master in the figure of a Dear:
Nor, till a thousand wounds had life disseis'd,
Could quiuer-bearing Dian be appeased.
'Twas censured variously: for, many thought
The punishment far greater than the fau't.
Others so sour a chastity commend,
As worthy her: and both, their parts defend.
Ioue's wife not so much blamed or praised the deed;
As she rejoices at the wounds that bleed
In Cadmus Family; who keeps in mind
Europa's rape, and hates all the kind.
Now new occasions fresh displeasure move:
For Semcle was great with child by Jove.
Then, thus she scolds: O, what amends succeeds
Our lost complaints! I now will fall to deeds.
If we be more than titularly great;
If we a Scepter sway; if Heaven our seat;
If Ioue's feared Wife and Sister (certainly,
His Sister) torment shall the Whore destroy.
Yet, with that theft perhaps she was content,
And quickly might the injury repent:
But, she conceiues, to aggrauate the blame,
And by her Belly does her crime proclaim.
Who would by Jupiter a Mother prove,
Which hardly once, has happened to our love:
So confident is beauty! Yet shall he
Deceive her hopes: nor let me Juno be,
Unless, by her own Jove destroyed, she make
A swift descent unto the Stygian Lake.
^ She quits her Throne, and in a yellow clowd
Approach't the Palace; nor disinist that shroud,
Till she had wrinkl'd her smooth skin, and made
Her head all gray: while creeping feet conuay'd
Her crooked lims; her voice small, weak, and hoarse,
Beroc-like, of Epidaure, her Nurse.
Long-talking; at the mention of Ioue's name,
She sigh't, and said; Pray heaven, he prove the same!
Yet much I fear: for many often beguile
With that pretext, and chastest beds desile.
Though Jove; that is not enough. Give he a sign
Of his affection, if he be divine.
Such, and so mighty, as when pleasure warmes
His melting bosom, in high Juno's arms;
With thee, such and so mighty, let him lie,
Decked with the ensigns of his deity.
Thus she aduiz'd the vnsuspecting Dame;
Who begs of love a boon without a name.
To whom the God: Choose, and thy choice possess;
Yet, that thy diffidencie may be less,
Witness that Power, who through obscure aboads
Spreads his dull streams: the fear, and God of Gods.
Pleased with her harm, of too much power to move!
To perish by the kindness of her Love:
Such be to me, she said, as when the Invites
Of Juno summon you to Venus Rites.
Her mouth he sought to stop: but, now that breath
Was mixed with air which sentenced her death.
Then, fetched a sigh, as if his breast would tear
(For, she might not vnwish, nor he vnsweare)
And sadly mounts the sky; who with him took
The Clouds, that imitate his mournful look;
Thick showrs and tempests adding to the same,
With thunder and incuitable flame.
Whose rigor yet he strives to subdew:
Not armed with that fire which overthrew
The hundred-handed Giant; 't was too wild;
There is another lightning, far more mild,
By Cyclops forged with less flame and ire:
Which, deathlesse Gods do call the Second fire.
This, to her Father's house, he with him took:
But (ah!) a mortal body could not brook
AEthere all tumults. Her success she mournes;
And in those so desired imbracements burns.
The imperfect Babe, which in her womb did lie,
Was taken by Jove, and sewed into his thigh,
His Mother's time accomplishing: whom first,
By stealth, his careful Aunt, kind Ino, nursed:
Then, given to the Nyseides, and bred
In secret Caves, with milk and honey fed.
While this on earth befell by Fates decree
(The twice-born Baccbus now from danger free)
Jove, weighty cares expelling from his breast
With flowing Nectar, and disposed to jest
With well-pleased Juno, said: In Venus deeds,
The Femal's pleasure far the Male's exceeds.
This she denies; Tiresias must decide
The difference, who both delights had tried.
For, two ingendring Serpents once he found,
And with a stroke their slumy twists unbound;
Who straight a Woman of a man became:
Seven Autums past, he in the eighth the same
Refinding, said: If such your power, so strange,
That they who strike you must their nature change;
Once more I Will try. Then, struck, away they ran:
And of a Woman he became a Man.
He, chosen Vmpire of this sportfull strife,
Ioue's words confirmed. This vexed his forward wife
More than the matter craved. To wreak her spite,
His eyes she mustled in eternal night.
Th'ominpotent (since no God may undo
An others deed) with Fates which should insew
Informed his Intellect; and did supply
His body's eyesight, with his minds clear eye.
He giving sure replies to such as came,
Through all the Aonian City's stretched his fame.
First, blew Liriope sad trial made
How that was but too true which he had said:
Whom in times past Cephisus flood embraced
Within his winding streams, and forced the chaste.
The lovely Nymph (who not unfruitful proved)
Brought forth a Boy, even then to be beloved,
Narcissus named Enquiring if old age
Should crown his Youth; He, in obscure presage,
Made this reply: Except himself he know.
Long, they no credit on his words bestow:
Yet did the event the prophecy approve,
In his strange ruin, and new kind of love.
Now, he to twenty added had a year:
Now in his looks both Boy and Man appear.
Many a loue-sick Youth did him desire;
And many a Maid his beauty set on fire:
Yet, in his tender age his pride was such
That neither Youth nor Maiden might him touch.
The vocal Nymph, this lovely Boy did spy
(She could not proffer speech, nor not reply)
When busy in pursuit of saluage spoils,
He drove the Dear into his corded toils.
Eccbo was then a Body, not a Voice:
Yet then, as now, of words she wanted choice*
But only could reiterate the close
Of every speech. This Juno did impose.
(...) Beholds his eyes, two stars! his dangling hair
Which with vnshorn Apolo's might compare!
His fingers worthy Bacebus! his smooth chin!
His Iuory neck! His heavenly face! Where-in
The linked Deities their Graces fix!
Where Roses with vnsullied Lillyes mix!
Admneth all for which, to be admired:
And vnconsiderately himself desired.
The praises, which he gives, his beauty claym'd.
Who seeks, is sought: the Inflamer is inflamed.
How often would he kiss the flattering spring!
How often with downe-thrust arms sought he to cling
About that loved neck! Those cous'ning lips
Delude his hopes; and from himself he slips.
Not knowing what, with what he sees he fryes:
And the error that deceiues, incites his eyes.
O Fool! That striu'st to catch a flying shade!
Thou seek'st what is nowhere: Turn aside, 'twill vade.
Thy forms reflection does thy sight delude:
Which is with nothing of its own indu'd.
With thee it comes; with thee it stays; and so
'Twould go away, had thou the power to go.
Nor sleep, nor hunger could the Lover raise:
Who, laid along, on that false form does gaze
With looks, which looking never could suffice;
And ruinares himself with his own eyes.
At length, a little lifting up his head;
You Woods, that round about your branches spread,
Was ever so unfortunate a Lover!
You know, to many you have been a cover;
From your first growth to this long distant day
Have you known any, thus to pine away!
I like, and so, but yet I cannot find
The liked, and seen. O'Loue, with error blind!
What grieves me more: no Sea, no Mountayn steep,
No ways, no walls, our joys a-sunder keep:
Whom but a little water does divide,
And he himself desires to be inioy'd.
As often as I to kiss the flood decline,
So often his lips ascend, to close with mine.
You Would think we touched: so small a thing does part
Our equal loves! Come forth, what ere thou art.
Sweet Boy, a simple Boy beguile not so:
From him that seeks thee, whither would thou go?
My age nor beauty merit thy disdain:
And me the Nymphs have often loved in vain.
Yet in thy friendly shows my poor hopes live;
Still striving to receive the hand I give:
Thou smil'st my smiles: when I a tear let fall,
Thou shedd'st an other; and consent'st in all.
And, lo, thy sweetly-mouing lips appear
To utter words, that come not to our care.
Ah, He is I! now, now I plainly see:
Nor is it my shadow that bewitcheth me.
With love of me I burn; (O too too sure!)
And suffer in those flames which I procure.
Shall I be wooed, or woo? What shall I crave?
Since what I covet, I already have.
Too much has made me poor! O, you divine
And favoring Powers, me from my self dis-ioynd
Of what I love, I would be dispossessed:
This, in a Lover, is a strange request
Now, strength through grief decays: short (...) the time
I have to live; extinguished in my Prime.
Nor grieves it me to part with well-mist breath;
For grief will find a perfect cure in death:
Would he I love might longer life enjoy!
Now, two ill-fated Lovers, in one, die.
This said; again upon his image gazed;
Tears on the troubled water circles raised:
The motion much obscured the fleeting shade.
With that, he cried (perceiving it to vade)
O, whither will thou! stay: nor cruel prove,
In leaving me, who infinitely love.
Yet let me see, what cannot be possessed;
And, with that empty food, my fury feast.
Complaining thus, himself he disarrayes;
And to remorselesse hands his breast displayes:
The blows that solid snow with crimson stripe:
Like Apples party-red, or Grapes scarce ripe.
But, in the water when the same appear,
He could no longer such a sorrow bear.
As Virgin wax dissolues with fervent heat:
Or morning frost, whereon the Sunbeams beat:
So thawes he with the ardor of desire;
And, by degrees, consumes in unseen fire.
His meger checks now lost, their red and white;
That life, that favor lost, which did delight.
Nor those divine proportions now remain,
So much by Eccbo lately loved in vain.
Which when she saw; although she angry were.
And still in mind her late repulse did bear;
As often as the miserable cried,
Alas! Alas, the woeful Nymph replied.
And ever when he struck his sounding breast,
Like sounds of mutual sufferance expressed.
His last words were, still hanging over his shade;
Ah, Boy, beloved in vain! so Echo said.
Farewell. Farewell, sigh't she. Then down he Iyes:
Deaths cold hand shuts his selfe-admiring eyes:
Which now eternally their gazes fix
Upon the Waters of infernal Styx.
The woeful Naiades lament the dead;
And their clipped hair upon their brother spread.
The woeful Dryades partake their woes:
With both, sad Echo ioynes at cuery close.
The funeral Pyle prepared, a Hearse they brought
To fetch his body, which they vainly sought.
In stead whereof a yellow flower was found,
With tufos of white about the button crowned.
This, through Achaia spread the Prophets fame;
Who worthily had purchas't a great name.
But, proud Echion's son, who did despise
The righteous Gods, derides his prophecies;
And twits Tiresias with his ravished sight.
He shook his head, which age had cloth'd-in white;
And said, 'T were well for thee, had thou no eyes
To see the Bacchanal solemnities.
The time shall come (which I presage is near)
When Semeleian Liber will be here:
Whom if thou honor not with Temples due;
Thy Mother, and her sisters shall imbrue
Their furious hands in thy effused blood;
And throw thy severed lims about the Wood.
'T will be; thy malice cannot but rebel:
And then thou wilt say; The blind did see too well.
His mouth proud Pentheus stops. Belief succeeds
Fore-runing threats: and words are sealed by deeds.
(...) is come; the fields with clamor sound:
They in his Orgies tread a frantic Round.
Women with Men, the base, and nobler sort.
Together to those unknown Rites resort.
You sons of Mars, you of the Dragons race
(Said be) what fury does your minds imbase?
Is Brafse of such a power, which drunkards bea^,
Or sound of Horns, or Magical deceit;
That you, whom Trumpets clangor, horrid fight,
Nor death, with all his terrors, could affright;
Loud Women, wine-bread rage, a lustful crew
Of Beasts, and Kettle-drums, should thus subdew?
At you, grave Fathers, can I but admire!
Who brought with you your flying Gods from Tire,
And sixth them here: now from that care so far
Estranged, as to lose them without war!
Or you, who of my able age appear;
Whose heads should helmets, and not garlands, wear!
Not leauy Iauelins, but good Swords adorn
The hands of Youth. O you, so nobly borne;
That Dragon's fiery fortitude indue,
Whose single valor such a number flue.
He, in defending of his Fountain, fell:
Do you the Inuadets of your fame repel.
He flue the strong: do^ you the weak destroy;
And free your Country from foul imfamy.
If Destinies decree that ^b^b^s must fall;
May men, may warlike engines raze her wall:
I et sword and fire our famisht lives assault:
Then should we not be wretched through our fault,
Nor strive to hide out guilt; but, Fortune blame;
And vent our pittyed sorrows without shame.
Now, by a naked Boy we are put to flight:
Whom bounding Steeds, nor glorious Arms delight,
But hair perfumed with Myrrh, soft Anadems,
And purple Robes inchac't with gold and gems:
Who shall confess (if you your aid deny)
His forged Father, and false Deity.
What? Had Acrisius virtue to withstand
Th'Impostor, chaced from the Argiue strand?
And shall this vagabond, this forainer,
Me Pentheus and the Thehan State deter?
Go (said he to his servants) go your way,
And drag him hither bound: prevent delay.
Him Cadmus, Athamas, and all dissuade;
By opposition, more intemperate made.
Fury increases, when it is with-stood:
And then good counsel does more harm than good.
So have I seen and vnstopt torrent glide
With quiet waters, scarcely heard to chide:
But, when fallen Trees, or Rocks, impeacht his course*
To some, and roar with uncontrolled force.
All bloody they return. Where is, said he,
This Bacchus? Bacchus none of us did see,
Replied they, This his minister we found
(Presenting one with hands behind him bound)
A Lydian. zealous in those mystories.
On whom fierce Pentheus looks, with wrathful eyes:
Who hardly could his puishment defer.
Then, thus: thou wretch, that others shall deter,
Declare thy Name, thy Nation, Parentage;
And why thou followest this newfangled Rage,
He in whom innnocency fear o're-came;
Made this reply: Acetes is my name:
My life I owe to the Maeonian earth;
To none, my fortunes; borne of humble birth.
No land my Father left me to manure,
Nor Herds, nor bleating Flocks: himself was poor.
The tempted Fish, with hook and line he caught:
His skill was all his wealth: His skill he taught;
And said, My heir, successor to my Art,
Receive the riches which I can impart.
He, dying, left me nothing; and yet all:
The Sea may I my patrimony call.
Yet, lest I still should on those Rocks abide,
To navigations I my time applied;
Observed the Olenian kids, that rain portend;
The Hyades, who weep when thy descend;
Taygeta, and Arcturur; the resort*
Of several winds; and harbour-giuing Ports.
For Delos bound, we made the Cbian shores:
And, there arrived, with industrions Oars.
Leaping ashore, I made the beach my bed.
When aged Night Aurora's blushes fled,
I rose; and bade my men fresh water bring:
Showing the way that guided to the Spring
Then, from a Hill observed the winds accords,
My Mates I called, and forthwith went abord.
All here, the Master's Mate Ophelies cries;
And thinking he had light upon a prize,
Along the shore a lovely Boy conuay'd,
Adorned with the beauty of a Maid.
Heavy with wine and sleep, he reeled so.
That, thought supported, he could hardly go^.
When I beheld his habit, gait, and feature,
I could not think it was a humane Creature.
Fellows, I doubt (nay, without doubt) said I,
This excellence includes a Deitic.
O, be propitious, who-so-'ere thou art;
And to out industry success impart;
And pardon these who have offended thus
Then, Dictys said: Forbear to pray for us:
(Than he, none could the top saile-yard bestride
With lighter speed; nor thence more nimbly slide)
This, Libys, swart Melanthus (who the Prov^
Commanded) and Alcimedon allow;
Epopeus the Boats-man, so all say;
Bewitched with the blind desire of prey.
This ship, said I, you shall not violate
With sacrilege of so divine a weight;
Wherein I have most interest, and command:
And on the hatches their ascent with-stand.
Whereat, the desperate Lycabas grew wild;
Who for a bloody murder was exiled
From Tuscam. Whilst I alone resist,
He took me such a buffer with his fist,
That down I fell; and had fallen ouer-board,
If I (though senseless) had not caught a cord.
The wicked Company the fact approve.
Then, Bacchus (for, 'twas he) began to move,
As if awaked with the noise they made
(His wind-bound senses now discharged) and said:
What clamor's this? What do you? Sailers, whither
Mean you to bear me? Ah, how came I hither!
Fear not, said Proreus; name where thou would be;
And to that Harbor we will carry thee.
Then, Friends, Lyaeus said, for Naxos stand:
Naxos my home; an hospitable Land.
By Seas, by all the Gods, by what auayles,
They swear they will, and bade me hoyse-vp sails.
Which trimmed for, Naxos on the Star-board side;
What do thou madman, fool? Opheltes cried.
Each fears his loss. Some whisper in mine care:
Most say by signs, Unto the Lar-board steer.
Amazed: Some other hold the Helm, said I;
IN le not be tainted with your perjury.
All chafe and storm. What? said Ethalion,
Is all our sefetie placed in thee alone?
With that, my office he upon him took;
And Naxos (altering her course) for sooke.
The God (as if their fraud but now out-found)
From the upper deck the Sea suruayed round;
Then, seem d to cry. Sirs, this is not, said he,
That promis't shore, the Land so wished by me.
What is my fault? What glory in my spoil,
If men a Boy, if many one beguile?
I wept before: but, they my tears deride;
And with laborious Oars the waves divide.
By him I swear (than whom none more in view)
That what I now shall utter, is as true,
As past belief. The ship in those profound
And spacefull Sea^, so stuck as on dry ground.
They, wondering, plied their Oars; the sails displayed;
And strive to run her with that added aid
When luy gave their Oars a fore't restraint;
Whose creeping bands the sails with Beriyes paint.
He, head-bound with a wreath of clustred Vines,
A lauelin shook, claspt with their leauy twines.
Stern Tigers, Lyaxes (such unto the eye)
And spotted Panthers, round about him lie.
All, ouer-boord now tumble; whether' twere
Out of infused madness, or for fear.
Then, Medon first with spiny fins grew black;
His form depressed, with a compast back.
To whom said Lycabas; o more than strange!
Into what uncouth Monster will thou change!
As thus he spoke, his mouth became more wide;
His nose more hookt: scales arm his hardened hide.
While Libys tugged an Oar that fixed stands,
His hands shrunk up; now finns, no longer hands.
An-other by a-cable thought to hold;
But, mist his arms. He fell: the Seas infold
His maimed body: which a tail est-soone
Receives, reuersed like the horned Moon.
They leap a loft, and sprinkle-vp the Flood;
Now chase above; now under water scud:
Who like lascivious Dancers friske about;
And gulped Seas, from their wide nosthrills spo^ue.
Of twenty Sailors, only I remayn'd:
So many men our Complement contayn'd.
The God my mind could hardly animate;
Trembling with horror of so dire a Fate.
Suppress, said he, these tumults of thy fear;
And now thy course for sacred Dia bear.
Arrived there, with his implored consent,
I Orders took; and thus his Feasts frequent.
Our ears are tired with thy long ambages:
Which wrath, said he, would by delay, appease.
Go, servants, take him hence: let his fore't breath
Expire in groans: and torture him to death.
In solid prison pent; while they proud
Whips, Racks, and Fire, the doors fly open wide.
And of themselves, as if dissolved by charms,
The fetters fall from his vnpinion'd arms.
But now, not bidding others, Pentheus flings
To high Cythaeron's sacred top, which rings
With frantic songs, and shrill-voic't Bacchanals,
In Liber's celebrated Festiuals.
And as the warlike Courser neighs and bounds,
Inflamed with fury, when the Trumpet sounds:
Even so their far-heard clamours set on fire
Stern Pentheus, and exasperate his ire.
In midst of all the spacious Mountain stood
A perspicable Champain, fringed with wood.
Here, first of all, his Mother him espyes,
Viewing those holy Rites with profane eyes.
She, first, upon him frantickly did run:
And first her eger Iauelin pearc't her son.
Come, sisters, cried she, this is that huge Bore
Which roots our fields; whom we with wounds must gore.
With that, in-rush the sense-distracted Crew:
And altogether the amazed pursew.
Now trembled he; now, late-breath'd threats suppressed:
Himself he blames, and his offense confessed.
Who cried, Help Aunt Autonoe^; I bleed:
O let Actaeon's ghost soft pity breed!
Not knowing who Actaeon was, she lops
His right hand off: the other Ino crops.
The wretch now to his Mother would have thrown
His sappliant hands: but, now his hands were gone.
Yet lifting up their bloody stumps, he said,
Ah, Mother, see! Agaue, well appay'd,
Shouts at the sight, casts up her neck, and shakes
Her staring hair in cruel hands she takes
His head, yet gasping: 16 sing, said she,
Io^ my Mates! This spoil belongs to me.
Not leaves, now withered, nipt by Autumn's frost,
So soon are ravished from high Trees, and tossed
By Scattering winds, as they in pieces tear
His minced lims. The Ismenians, struck with fear.
His Orgies celebrate; his praises sing;
And incense to his holy Altars bring.
OVID'S METAMORPHOSIS. The fourth Book.
THE ARGUMENT.
DErceta, a Fish. Semiramis a D^u^.
Transforming Nais equal Fate dosh pr^^^.
White berries Lovers blood with black dosiles.
Appollo, like Eury nome, beguiles
Leucothoe, buried quick for that offense:
who, Nector-sprinkled, sprouts to Frankincense.
Grieved Clitie, turned t'a Flowr, turns with the S^^.
Daphnis, to stone. Sex changes Scytheon.
Celmus, a Lodestone. Curets got by showrs.
Crocus, and Smilax, rurn'd to little flowrs.
In one Hermaphrodite, two bodies join.
Mineides, Bats. Sad Ino made divine,
With Melicert. who luno's fact vpbray'd,
Or Statues, or Cadmean Fowls are made.
Hermione and Cadmus, worn with woe,
Prove hurtlesse Dragons. Drops to Serpents grow^.
Atlas, a Mountain. Gorgon touched Sea-weeds
To C orall change, From Gorgon's blood, proceeds
Swift Pegasus: Crysaor also takes
From thence his birth. Fair hairs conuers to Snakes.
But yet, Alcitboe^ Mine^ides
The honored Orgies of the God displease.
Her sisters share in that impiety;
Who Bacchus for the son of Jove denic.
And now his Priest proclaims a solemn Feast;
That Dames and Maids from usual labor rest;
That wrapped in skins, their haire-laces unbound,
And dangling Tresses with wild luy crowned,
They leauy Spears assume. Who prophesies
Sad haps to such as his command despise.
The Matrons and new-marryed Wives obey:
Their Webs, their vn-spun Wool, aside they lay;
Sweet odours burn; and sing: Lyaeus, Baccbus,
Nrsaeus, Bromius, Euan, great Iacchus;
F^^-e-got, Son of two Mothers, The twice-borne,
Father Eleleus, Thyon, nouer shorn,
Lenaeus, planter' of life cheering Vines;
Nyetileus: with all names that Greece assigns
To thee. o Liber! Still do thou enjoy
Unwasted Youth; eternally a Boy!
You Are seen in heaven; whom all perfections, grace;
And, when vnhorn'd, thou have a Virgins face.
Thy conquests through the Orient are renowned,
Where tawny India is by Ganges bound.
Proud Pentheus, and Iyenrgus, like profane,
By thee (o greatly to be feared!) were slain:
The Thuscaus drencht in Seas. Thou hold'st in awe
The spotted Lynxes, which thy Chariot draw.
Light Bacchanals, and skipping Satyrs follow,
Whilst old. Sylenus, reeling still, does halloo;
Who weakly hangs, upon his tardie Ass.
What place so-e're thou entrest, sounding brass,
I owd Sack-buts, Tymbrels, the confused cries
Of Youths and Women, pierce the marble skies.
Thy presence, we, Ismenides, implore:
Come, o come pleased! Thus they his Rites restore.
Yet, the Mene^ides at home remain:
And with their plied task's his Feast profane:
Who either weaue, or at their distaffs spin:
And urge their Maids to exercise their sin.
One said, as she the twisted thread out-drew:
While others sport, and forged Gods pursew.
Let us. whom better Palles does inuit,
Out useful labor season with delight,
And stories tell by turns; that, what long years.
Deny our eyes, may enter at our ears.
They all agree; and bade the eldest tell
Her story first. She paused, not knowing well
Of many which to choose: Tinsist upon
The Sad Dercetis, of famed Ba^ylon
(Who, as the Palestines believe, did take
A scaly form, inhabiting a Lake)
Or of her daughter speak, with winged ascent
High-pearcht on towers: who there her old age spent:
Or of that Ndis; who with charms most strange,
And weeds too powerful, humane shapes did change,
Into mute Fishes, till a Fish thee grew:
Or of the Tree whose berries changed their hew;
The white to black, by bloods aspersion, grown:
This pleases best; as being most unknown.
Who thus began; and draws the following woll.
Young Pyramus (no Youch so beautiful
Through all the East) and Thube (Who for fair
Might with the immortal Goddesses compose)
Joined houses, where Semiramis enclosed
Her stately town, with walls of brick composed.
This neighborhood their first acquaintance bred:
That, grew to love; Love fought a nuptial bed:
But Parents, who could not with-stand, with-stood
Their joint desires, and like incensed blood.
Signs only utter their vnwitnest loves:
But hidden fire the violenter proves.
A cranny in the parting wall was left;
By shrinking of the new-layd mortar, cleft:
This, for so many Ages vndescry'd.
(What cannot Love find out!) the Lovers spied.
By which, their whispering voices softly trade,
And Passion's amorous embassy conuay'd.
On this side, and on that, like Snailes they cleave;
And greedily each others breath receive.
O envious walls (said they) who thus divide
Whom Love has joined! O, give us way to slide
Into each others arms! if such a bliss
Transcend our Fates, yet suffer us to kiss!
Nor are w'ingrate: much we confess we owe
To you, who this dear liberty bestow.
At Night they did farewell. Their kisses greet
The senseless stones, with lips that could not meet.
When from th'approching Morn the stars withdrew,
And that the Sun had drunk the scorched dew,
They at the usual Station meet again;
And with soft murmurs mutually complain.
At last, resolve in silence of the Night
To steal away, and free themselves by flight;
And with their houses, to forsake the Town.
Yet, lest they so might wander up and down;
To meet at Ninus tomb they both agree,
Under the shel er of a shady Tree.
There, a high Mulberry, full of white fruit;
Hard by a living Fountain fixed his Root.
The Sun, that seemed too slow, his steeds bestows
In restfull Seas: from Seas, wished Night arose.
Then Thisbe in the dark the cloores vnbarr'd;
And slipping forth, vnmissed by her guard,
Comes maskt to Ninus tomb: there in the cold
Sits underneath that Tree: Love made her bold.
When (lo!) a Lioness, smeared with the blood
Of late-slaine Beeues, approcht the neighbor flood,
To quench her thirst. Far-off by Moonlight spied,
Swift fear her flight into a Cave does guide.
Flying, her mantle from her shoulders fell:
The fatal Lioness, as from the Well
Up to the rocky Mountain she with-drawes,
Found it, and tore it with her bloody jaws.
When Pyramus, who came not forth so soon,
Perceived by the glimpses of the Moon
The footing of wild Beasts: his look grew pale.
But, when he spied her torn and bloody veil;
One night (said he) two lovers shall destroy!
She longer life deserved to enjoy.
The guilt is mine: 'twas I (poor soul!) that slew thee
Who to a place so full of danger drew thee,
Nor came before. You Lions, o descend
From your aboads! a wretch in pecces rend,
Condemned by his selfe-pronounced doom:
And make your entrails my opprobrious tomb!
But Cowards wish to die. Her mantle he
Carries along unto the appointed Tree.
There having kissed, and washed it with his eyes;
Take from our blood, said he, the double dies.
With that, his body on his sword he threw:
Which, from the reaking wound, be dying drew.
Now, on his back, vp-spun the blood in smoke:
As when a Spring-conducting pipe is broke,
The waters at a little breach break out,
And hissing, through the aerie Region spout.
The Mulberries their former white forsake;
And from his sprinkling blood their crimson take.
Now she, who could not yet her fear remove,
Retuins, for fear to disappoint her Love.
Her eger spirit seeks him through her eyes;
Who longs to tell of her escaped surprise.
The place and figure of the Tree she knew;
Yet doubts, the berries having changed their hew.
Uncertain; she his panting lims descried,
That struck the stained earth; and starts aside.
Box was not paler than her changed look:
And like the lightly breath'd-on Sea she shook.
But, when she knew 'twas he (now dispossessed
Of her amaze) she shrecks, beats her swollen breast,
Pulls off her hair; embraces, softly reares
His hanging head, and fills his wound with reares.
Then, kissing his cold lips: Woe's (she said)
What cursed Fate has this division made!
O speak, my Pyramus! o look on me!
Thy dear, thy desperate Thisbe calls to thee!
At Thisbe's name he opens his dim eyes;
And having seen her, shuts them up, and dies.
But when his emprie seabbard she had spied,
And her known Robe; Unhappy man! she cried,
These wounds from love, stom thine own hand proceed!
Nor is my hand too weak for such a deed:
My love as strong. This, this shall courage give
To force that life which much disdains to live.
In death I Will follow thee! instyl'd by all,
The wretched Cause, and partner of thy Fall.
Whom Death (that had (alas!) alone the might
To pull thee from me!) shall not dis-vnite.
O you, our wretched Parents (thus severe
To your own blood!) my last Petition hear:
Whom constant love, whom death has joined, interre
Together in one envied Sepulcher.
And thou, o Tree, whose branches shade the slain;
Of both our slaughters bear the lasting stain:
In funeral habit: ever clothe your brood;
A living monument of our mixed blood.
This said, his sword, yet recking, she reuers't,
And with a mortal wound her bosom pearc't.
The easy Gods unto her wish accord;
Their Parents also her desire afford:
The late-white Mulberryes in black now mourn;
And what the fire had left, lay in one vrne.
Here ended she. Some intermission made,
Leucothoe, her sisters silent, said:
This Sun, who all directs with his light,
Weak Love has tamed: his loves we now recite.
He first discovered the adultery
Of Mars and Venus (nothing scapes his eye)
And in displeasure told to Juno's son
Their secret stealths, and where the deed was done.
His spirits faint: his hands could not sustain
The work in hand. Forthwith, he forged a chain,
With nets of brass, that might the eye deceive,
(Less curious far the webs which Spiders we^uc.)
Made pliant to each touch, and apt to close:
This, he about the guilty bed bestows.
No sooner these Adulterer's were met,
Than caught in his so strangely forged net;
Who, struggling, in compeld imbracements lay.
The Iuory doors then Vulcan does desplay;
And calls the Gods. The shamefully lay bound:
Yet one, a wanton, wished to be so found.
The heavenly dwellers laugh. This tale was told
Through all the Round, and mirth did long uphold.
Venus, incenst on him who this disclosed
A memorable punishment imposed.
And he, of late so tyrannous to Love,
Love's tyranny in just exchange does prove.
Hyperion's son, what boots thy pearcing sight!
Thy feature, color, or thy radiant light!
For thou, who earth inflamest with thy fires,
Art now thy self inflamed with new desires.
Thy melting eyes alone Leucothoe view;
And give to her, what to the World is dew.
Now, in the East thou hastnest thy vp-rise:
Now, slowly sett'st; even loath to leave the skies.
And, while that Object thus exacts thy stay,
Thou addest hours unto the Winters day.
Often, in thy face thy minds disease appears;
Affrighting all the darkened World with fears.
Not Cynchia's interposed Orb does move
These pale aspects; this color springs from love.
She all thy thoughts ingrost: nor did thou care
For Clymen,c for her who Circes bare,
For Khodos, Clytie, who in love abounds,
Although despised, though tortured with two wounds.
All, all were buried in Leucothoe^
Borne in sweet Saba, of Eurynome.
As she in beautic far surpast all other:
So much the Daughter far surpast the Mother.
Great Orchamus was Father to the Maid:
Who, seventh from Belus Priscus, Persu^sway'd.
In low Hisperian Vales those pastures are
Where Phoebus horses o^ Ambrosrosia fare.
There, tired with the travels of the day,
They renouate what labor does decay.
Now, while celestial food their hu^^er seeds,
And Night in her alternate reign succeeds;
In figure of Eurynome, the God
Approcht the chamber, where his life abode.
He, spinning by a lamp, Leucath o^ found,
With twice six handmaids, who enclosed her round.
Then kissing her (her Mother now by Art)
I have, said he, a secret to impart:
Maids, presently withdraw. They all obeyed.
He, after he had cleared the chamber, said*
The tardie Year I measure: I am he
Who see all Objects, and by whom all see;
The World's cloere eye: by thy fair solse, I swear,
I love thee above thought. Shot shook for fear;
Her spindle and her distasse from her fell:
And yet that fear became her wondrous well.
Then, his own form and radiancy, he took:
Though with that unexpected presence strookes
Yet, vanquished by his beauty, her complaint
She said aside, and suffered his constraint.
This Clytic vexed (his love obsecur'd no measure)
Who in the fury of her fell displeasure,
Divulged the quickly-spreading infamy:
And to her father does the fact descry.
Who stern and savage, shuts up all remorse,
From her that'su'd, subdew'd. she said, by force;
And Sol to witness calls. He his dishonor
Interres alive, and casts a Mount upon her.
Hyperion's son this batters with his rays:
And for her re-ascent a breach displayes.
Yet could not she advance her heavy head:
But life, too hasty, from her body fled.
Never did Phoel^us with such sorrow mourn
Since wretched Bhoeton the World did burn:
Yet strives he with his influence to beget
In her cold lims'a life-rouoking heat.
But, since the Fates such great attempts withstood;
He steep's the place and body in a flood
Offragrant Nectar: much bewailes her end:
And sighing, said; Yet shall thou heaven ascend.
Forthwith, her body thawes in to a deaw:
Which, from the moy stned earth, an odor threw.
Then through the hill ashrub of Frankincense
Thrust up his crown, and took his root from thence
Though love might clyties sorrow have excused,
Sorrow, her tongue; Daye's king her bed refused.
She, with distracted passion, pines away,
Detesteth company; all night, all day,
Disrobed, with her ruffled hair unbound,
And wet with humor, fits upon the ground:
For ^nelong days all sustenance for bears;
Her hunger ^loyd with deaw, her thirst with tears.
Nor rose; but, ^^uets on the God her eyes;
And ever turns her face to him that flies.
At length, to earth her stupid body cleaues;
Her wan complexion turns to bloodlesse-leaues;
Yet streak't with red: her perished lims beget
A flower, resembling the pale Violet;
Which, with the sun, though rooted fast, does move;
And, being changed, changes not her love.
Thus she. This wondrous story caught their cares;
To some the same impossible, appears,
Others, that all is possible, conclude,
To true-styl'd Gods: but, Bacebus they extrude.
All whist, Alcithoe, call'd-vpon, does run
Her shettle through the web; and thus begun.
T'omit the pastoral loves, to few unknown,
Of young Idaean Duphnis; turned to stone
By that vexed Nymph; who could not else assuage
Her jealousy: such is a louer's rage!
And Scython who his nature in innouates,
Now male, now female, by alternate Fates;
With Celmus turned into an Adamant,
Who of his faith to little love might vant;
The shorn Curetes, got by falling showers;
crocos and Smilax, changed to prerty flowers,
I ouer-passe; and will your ears surprise
With sweet delight of unknown novelties.
Then, know, how Salmacis in famous grew;
Whose too strong waves all manly strength undo,
And mollify, with their soule-sostning touch:
The cause unknown; their nature known too much
The ideaean Nymphs nursed, in secure delight,
The son of Hermes and fair Aphrodite.
His father and his mother in his look
You might behold: from whom, his name he took.
When Summers five he thrice had multiplied;
Leaving the fount-full Hills of foster I Would,
He wandered through strange Lands, pleased with the sight
Of foreign streams; toil lessening with delight.
The Lycian Cities past, he treads the grounds
Of wealthy Caria, which on Lycia bounds:
There lighted on a Poole, so passing clear,
That all the glittering bottom did appear;
Inuiron'd with no marish-louing Reeds,
Nor piked Bull-rushes, nor barren weeds:
But, living Turf upon the border grew;
Whose euer-Spring no blasting Winter knew,
A Nymph this haunts, vnpractiz'd in the chase,
To bend a Bow, or run a strife-full race.
Of all the Water-Nimphs, this Nymph alone
To nimble-footed Dian was unknown.
Her sisters often would say,; Fie, salmacis,
Fie lazic sister, what a sloth is this!
Upon a Quiver, or a Iauelin seize;
And with laborious hunting mix thine ease.
On Quiver, nor on Iauelin, would she seize;
Nor with laborious hunting mix her ease,
But now in her own Fountain bathes her fair
And shapefull lime; now kembs her golden hair:
Her self often by that liquid mirror dressed
There taking counsel what became her best:
Her body in transparant Robes arrayed,
Now on soft leaves, or softet moss displayed:
Often gathers flowers; so when she saw the Boy:
Whom seen, forthwith she couets to enjoy;
And yet would not approach, though big with haste,
Till neatly trickt, till all in order placed;
Her loue-inueighling looks set to insoare;
Who merited to be reputed fair.
Sweet Boy, said she, well worthy the abode
Of blessed coelestialls! if thou be a God,
Then art thou cupid! if of humane race,
Happy the Parents, whom thy person grace!
Thy sister, if thou have a sister, blessed!
Thy Nurse, muchmore, who fed thee with her breast!
But (o!) no less than deifi'd is she
Whom marriage shall incorporate to thee!
If any such; let me this treasure steal:
If not, be it I; and our dear Nuptials seal.
This said, she held her peace. He blushed for shame;
Not knowing love: whom shamefac'tnesse became.
So Apples show upon the sunny side;
So Iuory, with rich Vermillion died:
So pure a red the filuer Moon does stain.
When auxil'ary brass resounds in vain.
She earnestly entreats a sisters kiss:
And now, advancing to embrace her bliss,
He, struggling, said; Lascivious Nymph, forbear;
Or I will quit the place, and leave you hear.
Fair Stranger, timorous salma^ is replied, I
It Is freely yours; and therewith stepped aside:
Yet, looking back, amongst the shrubby Trees
She closely sculks, and crouches on her knees.
The vacant Boy, now being left alone,
Imagining he was observed by none,
Now here, now there, about the margent trips;
And, in th'alluring waves his ankles dips.
Caught with the Water's flattering temp'rature,
He straight distobes his body; o, how pure!
His naked beauty Salmacis amazed:
Who with unsatisfied longing gazed.
Her sparkling eyes shoot flames through this sweet error;
Much like the Sun reflected by a mirror.
Now, she impatiently her hope delays;
Now, burns t'imbrace: now, halfe-madde, hardly stays.
He swiftly from the bank on which he stood,
Clapping his body, leaps into the flood;
And, with his rowing arms, supports his lims:
Which, through the pure waves, glister as he swims.
Like Iuory statues, which the life surpass;
Or like a Lilly, in a crystal glass.
He Is mine! the Nymph exclaimed: who all vnstript;
And, as she spoke, into the water skipt:
Hanging about the neck that did resist;
And, with a mastring force, th'vnwilling kissed:
Now, puts her hand beneath his scornful breast;
Now every way inuading the distressed:
And wraps-about the subject of her lust,
Much like a Serpent by an Eagle truss't;
Which to his head and feet, infettered, clings;
And wreaths her tail about his stretcht-out wings.
So clasping luy to the Oak does grow;
And so the Polypus detaines his foe.
But Atlantiades, relentlesse coy,
Still struggles, and resists her hop't-for joy.
Invested with her body: fool, said she,
Struggle thou may; but never shall be free.
O you, who in immortal thrones reside,
Grant that no day may ever us divide!
Her wishes had their Gods. Even in that space
Their cleaving bodies mix: both have one face.
As when we two divided scions join,
And see them grow together in one rine:
So they, by such a strict imbracement glew'd,
Are now but one, with double form Indew'd.
No longer he a boy, not she a maid;
But neither, and yet either, might be said.
Hermaphrodi^us at himself admires:
Who half a female from the spring retires,
His manly li^^s now softened; and thus prays,
With such a voice as neither sex betrays:
Swift Hermes, Ap^rodir^^ him o hear
Who was your son! who both your names does bear!
May every man, that in this water swims,
Return halfe-woman, with infeebled lims.
His gentle parents sign to his request;
And with unknown receipts the spring infest.
Here, they conclude: yet give their hands no rest;
But Bacchus slight, and still profane his Feast.
Then, suddenly harsh instruments surprise
Their, charged ears, not extant to their eyes:
Sweet Myrrh and Saffron all the house perfume.
Their webs (past credit!) flourish in the loome:
The hanging wool to green-leau'd Iuy spreads;
Part, into vines: the equal twisted threads
To branches run: buds from the dist^^^e shoot:
And with that purple paint their blushing fruit.
Now to the day succeeds that doubtful light;
Which neither can be called day, nor night.
The building trembles: torches of fat Pines
Appear to burn; the room with flashes shines;
Filled with fantastical resemblances
Of howling beasts, whom blood and slaughter* please.
The Sisters, to the smoaky roof retire;
And, there dispersed, a^o^d both ^ight and ^^re.
Thus, while they corners seek, thin films extend
From lightened lims, with small beams inter-pend.
But how their former shapes they did forgo,
Concealing darkness would not let them know.
Nor are these little Light-detesting things
Born-vp with feathers, but transparant wings.
Their voice besits their bodies; small, and faint:
Wherewith they harshly utter their complaint.
These houses haunt, in night conceal their shame;
And of the loved Evening take their name.
All Thebes now feared Bacchus celebrates:
Whose wondrous power his boasting Aunt relates.
She only, of so many sisters, knew
No grief as yet, but what from them she drew.
A happy Mother, Wife to Athamas,
Nurse to a God: these caused her to surpass
The bounds of her felicities; and made*
Vexed Juno storm; who to her self thus said;
What? could that Strumpets brat the form defeise*
Of poor Maeonian Sailors, drencht in Seas?
A Mother urge to murder her own son?
And wing the three Mine^ides that spun?
Can I but vn-reuenged wrongs deplore?
Must that suffize? and is our power no more?
He teaches what to do; learn of thy Foe:
What fury can, the wounds of Pentheus show
More than too-much. Why should not I^o tread
The path which late her frantic sisters lead?
A steep dark Cave, with deadly Ewe reple^^,
Through silence leads to hell's infernal seat.
By this, dull Styx eiects a blasting furne:
Here ghosts descend, whose bodies earth inhume;
Amongst those thorns, stiff Cold, and Palenesse dwell.
The new-come ghosts nor know the way to Hell;
Nor where the roomy Stygian City stands;
Or that dire Palace where black Dis commands.
A thousand entries to this City guide:
The gates still open stand, on every side.
And as all Rivers run into the Deep:
So all vnhoused Souls do thither creep.
Nor are they pestered for want of room:
Not can it be perceived that any come.
Here shadows wander from their bodies pent:
Some plead; and some the Tyrants Court frequent;
Some in life-practiz'd Arts employ their times:
Others are tortured for their former Crimes.
Saturnia stooping from her Throne of Air
(Her hate immortal!) thither makes repair.
As soon as she had entered the gate,
The threshold trembled with her sacred weight.
Still-waking Cerberus the Goddess dreads,
And barketh thrice at once, with his three heads.
She calls the Furies, Daughters to old Night;
Implacable, and hating all delight.
Before the doors of Adamant they sit;
And there with combs their snaky curles unknit.
When they through gloomy darkness did disclose
That form of Heaven, the Goddesses arose.
The Dungeon of the Damned this is named.
Here Tityus, for attempted Rape defamed,
Had his vast body* on nine Acres spread:
And on his heart a greedy Vulture fed.
From Tantalus, deceitful water slips:
And catcht-at fruit auoids his touched lips.
Thou ever seek, of roul'st up in vain
A stone, o Sisyphus, to fall again.
Ixion, turned upon a restless wheel,
With giddy head pur^ews his flying heel.
The Besides, whom kins-men's blood accuse,
For ever draw the Water; which they loose.
On all, Saturnia frowns; but most of all
At thee Ixion; then, a look lets fall
On Sisyphus: And why (said she) remains
This brother only in perpetual pains;
When haughty Athamas, whose thoughts despise
Both Jove and me, abides in constant joys?
Then tells the cause of her approach, her hate,
And what she would: the fall of Cadmus state;
That Athamas the Furies would distract,
And urge him to some execrable fact.
Importunately she soliciteth,
Commands, entreats, and promised, with one breath.
Incenst Tisiphone her Tresses shakes;
And, tossing from her face the hissing Snakes,
Thus said: Younced not use long ambages;
Suppose all done already, that may please:
Forsake this Iothsome Kingdom, and repair
To th'vpper world's more comfortable air.
Well-pleased Saturnia then to heaven withdrew:
Whom first Thaumantian Iris purged with deaw.
Forthwith, Tis^phone her garment takes,
Dropping with blood, and girt with knotted Snakes.
About her head a bloody torch she shook;
And swiftly those accursed aboads forsook.
Sull-sighing Sorrow, Horror, trembling Fear,
And ghastly Madness, her associats were.
The entered Palace gron'd: pale poison soyles
The polisht doors: the frighted Sun recoyles.
Then Athamas and Ino, struck with dread
And monstrous apparitions, sought to have fled:
But stern Erinnys* their escape withstands;
And stretching-out her viper-grasping hands,
Shook her dark brows. The troubled Serpents hist:
Some, falling on her shoulders, there untwist;
Others, upon her ugly breast descend,
Spet poison, and their forked tongues extend.
Two Adders from her crawling hair she drew;
And those at Athamas and Ino threw:
These up and down about their bosoms roll;
And with infused infection sad the Soul.
No wound upon their bodies could be found:
It was the mind that felt the desperate wound.
She brought besides, from her abhorred ho^e,
The surfeit of Echidna, with the foam
Of hell-bred Cerberus, still-wandring Error,
Oblivion, Mischief, Tears, in fernall Terror,
Distracted Fury, an Affection fixed*
On murder; altogether ground, and mixed*
With blood yet recking; boiled in hollow brass,
And stird with Hemlocke. While sad Athamas
And ^no quake, she pours into their breasts
The ragefull poison; which their peace infests.
Her flamy torch then whisking in a round
(Whose circularie fire her conquest crowned)
To ^luto's empty regiment she makes
A swift descent; and there vngirts her Snakes.
Forth with, Aeolides with poyso^ boyles.
I^, my Mates, he cries, here pitch your toils;
Here, late a Lioness by me was seen
With her two whelps. With that, pursues the Quee^
And from her breast Clearchus snatched: The Child
Stretch ^forth his little arms, and on him smiled:
Whom like a sling about his head he swings;
And cruelly against the pauement flings.
The Mother, whether with her grief distraught*
Or that the poison on her senses wrought,
^uns howling with her hair about her ears;
And in bare arms her Melicerta bears;
Cries Euohe Bacchus! Juno l^ught, and said;
Thus art thou by thy Foster-child repaid.
There is a Rock that ouer-looks the Main,
^ollow'd by fretting Surges, s^onst from rain;
Whose craggy brow to vaster Seas extends.
This, Ino (fury adding strength) ascends;
Descending headlong, with the load she bears;
And strikes the sparkling waves, that fall in tears.
Then* Venus, grieuing at her Neece's Fate,
^er Uncle thus entreats: O thou, whose State
Is next to Ioue's* great Ruler of the Flood;
My suit is bold; yet pity thou my blood,
Now tossed in the deep I^nian Seas:
And join them to thy wa^rie Deities.
Some favor of the Sea I should obtain,
That am ingender'd of the ^omy Maine:
Of which, the acceptable name I bear.
Neptune affords a favorable ear;
Who what was mortal from their beings took;
Then gave to either a Maiesticke look;
In all their faculties divinely framed:
And her, (...); him, Paleman named*
The Th^ban Ladies, who her steps pursew'd,
Her last on the first Promontorie viewed.
Then, held for dead; with hair, and garments rent,
They beat their breasts; and Cadmus House lament.
Of litttle Justice, and much Cruelty.
All, Juno tax. Endure (she said) shall I
Such blasphemies? I Will make you monuments*
Of my revenge. Threats usher their events.
When one, of all the most affectionate,
Cried, O my Queen, I will partake thy Fate!
And thought to leap into the roaring Flood;
But could not move: her feet fast^fixed stood.
Another, who her bosom meant to beat;
Perceived her stiff'ned arms to lose their heat.
By chance, her hand This stretches to the Maine;
Nor could her hand, now sto^e, vnstretch again.
As She her violated Tresses tare,
Her fingers forthwith hardened in her hair.
Their Statues now those several gestures bear.
Wherein they formerly surprised were.
Some, Fowls became; now called Cadme^ides;
Who with their light wings sweep those gulphy Seas.
Little knew Cad^us, that his Children reigned*
In sacred Seas, and deathlesse States retayn'd.
Subdew'd with woes, with tragical events,
That had no end, and many dire ostents,
He leaves his City; as not through his own,
But by the fortune of the place o're-throwne:
And with his wife Hermione, long tossed,
At length arriueth at the Illyrian Coast.
Now spent with grief and age, whilst they relate*
Their former toils, and Familie's first fate:
And was that Serpent sacred, which I slew
(Said he) whose teeth into the Earth I threw
(An uncouth seed) when I from Sidon came?
If this, the vengefull Gods so much inflame,
May I my belly Serpent-like extend!
His belly lengthned, ere his wish could end.
Tough scales upon his hardened outside grew;
The black, distinguished with drops of blew.
Then, falling on his breast, his thighs unite;
And in a spiny progress stretch outright.
His arms (for, arms as yet they were) he spreads:
And tears on cheeks, that yet were humane, sheds.
Come, O Sad Soul, said he; thy husband touch;
Whilst I am I, or part of me be such.
Shake hands, while yet I have a hand to shake;
Before I totally endue a Snake.
His tongue was yet in motion; when it cleft
In two, forthwith of humane speech bereft.
He hist, when he his sorrows sought to vent;
The only language now which Nature lent.
His Wife her naked bosom beats, and cries,
Stay Cadmus, and put off these prodigies.
O strange! where are thy feet, hands, shoulders, breast,
Thy color, face, and (while I speak) the rest!
You Gods, why also am not I a Snake?
He lick't her willing lips even as she spoke;
Into her well known bosom glides; her waste,
And yielding neck, with loving twines embraced.
Amazement all the standers-by possessed;
While glittering combs their slippery heads inuest.
Now are they two: who crept, together chayn'd,
Till they the covert of the Wood attayn'd.
These gentle Dragons, knowing what they were,
Do hurt to no man, nor man's presence fear.
Yet were those sorrows by their daughters son
Much comforted, who vanquished India won:
To whom the Achaians Temples consecrate;
Divinely magnified through either State.
Alone Acrisius Abantrades,
Though of one Progeny, dissents from these:
Who, from the Argolian City, made his fly;
And managed arms against a Deity.
Nor him, nor Pers^us he for Ioue's does hold;
(Begot on Danae^ in a shower of gold)
Yet straight repents (so preualent is truth)
Both to have forced the God, and doomed the Youth.
Now is the one inthroned in the skies:
The other through Ayr's empty Region flies;
And bears along the memorable spoil
Of that new Monster, conquered by his toil.
And as he over the Lybian Deserts flew,
The blood, that drop's from Gorgen's head, straight gre^^
To various Serpents, quickened by the ground:
With these, those much infested Climes abound.
Hither and thither, like a cloud of rain
Borne by cross winds, he cuts the ayrie Main;
Far-distant earth beholding from on high;
And over all the ample World does fly:
Thrice saw Aroturus, thrice to Cancer pressed;
Often harried to the East, often to the West.
And now, not trusting to approached night,
Upon the Hesperian Continent does light:
And craves some rest, till Lucifer displayes
Aurora's blush, and she Apollo's rays.
Huge-statur'd Atlas Iapetonides
Here swayed the utmost bounds of Earth and Seas;
Where Titan's panting steeds his Chariot steep,
And bathe their fiery feet-locks in the Deep.
A thousand Herds, as many Flocks, he fed
In those large Pastures, where no neighbors tread.
Here to their tree the shining branches suit;
To them, their leaves; to those, the golden fruit.
Great King, said Perseus, if high birth may move
Respect in thee, behold the son of Jove:
If admiration, then my Acts admire;
Who rest, and hospitable Rites desire;
He, mindful of this prophecy, of old
By sacred Themis of Parnassus told;
In time thy golden fruit a prey shall prove,
O Iaphets son, unto the son of Jove.
This fearing, he his Orchard had enclosed
With solid Cliffs, that all access opposed:
The Guard whereof a monstrous Dragon held;
And from his Land all Forrainers expeld.
Be gone, said he, for fear thy glories prove,
But counterfeit; and thou no son to Jove;
Then adds uncivil violence to threats.
With strength the other seconds his entreats:
In strength inferior; Who so strong as he?
Since courtesy, nor any worth in me,
Vexed Perseus said, can purchase my regard;
Yet from a guest receive thy due reward.
With that, Medusa's ugly head he drew,
His own reuersed. Forthwith, Atlas grew:
Into a Mountain equal to the man:
His hair and beard to woods and bushes ran*
His arms and shoulders' into ridges spread;
And what was his, is now the Mountains head:
Bones turn to stones; and all his parts extrude
Into a huge prodigious altitude.
(Such was the pleasure of the euer-blest)
Whereon the heavens, with all their tapers, rest.
Hippotades in hollow rocks did close
The strife-full Winds: Bright Lucifer ^ose
And rous'd-vp Labor. Perseus, having tied
His wings to his feet, his fauchion to his side,
Sprung into air: below, on either hand
Innumerable Nations left: the Land
Of Aethiop, and the Cephe^ fields suruay'd;
There, where the innocently wretched maid
Was for her mothers proud impiety,
By unjust Ammon sentenced to die.
Whom when the Heroes saw to hard rocks chained;
But that warm tears from charged eye-springs drained.
And light winds gently fanned her fluent hair,
He would have thought her marble: Ere aware
He fire attracteth; and, astonished by
Her beauty, had almost forgot to fly.
Who lighting said; O fairest of thy kind
(More worthy of those bands which Lovers bind,
Than these rude gyues) the Land by thee renownd,
Thy name, thy birth declare; and why thus bound.
At first, the silent Virgin was affrayd
To speak to a man; and modestly had made
A visard of her hands; but, they were tied:
And yet abortiue tears their fountains hide.
Still urged, lest she should wrong her innocence,
As if ashamed to utter her offense,
Her Country she discouers; her own name;
Her beauteous Mothers confidence, and blame.
All yet untold, the Waves began to rore:
The apparent Monster (hastening to the shore)
Before his breast, the broad-spred Sea vp-beares.
The Virgin shreeks. Her Parents see their fears.
Both mourn; both wretched (but, she justly so:)
Who bring no aid, but ecstasies of woe,
With tears that suit the time: Who take the leave
They loathe to take; and to her body cleave.
You for your grief may have, the stranger said,
A time too long: short is the hour of aid.
If freed by me, Ioue's son, in fruitful gold
Begot on Dana^ through a brazen Hold;
Who conquered Gorgon with the snakie hair;
And boldly glide through vn-inclosed air:
If for your son you then will me prefer;
Add to this worth, That in delivering her;
I Will try (so favor me the Powers divine)
That she, saved by my valor, may be mine.
They take a Law; entreat what he does offer:
And further, for a Dowre their Kingdom proffer.
Lo! as a Gally with fore-fixed prow
(Rowed by the sweat of slaves) the Sea does plow:
Even so the Monster furroweth with his breast,
The foming flood; and to the near Rock pressed:
Not farther distant, than a man might fling
A way-inforcing bullet from a sling.
Forthwith, the youthful issue of rich showrs,
Earth pushing from him, to the blew sky towrs.
The furious Monster eagerly does chase
His shadow, gliding on the Seas smooth face.
And as Ioue's bird, when she from high suruayes
A Dragon basking in Apollo's rays;
Descends unseen, and through his necks blew scales
(To shun his deadly teeth) her talons naile's:
So swiftly stoops high-pitcht Inachides
Through singing air: then on his back does sears;
And near his right sin sheaths his crooked sword
Up to the hilts; who deeply wounded, roared:
Now capers in the air, now dives below
The troubled waves; now turn's upon his foe:
Much like a chafed ^Bore, whom eager hounds
Have at a Bay, and terrify with sounds.
He, with swift wings, his greedy jaws auoids;
Now, with his fauchion wounds his scaly sides;
Now, his shell-rough-cast back; now, where the tail
Ends in a Fish, or parts exposed t'assaile.
A stream mixed with his blood the Monster flings
From his wide throat; which wets his heavy wings:
Nor longer dares the wary Youth rely
On their support. He sees a rock hard by,
Whose top above the quiet waters stood;
But underneath the winde-incensed flood.
There lights; and, holding by the rocks extent,
His oft-thrust sword into his bowels sent.
The shore rings with the applause that fills the sky.
Then, Cepheus and Cassiope, with joy,
Salute him for their son: whom now they call
The Savior of their House, and of them all.
Up came Andromeda, freed from her chains;
The cause, and recompense of all his pains.
Meane-while, he washes his victorious hands
In cleansing waves. And lest the beachy Sands
Should hurt the snaky head, the ground he strew
With leaves and twigs that under water grew:
Whereon, Medusa's ugly face he lays.
The green, yet iuicy, and attractiue sprayes
From the touched Monster stiffning hardness took;
And their own native pliancy forsook.
The Sea-Nymphs this admired wonder try
On other Sprigs, and in the issue joy:
Who sow again their Seeds upon the Deep.
The Coral now that property does keep,
Receiving hardness from felt air alone:
Beneath the Sea a twig, above a stone.
Forthwith, three Altars he of Turf erects,
To Hermes, Jove, and Her who war affects:
Minerua's on the right; on the left hand
Stood Mercurie's: Ioue's in the midst did stand.
To Mercury, a Calfe they sacrifice;
To Jove, a Bull; a Cow, to Pallas dies:
Then takes Andromeda, the full reward
Of so great worth; with Dower, of less regard.
Now, Love and Hymen urge the Nuptial Bed:
The sacred Fires with rich perfumes are fed;
The house hung round with Garlands; every where
Melodious Harps and Songs salute the ear;
Ofiocond mirth the free and happy signs:
With Doors displayed, the golden Palace shines.
The Cephen Nobles, and each stranger Guest,
Together enter to this sumptuous Feast.
The Banquet done, with generous wines they cheer
Their heightened spirits: Perseus longs to hear
Their fashions, manners, and original;
Who, by Lyncides is informed of all.
This told; he said: Now tell, O valiant Knight,
By what felicity of force or slight,
You got this purchase of the snaky hairs.
Then Abantiades forthwith declares,
How under frosty Atlas cliffy side
There lay a Plain, with Mountains fortified:
In whose access the Phorcides did lie;
Two sisters; both of them had but one eye:
How cunningly his hands thereon he laid,
As they from one another it conuay'd.
Then through blind wastes, and rocky forests came
To Gorgon's house: the way unto the same,
Beset with forms of men and beasts, alone
By seeing of Medusa turned to stone:
Whose horrid shape securely he did eye,
In his bright target's clear refulgency.
And how her head he from her shoulders took,
Ere heavy sleep her snakes and her forsook.
Then told of Pegasus, and of his brother,
Sprung from the blood of their new-slaughtred mother:
Adding the perils past in his long way;
What seas, what soyles, his eyes below suruay;
And to what stars his lofty pitch ascends:
Yet long before their expectation ends.
One Lord among the rest would gladly know,
Why Serpents only on her head did grow.
Stranger, said he, since this that you require
Deserves the knowledge, take what you desire:
Her passing beauty was the only scope
Of men's affections, and their envied hope:
Yet was not any part of her more rare
(So say they who have seen her) than her hair.
Whom Neptune in Minerua's Fane comprest.
Ioue's daughter, with the Ae^is on her breast,
Hid her chaste blushes: and due vengeance takes,
In turning of the Gorgon's hair to Snakes.
Who now, to make her enemies affrayd,
Bears in her shield the Serpents which she made.
OVID'S METAMORPHOSIS. The fifth Book.
THE ARGUMENT.
THe Gorgon seen, Cepheni Statues grow:
So Phineus Peaetus, ^olydect, the foe
To Perseus praise. The fountain Hippocrene
By Horse-hoofe r^ys'd. The Muses into Nine
Rape-flying Birds: Pierides, to Pyes.
The Gods, by Typhon cha^'t, themselves disguis^.
Sad ^yane into a Fountain flows.
The ill-nurtur'd Boy a spotted Stellion grows.
Loved Arethusa th^^es into a spring.
A scalaphus an (...) Light feathers wing
(...) Sirens, who an Waters (...)
Stern Lyneus Ceres to a Lynx does turn.
Whilst the Dana^an Heroes this relates,
Amidst the assembly of the Cephen States;
Exalted voices through the Palace ring:
Not like to theirs who at a marriage sing;
But such as menace war. The nuptial Feast,
Thus turned to tumult, to the life expres^
A peaceful Sea, whose brow no frown deformes,
Straight ruffled into billows by rude storm*
First* hineus, the rash Author of this war,
Shaking a Lance; began the deadly jar.
Lo, I the man, that will upon thy life
Revenge, said he, the rapture of my wife.
Nor shall thy wings, nor Jove inforged gold,
Work thy escape. About to throw: O hold!
Perplexed Cepheus cries: What will thou do?
What fury, frantic brother, tempts thee to
So foul a fact? Is this the recompense
For such high merit? for her life's defense?
Not Perseus, but the incens't Nereides,
But horned Hammon, and the wrath of Seas
(That Orke that sought my bowels to devour)
Have snatched her from thee; ravished in the hour
Of her exposure. But thy cruelty
Perhaps was well content that she should die,
To ease thy loss with ours. May't not suffize,
That she was bound in chains before thine eyes;
That thou, her Uncle, and her Husband, brought
Her peril no prevention, nor none sought;
But that another aid thou must envy,
And claim the Tropheys of his victory?
Which, if of such esteem, thou should have strained
TO have forced them from those Rocks, where lately chaind.
Let him, who did, enjoy them: nor exact
What is his dew by merit and compact.
Nor think, we Perseus before thee prefer;
But him, before so abhorred a sepulcher.
He, without answer, rolling to and fro
His eyes on either, doubts at which to throw:
And pausing, his ill-aymed lance at length
At Perseus hurles, with rage-redoubled strength,
Fixed in the bed-stock; up fierce Perseus starts,
And his retorted Spear at Phineus darts:
Who suddenly behind an Altar stepped;
An Altar vengeance from the wicked kept:
And yet in Rhoetus brow the weapon stuck.
He fell: the steel out of his scull they pluck:
Who spurns the earth, and staynes the board with blood,
With that, the multitude, with fury wood,
Their Lances fling, and some there be who cry,
That Cepheus, and his son in law, should die.
But Cepheus wisely quits the clamorous Hall:
Who Faith and Justice does to record call,
With all the hospitable Gods; that he
Was from this execrable vp-rore free.
The warlike Pallas, present, with her shield
Protects her Brother, and his courage steeled.
Young Indian Atys by ill hap was there,
Whom Ganges-got Limniace did bear
In her clear Waves: his beauty excellent,
Which c^re and costly ornaments augment:
Who scarce had fully sixteen Summers told:
Clad in a Tyrian mantle, fringed with gold.
About his neck he wore a carquenet:
His hair with Riband bound, and odors wet.
Although he cunningly a Dart could throw*
Yet with more cunning could he use his Bow.
Which now a-drawing with a tardy hand;
Quick Perseus from the Altar snatched a Brand,
And dashed it on his face: out-start his eyes;
And through his flesh the shiuered bones arise.
When Syrian Lycabas his Atys viewed,
Shaking his formlesse looks, with blood imbrew'd:
To him in strictest bonds of friendship tied,
And one who could not his affection hide:
After he had his tragedy bewailed;
Who through the bitter wound his soul exhaled:
He took the Bow, which crst the Youth did bend;
And said; With me, thou Murderer contend;
Nor longer glory in a Boye's sad fate,
Which stains thy actions with deserved hate,
Yet speaking, from the string the arrow flew:
Which took his plighted robe, as he withdrew
Acrisioniades upon him pressed;
And sheathed his Harpy in his groaning breast.
Now dying, he for Atys looks, with eyes
That swim in night; and on his bosom lies:
Then cheerfully expires his parting breath:
Rejoicing to be joined to him in death.
Phorbas the Sye^nit, Methion's son
With him the Libyan Amphimedon;
Eager of combat, slipping in the blood.
That drencht the pauement, fell: his sword withstood
Their re-ascent, which through the short-ribs smote
Amphimedon, and cut the others throat.
Yet Perseus would not venture to invade
the Halbertere Eritheu^ with his blade;
But in both hands a Goblet high imbost
And massy, took; which at his head he cost:
Who vomits clotted blood; and, tumbling down,
Knocks the hard pauement with his dying crown.
Then Polydaemon (sprung from Goddesse-borne
Semiramis) Phlegyas, the unshorn
Elyce, Clytus, Scythian Aba^is,
And brave Lycetus (old Sperchesiu^ bliss)
Fell by his hand: whose foet in triumph tread
Upon the slaughtred bodies of the dead.
But Phineus, fearing to confront his Foe
In close assault, far-off a dart does throw*
Which led by error, did on I da light;
A Neuter, who in vain forbear to fight.
He, sternly frowning, thus to Phineus spoke:
Since you, me an unwilling party make,
Receive the enemy whom you have made;
That, by a wound, a wound may be repaid.
About to hurl the Dart, drawn from his side;
With loss of blood he faints, and falling died.
Then, great Odytes fell by Clyman's sword;
Next to the King the greatest Cephen Lord:
Hypsaeus slew Prot^nor; Ly^^edes
Hyps^us. Old Emathion fell with these;
Who feared the Gods, and favored the right.
He, whom old age exempted from the fight,
Fights with his tongue, himself does interpose,
And deeply execrates their wicked blows.
Cromis, as he embraced the Altar, lopt
His shaking head; which on the Altar dropped:
Whose halfe-dead tongue yet curses; and expire^
His righteous soul amidst the sacred Fires.
Then B^^teas and Ammon, Phineus slew;
Who from one womb at once their being dre^^:
Invincible with hurle-bats, could they quell
The dints of swords Near these Alphytus fell,
The Priest of Ceres, with a Miter crowned;
Which to his temples a white fillet bound.
And thou Lampelides, whose pleasant wit,
Detesting discord, in soft peace more fit
To sing unto thy tunefull Lire; now pressed
With Songs to celebrate the nuptial Feast:
When Pettalus, at him who stood far off
With his defenselesse Harp; strikes with this scoff;
Go sing the rest unto the Ghosts below:
And pear^t his Temples with a deadly blow.
His dying fingers warble in his fall:
And then, by chance, the Song was tragical.
This, unrevenged, Lycormas could not brook;
But from the door's right side a Leauer took,
And him between the head and shoulders knocks:
Down falls he, like a sacrificed Ox.
Ciniphean Palates then sought to seize
Upon the left: when fierce Marmorides
His hand nayl'd to the door-post with a Spear:
Whose side stern Abas pierced as he stuck there.
Nor could he fall; but, giving up the ghost,
Hung by the hand against the smeared post.
Melaneus then, of Perseus party, fell;
And Dorilas, whose riches did excel:
In Nasoemoniae none than he more great
For large Possessions, and huge hoards of Wheat.
The steel stuck in his groine, which death pursew'd:
Whom Halcyoneus of Bactria viewed
(The Author of the wound) as he did roll
His turn'd-vp eyes, and sighed-out his soul:
For all thy land, said he, by this divorce
Receive thy length; and left his bloudlesse corse.
The Spear, reuengefull Abantides drew
From his warm wound; and at the Thrower threw:
Which in the middle does his nares divide;
And, passing through, appeared on either side.
Whilst Fortune crowned him, Clytiu^ he confounds
And Danus, of one womb, with different wounds:
Through Clytius thighs a ready Dart he cast;
An other 'twixt the jaws of Danus past.
Minde^^an Celadon and After slew,
His Father doubtful, gotton on a Jew:
Echion, late well seen in things to come,
Now ouer-taken by an unknown doom:
Thoactes, Phineus Squire, his fauchion tried:
And fell Agyrtes, that fould parricide.
Yet more remayn'd than were already spent:
For, all of them, to murder one, consent
The bold Conspirators on all sides fight;
Impugning promise, merit, and his right.
The vainely-pious Father sides with the other;
With him, the frighted Bride, and pensive Mother^;
Who fill the Court with outcries; by the sound
Of clashing Arms, and dying screeches drowned
Bellona the polluted floor imbrews
With streams of blood, and horrid war renewes.
False Phineus, with a thousand, in a ring
Begirt the Heroes: who their Lances fling
As thick as Winters hail; that blind his sight,
Sing in his ears, and round about him light.
His guarded back he to a pillar sets;
And with undaunted force confronts their threat^^
Chaonian Molpeus pressed to his left side:
The right, Nabathean Ethemon plied
As when a Tiger pincht with famine, hears
Two bellowing Herds within one Vale; for bears*
Nor knows on which to rush, as being loath
To leave the other, and would fall on both:
So Perseus, which to strike, uncertain proves;
Who daunted Molpeus with a wound remoues;
Contented with his flight, in that the rage.
Of fierce Ethemon did his force engage:
Who at his neck uncircumspectly stroke,
And his keen sword against the pillar broke.
The blade from unrelenting stone rebounds;
And in his throat the unhappy owner wounds*
Yet was not that enough to work his end;
Who fearfully does now his arms extend
For pity unto Perseus, all in vain;
Who thrust him through with his Cy^enian skeine
But, when he saw his valor ouer-sway'd
By multitude: I must, said he, sec^ aid
(Since you your selves compel me) from my foe;
Friends turn your backs: then G^rgons head does sh^^*
Some others seek, said Thessalus, to fright
With this thy Monster; and with all his might
A deadly dart indeuour'd to have thrown:
But in that positure became a stone.
Next, Amphix, full of spirit, forward pressed;
And thrust his sword at bold Lyncides breast:
When, in the pass, his fingers stupid grow;
Nor had the power of moving to or fro.
But Nileus (he who with a forged style
Vanted to be the son of seuen-fold Nile,
And bare seven sihier Rivers in his shield,
Distinctly wauing through a golden field)
To Perseus said: Behold, from whence we sprung*
To euer-silent shadows bear a-long
This comfort of thy death, that thou did die
By such a brave and high borne enemy.
His utterance faultred in the latter clause:
The yet vnfinisht sound struck in his jaws;
Who gaping stood as he would something say:
And so had done, if words had sound a way.
These Eryx blames; It Is your faint souls that dead
Your powers, said he, and not the Gorgon's head.
Rush on with me, and prostrate with deep wounds
This Youth, who thus with Magic Arms confound^*
Then rushing on, the ground his footsteps stayed;
Now mutely fixed: an armed Statue made.
These suffered worthily. One, who did fight
For Perseus, bold Aconteus, at the sight
Of Gorgon's snakes abortiue marble grew.
On whom Astyages in fury flew,
As if alive, with his two-handed blade;
Which shrilly twang'd; but not incision made:
Who, whilst he wonders, the same nature took,
And now his Statue has a wondering look.
It were too tedious for me to report
Their names, who perished of the vulgar sort.
Two hundred escaped the fury of the fight:
Two hundred turn to stone at Gorgon's fight.
Now Phineus his unjust commotion rewes:
What should he do? The senseless shapes he views
Of his known friends, which differing figures bore*
And does by name their several aid implore.
And yet not trusting to his eyes alone,
The next he touched; and found it to be stone.
Then turns aside: and now, a Penitent,
With suppliant hands, and arms obliquely bent;
O Perseus, thine said he, thine is the day!
Remove this Monster. Hence O hence convey
Medusa's ugly looks, or what more strange,
Which humane bodies into marble change!
Not hate, not thirst of rule begot this strife:
I only fought to re-obtaine my Wife.
Thine is the plea of Merit; mine, of Time:
Yet, in contending I confess my crime
For life (O chief of men) I only sew:
Afford me that: the rest I yield to you.
Thus he; not daring to reuert his eyes
On him whom he entreats: who thus replye^.
Faint-hearted Phineus, what I can afford,
(A gift of worth to such a fearful Lord)
Take courage, and persuade thy self I will:
No wounding sword thy blood shall ever spill.
Moreover, that I may thy wish prevent,
Here will I fix thy lasting monument:
That thou by her thou love may still be seen;
And with her Spouse's image cheer our Queen.
Then, on that side Phoreynis head does place,
To which the Prince had turned his trembling face,
And as from thence his eyes he would have thrown*
His neck grew stiff: his tears congeale to stone.
With fearful suppliant looks, submissiue hands,
And guilty countenance, the Statue stands.
Victorious Aban^iade^ now hyes
This native City, with the rescued prize:
There, vengeance takes on Proetus, and restored
His Grandfather; whose wrongs redress implor'^*
For Proetus had by force of Arms expeld
His brother; and usurped Argos held.
But him, nor Arms, not Bulwarks, could protect
Against the snaky Monsters grim aspect.
Yet not the virtue of the Youth, which shone
Through so great toil, nor sorrows vnder-gone;
With thee, O Polydecte^, King of small
Sea-girt Seriphus, could prevail at all.
Endless thy wrath, thy hate inexorable:
Detracting; and condemning for a fable
Medusa's death. The moved Youth replies:
The truth your self shall see; Friends, shut your ey^^*
Then, represents Medusa to his view:
Who presently a bloudlesse Statue grew.
Thus long Tritonia to her brother cleaues:
Then in a hollow cloud Seriphus leaves
( Scyros and Gyaros on the right hand side)
And over the toyling Seas her course applied
To Thebes, and Virgin Helecon; there stayed:
And thus unto the learned Sisters said.
The fame of your new Fountain, raised by force:
Of that swift-winged Medusaean horse,
Me hither drew, to see the wondrous Flood:
Who saw him issue from his Mothers blood.
Goddess, Urania answered, what cause
So-euer you to this our Mansion draws,
You are most wel-come. What you heard is true;
And from that Pegasus this Fountain grew.
Then Pallas to the sacred Spring conuay'd,
She admires the waters by the horse-hoofe made;
Suruay's their high-grown groves, cool caves, fresh bow^^,
And meadows painted with all sorts of flowers:
Then happy styles she the Maeonides,
Both for their Arts, and such aboads as these.
O heavenly Virgin, one of them replied,
Most worthy our Society to guide,
If so your active virtue did not move.
To greater deeds: deseru'dly you approve
Our studies, pleasant seat and happy state,
Were we secure from what we chiefly hate.
(...) Venus a Fish, a Stork did Hermes hide:
And still her voice unto her Harp applied*
Then call they us. But, ours perhaps to hear,
Not leisure serves you, nor is it worth your care.
Doubt not, said Pallas, orderly repeat
Your longed for Verse; and takes a shady seat.
Then she; On one we did the task impose:
Calliope, with Iuy crowned vp-rose;
Who with her thumb first tuned the quauering strings,
And then this Ditty to the music sings.
The gleab, with crooked plough, first Ceres rent;
First gave us corn, a better nourishment;
First Laws prescribed: all from her bounty sprung.
By me, the Goddess Ceres shall be sung.
Would We could Verses, worthy her, rehearse:
For she is more than worthy of our Verse.
Trinacria was on wicked- Typhon thrown;
Who underneath the Islands weight does gron^*
That durst affect the Empire of the skies:
Often he attempteth, but in vains, to rise.
Ausonian P^lorn^ his right hand
Down waighs; Pachyne on the left does stand;
His legs are under Lilybaeus spread;
And Aetna's bases charge his horrid head:
Where, lying on his back, his jaws expire
Thick clouds of dust, and vomit flakes of fire,
Often times he struggles with his load below:
And Towns, and Mountains labors to ore-throw
Earthquakes therewith* the King of shadows dreads,
For fear the ground should split above their heads,
And let-in Day ^^affright the trembling Ghosts.
For this, he from his silent Empire posts,
Drawn by black horses; tracing all the Round
Of rich Sicilia; but, no breaches found.
Him Erycina from her Mount suruay'd
(Now fearelesse) and, her son embracing, said.
My Arms, my strength, my glory; for my sake,
O Cupid, thy all-conquering weapons take;
And fix thy winged arrows in his heart,
Who rules the triple world's inferior part.
The Gods, even Jove himself; the God of waves;
And who illustrates earth have been thy slaves.
Shall Hell be free? Thine, and thy mother's Sway
Enlarge, and make the internal Powr's obey,
Yet we (such is our patience) are dispis'd
In our own heaven; and all our force vnpriz'd.
See thou not Pallas, and the Queen of Night,
Far-darting Dian; how my worth they slight?
And Ceres daughter will a Maid abide,
If we permit; for she affects their pride.
But, if thou favor our joint Monarchy,
Thy Uncle to the Virgin-Goddesse tie
Thus Venus. He his Quiver does unclose;
And one, out of a thousand arrows, chose
At her Arbitriment: a sharper head
None had; more ready, or that surer sped.
Then bends his Bow: the string this ear arriues,
And through the heart of Dis the arrow drives.
Not far removed from Enna's high-built wall,
A Lake there is, which men Pergusa call.
Cayster's slowly-gliding waters bear
Far fewer singing Swans than are heard there.
Woods crown the Lake, and clothe it round about
With leauy veils, which Phoebus beams keep-out.
The trees create fresh air, The Earth various flowers:
Where heat nor cold the eternal Spring deuoures.
Whilst in this grove Proserpina disports,
Or Violets pulls, or Lyllyes of all sorts;
And while she strove with childish care and speed
To fill her lap, and others to exceed;
Dis saw, affected, carried her away,
Almost at once. Love could not brook delay.
The sad-fac't Goddess cries (with fear appalled)
To her Companions; often her Mother called.
And as she tore th'adornment of her hair,
Down fell the flowers which in her lap she bare.
And such was her sweet Youth's simplicity,
That their loss also made the Virgin cry.
The Rauisher flies on swift wheels; his horses
Excites by name, and their full speed inforces:
Shaking for haste the rust-obscured reigns
Upon their cole-black n^^ks, and shaggy maines.
Through Lakes, through Palicine, which expires
A sulphrous breath, through earth ingendring fires,
They pass to where Corinthian Bacchides
Their City built between unequal Seas.
The Land 'twixt Aret^^sa and Cy^ne
With stretcht-out horns begirts th'included Sea.
Here Cyane who gave the Lake a name,
Amongst Sicilian Nymphs of special fame,
Her head advanced: who did the Goddess know?
And boldly said, You shall no farther go;
Nor can you be unwilling Ce^es son:
What you compel, persuasion should have won.
If humble things I may compare with great;
Anapis loved me: yet did he entreat,
And me, not frighted thus, espoused. This said,
With out-stretcht arms his farther passage staid.
His wrath no longer Pluto could restrain;
But gives his terror-striking steeds the reign;
And with his Regal mace, through the profound
And yielding water, cleaues the solid ground:
The breath t'infernall Tartarus extends:
At whose dark jaws the Chariot descends.
But Cyane the Goddess Rape laments;
And her own injured Spring; whose discontents.
Admit no comfort: in her heart she bears
Her silent sorrow: now, resolves to tears;
And with that Fountain does incorporate,
Whereof the immortal Deitic but late.
Her softened members thaw into a dow:
Her nails less hard, her bones now limber grew.
The slendrest parts first melt away: her hair,
Fine fingers, legs, and feet; that soon impair,
And drop to streams: then, arms, back, shoulders, side*
And bosom, into little Currents glide.
Water, in stead of blood, fills her pale veins:
And nothing now, that may be graspt, remains.
Meanwhile, through all the earth, and all the Maine,
The fearful Mother sought her child in vain.
Not deawy-hayr'd Aurora, when she rose,
Nor Hesperus, could witness her repose.
Two pitchy Pines at flaming Ae^na lights;
And restless, carries them through freezing Nights:
Again, when Day the vanquished Stars suppressed,
Her vanished comfort seeks from East to West.
Thirs^y with travel, and no Fountain nigh,
A cottage thatcht with straw, inuites her eye.
At the humble gate she knocks: An old wife shows
Her self thereat; and seeing her, bestows
The water so desired; which she before
Had boiled with barley. Drinking at the door,
A rude hard-fauour'd Boy beside her stood,
Who laughed, and called her greedy-gut. Her blood
Inflamed with anger, what remayn'd she threw
Full in his face; which forthwith speckled grew.
His arms convert to legs; a tail withal
Spines from his changed shape: of body small,
Lest he might prove too great a foe to life:
Though less, yet like a Lizard: th'aged wife
(That wonders, weeps, and fears to touch it) shuns,
And presently into a creuise runs.
Fit to his color they a name elect;
With sundry little stars all-ouerspeckt.
What Lands, what Seas, the Goddess wandered through
Were long to tell: Earth had not room enough.
To Sicil she returns: where ere she goes,
Inquires; and came where Cyane now flows.
She, had she not been changed, all had told;
Now, wants a tongue her knowledge to unfold:
Yet, to the mother, of her daughter gave
A sure ostent: who bore upon a wave
Persepbone's rich zone; that from her fell,
When, through the sacred Spring, she sunk to hell.
This seen, and known; as but then lost, she tare,
Without selfe-pitty, her dis-sheueled hair;
And with redoubled blows her breast inuades:
Nor knows what Land t'accuse, yet all vpbraids;
Ingrate, unworthy with her gifts t'abound:
Tri^acria chiefly; where the steps she found.
Of her misfortunes. Therefore there she brake
The furrowing plough; the Ox and owner struck
Both with one death; then, bade the fields beguile
The trust imposed, shrunk seed corrupts. That soil,
So celebrated for fertility,
Now barren grew: corn in the blade does die.
Now, too much drouth annoys; now, lodging showers:
Stars smitch, winds blast. The greedy foul deuoures
The new-sowne grain: Kintare, and Darnell tire
The fettered Wheat; and weeds that through it spire.
In Elean waves Alphaeus Love appeard;
And from her dropping hair her forehead cleared:
O Mother of that far-sought Maid, thou friend
To life, said she; here let thy labor end:
Nor be offended with thy faithful Land;
That blameless is, nor could her rape with-stand.
I, here a guest, not for my Country plead:
My Country Pisa is, in Elis bred;
And, as an Alien, in Sicania dwell:
But yet no Country pleases me so well:
I Arethusa, now these Springs possess:
This is my seat: which, courteous Goddess, bless.
Why I affect this place, to Ortrgia came
Through such vast Seas; I shall impart the same
To your desire; when you, more fit to hear,
Shall quit your care, and be of better cheer.
Earth gives me way: through whose dark cauerns rolled,
I here ascend; and unknown stars behold.
While under ground by Styx my waters glide,
Your sweet Proserpina I there espied.
Full sad she was: even then you might have seen
Fear in her face: and yet she is a Queen;
And yet she in that gloomy Empire swayes;
And yet her w^ll the infernal King obayes.
Stone-like stood Ceres at this heavy news;
And, staring, long continued in a muse.
When grief had quickened her stupiditie,
She took her Chariot, and ascends the sky:
There, veiled all in clouds, with scattered hair,
She kneeles to Jupiter, and made this prayer.
^ Both for my blood and thine, o Jove, I sew:
If I be nothing gracious, yet do you
A Father to your Daughter prove; nor be
Your care the less, because she sprung from me.
Lo, she at length is found, long sought through all*
The spacious World; if you a Finding call
What more the loss assures: but if, to know
Her being, be to Find, I have found her so.
And yet I would the injury remit,
So he the stolen restore: 'Twere most unfit
That holy Hymen should thy daughter join.
To such a Thief; although she were not mine.
Then Jove: The pledge is mutual, and these cares
To either equal: Yet this deed declares
Much love, mis-called Wrong: nor should we shame
Of such a son, could you but think the same.
All wants suppose, can he be less than great,
And be Ioue's brother? What, when all complete?
I, but preferred by lot? Or if you burn
In endless spleen; Let Proserpine return:
On this condition, That she yet have taken
No sustenance: so Destinies ordain.
To fetch her daughter, Ceres posts in haste:
But, Fates with-stood: the Maid had broke her fast.
For, wandering in the Ort-yard, simply she
Plucked a Pomegranet from the stooping Tree;
Thence took seven grains and eats them one by one:
Observed by Ascalaphus alone;
Whom A^^eron on Orphne erst begot
In pitchy Caves* a Dame of special note
Amongst the Auernal Nymphs. This vtter'd, stayed
The sighing Queen of Erebus who made
The Blab a Bird: with waves of Phleg^t^n
His face besprinkles; (...) appears thereon,
Crookt beak, and broader eyes: the shape he had
He lost, forthwith in yellow feathers clad.
His head or'e-siz'd, his long nails talons prove;
His winged arms for laziness scarce move:
A filthy, ever ill-presaging Foul,
To Mortals ominous: a screeching Owl.
Yet was the punishment no more than due
To his offense. But how offended you
Acheloides that wings and claws disgrace,
Your goodly forms, yet keep your Virgin-face?
Was it, you Sir^ns, that your deathlesse Powers
Were with the Goddess when she gatherd flowrs?
Whom when through all the Earth you sought in vain,
You wished for wings to swim upon the Maine;
That pathlesse Seas might testify your care:
The easy Gods consented to your prayer.
Straight, golden feathers on your backs appear:
But, left that music, framed to inchant the ear,
And so great gifts of speech should be profaned;
Your Virgin-lookes, and humane voice remayn'd.
But Jove, his sister's discontent to cheer,
Between her and her Brother parts the year,
The Goddess now in either Empire swayes:
Six months with Ceres, six with Pluto stays.
Proserpina then changed her mind, and look
(Late such as sullen Dis could hardly brook)
And cleared her brows; as Sol, obscured in shrowds
Of exhalations, breaks through vanquished clouds.
Pleased Ceres now bade Arethusa tell
Her cause of flight: and why a sacred Well.
Th'obsequious waters left their murmuring:
The Goddess then above the Crystall-Spring
Her head advanced; and, wringing her green hairs,
She thus Alphaeus ancient love declares.
I, of Achaia once a Nymph: none more
The chase affected, or t'intoyle the Bore.
By beauty though I never sought for fame;
Though masculine; of fair I bare the name.
Nor took I pleasure in my praised face,
Which others value as their only grace:
But, simple, was ashamed to excel;
And thought it infamy to please too-well.
As from Stymphalian woods I made retreat
('It Was hot, and labor had increast the heat)
When well-nigh tired; a silent stream I found,
All eddilesse, perspicuous to the ground:
Through which you every pebble might have seen;
And ran, as if it had no River been.
The Poplar, and the hoary Willow, fed
By bordering streams, their grateful shadow spread*
In this cool Rivulet my foot I dipped;
And by and by into the middle skipt:
Where, while I swim, and labor to and fro
A thousand ways, with arms that swiftly row,
I from the bottom heard and unknown tongue;
And frighted, to the hither margent sprung.
Whither so fast, o Arethusa! twice
Out cried Alphaeus, which a hollow voice.
Unclothed as I was, I ran away
(For, on the other side my garments lay)
The faster followed he, the more did burn;
Who naked, seem the readier for his turn.
As trembling Doves the eger Hawks eschew;
As eger Hawks the trembling Doves pursew;
I fled, He followed. To Orchomenus,
Psophis, Cyllene, high-brow'd Maenalaus,
Cold Erymanthus, and to Elis, I
My flight maintained; nor could he come ny:
But, far unable to hold out so long;
He, patient of much labor, and more strong.
And yet over Plains, over woody hills I fled,
And craggy Rocks, where foot did never tread.
The Sun was at our backs: before my feet
I saw his shadow; or my fear did sec't.
How-ere his sounding steps, and thick drawn breath
That fanned my hair, affrighted me to death.
Stark tired, I cried: Ah caught! help (o forlorn!)
Diana help thy Squire, who often have borne
Thy Bow and Quiver! Moved at my request.
With muffling clouds she covered the distressed.
The River seeks me in that pitchy shroud,
And searches round about the hollow clowd:
Twice came to where Diana me did hide;
And twice he Io Arethusa cried.
Then what a heart had I! the Lamb so fears
When howling Wolves about the Fold she hears*
So heartlesse Hare, when trayling Hounds draw nigh
Her sented form; nor dares to move and eye.
Nor went he on, in that he could not trace
My further steps; but guards the clowd and place.
Cold sweats my then-besieged lims possessed:
In thin thick-falling drops my strength decreast.
Where-ere I step, streams run; my hair now fell
In trickling deaw; and sooner than I tell
My destiny, into a Flood I grew.
The River his beloved waters knew;
And, putting off th'assumed shape of man,
Resumes his own; and in my Current ran.
Chaste Delia cleft the ground. Then, through blind cau^^,
To loved Ortygia she conducts my waves;
Affected for her name: where first I take
Reuiew of day. This, Arethusa spoke.
The fertile Goddess to her Chariot chains
Her yoked Dragons, checked with stubborn reigns:
Her course, 'twixt heaven and earth, to Athens bends;
And to Triptolemus her Chariot sends.
Part of the seed she gave, she bade him throw
On vntill'd earth; part on the tilled to sow.
Over Europe, and the Asian soil conuay'd,
The Youth to Scythia turns; where Lyncus swayed.
His Court he enters. Asked what way he came,
His cause of coming, Country, and his Name:
Triprolemus men call me, he replied;
And in renowned Athens I reside.
No ship through toyling Seas me hither bare;
Nor ouer-land came I; but through the air.
I bring you Ceres gift: which sown in fields,
Corn-bearing crops (a better feeding) yields.
The barbarous King enuies it: and, that he
The Author of so great a good might be;
Gives entertaynment: but, when sleep oppressed
His heavy eyes, with steel attempts his breast.
Whom Ceres turn's t'a Lynx: and homewards makes
The young Mopsopian drive her sacred Snakes.
Our Chief concluded here her learned Lays.
The Nymphs, with one consent, give us the Bays:
The vanquished rail. To whom the Muse: Since you
Esteem it nothing to deserve the due
To your contention, but must add foul words
To your ill deeds; nor this your pride affords
Our patience room: we'll wreak it on your heads,
And tread the path which Indignation leads.
The Paeons laugh, and our sharp threats despise.
About to scould, and with disgraceful noise
To clap their hands; they saw the feathers sprout
Beneath their nails, and clothe their arms throug^^*
Hard nebs in one another's faces spy;
And now, new birds, into the Forest fly.
These Syluan Scoulds, as they their arms prepare
To beat their bosoms; mount, and hang in air.
Who yet retain their ancient eloquence;
Full of harsh chat, and prating without sense.
OVID'S METAMORPHOSIS. The sixth Book.
THE ARGUMENT.
PAllas, an old-wife, (...) is thoughts o're-throw
Haemus and Rhodope; who Mountains gr^w.
The Pigmy, a Crane, Antigo^e become,
A Storke, A statue (...):
His impious daughters, stones. In various shapes
The Gods commit adulteries and rapes*
Arachne, a Spider. Niche yet drownes
Her marble cheeks in tears. Vnci^ill Clownes
Are cursed to Frog^. From (...)
His iuory shoulder now-made Pelops (...).
P^ogne, a Swallow; signed with murder^ (...)
Sad Philomel to secret might complains*
Rage to a Lapwing turns th'Odrysian king,
Calais and Zetes natius (...).
TRitonia to the Muse attention lends:
Who both her Verse, and just revenge (...)
Then said t'her self: To praise is of no worth*
Let our revenged Power our praise set forth.
Intends Arathnes ruin. She, she heard,
Before her curious webs, her own preferred.
Nor dwelling, nor her nation fame impart
Unto the Damsel, but excelling Art.
Derived from Coloph^nian Idmons side;
Who thirsty Wool in Phocian purple ^ide.
Her mother (who had paid her debt to fate)
Was also mean, and equal to her mate.
Yet through the Lydian towns her praise was spread;
Though poor her birth, in poor Hypaepa bred.
The Nymphs of Tmolus often their Vines forsook;
The sleeke Pactolian Nymphs their streams; to look
On her rare works: nor more delight in viewing
The don (don with such grace) than when a doing.
Whether she orbe-like roll the ruder wool;
Or, finely fingered, the selected cull*
Or draw it into clowd-resembling flakes;
Or equal twine with swift-turn'd spindle makes;
Or with her liuely-painting needle wrought:
You might perceive she was by Pallas taught.
Yet such a Mistress her proud thoughts disclame:
Let her with me contend; if foyld, no shame
(Said she) nor punishment will I refuse.
Pallas, forthwith, an old-wiues shape indues:
Her hair all white; her lime, appearing weak,
A staff supports: who thus began to speak.
Old Age has something which we need not shun:
Experience by long tract of time is won.
Scorn not advice: with dames of humane race
Contend for same, but give a Goddess place.
Crave pardon, and she will thy crime remit.
With eyes confessing rage, and eyebrows knit,
(Her labour-leauing hands scarce held from strokes)
She, masked Pallas with these words prouokes.
Old fool, that dot'st with age; to whom long-life
Is now a curse: thy daughter, or sons wife,
(if thou have either) ^aught be they by this*
My wisdom, for my self, sufficient is.
And least thy counsel should an intrest clame
In my diuersion, I abide the same.
Why comes she not? why trial thu^ delays?
She comes, said Pallas* and her self displayes.
Nymphs, and M^gdomian dames the Power adore:
Only the maid her self undaunted bore:
And yet she blushe; against her will the red
Flusht in her ch^cks, and thence as swiftly flod.
Even so the purple Morning paints the skies:
And so they whi^^n at the Suns vprise.
Who now* as desperately obstinate,
Praise ill affecting, runs on her own fate.
No more Jove's daughter labors to dissuade;
No more refuses; nor the strife delayde.
Both settle to their tasks apart: both spread
At once their warps, consisting of fine thread,
Tied to their beams: a reed the thread diuides,
Through which the quick-returning shuttle glides,
Shot by swift hands. The combs inserted tooth
Between the warp suppressed the rising woofe:
Strife lessening toil. With skirts ruckt to their waste,
Both move their cunning arms with nimble haste.
Here crimson, did in Tyr^an brass, they weaue:
The scarce distinguished shadows sight deceive.
So warry clouds, shot by Ap^llo, show;
The vast sky painted with a mighty Bow:
Where, though a thousand several colors shine,
No eye their close transition can define:
What touch, the same so nearly represents;
And by degrees, scarce sensible, dissents.
Through-out imbellished with ductil gold:
And both revived antiquities unfold.
Pallas in Athens, Marse's Rock does frame:
And that old strife about the Cities name.
Twice six Coelestials sit enthroned on hic,
Repleat with awe-infusing gravity:
Jove in the midst. The suited figures took
Their lively forms: Jove had a regal look.
The Sea-god stood, and with his Trident struck
The cleaving rock, from whence a fountain brake:
Whereon he grounds his cla^^. With spear and shield
Her self she arms: her head a mu^^ion steild:
Her breast her Aegis guards. Her lance the ground
Appears to strike, and from that pregnant wound
The hoary olive, charged with fruit, ascends.
The Gods admire: With victory she ends.
Yet she, to snow the Rival of her praise
What hopes to cherish for such bold assayes,
Add's four contentions in the utmost bounds
Of every angle, wrought in little Rounds.
One, Thracian Rhodope and (...) show^^,
Now mountains, topt with neuer-melting showe^,
Once humane bodies: who durst emula^e
The blessed Coelestialls both in style and state.
The next contains the miserable doom
Of that Pygmi^an marron, overcome
By Juno; made a Ctane, and fore't to ^ar
With her own nation in perpetual was.
A third presents Antigone, who strove
For unmatched beauty with the wife or Jove.
Not Ilium, nor ^anmedon her sire,
Prevailed with violent S^^^rnia's ire.
Turned to a Stork; who, with white pinions raised,
Is ever by her creaking bill selfe-prais'd.
In the last circle Cynaras was placed;
Who, on the temples stairs, the forms embraced
Of his late daughters, by their pride o're-throwne:
And seems himself to be a weeping stone.
The web a wreathe of peaceful ^live bounds:
And her own tree her work both ends and crowns.
Arachne weaues Europa's rape by Iou^:
The Bull appears to live, the Sea to move.
Back to the shore she casts a heavy eye;
To her distracted damsels seems to cry:
And from the sprinkling waves, that skip to meet.
With such a burden, shrinks hor (...) embling feet.
Asteria there a struggling Eagle pressed*
A Swan here spreads his wings over Leda's breast.
Jove, Satyr-like, Antiope compels;
Whose fruitful womb with double ^ssue swells:
Amphitryo for Alemena's love became:
A shower for Da^al; for Aegina flame:
For beautiful Muemosyne he tak^^
A pastors form; for Deois, (...).
Thee also, Neptune, like a lustful S^ete,
She makes the fair Ae^tian Virgin bear:
To get the Aloide's in Enip^'s shape:
Now turned t'a Ram in sad Bisaltis rape.
The gold-hair'd mother of life-strengthning Seed^,
The snake-hair'd (...) of the winged Steed,
Found thee a Stalion thee Malanth^ finds
A Delphin. She to every son assigns
Life-equald looks; to every place their sites.
Here Phoebus in a Heards-mans shape deligh^^*
A Lyon's now; now falcons wings displayes:
Macarian Issa shepheard-like betrays.
Liber, a grape, Erigone comprest:
And Saturn, horse-like, Chiro^ gets, halfe-beast.
A slender wreathe her finished web confines:
I lowres intermixed with clasping i^y twines.
Not Pallas this, not Envy this reproues:
Her fair success the vex^ Virago moves;
Who tears the web, with crimes celestial fraught.
With sh^^tle from Cytorian mountains brought,
Arachne thrice upon the forehead hits.
Her great heart brooks it not. A cord she knits
About her neck. Remorsefull Pallas stayed
Her falling weight: Live wretch, yet hang, she said.
This curse (least after times thy pride secure)
Still to thy issue, and their race, endure.
Sprinkled with Hecat's banefull weeds, her hair
She forthwith sheds: her nose and ears impair;
Her head grows little; her whole body so;
Her thighs and legs to spiny fingers grow:
The rest all belly. Whence a thread she sends:
And now, a Spider, her old webs extends.
All Lydia storms; the fame through Phygia rung:
And gave an argument to every tongue.
Her, Niobe, had known; when she, a maid,
In Sipylus and in Maonia staid.
Yet slights that home example: still rebels
Against the Gods; and with proud l^^guage swells.
Many things sweld her. Yet Amphi^^s town,
Their high descents; not glory of a crown,
So pleased her (though she pleased her self in all)
As her fair race. We Niobe might call
The happiest mother that yet ever brought
Life unto light; had not her self so thought.
Tiresian Manto, in presages skild,
The streets, inspired by holy fury, filled
With these exhorts: Ismenides, prepare:
To great Latona, and her Twins; with prayer
Mix sweet perfumes; your brows with Laurel bind^*
By me Latona bids. The Thebans wind
About their temples the commanded Bay:
And sacred fires, with incense feeding, pray*
Behold, the Queen in height of state appears:
A Phrygian mantle, weau^d with gold, she wears:
Her face, as much as rage would suffer, fair.
She stops; and shaking her disheueled hair,
The godly troop with hauty eyes suruayes.
What madness is it Here-say Gods (she says)
Before the seen Coelestials to prefer?
Or while I Altars want, to worship her?
Me Tantalus begot, alowd to feast
In heavenly bowres; my mother not the least
Pleias greatest Atlas fire to those,
On whose high shoulders all the stars repose.
Jove is my other Grandfather; and he
My father in law: a double grace to me.
Me Phrygia, Cadmus kingdoms me obey:
My husbands harp-rais'd walls we jointly sway.
Through-out my Court behold in every place
Infinite riches! add to this, a face
Worthy a Goddess. Then, to crown my joys*
Seven beauteous daughters, and as many boys:
All these by marriage to be multiplied.
Say now, have we not reason for our pride?
How dare you then Latona, Caeus birth
Before me place? to whom the ample Earth
Denied a little spot t'vnlade her womb?
Heaven, Earth, nor Seas, afford your Goddess room:
A Vagabond, till Delas harbor gave.
Thou wandrest on the land, I on the wave,
It said; and granted an unstable place.
She brought forth two; the seventh part of my race*
Happy! who doubts? I happy will abide:
Or who doubts that? with plenty fortified.
My state too great for fortune to bereave:
Though much she ravish, she much more must leave.
My blessings are above low fear. Suppose
Some of my hopeful sons this people lose,
They cannot be reduced to such a few.
Off with your bays; these idle Rites eschew.
They put them off; the sacrifice forbore:
And yet Latona silently adore.
As far as free from barrenness, so much
Disdain and grief the enraged Goddess touch.
Who on the top of Cynthus thus begins
To vent her passion to her sacred Twins.
Lo I, your mother, proud in you alone;
(Excepting Juno, second unto none)
Am questioned if a Goddess: and must loose,
If you assist not, all religious dews.
Nor is this all: that cursed Tantalian Seeds
Adds soul reproaches to her impious deed.
She dares her children before you prefer;
And calls me childlesse: may it light on her!
Whose wicked words her fathers tongue declar^
About to second her report with prayer;
Peace, Phoebus said, complaint too long delays
Conceau'd revenge: the same vexed Phoebe says.
Then swiftly through the yielding air they glide
To Cadmus towers; whom thickened vapors hide.
A spacious plain before the city lie^.
Made dusty with the daily exercise
Of trampling hooues; by strife-full chariots tracke.
Part of Amphions active sons here backed
High-bounding steeds; whose rich caparison
With scarlet blushed, with gold their bridles shone.
Ismenus Ioe, her pregnant wombs first spring*
As with his ready horse he bears a Ring,
And checks his fomy jaws; ay me ^he cries;
While through his gro^ing breast an arrow fly^^*
His bridle slackning with his dying force,
He leasurely sinks side-long from his horse.
Next, Siphilus from clashing quiver flie^
With slackned reigns: as when a Pilot spies
A growing storm; and, least the gentle gaile
Should escape besides him, claps on all his sail.
His haste th'vneuitable bow O're-took,
And through his throat the deadly arrow struck.
Who, by the horses mane and speedy thighs
Drops headlong, and the earth in purple dies.
Now Phoedimus; and Tantalus the heir
This Grand-^ires names; that labor done, prepare
To wrestle. Whilst with oyled lims they pressed
Each others power, close grasping breast to breast;
A shaft, which from th'impulsiue bow-string flew,
Them, in that sad Conjunction jointly slew.
Both groan at once, at once their bodies bend
With bitter pangs, at once to earth descend:
(...) Her tongue, and pallat robbed of inward heat
At once congeale: her pulse forbeares to beat:
Her neck wants power to turn, her feet to go,
Her arms to move: her very bowels grow
Into a stone. She yet retains her tears.
Whom straight a hurle-wind to her Country bears;
And fixes on the summit of a hill.
Now from that mourning marble tears distill.
Th'exemplary revenge struck all with fear:
Who offerings to Latona's altars bear
With doubled zeal. When, one as often befalls,
By present accidents the past recalls.
In fruitful Lyci^ once, said he, there dwelt
A sort of Pesants, who her vengeance felt.
'Twas of no note, in that the men were base:
Yet wonderful I saw the poole, and place,
Signed with the prodigy. My father, spent
Almost with age, ill brooking travel, sent
Me thither for choice Steeres: and for my guide
A native gave. Those pastures searched, we spied
An ancient Altar, black with cinders; placed
Amidst a Lake, with shiuering reeds embraced.
O favor me* he, softly murmuring, said:
O favor me! I, softly murmuring, praid:
Then asked, if Nymph, or Faune therein reside,
Or rural God. The stranger thus replied.
O youth, no mountain Powers this altar hold:
She calls it hers, to whom Jove's wife, of old,
Earth interdicted: till that floting I Will,
Waue-wandring Delo, finished her exile.
Where, coucht on palms and olives, she in spite
Of fre^full Juno, brought her Twins to light.
Thence also, frighted from her painful bed,
With her two infant Deities she fled.
Now in Chimara-breeding Lycia (fired
By burning beams) and with long travel tired.
Heat-raised thirst the Goddess sore oppressed:
By their exhausting of her milk increast.
By fortune, in a dale, with longing eyes
A Lake of shallow water she descries:
Where Clownes were then a gathering picked weeds,
With shrubby osiers, and plash-louing reeds.
Approcht; Titania kneeles upon the brink:
And of the cooling liquor stoops to drink.
The Clownes with-stood. Why hinder you, said she,
The use of water, that to all is free?
The Sun, air, water, Nature did not frame.
Peculiar; a public gift I clame.
Yet humbly I entreat it: not to drench
My weary lims, but killing thirst to quench.
My tongue wants moisture, and my jaws are dry:
Scarce is there way for speech. For drink I dye.
Water to me, were Nectar. If I live,
It Is by your favor: life with water give.
Pity these babes: for pity they advance
Their little arms! their arms they stretched by chanc^
With whom would not such gentle words prevail?
But they, perseuering to prohibit, rail;
The place with threats command her to forsake.
Then with their hands and feet disturb the lake:
And leaping with malicious motion, move
The troubled mud; which rising, flotes above.
Rage quenched her thirst: no more Latona sues*
To such base slaves: but Goddesse-like does use
Her dreadful tongue; which thus their fates implied:
May you for ever in this lake reside!
Her wish succeeds. In loved lakes they strive;
Now sprawle above, now under water diue;
Often hop upon the bank, as often again.
Back to the water: nor can yet restrain
Their brawling tongues; but setting shame aside;
Though hid in water, under water chide.
Their voices still are hoarce: the breath they fetch
Swells their wide throtes; their jaws with railing stretch.
Their heads their shoulders touch; no neck between,
As intercepted. All the back is green*
Their bellies (every part o're-sizing) white.
Who now, new Frogs, in slimy pooles delight.
Thus much, I know not by what Lycian, said:
An other mention of a Satyr made,
By Phoebus, with Tritena's reed, o're-come:
Who for presuming felt a heavy doom.
Why do you (oh!) me from my self distract?
(Oh!) I repent, he cried: Alas! this fact
Deserves not such a vengeance! Whilst he cried;
Apollo from his body stripped his hide.
His body was one wound, blood every way
Streams from all parts: his sinews naked lay.
His bare veins pant: his heart you might behold;
And all the fiuers in his breast have told.
For him the Faunes, that in the forests keep;
For him the Nymphs, and german Satyrs weep:
His end, Olympus (famous then) bewailes;
With all the shepherds of those hills and dales*
The pregnant Earth conceiueth with their tears;
Which in her penetrated womb she bears,
Till big with waters: then discharged her fraught*
This purest Phrygian Stream a way out sought.
By down-falls, till to toyling seas he came:
Now called Marsyas of the Satyrs name.
The Vulgar, these examples told, return
Unto the present: for Amphion mourn,
And his poor issue. All the mother hate.
Pelops alone laments his sisters fate.
While with torn garments he presents his woes,
The iuory piece on his left shoulder shows.
This fleshy was, and colored like the right.
Slain by his fire, the Gods his lims unite:
His scattered parts all found; save that alone
Which interposed the neck and shoulder bone.
They then with iuory supplied the unsound:
And thus restored Pelops was made sound.
The neighboring princes meet: the Cities near
Entreat their kings the desolate to cheer.
Pelops Mycaene, Sparta, the Argiue State;
And Calydon, not yet in Dian's hate;
Fertile Orehemenes; Corinthus famed
For high-priz'd brass; Messene, never tamed;
Cleona; Patra; Pylos, Nelius crown;
And Troezen, not then known for Pittl^us town;
With all that two-sea'd Isth^os Streights include:
And all without by two-sea'd Isthmos viewed.
Athens alone (who would beleeu't) withheld:
Thee, from that civil office, war compeld.
The inhabitants about the Pontick coast
Had then besieged thee with a barbarous host:
Whom Thracian Tereus, with his Aids, o'rethrew;
And by that victory renowned grew.
Potent in wealth, and people; from the loins
Of Mars derived: Pandion Progne ioynes
To him in marriage. This, nor Juno blessed;
Nor Hymen, nor the Graces graced that feast.
Eumenides the nuptial tapers light
At funeral fires; and made the bed that Night.
The ill-boading Owl upon the roof was set.
Progne and Tereus with these omens met:
Thus parents grew. The Thracians yet rejoice;
And thank the Gods with harmony of voice.
The marriage day, and that of Itys birth,
They consecrate to universal mirth.
So lies the good unseen. By this the Sun,
Conducting Time, had through five Autumns run:
When flattering Progne thus allures her Lord.
If I have any grace with thee, afford.
This favor, that I may my sister see:
Send me to her, or bring thou her to me.
Promise my father that with swiftest speed
She shall return. If this attempt succeed,
The sum of all my wishes I obtain.
He bids them lanch his ships into the maine:
Then makes the Athenian port with sails and oars;
And lands upon the wished Pyraean shores.
Brought to Pandion's presence, they salute.
The King with bad presage begins his suit.
For lo, as he his wifes command recites,
And for her quick return his promise plights,
Comes Phi^omela; clad in rich array;
More rich in beauty. So they use to say
The stately Naiades, and Dryad's go
In Syluan shades; were they apparrel'd so.
This sight in Tereus such a burning breeds,
As when we fire a heap of hoary reeds;
Or catching flames to Sun-dry'd stubble thrust.
Her face was excellent: but inbred lust
Enraged his blood; to which those Climes are prone:
Stung by his countries fury, and his own.
He straight intends her women to entice,
And bribe her Nurse to prosecute his vice;
Her self to tempt with gifts; his crown to spend:
Or ravish, and by war his rape defend.
What dares he not, thrust on by wild desire?
Nor can his breast contain so great a fire.
Rackt with delay, he Progue's suit renewes:
And for himself in that pretention sues.
Love made him eloquent. As often as he
Exceeded, he would say, Thus charged she.
And moving tears (as she had sent them) sheds.
O Gods! how dark a blindness ouer-spreds
The souls of men! whilst to his sin he climes,
They think him good; and praise him for his crimes.
Even Philomela wished it! with soft arms
She hugs her father, and with winning charms
Of her lives safety, her destruction pressed:
While Tereus by beholding pre-possest.
Her kisses and embraces heat his blood;
And all afford his fire and fury food.
And wished, as often as she her fire embraced,
He were her sire: nor would have been more chaste.
He, by their importunities is wrought.
She, ouer-ioy'd, her father thanks: and thought
Her self and sister in that fortunate,
Which drew on both a lamentable fate.
The labor of the Day now near an end,
From steep Olympus Phoebus Steeds descend.
The boards are princely scru'd: Lyans flows
In burnisht gold. Then take their soft repose.
And yet the Odrysian King, though parted, fries:
Her face and graces ever in his eyes.
Who parts unseen unto his fancy faines;
And feeds his fires: Sleep flies his troubled brains*
Day up: Pandion his departing son
Wrings by the hand; and weeping, thus begun.
Dear Son, since Piety this dew requires;
With her, receive both your and their desires.
By faith, aliance, by the Gods above,
I charge you guard her with a fathers love:
And suddenly send back (for all delay
To me is death) my ages only stay.
And daughter ('it is enough thy sister's gone)
For pity leave me not too long alone.
As he imposed this charge, he kissed with-all:
And drops of tears at every accent fall.
The pledges then of promised faith demands
(Which mutually they give) their plighted hands.
To Progue, and her little boy, said he,
My Jove remember, and salute from me.
Scarce could he bid farewell: sobs so engage
His troubled speech; who dreads his souls presage.
^ As soon as shipped; as soon as active ores
Had moved the surges, and removed the shores;
She Is ours! with me my wish I bear! he cries.
Exults; and barbarous, scarce defers his joys:
His eyes fast fixed. As when Jove's eagle bears
A Hare t'her ayery, trust in rapefull fears:
And to the trembling prisoner leaves no way
For hoped flight; but still beholds her pray.
The Voyage made; on his own land he treads:
And to a Lodge Pandions daughter leads;
Obscured with woods: pale, trembring, full of fears;
And for her sister asking now with tears.
There mues her up; his foul intent makes known:
Enforced her; a weak Virgin, and but one.
Help father! sister help! in her distress
She cries; and on the Gods, with like success.
She trembles like a lamb, snatched from the phangs
Of some sell wolf; that dreads her former pangs:
Or as a dove, who on her gorget bears
Her bloods fresh stains, and late-felt talents fears.
Restored unto her mind, her ruffled hair,
As at a woeful funeral she care;
Her arms with her own fury bloody made:
Who, wringing her vp-heaued hands, thus said.
O monster! barbarous in thy horrid lust!
Treacherous Tyrant! whom my fathers trust;
Imposed with holy tears; my sisters love;
My virgin state; nor nuptial ties, could move!
O what a wild confusion have thou, bred!
I, an adultresse to my sisters bed;
Thou husband to us both; to me a foe;
To all a punishment; and justly so.
Why make thou not thy villainies complete;
By forcing life from her abhorred seat?
O would thou had, e're I my honor lost!
Then had I parted with a spotless ghost.
Yet, if the Gods have eyes; if their Powers be
Of any power; not all decay with me;
Thou shall not escape due vengeance. Sense of shame
I will abandon; and thy crime proclaim:
To men, if free; if not, my voice shall break
Through these thick walls; and teach the woods to speak:
Hard rocks resolve to ruth. Let heaven this hear;
And Heauen-thron'd Gods: if there be any there!
These words the saluage Tyrant moves to wroth:
Nor less his fear: a like prouok't by both.
Who draws his sword: his cruel hands he winds
In her loose hair: her arms behind her binds.
Her throat glad Philomela ready made:
Conceiving hope of death from his drawn blade.
Whilst she reuiles, inuokes her father; sought
To vent her spleen; her tongue in pincers caught,
His sword deuideth from the panting root:
Which, trembling, murmurs curses at his foot.
And as a serpents tail, disseuer'd, skips:
Even so her tongue: and dying sought her lips.
After this fact (if we may Rumor trust)
He often abused her body with his lust.
Yet home to Progne, in the end, retires:
Who for her sister hastily inquires.
He funerals belyes, with fained grief:
And by instructed tears begets belief.
Progne her royal ornaments reiects;
And puts on black: an empty tomb erects;
To her imagined Ghost oblations burns:
Her sisters fate, not as she should, she mournes.
Now through twelve Signs the year his period drew.
What should distressed Philomela do?
A guard restraind her flight; the walls were strong;
Her mouth had lost the index of her tongue.
The wit that misery begets is great:
Great sorrow adds a quickness to conceit.
A woofe upon a Thracian loome she spreds;
And inter-weaues the white with crimson threads;
That character her wrong. The closely wrought,
As closely to a servant gave; besought
To bear it to her Mistress: who presents
The Queen therewith; not knowing the contents.
The wife to that dire Tyrant this unfolds:
And in a woeful verse her state beholds.
She held her peace: 'twas strange! grief struck her mute.
No language could with such a passion suit.
Nor had she time to weep. Right, wrong, were mixed
In her fell thoughts* her soul on vengeance fixed.
It was that time; when, in a wild disguise,
Sithonian matrons use to solemnise
Lyaeus three-yeares Feast. Night spreds her wings:
By night high Rho^ope with timbrels rings.
By night the impatient Queen a iauelin takes,
And now a Bacchanal, the Court forsakes.
Vines shade her brows: the rough hide of a Dear
Shogs at her sides her shoulder bare a spear.
Hurried through woods, with her attendant froes,
Terrible Progne, frantic with her woes,
Thy milderfuly, Bacchus, counterfets.
At length unto the desert cottage gets:
Howles; Eu^h^, cries: breaks open the doors, and took
Her sister thence: with iuy hides her look:
In habit of a Bacchanal arrayd:
And to her city the amazed ^onu^yd.
That hated roof when I hi (...) la knew;
The poor soul shook, her (...) bloudlesse grew.
Progne with-drawes; the sacred weeds vnlos'd;
Her woeful sisters bashful face disclosed:
Falls on her neck. The other durst not raise
Her down-cast eyes: her sisters wrong suruayes
In her dishonor. As she strove to have sworn
With vp-rais'd looks; and call the Gods t 'haue borne
Her pure thoughts witness, how she was compeld
To that loathed fact; she hands, for speech, vpheld.
Stern Progne broiles; her bosom hardly bears
So vast a rage: who chides her sisters tears.
No tears, said she, our lost condition needs:
But steel; or if thou have what steel exceeds.
I, for all horrid practices, am fit:
To wrap this roof in flame, and him in it:
His eyes, his tongue, or what did thee enforce,
Textirp; or with a thousand wounds, divorce
His guilty soul? The deed I intend, is great:
But what, as yet, I know not. In this heat
Came Itys in, and taught her what to do.
Beheld with cruel eyes; Ah, how I view
In thee, said she, thy father! and began
Her tragic Scene: with silent anger wan.
But when her son saluted her, and ching
Unto her neck; mixed kisses, as he hung,
With childish blandishments; her high-wrought blood
Began to calm, and rage distracted stood.
Tears trickl'd from her eyes by strong constraint.
But when she found her resolution faint
With too much pity, her sad sister viewes,
And said, while both, her eyes by turns peruse.
Why flatters he? why tonguelesse weeps the other?
Why sister calls not she, whom he calls mother?
Degenerate! think whose daughter; to whom wed:
All pietic is sin to Tereus bed.
Then Itys trailes: as when by Ganges floods
A Tigresse drags a Fawn through silent woods.
Retiring to the most sequestered room:
While he, with hands vp-heau'd, fore-sees his doom,
Clings to her bosom; mother! mother! cried;
She stabs him: nor once turned her face aside.
His throat was cut by Philomela's knife:
Although one wound suffiz'd to vanquish life.
His yet quick lims, ere all his soul could pass,
She piece-meale tears. Some boil in hollow brass,
Some hiss on spits. The pauements blushed with blood.
Progne inuites her husband to this food:
And faines her Countries Rite; which would afford
No attendant, nor companion, but her Lord.
Now Tereus, mounted on his Grand-sires throne,
With his sons carved entrails stuffes his own:
And bids her (so Soule-blinded!) call his boy.
Progne could not disguise her cruel joy:
In full fruition of her horrid ire,
Thou have, said she, within thee thy desire.
He looks about: asks where. And while again
He asks, and calls: all bloody with the slain,
Forth, like a Fury, Philomela flew;
And at his face the head of Itys threw.
Nor ever more than now desired a tongue;
Texpresse the joy of her revenged wrong.
He, with loud outcries, does the board repel;
And cites the Furies from the depth of hell.
Now from his rising stomach strives to cast
The abhorred food: now weeps, with grief agast':
And calls himself his sons unhappy tomb.
Then draws his sword; and through the guilty room
Pursues the Sisters; who appear with wings
To cut the air: and so they did. One sings
In woods, the other near the house remains:
And on her breast yet bears her murders stains.
He, swift with grief and fury, in that space
His person changed Long tufts of feathers grace
His shining crown; his sword a bill became;
His face all armed: whom we a Lapwing name.
This killing news, ere half his age was spent.
Pandion to the infernal Shadows sent.
Erichtheus his throne and seepter held:
Who, both in justice, and bold arms excelled.
To him his wife four sons, all hopeful, bare:
As many daughters: two, surpassing fair.
Thee, Cephalus, thy Procris happy made:
But Thrace and Tereus, Boreas nuptial stayed.
The God beloved Orithya wanted long;
While he put off his power, to use his tougue.
His suit rejected; horridly inclind
To anger (too familiar with that Wind.)
I justly suffer this indignity:
For why, said he, have I my arms laid by?
Strength, violence, high rage, and awful threats.
It Is my dishonor to have used entreats.
Force me befits. With this, thick clouds I drive;
Toss the blew billows, knotty Oaks vp-riue;
Congeale soft snow, and beat the earth with hail.
When I my brethren in the air assail,
(For that is our field) we meet with such a shocke,
That thundering skies with our incounters rock,
And clowd-struck lightning flashes from on high.
When throught the crannies of the earth I fly,
And force her in her hollow caves, I make
The Ghosts to tremble, and the ground to quake.
Thus should I have wood; with these my match have made:
Erichtheus should have been compeld, not prayed.
Thus Boreas cha^^ or no less storming, shook
His horrid wings, whose ayery motion struck
The earth with blasts, and made the Ocean rore.
Trayling his dusky mantle on the flore,
He hid himself in clouds of dust, and caught.
Beloved Orithya, with her fear distraught.
Flying, his agitated fires increast:
Nor of his ayerie race the reigns suppressed
Till to the walled Cicones he came.
Two goodly Twins the espoused Athenian Dame
Gave to the Icie author of her rape:
Who had their fathers wings and mothers shape.
Yet not so borne. Before their faces bare
The manly ensigns of their yellow hair,
Calais and Zetes both vnplumed were.
But as the down did on their chins appear;
So, foule-like, from their sides soft feathers bud.
When youth to action had inflamed their blood;
In the first vessel, with the flower of Greece,
Through unknown seas, they sought the Golden Fleece.
OVID'S METAMORPHOSIS. The seventh Book.
THE ARGUMENT.
MEn, Dragons teeth produce. Winged Snakes their year^
By odors cast. A seire branch Olives bears.
Drops sprout to Flowers. Old Aeson young became,
So Libers Nurses. An old Sheep a Lamb.
Cerambus flies. A Snake, a snake-like Stone.
An Ox, a Stag. Sad Mera barks unknown.
Horns front the Co^^ dames. The Telchines
All change. A Doue-turn'd Maid. The hard to please,
Becomes a Swan. His mother Hyrie weeps
Into a Lake. High-mounting Comb keeps
Her son-sought Life. A King and Queen estranged
To flightfull Foul. Cephilus Nephew changd
Into a Seal. Eum^lus daughter flees
Through tracelesse regious. Men from Mushrumpe rise,
Phinius and Periphas light wings assume.
So Polyphemous niece. From Cerberns spume
Springs Aconite. Just Earth a grave denies
To Scyrons bones; which now in rocks ^^ise.
Arne, a Chough. Stout Myrmidons are borne
Of toyling Ants. The late rejected Morn
Masks Cephalus. The Dog, that did pursus,
And Beast pusu'de; two m^rbl^ Statues grew.
With Pagasaean keele the Minyae plow
The curling waves: and p^^neus see; who now
In endless night his needy age consumes.
The youthful sons of Boreas, raised with plumes,
Those greedy Harpyes, with tho virgin face,
Far-off from his polluted table chase.
They, under Jason, having suffered much;
At length the banks of slimy Phasis touch.
Now Phryxus fleece the hardy Minyae ask:
And from the King receive a dreadful task.
Meane-while Ae^tias fries in secret fires:
Who struggling long with ouer-strong desires,
When reason could not such a rage restrain;
She said: Medea, thou resists in vain.
Some God, unknown, with-stands. What will this prove!
Or is it such as others fancy, Iouo?
Why seem the Kings commands so too severe?
And so, in truth they be. Why should I fear
A strangers ruin, never seen before?
Whence spring these cares? Why fear I more and more?
These furies from thy virgin breast repel,
Wretch, if thon can. Could I, I should be well.
A new-felt force my striving powers inuades:
Affection this, discretion that, persuades.
I see the better, I approve it too:
The worse I follow. Why should thou pursue
A husband of an other world; that art
Of royal birth? Our country may impart
A choice as worthy. If this foreign mate;
Or live, or dye; it is in the hands of fate.
Yet, may he live! I such a suit might move
To equal Gods, although I did not love.
For what has Jason done? his hopeful Youth
Would move all hearts, that were not hard, to ruth;
His birth, his valor. Set all these apart;
His person would: I am sure it moves my heart.
Yet should not I assist, the flaming breath
Of Bulls would blast him; or, assaults of death
Spring up in arms from Tellus hostill womb:
Or else the greedy Dragon proves his tomb.
This suffer, and thou have a heart of stone;
Borne of Tygresse, and more savage grown.
Yet why stand I not by? behold him slain?
And with that spectacle my eyes profane?
Add fury to the Bulls? to the Earth-borne ire?
And sleeplesse Dragon with more spleen inspire?
The Gods forbid! yet rather help, than pray.
My fathers kingdom shall I then betray?
And save this fellow, whom I hardly know,
That saved by me, he should without me go,
Marry an other, and leave me behind
To punishment? could he prove so unkind,
Or for an other my deserts neglect;
Then should he dye Such is not his aspect;
The clearness of his mind; his every grace;
To sear deceit, or censure him so base.
Besides, before hand he shall plight his troth:
And bind the contract by a solemn oath.
What need thou doubt? go on; delay decline:
Obliged Jason will be ever thine.
Hymen shall crown, and mothers celebrate
Their sons Protectresse through the Achaian State.
My sister, brother, father, country, Gods,
Shall I abandon for unknown abodes?
Austere my father, barbarous my land,
My brother, a child, my sisters wishes stand
With my desires; the greatest God of all
My breast inshrines. What I forsake is small:
Great hopes I follow. To receive the grace
for Argo's safetic: know a better place
And Cities, which, in these far-distant parts,
Are famous; with civility, and arts:
And Aeson^ son, whom I more dearly prize
Than wealthy Earth and all her Monarchies.
In him most happy, and affected by
The bounteous gods, my crown shall reach the sky.
They tell of Rocks that iustle in the maine:
Charybdis, that sucks in, and casts again
The wrackfull waves: how rau^nous Scylla waits
With barking dogs in rough Sicilian straits.
My love poslest; in Iasons besome laid;
Let seas swell high: I cannot be dismayed
While I infold my husband in my arms.
Or should I fear, I should but fear his harms.
Call'st thou him husband? will thou then thy blame
M^dea, varnish with an honest name?
Consider well what thou intendst to do;
And, while thou may, so foul a crime eschew.
Thus she. When honor, pictie, the right,
Before her stood; and Cupid put to flight.
Then goes where Hecates old Altar stood;
O're-shadowed by a dark and secret wood.
Her broken ardor she had now reclaimed:
Which Iasons presence forthwith re-inflam'd.
Her cheeks blush fire: her face with feruor flashes.
And as a dying cinder, raked in ashes,
Fed by reviving winds, augmenting, glowes;
And tossed, to accustomed fury grows:
So sickly Love, which lare appeared to dye;
New life assumed from his inflaming eye.
Whose looks by chance more beauty now discover
Than heretofore: you might forgive the lover.
Her eager eyes she riuets on his face;
And, frantic, thinks him of no humane race:
Nor could divert her looks. As he his tongue
Began t'vnloose, her fair hand softly wrung,
Implored her aid, and promised her his bed:
She answer made, with tearrs profusely shed.
I see to what events m' intentions move:
Nor ignorance deceiues me thus; but love.
You, by the virtue of my art, shall live:
In recompense, your faithful promise give.
He, by the Altar of the Triple Power,
The groves which that great Deity imbowre,
Her fathers Sire, to whom the hid appears,
His own success, and so great danger, swears.
Believed: from her the enchanted herbs receives*
With them, their use: and his Protectresse leaves.
The Morrow had the sparkling stars defaced:
When all in Marse's field assemble; placed
On circling ridges. Seated on a throne,
The iuory-scepter'd King in scarlet shone.
From adamant nostrils bras-hoou'd Bulls now cast
Hot Vulcan, and the grass with vapors blast.
And as full forges, blown by art, resound;
As puluer'd flints, infurnest under ground;
By sprinkled water fire conceive: so they
Pent flames, inuolu'd in noysefull breasts, betray;
So rumble their scorcht throtes. Yet Aesons Heir
Came bravely on: on whom they trune, and stare
With terrible aspects; his ruin threat
With steele-tipt horns. Enraged, their cleft hooues beat
The thundering ground; whence clouds of dust arise;
And with their smoky bellowings rend the skies.
The Minya freeze with fear; but he remains
Untouched: such virtue Sorcery contains.
Their dew-laps boldly with his hand he strokes.
Enforced to draw the plough with heavy yokes.
The Colchians at so strange a sight admire:
The Minya shout, and set his powers on fire.
Then, in his caske, the vipers teeth assumes:
Those in the turn'd-vp furrows he inhumes.
Earth mollifies the poisonous seeds, which spring;
And forth a harvest of new People bring.
And as an Embrion, in the womb enclosed,
Assumes the form of man; within composed,
Through all accomplished numbers; nor comes forth
To breathe in air, till his maturer growth:
So when the bowels of the teeming Earth
Grew great, she gave men's perfect shapes their birth.
And, what is more strange; with them, their arms ascend;
Who at the Aemonian Youth their lances bend.
When this the Achaians saw, they hung the head:
And all their courages for terror fled.
Even she, who had secured him was afraid,
When she beheld so many one invade.
A chil cold checks her blood; death looks less pale.
And left the herbs she gave should chance to fail;
Unheard auxiliarie charms imparts:
And calls the assistance of her secret Arts.
He hurles a massi^ stone among his foes:
Who on themselves convert their deadly blows.
The Earth-borne brothers mutual wounds destroy,
And civil war. The Achiues skip for joy,
And throng to embrace the Victor. Her the same.
Affection spurd, but was withheld by shame.
Yet that too weak if none had looked upon her:
Not virtue checked her, but the wrack of honor.
Now, in conceit, she hugs him in her arms:
Applauds the inuentiue Gods; with them, her charms.
To make the Dragon sleep that never slept,
Remains; whose care the golden purchase kept.
Bright crested, triple tongued; his cruel jaws
Armed with sharp phangs; his feet with dreadful clawe^.
When once besprinkled with Lethaean juice,
And words repeated thrice; which sleep produce,
Calm the rough seas, and make swift rivers stand;
His eyelids veiled to sleeps unknown command.
The Heroes, of the Golden Fleece possessed,
Proud of the spoil, with her whose fouour blessed
His enterprise, an other Spoil, now bore
To sea; and lands on safe Iolcian shore.
Aemonian parents, for their sons return,
Bring grateful gifts, coniested incense burn;
And cheerfully with horne-gilt offerings pay
Religious vows. But Aeson was away;
Oppressed with redious age, now near his tomb.
When thus Aesonides: O wife, to whom
My life I owe: though all I hold in chief
From thy deserts, which far surpass belief;
If magic can (what cannot magic do?)
Take years from me; and his with mine renew.
Then wept. His piety her passion stirs:
Who sighs to think how unlike she had been to hers.
Yet this concealing, answers: What a crime
Has slipped thy tongue? think thou, that with thy time
I can, or will, another life inuest?
Hecat' fore-fend! nor is it a just request.
Yet Jason, we a greater gift will give:
Thy father, by our art renewed, shall live,
Without thy loss; if so the triple Power
Assist me with her presence in that hour.
Three nights yet wanted, ere the Moon could join
Her growing horns. When with replenisht shine
She faced the earth; the Court she leaves; her hair
Vntrest, her garments loose, her ankles bare:
And wanders through the dead of drowsy Night
With unseen steps Men, beasts, and birds of flight,
Deep Rest had bound in humid gyues; who crept
So silently, as if her self had slept.
No Aspen wags, moist air no sound receives;
Stars only shine: to which her arms she heaues:
Thrice turns about; besprinkles thrice her crown
With gathered deaw; thrice yawnes: and kneeling down:
O Night, thou friend to Secrets; you clear fires,
That, with the Moon, succeed when Day retires:
Great Hecate, that know, and aid imparts
To our designs: you Charms, and magic Arts:
And thou, O Earth, that to Magicians yields
Thy powerful simples: aires, winds, mountains, fields;
Soft murmuring springs, still lakes, and rivers clear:
You Gods of woods; you Gods of night, appear
By you, at will, I make swift streams retire
To their first fountaynes, whilst their banks admire;
Seas toss, and smooth; clear clouds, with clouds deforme;
Storms turn to calmes, and make a calm a Storm.
With spells and charms I break the Vipers iaw,
Cleave solid rocks, oaks from their seasures draw,
Whole Woods remove, the ayrie mountains shake;
Earth groan, and ghosts from beds of death awake.
And thee, T^tania, from thy sphere I hale:
Though ringing Cymballs thy extremes avail.
Our charms thy chariot pale; our poisonous weeds,
The frighted Morn; though drawn by rosy Steeds.
Flame-breathing bulls you tamed; you made them bow
Their stubborn necks unto the seruill plow;
The Serpents brood by you selfe-slaughtred lies;
Your slumbers closed the wakefull Dragons eyes,
At our command: and sent the Golden Fleece
(The guard deluded) to the towers of Greece.
Now need I drugs, that may old age indue
With vigor, and the flower of youth renew.
Which you shall give. Nor blaze these stars in vain:
Nor Dragous vainly through the ayrie maine
This Chariot draw. Hard by the chariot rests.
Mounting, she strokes the bridled dragons crests;
And shakes the reigns. Rapt up, beneath her spies
Thessalian Tempe; and her snakes applies
To parts retired. The herbs that ^ssa bear,
Steep Pelion, Othrys, Pindus; euer-cleare
Olympus, who the lofty Pindus tops;
Vp-roots, or with her brazen Cycle crops.
Much gathers on the bank of Apidan;
By Amphr^sus much; and where Enipeus ran.
Nor Sperchius, nor Peneus, barren found:
Nor thee smoothe Boe^es with sharp rushes crowned.
And ravished from Eubo^an Anthedon,
That herb, as yet by Glaucus change unknown.
By winged Dragons drawn, nine nights, nine days,
About she romes; and every field suruayes.
Returned: her Snakes, that did but only smell
The Odors, cast their skins, and age expel.
Her feet to enter her own roof refuse
Rooft by the sky: she touch of man eschues.
Two Altars builds of living turfe: the right
To Hecate, the left to Youth. These dight
With Vervin and green boughs; hard by, two pits
She forthwith digs: and sacrificing, slits
The throtes of black-^^eest rams. With reaking blood
The ditches fills; and powers thereon a flood
Of honey, and new milk, from turn'd-vp bowls;
Repeating powerful words. The King of Souls,
His ravished Queen, inuokes; and Powers beneath,
Not to prevent her by old Aesons death.
With prayers, and long-breathed murmurings appeased:
She bids them to produce the age-diseas'd.
Her sleepe-producing charm his spirits deads:
Who on the grass his senseless body spreads.
Charged Jason, and the rest, far-off withdrew:
Unhallowed eyes might not such secrets view.
Furious Medea, with her hair unbound,
About the flagrant Altar trots a Round.
The brands dips in the ditches, black with blood;
(...) on the Altars fires the infected wood.
Thrice purges him with waters, thrice with flames,
And thrice with sulphur; muttering horrid names.
Mean while, in hollow brass the medicine boyles:
And swelling high, in fomy bubbles toils.
There seethes she what the Aenonian vales produce;
^ootes, iuyces, flowers, and seeds of sovereign use.
Adds precious stones, from farthest Orient rest:
And pibles, by the ebbing Ocean left.
The deaw collected ere the Dawning springs:
A Screech-owles flesh, with her infamous wings.
The entrails of ambiguous Wolves; that can
Take, and forsake the figure of a man.
The liver of a long-liu'd Heart: then takes
The scaly skins of small Cinyphean snakes.
A Crows black head, and poynted beak, was cast:
Among the rest; which had nine ages past.
These, and a thousand more; without a name,
Were thus prepared by the barbarous Dame
For humane benefit. Th'ingredients now
She mingles with a withered olive bough.
Lo! from the caldron the dry stick receives
First virdure; and a little after, leaves;
Forthwith, with ouer-burdning Olives decked.
The skipping spume which under flames eiect,
Upon the ground descended in a dew:
Whence vernall flowers, and springing pasture grew.
This seen, she cuts the old man's throat; out-scrus'd:
His scarce-warme blood, and her receipt infused.
Sucked in at mouth or wound, his beard and head
Black hair forthwith adorn, the hoary shed.
Pale color, morphue, meger looks remove:
And vnder-rising flesh his wrinkles smoothe.
His limbs wax strong and lusty. Aeson much
Admires his change: himself remembers such
Twice twenty summers past. With all, indu'd.
A youthful mind: and both at once renewed.
This wonder from on high Lyaeus views:
By Colchis gift his nurses dates renewes.
Least frand should fail; she, with her bed's Consort
Dissension faines, and flies to Pelias Court.
His daughters (for sad Age the King arrests)
Her entertain. Who soon with sly protests
Of forged love allures their quick belief.
Among her (...) mentions the repriefe
Of Aese^^ years; insisting on that part.
This hope ingenders, that her able Art
Might so their father's vanished youth restore:
Whom they, with infinite rewards implore.
She, musing, seems to doubt: and, with pretense
Of difficulty, holds them in suspense.
But when she had a tardy promise made;
To win your steadfast confidence (she said)
Take from your flocks the most age-shaken Ram;
And suddenly he shall become a Lamb.
Straight thither by the wreathed horns they drew
A sunk-ey'd Ram; whose youth none living knew.
Now, at his riueled throat, out-lanching life
(Whose little blood could hardly stain her knife)
His carcass she into a caldron throws:
With it, her drugs. Each limb more slender grows;
He casts his horns, and with his horns his years:
Anon a tender bleating strikes their cares.
While they admire, out skips a frisking lamb;
That sports, and seeks the vdder of his dam.
Fixed with amaze: they, strongly now possessed,
Her promise more importunately pressed.
Thrice Phoebus had vnyok't his panting Steeds,
Drencht in Iberian Seas; whist Night succeeds,
Studded with stars: when false Medea took,
With vselesse herbs, mere water of the brook.
On Pelias* and his drowsy Guard, she hung
A death-like sleep with her enchanting tongue.
Whom now the so-instructed sisters led
Into his chamber; and besiege his bed.
Why pause you thus, said she, o slow to good!
Vnsheath your swords, and shed his aged blood;
That I his veins with sprightly juice may fill:
His life and youth depend upon your will.
If you have any virtue, nor pursue
Unfruitful hopes, perform this filial due.
With steel your fathers age expulse, and purge
His dregs through wounds. Their zeal her speeches urge.
Who were most pious, impious first became:
And, by avoiding, perpetrate the same.
Yet hearts they had not to behold the blow:
But, with auerted looks, blind wounds bestow.
He, blood-imbrew'd, his hoary head advanced:
Halfe-mangled, strove to rise. Who now intranc't
Amidst so many swords, his arms vp-help;
And, Daughters, cried, what do you! what compeld
Those cruel hands t'inuade your fathers life!
Down sunk their hands and hearts. Medea's knife,
With following speech his throat asunder cuts:
And his hackt limbs in seething liquor puts.
And had not Dragons rapt her through the skies,
Revenge had tortured her. Aloft she flies
Ore shady Pelion, god-like Chirons Den,
Aspiring Othrys, hills renowned by men
For old Cerambus safety: who, by aid
Of favoring Nymphs, reliefefull wings displaide;
While swallowing waves the weighty earth surround:
And swollen Deucalions surges escaped vndrown'd.
Aeolian Pitane on her left hand leaves;
That marble which the Serpents shape receives;
Idaean groves, where ^iber turned a Steer
(To cloak his sons slye theft) into a Dear;
The sand-heape which Corytus Sire contains;
And where new-barking Mer^ frights the plains:
Euryphylus town, where horns the Matrons shamed
Of ^o, when Hercules the Coans tamed;
Phoebeian ^hode; ^al, sian Telchines,
Drencht by Jove's vengeance in his brothers seas,
For all transforming with their vicious eyes:
By Caea's old Carthetan turrets flies,
Where fates Alcidamas with wonder move,
To think his daughter could become a Dove.
Then Hyries lake, Cy^neian Tempe viewed,
Graced by a Swan with sudden plumes indu'd.
For Phyllius there, had, at a Boys command,
Wild birds, and saluage Lions, brought to hand.
Who bid to tame a Bull, his will performed;
Yet at so stern a love not seldom stormed,
And his last purchase to the boy denied.
Pouting, You Will wish you had given it me, he cried;
And iumpt from downright cliffs. All held him bain'd;
When spredding wings a silver Swan sustained
His Mother (ignorant thereof) became
A Lake with weeping: which they Hyrie name.
Next Ple^ron lies; where Ophian Comb shuns,
With trembling wings, her life pursuing sons.
Then near ^atona-lou'd Calaurea ranged;
In which the King and Queen to birds were changed.
(...) on the right hand (where the beast
(...) would his mother have comprest.)
Cephisus spies (who for his nephew mourned;
Into a Sea-calfe by Apollo turned).
(...) Court, whose daughter sads her Sire,
With mounting wings. Her Snakes at length retire.
To Piren, Ephyr: men, if Fame say true,
Here at the first from shower-raysd mushrumps grew.
But after Colchis had the new-wed Dame,
And Creons Palace, wrapped in Magic flame;
When impious steel her childrens blood had shed,
The ill-reueng'd from Iasons fury fled.
Whom now the swift Titanian Dragons draw
To Pallas towers. Those thee, just Phineus, saw;
And thee, old Periphas, at once to fly:
Where Polyphemons Niece new wings supply.
Aegaeus entertaines her (of his life
The only stain) and took her for his wife.
Here Theseus maskt unknown: who, great in Deed
Had two-sea'd Isthmos from oppression freed.
Whose undeserved ruin Phasias sought
By mortal Aconite, from Scythia brought.
This from Echidna's hel-hound effence draws.
There is a blind steep cave with foggy jaws,
Through which the bold Tirynthian Heroes strained
Dragged Cerberus, with adamant inchain'd.
Who backward hung, and scouling, looked a-skew
On glorious Day; with anger rabid grew:
Thrice howles, thrice barks at once, with his three heads;
And on the grass his spumy poison sheds.
This sprung; attracting from the fruitful soil
Dire nourishment, and power of deathfull spoil.
The rural Swains, because it takes delight
In living rocks, surnamed it Aconite.
Aegaeus, by her fly persuasions won;
As to a foe, presents it to his son.
He took the cup: when by the iuory hilt
Of Theseus sword, Aegaeus found her guilt;
And struck the potion from his lips. With charms
Ingendring clouds, she scapes his lengthlesse arms.
Though glad of his sons safety, a chill fear
Shook all his powers, that danger was so near.
With fire he feeds the Altars, richly feasts
The Gods with gifts. Whole Hecatombs of beasts
(Their horns with ribands wreathed) imbrew the ground
No day, they say, was ever so renowned
Amongst the Athenians. Noble, vulgar, all,
Together celebrate that Festival.
And sing, when flowing bowls their spirits raise:
Great Theseus, Marathon resounds thy praise
For slaughter of the Cretan Bull. Secure
They live, who Cremyons wasted fields manure,
By thy exploit and bounty. Vulcans Seed
By thee glad Epidaure beheld to bleed.
Immane Procrustes death Cephisia viewed:
Elusis, Cercyon's. Scinis ill indu'de
With strength so much abused; who Beeches bent,
And tortured bodies 'twixt their branches rent,
Thou slew'st. The way which to Alcathoe led
Is now secure, inhumane Scyron dead.
The Earth his scattered bones a grave denied;
Nor would the Sea his hated relics hide:
Which tossed to and fro, in time became
A solid rock: the rock we Scyron name.
If we thy years should number with thy acts;
Thy years would prove a cipher to thy facts.
Great soul! for thee, as for our public wealth,
We pray; and quaffe Lyaeus to thy health.
The Palace with the peoples praises rings:
And sacred Joy in every bosom springs.
Aegaeus yet (no pleasure is complete:
Grief twins with joy.) for Theseus safe receipt
Reapes little comfort. Minos makes a war:
Though strong in men and ships, yet stronger far
Through vengeance of a father: who, his harme^
In slain Androgeus, scourges with just arms.
Yet wisely first endeavors foreign aid:
And all the Islands of that Sea suruai'd.
Who Anaphe and Astipalea gained;
The one by gifts, the other was constrained:
Low Mycone, Cimolus chalkie fields,
High Scyros, Siphnus, which rich metals yields,
Champion Seriphos, Paros far displayed
With marble brows, and Cythnos il-betray'd
By impious Arne for yet-loued gold;
Turned to a Chough, whom sable plumes infold.
Oliaros, Didymae the Sea-lou'd soil
Of Tenos, l'eparethes fat with oil,
Andros, and Gyaros; these their aid denied.
The Gnossian fleet from thence their sails applied
Unto Oenopia, for her children famed.
Oenopia by the ancient dwellers named:
But Aeacus, there reigning, called the same*
Aegina, of his honored mothers name.
All throng to see a Prince of so great worth.
Straight ^elamon and Peleus, issuing forth,
With Phocus, youngest of that royal race,
Make haste to meet him. With a tardie pace
Came aged Aeacus, and asked the cause
Of his repair. At those sad thoughts he draws
His breath in sighs: some intermission made,
The Ruler of the hundred Cities said.
Assist our arms, borne for my murdered son;
And in this pious war our fortunes run:
Give comfort to his grave. The King replied:
In vain you ask what needs must be denied.
No City is in stricter league than ours
Conioyn'd to Athens: mutual are our powers.
He, parting, said: Your league shall cost you dear.
And held it better far* to threat, than bear
An accidental war; whereby he might
Consume his force before he came to fight.
Yet might they see the Cretans under sail
From high built walls: when, with a leading gale,
The At^^ck ship attained their friendly shore:
Which Cephalus, and his embassage, bore.
Th! Aeacides him knew (though many a day
Unseen) embrace, and to the Court convey.
The goodly Prince, who yet the pledges held
Of those perfections, which in youth excelled,
Enters the Palace; bearing in his hand.
A brancit of Olive. At his elbowes stand
Clytus, and Butes; valorous and young:
Who from the loins of high-borne Pa^las sprung.
First Cephalus his full oration made;
Which showed his message, and demanded aid:
Their leagues, an ancient loves to mind recalls;
And how all Greece was threatened in their falls:
With eloquence enforced his embassy.
When God-like Aeacus made this reply
(His royal scepter shining in his hand)
Athenians, crave not succor, but command:
This Islands forces yours vouchsafe to call;
For in your aid I will adventure all.
Soldiers I have enough, at once to oppose
My enemies, and to repel your foes.
The Gods be praised, and happy times, that will
Seek no excuses. May your City still
Increase with people; Cephalus replied.
At my approach I not a little joyed
To meet so many youths of equal years,
So fresh and lusty. Yet not one appears
Of those who heretofore your town possessed;
When first you entertayn'd me for a Guest.
Then Aeacus, (in sighs his words ascend)
A sad beginning had a better end.
Would I could veter all: Day would expire
Ere all were told, and it would your patience tire.
Their bones, and ashes, silent graves enclose:
And what a treasure perished with those!
By Iun^'s wrath, a dreadful pestilence
Devoured our lives: who took unjust offense,
In that this I Will her Riuals name professed.
While it seemed humane, and the cause vnghest;
So long we death-repelling Physic tried:
But those diseases vanquished Art deride.
Heaven first, the earth with thickened vapors shrouds;
And lazy heat inuolues in sullen clouds.
Four pallid moons their growing horns unite,
And had as often with-drawne their feeble light;
Yet still the death-producing Auster blew.
Sunk springs, and standing lakes infected grew:
Serpents in untilled fields by millions creep;
And in the streams their tainting poisons steep.
First, dogs, sheep, oxen, foul that flagging fly,
And saluage beasts, the swift infection try.
Sad Swains, amazed, see their oxen shrink
Beneath the yoke, and in the furrows sink.
The fleecie flocks with anguish faintly bleat;
Let fall their wool, and pine away with heat,
The generous Horse that from the Olympicks late
Returned with honor, now degenerate,
Unmindful of the glory of his prize;
Groans at his manger, and there deedlesse dies.
The Bore ^orgets his rage: swift feet now fail
The Heart: nor Bears the horned Herd assail.
All languish. Woods, fields, paths (no longer bare)
Are filled with carcasses, that stench the air.
Which neither dogs, nor greedy foul (how much
To be admired!) nor hoary wolves would touch.
Falling, they rot: which deadly Odors bred,
That round about their dire contagion spread.
Now raues among the wretched country Swains:
Now in our large and populous City reigns.
At first, their bowels broyle, with feruor stretched:
The symptoms; redness, hot wind hardly fetched.
Their furd tongs swell; their dry jaws gasp for breath;
And with the air inhale a swifter death.
None could endure or couerture, or bed:
But on the stones their panting bosoms spread.
Cold stones could no way mitigate that heat:
Even they beneath those burning burdens sweat.
None cure attempt: the stern Disease inuades
The heartlesse Leech; nor Art her author aids.
The near allied, whose care the sick attends,
Sicken themselves, and dye before their friends.
Of remedy they see no hope at all,
But only in approaching funeral.
All cherish their desires: for help none care:
Help was there none. In shameless throngs repair
To springs and wells: there cleave, in bitter strife
T'extinguish thirst; but first extinguish life.
Nor could th'o're-charg'd arise; but dying, sink:
And of those tainted waters, others drink.
The wretches loathe their tedious beds: thence break
With giddy steps. Or, if now grown too weak,
Roll on the floor: there quitted houses hate,
As guilty of their miserable fare;
And, ignorant of the cause, the place accuse:
Halfe-ghosts, they walk, while they their legs could use.
You might see others on the earth lie mourning;
Their heavy eyes with dying motion turning:
Stretching their arms to heaven, where ever death
Surprised them, parting with their sigh't-out breath.
O what a heart had I! or ought to have!
I loathed my life, and wished with them a grave.
Which way soever I convert my eye,
The breathless multitude dispersed lie.
Like perished apples, dropping with the strokes
Of rocking winds; or acornes from broad oaks.
See you yon' Temple, mounted on high stairs?
It Is Jupiters. Who has not offered prayers,
And slighted incense there! husbands for wives;
Fathers for sons: and while they pray, their lives
Before th'inexorable altars vent;
With incense in their hands, half yet unspent!
How often the ox, unto the temple brought,
While yet the Priest the angry Powers besought,
And poured pure wine between his horns; fell down
Before the axe had touched his curled crown!
To Jupiter about to sacrifice,
For me, my country, sons; with horrid noise
Th'vnwounded Offering fell: the blood that life
Bore into exile, hardly staind the knife.
The Inwards lost their signs of heavens presage;
Out-raized by the stern Diseases rage.
The dead before the sacred doors were laid:
Before the Altars too; the Gods t'vpbraid.
Some choke themselves with cords: by death eschew
The fear of death; and following Fates pursue.
Dead corpse, without the Dues of funeral,
They weakly bear: the ports are now too small.
Or vn-inhum'd they lie: or else are thrown
On wealthlesse pyles. Respect is given to none.
For Pyles they strive: on those their kinsfolk burn,
That flame for others. None are left to mourn.
Ghosts wander vndeplor'd by sons or fires:
Nor is there room for tombs, or wood for fires.
Astonished with these tempests of extremes:
O Jove, said I, if they be more than dreams
That wrapped thee in Aegina's arms; nor shame
That I, thy son, should thee my father name:
Render me mine, or render me a grave!
With prosperous thunderclaps a sign he gave.
I take it, said I; let this Omen be
A happy pledge of thy intents to me;
Hard by, a goodly Oak, by fortune, stood,
Sacred to Jove; of Dodoneian wood:
Graine-gathering Ants there, in long files I saw,
Whose little mouths selfe-greater burdens draw;
Keeping their paths along the rugged rine.
While I admire their number: O divine,
And ever helpful! give to me, said I,
As many men; who may the dead supply.
The trembling oak his lofty top declined:
And murmured without a breath of wind.
I shook with fear: my tresses stood an end:
Yet on the earth and oak I kisses spend.
I durst not seem to hope; yet hope I did:
And in my breast my cherisht wishes hid.
Night came; and Sleep care-wasted bodies cheered:
Before my eyes the selfsame Oak appeared;
So many branches, as before there were;
So many busy Ants those branches bear;
So shook the Oak, and with that motion threw
To vnder-earth the graine-supporting crew.
Greater and greater straight they seem to sight:
To raise themselves from earth, and stand vp-right.
Whom numerous feet, black color, lanknesse leave:
And instantly a humane shape receive.
Now Sleep withdrew. My dream I waking blame:
And on the small-performing Gods exclaim.
Yet heard a mighty noise; and seemed to hear
Almost forgotten voices: yet I fear
That this a dream was also. Whereupon,
The door thrust open, in rusht Telamon;
Come forth, said he, O father; and behold
What hope transcends; nor can with faith be told!
Forth went I; and beheld the men which late
My dream presented: such in every state
I saw; and knew them. They salute their King.
Jove praised: a partio to the town I bring;
Among the rest I share the fields: and call
Them Myrmidons of their original.
You see their persons: such their manners are
As formerly. A people given to spare,
Patient of labor; what they get, preserve.
They, like in years and minds, these wars shall serve,
And follow your conduct; when first this wind
(The wind blow Easterly) that was so kind
To bring you hither, will to your avail
Convert it self into a Southern gale.
Discourse thus entertained the day; with feasts
They crown the evening: Sleep the Night inuest*
The morning Sun proiects his golden rays:
Still Eurus blew; and their departure stays.
Now Pallas sons to Cephalus resort,
And Cephalus, with Pallas sons, to Court,
With early visits: (sleep the King inchaines).
Whom Phocus in the Presence entertaines.
For Peteus, with his brother Telamon,
To raise an army were already gone.
Meane-while the Athenians Phocus leads into
The Privy chamber, beautiful to view.
Talking; his eyes upon the iau^lin seize,
Which graced the singers of Aeolides.
I haunt, said he, the woods; delight in blood
Of saluage beasts; yet know not of what wood
Your dart is made of. If of ash it were
'Tould look more brown; if Cornel, 'twould appear
More knotty: on what tree so'ere it grew,
My eyes did never such another view.
One of the Actaean brethren made reply:
You would more wonder at the quality.
It hits the aimed at, not by fortune led;
And of it self returns with slaughter red.
Phocus the cause desires much to know:
From whence it came; and who did it bestow.
He yields to his request; yet things well known,
Restrained by modesty, he lets alone.
Who touched with sorrow for his wife, that bleeds
In his remembrance; thus with tears proceeds.
This Dart, o Goddesse-borne, prouokes these teare^^
And ever would, if endless were my years.
This me, in my unhappy wife, destroyed:
This gift I would I never had inioy'd!
Procris Orithya's sister was; if Fame
Have more informed you of Orithya's name.
Yet she (should you their minds and forms confer)
More worth the rape. Erechtheus, me to her,
And love, unite. Then happy! happy, I
Might yet have been. But o, the Gods envy!
Two months were now consumed in chaste deligh^^
When gray Aurora, having vanquished Night,
Beheld me on the euer-fragrant hill
Of steep Hymettus: and, against my will,
As I my toils extended, bare me thence.
I may the truth declare without offense:
Though rosy be her cheeks; although she sway
The deawy Confines of the Night and Day,
And Nectar drink; my Procris all possessed:
My heart was hers; my tongue her praise professed.
I told her of our holy nuptial ties;
Of wedlocks breach; and yet scarce tasted joys.
Fire-red, she said; thy harsh complaints forbear:
Possess thy Procris. Though so fair, so dear;
Thou' It wish thou had never known her, if I know
Insewing fate: and angry, lets me go.
Her words I ponder as I went along:
And 'gan to doubt she might my honor wrong.
Her youth and beauty tempt me to distrust:
Her virtue checks those fears, as most unjust.
But I was absent: but example fed
My jealousy: but lovers all things dread.
I seek my sorrows; and with gifts intend
To tempt the chaste. Aurora proves a friend
To this suspicion; and my form translates.
Unknown, I enter the Athenian gates;
And then my own. The house from blame was free:
In decent order, and perplexed for me.
Scarce with a thousand sleights I gained a view:
Viewed with astonishment, I scarce pursue
My first intent: scarce could I but reveal
The truth; and pardon with due kisses seal.
She was full sad: yet louelier none than she,
Even in that sadness: sorrowful for me.
How excellent, o Phocus, was that face,
Which could in grief retain so sweet a grace?
What need I tell how often I assailed
Her vexed chasticie! how often failed!
How often said the! One I only serve:
For him, where ever, I my joys preserve.
What mad man would such faith have farther pressed,
But I? indushious in my own unrest.
With deep protests, and gifts still multiplied,
At length she wauers False of faith, I cried,
Thou art disclosed: I, no adulterer,
But thy wronged spouse: nor can this trial err.
She made no answer, pressed with silent shame.
Th'insidious house, and me, far more in blame,
Forsaking* mankind for my sake eschues:
And Dian like the mountain chase pursues.
Abandoned; hotter flames my blood incense.
I begged her pardon, and confessed m'offence:
And said, Auro^a might have me subdude
With such inticements, had but she so wooed.
My fault confessed, her wrong revenged, we
Grow reconciled; and happily agree.
Besides her self, as though that gift were small,
A Dog she gave: which Cynthia giving; All,
Said she, surpass in swiftness: and this Spear
You so commend, which in my hand I bear.
Do you the fortune of the first inquire?
Receive a wonder: and the fact admire.
Dark prophesies, not understood of old,
The Naiades with searching wits unfold.
When sacred Themis, in that so obscure,
Neglected grew. Nor could she this endure.
A cruel Beast infests the A^nian plains;
To many fatal: feared by country Swains,
Both for their cattle, and themselves. We met:
And with our toils the ample fields beset.
He nimbly skips above the upper lines:
And mounting over, frustrates our designs.
Their dogs the' uncouple; whose pursuit he out-spring*
With no less speed, than if supplied by wings.
All bid me let my ^alaps slip (for so
My dog was called) who struggling long ago,
Halfe-th^otled, straind the leash. No sooner gone,
Than out of sight; his footsteps left upon
The burning sand: who vanished from our eyes
As swiftly as a well-driuen iauelin flies*
Or as a singing pellet from a sling;
Or as an arrow from a Cretan string.
I mount a hill which ouer-topt the place;
From thence beholding this admired chase.
The Beast now pincht appears, now shuns by slight
His catching jaws. Nor (crafty) runs outright;
Nor trusts his heels: with nimble turnings shunning
His urgent foe; cast back by ouer-running.
Who pressed, what only might in speed compare;
Appears to catch th'vncaught; and mouths the air.
My dart I take to aid: which, while I shook,
And on the thong direct my hasty look
To fit my fingers; looking up again,
I saw two marble statues on the plain.
Had you these seen, you could not choose but say
That this appeared to run, and that to bay.
That neither should each other ouer-goe
The Gods decreed: if Gods descend so low.
Thus he: here paused. Then Phocus; Pray'vnfold
Your darts offense. Which Cephalus thus told.
Joy grief fore-runs: that joy we first recite.
Fo^o, those times I mention with delight,
When youth and ^ymen crowned our happy life:
She, in her husband blessed; I in my wife.
In both one care, and one affection moves.
She would not have exchanged my bed for Jove's;
(...) could have tempted my desire:
Our bosom flamed with such an equal fire.
When Sol had raised his beams above the floods;
My custom was to trace the leauy woods;
Armed with this dart, I solitary went,
Without horse, huntsmen, toils, or dogs of sent.
Much killed; I to the cooler shades repair:
And where the vallie breathes a fresher air.
Cool air I seek, while all with feruor gloes:
Cool air expect, my travels sweet repose.
Come air, I wont to sing, relieve the oppressed;
Come, o most welcome, glide into my breast:
Now quench, as erst, in me this scalding heat.
By chance I other blandishments repeat;
(So Fates enforce) as, o my souls delight!
By thee I am fed and cheered: thy sweets excite
My affections to these woods: o life of death!
May ever I inhale thy quickening breath!
A busy ear these doubtful speeches caught;
Who oft-nam'd air some much-lou'd Dryad though^
And told to Procris, with a leuder tongue,
His false surmises; with the song I sung.
Love is too credulous. With grief she faints;
And scarce reviving, bursts into complaints:
My spotless faith with fury execrates.
Woe's me, she cries, produced to cruel fates!
Transported with imaginary blame,
What is not, fears: an vnsubstantiall name.
Yet grieves (poor soul!) as if in truth abused:
Yet often doubts; and her distrust accused.
Now holds the information for a lie:
Nor will trust other witness than her eye.
Aurora re-inthron'd th'insuing Day:
I hunt, and speed. As on the grass I lay,
Come air, said I, my tired spirits cheer.
At this an unknown sighe inuades my ear.
Yet I; O come, before all joys preferred.
Among the withered leaves a rustling heard,
I threw my dart; supposing it some beast:
But o, 'twas Procris! wounded on the breast,
She shreckt, ay me! Her voice too well I knew:
And thither, with my grief distracted, flew.
Half dead, all blood-imbrew'd, my wife I found:
Her gift (alas!) exhaling from her wound.
I raised her body, than my own more dear:
To bind her wounds my lighter garment tear;
And strive to stench the blood. O pity take,
Said I, nor thus a guilty soul forsake!
She, weak, and now a dying, thus applies
Her tongues forced motion: By our nuptial ties;
By heauen-imbowred Gods; by those below,
To whose infernal monarchy I go:
By that, if ever I deserved well;
By this ill-fated love, for which I fell,
Yet now in death most constantly retain;
O, let not Air our chaster bed profane.
This said; I showed, and she perceived how
That error grew: but what auail'd it now?
She sinkes; her blood along her spirits took:
Who looks on me as long as she could look.
My lips her soul receive, with her last breath:
Who, now resolved, sweetly smiles in death.
The weeping Hero's told this tragedy
To those that wept as fast. The King drew nigh
And his two sons, with wel-arm'd Regiments,
New-raised; which he to Cephalus presents.
OVID'S METAMORPHOSIS. The Eighth Book.
THE ARGUMENT.
HArmonious walls. Lewd Scylla now despaires;
With Nisus, changed: the Lark the Hobby dares.
Ariadnes Crown a Constellation made.
Th'inuentiue youth a Partridge; still afraid
Of mounting. Meleagers Sisters mourn
His tragedio: to Foul, so named, turn*
Five water Nymphs the five Echinades
Defigure. Perimele, near to these,
Becomes an Island. Jove and Hermes take
The forms of men. A City turn' t'a Lake:
A Cottage to a Temple. That good pare,
Old Baucis and Philemon, changed are
At once to sacred Trees In various shapes
Blew Proteus sports. Often self* changed Metra scap^^
Scorn'a' servitude. The Stream of Calydon
Forsakes his own, and other shapes puts on.
NOw Lucifer exalts the Day: to hell
Old Night descends. The Eastern winds now fell;
Moist clouds arose: when gentle Southern gales
Befriend returning Cephalus. Full sails
Wing his successful course: who, long before
All expectation, touched the wished shore.
(...) For no heart is so hard, that did but know,
And would a lance against his bosom throw.
It takes: with me, my country I intend
To render up; and give these wars an end.
What is^ to intend? Each passage has a guard;
My father keeps the keys, and sees them bard.
It Is he defers my ^oyes; it is he I dread:
Would I were not, or he were with the dead!
^u^h, we are our own Gods. They thrive, that dare:
And fortune is a foe to slothful praire.
Long since, an other, scorcht with such a fire,
By death had for^'^ a way to her desire.
Yet why should any more aduenturous prove?
I dare through sword and fire make way to Love.
And yet here is no use of fire nor sword;
But of my fathers hair. This must afford
What (...) so much affect, and make me blessed:
(...) than all the treasure of the East.
This said; Night, nurse of cares, her curtains drew*
When in the dark she more audacious grew.
In (...) of rest, when tired with day-bred cares
Sleep all inuests; she silently repaires
Into her fathers bedchamber; and there
Extracts (o horrid act ^) his fatal hair.
(...) of her wicked prey; with her she bore
The (...) spoil; unlocks a Posterne door:
(...) the foe (bold by her merit made)
(...) vn-astonisht, said.
(...) Seed,
(...) my Gods: no meede,
(...) ^aire receive,
(...) not think a hair! give,
But my old fathers head. With that, presents
The gift with wicked hand, and bad ostents.
Minos reiects it: and much terrifide
With horror of so foul a deed, replide:
The Gods exile thee (O thou most abhord!)
Their world; to thee nor Land nor Sea afford*
How-ere Jove's Creete, the world wherein I reign,
Shall such a Monster never entertain.
This said: the most just Victor does impose
Laws, no less just, upon his vanquished foes.
Then orders, that they forth with ores convey
Abord the brasse-beakt ships, and anchors way.
When Scylla saw the Gnossian navy swim;
And that her treason was abhorred by him:
To violent anger she conuerts her prayers.
And Furie-like, with stretched arms and spread hairs;
Cried; Whither fly'st thou? leaving me for-lore,
That conquest-crown'd thee? o preferred before
My Country! Father! 't was not thou did win;
But I that gave: my merit, and my sin.
Not this; not such affection, could persuade:
Nor that on thee I all my hopes had laid.
For whither should I go, thus left alone?
What? to my Country? that is by me o're-throwne.
Were not? my treason doomes me to exile.
Or to my father; given unto thy spoil?
Me worthily the Citizens will hate:
And neighbors fear the example in their State.
I, out of all the world my self have thrown,
To purchase an access to Creet alone.
Which if denied; and left to such despair*
Europa never one so ungrateful bare:
But swallowing Syrt's, Charybdis chaft with wind;
Or some fell Tygres of the A^menian kind.
Io^e'^ no^ thy father; nor with forged shape
Of Bull beguild, thy mother culd her rape.
That story of thy glorious race is faind:
For she a wild and louelesse Bull sustaind.
O father Nisus, thy revenge behold!
Reioyee, O City, by my treason sold!
Death, I confess, I merit. Yet would I
Might, by their hands whom I have injured, dye.
I or why should thou, who only did subdue
By my offending, my offense pursue?
My Country and my father felt this sin:
Which unto thee a courtesy has been.
Thou worthy art of such a wife, as stood
A Bulls hot incest in a Cow of wood;
Whose shameless womb a monstrous burden bare.
Ah! do my sorrows to thy ears repair?
Or are my fruitless words borne by that wind
That bra^es thee hence, and leaves a wretch behind?
What though Pasiphae a Bull preferred?
'Thou far more brutish than the saluage Herd.
Woe's me! Make have I must: the waves with or^^
Ref^und, his ship for sakes, with us, our shores.
In vame ^^le follow thee ungrateful king:
And while I to thy crooked vessel cling
Be drag^d through drenching seas. This having said,
Attempts the waves, by Cupid^ strengthening aid,
And clea^es t^his ship. Her father, now high-flowne
Strikes (...)a red-maild Hobbie grown)
And st^^^ (...) her with his golden ^eares.
She ^^ps her h^^d, in feebled by her fears.
While yet a falling, that she might eschew
The threatening sea, light wings t'her shoulders grew.
Now changed to a bird in sight of all:
This, of her tufted crown we Ciris call.
No sooner Minos touched the Cretan ground,
But by an hundred Bulls, with garlands crowned.
His vows to conquest-giuing Jove he paid:
And all his palace with the spoil arrayd.
And now his families reproach increast.
That uncouth prodigy, half man, half beast,
His mothers dire adultery descryd.
Minos resolves his marriage shame to hide
In multitude of rooms, perplexed and blind
The work t'excelling Daedalus assignd.
Who sense distracts, and error leads a maze
Through subtle ambages of sundry ways.
As Phrygian Meander sports about
The flowrie vales; now winding in, now out;
Himself incounters, sees his following floods,
His streams leads to their springs; and, doubling, scuds
To long mocked seas: so Daedalus compiled
Innumerable by-ways, which beguild
The senses conduct; that himself with much
Ado returns: the fallacies were such.
When in this fabric Minos had enclosed
This double form, of man and beast composed;
The Monster, with Athenian blood twice fed,
His own, the third Lot, in the ninth year, shed
Then by a Clew reguided to the door
(A virgins counsel) never found before;
Aegides, with rapt Ariadne, makes
For Dia: on the naked shore forsakes
His confident and sleepe-oppressed Mate.
Now ^pining in complaints, the desolate
(...) with ma^^age, comforts; and that she
Might glorious by a C^nstellation be;
Her head ^^burtthens of her crown, and threw
(...) to heaven: through thinner air it flew.
(...), the jewels that the verge inchace
(...) to f^ies; fast-fixed in one place;
Th(...) retaining. They their station take,
(...) that Kneeles, and Him who holds the Snake.
The Sea impris^ned Paedalus, meane-while,
W^(...) of (...), and of his long exile;
(...) with his countries love, and place of birth;
Thus said: Though Minos ba^ both sea and earth;
Yet heaven is free. That course attempt I dare:
Held he the world, he could not hold the air.
I his said^ to arts unknown he bends his wits
In na^^es change. The quils in order knits,
Beginning with the least: the longer still
The sh^^t succeeds; much like a rising hill.
Their in all pipes, the shepherds, long ago,
(F^am'd of vneq ^all reeds) cont^iued so.
With threads the midst, with wax he ioynes the ends:
And these, as natural wings, a little bends.
Young, ^^us stood by, who little thought
That with his death he played; and smiling, caught
The feathers that lay hulling in the ayte:
Now chases the yellow wax with busy care,
And interrupts his Si^e. When his last hand
He had imposed: with new-made wings he ^and
The ayte that bare them. Then instructs his son:
^e sure that in the middle course thou run.
Dank seas will clog the wings that lowly fly:
The Sun will burn them if thou for'st too high.
Twixt either keep. Nor on Boots gaze,
Nor Helice, nor stern Orions rays:
But follow me. At once, he does advise;
And unknown pinions to his shoulders ties,
Amid his work and words a tide of tears
Fret his old cheeks, who trembling fingers reares.
Then kissed him, never to be kissed more:
And raised on lightsome feathers flies before;
His fear behind: as birds through boundless sky
From ayerie nests produce their young to fly;
Exhorts to follow: taught his banefull skill;
Waves his own wings, his sons observing still.
These, while some Angler, fishing with a cane;
Or Shepherd, learning on his staff; or Swain;
With wonder viewes: he thinks them Gods that glide
Through ayrie regions. Now on the left side
Leaves Juno's Samos, Delos, Paros white,
Lebynthos, and Calydna on the right,
Flowing with honey. When the boy, much took
With pleasure of his wings, his Guide forsook:
And ravished with desire of heaven, aloft
Ascends. The odor-yeelding wax more soft
By the swift Suns vicinitie now grew:
Which late his feathers did together glue.
That thawed; he shakes his naked arms, that bare,
As then no sail, nor could contain the air.
When crying, Help, o father! his exclaim
Blew Seas suppressed which took from him their name.
His father, now no father, left alone,
Cryde Icarus! where art thou? which way flowne?
What region, Icarus, does thee contain.
Then spies the feathers floting on the Maine.
He cursed his arts interies the co^pse, that gave
The land a name, which gave his son a grave.
The Partridge from a thicket him suruayd;
As in a tomb his wretched son he laid;
Who clapped his fanning wings, and lowdly churd
T^ express his joy: as then an only bird.
So made of late (unknown in former the e)
O Pa^^lus, by thy eternal crime.
To thee thy Sister gave him to be taught;
Who little of his destiny forethought:
The boy then twelve year aged; of a mind
Apt for ^^struction, and to Arts inclind.
He Sawes invented, by the bones that grow
In fithes backs; the steel indenting so.
And two-shankt Compasses with riuet bound;
Th^one to stand still, the other turning round
In (...) distance. Dae^^a^us this stung:
Who from Manerua sacred turret flung
The eau^d headlong; and his falling faines.
Him Pall^s, fautor of good wits, sustaines:
Who straight the figure of foul assumes;
Clad in the midst of air with freckled plun^es.
The vigor of his late swift wit now came
Into his feet, and wings: he keeps his name.
They never mount aloft, nor trust their birth
To tops of ^^ees; but sleck as low as earth,
And lay their eggs in tufts. In mind they bear
Then ancient fall, haughty places fear.
I yr d ^ ae^^u now in S^c^lia lights:
In whole defense hospitious Coca^^^ fights.
Now Athens by Aegoeus glorious Seed
Was from her lamentable tribute freed.
They crown their Temples: warlike Pallas, Jove,
Inuoke; with all the Deities above.
Whom now they honor with the large expense
Of blood, free gifts, and heaps of frankincense.
Vast fame through all the Argolian cities spread
His praise: and all that rich Acbaia fed
His aid in their extremities entreat,
His aid afflicted Calydon (though great
In Meleager) sought. The cause a Bore:
Dian's revenge, and horrid Seruatore.
For Ocneus, with a plenteous harvest blessed;
To Ceres his first fruits of corn addressed,
To Pallas oil, and to Lyaeus wine.
Ambitious honors all the Powers divine
Reap from the rurals; yet neglect to pay
Diana dues; her Altars empty lay.
Anger affects the Gods. This will not we
Unpunished bear: nor unrevenged, said she,
Though vn-adored, shall they vant we be.
With that she sent into Oeniean fields
A vengefull Bore. Rank-grast Epirus yields
No big-bon'd bullock of a larger breed:
But those are less which in Sicilia feed.
His eyes blaze blood and fire: his stiff neck bears
Horrible bristles, like a grove of spears.
A boiling foam upon his shoulders flows
From grinding jaws: his tushes equal those
Of Indian Elephants: his fell mouth casts
Hot lightning; and his breath the virdure blasts.
He tramples under foot the growing corn;
And leaves the sighing husbandman for lorne;
Reaping the uper eats. Their usual grain
The baines and threshing floores expect in vain.
Broad-spreading vines he with their burden, sheres:
And boughs from euer-leauy olives tears.
Then falls on beasts: the He^dsmen, now vnseard;
Nor dogs, nor raging Bulls, defend their Herd.
The people fly; nor are secure of mind
In walled towns, ^ll M^leager, joined
With youths of choycest worth, inflamed with praise,
Attempts his death. The twined Iyndarides;
One for his horsemanship, the other famed
For hurle-bats; Jason, who the first ship framed;
Theseus with his I trithous, a pair
Of happy friends; and Lynetus, Aphar's heir;
The two Thest^adae, Leucippus crowned
For strength; Acastus for his dart renownd;
Swist Idas, Caeneus, not a maiden then;
Hippothous, ^ryas; Phoenix (best of men,)
A^yntors issue; both the Actorides,
And P^yleus sent from El^, came with these:
I here^es hope; aduenturous ^elamon;
And he who called the great Achilles son;
H(...) the quick graced
E^^ytion; and ^^^ion, who surpast
In ^unning (...) the Naeryc^an,
With (...) Hyleus, Hip^asan,
Now yoath'all (...): ^ons to that in^^^t
(...), sent:
(...) in law, (...) bred
(...) well read
In fates, (...), not as yet betrayed
B'his wife; Tegeaean, Atalant', a maid
Of passing beauty, sprung from Schoenus race:
Of high Lycaean woods the only grace.
A polisht Zone her upper garment bound;
And in one knot her artlesse hair was wound:
Her arrows iuory guardian clattering hung
On her left shoulder; and a bow well strung
Her left hand held Her looks a wench displayed
In a boys face, a boys face in a maid.
The Calydonian Heroes her beheld
And wished at once: his wishes fate repeld.
Who lurking flames attracts; and said, O blessed
Is he, whom thou shall with thy joys inuest!
But time, and shame, with further speech dispense:
Urged by a work of greater con'equence.
A Wood o're-growne with trees, yet never feld,
Mounts from a Plain, that all beneath beheld.
The glory-thirsting Gallants this ascend.
Forthwith a part their corded toils extend;
Some hounds uncouple; some the tract of feet
Together trace: and danger long to meet.
A Dale there was, through which the raine-rais'd flood
Often tumbled down, and in the bottom stood:
Repleat with plyant willowes, marish weeds,
Sharp rushes, osiers, and long slender reeds.
The Bore from thence dislodged, like lightaing crushed
Through iustling clouds, among the hunters rusht:
Bears down the obuious trees; the crashing woods
Report their fall. The youths each other bloods
With high-rais'd shoots inflame: who keep their stands:
And shake their broad-tipt spear^^ with threatening hands.
The dogs he scatters, those that durst oppose
His horrid fury, wounds with ganching blows.
F^^ton first his iauelin vainly cast,
Which struck a beech. The next his sides had past,
But that with too much strength it ouer-flew:
The weapon Pagasaean Jason threw.
O ^habus, said Ampycides, If I
Have honored, and do honor thee, apply
Thy succor in success of my intents.
The God, as much as lay in him, assents:
But from the dart the head Diana took;
Which gave no wound, although the Bore it struck.
The beast like lightning burns, thus chaft with ire:
His grim eyes shine, his breast breaths flames of fire.
And as a stone which some huge engine throws
Against a wall, or bulwark manned with foes:
The deadly Bore with such sure violence
Assaults their forces. The right wings defense;
F^palaman, and ^elagonus, cast
On ^ounding earth: drawn off with timely have.
(...), great (...) son,
Could not so well his slaughtring tushes shun:
Which cut the sbrinking sinews in his thigh,
Even as he trembled, and prepared to fly.
And (...) long had perished, perchance,
(...) war, but, vauting on a lance,
I^^^ooke a tree, which there his branches spread;
And safely saw the foe from whom he had fled.
Who, ^ull of ^age, his vengefull tushes whets
Upon an Oak; and dite destruction threats.
When ^^usting to his new-edg'd arms, the Bore
The manly thigh of great ^^^thyus tore.
The brother I wins, not yet celestial Stars;
Conspicuous both, both terrible in wars;
Both mounted on white Steeds, a loft both bare
Their glittring spears, which trembled in the air:
And both had sped; but that the Swine withdrew
Where neither horse nor iauelin could pursue.
In follows Telamon, hot of the chase;
And stumbling at a root, fell on his face.
While Peleus lifts him up, a winged fight
Tegaea drew, which flew as swist as sight:
Below his care the fixed arrow stood,
And staind his bristles with a little blood.
The Virgin less rejoiced in the blow
Than Meleager;: who first saw it flow,
First showed his mates the blood: O most renownd
Said he, thy virtue has thy honor crowned.
The men, they blush for shame; each other cheer;
And high-rais'd souls, with clamors higher rear:
Their spears in clusters fling; which make no breach
Through idle store: and throws their throws impeach.
Behold, Ancaeus with a polax stern
To his own fate; who said, By me O learn
You youths, how much a man's sharp steel exceeds
A woman's weapons, and applaud my deeds.
Though Dian should take arms, and in this strife
Protect her beast, she should not save his life.
Thus gloriously he boasts; in both his hands
Advanced his polax, and on tip-toes stands.
Whom, ere his arms descend, the furious Swine
Preuents, and sheathes his tushes in his groyne.
Down fell. Ancaeus, out of his bowels gusht,
All gore; with blood the earth, as guilty blushed
Ixions son Pirithous forward pressed:
And with an able at me his lance addressed.
To whom Aegides; O to me more dear
Than my own life! my better half, forbear.
The w^^e in valor should aloof contend:
Fool hardy courage was A^^aeus end.
This said his heavy cornell; with a head
Of b^asle, he hurles: which sure had struck him dead
(It was delivered with so true an aim)
But that a Medlar interposed the same.
Aeson^^es then threw his thrilling lance;
Which hit (diuerted from the mark by chance)
A dog between his baying jaws: the wound
Rusht through his guts, and naild him to the ground.
(...) varying hand dischargd two spears:
The earth the one, the beast, the other bears.
While now he raues, grunts, turns his body round,
Casts blood and some; the author of his wound
Ru^^ in; prouokes his greater wrath; and where
The thields diffeuer, thrusts his deadly spear.
They all with cheerful shouts their joys unfold;
Shake his victorious hands; the Beast behold
With wonder, whose huge bulk possessed so much:
And hardly think it safe the slain to touch:
Yet with his blood they die their iauelins red.
He set, his foot upon his horrid head;.
My right, said he, receive rare Nonacrine,
And let my glory ever share with thine.
Then gave the bristled spoil, in terror charmed;
And ghastly head with monstrous ^ushes armed.
She in the Gift and Gi^er pleasure took.
All (...), with prepostrous envy, struck.
On whom the violent, (...) frown;
And cry aloud with stretcht-out arms; Lay down:
Nor, Woman, of our titles us bereave,
Lest thee thy beauties confidence deceive;
His aid to weak whom love has rest of sight:
And snatched from her, her gift; from him, his right.
O^nides swells; his looks with anger stern:
You rauishers of others honors, learn
(Said he) the distance between words and deeds.
With wicked steel secure Plexippus speeds.
While Toxeus, whether to revenge his blood,
Or shun his brothers fortune, wavering stood;
He cleares the doubt: the weapon, hot before
By the others wound, new heats in his hearts gore.
Gifts to the holy Gods Althaea brings
For her sons victory; and Paeans sings.
When back she saw her slaughtred brothers brought:
At that sad object screecht; and griefe-distraught,
The City fills with outcries: off she tears
Her royal robes, and funeral garments wears.
But told by whom they fell; no longer mournes:
Rage dries her eyes; her tears to vengeance turns.
The triple Sisters erst a brand conuai'd
Into the fire; her belly newly laid;
Thus chanting, while they spun the fatal twine:
O lately borne, one period we assign
To thee and to this brand. The charm they weaue
Into his fate; and then the chamber leave.
His mother snatched it with an hasty hand
Out of the fire; and quenched the flagrant brand.
This in an inward closser closely lays:
And by preserving it, preserues his days.
Which now produced; a pyle of wood she raised,
That by the hostile fire invaded, blazed.
Four times she proffers to the greedy flame
The fatal brand: as often withdrew the same.
A Mother, and a Sister, now contend:
And two-diuided names, one bosom rend.
Often fear of future crimes a palenesse bred:
Often burning Fury gave her eyes his red.
Now seems to threaten with a cruel look:
And now appears like one that pity took.
Her tears the feruor of her anger dryes:
Yet found she tears again to drown her eyes.
^uea as a ship, when wind and tide contends,
F^eles both their furies, and with either bends:
So Thestias, whom vnsteddie passion drives;
Fie changes, calmes her rage, and rage reuiues.
A sister love at length subdues a mothers:
That blood may appease the ghosts of bleeding brothers,
Impiously pious. Flames, to ashes turn
This brand, said she, and my loathed bowels burn.
Then, holding in her hand the fatal wood;
As she before the funeral altar stood:
You triple Powers, who guilty Souls pursue;
Fun enides these Rites of vengeance view.
^act the crime I punish. Death must be
By death atton'd. On murder, murder we
Accumulate; redoubling sunerall.
Due Image, by congested sorrows fall.
Shall Oeneus joy in his victorious son?
Sad Thestius robbed of his? be both undone.
I ^^ke up, o you my brothers ghosts; you late
^^^ledged souls; see how I right your fate.
A(...) to: this infernal sacr^fizo,
Of high esteem: my womb^ accursed prize.
Ay me! o whither am I rapt! excuse
A mother, brothers. Trembling hands refuse
Their fainting aid. He merits death: yet by
A mothers rage me thinks he should not dye.
Then shall he escape? alive, a victor, feast
In proud success; of Calydon possessed?
You, little ashes, and chill Shades, sorlorne?
I Will not endure it. Perish Villain, borne
To our immortal ruin. Ruinate
With thee, thy fathers hopes, his crown and state.
Where is a mothers hear? a parents prayer?
The vnthought-of burden which I ten months bare?
O would, while yet an infant, the first flame
Had thee devoured; nor I opposed the same!
Thy life, my gift; by thine own merit dye:
A just reward for thy impiety.
Thy twice-giuen life restore; first by my womb,
Last by this ravished brand; or me a tomb
With my poor brothers. Feign I would pursue
Revenge; yet would not. O, what shall I do!
Before my eyes my brothers wounds now bleed:
And the sad image of so soul a deed.
Now pity, and a mothers name control
My stern intention o distracted soul!
You have won, my brothers; but, alas, ill won:
So that, while thus I comfort you, I run
Your fate. With eyes reuerst, her quaking hand
To trembling flames exposed the funeral brand.
The Brand appears to sigh, or sighs expires:
Wrapped in th'imbracements of unwilling fires*
Unknowing Meleager, absent broils
Even in those flames: his blood, thick-panting, boyles
I unseen fire. Who such tormenting pains
With more then manly fortitude sustaines.
Yet grieves that by a slothful death he falls
Without a wound: Ancaeus happy calls.
His aged father, brothers, sisters, wife,
Now g^oning names, with his last words of life:
Perhaps his mother. Flames and pains increase:
Again they languish; and together cease.
To liquid a^^e his van^sht spirits turn.
And ^able coals in shrouds of ashes mourn.
I ow he^ high Calydon: the yongue, the old,
Ignoble, noble, all, their griefs unfold.
The C^lydonian matrons cut their hair;
(...) their beauties: cry, woe and despair!
His hea^ie head with dust his father hides;
^yes gr^ueling on the ground; and old age chides.
For now his mother, by her guilt persude,
Revenging steel in her own breast imbrude:
Though Jove an hundred able tongues bestow,
A (...) that should with full invention flow,
A (...) i^tuse into my breast;
(...) ^isters follows could not be expressed.
Then selves for getting decency, deface:
As long as he a body, it embrace;
(...) his pal^lips: when turned to ashes, they
The ashes in their b^uised bosoms lay:
^allon his tomb; his name, that there appears;
In^old, and fill the characters with tears.
But when Dana's wrath was satisfide
W^an Oeniu ^rery: they all (beside
(...) Gorge and the lovely D^ian^^)
On plumy pinions, by her power, aspire;
With long-extended wings, and beakes of horn:
Who through the air in varied shapes are borne.
Mean while to Pallas towers Aegides hyes
(His part perform^d in that joint enterprise)
Whose have raine-raised Achelous staid.
Renoun'd ^ecropian Prince, the River said,
Vouchsafe my roof; n^^ to the impetuous flood
Commit thy person; Often huge logs of wood,
And broken rocks, downe-tumbling, lowdly rore.
Houses and Herds not seldom here to fore
Hurried away: nor was the Ox of force
To keep his stand; nor swiftness saved the Horse.
And when dissolved snow from mountains poured,
The turning eddies many have devoured.
More safe to stay until the current run
Within his bounds. To whom Aegaeus son:
Twere folly, if not madness, to refuse
Thy house and counsel: both I mean to use.
Then exters his large cave, where Nature played
The A^tisun; of hollow Pumice made,
And rugged Tophas; floord with humid moss:
The roose pure white and purple shells imbosse.
Now had Hyperion past two parts of day:
When Theseus, with the partners of his way.
Piri^hous, and Lelex the renown
Of Troezen, now appearing gray; sat down:
And whom the River glad of such a guest,
Preferred unto the honor of his feast.
Forthwith, barefooted Nymphs bring in the meat:
That taken away, upon the table set
Crowned cups of wine. When Theseus turned his face
To under seas; and poynting, said; What place
Is yon', and of what name, that stands alone?
And yet me thinks it should be more then one.
It is not one, the courteous Flood replies,
But five; their neighborhood deceiues your eyes.
The less t'admire Diana, late despised,
Five Nymphs they were: who having sacrifis'd
Ten beeues, invited to their festival
The rural Gods; my self forgot by all.
At this my surges swell. I, then as great
As ever, with enraged waters fret.
The woods from woods, and fields from fields I tear
With them, the Nymphs (now mindful of me) bear
In exile to the Deep: whose waves, with mine,
That then united mass of earth dis-ioyne
Into as many pieces as in seas
Are of the flood embraced Echin^des.
Yet see one I Will, far, o far off removed!
Called Perim^le; once by me beloved.
I, from this Nymph, her virgin honor took
R^^^damas his daughter could not brook:
(...) cast her from a rock into the Deep.
Whom while my thickened streams from sinking keep;
(...): O Neptune, thou that do command
^he wandering waves that beat upon the land;
To whom we Rivers run, in whom we end;
Incline a gentle care. I did offend;
In wronging whom I bear: if pious; he
Would both have pitied her, and pardoned me.
Her, whom his fury has from earth exiled,
And in the strangling waters drencht his child;
A place afford: or let her be a place
Which I may ever with my streams embrace.
His head the King of Surges forward shook:
And, in assenting, all the Ocean struck.
The Nymph yet swims; although with fear oppressed.
I laid my hand upon her parting breast:
While thus I handled her, I might perceive
The earth about her stifning body cleave.
Now, with a mass infolded, as she swims,
An Island rose from her transformed lims.
He held his peace. This admiration won
In all: derided by Ixions son:
By nature rough, and one who did despise
All able Gods: who said; Thou tel'st us lies,
And think the Gods too potent: as if they
Could give new shapes, or take our old away.
His saying all amazed and none approud'd:
Most Lelex, ripe in age and wisdom, moved.
Heavens power immense and endless, none can shun*
Said he; and what the Gods would do, is done,
To check your doubt; on Phrygian hills there grows
An Oak by a Line-tree, which old walls enclose.
My self this saw, while I in Phrygia staid;
By Pitthens sent: where erst his father swaid.
Hard by, a lake, once habitable ground;
Where Coots and fishing Cormorants abound.
Joue, in a humane shape; with Mercury;
(His heels vnwing'd) that way their steps apply.
Who guest-rites at a thousand houses crave;
A thousand shut their doors: One only gave.
A small thatch't Cottage: where, a pious wife
Old Baucis, and Phileman, led their life.
Both equall-ag'd. In this, their youth they spent;
In this grew old: rich only in content.
Who poverty, by bearing it, declind:
And made it easy with a cheerful mind.
None Master, not none Servant, could you call:
They who command, obey; for two were all.
Jove father came, with his Cyllenian mate;
And stooping, enters at the humble gate.
Sit down, and take your ease, Philemon said.
While busy Bau^is straw-stuft cushions laid:
Who stud abroad the glowing coals, that lay
In smothering ashes; ^ak't up yester-day.
Dry bark, and withered leaves, thereon she thrown*
Whose feeble breath to flame the cinders blows.
Then slender clests, and broken branches gets:
And over all a little kettle sets.
Her husband gathers cole-flowrs, with their leaves;
Which from his gretefull garden he receives:
Took down a flitch of bacon with a prung,
That long had in the smokie chimney hung:
Whereof a little quantity he cuts:
And it into the boiling liquor puts.
This seething; they the time beguile with speech:
Vnser ^word of stay. A bowl of beech,
There, by the handle hung upon a pin:
This (...) with warm water; and therein
Wash then feet. A moste-stuft bed and pillow
Lay on a homely bed steed made of willow:
A (...), only us d at feasts, they spread:
Though course, and old; yet fit for such a bed.
Down (...) the Gods. The palsie-snaken Dame
Sets forth a ta le with three legs; one lame,
And she^ter then the rest, a pot share reares:
This, now made level, with green mint she cleares.
Whereon they party-colored olives set,
Autumnall Cornels, in tart pickle wet;
Cool endiffe, radish, new eggs roasted rear,
And late-prest cheese; which earthen dishes bear.
A goblet, of the self same silver wrought;
And bowls of beech, with wax well varnisht, brought.
Hot victuals from the fire were forth with sent:
Then wine, not yet of perfect age, present.
This taken away; the second Course now comes:
Philberts, dry figs, with rugged dates, ripe plummes,
Sweet smelling apples, disht in osier twines;
And purple grapes new gatherd from their vines:
In The midst, a honey comb. Above all these;
A cheerful look, and ready will to please.
Meane-while, the Muple cup it self does fill:
And often exhausted, is replenisht still.
Astonished at the miracle; with fear
Philemon, and the aged Baucis, rear
Their trembling hands in prayre: and pardon crave,
For that poor entertainment which they gave.
One Goose they had, their cottaqes chief guard;
Which they to hospitable Gods award:
Who long their slow persuit deluding, flies
To Jupiter; so saved from sacrifice.
We Are Gods, said they; Revenge shall all undo:
Alone immunitie we grant to you.
Together leave your house; and to yon hill
Follow our steps. They both obey their will;
The Gods conducting; feebly both ascend;
Their stanes, with theirs; they, with times burden bend.
A slight-shot from the top, reuiew they take;
(...) Thus st^ming: Not the Goddesse-lou'd alone;
But though this were the Godesse, she should down:
And sweep the earth with her aspiring crown.
A he advanced his arms to strike; the Oak
(...) sighed and trembled at the threatening stroke.
His leaves and acornes pale together grew:
And colour-changing branches sweat cold deaw.
Then wounded by his impious hand, the blood
(...) from th'incision in a purple flood.
Much like a mighty ox, that falls before
The sacred altar; spouting streams of gore.
On all amazement seaz'd: when One of all
The came deterres; nor would his axe let fall.
^^ntracting his stern brows; Receive, said he,
Thy preties reward; and from the tree
The stroke converting, lops his head; then struck
The Oak again: from whence a voice thus spoke;
A Nymph am I, within this tree inshrin'd,
Releu'd ot Ceres. O profane of mind,
Vengeance is near thee. With my parting breath
I prophecy: a comfort to my death.
He still his guilt persues: who overthrows
With cabels, and innumerable blows.
The sturdy Oak: which, nodding long, down rusht;
And in ^^s lo^ty fall his fellows crushed.
Their sister, and their grove, the Nymphs lament;
Who h^d in sable stoles, to Ceres went;
On Eri^ch ^hen just revenge require.
who read^ly consents to their desire.
The faire-brow'd Goddess shakes her shining hairs:
With that, the fields shook all their golden ears.
Who to apitteous punishment proceeds,
(Had he had any pity in his deeds)
By staruing. But since not by fatal doom,
Ceres and Famine might together come:
A mountain Faery of the Oreades
Dispatcheth thither, with such words as these.
In frosty Scythia lies a land, forlorn
And barren; bearing neither fruit nor corn,
Numb Cold, pale Hew, chill Ague, there abide;
And fasting Famine. Bid the Fury glide
Into his cursed entrails, and devour
All plenty: let her rage subdue my power.
But lest long ways thy iourny tedious make:
My chariot and my yoked dragons take.
Taking her chariot; through the empty skies
To Scythia and rough Caucasus she flies.
There, in a stony field, sad Famine found;
Tearing with teeth and nails the foodlesse ground;
With snarled hair, sunk eyes, looks pale and dead,
Lips white with slime, thin teeth with rust ore-spred;
Hide-bound, through which her clinged guts appear;
Dry bones, in spare and crooked hips, vp-beare;
Her belly bellylesse: low hung her breast;
So lank, as if her bosom had no chest:
The rising knuckles falling flesh augment;
Round knees and ankles leanely eminent,
Espide far off (she durst not be so bold
To come too near) the Nymph her message told.
After a little stay, although she were*
Far off, although but now arrived there;
She famine felt. Who wheels about her Snakes*
And her high passage to Aemonia takes.
Famine obayes the Goddesses command;
Though their endeavors still opposed stand.
Who, by a tempest hurried through the skies,
Enters the wretches roose: besides him lies,
Then fast asleep: (for now Nights heavy charms
All eyes had closed) imbra'st himin her arms;
Her self infused; breathes on his face and breast:
And empty veins with hungers rage possessed.
This thus performed forsakes the fruitful earth:
And back returns to her abodes of dearth.
Sound Sleep as yet with pleasurable wings
On Frisichth^n gentle slumber flings.
Who dreams of feasts, extends his idle jaws;
With laboring teeth fantastically chawes.
Deludes his throat by swallowing empty fare:
And for affected food deuoures the air.
Awak't; hot famine raues through all his veins:
And in his guts, and greedy pallat reigns.
Forthwith; what Sea, what Earth, what Air affords,
Acquires: complains of staruing at full bords.
In banquets, banquets seeks. What might alone
Have Iownes and Nations fed; suffize not one.
Hunger increases with increast repast.
And as all rivers to the Ocean have;
Who thirsty still, drinks up the stranger floods:
As ravenous fires refuse no profferd foods;
Huge pyles receive; the more they have, the more
By much desire; made hungry with their store.
So (...) thou, of a mind profane,
Full dishes empties, and demands again.
Meat breeds in him an appetite to meat;
Who ever empty, still prepares to eat.
His bellies gulf his patrimonic wastes:
Consuming famine yet vnlesned lasts;
And his insatible throtes extent
Now all his wealth, into his bowels sent:
A daughter left, unworthy scuh a Sire,
The beggar sold to feed his hungers fire.
Her noble thoughts base servitude disdain:
Who now her hands extending to the Maine;
O thou that had my mayden-head, said she,
Thy ravished spoil from hated bondage free!
Neptune had this: who to her prayer consents.
And, though then by her master seen, preuents
His following search: transforming of his Rape
Into a man; maskt in a fishers shape.
Angler, her master said, that with thy bait
Conceal'st thy hook; so prosper thy deceit,
So rest the sea composed; so may the fish
Be credulous, and taken at thy wish;
As thou reueal'st her, who in garments, poor,
And ruffled hair, late stood upon this shore.
Fox here, but very now, I saw her stand:
Nor farther trace her footsteps in the sand.
She, Neptunes bounty finding; well a paid
To be inquired for her self; thus said.
Pardon me Sir, who e're you are; my eyes
Have been attentive on this exercise.
To win belief; so may the God of Seas
Assist my cunning in such arts as these
As late nor man nor maid I saw before
Your self, my self excepted, on this shore.
He credits, and beguiled, the shore forsook:
When she again her former figure took,
Her father, seeing she could change her shape*
Ost sold her; who as often made a escape.
Now hart-like, now a cow, a bird, a mare:
And fed his hunger with ill-purchast fare.
But when his malady all means had spent,
He gave the mischief a new nourishment.
Now to devour his proper flesh proceeds:
And by diminishing, his body feeds.
What need I dwell on foreign facts? even we
Can vary shapes, though limited they be
Now seem I as I am; ost like a Snake:
And many times a Bulls hornd figure take.
But while I horns assumed, one thus was broke,
As you behold. This, with a sigh, he spoke.
OVID'S METAMORPHOSIS. The ninth Book.
THE ARGUMENT.
A Serpont Achelous: now a Bull:
His senered Horn with plenty ever full.
Lichas a Rock^. Alcides sunk in flame,
Ascends a God. The labour^helping Damo
A Weesell. Lotis, flying lust, becomes
A Tree: the like sad Dryope intombes
Old Iolaus waxes young again.
Callinhoes Infants so^denly grow Men.
Byblis a weeping Fourtaine. Iphis now
A Boy, to Isis pays his maiden Vow.
He, who his high descent from Neptune draws,
Of his so sad a sigh demands the cause,
And maimed brow. When thus the God proceeds;
His dangling curles impald with quiuering reeds.
A heavy task you impose: his own disgrace
Who would revive? yet was it not so base
To be subdude, as noble to contend:
And such a Victor does my foil defend.
Have you not heard of faire-cheekt Deianire?
The enui'd hope of many: the desire
Of all that knew her. We, with others went
To Oeneus Court, to purchase his consent.
(...) More strong by twinning heirs. This death-borne crew
Growing in wounds; I tamed: and twice subdue.
What hope have thou, a forged Snake, to escape?
That f^^hest with others arms; and begst thy shape.
This said; my neck his grasping fingers clincht;
And s^ruz'd my throat; as if with pin^ers wrincht;
While from his gripes I strove my laws to pull.
Twice euer-come; now, like a furious Bull,
Once more his terrible affaults oppose.
His arms about my swelling chest he throws,
And following, backward hales: my foreheads birth
^ixt in the ground; and threw me on the earth.
My brow (that not sufficing) disadornes:
By breaking one of my engaged horns.
The Naiades with fruits and flowers this fill:
Good Plenty, in my Horn abounds still.
Here Ach^^^s ends. One louely-faire,
G^^t like Diana's Nymph, with flowing hair,
Came in; and brought the wealthy Horn; repleat
With Autumnes store, and apples after meat.
Day springs, and mountains shine with early beams.
His Guests depart: nor stay till peaceful streams
G'yde gently down, and keep the it bounded race.
When Ache^ous, his agrestick face
And maimed head within the current shrowds.
This blea^uh much his former beauty clouds:
All the complete. The rupture of his brows
He shades with flaggie wreathes, and ^allow boughs.
So Dianna, Ne^sus, was thy wrack:
A deadly arrow pre^^ng through thy back.
I (...), with his new wife; so Theves his course
D^cc^^g, ^anc ^ L^enus: apid sourse.
The big-swolne Streams increast with winters rain,
And full of turning gulfes, his Pass restrain.
For her he fears: though he selfe-feare abhord.
When strong-limd Nessus came, who knew the Ford;
And said; I safely will transport thy Bride:
Meane-while swim thou unto the otherside.
To him Alcides his pale wife betakes:
Who, fearing both the flood, and Nessus, quakes.
Charged with his quiver, and his Lions skin
(His club and bow before thrown over) in
The Heroes leapes, and said; How ever vast,
These waves, since under taken, shall be past.
And confident, nor seeks the smoothest ways:
Nor die declining his transcent delays.
Now over; stooping for his bow, he heard
His wives shrill shrecks; and Nessus saw, prepared
To violate his trust. Thou rauisher,
What hope, said he, can thy vain speed confer?
Holla, thou half a beast; with hold thy flight:
I pray thee hear; nor intercept my light.
It no respect of me can fix thy trust:
Yet, let thy Fathers wheel resh aine thy lust.
Nor shall thou escape revenge; how ever fleet,
Wounds shall ore-take thy speed, though not my feet.
The last, his deeds confirm; for as he fled,
An arrow struck his back: the barbed head
Past through his breast. Tug'd out, both vents extrude
Hot spinning gore, with Hydras blood imbrude.
This Nessis took: and softly said: yet I,
Alcides, will not unrevenged die.
And gave his Rape a vest, dipped in that gore:
This will (said he) the heat of love restore.
Long after (all the ample world possessed
With his great acts, and Iunos hate increast)
From razed O echalia hastening his remove,
To sacrifice unto Cenaean Jove:
Fames bablings Deianira's ears surprise
(Who falsehood ads to truth, and grows by lies)
How Io^e, Amphitryoniades
With love in thraul'd. Stung with this strong disease.
The troubled lover credits what she fears.
At first she nourishes her grief with tears:
Which weeping eyes diffuse. Then said; But why
Weep we? the Strumpet in these tears will joy.
Since come she will, some change attempt I must;
Before my bed be stained with her lust.
Shall I complain? be mute? shift houses? stay?
Return to Calydon, and give her way?
Or call to mind that I am sister to
Great Meleager, and some mischief do?
What injured woman; what the sploenefull woe
Of ^elousie; or harlots death, can show?
Her thoughts, long toyld with change, now fixed stood
To send the garment dipped in Nessus blood;
To quicken fainting love. The Present she
To Lycas gave (as ignorant as he)
And her own sorrow. Who, with kind commends,
The robe to her suspectlesse husband sends.
Which now the sacrificing Heroes wore:
Wrapped inn the poison of Echidna's gore.
Who praying, newborn flames with incense fed:
And bowls of wine on marble altars shed.
The spreading mischief works: with heat lissolu'd,
The manly limbs of Hercules inuolu'd.
Who, whilst he could, with usual fortitude
His groans suppressed. All patience now subdew'd
With such extremes; the altar down he flings:
And shady Octe with his clamor rings.
Forthwith to tear the torture off, he strives.
The riuen robe, his skin that lines it, riues;
Or to his limbs inseperable cleaues;
Or his huge bones and sinews naked leaves.
As fire-red steel in water drencht; so toils
His hissing blood, and with hot poison boyles.
No mean! the greedy flames his bowels fret;
And all his body flows with purple sweat:
His scorched sinews crack, his marrow fries.
Then, to the stars his hands advancing, aries.
Feast, Juno, on our harms. O from on high
Behold this plague! thy cruel stomach cloy.
If foes may pity purchase (such are we)
This life, with torments cras'd; long sought by thee;
And borne to toil, deprive. For death would prove
To me a blessing: and a Step-dames love
May such a blessing give. Have I this gained
For slain Busiris who Jove's temple stained
With strangers blood? That from Anteus took
His mothers aid? Whom Geryans triple look,
Nor thine, o Cerberus, could once dismay?
These hands, these made the Cretan Bull obey.
Your labors, Elis; smooth Stymp^ation floods,
Confess with praises; and Partheni^n woods.
You got the golden belt of Thermodon:
And apples from the sleeplesse Dragon won.
Nor Cloud-borne Centaures, nor the Arcadian Bore,
Could me re^ist: nor Hydra wa^ her store
Of frig^tfull heads; which by their loss increast.
I, when I saw the Th^acian Horses feast
With humane flesh, their mangers ouer-threw:
And with his steeds, their wicked Master slew.
These hands the Nen^ean Lion choakt: these queld
Huge Cacus: and these shoulders heaven vpheld.
Jove's cruel wife grew weary to impose;
I never to perform. But ^ these woes,
This new found plague, no virtue can repel;
No^ arms, nor weapons! Hungry flames of hell
Shoot through my veins, and on my liver prey.
And yet Eurys^h^us thriues: and some will say
That there be Gods! Here his complaints he ends,
And high-raisd steps ore lofty Oeta bends,
Hu^^ied with anguish^ lik a Bull that bears
A wounding iauelin; whom the wounder fears.
Often should you see him quake, often groan, often striving
To te^re his garments; solid trees vp-riuing,
Enraged with the mountains, and to rear
His sco^^hed arms unto his fathers sphere.
H^d in a hollow rock, he Lycas spies:
When torture had possessed his faculties
With all her furies Lycas did thou give
This ho^id gift, said he? Think thou to live;
And I die ^y thy treason? While he quakes,
Looks ghastly pale, unheard excuses makes;
While yet he spoke, while to his knees he clung
Caught by the heels, about his head thrice swong,
Him into deep Eubaean surges threw
(As engines stones) who hardened as he flew.
As fa^ling (...) congeald with freezing winds
Convert to snow, as snow together binds,
And rouling round in solid hail descends:
So while the air his forced body rends,
Bloodlesse with terror, all his moisture gone;
Those times his change produced ^^^gid stone.
And still within Eub^as gulphy (...):
A short rock lies, which man's proportion ^eepes.
Whereon the mariners forbear^ to (...),
As sensitive. And this they (...).
But thou, Jove's God-like (...) with store
Of trees advanced, which lofty (...)
Thy bow and ample (...)
Those arrows that against must visit Troy)
Bequeath'st to (...): who catching fire
Puts to the Pyle. While greedy (...) aspire;
Thou on the top thy (...) did spread:
And lay thereon (thy (...) thy head)
With such a look; as if (...)
Amidst full goblets, (...).
Now all embracing (...) made:
And their Contem^^ (...) invade.
The Gods much thought (...) Defender took:
When thus Saturnius, with a (...) look:
This grief, you Gods, is (...) with all
Our soul we joy, that (...) call
Us King and Father (...),
And of our progeny (...).
For though his (...),
You us oblige. (...)
Your loyal (...):
Who conquered all, (...)
Vul^an his (...) shall but (...)
For that is immortal which from us be drew;
(...) Or if I lie, may my green branches fade:
And, feld with axes, on the fire be laid,
This I^fant from his dyi^g mother bear
To son^e kind Nurse: and often let him here
Be fed with milk; often in my shadow play.
Let him salute my tree; and sadly say.
(When he can speak) This Lotis does contain
My dearest mother: Yet let him refrain
All lakes; nor ever dare to touch a flower:
But think that every tree inshrines a Power.
Dear Husband, Sister, Father, all farewell.
Since you I know in piety excel,
Suffer no axe to wound my tender boughs;
Nor on my leaves let hungry cattaile brouse.
And since I cannot unto you decline,
Ascend to me; and join your lips to mine.
My little son, while I can kiss, advance.
But fate cuts off my failing utterance.
For now the softer rine my neck ascends:
And round about my leauy top extends.
Remove your hands: without the ^elpe of those,
The wrapping bark my dying eyes will close.
So left to speak, and be. Yet humane heat
In her changed body long retained a seat.
While (...) this story told; her eyes,
Glazed with her tears, the kind Alemena dryes;
And weeps her self. Behold, a better change
With joy defers their sorrow: nor less strange.
For Io^aus, twice a youth, came in:
The doubtful down now budding on his chin.
Fair Hebe, at her husbands suit, on thee
This gift bestowed. About to swear that she
Would never give the like; wise Themis said,
Forbear; War raues in Th^bes by Discord swayd:
And Capaneus but by Jove alone
Can be subdude. The brothers then shall groan
With mutual wounds. The sacred Prophet, lost
In swallowing earth, alive shall see his Ghost.
His Sons red hands his Mothers life extract
TO appease his Sire: a just and wicked fact.
Rapt from his home and senses, with th'affright
Of staring Furies, and his mothers Sprite,
Until his wife the fatal gold demands:
The kinsman murdered by Phegides hands.
Then Acheloian Callirrh^a
Shall Jove improtune, that her infants may
Be turned to men: and due revenge require
(As he, for his) of those who slew their sire;
Her prayers shall win consent from Jove: who then
Will bid thee make C^llirr^o^'s children men.
This, Themis with prophetic rapture sung.
Among the Gods a grudging murmur sprung,
Why she this gift should not to others give*
Aurora for her (...) does grieve*
Ceres complains of I^s^us (...)
Vulcan would (...);
And cares of time to c^^e in (...)
That her An^hise^ might wa^ young a^^ine.
All sue for some: seditious (...) strove
In hight of ^^mult; thus oppressed by Jove.
What mutter you? Or where is your respect?
Think you, you can the power of fate subject?
Old Iolaus was by fate renewed:
By fate Callirrhoe's babes shall be indew'd
What will become of me (she weeping said)
Whom new, unknown, prodigious ^oues invade!
If pitiful, the Gods should have destroi^d:
Or else have given what might have been inioy'd.
No Cow a Cow, no Mare a Mare persues:
But Hearts their gentle Hindes, and Rams their Ewes.
So Birds together pair. Of all that move,
No Female suffers for a Female ^oue.
O would I had no being! Yet, that all
Abhord by Nature should in Creet befall;
Sol's lust-incensed daughter loved a Bull:
They male and female. Mine, o far more full
Of uncouth fury! for she pleased her blood;
And stood his error in a Cow of wood:
She, to deceive, had an adulterer.
Should all the world their daring wits confer:
Should Dedalus his waxen wings renew,
And hither fly; what could his cunning do*
Can art convert a virgin to a boy?
Or fit I^nt he for a maidens joy?
No, fix thy mind; compose thy vast desires:
O quench these ill-aduis'd and foolish fires!
Or know thy self, or Selfe-deceit accuse:
What may be, seek; and love as virgins use.
Hope wings Desire; hope Cupids ^light sustaines:
In thee thy Sex this deads. No watch restraines
Out dear embrace, nor husbands iealousies,
Nor rigorous Sires; nor she her self denies:
Yet not to be inioy'd. Nor can thou be
Happy in her; though men and Gods agree!
Now also all to my desires accord:
What they can give, the easy Gods afford;
What me, my Father, he^s, her self would please,
Displeases Nature; stranger than all these.
She, she forbids. That day begins to shine;
Long wished! wherein I^^the must be mine:
And yet not mine. Of mortals most accursed!
I starve at feasts, and in the river thirst.
Juno, o Hymen, where (...) are you come?
We both are Brides: but where is the Bridegroom?
Here ended. Nor less burne^ the other Maid;
Who, Hymen, for thy swift appearance praid.
Yet Telethusa fears what thou affects;
Protracting time: often want of health objects;
Ill-boading dreams, and auguries often ^aines:
But now no color for excuse remains.
Their nuptial rites, put of^ with such delay;
Were to be solemni^'d the following day.
When she vnbind^, (...) hair;
And holding by the (...).
Isis; who Para^^^^^ (...)
Smooth M^^cotis, and seven (...)
Chear'st with thy presence: thy poor suppliants hear:
O help in these extremes, and cure our fear!
Thee Goddess, thee of old; these ensigns, I
Have seen, and know: thy lamps, attendancie,
And sounding (...): and have thee obaid.
To me, impunity* ^^fe, to this maid,
Thy saving counsel gave: to both (...)
Thy timely pity. Tears her word^ pursue.
The Goddess shakes her Altar; when the gate
Shook on the hinges: horns that imitate
The waxing Moons, through all the Temple flung
A sacred splendour: noyse-full Timbrels rung.
The Mother, glad of this successful sign,
Though not secure, returns from Isis shrine.
Whom Iphis f^llowes with a larger pace
Then usual; nor had so white a face.
Her strength augments; her look more bold appears;
Her shortning curles scarce hang beneath her ears;
More courage has, then, when a wench, she had:
For thou, of late a Wench, art now a Lad.
Gifts to the temple bear, and I^ sing!
Sing Joy! Their gifts unto the Temple bring;
And add a title in one verse displaid:
What Iphis vowed a Wench, a Boy he pai'd.
The Morning Night dismasks with welcome flame:
When Juno, Vinus, and free Hymen came
To grace their marriage; who, with gifts divine,
Iphis the Boy, to his (...) join.
OVID'S METAMORPHOSIS. The tenth Book.
THE ARGUMENT.
Fear turns a (...) to (...). Lethra's blame
Olenus bears: (...); their shapes the same.
Vex^ Cybele to Pi^^ her Atys turns.
Sweet Cypariss^s in a Cypres^^ (...).
En^moured Jove at (...) wings display^^;
And (...)
Slain Hyac in^hus sighs in his new (...).
The cruel Sacrific^rs by the power
Of Venus turned to Bulls. The Proctiture
To Stones. Pyg^alion wives the living fruit
Of his (...) Art. (...) does shine
In (...) to the Virgin Sign.
Myrrha, (...) Tree. Hippomenes
And Atalanta, Lions. Cyprides
(Informed by Mentha's change) her (...)
Turns to a fair, has quickly (...) flower.
HEnce to the Ci^^es through boundless skies,
In saffron mantle, Hymo^^us (...):
By Orp^^^^ called. But neither usual words,
Nor cheerful looks, (...) happy signs affords.
The torch his hand sustained, still sputtering raised
A tearefull smoke: nor yet, though shaken, bla^'d.
The Event worse then the Omen. As his Bride
Troops with the Nai^des by Hebrus side;
A Serpent bit her by the heel: which forced
Life from her hold, and nuptial ties diuorc't.
Whom when the Thracian Poet had above
Enough bewailed; that his complaints might move
The under Shades, at Taenarus descends
To S^ygian floods; and his bold steps extends
By ayrie Shapes, and fleeting Souls, that boast
Of sepulture, through that unpleasant coast
To Plutos Court. When, having tuned his strings,
Thus to his harp the God-like Poet sings.
You Powers that sway the world beneath the Earth;
The last abode of all our humane birth:
If we the truth without offense may tell;
I come not hither to discover Hell,
Nor bind that scolding Curre, who barking shakes
About his triple brows Medusa's snakes.
My wife this journey urged: who, by the tooth
Of trod-on Viper, perished in her youth.
I would, and strove to have borne her loss: but Love
Won in that strife. A God well known above:
Nor here, perhaps, unknown. If truly Fame
Report old rapes, you also felt his flame.
By these obscure abodes, so full of dread;
By this huge Ch^^s, and deep Silence, sp^^^d
Through your vast Empire; by these prayers of mine;
Eury^ices too-hasty fate vatwine.
We all are yours: and after a short stay;
Early, or late; we all must run one way.
Hither we throng; for our last home assigned:
The Eternal habitation of mankind.
She, when her time by nature shall expire,
Again is yours: I but the use desire.
If Fate deny me this, my second choice
Is here to abide: in both our deaths rejoice.
While thus he sung, and struck the quauering strings,
The bloudlesse Shadows wept: not flattering Springs
Tempt Tantalus; Ixions Wheel stood still;
Their Vrne the Belides no longer fill:
The Vultures feed not; Tityus lest to groan:
And Sisyphus sat listening on his Stone.
The Furies, vanquished by his verse, were seen
To weep, that never wept before. Hels Queen,
The king of darkness yield to his powrefull plea.
Among the late-come Souls, E^rydice
They call: she came; yet halting of her wound.
Given Orpheus, with this law: Till thou the bound.
Of pale Auernus pass, if back thou cast
Thy careful eyes, thou loosest what thou have.
A steep ascent, dark, thick with fogges, they clime
Through everlasting Silence. By this time
Approach the confines of illustrious Light.
Doubting her loss, and longing for a sight,
His eyes the impatient lover backward threw:
When she, back sliding, presently withdrew.
He catches at her, in his wits distraught;
And yielding air for her (unhappy!) caught.
Nor did she, dying twice, her spouse reprove:
For what could she complain of, but his love?
Who takes her last farewell: her parting breath
Scarce reached his ears; and so (...) for d^^th.
Her double loss sad Orpheus stupiside;
With equal terror unto his, who spide
(...) About the pleasant fields in pleasure ride;
And with a purple reign the willing guide.
'T was Summer, and high Noone: Days burning eye
Made smoking Cancers crooked claws to fry.
Upon the ground the panting Heart was laid:
Cool air receiving from the syluan shade.
Whom silly Cyparissus wounds by chance:
And seeing life pursue his tug'd out lance,
Resolves to die. What did not Phoebus say,
That might a grief, so slightly caused, allay?
He answers him in sight: this last good-turne
Implores; That he might never cease to mourn.
His blood now shed in tears, a greenish hiew
His body dimmes: the locks that dangling grew
Upon his iuory forehead bristling use;
And pointing upward, seem to threat the skies.
When Phoebus; sighing: I for thee will mourn:
Mourn thou for others: Herses still adorn.
Such trees attracting; and inuiron'd round
With birds and beasts, upon the rising ground
The Poet sits: who, having tuned his strings,
Indissonancie musical, thus sings.
From Jove, o Mother Muse, derive my verse;
All bow to Jove: Ieues power we o^t rehearse.
And late of Giants sung, in lofty strains,
For^^d^ y his thunder on Phiegraean plains.
N^w in a lower key, to lovely boys
Beloved of Gods, turn we our softer lays.
And sing of women's furies, who pursue
For breden lusts: persude by Vengeance due.
Heavens King, young Ganymed inflames with love:
There was what Jove would rather be than Jove.
Yet daines no other shape than hers, that bears
His awful lightning in her golden seares.
Who forth with stooping with deceitful wings,
Trust up Iliades by Ida's springs.
Who now, for Jove (though jealous Juno scoules)
Delitious Nectar fills in flowing bowls.
And thee Amyclides, in azure skies
Had Phoebus fixed; if cruel Destinies
Had not prevented: yet in some sort made
Eretnall. For, as often as Springs invade
Sharp winters; and to Aries Pisces yields:
So often renu'd, thy Flower adorn the fields.
Thee loved my Father, best of humane births.
Her Guardian quits his Delphos, in wide Earths
Round nauill seated: while the God of Beams
Haunts wall-lesse Sparta, and Eure^as streams.
Now neither for his Harp, nor Quiver, cares:
Himself debasing, bears the corded snares;
Or leads the dogs; or clambers mountains; led
By Lordly Love, and flames by custom fed.
Now Titan bore his equal distant Light,
Between fore-running and ensuing Night:
When lightened of their garments, either shone
With suppling Oil, in strife to throw the stone.
This swinging through the air first Phoebus threw:
The obuious clouds dispersing as it flew;
On solid earth, though flying long, at length
Descends; enforced by art-inabling strength.
Th'imprudent Boy attempts with fatal have
To take it up; when Earth, by boundings, cast
The Globe, o Hyacinthus, at thy head.
The Boy locked pale; and so the God, who bled
(...) Their looks imboldned, modesty now gone,
Convert at length to little-differing Stone.
Pygmalion seeing these to spend their times
So beast-like; frighted with the many crimes
That rule in women; chose a single life:
And long forbore the pleasure of a wife.
Mean while, injoury with happy art
A Statue carues; so shapefull in each part,
As woman never equaled it: who stands
Affected to the fabric of his hands.
It seemed a Virgin, full of living flame;
That would have moved, if not withheld by shame,
So Art it self concealed. His art admires;
From The Image draws imaginary fires:
And often feels it with his hands, to try
If 'twere a body, or cold iuory.
Not could resolve. Who kissing, thought it kissed:
Often courts, embraces, wrings it by the wrist;
The flesh impressing (his conceit was such)
And fears to hurt it with too rude a touch.
Now flatters her; now sparkling stones presents,
And orient pearl (loves witching instruments)
Soft-singing birds, each several colored flower,
First Lillies, painted balls, and tears that power
From weeping trees. Rich Robes her person deck;
Her fingers, rings; reflecting chains her neck;
Pendants her ears; a glittering zone her breft.
In all, showed well; but showed, when naked, best.
Now lays he her upon a gorgeous bed:
With carpets of Sidonian purple spread.
Now calls her wife. Her head a pillow pressed
Of plumy down, as if with sense possessed.
Now came the day of Venus Festival:
Through wealthy Cypr^s solemnized by all.
White heifers, decked with golden horns, by strokes
Of axes fall: ascending incense smokes.
He, with his gift, before the Altar stands:
You Gods, if all we crave be in your hands,
Give me the wife I wish: one like, he said,
But durst not say, give me my iuory Maid.
The golden Venus, present at her Feast,
Conceiues his wish; and friendly fignes expressed:
The fire thrice blasing, sparkling thrice on high.
He hastes to his admired Imag'ne:
Couches besides her, raised her with his arm;
Then kissed her tempting lips, and found them warm.
That lesson often repeates; her bosom often
With amorous touches feels, and fe^t it soft,
The iuory dimpled with his singers, lacks
Accustomed hardness: as Hymettian wax
Relents with heat, which chasing thombs reduce
To pliant forms, by handling framed for use.
Amazed with doubtful joy, and hope that reeles;
Again the Lover, what he wishes, feels.
The veins beneath his thumbs impression beat:
A perfect Virgin full of juice and heat.
The Cyprian Prince with ioy-enhightned words,
To pleasure-giuing Venus thanks affords.
His lips to hers he ioynes, which seem to melt:
The blushing Virgin now his kisses felt;
And fearfully erecting her fair eyes,
Together with the light, her Lover spies.
Venus was present at the match she made.
And when nine Crescents had at full displaide
(...) Would I? it will not: he too well inclined.
O that like fury would inflame his mind!
Thus she. But Cinyras, pressed with the store
Of worthy suitors who his voice implore;
In his own choice irresolute, demands
(Their names rehearsing) how her fancy stands.
She, thoughtfull silent; gazing on his face,
Flusht with imbosom'd flames, and wept apace.
He, taking this for maiden fear; Desist
From weeping, said: then dride her cheeks, and kissed;
Too much she ioyos. Again demanded, who
She best could like: replyde, One, like to you.
Be still, said he, so pious. At that name
She hung the head, as conscious of her blame.
'T was now the mid of night: when Sleep bestows
On men; and on their cares, a sweetrepose.
But Myrrba watches, rapt with tamelesse fires;
Retracting her implacable desires.
Despaires, hopes; will not, will; now shames, again
Desires; nor knows what course to take. As when
A mighty Oak (one blow behind) his fall
On each side threatens; and is feared on all:
Even so her mind, impaired with various wounds,
Waves to and fro; and changes still propounds.
No mean, no cure, was left for love but death:
Death pleased. Resolved to choke her hated breath;
Vp-starting, to a beam her girdle ties.
Dear Cinyras fare well (she softly cries)
And of my ruin understand the cause.
That said, the noose about her neck she draws.
Her wakefull Nurses faithful cares, they say,
A whispering heard: who in the Lobby lay.
Straight rose; unlocked the doors; the instrument
Of death beholding, sereecht: together rent
Her hair and bosom: and, with trembling haste,
The girdle from her pallid nocke displac't.
Now had she time to weep; t'imbrace her Care:
And ask the cause of such accursed despair.
She silent, fixes on the earth her eyes:
And grieves at deaths prevented enterprise.
^aring her horie hairs and empty breast,
The Nurse, by her first food, and cradle, pressed
Her griefs disclosure. Myrr^a turns aside,
And sighs. The Nurse would not be so denide:
Nor only promised secrecy; but said:
Tell me, my child, and entertain my aid.
My old age is not fruitless: charms have we,
And powerful medcines, if it fury be:
If witchcraft; magic shall thy torments ease:
If wrath of Gods, the Gods we will appease
With sacrifice. What can be else su^miz'd?
Thy fortunes by incursions vnsurpriz'd;
Thy mother, and thy father, well? That Name
Drew from her soul a sigh, that soorcht like flame.
Nor in the Nurse did this suspicion move
Of such a crime: and yet she saw 'twas Love.
Importunate to know what least she fears,
Laid in her lap surrounded with her tears,
Sh'infolds her in her feeble arms, and said;
I know thou lou'^s;t: wherein (nor be afraid)
Thou may on my sedulity rely:
Nor shall thy father ever this descry.
At that, in fury from her lap she sprung;
Then on the bed her prostrate body flung;
(...) As swift as Scythian shafts; her for me he more
Admires; by motion louelier than before.
The wind reuerberates her ankles wings,
And whiskes her ham-bound buskins purple strings,
Tossing her hair, on iuory shoulders spread.
Her pure white body so assumes the red;
As when carnation curtains are displayed
On pure white walls, and dye them with their shade,
While this the stranger viewed the race was run:
And A^alanti's brows the garland won.
The vanquished sigh, and pay their forfeiture.
Nor could so sad success his fear procure:
Who rose; and fixing on the Maid his eyes;
Why seek you praise by easy victories?
Contend with us: if we obtain the Bays,
Our victory will not eclipse your praise.
Megareus, me begor, Orchastius blood;
He Neptunes, Ruler of the sacred Flood:
Nor we degenerate. My foil, your name
Will honor; and immortalize your fame.
This while, a well-pleased eye She on him threw:
Nor knows her wish: to lose, or to subdue.
What God, a Foe to beauty, would destroy
This Youth, said she, who seeks my bed t'inioy
With his life's forfeiture? If I may be
The judge, there is not so much worth in me.
Nor is it his beauty moves, though it might move;
But that a Boy. We pity, and not love.
Besides; his courage, and contempt of death!
But once removed from Neptunes sacred birth!
And then, his Love; content to part with life,
If harder, fate deny me for his wife!
Begone, o Stranger; shun my bloody bed,
While yet thou may: this Match will cost thy head.
No Virgin is there who would not be thine:
And such would seek, whose lusters darken mine.
Yet why regard I him, so may slain?
Look to thy self, or perish: since in vain
Admonisht by such numbers, whom this strife
Has sent to death. You Are weary of thy life.
And must be die, because he would lieu with me?
Must death, aduenturous Love, thy wages be?
This murder will our victory defame;
And purchase hate: yet am not I in blame.
O would thou would desist, and danger shun!
Or since so mad, would thou could faster run!
How Boy and Virgin revel in his face!
Ah poor Hipp^^nenes! O would this place,
Thou Had never seen I thou well deseru'st to line.
Were I more happy, and hard fate would give
Me leave to marry; thou art He alone,
To whom my bed and bennies should be known.
Thus she: Who raw, and pierced with Loves first touch,
Erres in her thoughts; and loves; nor knew so much.
Now King and People call upon the Race:
When Neptunes Issue thus implored my grace.
O Venus, favor my attempts, he said:
And those affections, which you gave me, aid!
This friendly winds conuey'd unto my care:
I pity, and no longer help for bear.
A field there is, so fertile none, through all
Rich Cyprus; which they Damoscenus call.
Antiquity this to my honor vowed:
And therewith all my Temples had endowed.
(...) OVID'S METAMORPHOSIS. The Eleventh Book.
THE ARGUMENT.
A Serpent changed to Stone. Rough barks infold
The cruel Bacchanals. To sharuing Gold
All turns at Midas touch: He'^ body laues
In clear Pactolus, whose enriched (...)
Wash off his gold and gilt: an Asso^ (...)
H^ f^lly shame: the whispred Secre^ bears
Like sounding Reeds. Apollo, and the Guide
Of sacred S^as, in humane shapes reside.
Fore't Thetis varies forms. Daedalion
(...) Faleon turned. A Wolf (...) deo (...).
Morpheus to mortals, Phobetor to Brutes,
And Phantasus to shapes inanimate suits.
Transformed Halcyone and Ceyx fiye
So Aesacus, who vai^ly strives to dye.
THus while the Thracian Poet with his songs
Beasts, trees, and stones, attracts in following throngs:
Behold, Ciconian dames (their furious breasts
Clad with the spotted skins of saluage beast^)
The Sacred Singer from a hill espied,
As he his dittie to his Harp applied.
Of these, One scream'd, and tossed her flairing hair
See, see the Woman-hater! then her spear
Threw at his vocal mouth; which iuie-bound,
Kissed his affected lips without a wound.
An Other hurles a stone; this, as it flew,
His voice and Harpes according tunes subdue:
Which selfe-accus'd for such a rude assay,
Before his feet, as in submission, lay:
Rash violence, the mean exiled, increast:
And mad Erin^ys reigned in every breast.
His songs had all their weapons charmed, if noise
Of Ber^cynthian Shalmes, clapped hands, loud cries,
Drum, howling Bacchanals, with frantic sound
Had not his all-appeasing music drowned.
The stones then blush with silenst Orpheus blood.
But first on ravished beasts that listening stood,
On foul, and Serpents, they their spite infer;
And raze the glory of his Theater.
Then all with cruel hands about him fly:
And flock, like birds, when they by day espy
The bird of Night. And as a Stag at bay,
In early Spectacle given to the pray
Of eager hounds; assail, together flung
Their leauie spears, not framed for such a wrong.
Some clods, some arms of trees, some stones advance:
And lest wild Rage should weapons want, by chance
Not far off Oxen drew the furrowing ploughes;
And Swains, providing food with sweating brows,
Their brawny arms employed: who feare-inclinde,
before them fled, and left their tools behind.
Their mattockes, rakes, and spades, dispersed lay
About the empty fields: these snatched away,
(The oxens ho^nes torn from their skuls) their hate
(...) them back unto the Poets fate.
Thee, holding up thy hands, who n'et before
Besought'st in vain, now to prevail no more,
That Rout of sacrilegious Furies slew!
Even through that mouth (o Jupiter!) which drew
From stones attention, which affection bred
In saluage beasts, his forced spirits fled!
Sad birds, wild Herds, hard flints, and woods which often
Removed to hear thee, wept: trees weeping doft
Their pallid leaves; streams with their tears increast:
The Naiades and Dryades inuest
Their loins in sullen fable, and display
Their scattered hair. Thy limbs dispersed lay.
Hebrus had head and Harp: as borne along
The Harp sounds something, sadly; the dead tongue
Sighs out sad dieties: the banckes sympathy;
That bound the river in their sad reply.
Now borne to Sea, from native streams they drive;
And at Methymuian Lesbos shore ariue.
A Dragon on the foreign sand prepares
To seize his head, and lick his dropping hairs.
When gaping to devour the Hymnists face,
Phoebus descen^^; and in that very space
Into a Stone conuerts him by his power,
With jaws extended ready to devour.
His Ghost retires to vnder-shades: once more
He sees, and knows, what he had seen before.
Then through the Elysian fields among the blessed
Seeks his Eurydice. Now repossest
With strict embraces, guided by one mind.
They walk together: often the comes behind,
Often goes before: now Orphens safely may
His following Eurydice suruay.
Yet would not ^accebus so remit their hate:
Who vexed for his Prophets cruel fate,
Fixed all the Edonian Dames that then were by
With spreading roots; and who more eagerly
Persudo his death, their toes he deeper drew
Within the sollid earth, which downward grew.
And even as foul whose feet entangled are
Within the subtle Fowlers secret snare
Become by fearful fluttering faster bound:
So, each of these, now cleaving to the ground,
With terror struggle to escape in vain;
For faster-binding roots their flight restrain.
One, looking for her nails, her toes, her feet:
Behold, her twinning legs in timber meet:
In passion, thinking to have struck her thighs,
She strikes hard oak; hard oak her breast supplies;
Her shoulders such: her arms appear to grow
In natural branches; and indeed did so.
Not thus content, their fields Lyaeus leaves:
Whom Tmolus, with a better crew, receives,
And swift Pactolus, who did then infold
No precious sands, nor grains of enui'd gold.
Satyrs and Bacchanals make their repair,
His vsualleraine: Silenus then not there.
Him ^rst the Phrygian rurals reeling found
With age and wine; and now, with iuie crowned,
To Midas bring: whom Orphens Orgies taught,
And sage Eu^nulpus from C^cr^pis brought.
When known to be his partner in those Rites;
Full twice five days, with their succeeding nights,
He entertained him with a sumptuous feast.
Eleven times Luciser the stars suppressed:
When, with wild mirth, he treads the Lydian fields;
And to the God his Foster-father yields.
He in his safe receipt does much rejoice:
Whose bounty Midas frustrates by his choice.
For, willed to wish; Let all, said he, I touch
Convert to go'd. His ignorance was such
Forthwith his hurtful wish Lyaus gives:
And at his folly not a little grieves.
But in his curle the Berecynthian joys:
And home-ward bound, the truth by touching tryes.
Scarce trusts himself. Who from a tree bereaues
A slender branch; this shone with golden leaves.
Takes up a stone,; that stone pale gold became:
Takes up a clod, the clod presents the same:
Crops stalks of corn; they yield a snea^e of gold:
An apple pulls; there in you might behold
The Hesperian purchase: touched by him alone,
The marble pillars with rich metal shone.
And when he washed his hands; that, showered in rain,
Might simple Dan^^ have deceived again.
His breast scarce holds his hopes; whose fancy wrought
On golden wonden: when his servants brought
Meat to the table. Sooner had not he
Touched Ceres bounty, but that proved to be
A shining mass: assumed viands straight
Between his greedy teeth convert to plate.
About to drink mixed wine; you might behold
His thirsty jaws o're-flow with liquid gold.
Struck with so strange a plague; both rich and poor;
He hates, and shuns the wealth he wished before.
No plenty hunger feeds; he burns with thirst:
In loathed gold deservedly accursed.
Then, lifting up his shining arms, thus praid:
Father Lenaeus, o afford thy aid!
I have offended; pity thou: and me
From this so beautiful a mischief free.
The gentle Power accepts his penitence:
And for his faith, does with his gift dispense.
Lest ill-wisht gold about him still abide.
Go, said he, to those Cristall streams that glide
By potent Sardis: keep the banks that lead
A long th'incountring Current to his head.
There, where the gushing fountain fomes, diue in:
And, with thy body, wash away thy sin.
The King obeyes: who in the fountain leaves
That golden virtue, which the Spring receives.
And still those ancient seeds these waters hold:
Who gild their shores with glittering grains of gold
He, hating wealth, in woods and fields bestows
His time with Pan: whom mountain Caves enclose.
Yet his g^osse wit remains: his shallow brain
An sottish senses punish him again.
High Tmolus with a steep ascent unfolds
His rigid brows, and vnder-seas beholds:
Whose stretch-out bases here to Sardis join;
There to Hypaepis, girt in small confine.
Where boasting Pan, while he his verse does praise
To tender Nymph, and pipes to his rural lays;
Before Apollo's durst his songs prefer.
They meet (ill-matcht) great Tmolus arbiter.
The old Judge on his own Mountain sits; and cleares
His ears from trees: alone a garland wears
Of Oak, with acorns dangling on his brow.
Who thus bespake the God of Shepherds: Now
Your Judge attends. He blows his wax-bound reeds:
And Midus fancy with rude numbers feeds.
Then sacred Tmolus to divine Apollo
Conuerts his looks: his woods his motion follow.
He, his long yellow hair with laurel bound,
Clad in a Tyr^an robe that swept the ground,
A Violl holds, with sparkling gemmes in chac't
And Indian teeth; the bow his right hand graced.
A perfect Artist showed. The strings then struck
With cunning hand: With his sweet music took,
Tmolus bids Pan his vanquished reeds resign.
All in the holy Mountains sentence join,
But Midas only; whose exclaimes traduce
The Censure. Phoebus for this gross abuse
Transformes his ears, his folly to declare:
Stretched out in length, and covered with gray hair:
Instable, and now apt to move. The rest
The former figure of a man possessed.
Punished in that offending part: who bears.
Upon his skull a slow-pac't Asses ears
He strives to cover such a foul defame:
And with a red Tiara hides his shame.
But this his servant saw that cut his hair:
Who big with secrets, neither durst declare
His Sovereigns seen deformity, not yet
Could hold his peace. Who digs a shallow pit,
And therein softly whispers his disgrace:
Then turning in the earth, forsook the place.
A tuft of whispering Reeds from thence there grows;
Which coming to maturity, disclose
The husbandman: and by soft South-winds blown
Restore his words, and his Lords ears make known.
Revenged Apollo, leaving Tmolus, flies
Through liquid air; and on the land which lies
On that side Helles straightened surges stands:
Where far-obey'd La^medon commands.
Below Rhoeaeu^, high above the flood,
And on the right hand of Sigaum, flood
An Altar vowed to Panomphaean Jove:
From whence He saw Laeomedon improve
New Troy's scarce founded walls; with what ado,
And with how great a charge they slowly grew.
Who, with the Father of the tumid Maine,
Indues a mortal shape: and entertain
Themselves for unregarded gold to build
The Pluygian Tyrants walls. That work fulfilled;
The King their promised reward denies:
And per^ury by swearing multiplies.
Reuengefull Neptune his wild waves unbound;
Which all the shores of greedy Troy surround,
And made the Land a Lake: the country Swain
His labor lost beneath that liquid Plain.
Besides the daughter of the King demands:
Who chained to a Rock exposed stands
To seed a Monster of the Sea; for free,
By strenuous Hercules. Yet could not He
The horses of Liom^don enjoy;
His valors hire: who sackes twice perjured Troy;
And gives his fellow Soldier Telamen
Hesione; for Poleus now had won
A Deity; nor in his Grandfather
Took greater pride, than in his Sire by her.
For Jupiter had Nephews more than one:
But he a Goddess had espoused alone.
For aged Proteus thus foretold the truth
To waue-wet Theth: Thou shall bear a Youth,
Who shall in glorious arms transcend his birth
And Fathers fame. Lest any thing on earth
Should be more great than Jove, Jove shuns the bed
Of Sea-thron'd Thetis, though her beauty led
His strong desires: who bids Aeacides
Succeed his love, and wed the Queen of Seas.
A Bay within Aemonia lies, that bends
Much like an arch, and fat-stretcht arms extends*
Which were, if deep, a harbor locked by land;
Where shallow seas over spread the yellow sand.
The sollid shore (where-on no sea-weed grows)
Nor clogs the way, nor print of footing shows.
Hand by, a myrtle grove affords a shade:
In this, a cave; though doubtful, rather made
By art than nature: hither Thetis swimmes
On Delphins backs, here ccucht her naked limbs.
In this the sleeping Goddess Peleus caught:
Who, when she could not by his words be wrougt,
Attempts to force, and claspt her in his arms.
And had she not assumed her usual charms
In varying shapes, he had his will obtained.
Now, turning to a foul, her flight restrained:
Now seems a massy tree adorned with leaves;
Close to the bole th'inamor'd Peleus cleaues.
A spotted Tygresse she presents at last:
When he, with terror struck, his arms vnclaspt.
Who pouring wine on seas, those Gods implores;
And with perfumes and sacrifice adore^:
Till the Carpathian Prophet raised his head,
And said; Aeacides, inicy her bed.
Do thou but bind her in her next surprise,
When in her gelid cave she sleeping lies:
And though she take a thousand shapes, let none
Dismay; but hold, till she resume her own.
This Proteus said, and diu'd to the Profound:
His latter word in his own waters drowned.
Now hasty Titan to Hesperian seas
Descends; when beauteous Thetis, bent to ease
Forsook the flood, and to her cave repaired.
No sooner she by Peleus was ensnared,
But forthwith varies forms; until she found
Her Virgin limbs within his fetters bound.
Then, spreading forth her arms, She sighing said,
Thou have subdude by some immortal aid;
And Thetis showed; nor his embrace repelled:
Whose pregnant womb with great Achilles swelled.
Happy was Peleus in his son and wife:
And had not Phocus murder soild his life,
All-fortunate. With brothers blood defiled,
Thee Tracbin harbors, from thy home exiled.
Where courteous Ceyx, free from rigor, reigned;
The son of Lucifer; whose looks retained
His fathers luster: then disconsolate,
Not like himself, for his lost brothers fate.
Hither, with travel tit'd, and clogged with cares,
The banished with a slender train repaires.
Mrs Hockes and Herds, with men for their defense,
Left in a s^adie vale not far from thence.
Conducted to his Royal presence, He
With olive brancht, down bending to his knee,
His name and birth declares: the murder maskes
With for^ed cause of flight: a dwelling asks
In field, or city. Ceyx thus replies:
Our hospitable bounty open lies
To men of vulgar rank: what owes it then
To your high spirit, so renoun'd by men?
Of monumentall praise? Whose blood extracts
His sourse from Jove, improued by your Acts?
To sue, is times abuse: your worth assures
Your full desires; of all, the choice is yours:
I wish it better. And then wept. The cause
Jove's Nephew asks: when, after a short pause;
Perhaps you think this Bird which lives by rape
To all a terror, ever had that shape.
He was a man; as constant in his mind
As fierce in war, to great attempts inclinde.
Daedalion named; sprung from that Star which wakes*
The deawie Morn, the last that heaven forsakes.
Affected peace I fostered, with the rites
Of nuptial joys: He joyed in bloody fights.
His valor Kingdoms with their Kings subdude;
By whom the Thisbian Doves are now persude.
His daughter Chione, whose beauty drew
A thousand suitors, ripe for marriage grew.
By fortune Phoebus, the son of Mar,
From Delphos, and Cyllenus, came this way:
Here meeting, look, and like. The God of Light*
Deserres his ioy-imbracing hopes till night.
Hermes ill-brookes delay: who on her laid
His drowsy rod, and forced the sleepie Maid.
Night spangs the sky with stars. An old wifes shape
Apollo took, and seconds Hermes rape.
Now when the fullness of her time drew nie,
Autolicbus was borne to Mercury.
Nor from the Sire the Son degenerates,
Cunning in theft, and wily in all fleights:
Who could with subtlety deceive the sight;
Converting white to black, and black to white.
To Phoebus (for she bare two sons) belongs
Philammon, famous for his Harp and songs.
What is it to have had two sons? two Gods t'inflame?
A valiant father? Jupiter the same?
Is glory fatal? sure it was so to Her:
Who to Dia^as durst her face confer,
And blame her beauty. With a cruel look,
She said; Our deeds shall right us. Forthwith took
Her bow, and bent it: when the bow-string flung
Th'eiected arrow through her guilty tongue.
It bleeds; of speech and sound at once berest:
And life, with blood, her falling body left.
What grief (o Piety!) oppressed my heart!
What said I not, t'asswage my brothers smart!
Who hears me so as rocks the roaring waves
That beat their brows; and for his Daughter raues.
But when he saw her burn, four times assailed
To sack the flamie Pile: as often failed.
Then turns his heels to flight (much likae a Bull
By Hornets stung) whom scratching brambles pull:
Yet seemed to run far faster than a man,
As if his feet had wings; and all out-ran.
Who swift in chase of wished death, ascends
Pa^^assus top. As he his body bends
To iumpe from downright cliffes, compassionate
Apollo, with light wings, preuents his fate:
With beak and tallons armed; with strength repleat
Above his size: his courage still as great.
This Falcon, friend to none, all soul persu'th:
And grieuing, is the cause of common ruth.
Sad Ceyx thus his brothers change relates:
When P^^^a^^ Anctor pressed the gates;
Who kept the Heard: and cried (half out of breath)
Peleus, I bring thee news of loss and death.
Report, said Peleus, we are bent to bear
The worst of fortunes. While the King with fear
Hangs on his tongue. He panting still afeard:
To winding shores we drove the weary Heard,
When Phoebus from the height of all the sky
The East and West beheld with equal eye.
A part on yellow sands their limbs display;
And from their ease the wauy fields suruay:
While other slowly wander here and there:
Some swim in seas, and lofty foreheads rear.
A Fane, vnd^ckt with gold or marble stone
Adioynes; high blockt; within a grove o're-growne.
This the Ner^i^des and Nereus hold:
By seamen, who there dried their nets, so told.
Near it, a Marish, thick with sallowes, stood;
Made plashie by the interchanging stood.
A Wolf, a monstrous beast; with hideous noise
That frights the confines, from those thickets flies.
His lightning jaws with blood and soame besmeared:
In whose red eyes two darting flames appeared.
Though fell with rage and famine; yet his rage
More greedy far: nor hunger seeks t'asswage
With blood of beeues, and so surcease; but all
He meets with, wounds; insuking in their fall.
Nor few of us, while we his force with-stood,
Fell by his rankling p^angs. The shore with blood,
With blood the sea-brimme blushed, and bellowing lakes.
Delay is loss; and Doubt if self forsakes.
Arm, arm, while something yet is left to lose:
And joining force, this mortal Bane oppose.
The Heardsman ends. Nor did this loss incense
Aeacides; remembering his offense:
Borne, as the justice of sad Psamathe,
To celebrate her Phocus Obsequie.
The King commands his men to arm: prouides
To go in person. Busy rumor guides
This to Al^y^ne: her passion bare
Her swiftly thither; running with her hair
Half vncompos'd: and that disordering, clung
About his neck: then weeps; and with a tongue
That scarce could speak, entreats, that they alone
Might go; nor hazard both their lives in one.
To whom Aeacides; Fair Queen forgo
Your virtuous fear: too much your bounties flow.
No force aua^les in such ^stents as these:
It Is prayer that must the sea-thron'd Power appease.
A lofty tow^e within a fortress stood;
A friend to wandering ships that plough the flood.
They this ascend; and sig^ung, see the shore
With cattle strewn; the Spoyler drencht in gore.
Here Peleus fixed on seas, with knees that bend,
Blew Psamathe implores at length to end
The iust^^^ of her wrath. She from his speech*
Diuerts her ears: till T^e^^s did beseech,
And got her husbands pardon: nor yet could
The saluage Wolf from thirst of blood withold;
T^ll she the beast, as he a Heifer flew,
Transformed to marble; differing but in ^ew:
All else entire. The color of the stone
Show him no Wolf: now terrible to none.
Yet Fate would not permit Aeacides
To harbor here; nor found in exile ease;
Till at Magnesi^, in a happy time
Acastus purged him from his bloody crime.
Meane-while perplexed with former prodigies
Both of his niece and brother; to aduize
With sacred Oracles, the joys of men,
C^yx prepares for Clares. Ph^rb^^ then,
With his Phlegyan host, alike profane,
The passage stopped to D^lphian Phoebus Fane.
Yet first to thee his secret purpose told,
Faith crowned Alcyone. An inward cold
Shot through her bones: her changing face appears
As pale as Box, surrounded with her tears.
Thrice strove to speak, thrice weeps through dear constraint:
Sobs interrupting her divine complaint.
What fault of mine, my Life, has changed thy mind?
Where is that love that late so clearly shined?
Can thou thy self enjoy, from me removed?
Do long ways please? is now my absence loved?
Yet did thou go by land, I should alone
Grieve without fear: now both combine in one.
Seas fright me with their tragical aspect.
Of late I saw them on the shore eiect
Their scattered wracks: and often have I read
Sad names on sepulchers that want their dead.
Nor let false hopes thy confidencie please;
In that my father, great Hippotades,
The struggling winds in rockie cauernes keeps.
And at his pleasure calmes the raging Deepes.
They once broke loose submit to no command;
But rave over all the sea, and all the land;
High clouds perplex, with stern concursions rore,
Emitting flames: I fear, by knowledge, more.
These knew I, and often saw their rude comport;
While yet a Girl, within my Fathers Court.
But if my prayers can no recesse procure;
And that, alas, thy going be too sure;
Take me along: let both one fortune bear;
Then shall I only what I suster fear.
Together sail we on the toyling Maine:
And equally what ever hap sustain.
Thus spoke Alcyone: whose sorrows melt
Her star-like spouse; nor he less passion felt.
Yet neither would his first intent forsake
Nor her a Partner in his danger make.
Much said he to assuage her troubled breast:
As much, in vain. This adds unto the rest,
Which only could her pensive cares reclaime^
All stay is irksome; by my fathers Flame,
I swear, if Fate permit, return I will
E'^e twice the Moon her shining Crescens fill.
Reuin'd with promise of so short a stay;
He bids them lanch the ship without delay,
And fit her tacklings. This renues her fears;
Presaging ill success: abortiue tears
Flow from their springs; then kissed; a sad farewell,
Long first, at length she takes; and swowning, fell*
The Seamen call aboard: in double ranks
Reduce their oars, vp-rising from their Banks
With equal str^kes She reares her humid eyes,
And first her husband on the Poope espies
Shaking his hand: that, answers. Now from shore
The vessel drives, and thence her Object bore.
Her following eyes the flying ship pursue:
That lost, the sails her eager gazes drew.
When all had left her, to her chamber goes;
And on the empty bed her body throws:
The bed and place, with tears, to mind recall
That absent part, which gave esteem to all.
Now far from Port; the winds began to blow
On quiuering Shrowds; their ores the Sailers slow:
Then hoise their Yards a trip, and all their sails
At once let fall to catch the approaching gales.
The Ship scarce half her Course, or sure no more,
By this had run; far off from either shore:
When, deep in night, fierce Lar^^ fu^^y blew;
And high-wrought Seas with cha^ing foamie grew.
Strike, strike the Top-saile, let the Main-sheat fly,
And furle your sails, the Master cried; his cry
The blustering winds and roaring seas suppress.
Yet of their own accord in this distress
They ply their taskes: some seeling yards bestri'd
And take-in sails; some stop on either side
The yawning leakes; some seas on seas reject.
While thus Disorder toiles to small effect,
The bitter storm augments; the wild Winds wage
War from all parts, and join with Neptunes rage.
The Master lost, in terror, neither knew
The state of things, what to command, or do;
Conf^^sing ignorance; so huge a mass
Of ills oppress! which slighted Art surpass.
Loud cries of men resound; with rattling shrowds,
Floods iustling floods, and thunder-crashing clouds.
(...) Who late a scepter held. His father in law,
And father, now inuokes: but could not draw
(Alas!) from either succor. Still his wife
Runs in his thoughts in that short span of life.
He wished the waves would cast him on the sands
Of Trachin, to be buried by her hands.
Who swimming, sighs Al^yone; her name
His last of speech: in Seas conceiues the same,
Behold; an arch of waters, black as h^ll,
Brake over the flood: the breaking surges quell
Their sinking Burden. Luciser that night
Became obscure; nor could you see his light.
And since he might not render up his place,
With pitchie clouds immured his darkened face.
Meane-while Al^yone, not knowing ought
Computes the tedious night; the days out-wrought
Upon a robe for him; another makes
To wear her self: whose flattering hope mistakes
In his return. Who holy fumes presents
To all the Gods; but most of all frequents
The Fane of Iu^^: at her altars prayed
For him that was not. Grant success! (she said)
A quick return! Give he our right to none!
Of all her prayers the last succeeds alone.
The melting Goddess could no longer brook
Her death-cro^t prayers; but from her altar shook
Her tainted hand; and thus to Iris spoke:
Haste faithful Messenger, thy journey take
To drowsy Sleeps dim palace: bid him send
A dream that may present the woeful end
Of Ceyx to Al^yone. This said;
She, in a thousand-coloured robe araid,
Her ample Bow from Heaven to Earth extends:
And in a cloud to his abode descends.
Near the Ci^^^rians sculks a Cave, in steep
And hollow hills; the Mansion of dull Sleep:
Not seen by Phoebus when he mounts the skies,
At height, nor stooping: gloomy mists arise
From humid earth, which still ^ twilight make.
No crested fowls ^^rill crowings here awake
The cheerful Morn: no ba^king Sentinel
Here watch; nor geefe, who wakefull dogs excel.
Beasts tame, nor saluage, no ^ind-shaken boughs,
Nor strife of iarring tongues, with noyses rouse
Secured Ease. Yet from the rock a spring,
With streams of L^^^s softly murmuring,
Purles on the pib^^^, and inuites Repole.
Before the Every pregnant Poppie grows,
With numerous Simples; from whose iuicie birth
Night gathers sleep, and shede it on the Earth.
No doors here on their cr^cking hinges iarr'd:
Through-out this court there was nor ^oore, nor g^^rd.
Amid the Hebon Cave a dow^^e bed
High mounted stand^, with sable couerings spread.
Here lay the lazy God, dissol^'d in rest.
Fantastic Dreams, who various forms expressed,
About him co^^h: then A^^^n's cares far more;
Or leaves of trees, or (...) on Neptunes shore.
The Virgin en^ing (...) the obui^^^rs Dreams:
And fills the sac^^d Co^^^e with the beams
Of her bright robe. The God with strife disioines
His seeled lid^; ag^^^ his head declines,
And knock ^ his (...) against his breast. A^on
Himself Himself ^iects; and, ^^^ing on
His elbow, asks (for he knew her) why
She thither came? When Iris made reply:
Thou Rest of things, most meek of all the Gods;
O Sleep, the Peace of minds, from whose abodes
Care ever flies; restoring the decay
Of toile-tyr'd limbs to labour-burdning Day:
Send thou a Dream, resembling truth, in post
T'Hereulean Trachin; that, like Ceyx ghost,
May to Alcyone his wrack unfold.
Saturnia this commands. Her message told,
Iris withdrew; who could the power of Sleep
Resist no longer. When she found it creep
Upon her yielding senses, thence she flies:
And by her painted Bow remounts the skies.
The Sire, among a thousand sons, excites
Shape-faining Morpheus: of those brother Sprites
None (bid t'assume) with subtler cunning can
Usurp the gesture, visage, voice of man,
His habit, and known phrase. He only takes
A humane form: an Other shows a snakes,
A birds, a beasts. This Icelos they call,
Whom heaven imbowre; though P^^^betor by all
Of mortal birth. Next Phantasus; but he,
Of different faculty, indues a tree,
Earth, water, stone, the several shapes of things
That life enjoy not. These appear to Kings
And Princes in deep night: the rest among
The vulgar stray. Of all the germane throng
Their aged father only Morpheus chose
To act Thau^^antia's charge, His eyes then close
Their drowsy lids, and hanging down his head,
Resolved to slumber, shrinkes into his bed.
His noiselesse wings through night fly Morpheus strains;
And with the swiftness of a thought attaines
The Aemonian towers: then laid them by, and took
The form of Ceyx. With a pallid look
He naked stood, like one deprived of life,
Before the Couch of his unhappy wife:
His beard all wet, the hair upon his head
With water dropped; who, leaning on her bed,
Thus spoke; while tears from seeming passion flow.
Do thou, o wretched Wife, thy C^yx know?
Or am I changed in death? look on the Lost:
And for thy husband thou shall see his Ghost.
No favor could thy pious prayers obtain:
For I am drowned; no longer hope in vain.
Cloud-crushing South-winds in Aegaeum caught
Our ravished ship, and wrackt her with her fraught.
My voice the floods oppressed, while on thy name
I vainly called. This, neither wandering Fame,
Nor doubtful Author tells: this I relate;
I, that there perished by untimely fate.
Arise, weep, put on black: nor vndeplor'd
For pity send me to the Stygian Ford.
To this he adds a voice, such a she knew
Expressed her Lords: with tears appearing true,
And gesture of his hand She sigh't and wept;
Stretch out her arms t'imbrace him as she slept,
But claspt the empty air. Then cried, O stay!
Ah, whither will thou! go we both one way.
Wak't with her voice, and husbands shade; with fear
She looks about for that which was not there.
For now the maids, raised with her shreekes, had brought
A Taper in. Not finding what she sought,
She strikes her cheeks, her nightly linen tare,
Inuades her breasts; nor stays t'vubind her hair,
But tugs it off. Her Nurse the cause demands
Of such a violence. She wrings her hands,
And in the passion of her grief replyde:
There Is no Alcyone; none, none! she did
Together with her Ceyx. Silent be
All sounds of comfort. These, these eyes did see
My ship-wrackt Lord. I knew him; and my hands
Thrust forth to have held him: but no mortal bands
Could force his stay. A Ghost: yet manifest:
My husbands ghost: which o but ill expressed
His form and beauty, late divinely rare!
Now pale, and naked, with yet dropping hair.
Here stood the miserable; in this place:
Here, here (and sought his aerie steps to trace.)
O this my sad mis-giuing soul diuin'd;
When thou forsook'st me to pursue the wind.
But since imbarqu'd for death, would I with thee
Had put to sea: a happy face for me!
Then both together all the time assigned
For life had lived; nor in our death dis-ioyn'd.
Now here, I perished there: on that profound
Poor I was wrackt; yet thou without me drowned.
O I, then floods more cruel; should I strive
To lengthen life, and such a grief survive!
Nor will I, nor for sake thee, nor defer.
Though one Vrne hold not both, one Sepulcher
Shall join out titles: though thy bones from mine
The seas disseuer, yet our names shall join.
Grief chok't the rest. Sobs every accent part:
And sighs ascend from her astonished heart.
Day springs: She to the shore addressed her haste,
Even to that place from whence she saw him last.
And while she sadly vtters, Here he staid;
Here parting, kissed me; from thence anchor waid;
While she such sighs recalls; her steady eyes
Fixed on the Sea, far off she something spies;
But knows not what: yet like a cor's. First she
Does doubt: driven nearer (though not near) might see
A body plainly. Though unknown, yet much
The Omen moved her, since his fate was such.
Poor wretch, who'ere thou art: and such (she said)
Thy wife, if wed, by thee a widow made!
By floods driven nearer; the more near, the more
Her spirits faint: now nigh the adjoining shore.
Now sees she what she knows; her husbands cor's.
Woe's me! it is He, she cries! at once does force
Her face, hair, habit: trembling hands extends
To soule-lesse Ceyx; and then said: Here ends
My last of hopes: thus, o then life more dear;
O husband, thus return'st thou! Art a Peer
Had stretched into the surges; Which with-stood,
And brake the first incursion of the flood.
Thither forthwith (o wonderful!) she springs;
^eating the passive air with new-growne wings.
Who, now a bird, the waters summit rakes:
About she ^ies, and full of sorrow, makes
A mournful noise; lamenting her divorce:
Anon she touched his dumb and bloudlesse cor's;
With stretched wings embraced her perished bliffe;
And gave his colder lips a heatlesse kiss.
Whether he felt it, or the floods his look
^duanc't, the vulgar doubt: vetsure he took
Sense from touch. The Gods commiserate:
And change them both, obnoxious to like fate.
As erst, they love: their nuptial faiths they show
In little birds; engender, parents grow.
Seven winter days with peaceful calmes possessed.
Alcyon sits upon her floting nest.
Then safely sail: then Aeolus incaues
For his, the winds; and smoothes the stooping waves.
Some old man seeing these their pinions move
Over broad-spread Seas, extols their endless love.
By theirs, a Neighbor, or Himself, teuiues
An others fate. Yon'sable foul that dives;
(And therewith shows the wide-mouthed Cormorant)
Of royal parentage may also vaunt.
Whose ancestors from Tros their branches spread:
Ilas, Assaracus, Jove's Ganymod,
Laomedon, and Priamus the last
That reigned in Troy: to Hector (Who surpast
In fortitude) a brother. If by power
Of Fate unchanged in his youths first flower,
He might perhaps as great a name have won:
Thought Hector were great Dymas daughters son.
For Alixoth^^, a country Maid,
Bare Aesacus by stealth in Idas shade.
He, hating Cities, and the discontents
Of glittering Courts; the lovely woods frequents,
And vnambitious fields; but made repair
To Ilium rarely: yet, he debonaire,
Nor vnexpugnable to love. Who splde
Eperia, often desired, by Cebrens side
(Her fathers river) drying in the Sun
Her fluent hair. Away the Nymph did run,
Swift as a frighted Hind the Wolf at hand;
Or like a fearful foul thrust ouer-land
Beneath a falcon. He persues the chase:
Fear wings her feet, and love enforced his pace.
Behold a lurking Viper in this strife,
Ceaz'd on her heel; repressing flight with life.
Frantic, his trembling arms the dead include:
Who cried, Alas that ever I persude!
^ feared not this; nor was the victory
Worth such a loss. Ay me! two, one destroy.
Thy wound the Serpent, I the occasion gave:
^, o more wicked! yet thy death shall have
My life for satisfaction. Therewith flung
His body from a cliffe which ouer-hung
The undermining Seas. His falling limbs
Vpheld by Tethys pity; as he swimmes
Sh' his person plumes, nor power of dying gives.
To be compelled to live the Lover grieves:
Disdaining that his soul, so well appai'd
To leave her wretched seat, should thus be staid,
And mounting on new wings, again on Seas
His body throws: the fall his feathers ease.
With that, enraged, into the deep he dives:
And still to drown himself as vainly strives.
Love makes him, lean. A long neck does sustain
His sable head; long-ioynted legs remain.
Nor ever the affected Seas for sakes;
And now a suited name from diuing takes.
OVID'S METAMORPHOSIS. The twelfth Book.
THE ARGUMENT.
A Snake; a snake-like Stone. Cv^nus, a^wan,
Caenis the maid, now Caenens and a man,
Becomes a Foul. Neleius varies sha^es:
At last an Eagle; nor Alcides scaepet.
OLd Priaus mournes for Aesacus; nor knew
That he suruiu'd, and with light feathers flew.
While Hector and his brethren dues, with tears,
Pay to the tomb which his inscription bears.
But Paris, absent from that obsequy,
Straight, with his Rape, brought ten years war to Troy.
A thousand ships, in one confederate,
Pursue his stealth, with all the Achaian State.
Nor vowed revenge so long had been delaid;
If wrathful Seas had not their passage staid;
At fishie Aulis, in Boe^tia,
Their wind-bound Navy in expectance lay.
Here, as the old use, to love they sacrifice.
While from the antique altar flames arise;
A blew scaled Dragon, in the Armies view,
Ascends a tree, which near the altar grew.
A feathered nest the upper branches bear,
With twice four birds: these and their dam (with fear
Flying about her losle) the greedy snake
At length devoured. This all with wonder struck.
When Chilchas cried (who could the truth divine)
Rejoice, Pelasgans, it is a happy sign!
Proud Troy shall fall; though with long toil and care:
These th'ice three birds, thrice three years war declare.
He, wound about a bough, gorged with his rape;
Became a Stone, hat held the Serpents shape.
Still Ner^us in Aonian surges raues:
Nor war transferies. Some think the God of Waves
Would Troy preserve; and save the walls he made.
Thestorides resents: who knew, and said,
A virgins blood must Dian' reconcile.
Now did the public cause the private foil;
A King a father; I phige^ia stood
Before the altar to resign her blood.
The Priest did weep; the Goddess pittieth too:
Who ^'re their eyes a cloudy mete or threw;
And while they prosecute her rites, and praid;
Produced a Hind to represent the Maid.
When fitter sacrifice had dul'd her rage;
Her fury and the Seas, at once assuage.
A fore-winde then their thousand Vessels bore:
Who, suffering much, attain the Phrygian shore.
A^^d the world, 'twixt Air, Earth, Neptunes brine,
A place there is; the triple Worlds confine.
Where all that is done, though far removed, appear:
And every whisper penetrates the care.
The House of Fame: who in the highest tower
Her lodging takes. To this capacious bower
Innumerable ways conduct; no way
With doors debarred, but open night and day.
All built of ringing brass; through out resounds:
The heard reports, and every word rebounds.
No rest within, no silence: yet the noise.
Not loud, but like the murmuring of a voice,
As seas that sally on far-distant shores;
Or as Jove's terminating thunder rores.
Hither the idle Vulgar come and go:
Millions of Rumors wander to and fro;
Lies mixed with truths, in words that vary still.
Of these, with news unknowing ears Some fill;
Some carry tales: all in the telling grows;
And every Author adds to what he knows.
Here dwells rash Error, light Credulity,
Dejected Fear, and vainly grounded loy;
New raised Sedition, secret Whisperings
Of unknown Authors, and of doubtful things.
All done in Heaven, Earth, Ocean, Fame sun uiewes:
And through the ample world inquires of news.
She notice gave, how with a dreadful host
The Grecian Navy steered for their coast.
Nor unexpected came: the Trojans bend
Their powers t'incounter, and their shores defend.
First thou thy life, Protesildus, lost
By Hectors fatal lance; the battle cost
The Greeks a world of souls: so clearly shone
Their fortitudes; great Hector yet unknown.
Nor no small streams of blood their valors drew
From Phrygian wounds, who felt what Greece could do.
And now their mingled gores Sig^^^ stain:
Now Neptunes Cycnus had a thousand slain.
Now, in his chariot, on Achilles fell;
And with his lance whole squadrons sent to hell:
Seeking for Cyenus, or for Hector, round
About the field; at length brave Cycnus found:
(For Fate nine years great Hectors life sustaines.)
Cheering his horses with the flaxen maines,
His thundering Chariot drives against his foe,
And shakes his trembling lance: about to throw;
O youth, he said, what e're thou art, rejoice:
Achilles honors thee with death. His voice
His spear persues: the steel no wound impressed
Though strongly thrown. When, bounding from his breast
He said; Thou Goddesse-borne, Fame brutes thee such;
Why wondrest thou ( Achilles wondered much)
This helm with horse-haire plumed, this shield I bear,
Defend not me: for fashion these I wear.
So Mars his person arms. Should I display
My naked breast, thy force could find no way
The grace to be Nereus son is small:
What his, who Nereus, who his Nymphs, who all
The Ocean guides? Then at Achilles threw
His lance, that pierced his plated shield, and through
Nine oxe-hides rusht: the tenth did it restrain.
The Heroes caught it, and retorts again
The singing steel; again it gave no wound.
The third assay no better entrance found,
Though Cyc^^s barred his bosom to the blow.
He rages like a bull in Citcian Show;
Whose dreadful horns the stammell, which prouokes
His fury, toss with still deluded strokes.
Then searches if the head were off: that on;
What, is my hand, said he, so feeble grown?
On one is all my vigor spent? My power
Was more, when first I razed Lyrnessus tower:
When Tenedos, Eetiou, Thebes, were filled
With blood of theirs, by my incounters spild.
The red Caycus slaughtred natives did:
Twice Telephus my powrefull lauelin tryde.
Behold these heaps of bodies! these I flew:
Much could my hand have done; as much can do.
This said, his former deeds almost suspects,
And at Menetes breast his aim directs,
(A Lycian of mean rank) the thrilling dart
Quite through his faithless curasse pierced his heart:
Whose dying body struck the groaning ground.
Snatching the weapon from his recking wound;
This hand, he said, this now victorious lance
Shall urge thy fate: assist me equal Chance!
With that, th'vnerring dart at Cycnus flung.
Th'vneuitated on his shoulder rung;
Which like a rock the lance repel'd again:
Yet where it hit it left a purple stain;
By vainly glad Ae^idas descried:
He woundlesse: this Menetes blood had died.
Then roaring, from his chariot leapes; and made
A horrid onset with his flaming blade:
Who sees the breaches in his helm and shield;
Yet he secure: his skin the steel vnsteeld.
Now all impatient, with the hilt his Foe's
Hard front inuades with thick redoubled blows:
Persues his back retreit, perturbs, insists;
Nor lets the astonished breath. He faints; blew mists
Swim over his eyes: whose now auerted steps
A stone with-stood. On whom Achilles leapes
(...) Or else assured. Caenis still for bore
All nuptial ties. As on the secret shore
She walked alone, the Sea-god her dissent
Enforced to Rape: for so the rumor went.
Rapt with the joy of loves first tasted fruit;
All shall, said Neptune, to thy wishes suit;
Wish what thou will. So Fame the story told.
My wrong, said Caenis, makes my wishes bold:
That never like inforcement may befall,
Be I no woman; and thou give me all.
Her latter words a deeper voice express,
Much like a man's, for now it proved no less.
The Sea-God had assented to her will:
And further adds, that steel should neither kill
Nor wound his person, Young Atracides,
Departs; rejoicing in such gifts as these:
Who great in every manly virtue grows;
And haunts the fields through which Paeneus flows.
The son of bold Ixi^^ now had wed
Hippodame: the saluage Cenraures, bred
Of clasped Clouds, his inuitation graced;
In plashed bowres at sundry tables placed.
There were the Aemoniax Princes; there was I:
The Palace rung with our confused joy.
They Hymen sing; the altars fume with flames:
Forth came the admired Bride with troops of dames.
We call Pirithaus happy in his choice:
But scarce maintain the O men of that voice.
For Eurytus, more heady than the rest,
Foul rapine harbors in his saluage breast;
Incenst by beauty, and the heat of wine;
Lust and ^^bri^ty, in outrage join.
Straight, turn'd-vp boords the feast profane: the fair
And tender spouse now haled by the hair.
Fierce Eurytus Hippodime: all took
Their choice, or whom they could: sacked cities look
With such a face. The women shreeke: we rise.
When Theseus first; o Eurytus, unwise!
Dare thou offend Pirithous as long
As Theseus lives? in one two suffer wrong.
The great-sould He^os, not to boast in vain,
Breaks through the throng, and from his fierce disdain
The Rape repris'd. He no reply affords;
Such facts could not be iustifi'd by words:
But with his fists the brave redeemer pressed;
Assailes his face, and strikes his generous breast.
Hard by there stood an antique goblet, wrought
With extant figures: this Aegides caught;
Hurled at the face of Eurytus: a flood
O freeking wine, of brains, and clotted blood
At once he vomits from his mouth and wound;
And falling backward, kickes the dabled ground.
The Centaures, frantie^ie for their brothers death,
Arm, arm, resound, with one exalted breath.
Wine courage gives. At first an uncouth ^^light
Of flagons, pots, and boules, began the fight:
Late fit for banquets, now for blood and broiks.
First Amycus, Op^ions issue, spoils
The sacred places of their gifts; down rampes
A brazen cresset t^^uche with burning ^^^yes:
This swings a loft, as when a white-hair'd Bull
The Sacrificer strikes; which crushed the skull
of Celadon the Lapit^i^s, and Just
His face unknown: confusion form bereft.
Out start his eyes; his battered nose betwixt
His shiuer'd bones slat to his pallat fixed.
Pallaean Pelades a tressell tore
That propt the board, and felled him to the flore,
He knockes his chin against his breast, and spude
Blood mixed with teeth. A second blow persude
The first; and sent his vexed soul to hell.
Next, Gryncus stood; his looks with vengeance swell:
Serves this, said he, for nothing? there with raised
A loft a mighty Altar: as it blazed,
Among the Lapi^^hites his burden threw;
Which Broteas, and the bold Orion slew.
Orions mother My^ale, eft-soone
Could with her charms deduce the struggling Moon.
Exadius cried, Nor shall thou so depart
Had I a weapon. Of a voted heart
The Antlers from a Pine he pulls; they six
Their forkes in Gryncus darkened eyes: this sticks
Upon the horn, that in concreted gore
Hung on his beard. A firebrand Rhaelus bore,
Snatch from the Altar; and Charaxus he^d
Cracked through the skull, with yellow tresses spread.
The rapid flame his blazing curles surround,
Like come on fire; blood broyling in his wound
Horribly hisses: asked steel that gloes
With seruent blasts, which pl^ant tongues dispose
To quenching coole-troughes, sputtors, strives, consumes;
And hissing under heated (...), fumes.
The Wounded from his singed tresses shakes
The greedy flame; and on his shoulders takes
A stone torn from the threshold, which alone
Would load a waine, as distant Rhoetus thrown.
This, falling short, Comeles life inuades:
And sent his friend to everlasting shades.
When Rhoetus, laughing; May you all abound
In strength so tried; and aggrauates his wound
With repercussions of his burning brand.
Crushed bones now sink in brains. Then turns his hand*
Upon young Coritus, Euagrus, Dryas:
Which gave to Coritus a fatal pass.
What glory can the slaughter of a boy
Afford, Euagrus said? nor more could say:
For Rhoetus, ever his jaws together came,
Hid in his throat and breast the choking flame.
Then whiskes the brand about his brows, and drives
At valiant Dryas: but no longer thriues.
For through his shoulder, who had triumphed long
In daily slaughter, Dryas fixed his prong.
Who groaning, tugs it out with all his might:
And soild with blood, conuerts his heels to fl^ght.
So Lycidas, Arnaeus, Medon (sped
In his right arm) Pisenor, Caumaes, fled:
Wound-tardie Mermerus, late swift of pace;
Meneleus, Pholus; Abas, used to chase
The Bore; and Astyl^s, who fates fore-knew:
Who vainly bade his friends that war eschew;
And said to frighted Nessus, Fly not so;
Thou art reserved for great Alcides bow.
But yet Eurynomus, nor Lycidas,
Arcus, nor Imbreus, vnslaughtred pass:
All quelled by Dryas hand. Thee Cantus too,
Though turned about for slight, afore-wound side*
For looking back; the point between his sights,
There where the nose ioynes with the forehead, lights.
(...) Who with his shield and burganet defends
The sounding strokes: yet still his sword extends,
And twixt his shoulders at one thrust does gore
His double breasts. Yet had he slain before
Phlegraeus, Hyles, with his lances flight;
Hiphinous and Danis, in close fight.
Adds Dorylas to these; who wore a skull
Of Wolfe-skin tan'd; the sharp horns of a Bull,
In stead of other weapons, fixed before:
And did in crimson with Laepithian gore.
To whom, with courage fired, I said in scorn;
Behold how much our steel excels thy horn.
And threw my lance: not to be shunned, he now
Claps his right hand upon his threatened brow;
Which both together nailed. They rore: and while
Th'ing aged with his bitter wound does toil;
Thy father, who was nearest, nearer made:
And through his nauill thrust his deadly bl^d^.
He bounds, and on the earth his bowels trailer;
The trailed kickes, the kicked in pe^ces hak^^;
Which winding, fetter both his legs and thighs
So falls; and with a gutlesse belly dies.
Nor thee thy beauty, Cyllarus, could save:
If such a two-form'd figure beauty have.
His chin now 'gan to bud with down of gold;
And golden curles his iuory back in sold:
His looks a pleasing vigor grace; his breast,
Hands, shoulders, necks, and all that man expressed,
Surpassing arts admired images.
Nor were his bestiall parts a shame to these:
Add but a horses head and crest, he were
For Castors use; his back so strong to bear,
So largely chested; blacker than the crow:
His tail and feet-lockes, white as falling snow.
A number of that nation sought his love;
Whom none but fair ^ylonome could move:
None for attracting favor so excel,
Of all the halfe-mares that on Othrys dwell.
She, by sweet words, by loving, by confessed
Affection, only Cyllarus possessed.
With combs she smoothes her hair; her person trimmet
With all that could be graceful to such limbs.
Of Roses, Rosemary and Violets,
And often of Lillies curious dressings pleats.
'Twice daily washed her face in Springs that fall*
From Pagasaean hills; twice daily all
Her body bathes in cleansing streams: and ware
The skins of beasts, such as were choice and rare,
Which flowing from her shoulder cross her breast,
Veil her left side. Both equal love possessed:
Together on the shady mountains stray,
In woods and hollow caves together lay.
Then to the palace of the Lepithits
Together came; and now together fight.
A iaueline from the left hand flung, thy breast
O Cyllarus, beneath thy neck impressed.
His heart though slightly hurt (the dart exhaled)
Grew forthwith cold; and all his body pal'd.
Hylonome his dying limbs receives;
^oments his wound: close to his lips she cleauer,
To stay his flying soul. But when she found
Life's fire extinct; with words in clamor drowned,
Even on that steel, which through his bosom past,
She threw her own: and him in death embraced.
Me thinks I see grim Phoeocomes yet:
Who with two Lions skins, together knit,
Protects his man and beast. A log he took,
Which scarce two teame could draw; this darted, struck
The Crown of Phonol^nides: his brains
It through the fractures of his skull constraines;
Which from his mouth, eyes, ears, and nosthrils gusht,
Like curds through wicker squeasd; or iuces erusht
Through draining Colendars. As he the dead
Prepares t'vnarme, my sword his bowels shred.
Your father saw his downfall. Chthonius too,
And stout Teleb^^ our fawchion slew.
The first a forked branch, the other held
A lengthfull lance: the lance this wound impeld;
Whereof you see the ancient scarre. Then I,
Then should I have been sent to have ruined Troy.
Then might I have restrained, if not o're-throwne
Great Hector. But, he either then was none,
Or else a child. Now spent with age, I waine.
What speak I of two-shape Pyretus, slain
By Periphas? Thy dart, without a head,
Brave Ampycus, foure-hoon'd Oicles sped.
Macareus, borne by Pelethronian rocks,
Huge Erigdupus with a leauer knocks
To ecchoing earth. His dart Cymelus sheathed
Deep in Nessaeus groine, and life bereaved.
Nor would you think Ampycides alone
Could Fate foretell; a lance by Mopsus thrown
Odites slew: this, as the Centaure railed,
His tongue to his chin, his chin to his bosom nailed.
Five Caeneus slew; Bro^nus Antimachus,
Axe-arm'd Pyracmos, Helins, Sliph^l^^s,
Although forgetful by what wounds they fell;
Their names, and number, I remember well.
Giant-like Latreus lightneth to these broiles;
Armed with Emathian Alesus spoils:
His years, 'twixt youth and age; nor age impaires
The strength of youth, though sprinkled with gray hairs,
A Maccdonian spear, a sword, a shield,
Confirm his powers: o're-viewes the well-fought field,
Clashes his arms; and trotting in a round,
Infringed the air with this disdainful sound.
Shall I endure thee Caenis? still to me
Thou art a woman, and shall Caenis? be.
Thou have forgot thy births original,
And for what fact rewarded; by what fall
Advanced to this man-counterfeiting shape.
Think of thy birth; think of thy easy rape.
Go, take a spindle and a distaffe; twine
The carded wool; and arms to men resign.
While thus he scoffs; and circularly ran;
Caeneus his sides gores with his lance, where man
And horse unite. He, mad with angush, flings
His spear at the Phyllaean youth, which rings
On his untainted face; and back recoiles,
As pibbles dropped on drums, or hail on tiles.
Then rushing on, with thrusts affayes to wound
His hardened sides; the sword no entrance found.
Nor shall thou escape; the edge shall lanch thy throat,
Although the point be dull. This said, and smote
At once. The blow, as if on marble, sounds:
And from his neck the broken blade rebounds:
When he his charmed limbs had open laid
Enough to wounds and wonder, Caeneus said:
Now will we try, if thou our sword can feel.
Then 'twixt his shoulders thrusts the fatal steel^
Up to the hilts; which to and fro he wanes
Deep in his guts, and wounds on wounds ingraues.
The frighted Centaures, with a horrid cry,
On him alone, with all their weapons sly.
Their darts rebated fall, but draw no blood:
For Caeneus still in-vulnerable stood.
This more amazed. Ah, Monychus exclaime^,
One foiles us all, to all our endless shames*
He scarce a man! nay he the man, and we
Are what he was: so poor our actions be.
What boots our mighty limbs? our double force?
The strongest of all creatures, man and horse,
In us by nature joined? sure we are not
A Goddess birth; nor by Ixion got,
Who durst the Queen of Deities embrace.
This Halfe-man conquers his degenerate race.
Stones, massy logs, whole mountains on him roll;
And with congested trees crush out his soul.
Let woods oppress his jaws: o're-whelme with weight,
In stead of idle wounds. Thus he: and straight
An Oak, vp-rooted by the furious blasts
Of frantic winds, on valiant Caeneus casts.
The example quickly Othrys difaraide
Of all his trees; and Pelion wanted shade.
Pressed with so huge a burden, Caeneus swea^^:
And to th'o're-whelming oaks his shoulders sets.
But now the load above his statu^e climbes,
And choakes the passage of his breath. Sometimes
He faints; then struggles to advance his crown
Above the Pile, and throw the timber down:
Sometimes the pressure with his motion quakes;
As when an earthquake yonder Id^ shakes.
His end was doubtful: some there be, who tell
How with that weight his body sunk to hell.
Mopsus dissents; who saw a foul arise
From thence with yellow wings, and mount the skies;
(The first I ever saw) which flying round
About our Tents, sent forth a mount ^efull sound.
This he persuing with his soul and fight,
Cried, Hail thou glory of the Lapithite!
O Caeneus, late a man at arms; but now
An unmatched foul! His witness all allow.
Grief whets our fury; brooking ill, that one
By such a multitude should be o're-throwne:
And Sorrow so long executes the fight,
Till half were slain: half saved by speed, and night.
Tlepelemus could not his tongue debar:
Since in the repetition of that war,
Of Hercules he had no mention made.
Old man, how can you so forget (he said)
Akides praise? my father often would tell,
How by his hand the Cloud-borne Centaures sell.
To this sad Nestor answered: why should you
Compel me to remember, and renew
My sorrow lost in time? or iterate
Your fathers guilt; together with my hate?
His acts transcend belief; his high repute
Fills all the world: which would I could refute.
But not Polyd^^^as Deiphob^^,
Nor valiant Hector, are extolled by us.
For who commends his^foe? Mess^n^'s walls
He razed: fair Elis, Pylus, in their falls
Detest his fury; Cities which his hate
Had not deserved: with them, did ruinate
Our House with sword and fire. Not now to tell
Of others, who by his stern outrage fell;
'Twice six-faire famed Neleidae were we;
Twice six Alsides slew, excepting me.
Conquest is common: but, o more than strange
Was Periclymen's slaughter! Who could change
And rechange to all figures. Such a grace
Great Neptune gave; the root of Neleus race.
He, forced to vary forms, at length unfolds
Jove's well-lou'd Foul, who in her tallons holds
Impetuous thunder; and His visage tears
Both with his crooked beak, and armed seares.
At him his bow, too sure, Alcides drew,
As towering in the lofty clouds he flew,
And struck his side-ioyn'd wing. The wound was slight;
But sunder'd nerves could not sustain his flight.
When tumbling down, his weight the arrow smote
In at his side, and thrust it through his throat.
Now brave Commander of the Rhodian Fleet;
Think thou Alcides praise a subject mere
For my discourse? Alone with silence we
Revenge our slaughtered brothers; and love thee.
When Nestor with mellifluous eloquence
Had thus much vtter'd; they with speech dispense,
And liberal Bacchus quaffe: then all arose;
And give the rest of night to soft repose.
The God, whose Trident calmes the Ocean,
For strangled Cyenus, turned into a Swan,
Grieves with paternall grief, Achilles fate
He prosecutes with more than civil hate.
Ten years now well-nigh lapsed in horrid fights,
Thus unshorn Smintheus his stern rage excites.
Of all our brothers sons to us most dear;
Whose hands, with ours, Troys walls in vain did rear:
O si hist thou not to see the Asian towers
So near their fall? their own, and aiding powers
By millions slain? the last of all their joy
Dead Hector dragged about his fathers Troy?
Yet dire Achilles, who our labor gives
To utter spoil, then War more cruel, lives.
Came he within my reach, he then should try
The vengeance of my Trident: but since I
Cannot approach t'incounter with my foe;
Let him thy close and mortal arrows know.
Delius assents: his uncles wrath intends;
With it, his own; and in a cloud descends
To the Illian host: amid the battle seeks
For Paris, shooting at vn-noted Greeks.
Then showed a God, and said: Why do thou lose
Thy shafts so basely? nobler objects chose;
If thou of thine at least have any care:
Thy brethrens deaths revenge on Peleus heir.
Then showed him stern Achilles, as he slew
The Tro an troops: and, while his bow he drew,
Directs the deadly shaft. This only might
Old Priam, after Hectors death, delight.
Him, who with conquests cloyed the jaws of death,
A faint adulterer depriues of breath.
If by th'esseminate to be o're-throwne;
Then should the Pollax of the Am^zon
Have forced thy fate. The Phrygian fear; the fame,
And strong protection of the G^aecian Name,
Invincible Aeacides now burns:
The God, who armed, his bones to ashes turns.
And of that great Achilles scarce remains
So much as now a little Vrne contains.
Yet still he lives; his glory lightens forth,
And fills the world: this answers his full worth.
This, o divine Pelides, soars as high
As thy great spirit; and shall never die.
And even his arms, to instance whose they were;
Procure a war. Arms for his arms they bear.
Atax Oileus, Diomedes, nor
The less Atrides, not in age and war
The Greater: no nor any; but the Son
Of old Latries, and bold Telamon,
Durst hope for such a prize. Tantalides,
To shun the burden, and the hate of these,
The Princes bids to sit before his tent:
And puts the strife on their arbitrament.
OVID'S METAMORPHOSIS. The Thirteenth Book:
THE ARGUMENT.
THose purple flowers which Ajax (...) display,
His blood produce. Enraged He^ub^
Becomes a Bitch. From Memnons cinders rise
Self slaughtring Foul: a yearly sacrifice.
What ever Anius daughters handle, prou^s
Corn, wine, or oil* themselves transformed to Domes.
From honored virgins ashes Sons ascend.
The Ambracian Judge a Stone. Light wings defend
M^lossus royal issue. Scylla grows
A horrid Monster. Murdered Acis flows
With speedy streams. The kind Nercides
For Glaucus sue: i^^bro^'d in sacred Sca^.
THe great Chiefes sat; the Soldiers crown the field:
Up rose the Master of the seuen-fold Shield.
With wrath impatient, his stern eyes suruay.
Sigaeum, and the Navy which there lay.
Then holding up his hands, O Jove, he said;
Before the Fleet must we our title plead?
And is Ulysses my Competitor?
Whose flightfull fear did Hector's flames abhor.
Th^se, I, sustained; from those this Navy treed.
Transfer to contend in word than deed,
I cannot talk, nor can he fight: as sarre
His tongue excells, as I exceed in war.
Nor need I to rehearse what you have seen
In act, renowned Greeks: what his has been
^er Ithacus declare; performed by slight,
Without a witness, only known to Night.
Great is the affected prize, I must confess:
But such a Rival makes the Value less.
For me it is no ambition to obtain,
How eue^ great, what he could hope to gain.
Who of this st^fe now wins the praise; that he,
When vanquished, may boast he strove with me.
But were my valor questioned, I might on
My birth insist, begot by Telamon,
Who under Hercules Troy's bulwarks scaled:
And in Pagascan keele to Colchus sailed.
His father, Aeacus; the judge of Souls,
Where S^lyphus his restesse torment roules.
High Jupiter upon a mortal Love
Got Aeacus: I Arax third from Jove.
Nor let this pedigree assist my clame,
If great Achilles joined not in the same.
He was my brother, his I ask. Why thus
Should thou, thou son of damned Sisyphus,
Alike in thef* and fraud, a stranger to
Achille^ race, the right of his pursue?
Because I first assumed arms, deseiy'd
By no detector, are these arms denied?
Or rather for the last in field designed;
Who with f^un'd lunacie the war declined:
Till Palamed more politic, and more
Selfe-fatall, did his coward-guile explore,
And drew him to avoided arms? Must he
Now wear the best, who all eschew'd? and we
Vnhonour'd, of hereditary right
Deprived, in that we first appeared in fight?
And would to Jove he had become truly mad;
Or still so thought: nor this companion had,
This tempter to foul actions, ever seen
The Phrygian towers. The should not thou have been
O Paeaus son, exposed by our crime
To Lemnian rocks: where thou consum'st thy time
In lovely caves obscured with woods, the stones
Preuok't to pity with thy daily groans,
And wishest him, what he deserves, thy pain:
If there are Gods thou wishest not in vain.
Now our Confederate (a Prince of brave
Command) to whom his shafts Alcides give;
Broken with pain and famine, does employ
Those arrows, that import the fate of Troy,
For food and clothing: yet he lives the while,
In that removed from Ulysses guile.
And Palamed might wish to have been so left:
Then had he lived, or perished vnbereft
Of his dear fame. This, hellishly inclined,
Bears his convicted madness in his mind;
And falsely him accused to have betrayed
The Achaian host; confirming what he said
By showing sums of gold, which in his tent
Himself had hid. Thus he by banishment
Or death, our strength impaires; for this preferred:
So fights, so is Ulysses to be feared.
Though faithful Nestor he in eloquence,
Surpass, his leaving Nestor, no defense
Of words can salve: who slow with tired Age
And wounded Steeds, implored to his engage
Ulysses help; who left to odds of foes
His old acquaintance. This Tydides knows
For no forged crime; who vainly called, to stay
His trembling friend, reuiling his dismay.
The Gods with I^stice view our humane deeds,
Who would not late assist, assistance needs:
And now to be forsaken by the law
Himself prescribed. He cried; I came, and saw
The coward quaking, pale, about to yield
His ghost for scare. I interposed my shield;
Best^^d him as he lay; and from that strife
Redeemed (my least of praise) his coward life.
But if thou will contend, reioyne we there;
Revoke the foe, thy wounds, and usual fear;
Behind my target sculke: then plead. This man,
Who (...) with wounds; freed, as unwounded, ran.
N^w (...) came, and brought the Gods along;
R^sla on all parts: not thou alone, the strong
And best^ es^^lued thrinke: so great a dread
He drew on all. Him, as he trumph led
Through blood and slaughter, with a mighty stone
(...) to ca^th: Him I sustained alone,
When he to all ^o bold a challenge made;
What (...) my lot you all devoutly prayed,
No, (...) in vain: If you inquire the sum
O^ (...) ^ight, I was not over come.
With v^nege full weapons, flames, and love, the men
Of Troy ^uade our navy: where was then
Your eloquent Ulysses? I, even I
A thousand ships preserved; whereon rely
The hope of your return. These arms for all
Your Fleet afford. The meed more honor shall
Receive then give: our glories justly pease;
These arms do Ajax seek, not Ajax these.
Rhesus surprise, with ours let him compare;
That poor Spy Dolon's, Hellenus despair;
The rapt Palladum: nothing done by day;
He nothing worth, take Diomed away.
If to such mean deserts these arms accrue;
Divide them: to Tydides most is due.
Why would he these? who still unarmed goes,
Concealed; and cunningly intraps his foes?
This radiant Caske that shines with burnisht gold;
Will his deceit, and lurking steps unfold.
His neck can scarce Achilles helmet bear;
Nor can his feeble arm employ this spear:
His shield, whose orb the figured world adornes;
A cowards arm, inured to theeuing, scorns.
O fool, that thus thy own undoing seeks!
If given thee by th'error of the Greeks,
It will not make thee dreadful to thy foe;
But be the occasion of thy overthrow,
And flight, wherein thou only do exceed,
Clogged with so huge a weight, will fail thy need.
Besides, thy shield in battle rarely borne,
Is yet entire: mine, all to hackt and torn
With storms of blows, a new successor needs.
What boots so many words? behold our deeds.
These arms deliver to the foes defense:
And let him wear, that wins the prize from thence.
Here Ajax ends. The Soldier in the close
A murmr raised; till Ith^cus arose:
Who having fixed on the earth a space
His eyes, unto the Princes raised his face;
And now expected, spoke unto this sense;
With all the grace of winning eloquence.
Graecians; If heaven, with yours, had heard my prayre;
So great a strife had found no doubtful Heir:
(...) had kept thy arms, Achilles, and we thee.
(...) steine Fate, auerse to you and me,
S^^^ueted an Excellence denies;
With that appears to weep, and wipes his eyes)
Who great Achilles with more right succeeds,
Than he who gave you great Achilles deeds?
Let not his folly purchase you assent;
Nor let my wit, in that so preualent
For you, my loss incur: nor hate incense,
That for my self I arm my eloquence;
(It I have any) often for you employed.
(...) one the glory of his own avoid.
(...) estors, druine original,
And deeds by us not done, we ours mis-call.
Yet in that Ajax vants himself to be
^^eat-grand hilde unto Jove; no less are we.
I (...) was my Site, Arc^sius his;
His Jupiter: in this def^ent there is
None damned nor banni^t. By the venture I
(...) inespring: in both a Deity.
No that more noble by the mothers side,
Nor that my father had his hands vndide
(...) hers blood, do I enforce this claim:
Weigh but our worths; and censure by the same
That Telamon and Peleus brethren were,
In Ajax is no merit. Not the Near
In birth, but Great in act, deserve this grace.
Or if proximity in blood have place,
Peleus his father, Pyrrhus is his son:
What right remains for Ajax Telamon?
To Phthia then, or Scyros carry these.
Teucer is coozen to Aeacides
As well as he; yet stirs not he herein:
Or if he should, should he the honor win?
Then since our actions must our suit advance;
Although my deeds surmount my utterance,
Their abstract yet in order to relate:
Thetis, fore-knowing great Achilles fate,
Disguised her son: so like a Virgin dressed,
That all mistook, and Ajax with the rest.
When, Arms, with women's trifles, that might blind
Suspect, I brought to tempt a manly mind.
Yet was the Heroes Virgin-like araid;
Who taking up the Spear and Shield, I said:
O Goddesse-borne, for thee the fate of Troy
Her fall reserues: Why doubts thou to destroy
Great Pergamus? then made him d'off those weeds:
And sent the mighty unto mighty deeds.
His acts are therefore ours. We Telephus
Foild with our lance; the suppliant cured by us.
Strong Thobes we sacked: sacked Lesbos us renounes.
Chrysa and Tenedos (Apollo's towns)
With Cilla; Sea-girt Syros, in their falls
Our fame advance: we razed Lyrnessu's walls.
To pass the rest; I gave, who could subdue
The brave Priatnides: I Hector slew.
For the arms that found Achilles, these I crave:
He dead, I ask but what, alive, I gave.
The grief of one, with all the Greeks preuailes:
Eubotan Aulis held a thousand sails.
The long-expected winds opposed stand,
Or sleep in calmes. When cruel Fates command
Afflicted Agamemnon to assuage
With Ighigenia's death, Diana's rage.
But he dissents; the Gods themselves reproues:
And in a king a fathers passion moves.
His a noble disposition never the less
I to the public won: and must confess
( Atr^des, pardon;) we did prosecute
Before a partial Judge a hateful suit.
Yet him his brother, scepter, public good
Persuade to purchase endless praise with blood.
Then went I to the mother for her child:
Now not to be exhorted, but beguild.
Had A^ax thither gone, our flagging sails
Not yet had swelled with still-expected gales.
Then on a bold embassage I was sent
To haughty Troy: to the Ilian Court I went,
Ye^ f^ll of men: and fearelesse, v^g'd at large
The common cause committed to my charge.
Fall Paris I accuse: rapt Helena
(...)-demand, with all they bore away.
Old p^aam and Antenor just appear.
(...) Paris, with his brethren, and who were
His ^ollowers in that stealth, from wicked blows
(...). This Menelaus Knows.
(...) dangers wherein you and I
(...)* But what my policy
And force performed, behoouefull to this State,
In that long war, too long is to relate.
The first great battle fought, our weary foes
Long live immu^'d: nor durst their powers expose.
Nine years expired, wars all the fields affright.
Meane-while what did thou, only fit to fight?
What use of thee? Inquire my actions; I
The foe entrap, our trenches fortify,
Encouraging the wea^y Soldier
To brook the tediousness of ling^ing war
With fair expectance: teach them ways to feed,
And arts to fight. Employed at every need.
The king del ded in his sleep by Jove,
Bids us the care of future war remove.
The author was his strong apology.
A^ax should have with-stood; the sack of Troy
He should have urged; and, what he could, have fought.
Why was the nobler siege by him unsought?
Why armed he not? a speech he might have made,
That would the wavering multitude have staid:
To him not difficult, who looks so high,
And speaks so big. What, if himself did fly?
I saw, and shamed to see thee turn thy back
I^o horse thy sails unto thy honors wrack.
What do you? o what madness, mates, said I,
Prouokes you to abandon yielding Troy?
Ten years nigh spent, what will you bear away
But infamy? I this, and more did say;
Wherein my sorrow made me eloquent:
And from the flying Fleet turned their consent.
The King a Council calls; distusts afford
No sound advice: durst A^ax speak a word?
When base Thersites durst the King provoke
With bitter words: Who felt my seepters stroke.
Their doubts with hope of conquest I Inspire:
And set their fainting courages on fire.
Since when, what he has nobly done, by right:
To me belongs, that thus reuok't his flight.
Besides, what one of all the wiser Greeks
Commends thee; or thy conversation seeks?
Tyd des us approues, builds on our will;
Is confident in his Ulysses still.
Among a million it is a grace for me
To be his consort; and the choice so free.
The danger of the foe, and night despised;
(...), then a counter-s^out, surprised:
Nor slew him, till I forced his bosom to;
Informed what perfidious Troy would do.
All known, and nothing left to be inquired;
I now with praise enough might have retired.
Yet not so satisfide, I forward went;
And R^^sus slew, with his, in his own Tent.
When like a Victor, on his Chariot I
Return^d in triumph. Can you then deny
Achelles arms, whose horses were assigned
For one nights hazard? Ajax is more kind.
What should I of Sar pedons forces tell,
O^e-thr^wne by us? by us caranes fell,
(...), Alastor, Chromius,
Al^ander, Prytanis, Nee nonus,
Haliu^, stout (...), bold Pheridamas,
With Char^pe: ^un^mon's fatal Pass
(...) by my lan^e: and many more in view
Of h^stile (...), of meaner rank, I slew.
And I, o Countrymen, have honored wounds,
Fair in their scarres: nor trust to empty sounds;
Behold (said he, with that his bosom bares)
This breast, still exercised in your affairs.
No drop of blo^d in all these lengthfull wars
For Greece has Ajax shed: show he his scarres.
What boots it, though his deeds his brags approve;
That for our fleet he fought with Troy and Jove?
I grant he did so: nor will we detract
With hated envy from a noble act.
So he ingrosse not to himself alone
A common praise, but render us our own.
Actorides (for great Achilles held)
Troy's flames and Fautor from our ships repeld.
He thinks, he only able, could alone
Encounter Hectors opposition:
The King, his brother, and my self forgot
Of nine the last, and but preferred by lot.
But what event, o great in valor, crowned
Your doughty combat? Hector had no wound.
Woe's me! With what a tide of grief I Call
That time to mind; wherein the Grecian Wall,
Achilles fell! tears, fears, nor sorrow staid
My forward zeal; his raised corpse I laid
Upon these shoulders: these, even these did ^eare
Him and his arms; which now I hope to wear.
Our strength sufficient is for such a weight:
Our knowledge can your bounty explicate.
Was Thetis so ambitious for her Son;
That such a brainlesse Soldier should put on
This heavenly gift, of so divine a frame?
Whose figured shield his ignorance would shame.
Wherein, the Ocean; Earth with cities crowned,
Skies with their stars; cold Arctos never drowned,
Sword-gi^t Orion, sad Pleiades;
The rain^e kids. He seeks, yet knows not, these
Vpbraids he me, that I this war did shun,
And time deferd till others had begun?
Nor can consider how he wounds in me
Achilles honor. If a crime it be
To counterfeit; we join in that defame:
If, in that tardy; I before him came.
Me, my kind wife; his mother him withdrew:
Out flow^e to them we gave; the fruit to you.
No^ fear I, should I quit my own defense,
To su^^er with so clear an Excellence.
Not A^ax wit revealed Ulysses; yet
Revealed Achilles was Ulysses wit.
Lest I should wonder, why h^s foolish tongue
Should slander me, he you vpbraids with wrong.
Was guiltles^e Palamed accused by me
To my desame? nor must his sentence be
To you reproachful? neither Nauplius Seed
Could justify so evident a deed:
No^ did your ^ares inform your faculties;
The h^^e of treason laid before your eyes.
P^^^ntius in Levinos left, was none
Of my offense; do you defend your own:
You to his stay consented. Yet, how^e^e,
I must confess I aduiz'd him to forbear
The ^^auels o^ long war: and to appease
The anguish his bitter wound with ease.
He did* he lives. Th^aduice was good: success
As fortunate approues it ^or nolesse.
Since Fate designs him for the fall of Troy:
Spare me, and Ajax industry employ.
His tongue the mad with wrath and anguish will
Appease: he will fetch him with some reach of skill.
First Simois shall retire, Id^ want a shade,
Achaia promise to the Trojans aid;
E're my endeavors in your service fail,
And sottish Ajax, with his wit, prevail.
And, Phil^ct^tes, though obdure thou be,
Incenst against the King, these Lords, and me;
Though curses lighten from thy lips, though still
Thou coue^ my access, my blood to spill;
Yet ^^le attempt thee: and will bring thee back;
That neither may his ^ager wishes lack.
Thy shafts I must possess (so Favor Fate)
As I possessed the Dardan Prophet late;
As I unknit the Trojan destiny,
And doubtful answer of the Gods; as I,
Amid a world of foes, the fatal Sign
Of Phrygian Pallas ravished from her shrine.
Compare with me will Ajax? this vntane,
Troy's hopt-for expugnation had been vain.
Where was strong Ajax? Where the glorious boast
Of that great Soldier? Why in terror lost?
How durst Ulysses trust himself to night,
Pass through the watch, their threatening weapons slight?
The walls not only, but the highest tower
Of Ilium scale: and from her Fane the Power
That bears their fate enforce: and with this prey,
Repasse the dangers of that horrid way?
Which had not ^ achieved, Yet in Field
Had Ajax vainly borne his seuen-fold Shield.
That night Troy fell before La^rtes son:
Won, when I made it that it might be won.
Forbear to mutter; nor with nodding gaze
On Diomed: he shares in equal praise.
Nor for our Navy did thou fight alone:
Thou by ^n host assisted, I by one.
He knew that wisdom valor should command;
That this belonged not to a strenuous hand:
Else he himself had joined in our debate;
Or the other Ajax, fa^ more moderate;
Bra^e Thoa^, fierce Eurypylus; with these
Idomen^us and Meri^nes
Of Creet; or (...) For they are
As strong, nor second unto thee in war*
Yet yield to ^ui advice. Thou, fit for fight,
Do need my reason to direct thy might.
Thy valor wants forecast, my studious care
Respects the future: thou can sight thy share;
The time and place must be by us assigned*
Thou only strong in body; I ^m mind.
As skil^ull P^lots those surpass, who row;
As wise Commanders, common soldiers; so
I thee excel. Our virtue is less great
In brawne than brain: this vigorously complete.
Then o remunerate my vigilance:
And, ^^^nces, for so many years expense
In anxious ^ares, this dignity extend
To ^y deserts. Our work is at an end:
With-standing fates removed: I, in that I
Have made it fesable, have taken Troy.
Now by our mutual hopes, Troy's overthrow,
Those Gods which late I ravished from the foe;
If ought remain to be discreetly done,
That courage craves, through danger to be won;
If in the Ilian destiny there be
A knot yet to vnkit; remember me.
Or if you can forget; these Arms resign
To this: and shows Minerua's fatal Sign.
The Chiefes were moved. Here words approved their charms:
The Eloquent the Valiant now disarmes.
He who alone, Jove, Hector, sword and fi^e
So often sustained; yields to one brunt of ire.
Th'vnconquered, sorrow conquers. Then his blade
In haste vnsheaths: Sure thou art mine, he said;
Or seeks Ulysses this? this shall conclude
All sense of wrong. And thee, so often imbrude
In Phrygian blood, thy Lord's must now imbrue:
That none but Ajax, Ajax may subdue.
This said; his breast, till then with wounds vngor'd,
The deadly sword, where it could enter, bored.
Nor could his strength the fixed steel revel;
Expeld by gushing gore. The blood that fell,
A purple flower engendered on the ground:
Created first by Hyacinthus wound.
The tender leaves indifferent letters paint;
Both of His name, and of the Gods complaint.
The Conqueror, now hoising sails, does stand
For chaste Hypsiphile's, and Thoas land;
(Defamed by women's vengefull violence)
To fetch the shafts of Hercules from thence.
These, with their owner, to the compe conuaid,
On that long war a final hand they laid.
Now Troy and Priamus together fall.
The Unhappy wife of Priam after all,
Her humane figure lost: who^e rauing Sprite
And uncouth howlings foreign fields affright.
The flames of Ilium stretch their hungry fire
To narrow Hellespont; nor there expire.
That little blood which Priams age could shed,
Jove's a^tar drinks. By her anointed head
Apollos Priest they drag, her hands in vain
To heaven vpheld. The Victor Greeks constrain
The Dardan Dames; a deadly-hating prey:
Who imbra^e their country Gods; and while they may,
Behold their burning Fanes. Di^e violence
Astana^ threw from that tower; from whence
He had seen his father, by his mother shown,
Fight for his Kingdoms safety, and his own.
North-winds to seas inuit, and prosperous gales
Sing in their shrouds: they haste to trim their sails.
The Trojan Ladies cry, Dear soil farewell!
We are haled to loathed captivity! thenfell
On kissed earth: and leave with much delay,
Their countries smoking ruins. Hecuba
Her sad departure to the last deferres:
Now found among her childrens sepulchers,
(A sight of ^uth!) spread on their tombs: there wailes;
Their cold bones kissing: whom Ulysses hales
From that sad comfort. Some of Hectors dust,
Up snatched, delivers to her bosoms trust.
Upon his tomb she left her horie hairs
(A po^^e oblation!) mingled with her tears.
Opp^s'd to Ilium's ruins lies a land,
Till^d by the Bistones, in the Command
Of Polmn^stor* Danger to p^^uent,
To him his father Polydorus sent.
And wisely; had he not withal consigned
A mass of gold, to tempt his greedy mind.
His foster-child, when lingering Ilium drew
To her last date, the Thracian Tyrant slew.
Whom, as if he his murder with the slain
Could cast away, he casts into the maine.
Now rod Atrides at the Thracian shore;
Till winds forbore to storm, and seas to rore.
When from they yawning earth Achilles rose;
Like mighty as in life: whose looks discose
As stern a wrath, as when his lawless blade
Was on Atrides drawn; and frowning, said:
You Greeks, of me unmindful; can you thus
From hence depart? shall our deserts with us
Lodge in oblivion? Prove not so ingrate.
With slain Polixena regratulate
Our Sepulcher: it is she I covet most:
A sacrifice, that will appease our Ghost.
Then vanished. They th'vngentle Sprite obaid;
And from her Mothers bosom drew the Maid,
(High-sould, unhappy, more then feminine,)
To his resembled tomb; with li^e to sign
Infernal Dues. Of her high birth she thought:
And now unto the bloody altar brought;
Seeing the sacrifice for her prepared,
And the Neoptolemus upon her star'd
With sword advanced; she said, untouched with dred:
Our generous blood to your intentions shed:
Dispatch; I am ready; in my throat or breast
Your weapon sheath. (With that, withdrew her vest*
Polyxena does servitude despise:
And yet no God affects such sacrifice.
I only wish my death might be unknown
To my afflicted mother. She alone
Disturbs the joys of death: though Priams wife
My death should less bewail, then her own life.
Nor let the touch of man pollute a maid:
That my free soul may to the Stygian shade
Untainted pass. If this be just, remove
Your hand: I shall more acceptable prove
Unto that God or Ghost, what ere he be
To whom I am offered, if my blood be free.
And if a dying tongue prevail at all;
I, late great Priams daughter, now a thrall,
Solicit that my corpse may not be sold;
But given my mother: nor exchange for gold
Sad rites of sepulture. In former years
Sh' had gold to give, now poor, accept her tears.
This having said; for her that would not weep,
The people wept: the Priest could hardly keep
His eyes from tears; Yet did what he abhord;
And in her proffered bosom thrust his sword.
On doubling knees she sinkes, with silent breath;
And cheerfully incounters smild-on Death.
Then when she fell, she had a care to hide
What should be hid; and chastly-decent did.
Her corpse was carried by the Trojan dames:
Who in a funeral long repeat the names
Of Pri^^s mourn'd-for Seed; what streams of gore
One House had spent. Thee, Virgin, they deplore:
And thee, O royal Wife, entitled late
The mother Queen, and glory of that State:
A Captive now, cast by a scorned lot
On victor Ithachas; refus^d, if not
For bearing Hector. Hector, so renoun'd,
A master hardly for his mother found.
She hug's the corpse that such a spirit kept.
Who for her country, children, husband, wept
^o often; now weeps for her: her lips comprest,
Her wounds h^s with her tears. Then beats her breast:
Her hoarie hair besmeared with clotted gore,
And bosom torn, this spoke she; and much more.
Poor daughter, our last sorrow: (what is left
For Fortunes spite!) by bloody death bereft.
On thee I see my wounds. That none of mine
May woundlesse die, these wounds thy bosom sign.
In that a woman, thee I held secured:
But thou, a woman, suffer'st by the sword.
This Bane of Troy, our Deprivation, who
So many of thy princely brothers slew;
Has slain thee also. When his life was laid
^y Paris and Apollo's shafts, I said,
Now is Achilles to be feared no more.
Now dead, to us as dreadful as before.
Against my race his ashes raues: his tomb
Presents a foe. O my unhappy womb!
To His siny fruitful! Ruined Troy descends;
And sad success the public sorrow ends:
Yet they are ended. ^lium alone
^o us remains: our sorrows freshly groan:
^erst so potent and so fortunate
(...) husbands, sons, and height of humane State;
(...) exile now am haled: despised, and torn
(...) my own sepulchers: from Phrygia borne
(...) serve Penelope; that while I sew
(...) spin at her commandment, she may show
Her slave to Ithacensian dames, and say,
Lo Hectors mother, Priam's Hecuba.
My sorrows sole relief, so many lost,
Is offered to appease an hostile Ghost.
Infernal sacrifices to the dead,
Even to my foe, my cursed womb has bred.
Hard heart, why break'st thou not? What hopes engage
Thy expectation? Mischienous Old Age,
For what reseru'st thou me? You cruel Powers,
Why lengthen you a poor old woman's hours
To see new funerals? O Priam, I
May call thee happy, after ruined Troy.
Happy in death. Thou see not this sad fate:
Thou lost thy life together with thy state.
Rich funerals attend thee, royal Maid:
And by thy Ancestors thou shall be laid.
O no! thy mothers tears, a heap of sand,
Must now content thee in a foreign land.
All, all is lost! Yet lives a little Boy
My last, and youngest joy, when I could joy;
For whom I condescend to lieu a space;
Here fostered by the courteous King of Thrace.
Mean while why stay we with the cleansing flood
To wash these wounds, and looks besmeared with blood?
Then with an aged pace, her horie hairs
All t^ne and scattred, to the Sea repaires.
And while the wretched said; You Troades,
A pitcher being to draw the brinish Seas:
She saw the eiected corpse of Polydore
Stuck full of wounds upon the beachie shore.
The Ladies sh^eeke; the dumb with sorrow stood:
Internal grief her voice, her tears, her blood,
At once deuout'd. And now, as if intranc't
Stares on the earth; sometimes to Heaven advanced
Her scouling brows: often on his visage gazed;
But oftener on his wounds. By anger raised,
Armed, and instructed; all on vengeance bent,
Still Queene-like, destinates his punishment.
And as a Lioness, robbed of her young,
Persues the vnseene-hunters steps: so stung
With fury, when her sorrow with her rage,
Had joined their powers; unmindful of her age,
But not of former greatness, ran with speed
To Polymnestor, author of this deed.
And craving conference, the Tyrant told
How she would show him sums of hidden gold
To give her Polydor. This held for true;
He thusty of his prey, with her withdrew.
And flattering her thus craftily begun:
Delay not, Hecuba, t'inrich thy son:
By all the Gods we justly will restore
What thou shall give, and what thou gave before.
She with a truculent aspect beheld
The falsely swearing King: with anger swelled.
Then calls the captive dames, upon him flies;
Who hides her fingers in his perjured eyes,
Extracts his eye balls: more then usual strong
With thirsty vengeance and the sense of wrong,
Her hand drownes in his skull; the roots vp-tore
Of this lost sight, imbrued with guilty gore.
The men of Thrace incensed for their King,
Weapons and stones at Hecuba now fling.
She, gnarling, bites the followed flints: her chaps,
For speech extended, bark. Of whose mis-hap^
That place is named. She, mindful of her old
Misfortunes, in Sithonian deserts howld.
Kind Trojans, Grecian foes, both love and hate;
Yea, all the Gods commiserate her fate.
So all, as Juno did to this descend;
That Hecuba deserved not such an end.
Auro^a had no leisure to lament
(Although those arms she favored) the event
Of Troy or Hecuba. Domestical
And nearer grief, affilicts her for the fall
Of Memnon who Achi^es lance imbrued
In Phrygian fields. This as the Goddess viewed,
The rosy die, that decked the Mornes vp-rise
Grew forth with pale, and clouds immured the skies.
Nor could endure to see his body laid
On funeral flames: but with her hair displaid,
As in that season, to high Io^^ repaires;
And kneeling, thus with tears, unfolds her cares.
To all inferior, whom the sky sustaines
(For mortals rarely honor me with Fanes)
A Goddess yet, I come: not to desire
Shines, Festiuals, nor Altars fraught with fire;
Yet should you weigh what I, a woman do,
That Night confine, and sacred Day renew,
I meant such: such suit not now our state;
Nor such desires infect the desolate.
Of Memnon robbed who glorious arms in vain
Ba^^ to^ his uncle, by Ac^^lles slain
In slow^^ of youth (so would you Gods) come I.
O chief of powers, a mothers sorrow, by
Some honor given him, lessen: death with fame
Recom^o^t Jove assents. When greedy flame
Devoured the funeral Pile; and curling fumes
Day ouer-cast: as when bright Sol assumes
From streams thick vapors, nor is seen below.
The flying, dying sparkles jointly grow
Into one body. Color, form, life, spring
To it from fire, which leuity does wing.
First like a Foul, forthwith a Foul indeed:
Innumerable sisters of that breed
Together whiske their feathers. Thrice they round
The funeral Pile; thrice raise a mournful sound.
In two battalions then divide their flight;
And like two strenuous nations fiercely fight:
Their opposites with beak and tallons rend;
Cuffe with their wings; in sacrifice descend.
Now dying on the ashes of the dead:
Remembering they were of the valiant bred.
These new-sprung Foul, men of their author call
Memnonides No sooner Sol through all
The Signs returns; but they reioyne again
In civil war, and dye upon the slame.
While others therefore do commiserate
Poo^e barking Hecuba in her changed fate:
Aurora her own grief intends; renewes
Her pious tears, which fall on earth in dewes.
Yet fates resist, that all the hopes of Troy
Should perish with her towers. The Son and Joy
Of Cythere^, with his household Gods,
And aged Sire, his pious shoulders lodes.
Of so great wealth he only chose that prize,
And his Ascanius: from Au^and^as flies
By seas, and shuns the wicked Thracian shore,
Defiled with blood of murdered Polyde^:
With prosperous winds arriving with his train
At Phoebus town, where Anius then did reign,
Apollo's holy Priest; who, with the rest,
Into the Temple leads his honored Guest:
The City, with the sacred places, shows;
And ^ees held by Latona in her throws.
In^ense on flames, and wine on incense powered;
Entra^les of slaughtered beeues by fire devoured;
His Guests conducts to Court: on carpet spread,
With Ceres and Lyaeus bounty fed.
When thus Anch^ses: o to Phoebus dear!
I am deceived; or, when I first was here,
Four daughters and a son thy solace crowned.
He shook his head, with sacred fillets bound;
And sighing said: o most renoun'd of men,
I was the father of five children then:
Whom now (such is the change of things!) you see
Half childlesse: for my absent son to me
I^ of small comfort; who, my Viceroy, reigns
I^sea-girt Andros, which his name retains.
Him, Delius with pro^hetick skill inspired.
A gift past credit, still to be admired,
My daughters Bac^has gave; above their suit
That all they touched should presently transmute
To wine, to come, and to Minerua's oil.
Rich in the use. To purchase such a spoil,
Great Troy's Depopulator, Atreus Heir,
(Lest you should think we have not borne a share
In your mis-haps) with axmed violence
Enforced them from me: charged to dispense
That heavenly gift unto the Argolian Hoft.
They escape by flight: two to Euboea crossed;
Two fled to Andros: these the Soldier
Persude, and threaten (if vnrender'd) war.
Fear nature now subdude: hid sisters were
By him resigned; forgive a brothers fear.
Not Hector nor Aeneas then were by
To guard his town, who so long guarded Troy.
About to bind their captive arms in bands;
Reating to heaven their yet unchained hands,
O father Bacchus help! While thus they prayed,
The Author of that gift presents his aid.
(If such a loss may be accounted so)
Yet how they lost their shapes I could not know;
Not yet can tell. It self the s^quell proves;
Converted to thy Wives white-feather'd Doves.
With such discourse they entertain the feast:
That to'ne away, dispose themselves to rest.
With day they rose; the Oracle exqui^e:
Who bids them to their ancient Nurse retire,
And kindred ^ shores. With them the King conuents,
And their departure with rich gifts presents.
A s^epter to Anchises gives: a brave
Rich cloak, a quiver to Ascanius gave:
A figured goblet on Aeneas pressed;
By Theban The^ses sent him, once his Guest.
Mylcan Alcon made what Therses sent;
And carved thereon this ample argument.
A City with seven gates of equal grace;
These painly character the name and place.
Before it, exequies, tombs, piles, bright fires.
Dames with spread hair, bare breasts, and torn at^res,
Decipher mourning: Nymphs appear to weep
For their dry Springs: sap-fearing cankers creep
On naked trees: Goats lick the foodlesse earth.
In midst of Theb^s, Orion's female birth
Vnd^nted stand: This proffers to the sword
Her manly breast; her hands her death afford,
For common safety. All the people mourn;
And with due funerals their bodies burn.
Yet lest the world should such a lineage lose,
Two youths out of their virgin ashes rose.
The^e O^phans wandering Fame Coronae calls:
Who celebrate them mothers funerals.
The ant^^ke brass with fulgent figures shined:
Whose b^im neat wreaths of guilt Acamhus bind.
Nor were the Trojan gifts of less expense:
Who gave a Censor for sweet frankincense,
An ample Chalice of a curious mold;
With these a crown, that shone with gemmes and gold.
In that the Tu^rans sprung from Teu^ers blood,
They sail to Creet: but Jove their stay with-stood.
I ^auing those hundred Cities, now they stand
For wished Ausonia's destinated strand.
Tossed by rough Winter and the wrath of seas,
They anchor at the faith loss Stroph^des.
Thence frighted by Aello; sail away
By steep Dulichium, stony Ithaca,
Samus high Neritus clasped by the Maine;
All subject to the slye Ulysses reign.
Then (...) Ambracia touch, the strife and grudge
Of angr^ Gods; the image of the Judge
Behold, them converted into stone:
Now to A^iacan Apollo known.
Then the ^odoncan vocal Oak they view;
Chaonia, (...) Mol^ssus children flew
With aidfull feathers from the impious flame;
Next to Phaeacia, rich in hort-yards, came;
Then to Epirus: at Buthrotos staid,
Whose scepter now the Phrygian Prophet swaid;
And see resembled Troy. Foretold of all
By Priam's Helenus, that would befall,
They reach Sicania. This three tongues extends
Into circumfluent Seas. Pachynus bends
To showrie Auster; flowrie Z^phyr blows
On Lilybaeums brows; Pelorus shows
His Cliffs to Boreas, and the Sea expelled
Arcturus. Under this their course they held
With stretching ores; and favored by the tide,
That night in Z^ncle's crooked harbor ride.
The right-side dangerous S^ylla, turbulent
Charybdis keeps the left; on ruin bent.
She belches swallowed ships from her profound:
Her sable womb, dogs ever rau'ning, round;
Yet bears a Virgins face: if all be true
That Poets sing, she was a Virgin too.
By many sought, as many she despised:
To Nymphs of seas, of sea-nymphs highly prized,
She bears her vizet^; and to them discouers
The history of her deluded lovers.
To whom thus Galatea, sighing, said;
While Scylla combed her hair. You, lovely Maid,
Are loved of generous-minded men, whom you
With safety may refuse, as now you do.
But I, great Nereus and blue Doris Seed,
Great in so many sisters of that breed;
By shunning of the Cyclops love prouok't
A sad revenge. Here tears her utterance chok't.
These cleansed by the marble-finger'd maid;
Who, having comforted the Goddess, said:
Relate, ^ most adored, nor from me keep
The wretched cause that makes a Goddess weep;
For I am faithful. Nereis consents,
And thus her grief to Cratis daughter vents.
The Nymph Siwethis bore a lovely Boy
To Faunus, Acis called; to them a joy;
To (...) a greater. For the sweetly-Faire
To me an innocent affection bare.
His blooming youth twice told eight Natals crown,
And sign his cheeks with scarce appearing down.
As I the gentle boy, so Polypheme
My love persu'd; unlike, a like extreme.
Whether my love to Acis, or my hate
To him were more, I hardly can relate.
Both infinite! o Venas, what a power
Has thy command! He still austere and sour,
A terror to the woods, from whom no guest
With life escapes, accustomed to feast
On humane flesh; who all the Gods above,
With them Olympus scorned; now stoops to love.
Forgetful of his flocks and caves, a fire
Feeds in his breast, conuerts into desire.
His feature now intends, now bends his care
To please: with rakes he combs his stubborn hair*
His bristles barbes with seithes: and by the brook's
Vnsolid mirror calmes his dreadful looks:
His thi^^ of blood, and love of slaughter cease;
Less cruel now: ships come and go in peace.
When Te^^^us came from Sicilian Seas,
Augurious^ clemus Eury^^ides,
And said to Polypheme, thy brows large sight
Shall by Ulysses be deprived of light.
O fool, he laughing said, thou tell a lie;
A female has already stolen that eye;
Thus flouts the Prophets true prediction:
And with extended paces stalks upon
The burdned shore; or weary, from the wave-
Bet beach retireth to his gloomy cave,
A promontory thrusts into the maine;
Whose cliffie sides the breaking Seas restrain:
The Cyclop this ascends: whose fleecy flock
Unforced follow. Seated on a rock;
His staff, a well-growne Pine, before him cast,
Sufficient for a yard-supporting mast;
He blows his hundred reeds: whose squeaking fills
The far-resounding Seas, and ecchoing hills.
Hid in a hollow rock, and laid along
By Acis side, I heard him sing this song.
O Galatea, more than lilly-white,
More fresh than flowrie meads, than glass more bright,
Higher than Alder-trees, than kids more blithe,
Smoother than shells whereon the surges drive,
More wished than winters Sun, or Summers air,
More sweet than grapes, than apples far more rare,
Cleerer than Ice, more seemly than tall Planes,
Softer than tender curds, or down of Swans,
More fair, if fixed, than Gardens by the fall
Of springs inchac't. Though thus, thou art withal
More fierce than saluage bulls, who know no yoke,
Then waves more giddy, harder than the oak,
Than vines or willow twigs more easly bent,
More stiff than rocks, than streams more violent,
Prouder than Peacocks praised, more rash than fire,
Than Bears more cruel, shall per than the brier,
Deafer than Seas, more fell than t^^d-on Snake;
And, if I could, what I would from thee take,
More speedy than the Hound-persued Hind,
Or chased clouds, or than the flying wind.
If known to thee, thou would thy flight repent;
Curse thy delay, and labor my content.
For I have Caves within the living stone;
To Summers heat, and Winters cold unknown:
Trees charged with Apples, spreading Vines that hold
A purple grape, and grapes resembling gold.
For thee I these pre^erue, affected Maid.
Thou Straw-berries shall gather in the shade,
Autumnall cornels, plummes with azure rin'd,
And wax-like yellow, of a generous kind;
Nor shall thou Ches-nuts want, if mine thou be,
Nor scalded wildings: served by every tree.
These flocks are ours: in valleys many stray,
Woods many shade, at home as many stay.
N^^ can I, should you ask, their number tell:
Who number theirs, are poor. How these excel,
Believe not me, but credit your own eyes:
See how their Vdders part their stradling thighs.
I^m my sheep-coats have new-weaned lambs;
And f^^sking kids late taken from their dams.
New milk, fresh curds and cream, with cheese well pressed,
Are never wanting for thy pallats feast*
Nor will we gifts for thy delight prepare
Of easy purchase, or what are not rare:
Dear, red and tallow, Roes, light-footed hares,
Nests, sea^d from cliffes, and doves produced by paires.
A rugged Be^res rough twins I found upon
The mountains late, scarce from each other known,
For thee to play with: finding these, I said,
My Mistress you shall serve. Come lovely Maid,
Come Galatea, from the surges rise,
Bright as the Morning; nor our gifts despise.
I know my self; my image in the brook
I lately saw, and therein pleasure took.
Behold how great! not Jupiter above
(For much you talk I know not of what Jove)
Is larged sized: curles on my brows displayed,
Affright; and like a grove my shoulders shade.
Nor let it your esteem of me impair,
That all my body bristles with thick hair.
Trees without leaves, and horses without manes,
Are sights unseemly: grass adornes the planes,
Wool sheep, and feathers foul. A manly face
A beard becomes: the skin rough bristles grace.
Amid my forehead shines one only light;
Round, like a mighty Shield, and clear of sight.
The Sun all objects sees beneath the sky:
And yet behold, the Sun has but one eye.
Besides your Seas obey my fathers throne:
I give you him for yours. Do you alone
Vouchsafe me pity, and your suppliant hear:
To you I only bow; you only fear.
Heaven, Jupiter his lightning I despise:
More dread the lightning (...) angry eyes.
And yet your scorn my patience less would move,
Were all contemned. Why should you Acis love,
And slight the Cyclop? why to him more free?
Although himself he please; and pleases thee,
The shore a meddow bounds; whereof one side
Is fringed with weeds, the other with the tide.
On this nor horned cattle ever fed,
Nor harmless sheep, nor gotes on mountains bred.
No bees from hence their thighs with honey lade;
Those flowers no geniall garlands ever made:
That grass never cut with sithes. Of mortals I
First thither came; my nets hung up to dry.
While I exposed the fishes which I took;
By their credulity hung on my hook,
Or masht in nets; (what would a lie behoue?
Yet such it seems) my prey began to move,
Display their sins, and swim as on the flood.
While I neglect their stay, and wondering stood;
They all by flight avoiding my command,
Together left their owner and the land.
Amazed, and doubting long; the cause I sought,
If either God, or Herb, this wonder wrought.
What herb, said I, has such a power? in haste
An herb I pulled, and gave it to my taste.
No sooner swallowed, but my entrails shook:
When forth with I another nature took.
Nor could refrain; but said, O Earth, my last
Farewell receive! in seas my self I cast.
The Sea-gods now vouchsafing my receipt
Into their sacred fellowship, entreat
Both Tethys and Oceanus, that they
Would take, what ever mortal was, away.
Whom now they hallow, and with charms nine times
Repeated, purge me from my humane crimes:
And ^ade me ^^uch beneath a hundred streams.
Forthwith the rivers rusht from sundry Realms;
And sea-rais'd surges roll above my crown.
As soon as streams retire, and seas were down,
Another body, and another mind;
Unlike the former, they to me assigned.
Thus much of Wonder I remember well:
Thence-forth insensible of what befell.
Then first of all this sea-greene beard I saw,
These dangling locks, which through the deep I draw;
Broad shoulder-blades, blew arms of greater might;
And thighs which in a fishes tail unite.
What boots this form? my grace with Gods of seas?
Or that a God? If thou affect not these?
While this he spoke, and would have uttered more,
Coy Scylla flies. He with impatience bore
His loves repulse: whom strong desires transport
To great Titani^n Circes horrid Court.
OVID'S METAMORPHOSIS. The Fourteenth Book.
THE ARGUMENT.
Enchanted Scylla, hemb'd with horrid shapes,
Becomes a Rock, Cercopeans turned to Apes.
Sibylla wears t'a Voice. Ulysses (...)
Transformed to Swine, are re-transform'd again
Picus a Bird: his Followers. Beasts. Despair.
Resolves sad-singing Canens into Air
The Mates of Diomed vnreconcil'd
Idalia turns to Foul. An Olius wild
Rude Apulus deciphers. Turn us (...)
Aeneas ships: these Berecynthia turns
To Sea-nymphs; who Alcinous Ship wish joy
Behold a Rock. The Trojan flames destroy
Besieged Ardea; from whose ashes springs
A meager Herne, that bears them on her wings.
Aeneas, Deis'd. Vertumnus tries
All shapes. Rhamnusia; for her (...),
Congeales proud Anaxaiete to Stone.
Cold Fountains boele with heat. TO a hea^enly thr^*
Mars Romulus assumes. Herfilia
Like grace receives: who joint in equal (...).
NOw Glaucus, throned in tumid floods, had past
High Aetna, on the jaws of Typh^^ cast;
Cyclopian fields, where never oxen drew
The furrowing plough, nor ever tillage knew;
Crookt Zancle; Rhegi^m on the other side;
The wrackfull Straights, whose double bounds divide
Sicilia from A^sonia: forward drives
Through spacious Tyrrhen Seas; at length arriues
At hearbie Hills, Phoebean Circes seat,
With sundry forms of monstrous beasts repleat.
When, mutually saluting, Glaucus said:
A God, o Goddess, pity: on your aid
Alone relies (if my desert might move
So dear a grace) th'asswagement of my Love.
For none than I, Titania, better knows
The power of herbs, that am transformed by those.
TO inform you better, in Italia
Against Messenia, on a sandy Bay,
I Scylla saw: it shames me to recite
My slighted court ship answered by her flight.
Do thou, if charms avail, in charms untie
Thy sacred tongue: or sovereign Herbs apply,
If of more power. Yet I affect no cure,
Nor end of Love: like heat let her endure.
But Circe (none to such desires more prone,
Or that the cause is in her self alone;
Or stung by Venus angry influence,
In that her Father published her offense)
Replied: The willing with more ease pursue;
Who wish the same, whom equal flames subdue.
For thou o well desern'st to be persude:
Give hope, and, credit me, thou shall be wooed,
Rest therefore of thy beauty confident:
Lo, I, a Goddess, radiant Sols descent,
In herbs so potent, and no less in charms;
Proffer my self, and pleasures to thy arms.
Scorn her that scorns thee; her, that seeks, pursue:
And in one deed revenge thy self of two.
Glaucus replied to her who sought him so:
First shady groves shall on the billows grow,
And Sea-weeds to the mountain tops remove;
Ere I (and Scylla living) change my love.
The Goddess frets: who since she neither could
Destroy a Deity, nor, loving, would;
On her, preferred before her, bends her ire:
And high-incensed with repulst desire,
Forthwith infectious drugs of dire effects
Together grindes; and Hecat's charms iniects:
A sullen robe indues, the Court forsakes
Through throngs of fawning beasts: her journey takes
To Rhegium opposite to Zancle's shore;
And treads the troubled waves that lowdly rore.
Running with vnwet feet on that Profound;
As if sh'had trod upon the solid ground.
A little Bay, by Scylla haunted, lies
Bent like a bow; sconst from the Seas and skies
Distemper, when the high-pitcht Sun inuades
The World with hottest beams, and shortens shades.
This with portenteous poisons she pollutes;
Be sprinkled with the juice of wicked roots:
In words dark and ambiguous, nine-times thrice
Enchantments mutters with her magic voice.
Now Scylla came; and, wading to the waste,
Beheld her hips with barking dogs embraced.
Stars back: at first not thinking that they were
Part of her self; but rates them, and does fear
Their threatening jaws: but those, from whom she flies,
She with her hales. Then looking for her thighs,
Her legs, and feet; in stead of them she found
The mouths of Cerberus; inuiron'd round
With rau'ning Curres: the backs of saluage beasts
Support her groine; whereon her belly rests.
Kind Glaucus wept; and Circes bed refused:
Who had so cruelly her Art abused.
But Scylla still remaining, Cir^^ hates;
Who for that cause destroyed Ulysses mates.
And had the Trojan navy drowned of late,
If not before transformed by powerful Fate
Into a Rock: the stony Prodigy
Yet eminent, from which the Seamen fly.
This, and Charybdis past with stretching oars;
The Trojan fleet, now near the Ausonian shores,
Cross winds, and violent, to Libya drove.
There, in her heart, and palace, Dido gave
Aeneas harbor: with impatience bears
Her husbands flight: forthwith a Pile she rearos,
Pretending sacrifice; and then does fall
Upon his sword: deceived, deceiving all.
Flying from Carthage, Eryx he re-gain'd;
There where his faithful friend Acestes reigned*
His fathers funerals re-solemniz'd,
He puts to Sea, with ships well-nigh surpised
By Iris flames. Hippotade's Command,
The sulphur-fuming Isles, the rockie Strand
Of Acheloian Sirens leaving, lost
His Pilot: to Inarime then crossed,
To Prochyta, and Pithecusa, walled
With barten hills; so of her people called.
For Jupiter, detesting much the sly
And fraudulent Cercopeans perjury,
Into deformed beasts transformed them then;
Although unlike, appearing like to men:
Contracts their limbs, their noses from their brows
He flats, their faces with old wrinkles plowes;
And, covering them with yellow hair, affords
This dwelling, first depriving them of words,
So much abused to perjury and wrongs:
Who iabber, and complain with stammering tongues.
Then on the right hand left Parthenope,
Misenus on the left, far-stretcht in Sea,
So named of his Trumpetor: thence, past
By slimie Marshes, and anchor cast
At Cuma; entering long-liu'd Sibyls caves.
A passage through obscure Auernus craves
TO his Fathers Manes. She erects her eyes,
Long fixed on earth, and with the Deities
Reception ^ill'd, in sacred rage replied.
Great things thou seek'st, o thou so magnified
For mighty deeds: thy piety through flame,
Thy arm through Armies consecrate thy name.
Yet fear not, Trojan, thy desires enjoy:
TO Elysian Fields, the infernal Monarchy,
And Fathers Shade, I will thy person guide:
No way to noble Virtue is denide.
Then to a Golden bough directs his view,
Which in Auernian Juno's Hort-yard grew:
And bade him pull it from the sacred tree.
Aeneas her obeyes: and now does see
The Spoils of dreadful Hell; his Grand-sires, lost
In death, and great Anchises aged Ghost.
(...) Is by his bounty: that the Cyc^ops foul
And hungry maw had not devoured my Soul:
That now I may be buried when I die;
Or at the least, not in his entrails lie.
O what a heart had I! with fear bereft
Of soul and sense! when I behind was left,
And saw your flight! I had an Outcry made,
But that afeard to have my self betrayed.
Yours, almost had Ulysses ship destroyed.
I saw him ^iue out of the mountains side
A solid rock, and dart it on the Maine:
I saw the furious Giant once again,
When mighty stones with monstrous strength he ^lung:
Like q^a^ries by a warlike engine slung.
Left ship should sink with waves and stones I fear:
Not then remembering, that I was not there.
He, when your flight had rescued you from death,
O^e Aetna paces; sighing clouds of breath:
And groping in the woods, bereft of sight,
Incounters rustling rocks: mad with despite
Extends his bloody arms to under waves,
The Greeks per^ues with curses; and thus raues.
O would some God Ulysses would engage,
Or some of his, to my insatiate rage!
I^d gnaw his heart, his living members rend,
G^lpe down his blood till it again ascend,
And cra^^^ his panting sinews. O, how light
A loss, or none, were then my loss of sight!
This spoke, and more. My joints pale horror shook,
To see his (...), and slaughter-smeared look,
His bloody hands, his eyes deserted seat,
Vast limbs, and beard with humane gore concreat.
Death stood before mine eyes (my least dismay:)
Now thought my self surpised; now, that I lay,
Sou'st in his paunch. That time presents my view,
When two of ours on dashing stones he threw:
Then on them like a shagged Lion lies;
Their entrails, flesh, yet moving arteries,
White marrow, with crasht bones, at once deuoures.
I, sad, and bloudlesse stood: fear chilled my powers,
Seeing him eat, and cast the horrid food;
Raw lumpes of flesh, wine mixed with clotted blood.
Even such a fate my wretched thoughts propound.
Long lying hid, afraid of every sound,
A^horring death, yet covering to die;
With mast, and herbs repelling famine; I,
Alone, forlorn, to death and torment left,
This ship espied: this by my gestures weft,
Tranne to shore, nor safety vainly seek:
A Tr^ian vessel entertained a Greek.
Now, worthy friend, your own adventures tell;
And what, since first you put to sea, befell.
He told how Aeolus reigned in Thus^an Seas,
Storme-fettering Aeolus Hippotades,
Who nobly gave to their Dulichian Guide
A wind, enclosed in an oxes hide.
Nine days they sailed with successful gales;
Sought shores descried: the tenth had blancht their sails;
When greedy Sailers, thinking to have found
A mass of enuy'd gold, the wind unbound.
This through rough seas the Navy backward drives,
Which at the Aeolian port again arriues.
To Lestrigonian Lamus ancient town
From thence, said he, we came. That countries crown
(...) Prosfering th'insidious Cup, her magic wand
About to raise, he thrusts her from her stand;
And with drawn sword the trembling Goddess frights.
When vowed faith with her fair hand she plights;
And graced him with her nuptial bed: who then
Demands in dowry his transfigur'd men.
Sprinkled with bitter juice, her wand reuerst
Above our crowns, and charms with charmers dispers^;
The more she chants, we grow the more upright,
Our b^^stles shed, our cloven feet unite,
Shoulders and arms possess their former grace.
With tears our weeping General we embrace,
And hang about his neck: nor scarce a word
Breathes through our lips, but such as thanks afford.
From hence our pass was for a year deferred;
In that long time much saw I, and much heard:
Of which, a Maid (one of the four, prepared
For sacred service) closely this declared.
For while my Chief with Circe spotts alone,
She showed a youthful Image of white stone
Closed in a Shrine, with crowns imbellished;
Who bare a Wood-pecker upon his head.
Demanding whose it was, why placed there,
Why he that Bird upon his summit bare?
I will, replied she, o Macareus, tell
In this my Mist^is power: observe me well.
Saturnian Picus in Ausonia reigned,
Who generous horses for the battle trained.
His form, such as you see: whom had you known,
You would have taken this feature for his own.
His mind as beautiful. Nor yet could he
Four^ Grecian wrastlings in the Olympicks see
The Dryades, in Latian mountains borne,
His looks attract: nor Nymphs of fountains seor^e
To sue for pity. Those whom Albul^,
Nu^nicus, Anio, Alm^ short of way,
And headie: N^r sustain, the shadie Flood
Of Farfarus, the Scythian Cynthi^s wooed*
Inuiron'd marshes, and neighboring lakes.
Yet for one only Nymph the rest forsakes:
Who whilome on Mount P^latine, the fair
Venilia to the two-fac'd Ianus bare.
The Maid, now marriageable, honored
Laurentian Picus with her nuptial bed.
Her beauty admirable: yet more famed
For artfull song; and thereof Canens named.
Her voice the woods and rocks to passion moves;
Tames saluage beasts, the troubled Rivers smooths,
Detaines their hasty course; and, when she sings,
The birds neglect the labor of their wings.
While her sweet voice celestial music yields;
Young Picus follows in Laurentian Fields
The sal^age Bore, upon a fiery Steed;
Armed with two darts: clad in a Tyrian weed
With gold close-buckl'd. Thither also came
The daughter of the Sun; who left her name.
Retaining fields, and on those fruitful hills
Her sacred lap with dewie Simples fills.
Seeing unseen, his sight her sense amazed:
The gathered herbs fell from her as she gazed:
Whose bones a marrow-melting flame enclosed.
But when she her distraction had composed;
About t'impart her wish, attendanc^e,
And swiftness of his horse, access deny.
Thou shall not so escape, said she, although
The winds should wing thee; if my self I know,
If herbs retain their power, if charms at least
My trust deceive not. Then creates a Beast
Without a body, bid to run before
The Kings persuit; and made the ayrie Bore
To take a thicket, where no horse could force
His barred access. He leaves his foming horse
On foot to follow a deceitful Shade,
With equal hopes? And through the forest strai'd.
New Vows she straight conceiueth, aid implores:
And Gods unknown with unknown charms adores.
Wherewith inured to eclipse the pale-fac't Moon:
And cloud her Fathers splendour at high Noone.
And now with pitchie fogs obscures the Day,
From earth exhaled. His Guard mistake their way
In that deceitful Night, and from his straid.
When she, the time and place befitting said:
By those fair eyes, which have inthralled mine;
And by that all alluring face of thine,
Which makes a Goddess sue; assuage the fire
^y thee incenst; and take unto thy Sire
The all-illuminating Sun: nor prove
Hard-hearted to Titanian Circes love.
Her, and her prayers, despised; What ere thou art,
I am not thine, said he: my captive heart
Another holds; and may she hold it long.
Nor will I with external Venus wrong
Our nuptial faith, so long as Fate shall give
Life to my veins, and ^a^us daughter live.
Tita^ia, tempting often, as often in vain;
Thou shall not escape my vengeance, nor again
Return to Canens. What the wronged can do,
A wronged Lover, and a Woman too;
Thou shall said she, by sad experience prove?
For I a woman, wronged and wronged in love.
Twice turns she to the East, twice to the West;
Thrice touched him with her wand, three charms expressed.
He flies; at his unwonted speed admired;
Then saw the feathers which his skin attired:
Who forthwith seeks the woods; and angry still,
Hard oaks assailes, and wounds them with hi, bill.
His wings the purple of his cloak assume;
The gold that claspt his garment turns to plume,
And now his neck with golden circle chains:
Of Picus nothing but his name remains.
The Courtiers Picus call, and seek him round
About the fields, that was not to be found.
Yet Circe find (for now the day grew fair,
The Sun and Winds set free to cleanse the air)
And charge her with true crimes: their King demand
With threatening looks, and weapons in their hand.
She sprinckles them with juice of wicked might.
From Erebus and Chaos coniures Night,
With all her Gods; and Hecate intreates
With tedious mumblings. Woods forsake their seats,
Trees pale their leaves, Herbs blush with drops of gore,
Earth groans, dogs howl, rocks horcely seem to rore:
Upon the tainted ground black Serpents slide;
And through the air unbodied Spirits alide.
Frighted with terrors, as they trembling stand,
She strokes their wondering faces with her wand:
Forthwith the shapes of Saluage beasts inuest
Their former forms; not one his own possessed.
Ph^ebus now entering the Tartessian Maine,
Sad Caneus with her eyes and soul, in vain
Expects her Spouse. Her servants she excites
To run about the woods with blazing lights.
Who not content to weep, to tear her hair,
And beat her breasts (though those present her care)
In haste forsakes her roof; and frantic, strayes
Through broad-spred fields. Six nights, as many days,
Without or sleep, of sustenance, she fled
Over hills and dales, the way which fortune led.
Now tired with grief and travel, Tybris last
Beheld the Nymph: on his cool banks she cast
Her feeble limbs: there weeps, and weeping sung
Her sorrows with a softly warbling tongue.
Even so the dying Swan with low-rais'd breath,
Sings her own exequies before her death.
At length her marrow melts with griefs despair:
And by degrees she vanishes to Air.
Yet still the place does memorize her same:
Which of the Nymph the Rural Ca^ens name.
In that long year, much, and such deeds as these
I saw and heard. Vn-neru'd with restie ease,
Again we put to Sea: by Circe told
Of our hard passage, and the manifold
Disasters to ensue, I grew afraid
(I must confess) and here ariuing, staid.
Macareus ends. Cateta Vr^e-inclos'd,
This verse had on her marble tomb imposed.
Here, with due fites, my pious Nurse-child me
Caieta burnt; from Grecian fires set free,
They loose their cables from the grassie strand;
Avoiding Cir^^s guil^full palace, stand
For those tall groves, where Tybris, dark with shades,
In Tyrrhen Seas his sandy streams vnlades.
The throne of Faunus son, the Latian star
Lauini gain; but not without a war.
War with a furious Nation is commenst;
Stern Turnus for his promised wife incenst:
While all Hetruria to Latium swarms:
Hard victory long sought with pensive arms.
To get Recrutes from foreign States they try.
Nor Trojans, nor Rutulians want supply.
Nor to Euanders town Aenea^s went
In vain: though vainly Venulus was sent
To banished Di^meds City, late immured:
Those fields Iapygian Daunus had insur'd
To him in dowre. When Venulus had done
His embassy to Tydeus warlike son:
The Prince excused his aid; as loath to draw
The subjects of his aged father in law
T'vnnecessary war: that none remain
Of his to arm. Left you should think I feign;
Though repetition Sorrow renouates;
Yet, while I suffers hear the worst of fa^es.
After that Pergamus our prey became,
And lofty Ilium fed the Grecian flame:
A Virgin, for a Virgins rape, let fall
Her Vengeance, to Oileus due, on all.
Scattered on faithless Seas with furious storms,
We, wretched Graecians, suffered all the forms
Of horror: lightning, night, showers, wrath of skies,
Of Seas, and dire Capharean cruelties.
To abridge the story of so sad a fate;
Now Priam would have pitied our estate.
Yet Pallas snatched me from the swallowing Maine;
Then from my ungrateful Country chac't again.
For Venus, mindful of her ancient wound,
New woes inflicts. Much on the vast profound,
Much suffering in terrestrial conflicts, I
Often called them happy, whom the injury
Of public tempests, and importunate
Capharcus drowned: and now enui'd their fate.
The worst endured; with seas and battles tired,
My men an end of their long toil desired.
But A^mon, full of fire, and fiercer made
By usual slaughters: What remains (he said)
O mates, which now our patience would eschew?
Though willing, what can Cytherea do
More than sh'hath done? when worse mishaps affright,
Then prayers avail: but when Misfortunes spite
Her worst inflicts, then fear is of no use:
And height of ills, security produce.
Let Venus hear: although she hate us all,
As all she hates that serve our General)
Yet let us all despise her empty hate;
Whose Power has made us so unfortunate.
Pl^uronion A^man angry Venus stung:
Revenge reviving with his lavish tongue.
Few like his words the most severely chid
His tongues excess. About to have replied,
His speech, and path of speech, at once grew small,
His hair con^erts to plume; plumes cover all
His neck, back, bosom: larger feathers spring
From his rough arms, and now his elbowes wing.
His feet divide to toes, hard horn extends
From his changed face, and in a bill descends.
Rhetenor, Nycteus, Lycus, Abas, I Would,
Admire! and in their admiration tried
Like destiny. Most of my Soldiers grew
Forthwith new Foul; and round about us flew.
If you inquire, what shape their own vn-mans;
They are not, yet are like to silver Swans.
These barren fields, with this poor remnant, I,
As son in law to Daunus, scarce enjoy.
Thus far Oenides, Venulus forsakes
Tydides Kingdom: by Puteoli takes
His way, and through Mesapia: there suruaid
A Cave, inuiron'd with a syluan shade,
Distilling streams. By halfe-goat Pan possessed:
Which erst the Wood-nymphs with their beauties blessed.
They terrified at first with sudden dread,
From home bred Apulus, the shepherd, fled.
Straight, taking heart, despised his persuit:
And danced with a measure-keeping foot.
He scoffs: their motion clowne-like imitates:
Nor only raileth, but obscenely prates.
Nor cea^eth, till a tree inuests his throat;
A tree whose berries his behavior note:
An olive wild, which bitter fruit affords,
Becomes; dis-seasned with his bitter words.
Th'Embassador returns without the sought
Aetolian succors: the Rutulians fought
Against foes and fortune; of that hope deprived:
Whole srteames of blood from mutual wounds derived.
Lo, firebrarnds to the Navy Turnus bears:
And what escaped drowning, burning fears.
Pitch, rozen, and like ready food for fire,
Now Valcan feed: the hungry flames aspire
Up to the sails along the lofty mast;
And catch the yards, with curling smoke embraced.
But when the Mother of the Gods beheld
Those blazing Pines, from top of Ida feld;
Loud shalmes and Cymballs vsher'd her repair:
Who, drawn by bridled Lions through the air,
Thus said: Thy wicked hands to small effect,
O Turnus violate, what we protect.
Nor shall the greedy fire a part of those
Tall Woods devour, which shelter our repose.
With that she thunders, pouring down amain
Thick storms of skipping hail, and clouds of rain.
The Astr^an Sons in swift concursions join;
Tossing the troubled air, and Neptunes brine.
One she imployes, whose speed the rest out-strips;
That brake the Cables of the Ph^ygian Ships,
And d^aue them under the high-swelling Flood.
The timber softens, flesh proceeds from wood,
The crooked Stern to heads and faces grows,
The Oars to swimming legs, fine feet and toes;
What were their holds, to ribbed sides are grown,
The lengthfull keele presenting the backbone;
The yards to arms, to hair the tackling grew:
As formerly, so now, their color blew.
And they, but lately of the floods afraid;
Now in the floods, with virgin pastime, played.
These Sea-nymphs, borne on mountains, celebrate
The Seas, for^etfull of their former state.
Yet weighing, what themselves so often endured
On high-wrought waves, often sinking ships secured;
Ex^^, ^span; as Glacians ca^^y: those
They hate, memorious of the Trojan woes.
Who saw Ulysses ships in surges queld
With pleased eyes, with pleased eyes beheld
Alcinous ship, in swiftness next to none,
Immovable; the wood transformed to stone.
'Twas thought this wondrous prodigy would fright
The Rutuli, and make them ceasoe from fight.
Both parts persist, both have their Gods to friend;
And Valor no less potent: nor contend
Now for Lauinia, for Latinus crown,
Nor dot all Kingdom; but for fair renown:
Ashamed to lay their bruised arms aside,
Till death or conquest had the quarrel tried.
Venus her son victorious sees at length.
Great Turnus fell; strong Ardea falls, of streng^h
While Turnus stood, decour'd by barbarous flame,
In dying cinders buried. From the same
A Foul, unknown to former ages, springs;
And fannes the ashes with her houering wings.
Pale color, leanenesse, shreeking sounds of woe,
The image of a captive City show.
Who also still the Cities name retains:
And with selfe-beating wings of Fate complains.
And now Aeneas virtues terminate
The wrath of Gods, and Juno's ancient hate.
An opulent foundation having laid
For young Iuius, by his merit made
Now fit for Heaven: the Power, who rules in Love
The Gods solicits; then, embracing Jove:
O Father, never yet to me unkind;
Now o enlarge the bounty of thy mind.
A Godhead, mean, so it a Godhead be,
Aeneas give; that art to him by me.
A Grandfather: th'vn-amiable realms
Suffice it once to have seen, and S^ygian streams.
The Gods agree; nor Juno's looks dissent.
Who with a cheerful freeness forward bent.
Then Jove; He well deserves a Deity:
Thy suit, fair Daughter, to thy wish enjoy.
She, joyful, thanks return: and through the air,
Dawne by he^yoaked Dones, lights on the bare
L^u en^^an shotes; where smooth Numicius creepes
Through whispering reeds into the neighbor Deepes.
Who (...) him from Aeneas wash away
All unto death obnoxious, and convey
It silently to Seas. The horned Flood
O eyes; and what subsists by mortal food,
With water pu^g'd, and only left behind
His better parts. His mother they refinde
Anoints with sacred odors, and his lips
In Nectar, mingled with Ambrosia, dips;
So deifi'd: whom Ind^ges Rome calls;
Honored with altars, shrines, and sestiualls.
Two-nam'd Ascan^us Latium then obeyed,
And Alba: next, the scepter Syluius swai'd.
His son Latinus, held that ancient name,
And crown. Him Epitus, renowned by Fame,
Succeed. Then Capys. Capetus, his Son
Succeeded him. Next Tiberine begun
His ^^^gne: who, drowned in Thuscan waters; gave
Those streams his name: who Remulus got, and brave*
Sold Acrota. But Remulus was slain
With thunder; who the Thunderer durst feign.
More moderate Acrota resigned his throne
To (...): upon the Mount whereon
He reigned, entombed; which yet his name retains.
Over the Palatines next Procas reigns.
Pomona flourisht in those times of case:
Of all the Latian Hamadryades,
None f^uitfull Hort-yards held in more repute;
Or took more care to propagate their fruit.
Thereof so named. Nor streams, nor shadie groves,
But trees producing generous burdens loves.
Her hand a hook, and not a iauelin bare:
Now prunes luxurious twigs, and boughs the dare
Transcend their bounds: now slits that bark, the bud
Inserts; enforced to nurse an others b^ood.
Nor suffers them to suffer thirst, but brings
To moisture-sucking roots, soft-sliding Springs.
Such her delight, her care. No thoughts extend
To loves unknown desires: yet to defend
Her self from rapefull Rurals, round about
Her Hort-yard walls; t'auoid, and keep them out.
What left the skipping Satyrs vn-assai'd:
Rude Pan, whose horns Pine-bristled garlands shade;
Silenus, still more youthful than his years;
Or he who thieves with hook, and member fears,
To taste her sweetness? but far more than all
Vertumnus loves; yet were his hopes as small.
How often, like a painful Reaper, came,
Laden with weighty sheafes; and seemed the same!
Often wreathes of new mowed grass his brows array;
As though then excercis'd in making hay.
A good now in his hardened hands he bears,
And newly seems to have vnyok't his Stee^es.
Often Vines and fruit trees with a pruning hook
Corrects, and dresses; often a lather took
To gather fruit: now with this crooked skeine
A Soldier seems; an Angler with his cane:
And various figures daily multiplies
To win access, and please his longing eyes.
Now, with a staff, an old-wife counterfeits;
On holy have, a painted miter sets.
The Ho^t yard entering, admires the fair
And pleasant f^uits: So much, said he, more rare
Then all the Nymphs whom Albula enjoy,
Ha^le spotless flower of Maiden chastity:
And kissed the praised. Nor did the Virgin know,
(So innocent) that old wives kissed not so.
Then, sitting on a bank, observes how
The pregnant boughs with Autums burden bow.
Hard by, an Elm with purple clusters shined:
This p^aising, with the Vine so closely joined;
Yet, said he, if this Elm should grow alone,
Except for shade, it would be prized by none:
And so this Vine, in amorous foldings wound,
If but dis-ioyn'd would creep upon the ground.
Yet art not thou by such examples led:
But shun'st the pleasures of a happy bed.
Nor would thou would: net Helen was so sought,
Nor the for whom the lustful Centaures fought,
As thou should be; no nor the wife of bold.
And t^morous Ulysses. Yet, behold
Though thou auerse to all, and all eschew;
A thousand men, Gods, de^^-gods, pursue
Thy constant scorn; and every deathlesse Power
Which Alha's high and shady hills imbowre.
Put thou, it wise, (...) thou wilt well married be;
Or an old woman trust, who credit me,
Affects thee more than all the rest, refuse
These common wooers, and Vertumnus choose.
Accept me for his gage; since so well none
Can know him; by himself not better known.
He is no wanderer, here is his delight:
Nor loves, like common lovers, at first sight.
Thou art the first, so thou the last shall be:
His life he only dedicates to thee.
Besides his youth perpetual; excellent
His beauty; and all shapes can represent.
Wish what you will, what ever has a name;
Such shall you see him. Your delights the same:
The first fruits of your Hort-yard are his due;
Which joyfully he still accepts from you.
But neither what these pregnant trees produce
He now desires, no^ herbs of pleasant juice:
Nor ought, but only You. O pity take!
And what I speak, suppose Vertumnus spoke.
Reuengefull Gods, Id^lia, still severe
To such as slight her, and Ramnusia fear.
The more to fright you from so foul a crime,
Receive (since much I know from aged Time)
A story, generally through Cyprus known;
To mollify a heart more hard than stone.
Ip^^, of humble birth, by chance did view
The high-borne Anaxarete, who drew
Her blood from T^ucer. Seeing her, his eyes
Extracts a fire, wherein his bosom f^ies.
Long strugl^ng, when no reason could reclaim
Hi fury, to her house the Suppliant came.
Now to her Nurse his wretched love displaid;
And by her loster'd hopes implored her aid:
Now humbly sues to some of most repute
In her affection, to prefer his suit.
Sad letters of this desperate passions bears:
Often myrtle garlands, sprinkled with his tears,
Hangs on the posts: the stony threshold lades
With his soft sides, and rigid doors vp-braids.
But she more cruel than the seas, imbroyl'd
With rising storms; more hard than iron, boiled
In fire-red furnaces; or rooted rocks;
Disdaines the lover, and his passion mocks:
Who to her forward deeds adds bitter words
Of no less scorn, nor hope to love affords.
Impatient of his torment, and her hate;
These words, his last, he vtters at her gate.
O Anaxerete, thou have over come!
Nor shall my life be longer wearisome
To thy disdain. Triumph, o too unkind!
Sing Paeans, and thy brows with laurel bind.
Thou have o're-come; lo, willingly I die:
Proceed, and celebrate thy cruel joy
Yet is there something in me, never the less,
That thou will raispe; and my deserts confess.
Think how my love my heart no sooner left
Then life it self: of both at once bereft.
Nor rumor, but even I will death present
In such a form, as shall thy pride content.
But O you Gods, if you our actions fee
(This only I implore) remember me!
Let after ages celebrate my name:
And what you take from life, afford to same.
Then heaues his meger arms and watery eyes
To those known posts, often crowned with wreaths, and ties
A halter to the top. Such wreathes, he said,
Best please; hard-hearted, and inhumane Maid!
Then turning toward her, he forward sprung:
When by the neck the unhappy lover hung.
Struck by his sprawling feet, wide open flies
The sounding wicket; and the deed descries.
The servants shreeke; the Vainly raised bore
To His mothers house; his father dead before.
His breathless corpse she in her bosom placed;
And in her arms his key-cold limbs embraced.
Lamenting long, as woeful parents use;
And having paid a woeful mothers dues;
The mournful Funeral through the City led;
And to prepared fires conueyes the dead.
This sorrowful Procession passing by
Her house, which bordering on the way, their cry
To the ears of Anaxarete arriues:
Whom now stern Nemesis to ruin drives
We Will see, said she, these sad solemnities:
And forthwith to the lofty window highes.
When seeing Iphis on his fatal bed;
Her eyes grew stiff; blood from her visage sled,
Usurped by palenesse. Striving to retire,
Her feet stuck fast; nor could to her desire
Divert her looks: for now her stony heart
^t self dilated into every part.
This Salamis yet keeps, to clear your doubt,
^n Venus temple; called, the Looker-out.
Informed by this, o lovely Nymph, decline
Thy former pride, and to thy lover join.
So may thy fruits survive the Vernall frost:
Nor after by the rapefull winds be tossed.
When this the God, who can all shapes indue,
Had said in vain; again himself he grew:
Th'abiliments of heatlesse Age deposed.
And such himself unto the Nymph disclosed,
As when the Sun, subduing with his reyes
The muffling clouds, his golden brow displaies.
Who force prepares: of force there was no need;
Struck with his beauty, mutually they bleed.
Unjust Amulius next the Ausonian State
I'y strength usurped. The nephews to the late
Deposed Numi^or, him re-inthrone:
Who Rome, in Pales Feasts, immured with stone.
Now Tatius leads the Sabine Sires to war.
Tarp^ia's hands her fathers gates vnbarre:
To death with a^ melets pressed; her treasons meed.
The Sabine Sires like silent Wolves proceed
T'inuade their sleeping sons, and seek to seaz^
Upon their gates; barred by Iliades.
One Juno opens: though no noise at all
The hinges made; yet by the bars loud fall
Descried by Venus: who had put it too;
But Gods may not, what Gods have done, vndo^.
Aus^nian Nymphs the places bordering
To Ianus held, inchased with a spring.
Their aid sh'implores. The Nymphs could not deny
A suit so just, but all their floods untie.
As yet the Fane of Ianus open stood:
Nor was their way impeached by the flood.
Beneath the fruitful spring they sulphur turn;
Whose hollow veins with black bitumen burn:
With these the vapors penetiate below;
And waters, late as cold as Alpin snow,
The fire it self in seruour dare provoke:
Now both the posts with flagrant moisture smoke.
These now-rais'd streams the Sabine Power exclude,
Till Mars his Soldiers had their arms indu'd.
By Romulus then in Batalia led:
The Roman fields the slaughtred Sabines spread;
Their own the Romans: Fathers, Sons in law,
With wicked steel, blood from each other draw.
At length conclude a peace; nor would contend
Unto the last. Two Kings one throne ascend
With equal rule. But noble Tatius slain,
Both Nations under Romulus remain.
When Mars laid by his shining caske; and then
Thus spoke unto the Sire of Gods, and men.
Now, Father, is the time (since Rome is grown
To such a greatness, and depends on One)
To put in act thy neuer-failing word;
And Romulus a heavenly throne afford.
You, in a synod of the Gods, professed
(Which still I carry in my thankful breast)
That one of mine (this o now ratify!)
Should be advanced unto the starry sky.
Jove condescends: with clouds the day benights;
And with flame-winged thunder earth affrights.
Mars, at the sign of his assumption,
Leanes on his lance, and strongly vaults upon
His bloody Chariot; lashes his hot horses
With sounding whips, and their full speed inforces:
Who, scouring down the ayrie region, staid
On fair mount Palatine, obscured with shade:
There Romulus assumeth from his Throne,
Vn-kinglike rendering justice to his own.
Rapt through the air, his mortal members waste,
Like melting Bullets by a Slinger cast:
More heavenly fair, more fit for lofty shrines;
Our great and sca^let-clad Quirinus shines.
Then Juno to the sad Hers^lia
(Lost in her sorrow) by a crooked way
Sent Iris to deliver this Command.
Star of the Latian, of the Sabine land;
Thy sexes glory: worthy then the vow
Of such a husband, of Quirinus now;
Suppress thy tears. If thy desire to see
Thy husband so exceed, then follow me
Unto those woods, which on mount Querin spring;
And shade the temple of the Roman King.
Iris obayes: and by her painted Bow
Downe-sliding, so much lets Hersilia know.
When she, scarce lifting up her modest eyes:
O Goddess (which of all the Deities
I know not; sure a Goddess) thou clear light,
Conduct me, o conduct me to the sight
Of my dear Lord: which when the Fates shall show,
They heaven on me, with all the gifts, bestow.
Then, with T^aumantias entering the high
Romu^a^ Hills, a Star shot from the Sky,
Whose golden beams inflamed Hersilia's hair;
When both together mount th'enlightned Air.
The Builder of the Roman City took
Her in his arms, and forthwith changed her look:
To whom the name of Ora he assigned.
This Goddess now is to Quirinus joined.
OVID'S METAMORPHOSIS. The Fifteenth Book.
THE ARGUMENT.
Black Stones con^ert to White. Pythagoras
In Ilium's lingering war Euphorbus was.
Of transmigrations, of the change of things,
and strange eff^cts, the learned Samian sings.
Recur'd Hippoly^us (...) dei^ide;
Whom safer Age, and name of Virbius bids.
Aegeria thawes into a Spring. From Earth
Prophetic Tages takes his wondrous birth.
A Spear a Tree. Gra^^ Cippus virtues (...)
The ^rowne, his Horues present. Appollo's Son
Assumes a Serpents shape. The Soul of War,
Great Caesar, slain, becomes a Blazing Star.
MEanewhile, a man is sought that might sustain
So great a burden, and succeed the reign
Of such a King: when true-foreshewing Fame
To God-like Numa destinates the same.
He, with his Sabine rites vnsatisfi'd
To greater things his able mind applied
In Natures search. Enticed with these cares,
He leaves his countries Cures, and repaires
To Croton's City! asks, what Grecian hand
Those walls erected on Italian land?
One of the Natives, not unknowing old,
Who much had heard and seen, this story told.
Jove's son, inrich't with his Iberian prey,
Came from the Ocean to Lacinia
With happy steps: who, while his cattle fed
Upon the tender clouer, entered
Heroic Croton's roof; a welcome Guest:
And his long travel recreates with rest.
Who said, departing; In the following age
A City here shall stand. A true presage.
There was one Mycilus, Argolian
Alemons issue: in thoso times, no man
More by the Gods affected. He, who bears
The dreadful Club, to him in sleep appears;
And said: Begone, thy countries bounds forsake;
To stony Aesarus thy journey take.
And threatens vengeance if he dis-obay.
The God and Sleep together flew away.
He, rising, on the Vision meditates:
Which in his doubtful soul he long debates.
The God commands; the Law forbids to go:
Death due to such as left their Country so.
Clear Sol in seas his radiant forehead veiled,
Swart Night her brows exalts, with stars impaled;
The self same God the same command repeats:
And greater plagues to disobedience threats.
Afraid, he now prepares to change his own
For for^eine seats. This through the City blown;
Accused for breach of laws, arraigned and tried;
They prove the fact, not by himself denied.
His hands and eyes then lifting to the sky:
O thou, whom twice Six Labors deifie,
Assist, that art the author of my crime!
White stones and black they vs's in former time;
The white acquit, the black the pris'nor cast:
And in such sort this heavy sentence past.
Black stones all threw into the fatal Vrne:
But all to white, turned out to number, turn.
Thus by Aleides power the sad Decree
Was strangely changed, and Mycilus set free.
Who, thanking Amphitryoniades,
With a full fore-wind crossed the I^nian Seas.
Lacedemonian Tarentum past,
Fair Sybaris, Neaethus running fast
By Salentinum, Thurin's crooked Bay,
High Temesis, and strong Iapygia:
Scarce searching all that shores sea-beaten bound,
The fatal mounth of Aesarus out-found.
A Tomb, hard by, the sacred bones enclosed
Of famous Croton: here, as erst imposed,
Alemons son erects his City walls:
Which of th'intombed he Crotona calls.
Of this Original, this City boasts:
Built by a Grecian on Italian coasts.
Here dwelt a Samian, who at once did fly
From Samos, Lords, and hated Tyranny:
Preferring voluntary banishment.
Though far from Heaven, his mind's divine ascent
Drew near the Gods: what natures self denies
To humane Sight, he saw with his Souls eyes.
All apprehended in his ample breast,
And studious cares; his knowledge he professed
To silent and admiring men: who taught
The Worlds original, past humane thought:
What nature was, what God: that cause of things;
From whence the Snow, fra^ whence the lightning springs
Whether Jove thunder, or the winds that rake
The breaking Clouds: what caused the Earth to quake;
What course the Star^es observed; what e're lay hid
From vulgar sense: and first of all forbid
With slaughtred creatures to defile our boords,
In such, though vnbeleeu'd; yet learned Words.
Forbear your selves, o Mortals, to pollute
With wicked food: corn is there; generous fruit
Oppress their boughs; plump grapes their Vines attire;
There are sweet herbs, and sauory roots, which fire
May mollify; milk, honey redolent
With flowers of Thime, thy pallat to content.
The prodigal Earth abounds with gentle food;
Affording banquets without death or blood.
Brute beasts with flesh their rau'nous hunger cloy:
And yet not all; in pastures horses joy;
So flocks and beards. But those whom Nature has
Indu'd with cruelty, and saluage wrath
(Wolves, Bears, Armenian Tigers, Lions) in
Hot blood delight. How horrible a Sin,
That entrails bleeding entrails should intombe!
That greedy flesh, by flesh should fat become!
While by the Livers death the Living lives!
Of all, which Earth, our wealthy mother, gives;
Can nothing please, unless thy teeth thou imbrue
In wounds, and dire Cyclopean fare renew?
Nor satiate the wild votacitie
Of thy rude panch, except an other die?
But that old Age, that innocent estate,
Which we the Golden call; was fortunate
In herbs, and fruits, her lips with blood vndy'd.
Then Foul through air their wings in safety plied*
The Hare, then fearelesse, wandered over the plain;
Nor Fish by their credulity were taken.
Not treacherous, nor fearing treachery,
All lived secure. When he, who did envy
(What God so e're it was) those harmless cates
And cramb'd his guts with flesh; set open the gates
To cruel Crimes. First, Slaughter without harm
(I must confess) to Piety, did warm
(Which might suffice) the reeking steel in blood
Of saluage beasts, which made our lives their food*
Though killed; not to be eaten. Sin now more
Audacious; the first sacrifice, the Bore
Was thought to merit death; who, bladed corn
Vp-rooting left the husbandman forlorn.
Vine-brouzing Gotes at Bacchus altar slain,
Fed his revenge: in both, their guilt their bane.
You Sheep, what ill did you? a gentle beast,
Whose vdders swell with Nectar* borne t'inuest
Exposed man with your soft wool; and are
Alive, then dead, more profitable far.
Or what the Ox? a creature without guile,
So innocent, so simple; borne for toil.
He most ungrateful is, deserving ill
The gift of corn; that can unyoke, then kill
His husbandman: that neck with axe to wound
In service galled, that had the stubborn ground
So often til'd; so many crops brought in.
Yet not content there with, (...) the sin
To guiltless Gods: as if the Powers on high
In death of labour-bearing oxen joy.
A spotless sacrifice, fair to behold,
('I is death to please) with ribands trickt, and gold,
Stands at the Altar, hearing prayers unknown:
And sees the meal upon his forehead thrown,
^ot by his toil: the knife smeared in his gore,
By fortune in the lauer seen before.
The entrails, from the panting body rent,
Forthwith they search; to know the Gods intent.
Whence springs so dire an appetite in man
To interdicted food? O Mortals, can,
Or da^e you feed on flesh? henceforth forbear
I you entreat, and to my words give ear:
When limbs of slaughtred Beeues become your meat;
Then think, and know, that you your Servants eat.
Phoebus inspires; his Spirit we obey:
My Delph^s, heaven it self, I will display:
The Oracle of that great power unfold:
And sing what long lay hid; what none of old
Could apprehend. I long to walk among
The lofty stars: dull earth despised, I long
To back the clouds; to sit on Atlas crown:
And from that hight on erring men look down
That reason want: those thus to animate
That fear to die; t'vnfold the book of Fate.
O You, whom horrors of cold death affright;
Why fear you Stix, vain names, and endless Night;
The dreams of Poets, and feigned miseries
Of forged Hell? whether last-flames surprise,
Or Age devour your bodies; they nor g^ieue,
No^ suffer pains. Ou^ Souls for ever lieu:
Yet evermore their ancient houses leave
To lieu in new; which them, as Guests, receive.
In Troi^n wars, I (I remember well)
Enphorbus was, Pantho^us son; and fell
By Menelaus lance: my shield again
At Argos late I saw, in Juno's Fane.
All alter, nothing finally decays:
Hither and thither still the Spirit strayes;
Guest to all bodies: out of beasts it flies
To men, from men to beasts; and never dies.
As pliant wax each new impression takes;
Fixed to no form, but still the old for sakes;
Yet it the same: so Souls the same abide,
Though various figures there reception hide.
Then lest thy greedy belly should destroy
(I prophecy) depressed Piety,
Forbear t'expulse thy kindreds Ghosts with food
By deach procured; nor nourish^ blood with blood.
Since on so vast a sea, my saile's vnfurl'd,
And-stretcht to rising winds; in all the World
There Is nothing permanent; all ebb and flow:
Each image formed to wander to and fro.
Even Time, with restless motion, slides away
Like living streams: nor can swift Rivers stay,
Nor light-heel'd Hours. As billow billow drives,
Driven by the following; as the next arriues
To chase the former: times so fly, pursue
At once each other; and are ever new.
What was before, is not; what was not, is:
All in a moment change from that to this.
See, how the Night on Light extends her shades*
See, how the Light the gloomy Night inuad^s.
Nor such Heavens hew, when Midnight crown's Repose;
As when bright Lucifer his taper shows:
Yet changing, when the Harbinger of Day
Th'inlightned World resignes to Phoebus sway.
His raised Shield, earths shadows scarely fled,
Looks ruddy; and low sinking, looks as red:
Yet bright at Noone; because that purer sky
Does far^e from Earth, and her contagion fly.
Nor can Night-wandring Dian's wavering light
Be ever equal, or the same: this night
Less than the following, if her horns she fill;
If the contract her Circle, greater still.
Does not the image of our age appear
In the successiue quarters of the Year?
The Springtide, tender; sucking Infancy
Resembling: then the iuy^efull blade sprouts high;
Though tender, weak; yet hope to Plough-men yields.
All things then flourish: flowers the gaudy fields
W^^h colors paint: no virtue yet in leaves.
Then following Summer greater strength receives:
A lusty Youth; no age more strength acquires,
Mo^^ fruitful, or more burning in desires.
Maturer Autumn, heat of Youth alaid,
The sober mean twixt youth and age, more staid
And temperate, in Summers waine repaires:
His reverend temples sprinkled with gray hairs.
Then comes old Winter, void of all delight,
With trembling steps: his head or bal'd, or white.
So change our ^odies without rest or stay:
What we were yester-day, not what to day,
Shall be to mor^^w. Once alone of men
The seeds and hope; the womb our mansion: when
Kind Nature showed her cunning; not content
That our vexed bodies should be longer pent
In mothers stetched entrails, forthwith bare
Them from that prison, to the open air.
We strengthlesse lie, when first of light possessed;
Straight creep upon all four, much like a beast;
Then, staggering with weak nerves, stand by degrees,
And by some stay support our feeble knees:
Now, lusty, swiftly run. Youth quickly spent,
And those our middle times, incontinent
We sink in setting Age: this last deuoures
The former, and dimolisheth their powers.
Old Milo wept, when he his arms beheld,
Which late the strongest beast in strength excelled,
Big, as Al^ides brawnes, in flaggie hide
Now hanging by slake sinews: Helen cried
When she beheld her wrinkles in her Glass;
And asks her self, why she twice ravished was.
Still-eating Time, and thou o envious Age,
All ruinate: diminisht by the rage
Of your devouring teeth, All that have breath
Consume, and languish by a lingering death.
Nor can these Elements stand at a stay:
But by exchanging alter every day.
The Eternal world four bodies comprehends,
Ingendring all. The heavy Earth descends,
So Water, clogged with weight: two light, aspire,
Deprest by none; pure Air and purer Fire.
And though they have their several fites; yet all
Of these are made, to these again they fall.
Resolved Earth to Water rarifies;
To Air extenuated Waters rise;
The Air, when it it self agiane refines,
To element all Fire extracted, shines.
They in like order back again repair:
The grosser Fire condenseth into Air;
Air, into water: Water thickning, then
Grows solid, and conuerts to Earth again.
None holds his own: for Nature ever joys
In change, and with new forms the old supplies.
In all the world not any perish quite:
But only are in various habits dight.
For; to begin to be, what we before
Were not, is to be borne; to dye, no more
Than ceasing to be such: although the frame
Be changeable, the substance is the same.
For nothing long continues in one mold.
You Ages, you to Silver grew from Gold;
To Brass from Silver; and to Y^'ne from Brass.
Even place often such change of fortunes pass;
Where once was solid land, Seas have I'seene;
And solid land where once deep Seas have been.
Sh^ls, far from Seas, like quarries in the ground;
And anchors have on mountain tops been found,
Torrents hue made a valley of a plain;
High hills by del^ges ^o^ne to the Maine.
Deep standing lakes sucked dry by thirsty sand;
And on late thirsty earth now lakes do stand.
Here Nature, in her charges manifold,
Sends forth new fountains; there shuts up the old.
Streams with impetuous earthquakes, heretofore
Have broken forth; or sunk, and run no more.
So ^ycus, swallowed by they yawning Earth,
Takes in an other world his second birth.
So Erasinus, now conceales, now yields
His rising waters to Argolian fields.
And Mysus, hating his first head, and brayes,
Calcus named elsewhere his stream displayes.
Cool Amasenus, watering Sicily,
Now flows; now spring-lockt, leaves his channel dry.
Men formerly drunk of Anigrus streams:
Not to be drunk (if any thing but dreams
The Poets tell) since Centaures therein washed
Their wounded limbs, by Alcides arrows gasht.
So Hypa^tis, derived from S^ythian Hills,
Long sweet, with bitter streams his channel fills.
Antissa, Tyrus, and Egyptian Phare,
The floods embraced: yet now no Islands are.
The Old Colon knew Leucadia Continent:
Which now the laboring surges circumuent.
So Zancle once on Italy con^n'd;
Till interposing waves their bounds dis-ioyn'd.
If Bura and Helice (Grecian towns)
You seek; behold, the Sea their glory drownes:
Whose buildings, and declined walls, below
The Ambitious flood as yet the Sailers show.
A Hill by Pitthean Troezen mounts, vncrown'd
With syluan shades, which once was level ground.
For furious winds (a story to admire!)
Pent in blind cauernes, struggling to expire;
And vainly seeking to enjoy the extent
Of freer air, the prison wanting vent;
Th'vnpassable tuffe earth inflated so,
As when with swelling breath we bladders blow,
The tumor of the place remained still,
In time grown sollid, like a lofty hill.
To speak a little more of many things
Both heard and known: New habits sundry Springs
Now give, now take. Horned Hamm^ns Well at Noone
Is cold; hot at Sunrise, and setting Sun.
Wood, put in bubling Athamas then fires;
When farthest from the Sun the Moon retires.
Ciconian streams congeale his guts to stone
That thereof drinks: and what therein is thrown.
Crathis, and Sybaris (from your mountains rold)
Color the hair like Amber, or pure gold.
Some fountains of a more prodigious kind,
Not only change the body but the mind.
Who has not heard of obscene Salmacis?
Of the Ethiopian Lake? who drink of this,
Run forthwith mad: or if their wits they keep,
Fall suddenly into a deadly sleep.
Who at Clito^i^^ Fountain thirst remove;
Loath wine, and abstinent, mere water love.
Whether it by antipathie expel
Desire or wine; or (as the Natives toll)
(...) having with his herbs and charms
Snatched Proe^u^ frantic daughters from the harms
Of entered ^^ries, their wit's physic cast
Into this spring; infusing such distaste.
With streams, to these opposed Lyncestus flows:
They (...), as drunk, who drink too much of those.
A Lake in fair Arcadia stands, of old
Called Phe^^us; suspected, as two fold:
Fear, and forbear, to drink thereof by night:
By night unwholesome, wholesome by daylight.
So other lakes and streams have other power.
Ortygia sloted once; fixed at this hour:
Once Argo feared the iustling Cyenes;
Which rooted now, resist both winds and seas.
Nor Ae^na, burning with imbowel'd fire,
Shall ever, or did always, flames expire.
For whether Tellus be an Animal,
Have lungs, and mouths that smoking flames exhale;
Her organs alter, when her motions close
These yawning passages* and open those.
Or whether winds, in caves impris'ned, rave;
Iustling the stones, and minerals which have
The seed of fire, inkindled with their rage:
They then extinguish when the winds assuage.
Or if Bitumen do the fire provoke;
Or sulpher burning with more subtle smoke:
When Earth that food and oily nourishment
With draws, the matter by long feeding spent;
The hungry fire of sustenance be^eft,
Ill-brooking famine, leaves, by being left.
In Hyperbo^ean Pallene live
A People, if to Fame we credit give,
Who, diuing three times thrice in Tritons lake,
Of Foul the feathers and the figure take.
The like, they say, the the Scyth^^n Witches do
With magic oils: incredible though true.
If we may trust to trial, see you not
Small creatures of corrupted flesh begot?
Bury your slaughtred Steer (a thing in use)
And his corrupted bowels will produce
Flowre-sucking-Bees; who, like their parent slain,
Love labor, fields, and toil in hope of gain.
Hornets from buried horses take their birth.
Break off the Crabs bent claws, and in the earth
Bury the rest; a Scorpion without fail
From thence will creep, and menace with his tail.
The Catterpillers, who their cop-webs weaue
On tender leafes (as Hindes from proof receive)
Convert to poysnous Butterflies in time
Green Frogs, engendered by the seed of slime,
First without feet, then leg, assume; now strong
And apt to swim, their hinder parts more long
Then are their former, framed to skip add iumpe.
The Bears deformed birth is but a lump
Of living flesh: when l^^ked by the Old,
It takes a form agreeing with the mold.
Who sees the Young of honie-bearing Bees
In their sexangular inelosure, sees
Their bodies limb-lesse: these unformed things
In time put forth their feet, and after, wings.
The starre-imbell^sht Foul, which Juno loves,
Jones Armour-bea^er, Cytharea's Doves,
And birds of every kind; did we not know
Them hatched of eggs, who would conjecture so?
Some think the pith of dead men, Snakes becomes;
When their back-bones corrupt in hollow tombs.
Yet these from others do derive their birth.
One only F^wle there is in all the Earth,
Called by the Assyrian Phoenix, who the waine
Of age r^paires, and s^wes her self again.
No (...) on grain no^ he^^s, but on the gum
O^ Frankin^ense, and mycre Amomum.
Now, when her life ^iue ages has fulfilled;
A neither (...) beak and tallons build
Upon the (...) of a trembling Palm:
This strew^d with Ca^^ia, Spicknard, precious Balm,
Bruz'd Cinnamon, and Myrrh; thereon she bends
Her body, and her age in odors ends.
This breeding Corp's a little Phoenix bears:
Which is it self to live as many years.
Grown strong; that load now able to transfer;
Her Cradle, and her parents sepulcher,
Devoutly carries to Hyperions town:
And on his flamie Altar lays it down.
If these be wonderful, admire like strange
Hyaena's, who their sex so often change:
Those foodlesse creatures, fed by air alone;
Who every color, which they touch, put on.
The Lynx, first brought from conquered India
By vine bound Bacchus, his hot piss, they say,
Congeales to stone. So Coral, which below
The water is a limber weed, does grow
Stone-hard, when touched by air. But Day will end,
And Phoebus panting Steeds to Seas descend,
Before my scant oration could pursue
All sorts of shapes, that change their old for new.
For this we see in all is general.
Some Nations gather strength, and others fall.
Troy, rich and powrefull, which so proudly stood;
That could for ten years spend such streams of blood;
For buildings, only her old ruins shows;
For riches, tombs; which slaughtred Sires enclose.
Sparta, Mycenae, were of Greece the flowers;
So Cecrop's City, and Amphion's towers;
Now glorious Sparta lies upon the ground;
Lofty Mycenae hardly to be found,
Of OEdipus his Thebes what now remains,
Or of Pandion's Athens, but their names?
Now Fame reports that Rome by Dardans Sons
Begins to rise, where yellow Tybris runs
From fountfull Appenines; and there the great
Foundation of so great a fabric seat.
This therefore shall by changing propagate,
And give the World a Head. Of such a fate
The Prophets have diuin'd. And this of old,
As I remember, Priam's Helen told
To sad Aeneas, of all hope forlorn,
In sinking Troy's eclipse. O Goddesse-borne,
If our Appollo can presage at all;
Troy, thou in safety, shall not wholly fall.
Both fire and sword shall give thy virtue way:
Flying with thee, thou Ilium shall convey;
Until thou find a Land as yet unknown,
To Troy, and thee, more friendly than thy own.
A City built by Phrygians I foresee;
So great none ever was, is, or shall be.
Others shall make it great: but He, whose birth
Springs from ^^lus, Sovereign of the Earth.
He, having ruled the World, shall then ascend
Aethereall thrones* and Heaven shall be his End.
This, I remember, with propheticke tongue,
Sage Helen to divine Aeneas sung.
We joy to see our kindreds City grow:
The Phrygians happy in their Ouer-throw.
But lest our heedlesse Steeds too far should range
From their proposed course; All suffer change:
The heavens themselves, what under them is found;
We, of the World a part, since we as well
Have Souls as Bodies, which in beasts may dwell:
To those, which may our parents Souls inuest,
Our brothers, dearest friends, or men at least;
Let us both safety, and respect afford:
Nor heap their bowels on Thyestes board.
How ill ^ur'd! to shed the blood of man
How wickedly is he p^epar'd, who can
Asunder cut the throats of calves; and hears
The bellowing ^reeder with relentlesse eats!
Or silly kids, which like poor infants cry,
Stick with his knife! or his voracitie
Feed with the foul he fed! o to what ill:
Are they not prone, who are so bent to kill!
Let Oxen till the ground, and die with age:
Let Sheep defend thee from the winters rage:
Goats bring their vdders to thy paile. Away
With nets, gr^ns, snares, and arts that do betray:
Deceive not birds with lime; nor Dear enclose
With terrors; nor thy baits to fish expose.
The hurtful kill: yet only kill: nor eat
Defiling flesh; but feed on fitter meat.
With other, and the like Philosophy
Instructed; N^^ma, now returned, was by
Th'intreating Lat^ne^ crowned. Taught by his Bride
The Nymph Aegeria, by the Muses guide,
Religion institutes; a People rude
And prone to war, with laws and peace imbued.
His reign and age resigned to funeral;
Plebeians, Roman Danies, Patricians, all
For Numa mou^ne. His wife the City fled:
Hid in Aricia's Vale, the ground her bed,
The woods her ^hroud, disturbes with groans and cries
Orestean Diana's sacrifice.
How often the Nymphs who haunt that Grove and Lake
Reprou'd her tears, and words of comfort spoke!
How often the Thesean Heroes, Temperate
Thy sorrow, said! Nor only is thy fate
To be deplored: on worse misfortunes look;
And you will yours with greater patience brook.
Would mine were no example to appease
So sad agrie^^: yet mine your grief may ease.
Perhaps y'haue heard of one Hippolytus;
By (...) fraud, and fathers credulous
Belief deuow'd to death. Admire you may
That I am he, if credit, what I say.
Whom Phoedra formerly solicited,
But va^nly to do file my fathers bed.
Fearing ^^tection, or in that refu^'d;
She (...) he crime, and me of here is accused.
My father, ^^nishing the innocent,
Along with me his winged curses sent.
Toward Pitt^^^an Troezen me my Chariot bore:
And d^^^ing now ^y the Corinthian shore,
The smooth Seas swell; a monstrous billow rose,
Which, rouling like a mountain, greater grows;
Then, bellowing, at the top asunder rend^:
When from the breach, breast high, a Bull ascends;
Who at his dreadful mouth and nosthrils spouts
Part of the Sea. Fear all my followers routs:
But my afflicted mind was all this while
Vnte^rifi'd; intending my exile.
When the hot horses start, e^ect their ears:
With horror rapt, and chased by their fears,
(...) ragged rocks the tottr'd Chariot drive:
While I to curb their fury vainly strive;
The bits all frotht with foam: with all my might
Pull back the reigns, now lying bolt vp-right.
Nor had their heady fright my strength o'r-gon;
Had not the fervent wheel, which roules upon
The bearing Axel-tree, rusht on a stump:
Which brake, and sell asunder with that iump.
Thrown from my chariot, in the reigns fast-bound,
My guts dragged out alive, my sinews wound
About the stumpe, some of my limbs haled thence
You might have seen, some hanging in suspense;
My breaking ^ones to crack, not any whole,
While I exhaled my faint and weary soul.
No part of all my parts you could have found
That might be known: for all was but one wound.
Now say, selfe-tortred Nymph, or can, or dare
You your calamities with ours compare?
I also saw those realms, to Day unknown:
And bathed my wounds in wauy Phlegeton.
Had not Apollo's Son imploi'd the aid
Of his great Art; I with the dead had staid.
But when by potent herbs, and Pae^ns skill,
I was restored, against angry Plutos will:
Lest I, if seen, might envy have procured,
Me, friendly Cynthia with a cloud immured:
And that, though seen, I might be hurt by none;
She added age, and left my face unknown.
Whether in Delos, doubting, or in Creet;
Rejecting Creet and Delos as unmeet,
She placed me here. Nor would I should retain
The memory of One by horses flaine:
But said; Hence forward Virb^us be thy name.
That were Hippolytus; though thou the same,
One of the Lesser Gods, here, in this Grove,
I Cynthia serve; preserved by her love.
But others miseries could not ab^te
Aegeria's sorrows, nor prevent her fate.
Who, couched at the bases of a hill,
Thawes into tears, that streame-like ran; until
Apollo's Sister, pitying her woes,
Turned hert' a Spring; whose current ever flows.
The Nymphs and Amazonian this amazed;
No less than when the Tyrrhen Plough-man gazed
Upon the fatal clod, that moved alone:
And, for a humane shape, excharg'd its own.
With infant lips the newly Animate,
Revealed the Mysteries of future fate:
Whom Natives Tages called. He first of all
The (...) taught to tell what would be fall.
Or when astonished Romulus of old
Did, on Mount Palatine, his lance behold
To flourish with green leaves: the fixed foot
Stood not on steel, but on a living root.
Which, now no weapon, spreading arms displayed;
And ga^e admirers unexpected shade.
Or when as Cippus in the liquid glass
Beheld his horns, which his belief surpass.
Who lifting often his fingers to his brow,
Felt what before he saw: nor longer now
Condemns his sight. Returned with victory;
His eyes and horns erecting to the sky:
You Gods, what e're these prodigies portend;
If prosperous, he said, let them descend
On Romans and on Rome: but if they be
Unfortunate, o let them fall on me!
An Altar then of living turfe erects;
The fire feeds with perfumes, pure wine iniects:
And with the panting entrails of a beast
New slain, consults; to know the Gods behest.
This, when the Tyrrben Augur had beheld,
And saw therein endeavors that excelled,
Although obscure; he from the sacrifice
To Cippus horns conuerts his steady eyes:
Hail King, to thee, and to those horns of thine,
This place, and Latian towers, their rule resign.
Delay not; enter thou the yielding gate:
Haste, Cippus, haste: such is the Will of Fate.
Thou shall be crowned a King upon that day:
And safely an eternal Scepter sway.
He, starting back, from Rome diuerts his face:
And said; You Gods, far hence this Omen chase.
Better that I in banishment grow old;
Than me, a King, the Capitol behold.
Hiding his ho^nes with leauie ornaments,
The people and grave Senate he conuents.
Then mounts a Mound, late by the Soldier made,
And praying first (as was the custom) said;
Unless expelled your City, here is One
Will be your King: though not by name, yet known
By his strange horns. I heard the Augur say,
If once in Rome, you all should him obey.
He might, vnstopt, have entered without feate:
But I withstood; though none to me more near.
Be he, Quirites, into exile sent:
Or, if he merit such a punishment,
Bind him in heavy chains, and keep him sure:
Or with the Tyrants death your fears secure.
The troubled People such a murmuring make;
As when far off the roaring surges take
On rattling shores; or when throught high-trust Pines
Loud Eurus howles. One only Voice dis-ioynes
In this confusion; asking, Which is he?
All seeking for the horns they could not see,
Cippus replied; Behold the man you look.
Then from his head (withheld) his garland took;
And showed the horns which one his forehead grew.
Not one but sighed, and down his countenance threw:
And those clear brows (a thing beyond belief)
Adorned with merit, they behold with grief.
Nor suffer him his honor to debase:
But on his head a laurel garland place.
And since he his own entrance did with-stand:
The Nobles, in due favor, so much land
To Cippus gave, as well two oxen might
Round with a plough from morning until night.
The Monumentall figure of his horns,
So much admired, the golden Posts adornes.
Now Muses, Goddesses of Verse, relate
(You know, nor years your memory abate)
How Aesculapius in our City found
A Temple, by circumfluent Tybris bound.
A deadly plague the Latian air defiled:
Souls from their seats the pale disease exiled.
Wearied with funerals, when physic failed;
Nor any humane industry prevailed;
They seek celestial aid. To Delphos sent,
Built in the round Earths navel, and present
Their prayers to Phoebus; that he would descend
To their relief, and give their woes an end.
His Temple, Laurel, and his Quiver, shake:
Who thus, they trembling, from his Tripod spoke.
What here you seek, you nearer should have sought:
And seek it nearer yet. Apollo ought
Not now to cure you, but Apollo's Seed.
Go with success; and fetch my Son with speed.
The Senate having heard this Oracle,
The City search, where Phoebus son should dwell.
The shore of Epidaure the Legate seeks:
There anchoring, he entreats the assembled Greeks
To send their God: who might the Ausonian State
To health restore; and urged the charge of Fate.
They vary in opinion: some assent
To send this succor; many, not content
To lose their own in giving others aid,
Strive to retain him, and the rest distwade.
While thus they doubt, the Day declined his Light:
And Earth-borne shadows clothed the world in Night.
The Health-giuing God, in sleep, appears to stand
In his old form; a staf^e in his left hand:
And stroking with his right his reverend beard;
From his hope-rendring breast these words were heard.
Fear not, I come; my shape I will forsake:
View, and mark well this staffe-infolding Snake:
Such will I seem, yet show of greater size;
So great as may a Deity comprize.
God with the Voice, with God and Voice away
Sleep flew: fled Sleep persude by cheerful Day.
The Stars now vanquished by the mornings flame;
The doubtful Nobles to the temple came,
Entreat him by coelest all signs to show
Whether he were content to stay or go.
This hardly said, the God in Serpent's shroud,
His high crest gold-like glistring, hist aloud.
His statue, altar, gates, the marble flore,
And golden roof, shook at the approaching Power.
He, in his Fane, brest-high his body raised:
Rouling about his eyes that flame-like blazed.
All tremble. The chaste Priest, his hair imbraid
With Virgin fillet, knew the God, and said:
It Is he! it is he! all you who present are
Pray with your hearts and tongues: o heauenly-Faire,
Propitious prove to those who thee implore!
All that were there the present Power adore;
Reiterating what the Priest had said:
With heart and tongue the Romans also prayed.
He, by the motion of his lofty crest,
And doubled hisses, signe's to their request.
Then sliding down the polisht stairs, his look
Reuerts on his old altars; now forsook:
Salute's his shrine, and Temple decked with towers.
Then creeping on the ground, strewn with fresh flowers.
Indenteth through the City; stopping where
The Harbor is defended by a Peer.
The following troops, and those whose zeales assist
In honoring him, with gentle looks dismissed;
He climbes the Ausonian ship: which felt the weight,
And shrunk with pressure of so great a freight.
The joyful Romans, offering on the strand
A Bull to Neptune; anchor weigh, and land
Forsake with easy gales, Raised on his train,
He, leaning, looks upon the blew-wau'd Maine.
Through I^nian Seas by friendly Z^phyrus borne,
They fell with Italy on the sixth morn.
Lacinian Iunos Fane, Scyllaean shores,
Iapygia past; they shun with nimble ores
Amphrysian rocks; Ceraunian, weather-cleft;
Romechium, Caulon, and Naryciae left:
S^cilian Straights o're-come, and wrackfull seas,
Sail by the mansion of Hippotades:
By Temesa, in metalls fruitful; by
Leucosia, and the Paestan Rosary.
Ne^re capreae, and Minerua's Fore-land row,
Surrentine hills, where wines so generous grow;
Heraclea, Stabiae, Naples borne to ease,
Cumaean Sibyl's Temple: next to these,
Hot Baths; Linternum, sweet with masticke flowers;
Vult^rnus, who his sandy channel skoures;
Sinuessa, swarming with white Snakes; ill-air'd
Minturnae; and where Piety prepared
His Nurse a tomb: forthwith the mansion make
Of fell Antiphates; and then the Lake --
Besieged Trachin: thence directly bore
To ^wee's I Will, and Antium's solid shore.
The Sea now swelling high, this harbor holds
The Saile-wing'd ship. The God his orbs unfolds:
And, with huge doublings over the yellow sand
Slides to his fathers Temple on that strand.
Rough waves asswag'd, the Epidaurian Guest
His fathers altar leaves; to Sea-ward pressed,
Slicing the sandy shore with rustling scales:
And, by her stern the ship ascending, sails
Till he to Castrum, to Lauinia's name --
Retaining Seat, and mouth of Tyber came.
All hither throng; sons, daughters, mothers, fires,
The Nuns who keep the Phrygian Vesta's fires,
(...) The Gods appease: the headless inwards show
Signs of succeeding Tumults, Death, and Woe.
Dogs nightly, in the Court, about the Gods,
And holy Temples howl. From sad abodes
The Dead arise, and wander here and there:
Rome trembling, both with Earthquakes and with fear,
These Warnings of the Gods no changes wrought
In Fate, or Treason. Murderous swords were brought
Into the Temple: for no place might sort
With such a Slaughter, but the sacred Court.
Then Venus smote her breast: who sought to shroud,
And snatch him thence in that Aethereall cloud,
Which Paris from Atrides rage conuaid:
And freed Aeneas from Tydid^s blade.
Daughter, said Jove, can thou resist the doom
Of conquering Fates? Into their mansion come,
There shall thou see Decrees that needs must Pass,
Writ in huge folds of solid steel and brass.
Which safe, eternal, ever fixed there;
My thunder, lightnings rage, nor ruin fear.
In lasting Adamant there ma^st thou read
What shall to thy great Progeny succeed.
I read, remember well, and will relate
What may inform thee in succeeding fate.
He, whom thou striu^st to save, his race has run
Of Time and Glory: whom, thou and his Son
Shall make in heaven a God; on Earth, with praire
And Temples dignified. His names great Heir
Alone his Load shall bear: and strongly shall
By our conduct revenge his fathers fall.
By his good fortune Mutinae, o're-throwne,
Shall ^ue for peace: Pharsalian fields shall groan*
Slaughter again Philippi shall imbrue:
On red Sicilian Seas he shall subdue
A mighty Name. The Egyptian Spouse shall fall,
Ill trusting to her Roman General:
To make out stately Capitol obey
Her proud Canopus, shall in vain assay.
What need I of those barbarous People tell,
And Nations, which by either Ocean dwell?
He shall the habitable Earth command;
And stretch his Empire over sea and land.
Peace given to Earth; he shall convert his care
To civil Rule, just Laws; and by his fair
Example Virtue guide. Then looking to
The future times, and Nephews to ensue;
A Son shall bless him from a holy womb:
To him he shall resign his name, and room.
Nor shall, till full of age, ascend th'aboads
Of heavenly Dwellers, and his kindred Gods.
Meane-while from this flaine corpse his soul convey
Up to the stars, and give it a clear Ray:
That Julius may with friendly influence
Shine on our Capitol and Court from thence.
This said: invisible fa^^e Venus stood
Amid the Senate; from his corpse, with blood*
Defiled, her Caesar's new-fled spirit bare
To heaven, not suffered to resolve to air.
And, as in her soft bosom borne, she might
Perceive it take a Power, and gather light.
When once let loose, It forth with vp-ward flew;
And afte^ it long blazing tresses drew.
The radia^t Star his Sons great acts beheld
T'out-luster his: and joyed, to be excelled.
Though he would have his Fathers deeds preferred
Before his own: yet free-tongu'd Fame, deterred
By no commandment, yield th'euited Bays
To his clear brows; and but in this gain-sayes.
So Atreus yields to Agamemnons fame;
Aegeus so to Theseus: Peleus name
Stoopes to Achilles. That I may confer
The Illustrious to their equals, Jupiter
So Saturn tops. Iou^ rules the arched Sky,
And triple-World; the Earths vast Monarchy
TO Augustus bows: both Fathers, and both sway.
You Gods, Aeneas mates, who made your way
Through fire and sword; you Gods of men become;
Quirinus, Father of triumphant Rome;
Thou Mars, invincible Quirinus Sire;
Chaste V^sta, with thy euer-burning fire,
Among great Caesar's Houshold-Gods inshrin'd;
Domesticke Phoebus, with his Vesta joined;
Thou Jove, Whom in Tarpeian towers we adore;
And you, all you, whom Poets may implore:
Slow be that day, and after I am dead,
Wherein Augustus, of the world the Head,
Leaving the Earth, shall unto Heaven repair;
And (...) those that seek to him by prayer.
And now the Work is ended, which, Ioue's rage,
Nor Fire* nor Sword shall raze, nor eating Age.
Come when it will my deaths uncertain hour;
Which only of my body has a power:
(...) Part transcend the skier;
And my immortal name shall never die.
For, where-so-ere the Roman Eagles spread
Their conquering wings, I shall of all be read:
And, if we Prophets truly can divine,
I, in my living Fame, shall ever shine.
(...) planations. With these I had thought, in their several places, to have
charged the margent: but the hastiness of the Press, and unexpected want of
leisure, have prevented me. The same reason may serve for diverse slips, aed
errors, which I not only know but acknowledge. Yet if the too cleanly Critic
sweep not all the dust together and lay it on one heap, it may perhaps be
hardly discerned, howsoever borne-with in so long and interrupted a labor.

A
ABantiades. page III. verse. 7. Actisius the Son of Abas King of Argos.
Abantiades. page 117. verse. 4.and page 124. verse. 25. and page 128. verse. 21.
Perseus great grandchild to Abas. Acheloides. the Sirens, daughters to
Achelous. Acheron. a River in Hell, and signifies deprivation of Joy.
Acrisionides. Perseus grand-child^ to Acrisius. Actorides. page 212. verse. 20.
Euritus and Creatus the sons of Actor. Actorides. page 359. verse. 13.
Patroclus grandchilde to Actor. The Aeacides. page 188. verse. 19. Peleus,
Telamon, and Phocus, sons to Aeacus. Aeacides. page 297. verse 7. and 32. page
302. verse. 6. Peleus the son of Aeacus. Aeacides. page 321. verse. 21. and
thence-forth, Achillles the grandchild of Aeacus. Aello. one of the Harpyes.
Aeetias. M^dea, the daughter of Aeeta. Aegides. Theseus, the son of Ae geus.
Aegis. Minerua's shield. Aeolian Virgin. page 149. verse. 24. Arne, the daughter
of Aeolus. Aeolides. page 107. verse. 31. Athamas, the son of Aeolus.
Aeolides. page 194. verse. 20. Cephalus, the grandchild of Aeolus. Aeolides.
page 250. verse. 17. Macareus and Canace, the son and daughter of Aeolus.
Aesonides. Jason, the son of Aeson. Agenorides. Cadmus, the son of Agenor.
(...) Otus and Ephialtes, got by Neptune on the wife of Aloeus. Alcides. a name
of Hercules, which signifies strength. Am^zonian Heroes. Hippolytus, son to
Hippolyte the Amazonian. Amiclydes. Hyacinthus, the son of Amyclas.
Amphrit^ite. the daughter of Oceanus, and wife to Neptune; taken for the Sea.
Amphitryonides* Hercules the son of Amphitryo. Ampycides. Mopsus, the son of
Ampycus. Anubis. an Idol of the Egyptians with the head of a dog. Apis. a
black Ox spotted with white, worshipped by the Egyptians in remembrance of
Osiris Aphrodites. a name of Venus, in that sprung from the foam of the Sea.
Arcturus. a Star in the tail of the Greater Bear. Astraea. Justice, so called
of Astraeus, a most just, Prince. Astraean sons. The winds, sons to the Giant
Astraen^. Athamantiades. Palaemon, the son of Athamas. Atlantiades. page 24.
verse. 8.and page 48. verse. 13. Mercury the grandchild of Atla^. Atlantiades.
page 102. verse. 23. Hermaphroditus, the son of Mercury, and great
grandchild of Atlas. Atracides. Caeneus, so called of Atrax a City of
Thessalie. Atrides. Agamemnon; sometimes Menelaus; both sons to Atreus.
Auernian Juno. Proserpina. Auernus. a lake in hell, over which no birds can
fly without falling. Autonoeius. Actaeon the son of Autonoe, Gadmus
daughter. Auster. The South Wind.
B
BAcchiadae. the offspring of Bacchia the Corinthian. Bacchanals. Women
solemnizing the feast of Bacchus. Belides. the Necces of Belus, and daughters
of Danaus. Berecynthian. page 293. verse. 9. Midas of Berecynthus, a City of
Phrygia. Boots. the Star, that follows Charles Waine. Boreas. the North Wind.
Bromius. a name of Bacchus, which signifies raging. Bubastis. an Egyptian
Goddess, companion to Isis.
C
CArpathian Prophet. Proteus a God of the Sea. Cecropides. the daughters of
Cecrops, King of Athens. Centaures. said to be half men and half beasts, in
that they were the first that rid on horses. Cerastae. men with horns.
Cerberus. the Hell-bound with three heads, signifing a de^ourer of the dead.
Chimaera. a monster; having the face of a woman, the body of a goat, and the
tail of a Serpent. Colchis. Medea, so called of Colchis, where she was borne.
Crataeis daughter. S^ylla. Cyclades. Islands in the Aegaean Sea, dispersed in
form of a cycle. Cyclops. Giants, and sons of Neptune; so called of the round
eye, which they had in their fore-h^ads. Cyclop^an darts. Thund^r and Lightning
forged by the Cyclops. Cyllenius, a name of Mercuric, in that borne on the hill
Cyllene. Cynthius Cynthia names of Apollo and Diana, of Cynthus a hill in Delo,
where they were borne. Cyprides a names of Venus, of the Island of Cyprus, where
she was worshipped. Cytherea. a name of Venus, of the Island Cythera, dedicated
to Venus.
D
DAnaean Heroes. Perseus the son of Dance. D^rdan Prophet. Helenus the son of
Prian^ (...) Hymen. the God of marriage; sometimes taken for marriage.
Hyperion. sometimes taken for the Sun, sometimes for the father of the Sun.
I
IAcchus. a name of Bacchus, which signifies clamor. Iapetonides. Atlas the
son of Iapet. Idalia. Venus of Idalia, a hill in Cyprus, where she had her
groves. Ilia des. page 267. verse. 4 Ganymed, grandchild to Ilus. Iliades. page
412. verse. 18. Romulus, descended from Ilus. Ilithyia. a name of Lucina,
Goddess of child birth. Inachis. page 21. verse. 30. Io, the daughter of
Inachus Inachides. page 26. verse. 19. Epaphus, the son of Io, and grandchild
of Inachus. Inachides. page 115. verse. 5. Perseus. The Argolians being so
called of the river Inachus. Io. an acclamation of joy: where it stands not for
Io the daughter of Inachus. Iris. the Rainbow. Ismenides Ismenians Thebans,
so called of Ismenus, a river of Boeotia.
Ithacus, Ulysses, of the land Ithaca, where he was borne. Iulus. a name of
Ascanius.
L
LEmnian issue. page 55. verse. 22. Erichthonius son to Vulcan, who dwelt in
Lemnos. Lenaeus. a name of Bacchus, of the vessel that receives the wine from
the press. Lethe. a river of Hell, and signifies forgetfulness. Liber. a name
of Bacchus, in that wine sreeth the heart from sorrow. Lucifer. the Morning
Star. Lyaeus. a name of Bacchus; the same with Liber.
M
MAeandrius. Caunus, grandchild by the mothers side to the river Maeander.
Maedusean Hearse. Pegasus, sprung from the blood of Medusa. Maeonidae. the
Muses. Of Maeonia, where they dwelt. (...) Paeons. the daughters of Pierus, so
called of the woods of Paeonia, which they frequented. Palladium. the Image of
Pallas. Paphian Heroes. Pigmalion of Paphos. Pelides. Achilles, the son of
Peleus. Persephone. The same with Proserpina. Phasias. a name of Medea, from
the river Phasts. Phegides. Themenus and Axion the sons of Phegeus. Pheres
hope. Admetus, the son of Pheres. Phlegeton. a burning river in hell. Phoebus
Phoebe names of the Sun and Moon, in regard of their splendour.
Phorcydes. the daughter of Phorcus. Phoronis. Io, the sister of Phoroneus.
Pleias. Maia, one of the Pleiades, and mother to Mercury. Pleiones Nephew.
Mercury, grandchild to Pleione, the wife of Atals. Poeans Heir Poeantius
Philoctetes, the son of Paean.
Pr^amides. page 355, verse. 32. Hector, the son of Priamus. Promerhides.
Deucalion, the son of Prometheus. Properides. Infamous women of Cyprus.
Q
QVirinus. a name of Romulus. Quirites. Romans, so called of Quirinus.
R
RHamnusia. a name of Nemesis, of the city Rhamnus, where she badher Temple.
S
SAturnius Saturnia Jupiter and Juno, the son and daughter of Saturn.
Smintheus. a name of Apollo, for destroying of mice. Sol. the Sun. Stygian
shades. Hell; socalled of Styx, an infernal river.
T
TAntalides. page 348. verse. 15. Agamemnon, grandchild to Tantalus. Taygeta.
one of the Pleiades, or seven Stars. Tellus. the Earth. Teucrans. Trojans,
descended of Teucer. Thaumantias. Iris, the daughter of Thaumas. Th^spiades.
the Muses; of Thesplae, a City near Helicon. Thestiadae. Toxeus and Plexippus,
the sons of Thestius. Thestias. Althaea, the daughter of Thestius.
Thestorides. Chalcas, the son of Thestor. Thyen. Bacchus; of Thyone, a name of
his mother Semele. Thyrsus. a Iauelin woond with Iuy, borne by Bacchus. Titan.
a name of the Sun, from his mother Titea. whose 45. children were generally
called by the name of Titans. Titania. p. 14. v. 19 Pyrrha, descended of the
Titans. Titania. page 67. verse. 19. and page 179. verse. 5. Diana, grandchild
to Titaea. Titania. page 157. verse. 11. Latona, daughter to Coeus, one of the
Titans. Titania. page 386. verse. 13. Circe, descended of the Titans. Triones.
the seven stars, that turn about the Pole. Triopeius. Eresich^hon, the son
of Triopas. Tritonia. Pallas, so called for her wisdom. Troades. the women of
Troy. Tydides. Diomedes, the son of Tydeus. Tyndaridae. Castor and Pollux,
the sons of Tyndarus. Tyrinthian. Hercules of Tyrus.
V
VVlcans seed page 186. verse. 19. Peripha^us.
Z
ZEphyru^^the West-wind.
FINIS.

