A IOVRNALL OR DAILY REGISTER OF all those warlike Atchieuements which happened
in the Siege of Berghen-vp-zoome in the Low Countries, between the Armies of
the Marquess Spinola Assaylants, and the Prince of Orange, Defendants, of the
said Town; together with the raising of the SIEGE.

IN THE END IS added two Letters, which discover the Errors fore-conceiued of
the success of that Siege, and the after-Designes of the Spanish Armies, if
they had taken in Bergen: with some particular accidents of war, which were
occasions of mirth to the beholders.

All faithfully translated out of the Original Low Dutch Copy.

LONDON, Printed for Nathaniel Butter, Bartholomew Downs, and Thomas Archer.
1622.

THE IOVRNALL OF THE SIEGE OF Bergen-vp-zoome.
TO omit that which being besides our purpose, cannot be expected of us;
namely, the antiquity of this town, and the siege of it by the Prince of
Parma, 1588. both which may be seen in our Dutch Stories: We will now come
to the late siege of the Marquess Spinola; and set nothing down, but what we
have had from very good hands, or have seen our selves.

The Marquess Spinola and Don Lewis de Valasco, having gotten Steenberghen by
composition; the conquered Provinces of the Netherlands rejoiced mightily, by
making of bone-fires upon the rumor thereof; in such manner, as if the fish
which they thought to catch, had had the hook already in his jaws.

The Spanish Forces not resting here, went presently thereupon the eighteenth
of July, 1622. to assault Berghen-vp-Zome, and fell instantly upon the
Horneworke, which lies near to the Rayberg; but they were bravely repulsed by
the Citizens, and those few soldiers which were left within the same.

The Prince hearing this news, sent immediately out of his Camp near the
Rhyne, diverse Companies into this City.

The aforesaid eighteenth of July, being holy Monday, the Enemy began
(according to their custom) in stead of ringing the Mary-bell, to cry out
jointly, Jesus Maria, three times together: but we not used to such songs or
tunes, wondered at it, and were partly afraid, not knowing what they meant by it.

The same night, some of our Garrison went to take possession of a high ground,
without the Gate toward Steenberghen.

The nineteenth of July, sixty of our horse made a sally, intending to see
wherefore they cried out the last night behind the Raybergh. The Enemy
perceiving them, thought to sound an Alarm with their Trumpets; but our horse
without any long deliberation set upon them, and took two Trumpetters, besides
seven or eight horse, and brought them into the City, none of the said sixty
horse being hurt at all. By this happy attempt our courages increased: and
when we espied off from our Steeple, the aid coming unto us, and the Enemy
then ceasing with his Ordnance: some of our Garrison cried out aloud to them,
That they had carried their Ordnance to the Lombard.

The twentieth and one and twentieth arrived here, these three following
Regiments, viz. of the Lord of Lockeren, of Colonel Hinderson, and of Colonel
Fama; so that our Garrison amounted at that time to five thousand men. There
came likewise with them these Enginers, namely, Captain Ralfe Dexter
Englishman, Mr. David of Orleans, Mr. Tretorain, Mr. Omkees, Mr. Klair, Mr.
Byuordt, and another Englishman.

They went presently, having advised with Mounsieur Rhyhouen, Governor of the
City, to fortify the old works and raise new, which were necessary for
defense; the Rauelins and Lines being designed out, were in one night raised
brest-high, and the next night perfected and brought to their full height, the
most part of those works being made without the Steenbergher gate, for without
the gate toward Wowe, there was an Horne-worke begun four or five year
since, and left unfinished. In the mean time, our Ordnance mounted upon the
North sconse, to Boere Verdriet, and the Bosh-gate, was night and day
discharged upon our Enemies, which endammaged them exceedingly, as not
discerning as yet where our bullets lighted: wherefore they made a defensive
work of Bavins, about a quarter and a half of a league distant from the
City, upon the way toward Halteren.

The two and twentieth on a Friday, being the day of S. Mary Magdalen, our
Soldiers went with three thousand foot, and four troops of horse to wake
the Enemies out of their sleep. They marching without the gate toward Wow,
left the Garden of Mr. Verwels on their left hand, and the Raybergh on their
right; and entered by the backside into the Quarter of Don Lewis de Valasco,
being there entrenched. Our horse having given a sign of the passage found,
both the English and Scots came on very furiously: and the Enemies being
already awakened, cried out Vienza, Vienza; and ours crying out, Quickly,
quickly, kill, kill; set valiantly upon the Enemies, and slew many of them; and
having spent their gunpowder, and perceiving that a third thousand came not on
to second them, they sounded a retreat with the Drum (being deeply entered
into the Enemies Quarter) and taking their way behind the hill to the City,
they thanked their fellows for the succor which they expected.

We understood afterward, that sundry Gentlemen with a Sergeant Mayor, and
two Captains, besides five hundred of the Enemies soldiers, were slain in
the same skirmish: on our side Captain Seaton was killed, and another Captain
hurt, besides five and twenty soldiers slain; but our men brought a Cornet
with his men into the City.

In the meanetime we labored very hard on three small redoubts, which in a
right line lead to Kick-inde-Pot: the new Horne-worke without the gate toward
Wow, was likewise taken in hand, and diverse other works made higher and
thicker.

Without the gate toward Steenberghen, they labored likewise very hard on the
Horne-worke, and in the Quarters of the Lord of Lockeren and Mounsieur Fama,
there was made also a Line of an hundred and sixty rods, (every rod contains
thirteen foot) because they conceived the Enemy about to erect two batteries
behind the Roffelbergh, on this side of the Rysbergh.

In those days, the enemies considering that the Garrison discharged their
Ordnance upon them, and sallied forth at their crying of Jesus Maria, they left
the same. Whereupon our soldiers mocked them, saying that they had compelled
the Enemies to forsake their redeemers: but I think they did it, because they
were beaten upon two of our Ladies days before.

The three and twentieth of July, the Enemy began to play with his Ordnance,
without the gate toward Steenberghen, upon the haven, he hit likewise
sometimes the roofes of the houses within the city, the tops of the Ships, and
the railes of a Bridge: spending that day three and twenty shot, without doing
any great hurt. The same night the city wrought hard upon all their works; and
principally on the North side, seeing the Spanish Camp erected diverse
batteries upon that side. This night our horse sallied forth both on the South
and North side, and drove away his sentinels and watches, causing also an
alarm in his Camp: They took certain horse, and prisoners, and brought them
into the city, so that they were in some trading.

In these days there came to us, many bauins, baskets, boards, beams, and
other such like provision.

The four and twentieth there was brought to us, good store of gunpowder,
lead, matches, granades, fire bals, and other munition: We shot the same day
fiercely with our Muskets, seeing the Spanish forces began to approach. In the
evening about ten a clock the enemy discharged eight cannon shot again, so
that certain women which were not used to the roaring of the Ordnance, grew
very heavy and prepared themselves to die, but they were laughed at. At the same
time also, some few left the city for fear.

From the five and twentieth until the eight and twentieth, there was done
nothing of any moment, but only that our works were fortified and strengthened
daily; the trees without the city were cut down (the citizens lending their
hatchets to the said purpose) and conveyed thither. There sallied now and then
a few at a time forth, and returned with prisoners and horses.

The enemy also having gotten more forces, began on the North side to
approach, creeping and crinckling on like a snake. The five and twentieth, they
threatened us, that they would beat us quite away, being S. James his day, for
the honor of that Saint: but we understood by their own soldiers, our
prisoners, that the same day one of our Cannon shot, slew 100. of the enemies.

The eight and twentieth and nine and twentieth, the Enemy began about four
a clock in the morning, to play with his Ordnance upon the city, but he did
little hurt, but we mighitly endammaged his new battery with our shot, and
spoiled one of his pieces.

August.

The first of August 80. of our horse sallied forth, behind the high ground,
taking their way, and leaving the trenches of the enemies; they not contenting
themselves by giving an Alarm unto the Camp, slew likewise diverse, and brought
sundry prisoners and horse into the City; many being incited by their good
success, sued daily for leave to sally forth, but they were delayed till
better opportunity.

The second day our Ordnance shot cruelly upon the Spanish Camp, thereupon
about two a clock in the night, our Garrison with forty Musketeers sallied
forth to make the Enemies to rise out of their sleep, and slew above an
hundred of them. Whereupon there arose likewise an Alarm in their Camp, and
our Garrison continued the skirmish with them, until the afternoon the next
day, at which time they returned victoriously to the City.

The third, fourth, fifth, and sixth, there was nothing done but working upon the
fortifications and shooting, and the old Mayor of the City on the sixth day
lost both his legs by a Cannon-shot, and died upon it.

The seventh and eight day, there came diverse of the Enemies soldiers running
to our City, being very near two hundred.

The ninth day, some of our soldiers, both horse and foot, sallied forth
behind Burghuliet, and slew there diverse of the enemies, beside them which
they hurt, returning home; and although they were not ouer-loaden with booty,
they yet gave God thanks, for that they escaped without the loss of any man,
which happens but seldom.

The tenth being upon Saint Laurence day, there was an Alarm given in the
North Quarter, but it was not known at the same time within the City: there
came at the same instant a strong conuoy into the Enemies Camp, with all kind
of warlike provision: this night they labored hard on both sides at their
fortifications. The Enemy gave a token in the North, that he would give us an
assault; wherefore, we would not weaken any Quarter, to make it destitute of
necessary defense, in case of necessity.

The tenth and eleventh we sallied forth upon the Enemy, and skirmished with
him: the Captain Friars Lieutenant behaved himself in the said skirmish as
valiantly, as ever any soldier did in our time, and offered up his soul with
such a garland of Laurel for the Country: likewise Mounsieur de Preau, Cornet
of Mounsieur de Me, jealous of his honor, went with him to the heavenly
joys, leaving the rest in this unhappy and miserable world.

From the eleventh until the fourteenth, the Enemy showed himself very
civil and peaceable; but in the mean time our Cannon did not cease.

The fifteenth, there was made a halfe-moone near unto the corner of Beckaff.

The sixteenth came the Enemy in the night, about ten of the clock, stealing
unto one of our Sentinels Perdu, he discharging his Musket, made an Alarm,
and retired to the little halfe-moone, near unto the Horne-worke of of
Beckaff, being closely followed by the enemies; upon his arrival the Pitch was
presently set over the fire, and they paid them home, as you shall hear.

Captain Carry, Captain Ralfe Dexter, and all other Captains under the
command of the valiant Colonel Hinderson, ranged themselves presently in
battell-array, to resist the Spanish forces with their valor: the Colonel
aforesaid, sent likewise some to the little halfe-moone before mentioned, to
aid them within it. The Enemy being very furious, would not let pass twelve
a clock, for the day before was the Assumption of our Lady, hoping, perhaps,
thereby to have the better success.

We being yet hardly in order, the Enemy came, without making any noise, close
unto us, but as soon as he perceived our bullets, he cried loud out, with a
general cry fuera viliaco: The besieged cried likewise, Take the Rogue,
kill, kill, so that the skirmish grew very hot: but the Enemies perceiving
that they could do no good with their fury, retired quietly by the side of
the halfe-moone; and afterward set presently upon the Garrison again, crying
as they did before; but they were likewise beaten back: and although they
assaulted the said halfe-moone eight times, and got twice upon it, yet were
they continually repulsed; at every assault the Enemy had fresh men; but the
English and the Scots withstood them, without being once so much as relieved, a
great while, until they called for aid, and were presently thereupon seconded
by the Low-Country-men, whereupon they shot together so fiercely upon the
Enemies, that they gave over the halfe-moone, after they had lost many
hundreths upon the place; and entrenched themselves behind the same work.
Whiles this fight lasted there were shot three thousand Cannon shot (namely,
from the Bosh gate, the Horne-worke, and the Contrescarpe at the Wow-gate)
amongst the Enemies, and did for the most part light upon the Enemies, because
their matches were seen.

In the said fight was the valiant and generous Collonell Hinderson, shot with
a musket in the upper part of his thigh, standing at the same time upon the
Rampeir, being bravely at push of Pike with the enemy, and being fallen from
the same, in his heavy armor, he was carried to the Hage where he died,
Captain Carry and the Enginer Captain Ralph Dexter, went likewise the same
way (after they had valiantly fought) besides one hundred twenty five of our
soldiers. This fight lasted from ten in the evening until five a clock in
the morning. The enemy lost in this fight one Count, five Captains, diverse
Lieutenants and Ensigne-bearers, besides eight hundred soldiers.

The same day there was a cessation of arms for the space of an hour agreed
of, to bury the dead on both sides: In the mean time, the Enemy working very
strong, contrary to the agreement, we discharged our Ordnance upon them, and
slew many, and the Enemy doing the like, the dead were for certain days left
unburied.

We perceived about the same time, that the Enemy was very sorry in regard of
the misfortune happened unto him, and would seek means to revenge himself.

In those days came certain Switsers besides other soldiers into the city;
Likewise the Italians which lay nere unto the Quarter of the Lord of Lockeren,
began to shoot diverse of our men with long Harquebuses through the heads, using
this devise: they tied green grass about their own heads, that they might
not be perceived, when they looked over the Rampeirs to shoot, for they seemed
only like some green earth cast into the air.

But afterward we perceiving their devise, discharged our shot upon the grass
aforesaid, striking down the same many times, with the head, and whole body.

The twentieth being Saint Laurence day, after the Vespers were sung, the
enemy came again about ten a clock, at one side of the half moon, and
would by force leap over the Ramparts; the Swissers which were lately arrived
perceiving the same, began to curse and swear, daring them to come over, they
in the mean time thrust fiercely at them with their pikes; but the Swissers
slashed them again bravely in pieces with their curtle-axes. This fight
increasing, the whole quarter rose in arms, and discharged certain thousands
of Musket shot upon the enemies, and flung granades likewise, and other fire
works amongst them, in such manner that the enemy lost again above 500. men,
and we had 20. slain, and about 50. hurt.

The one and twentieth came six Companies into the City; and the enemy
shooting very cruelly, we answered them with the like; It was the same day
resolved in the city, to build a half moon upon the haven, betwixt the North
Sconse and the city.

The two and twentieth, three and twentieth, and four and twentieth, were two
English Ensigns slain with Musket shot, the one being hit by a Friar, who was
very skillful in discharging of the long Harquebuse. The same day there went
two troops of horse hence toward Breda, 60. more got leave to go by land
thither, and went in the night forth from the Bosh gate, riding behind
Burgvliet and arrived the next day at Breda, with 18. prisoners; almost all our
works without the city were perfected at the same time, but yet every day we
labored hard upon the trauerses or trauers lines and offcuttings and such like.

The six and twentieth and seven and twentieth there came seven companies into
the City with Collonell Morgan, the Landgraue Philips of Hessen, and the
Yonker William of Nassaw, so that the Garrison was at the same time ten
thousand strong; it seemed that at the same instant, the enemy would attempt
something on the waters side; but we within prepared our selves to resist him.

In those days there rose an Alarm in the city, for that a Corporal with 10.
or 12. soldiers, fell about noone upon the approaching enemies, sallying forth
out of the Quarter of the Lord of Lockeren; after they had slain some few,
they returned all safely back, bringing away diverse Muskets and shouels.

Collonell Morgan in those days with a Frenchman being Captain of the
Trunckes, surueyed all the works and mines: those Truncks were almost all made
in two or three days.

The nine and twentieth the Enemy made a work of bauins opposite unto the
Coninsbergh and the furthermost half moon, near unto the new horne-worke
above the Crabbe sconse: Whereupon we shot fiercely and cast granades and
fireworkes upon the Enemies, killing above an hundred of them, and burning the
greater part of their bauins, before our retreat. The Enemy being desirous to
revenge this spite, Don Inigo de Brosgado gave an onset upon a little half
moon, lying at the quarter of Monsieur Famaes Quarter without the line: Our
soldiers beat them off sundry times very valiantly, with musket shot and
granades; hereupon the Enemy caused his horse to drive them on again; so that
with much ado they entrenched themselves at last behind the said little half
moon: Our soldiers kept the Enemies back, with granades and burning of
straw, until their fellows had pillaged the dead. The Enemies lost here 500.
men, besides those which were hurt, Don Joan de Portugals Corpse (being slain
among the rest) was afterward ransommed for 500. Gilders; which is 50. li.
Sterling. On our side were killed the Lieutenant of the Lord of Lockeren,
Captain Hans Vande Bosh, besides twenty soldiers: Moreover there were forty
hurt.

The last of August, and the first of September, the Enemy would approach with
rolling Trenches about the Coninsbergh, but he was beaten back.

The 2. of September there happened a Skirmish in the out-workes, and we drove
the Enemies with our Canon and Granades, out of some of their foremost works,
taking afterward with us the Instruments which they left behind them, with
other such commodities. The Enemy lost there many; on our side there were 20.
slain, and 12. or 14. hurt. The same Evening the Enemy made Boone-fires (in
regard of the Victory which he pretended that Don Cordua had gotten against
Count Mansfield, and the Duke of Brunswicke, passing through Brabant) and
discharged his Ordnance: in the mean time the Spanish retreated a little from
their work on the Northside, and our Forces getting notice thereof, went
presently thither and pulled it down, carrying the boards and other materials
into their Garrison.

The 3. we had news from Breda, of Count Mansfields arrival there: in the
evening was all our Cannon as well within as without the City, discharged to
welcome Count Mansfield; the Enemy answered us with 8. or 10. Shot. The same
night our Garrison invaded again the Enemies Works, on the North side, and
pulled a great part of the same down to the ground, and took almost all the
Bavins away, without any resistance or opposition of the Enemies.

The 4. the Enemy assaulted our half moon on the North-side four times in
one night; but our Garrison driving them back, assaulted them afterward in
their own Camp, and took abundance of Pikes from the Enemies, and burnt
great store of their Bavins, (brought thither to fortify withal) we saw 30.
of the Spanish Camp lying dead upon the ground, besides others which lay here
and there dispersed; we had two slain, and three or four hurt.

The 5. and 6. there happened certain strange Accidents, which are rehearsed
at the latter end of this Book.

The 7. we blew up one of our Mines on the North side, perceiving that the
Enemy had likewise one there, which also burst as well as ours; we repaired
our Work presently again, and lost nothing by it.

Our Garrison went the same evening betwixt ten and eleven a clock toward the
Enemies Trenches, and made them to retire close to their Batteries. We took
there abundance of Bauins for the space of two hours together, and destroyed
his Gabionbaskets, with sundry other works.

The 8. day in the afternoon, Don Cordua arrived in Spinola's Camp, being
accompanied with 56. or 57. Companies, and certain Ordnance to strengthen the
Siedge. We heard this day that the E^my was raising a Fort at Saint-Vliedt, a
place lying betwixt Lillo and this City.

The 9. we burnt on the North side great store of the Enemies Bauins, which
he had brought thither to advance his approaches.

The 10. our Garrison sallied forth again on the North side, and took away all
the Bags of the Enemies by day light, which they had prepared to fill up our
ditches withal, and to assault our Works afterward, they are filled with
stones, and so big, that a man has much ado to carry one of them.

The eleventh and 12. our Soldiers continued both in the North and South side
of this City, to endamage the Enemies by their sallies: the Works which he
made in the night, we spoiled in the day, beating him out of his Trenches, with
the death of many of his Soldiers, burning some of his Bauins, and taking away
the rest even in our own quarters.

In the same days, and the eight next following, there came 20. 30. or 40. of
the Enemies daily running unto us, for want of pay, as they told us.

The 13. and 14. the Enemy shot very furiously upon the City, and did much hurt
to diverse Houses and Steeples; but God be praised few persons were hurt: This
night he approached with a Line from the Wood, toward the great Horne-worke,
lying South-west from the City; but we stayed him presently with a
Counter-line.

The 14. our Soldiers beat the Enemies out of their Trench on the South Side,
and slew all that they could meet withal, and finding there two Barrels of
Beer, drank them both quite up, and so having gotten some booty of Apparel
and Arms, they returned back again into our works.

The 15 in the night, the English and Scots, under the Command of Colonel
Morgan, assaulted the Enemies quarters; and having driven them away, they
tarried there till morning, and eat up all their prou^t, and cast down 50.
Rods of the Enemies Line, which he had newly begun; but the next night the
enemies wrought on the same again, resolving to finish it fully. But it is a
very memorable thing to tell; an English Greyhound which followed his Master
when he sallyed forth, senting and snuffling about in the Enemies quarter,
found there a Bag of poisoned Bullets, (which are against the Law of Arms)
and brought the same unto his Master. And I, getting some of them of the
Sergeant Mayor of the English, sent them to my friends for a raritie. The same
day about 100. of our Horse of Berghen, rode forth from Breda, and took seven
or eight Horse of the Enemies, near Huysberghen, about a League and a half
from hence, lying South-east from this City: and afterward they sent sundry
Troops close to the Raybergh, and brought 75. Horse into Breda.

The 16. the Enemy blew a Mine up on the North d e, whereby two of ours were
killed, and four or five hurt: but we set presently upon the Enemies, and
caused them to retire.

The 17. there were sent hither back again from Breda, 60. of our Horse,
which lay within this City before.

The Enemy at this time threatened us mightily; wherefore there was order given,
that all the Companies should tarry for the space of eight days without the
City; whereas they in former time returned usually the fourth day into the
Town.

About the same time we got many Horses of the Enemies; but seeing we wanted
pasture for them, there were many times good Horses sold for the value of 1. 2.
3. or 4. shilling sterling money; yea, the English bartered them away sometimes
for a little Tobacco.

The same day we labored on both sides, night and day without ceasing, and
principally under and about the forsaken half moon, lying in the South part
of the City, upon the corner of the great horneworke, near unto the Wood; both
we and the Enemies having undermined the very same piece: but our Mine was
eight foot deeper then theirs. About the evening we blew up a counterfeited or
false Mine, which we had made upon purpose not far from the other: the Enemy
thereupon thinking, and understanding likewise by the Runagates, that our Mine
was blown up, without having taken any effect; they thought to make use of
theirs, and to draw our men thither by inticements: but the Fox had invited
the Crane, as the Proverb says. Colonel Morgan having sent a little before
200. Musquettiers into a Ditch, with charge to make an Alarm into the very
Trenches and Works of the Enemies; which by them was so bravely performed,
that they drove the Enemies close to the Rayebergh, and into their own
Quarter, where they were strongly seconded. Then began our Musquettiers softly
to retire, and forsook the ground which they had gotten, only in policy, to
lead the Enemies another manner of dance then the Spanish Pauin: They followed
our men hard, and came in great numbers into the compass of the aforesaid
forsaken halfe-moone, and further too, where they were saluted by our bright
and well-oyled Muskets, and afterward blown up into the air both by ours,
and likewise by their own Mines too, when they little suspected any such
matter, as is aforesaid. They made a pitiful noise and a lamentable cry, and
our Garrison setting upon them, killed many (which were sunk into the sand by the
blowing up of the Mines, some sunk therein up to their middle, some unto their
breasts, and some unto their shoulders) knocking them down with their pieces in
such manner, that we gat our purpose of them. We might likewise have blown
up the Enemies battery, near unto the aforesaid halfe-moone, and endamaged him
mightily thereby, seeing we had a Mine under the same, if our Commanders
generally had consented thereunto; the Enemies had 11. Pieces planted upon the
said battery, and annoyed us mightily.

The 18. they were laboring hard on both sides, at their Trenches, Mines,
Lines and Trauerses, and had some small Skirmishes with us, wherein sundry were
hurt; so that the linen which some Patriots or wel-willers of the Country had
sent thither, was well employed in the dressing of the wounds: there were
likewise made 1500. Cushions for the breast, and abundance of head pillowes
for the sick or hurt Soldiers.

The 19. we perceiving that the Enemies would blow up one of their Mines, (in
the Quarter of the Colonel Fama, and the Lord of Loqueren, near unto the
forsaken half moon) we went all out of our Mine, which was hard by the same)
except a Frenchman and two other, which after the Enemy had blown up his Mine,
were yet found alive and drawn out: hereupon the Enemy came fiercely on,
thinking that he had paid us home, with a purpose to settle himself upon the
forsaken halfe-moone; for a while we resisted them, and they following us
afterward at our Retreat, were blown up by our Mine; and buried alive, this
happened betwixt 11. and 4. a Clock in the afternoon.

The 20. the Enemy began from all sides to shoot very fiercely upon the City,
endamaging mightily the Church and Steeple of the same, in such manner, that
the ordinary waiter nor no body else durst abide therein: We supposed that the
Enemy did this because Mounsieur de Grieve, Governor of Isendycke, was burning
and ransacking Flaunders with 2000. Soldiers and 200. Mariners. This same day
Don Garcia Piementelli, a brave Soldier, was killed by one of our Mines, so that
Spinola was very sorry for his death.

The 21. we blew two Mines up without the Bosh-gate, and saw the Enemies
flying up into the Air like Storkes. At Antwerpe they call now our City,
Berghen bring on, in stead of Berghen up Zoom, seeing there have been so many
brought and sent thither from sundry places. But they dare no more assault us
so freely as they did in the beginning. We have our hands daily full of work:
but it is no matter; for whereas we lose one man, the Enemy loses ten.

We thought that they would have broken up the Siedge upon our fasting or
prayer day, seeing the approaches were forsaken by them, about the Quarter of
Colonel Fama, and the Lord of Lockeren.

It is remarkable to consider, that of so many iron Bullets which both high and
low are daily shot into the City, but few hurt or kill any, there is such store
of them that are daily sent to the Storehouse with Wheele-barrowes, and the
Children play with the Musket bullets which fall upon the streets, using them
in stead of earthen Bullets (with which the Children in the Low Countries are
used to play: for Custom being another nature as it were, both Men, Women and
Children have been so used to the thundering of the Shot, that it causes no
astonishment or alteration in them any longer-

The same day we sallied forth on the North Quarter, and having driven the
Enemies out of their Trenches, we burnt their Bavins and Faggots, pulled down
their Lines, and slew many of them.

The 22. we blew up 3. Mines with good success near unto the English
Quarter, endamaging mightily both the Soldiers and Works of the Enemies. But
the fourth Mine which we blew up likewise thereabouts, toward the euennig,
did exceeding great hurt, burying the Enemies alive in the Mines, whereupon
there rose an Alarm in their Quarter, and almost all night long six of our
batteries, and three of the Enemies played with their Ordnance incessantly.

The 23. and 24. we were busy about blowing up of our Mines round about the
City, and to surprise our Enemies: we made likewise Counter-workes against his
Works, or new approaches, in such manner, that we saw the same day about all
our Quarter, great store of our Enemies slain and swallowed up by our Mines:
and it being very hot in those places, in regard of our Musket shot, the
Enemies durst not come to fetch them away; so that they became food for the
Crows and Worms, and all this was effected with small loss of ours.

The 25. 26. and 27. the Enemies blew their Mines up, first in the North-west,
and afterward two Mines in the South-east of the City, but did no hurt to us
nor our Works: it is true that an Englishman and a Swisser were swallowed up
by the Sands unto their knees, but they were presently drawn out by their
feere; and against all expectation brought off alive.

The 28. the Enemy was drawing a Trench East, South-east, toward the way of
Wowe: but curs blew up a Mine about four a Clock in the afternoon, through
the Command of the two Colonels Fama and Lockeren, lying North-west from the
City, close to the sorsaken halfemoone, which took very good effect.

There was order given before by the said Colonels, that certain Pioners
should be in readiness with their Mattocks and Spades, and certain Soldiers
with halfe-Pikes, to sally forth when the Mine should be blown up, to level
the ground even and plain again, so that our Soldiers might pass over it
and set upon the Enemies.

All this was very happily by the aid of God performed, without any damage of
ours, pulling besides a great deal of the Enemies Work to the ground, and
being afterward seconded by 220. men, under the Command of Captain William
Van Fama, Brother of the Colonel, they filled up the Enemies rolling Trenches,
which are nery narrow but deep, and killed there a hundred and fifty of the
Enemies, with Rapiers, Courtleaxes, Mattocks, Hatchets, Spades, and such like
tools, taking also seventeen Prisoners which were brought afterward into the
City, as likewise the booties gotten, of money, Ierkins, Cassocks, etc.

I must not forget here to relate how that Youncker William of Nassau, base or
natural Son to the Prince of Orange, was not only a Spectator, but likewise
an Actor in this Fray, running with a Sword in his hand amongst the thickest of
them, and having afterward gotten one of the Encmies half Pikes, did brave
Service with it, and was none of the first that came off, he was only hurt in
the little finger.

The same night the English did likewise an admirable Exploit in their Quarter,
Captain Clerk being the inuenter of it. They dug a concauity under the
Trenches of the Enemies, which lay upon a high ground: The Spanish Soldiers
perceiving the noise and rumbling under ground, ran partly away (as being
afraid to be blown up) those which tarried, were afterward when ours had
broken through the ground, likewise driven away, or slain: This was such an
invention, as was yet never heard of before, by digging under the Enemies, to
take from them their advantages, and keep them.

Colonel Morgan likewise deceived the Enemies very cunningly: he commanded
certain Hattes to be set upon sticks behind the Baskets in our new
halfe-moone, to make the Enemies believe our Soldiers were lying there, and so
it fell out indeed, for the Enemy supposing the very same, came and cast
therein diverse Granades, but few of them took fire kindly, although they could
not have done any great hurt amongst the Hats and sticks: in the mean time
our Soldiers came stealing and creeping upon them, and made themselves
masters of the halfe-moone, before which they had shed so much blood in former
time, getting now the same again by a device without loss of blood: before
10. of the Clock, all things were mended and repaired in the same, and the
Gabions placed the English shooting from betwixt them upon the Enemy. At the
same time the English got in the South-east 60. places of ground from the
Enemies. And in the North-west Quarter, the Garrison got likewise 50. paces from
them.

The 29. we assaulted again the enemies rolling or dry trenches, and slew some
of them, so that they trebled their Watches to prevent more mischief. We blew
up a Mine in the afternoon, and after set upon the Enemy, but lost 9. or 10.
and among them a French Ensign. We slew a Captain of the Enemies, and a great
number of soldiers, and took diverse prisoners.

The 30. day before six a clock in the morning, there were threescore of the
Enemies fled unto our City, being for the most part Italians.

The same day our Burgomaster received a Letter from Breda, sent by his
brother, the Contents were this: That Count Henry of Nassaw toward the evening
would come with his Horse to Rossendale to logde there, and that the Prince of
Orange was following him, with six and twenty thousand Foot, and eight
thousand Horse, being all fully resolved to adventure their lives and bloods,
for the honor of God, the welfare of these Lands in general, and our rescuing.

THe 1. of October, we perceived that the Enemy had removed almost all his
Cannon, which were planted on the North side: we thought he would have
welcomed the Prince of Orange therewith, but yet they were not so courteous.

The same day there came diverse of the Enemies Soldiers running unto us,
saying that all the Baggage and Ordnance was removed, except only some few
Field-Peeces, or Colverings.

The same time, there arrived many Troops of Horse in the South Quarter of the
Enemies, little thinking to come to the removing of the Siege. In the mean
time they shot fiercely with their Muskets, and gave us certain false
Alarums; thinking to draw our Forces of both Quarters upon their Mines. But we
suspecting that they would depart with a stink or a smell, would not come to
them, but saluted them with our Cannon and Musket shot. They blew up
afterward their Mines which were ready, although they could not annoy us any
way with them.

The 2. day there came an hundred and five and twenty of the Enemies to us,
telling us, that Spinola was breaking up. We in the mean time played with our
Ordnance upon them. About noone they fired Spinolaes Quarter, and planted
themselves in Battle-aray, as if they had been afraid that we would take the
prize or booty from them: marching partly in the afternoon, and partly in the
night following to their South Quarter, which likewise was almost all sired.
They stood all night in order of battle, and sent the baggage away toward
Antwerpe: the Foot followed the same, the Horse keeping in the mean time the
Arriere-gard. But our Ordnance spared neither Gunpowder no Lead, but gave them
their Farewell as well as they had before given them their welcome. Our
Soldiers visiting Spinolaes Camp in the mean time, found there Arms enough
for five and twenty hundred men, and diverse Instruments, materials, and
wagons, besides their unburied dead bodies, and great store of sick and hurt
men, complaining and lamenting against their own Commanders. We brought them
into the City for charities sake, and cured them as fitting.

The Enemy departing hence with dishonor, had lost since the Siege 11000. men
which were slain, besides those which were run away hither and thither,
there being in this one City full two thousand of them.

We have lost in this Siege six hundred brave men, besides those which are
wounded, whereof there are a great number.

God be praised for our Delivery, and the Prince and the Soldiers commended
for their good endeavors.

There have been discharged since the first ariuall of the Enemy 200000 Cannon
shot, both within and without the City.

The Copies of two Letters written from Antwerpe, the first by a good
Protestant, dated the 24. of September, and the other by a Romish Catholic,
dated before the 13. of September.
Dearly beloved Brother in the Lord, it is now long ago, since I received any
Letters from you: It is true that I understood by a Messenger, that you were
well before the siege, hoping now the like. For as much as concerns us, we are
in health, God be praised. Furthermore, we hear here daily of nothing else but
heavy news. First, in regard of the great store of wounded and hurt men, which
are daily brought hither, with twenty, thirty, yea, sometime forty Wagons at a
time, lamenting and complaining pitifully, they dye also many times
desperately upon the Wagons, cursing the hour of their birth. Secondly
because we hear daily such ill news of Bergen up Zome, for it is here
reported, that the Spanish forces are gotten into your Walls, and sweep the
streets clear with their Ordnance, in such manner that none dare walk the
same by day light: They say here likewise, that the Town is undermined unto
the Steeple of the Church too, that the enemies defer only the blowing up;
until such time as they shall be sure, that the Church is full of Heretics;
relating moreover that no Ships can any more go forth, or come into your
Haven, so that the City is not able to hold out above eight or ten days,
adding thereunto, that the best Ordnance, besides the Horse, and all what was
of any value, was sent thence already, and that whatsoever is left within it,
is like to fall into their hands very shortly; and here are many which lay
great wagers upon the surrendering up of the said City: Therefore I pray you to
send me word by word of mouth, or by writing (as you shall think it most
convenient) how all stands.

Vale, Antwerpe, the 24. of Septem. Anno 1622.

The second Letter.
COsen, I have written to you in former times, that Holland was in great
danger, and I hope that you perceive now, that I informed you of the truth, and
therefore will resolve to come over unto us, if you please, I shall send you a
Pasport to prevent all suspicion of your absolute departure. For it will not be
long ere Holland will fall into utter confusion and misery. I doubt how you
can escape in such a case, though you be a Catholic: for our Jesuits say,
that the greatest part of the Hollandish Catholics are poisoned by the
potions of the Heretics, making this comparison, that an Iron which has once
taken the air of the Lodestone, participates presently of the same nature; in
such manner, that it cannot be taken away, or driven out by fire.

Wherefore I am afraid that you will speed no better then the Catholics have
done, which were in Prague, or Heydelberg, or those sometimes did, when this
City was sacked, where the Soldiers answered them which desired to be spared
for their Romish religions sake, that there was no mercy to be found at their
hands, but if they were Catholics, it should be the better for their souls.

Can you look now for any thing else, then a surprisal, and general
overthrow, seeing the Emperor and all Kings are on our side? You have relied
and trusted upon a bulrush, therefore I pray you to come speedily away, for our
forces intend suddenly to make an end of the siege before Bergen. And have
therefore appointed a Clergy for the divine service, and a Governor to
command in the City. Afterward, Marquess Spinola is to set upon Tertolen,
and all the Islands of Sealand. Don Lewis de Valasco shall besiege Sluys, Don
Gonsales de Cordua, shall with his forces, keep the Camp of the Prince of
Orange, in awe. Count Henry Vanden Bergh, with the Baron of Anholt, and the
Bauarian forces shall invade Friesland. Therefore I pray you come presently
hither, and deliver me from my fear; seeing that at every Canon shot I am
doubtful of your life, suspecting you to be slain therewith: Do likewise
your best endeavor to draw all other good Catholics out of that cursed
Sodom, Antwerpe the 13. of September, Anno 1622.

Tragedies and Commedies of BERGEN.
The Bullet must have a lighting place.
A Soldier being shot through the hand, after he was dressed, went to the
Well upon the market place to wash himself: in the mean time, there comes
another dead Bullet, and pierced his cheek, without doing any other hurt: this
unfortunate Soldier, takes the Bullet out of his mouth, and returns to the
Surgeon to be dressed again. The Surgeon espying him, was very angry; for that
he had so carelessly spoiled his late dressing; but when he perceived how the
case stood, he said unto him, ryming in Lowdutch, Misfortune runs round, some
it hits upon the head, and you in the mouth.

He is well kept, whom God keeps.
Three Children playing in the street, there fell a Bullet down upon a corner
stone about the Bosh-gate, and rebounding, stroke the three Children down, so
that they all cried out for fear; but before any came to help them, they had
got up of themselves, and played again as before, without any other amazement:
for use takes away fear.

Whom God has joined, shall no man put asunder.
A Bullet understanding this Proverb, struck in betwixt a Suter and his Love,
and cast John upon Margaret. Fortune, and misfortune stand one next another.

The more knave, the better luck.
Three Spaniards playing at Dice upon the head of a Drum, a courteous Bullet
shot by the Garrison, with a great noise took the Drum quite away, so that
they altogether stricken with amazement, fell to the ground; their fellows
thinking that they had been struck dead, covered them over with Straw; but
within a while, they crept all up again, not being hurt any manner of ways.

One man's fortune, is another man's misfortune.
This Bullet having not yet left grazing, took afterward, seven legs of
seven sundry Wallounes quite off; which was a pitiful sight to behold: this
iron Bullet was cast at Luycke, therefore I say, ill pays his own Master.

A good bit spared, is for the most part eaten by the Catte.
A Corporal, with those Soldiers under his command, having gotten in a night
half a Barrel of Beer, with great pains, and danger of their lives, and
sitting round about it, a dry Bullet took the Can out of one of their hands,
and flew afterward into the Barrel, in such manner, that the Hoopes hit them
on the heads, and one amongst the rest, said, if I had not known the like
before, I would have sworn it had been Witchcraft, and complaining of this
mischance said: The mouth thought the throat cut; Multa cadunt inter calicem
fupremaque labra. There falls much to the ground betwixt the cup and the lip.)

Scholars goods pay no Custom, in the Empire.
But it seems that the Bullets take no notice thereof; seeing they pursued
the learned N. N. in his house, yea, in his private study, yet our Bullet
respected his learning so much, that it suffered him to rise from his seat to
reach for a Book, before it would take possession of his place; doing
according to the Childrens saying; who rises from his seat, loses his place,
he hearing the Bullet with a great noise to take his room, said, There is
nothing more uncertain then life, and nothing more certain then death.

Wish and have.
A fellow standing with his long neck, looking over a Rampire, heard the
Bullets whizzing, with great fear, and said to his fellow, I wish I might have
a phillip with a glancing Bullet, to show that I had been in the wars. A
Soldier hard by, ouer-hearing him, very nimbly took a Musket bullet, and
threw it at him as he went down from the work, hitting him in such manner
upon the head, that he sunk down, and cried out, I am dead, I am dead; the
Soldier running to him to make him rise, takes the Bullet up; he who thought
himself shot, desiring to have the Bullet, asked for it, but the Soldier
refused to give it him, alleging, great miracles might be done with a Bullet
wherewith a man was shot; but at last he agreed thereunto, though upon this
condition; that he should give him a piece of money, and a Bottle of Wine,
which we drank verv merrily; and then suffered him to go away with his
Bullet. Children are well pleased, when they have their desire.

Nothing venture, nothing have.
An Englishman desiring to get a Spaniards clothes, which lay dead without the
Pallisadoes, near to a half Moon; imboldened himself to leap over the
Pallisadoes; and having tied two Matches together, he fastened them about the
Spaniards neck, and being leapt over the ditch again, he begins to draw the
dead body to him: but the match breaking, he scratcht his head, and taking a
new courage, went to him again, and cast him into the ditch, and having stripped
him, put on his clothes, his fellows in the mean time shooting very fiercely
with their Muskets upon the Spaniards; aimed at him likewise not knowing any
thing else, but that he was a Spanyard, he thinking to climb over the
Pallisadoes, hung fast by the breeches, and crying for help, his fellows
took him off, so that he came safe back again (and is a Felt-maker now in
London) saying, Having is sure, getting is chance.

Two cursed dogs bite not one another.
A Mariner drawing down with a Boat-hooke, the Gabion-baskets of one of the
enemies Rampires, a bold Spaniard takes hold on the hook, to pull it out of
his hand; but at last, after great haling and pulling, the Spanyard letting it
go, being not so well experienced in that weapon, the Mariner cried out for
help, intending to draw the Spanyard over, but he crying out very fearfully,
his fellows pulled him back in such manner, that his Glove rending where it
had caught hold, they fell both to the ground, with great laughter of the
Spectators, which said, In an equal match, there is no hurt done.

Take he de what you catch at.
An English Gray-Hound running upon the Walls of the City, it happened that a
Bullet was shot thorough the Rampire, which the dog perceiving, snapt at,
thinking to get a good mouthfull, but he was by the same thrown down the
Walls, wherewith his chaps being hurt and bloody, he sung out his doggish
Music.

There are diverse other Jests happened, but this Paper is not able to hold them
all.

FINIS.

