THE UNMASKING OF All popish Monks, Friars, and Jesuits. OR, A Treatise of
their Genealogy, beginnings, proceedings, and present state. Together with
some brief observations of their Treasons, Murders, Fornications, Impostures,
Blasphemies, and sundry other abominable impieties. Written as a Caveat or
forewarning for Great Britain to take heed in time of these Romish Locusts.

By Lewis Owen.

STOB. SERMON. 44. Quae nascentia mala sunt, ea crescentia peiora. LONDON,
Printed by J. H. for George Gib^, and are to be sold a^ his Shop at the sign
of the Flower-de-Luce in Popes head Alley. 1628.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, Sir JOHN LLOYD Knight, and Sergeant at Law, and one
of his Majesty's Justices of Peace and Quorum for the County of Merioneth, etc.
SIR,
NOt being able in any better manner to answer the greatness of the obligation
wherein I stand engaged unto your Worship for your manifold favors so often
conferred upon me, I must entreat you to rest contented with an infinity of
thanks, which I presently send you, together with this ensuing Discourse or
Pamphlet, being A Treatise of the genealogy, proceedings, and present state of
all Monks, Friars, and Jesuits in general, etc. until such time as occasion
shall furnish me with means to make you a more worthy satisfaction.

(...) To the Gentle Reader.
AS our Savior Christ (Courteous Reader) has builded his Church, which he
has so dearly bought, and purchased, upon himself, the only sure rock, and
foundation thereof, Than the which (as the Apostle says) no other can be laid:
So on the other side, has Satan always sought nothing more than to undermine,
shake, and (if it were possible) to overthrow the same. For he well peceiueth,
that so long as this spiritual house, and glorious building, stands firmly
and surely grounded and founded upon Christ, the everlasting truth, the way and
the life, contained in the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles; which they
not only have delivered to the Church by lively voice: But as the faithful
Penmen, Notaries, and Secretaries of the Holy Ghost, have also registered, and
committed to writing in the sacred Scriptures (for the continual comfort and
instruction thereof:) Matt. 7.24,25.
it remains unremovable and invincible against hell gates, and all the
storms and tempests raised against it by him, and all his instruments. John
8.44.
Wherefore he lays all his battery, and bends all his forces against this
foundation, laboring by falsehood and lies, whereof he is the father, to
corrupt, deprive, alter, obscure and deface the Gospel of Christ, and the word
of life; and thereby to subvert and ouerturne, or at least, to weaken and shake
the faith of the faithful, resting wholly thereupon. This has been ever from
the beginning his practice, and is at this day, and shall be until his kingdom
be utterly removed and taken away. Wherefore he is fitly named by Christ John
8.44.
A liar, and a murderer from the beginning. For as by lies he labors either
to extinguish and abolish, either to discredit and pervert the truth of the
Word; so does he thereby intend and purpose the murdering and destruction of
mankind, both body and soul. For which cause our blessed Savior Jesus Christ
foreseeing the dangerous and malicious attempt of Satan, gave us warning
aforehand, that we might not be found unprovided, and so by security and
carelessness lose the victory. Deuteronomy. 13.
Therefore as well Moses and the Prophets before the coming of Christ,
inspired with his Spirit, as also at his coming in the flesh, he himself, and
his Apostles do give us a watchword, and often admonish us, Mat. 7.15.
To avoid and take heed of false Prophets, false Apostles, and false Teachers;
though they work signs, and miracles, and come in sheeps clothing; that is,
make never so great a show to be the true Prophets of God in outward
appearance: yea though they (following the footsteps of their father Satan, 2
Cor. 11.14,15
Who transformeth himself, the sooner to deceive, into an Angel of light)
turn themselves into the Apostles of Christ. Here-hence is it that the Apostle
Saint Paul charge the Galathians, Not to believe an Angel coming from
heaven; but rather to hold him accursed, if he should teach unto them any
other doctrine, than that which at his mouth they had received. To the same
purpose Saint John 1 Ioh. 4.1.
wills the faithful not to believe every spirit, but to try the spirits
whether they be of God, because many false Prophets are entered into the world.
But albeit this warning against false Prophets, be in diverse places given unto
us: yet then especially does our Savior Christ, and his Apostles, labor to
stir up the godly to a more continual and earnest watchfulness and
wariness, when they tell of the state of the latter days wherein we live:
Apo. 12.12.
by how much they foresaw these times should be more perilous than any other,
in which Satan perceiving his time and kingdom to be short, should rage most
violently, and use most tyranny and strange practices, to drive them from the
only foundation Christ. Take heed (says our Savior, speaking of these later
times) Mat. 24.4,5,11,23,24,25,26. Mark. 13.21. Luke 17.23.
that no man deceive you; for many shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ,
and shall deceive many, and there shall arise false Christ's and false Prophets,
and shall show great signs and wonders, so that (if it were possible) they
should deceive the very Elect; behold I have told you before. Saint Paul says,
1 Timothy 4.1,2,3.
That in the later times men should depart from the faith, and should give heed
unto spirits of errors, and doctrines of Devils, etc. Peter also and Jude, 2
Tit. 3.1,2,3,4,5. 1 Pet. 2.1,2,3. Iud. 4.18.
Declare that there should be false Teachers, which should privily bring in
damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that had bought them, and that many
should follow their destruction, by whom the way of truth should be evil
spoken of, and should turn the grace of God into wantonness, and deny God the
only Lord, and our Lord Jesus Christ. But that is chiefly to be considered and
marked, which the Apostle Saint Paul writes, of Antichrist and his coming:
for before the later day, he shows, 1 These. 2.3,4,8,9,10,11.
That there should come an Apostasy, and departing from the faith, and that
the man of sin should be disclosed, even the son of perdition, which is an
adversary, and exalts himself against all that is called God, etc.

But to omit their monstrous and manifold errors drawn from the sinckes and
puddles of all former Heretics, wherewith this confused and huge Babel of
this Romish Antichristian kingdom has been builded up: the means, and
instruments whereby the same has bin brought to pass, are the hypocritical
swarms of Popish Monks, Friars, Jesuits, and such other irreligious Orders:
But especially the same is to be seen at this day in the new, and lately
invented sects of the Jesuits, Capuchins, and the rest of the Mendicant Friars;
which the Romish Antichrist has set forth as the last proppe and stay of his
tottering and ruinous kingdom: for he perceiving that (as Saint Paul has
foreshewed) Christ has begun to consume it, with the breath of his mouth, and
abolish it with the brightness of his coming, that is, the preaching of the
Gospel: And seeing moreover the world to grow to a disliking and contempt of
the ignorance, sluggishnesse, and lewdness of the other Orders of Monks and
Friars, taken from men, as Benet, Dominick, Francis, and such like; has sent
abroad into Christendom this new Sect hypocritically adorned with the name of
Jesus; and furnished with more show of learning, holiness and godliness, than
their other Popish fraternities: to the intent that Jesus Christ may be the
sooner betrayed, while these holy Jesuits give him a Judas salutation and
kiss. Because he is in good hope that they are the men, by whom he shall
recover again, that so large a circuit of ground, which he has lost in
France, England, Germany, Scotland, Ireland, Denmark, Swethland and other
Countries of Christendom. Furthermore, he uses this special policy, to cause
them by all means, privily to allure and entice the youths of the Universities
and Countries where the Gospel is preached, to depart from the places where
they are, unto his Colleges, Seminaries and Cloisters, to the end that being
there for a time nuzled, and trained up until they be hardened in hypocrisy,
obstinacy, and malice against the truth; and poisoned with the pestilent
errors of the Romish Synagogue: they may be sent out as new false Apostles
into their own countries, or else thither, where it is thought they may do
most harm. Wherein they follow their forefathers the Scribes and Pharisees,
the like hypocrites, who (as Christ says) compassed both sea and land, to make
one Proselyte, or of their profession: and when he is made, they make him
twofold more the child of hell, than they themselves.

Now to the intent, my Countrymen, who as yet are not thoroughly acquainted
with these Monks, Friars and Jesuits, or with their profession, doctrine and
purposes (and therefore are in danger the sooner to be deceived by them) may be
the better admonished, yea armed and provided against them: I have compiled
this ensuing discourse, or Treatise of their Genealogy, Proceedings and
present estate; my purpose being at this time, in some sort, to unmask these
monsters, wherein I do use such modesty as the subject can bear, to reprove
their errors; the which, the love of the truth and virtue enforces me; and
not to cavil or to slander any one of them, which I detest and abhor.
Moreover, I do crave of the Readers, that they bring with them to the reading
hereof, a love and zeal of the truth, joined with godliness, and desire of
their own salvation. Farewell.

Thine in the Lord, LEWIS OWEN.

GEntle Reader, I pray thee, if thou see some literal faults escaped in this
Discourse, correct them, but especially I must admonish thee of these, viz.

Page 74. line 27. for vniuis read viuis. p. 93. l. 11. for 1504. r. 1540.
codem p. l. 12. r. in stead of Paul the 5. Paul. the 5. or Gregory the 15. p.
98. r. Catulos in some books for Catulo. p. 160. l. 34. for you unto, r. unto
you.

THE UNMASKING OF ALL POPISH MONKS, FRIARS, AND IESVITES.
ALbeit that the Apostle Saint Paul says, Coloss. 2.2.3.4. unto the 22. verse.
That in Christ Jesus, and in the knowledge of him all the treasure and wisdom
of God lies hidden: so that the faithful ought not to receive any institution
or doctrine of men. Yet many hundred years after the Apostles decease, the
Church of Rome has found out a wonderful and unspeakable hoord of wisdom and
knowledge, through which a man may come to perfect Justification, and to an
Angelical life, and withal get a store and a heap of merits and good works,
to help a good friend withal at a pinch, and to release a dozen or twain of
silly souls out of Purgatory. And these are they, especially the holy Orders
and full perfections of Monks and Friars, especially of Saint Francis, Saint
Bernard, Saint Dominick, Saint Ignatius, and many more of the same stamp,
which the Apostles knew not of, when men were satisfied with the pure and
unmingled milk of God Word, Like newborn children, as Saint Peter says, 1
Pet. 2.2. John 14.29. and 15.
yea these rich treasures were not yet revealed to Christ himself, who taught
nothing, but that which he had received of his Father; and the same did he
fully and wholly deliver to his Disciples and Apostles. This is plainly written
in the fifth book of Sexti Decret. and in Bulla Nic. 4. beginning at Exit. qui
Sem. nec his 1. de Verb. sign. And in their Legends, and in the book which
Almas made in the Inspiration of Mary the Egyptian. Vid. Conformitat. S.
Francisci 83. and established with the Popes Bulls.
But this (as it seems) was too dainty a dish for his mouth, and therefore
must be kept for the last course, against the time that the holy Fathers, Saint
Francis, Saint Dominicke, and Saint Alane (who sucked the blessed Virgins
breast, as well as Christ himself, and walked about the town with her, as the
Bridegroom with the Bride) and many more of that rabble should appear. I dare
give them a pair of silver Eyes to be offered to the black wooden Lady of
Loretto, if they can find in the Bible that either Christ, or his Apostles did
ever know or teach, that whosoever should die in a Gray-friers habit, should
never come into Purgatory: or that Saint Francis is placed in Lucifers seat in
heaven above all Angels at the upper end, and that he did live a more perfect
life than Christ, and that the Angels are not to be compared with him: or what
knew they that he that should die in a White-friers Scapularie, should be
saved, as (they say) the blessed Virgin did declare to Friar Simon Stock: In
hoc moriens saluabitur, that is, Who so dies in this shall be saved, as in
their Churches every where is painted forth. Or what knew they that Friar
Alanus should make the Rosary of our Lady, which must be esteemed as the
Gospel, as Tarthemius, Leander, and others their Divines have written, and
their famous great Champion Blindasinus in his book called Panopolie, or his
full furniture of Weapons and harness, says, that Saint Francis his Vineyard,
the Golden Legend, the book of the Conformity of Saint Francis, and the
Masse-booke must be as much esteemed in all respects as the holy Scripture; yea
in the book of the Conformity of Saint Francis, made by Friar Bartholomew of
Pisa, Anno 1389. and allowed by the Chapter general of Assyso, is written that
the same book is better than the Gospel. And therefore to maintain these
errors and blasphemies the Church of Rome and the Popes her holy Vicars have at
sundry times erected several Orders of Monks and Friars (like so many
bulwarks, or strong forts to oppose all batteries and assaults whatsoever her
Adversaries shall plant or set against her:) As the Benedictins, Carthusians,
Ieromites, Bernardins, Augustins, Carmelites, Dominicans, Franciscans,
Capuchins, Recollects, Jesuits, Theotines, Oraterians, Fullians, Barnabists,
and an hundred more of these bald pates. Also Nuns, Beghins, close Nuns,
loose Nuns, Sisters, Canonesses. And Hermites, as those of the Orders which
they attribute to Saint Anthony, Hilary, Macarius, S. Theon. S. Frontinian, S.
Paul the Heremite, S. Apollonius, and many more. Now has the Popes added to
these the holy Gildes, or Confraternities of Saint Roch, Saint Hubricht, S.
Sebastian, S. Coronna, who are clad in blew, Saint Anthony in black, Saint
Martin in white, Saint Dominicke in black. Of the Jesuits and Capuchins, etc.
Yea moreover holy Orders of Knights, as those of the Rhodes, or Malta,
Teutonickes or Dutch Knights, Templers, Knights of Saint James: Our Ladies
Knights, Knights of Jerusalem, Knights of the Order of Calatraua, and many
more, whom for brevity sake, I omit: for truly I had need of six hundred
tongues, and two hundred pens, yea a mouth of steel, with a brazen voice, if I
should declare all the diversities of Orders and Religions which the holy Popes
have set up, not only without, but also against the holy Scripture. And yet I
name not the Popes themselves, their Cardinals, Prelates, Patriarchs, and such
like beasts, whereof neither the Apostles or Prophets ever heard of; nay I dare
boldly say, that if the Apostles or Prophets had but once seen or heard the
hundredth part of these new Religious Orders named, they would have been afraid
of them. For, seeing that Saint Paul could not suffer, that among the
Corinthians, some should call themselves the disciples of Peter, others of
Paul, and others of Apollo: how would he have been then afraid and out of
quiet, to have seen and heard of such an innumerable company of new and diverse
names, Professions, Religions, and Rules of perfection, some clad in black,
some in white, some in gray, green, blew, some in red, and some in furs,
etc. And every one to esteem his own Order and Rules for the best, and most
worthy to be regarded, he would surely have thought himself to be in a new
world. Therefore the holy Father the Pope and his Monks and Friars, yea all his
Clergy men, will not have men to found themselves, or depend only upon that
which the Prophets and Apostles have written and taught, for (say they) the
world is now altered, and the Popes have found out and established new
Religions, new Commandments, and new Articles of Faith; whereof the Apostles
never heard, or knew of. For otherwise (believe me) if nothing else were
esteemed but the bare Scriptures and writings of the Prophets and Apostles,
then should the Decrees, Decretals, and Ordinances of the Church of Rome, and
all the Counsels which have been kept and holden by the Order and
Commandments of the Popes; yea all the before specified Orders and Religions
of Monks, Friars, Nuns, Heremites, Gildes and Knight-hoods, be utterly
overthrown: yea all their pretended Merits and Supererogations, Prayers to
Saints, Purgatory, and such like trumperies, would not be worth a rotten Apple.
If men (I say) would begin to esteem the holy Scripture alone, for a true and
sufficient rule and direction to attain to salvation, then should Luther be
commended and praised for causing the Decrees and Decretalls of the Pope to be
burned in Germany, when his books were burned at Rome.

Now because there are many Monks, Friars, and Jesuits sent and transported
into England out of the English Seminaries, Colleges, and Cloisters that are in
foreign parts, as trading Factors for the Pope and the King of Spain, to
extol the sanctity of the one, and the power of the other; I have (according
to my bounden duty to my native Country, and out of the zeal and reverence I
bear to Gods Church and true Religion) undertaken to write this ensuing
Discourse; my purpose being to discover the beginning, and (in some manner) the
proceedings and present estate, drifts and impostures of all Monks, Friars, and
Jesuits in general, and of our English in particular, and as well to instruct
all those my loving Country men, that are not as yet thoroughly acquainted with
their Impostures, Hypocrisies, Fornications, Murders, Idolatries, Blasphemies,
and many other abominable Impieties, and inaccessible Mysteries: as also to
inform those that are carried away with the blind love of these busy Hornets,
that they will not be persuaded, that they are such wicked Hypocrites, and
impious Traitors, as they are indeed: to the end, that the truth being known,
it may appear in the face of the world what they are, who in stead of the
wholesome milk of the Word of God, do feed them, who are committed to their
charge, with the poison of detestable Blasphemies and humane Traditions;
applying unto the Virgin Mary and others, their Saints, many passages of holy
Scriptures, which are only proper unto the Divinity: with their impious and
abhorred doctrine of killing and murdering of Kings and Princes, that are
excommunicated by the Pope and Church of Rome.

We read that many religious men heretofore contemning the world, and all the
pomp, pride, and vanity thereof, withdrew themselves into Wildernesses and
desert places in Syria, Egypt, and other Countries, to the end they might the
better (being not troubled with worldly cares and encumbrances) bestow their
time in reading and studying the holy Scriptures, fasting, praying, meditating,
and such divine exercises: Whereof Paul, (surnamed the first Heremite) Anthony,
Hilarion, Basil, and Jerome, were the first and chiefest among the Christians,
who for their sanctity of life, were in those days had in great honor; for
then this kind of life was simple and free, and not bound or tied to such
unlawful Vows, and ridiculous Ceremonies, as our modern Monks and Friars
now adays pretend to observe and keep. Their Habit was then homely and yet
decent, as every man best pleased to wear; Neither were they bound, to abide
or remain in any one particular place or Covent, nor tied to one kind of life
by vow; but free to stay there, where they liked best, or to go unto any other
City or Country where they would at their own pleasure: and if that at any
time it repented any of them to have undertaken or entered into that kind of
life, it was in his own proper power to recant, and withal to return to his
former vocation or calling again, without any note, or sign of inconstancy or
scandal: which kind of life, if the Monks of our time would imitate, we should
hold them far more holy than we do, or (to say the truth) than they are
indeed.

They sought out the most desert places they could find, that is, in the
Wilderness, and therefore were called Heremites; (quasi eremum colentes,
inhabiting in the Wilderness) which the Grecians call Anchorites, because they
lived alone without any company, and therefore our Monks call themselves
Monachus, that is to say, a solitary man: but by little and little afterward
they began to gather themselves together, as hereafter shall be showed. So that
in those days, the Monks by their Prayers, Fasting, Watching, Reading, and
studying of the holy Scriptures, living hardly and far from the company or
society of men, working with their own hands, and getting their living with
the sweat of their brows, gave a singular good example to all men to live
verruous and godly; and afterward those that were first gathered together into
one Congregation for a long time, following the footsteps of their
Predecessors, instructed their Families, and others that resorted unto them, to
lead a godly and a Christian life: and were admired and honored of all good
men, for their doctrine, integrity of life and godly zeal: for as yet the
Christians Commonwealth had but one Law and one Religion; which now (to the
great grief and sorrow of all good men) is rent and divided into so many Sects
and Factions, Superstitions, and Ceremonies, that it is a lamentable sight to
see or think upon the present misery and calamity of the Church.

There are some of our Modern Monks and Friars which affirm, that Elias and
John Baptist were the first that led a solitary life in the Wilderness; and
were the Authors or Patrons of their Orders, and therefore would persuade the
world that they do imitate them; yea, derive their Rules and Orders from them
(of whom I shall have occasion hereafter to speak in another place) but as the
one was greater than a Prophet; so was the other more, yea far better than
ever any Monk or Friar was, as our Savior himself testifies of John saying,
That among the sons of men there was never any one greater than John Baptist.
Nevertheless, the Monks of the order of Saint Anthony hold it no less than
Blasphemy to say that any order of Monks or Friars is more ancient than theirs;
and yet those of Saint Benets Order do deny it flatly, and in all Processions
or solemn meetings do take the upper hand and place of them, and of all other
disordered Orders or rabble of Monks, or Friars whatsoever.

Others there be that think this kind of Monastical life to have been first
instituted by a sort of religious men in Palestina, called Essaei or Esseni, a
Sect in those days very famous and in great reputation among the Jews, as
Philo the learned Jew, cited by Eusebius, testifies saying, Eusebius. li. 8. de
Euang. Praepa.
Palaestinam maxima gens Iudeorum, inter quos qui dicuntur Essaei, etc. The
chiefest people of the Jews do inhabit Palestina, among whom those that are
called Essaei, be (as I think) more in number than four thousand: they are
called Essaei quasi Sancti, that is to say, Saints; because they are the
chiefest worshippers of God, not in sacrificing of beasts, but by offering up
their bodies and souls as an acceptable sacrifice unto God. There is neither
boy or youth among them because of the instability of their age, but all old
men. They dwell not in Towns or Cities, imagining, that as the contagion of the
air is hurtful to the body, so the conversation of the people to be dangerous
to the soul. Some of them do till and manure the ground, others do exercise
some peaceable and quiet trade to his own profit, and his neighbors good:
neither do they lay up in store any gold or silver, or possess any great
Farms or Livings; but only so much as is sufficient to maintain them. They,
of all other men, do contemn and despise Lands and Money; holding themselves
to be richest in virtue, and judging a mean calling, without any great want,
the greatest wealth in the world. None of them does make any kind of weapon,
either Swords, Helmets, Bucklers, or any other warlike Instrument: Neither do
they exercise any Art or Trade that is noisome, or hurtful to any man; they
never trade or traffic in Merchandise, or keep any Inn or Victualing house:
they know not what Navigations means, they use no manner of rapine or deceit.
They have no servants among them, but all are equal and free men, the one
serving and assisting the other. The seventh day they repair to a holy place,
which they call a Synagogue, the younger sort sit beneath the elder, there they
read the Scripture diligently, and expound it truly and sincerely. They learn
to live godlily, holily, and justly, and have a threefold rule or order; the
first, to love God above all things zealously; the second, to seek after
virtue diligently; and the third, to love their neighbors fervently. And that
they love God above all things, we may allege many Arguments, as perpetual
chastity, their hatred toward swearing and lying, and especially that they
confidently believe God to be the only Author and efficient cause of all good
things, and not of any evil thing. And that they study Virtue may appear,
because they neglect money, despise honor, and hate all voluptuousness. And
lastly, their benevolence, society, and equality are apparent testimonies of
their brotherly love and Charity: for none has a house that is not common to
all the rest, and their money and expenses are common. Moreover, their
Apparel, Meat, and Drink, yea all that they have is in common. Hither are the
words of Phylo cited by Eusebius. Now let our Monks, who live like Kings, who
swim in all manner of delights and pleasures, who affect nothing more than
promotion and honor; and whose chiefest care and study is to gather wealth,
and hoord up Gold, Silver, Pearls, and precious Stones, be ashamed that their
righteousness does not now exceed those Essaeians or Essenians, but does
rather come far short of theirs.

But yet most of the learned, yea they of the Church of Rome are of opinion
that this Saint Anthony was the first that instituted this Monastical life,
which was in Thebaica, a region in Egypt, where he built a Monastery, and
there together with Sarmatas, Amatas, and Macharius his Disciples, lived many
years, spending the residue of their time in fasting and praying; their food
being but Bread, Herbs, and Roots, and their drink Water. He died in the
Wilderness in the year of our Lord God CCCLXI. being 105. years old.

Whereby it seems, that this kind of Monastical or private life was very
ancient, and such as the time and estate of the Church required then: but that
which after in place thereof sprang up among us, was of later time, and being
at the first far unlike the other, the longer it stood, did notwithstanding
still degenerate more and more, till at length it grew intolerable.

Of the Benedictin Monks.
Afterward about the year of our Lord 567. being two hundred and six years
after the death of Saint Anthony, one Benedictus Nursinus (whom the English
Papists vulgarly call Saint Benet) a man borne in Vmbria, a Region in Italy,
having led some certain years a solitary life in those desert places, at
length retired to Subl^cum, a town distant forty miles from Rome, whither many
people (by reason of the great fame of his integrity and holiness of life)
resorted unto him: but within a while he departed thence and repaired to
Cassinum, an ancient City in that Region, where he built a Monastery, and in a
very short time gathered together all such Monks as then wandered here and there
in the Woods and Deserts of Italy; and gave them certain rules and statutes to
observe and keep: And withal bound them to three several Vows; the which
were never heard of, before that S. Basil had ordained them in the East Country
to his Monks, which was about the year 383. for Basil was the first that gave
Rules or Orders unto Monks. Among other Laws and Statutes, he ordained, that
after that a Monk had remained the space of one whole year in his Abbey (if so
be that he was willing to continue there still) he should make three several
solemn Vows: first to live chastely, (but with this Prouiso, Si non cast,
tamen caute, that is to say, if he could not live chastely, he should go about
his bunesse warily. Secondarily, to possess nothing. And thirdly, to obey his
Superiors in what thing soever they should command him. Which decree of Benet
(or rather of Basil, but received and allowed of by Benet) was ratified by the
Church of Rome for an Evangelical Law or Decree.

Again Benet gave his Monklings a new kind of foolish habit; appointing them
also a certain form of praying; allowing them but mean Commons, and withal
a new manner of Abstinence, that was likewise never heard of before.

But now the world is altered with them; for whosoever will suruay or view them
well, shall see that they live like Princes, and far more like Epicures than
Religious men, as all those that are, or have been acquainted with them, can
testify.

This Congregation of Saint Benet grew, by little and little, to be so great,
that it is almost incredible. Yet in the end there happened such a Schism among
them, that it was and still is divided into many families, as Cluniacenses,
Camalduenses, Vallisumbrenses, Montoliuetenses, Grandimontenses, Cistercienses,
Syluestrenses Coelestini, and diverse others, who are now adays either united
with other Orders, or else quite extirpated and abolished.

All these several Sects of Monks (who apply their minds to nothing else but
to sloth, idleness, gluttony, idolatry, whordome, fornication, and the like
impiety (unless it be to invent and bring in daily more new Sects of Monks
and Friars) are reported to have proceeded from the first Family of Saint
Benet. Those that were first instituted by this Saint (as they themselves
confess) are those that now adays wear a black loose Coat of stuff
reaching down to their heels, with a Cowle (or hood) to cover their bald
Pates, which hangs down to their shoulders; and their Scapular shorter than
any other of these Monks; and under that Coat another white Habit as large as
the former, made of Stuff or white Flannen. They shave the hairs of their
heads, except one little round circle which they leave round about their heads,
which they call Corona, their Crown forsooth, because they would be honored
as Kings and Princes. By the rule that their Patron gave them, they are bound
to abstain perpetually from flesh, unless, when they are sick. And therefore
these immodest modern Monks (who do eat Flesh daily, except the time of Lent,
and other fish days) must of necessity be always sick, unless they will
impudently confess (as indeed they cannot deny) but that they observe not the
Laws and Statutes of their Patron Saint Benet, and therein have infringed and
falsified one of their unlawful Vows. Where you may observe that this
Monastical Institution, being but humane, and not grounded or warranted by the
Word of God, did not continue long inuiolated; the nature of men being inclined
(yea in the best things) to wax daily rather worse than better. And therefore
the Benedictin Monks have contaminated their former Piety and Devotions with
the Mammon of this world, as Promotions, Sloth, Gluttony, and all manner of
Luxury; which was the cause that this one Family was so rent and divided into
so many Sects and Schisms as daily experience teaches us. How religiously
they have lived heretofore, and still live, those that are conversant in their
own Histories, and have traveled in foreign Countries, can best tell, to
their perpetual shame; although our new vpstart English Benedictin Monks would
have the world believe that their Order first planted the Christian Religion in
this Land, and that the Monks of their Order were ever godly and religious men,
and therefore not to be ranked with the Jesuits who are great Statesmen; for
they (good Monks) meddle not with matters of State, or with Kings affairs: but
for all their counterfeit holiness let me tell them in their ears, that an
English Benedictin of Swinsteed Abbey poisoned King John; for the which fact he
was, and still is highly honored by all Papists in general. And one says of
him thus, Johannes Mayor de gestis Scotorum lib. 4. c. 3. Cluniacenses.
Regem perimere meritorium ratus est, he thought it a meritorious deed to kill
the King.

The Monks that are called Cluniacenses, being formerly of the Congregation of
Benet, were first instituted in Burgundy by one Otho an Abbot of that
Congregation, unto whom William (surnamed the Godly) Duke of Aquitaine, gave a
certain Village called Mastick, and other lands toward their maintenance,
which was about the year of our Lord DCCCCXVI.

Camalduenses.
Not long after the Camalduenses Monks started up; the Author of it was one
Romoaldus, who had been formerly a Monk of Benets Order in a Cloister near
Rauenna in Italy, from whence he made an escape, to the Province of Hetruria,
which is now the Duke of Florence his Dominion, where, having obtained a
convenient place of one Modulus, he built a Monastery on the top of the
Appenine hills, and there erected another new Family. These Monks wear a white
habit, and profess to lead a very austere kind of life; but, to say the
truth, all is but mere hypocrisy.

Vallis-vmbresenses.
In the other side of those former hills, at a place called Vallis-Vmbrosa, in
the year of our Lord 1060. one John Gualbertus, a Florentine, instituted
another new Family of Monks, who did wear a purple habit.

Monteliuetenses.
The Monteliuetenses began to peep out about the year 1047. at the same time
when there were three several Popes living, who troubled all Christendom for
the Papacy. The Institutor of this Family of Monks, was one Bernardus
Ptolomeus, they lived at the first at Sienna, a City in Tuscan in Italy; but
afterward (having gathered their crummes together) they built an Abbey on the
top of an high hill not far from thence; they wear a white habit, this
Family was approved by Pope Gregory the twelfth.

Grandimontenses.
The Author or Institutor of the Grandimontensian Monks, was one Stephen, a
Nobleman borne in Auernia in France, who gave them (much about that time)
large possessions and revenues to maintain themselves withal.

The Cistercienses, or Bernanardin Monks.
And about the very selfsame time one Robert, Abbot of Molismenia, perceiving
how the old Benedictin Monks had then almost quite left and forsaken the
ancient rule and discipline that Benet had given them, accompanied with more
than twenty other Monks, repaired to a place called Sistercium in Burgundy,
being an horrible stupendous place and not inhabited, and there erected
another new Family, and called them Sistercienses of the place he built his
first Abbey. In the year of our Lord MXCVIII. The Bernardin Monks.
Saint Bernard being a man nobly descended in Burgundy, and one that before
that time had undertaken this Monastical life; at Cistercium aforesaid became
very famous as well for his learning as for his sanctity of life; and therefore
was chosen to be Abbat of the Abbey of Claranallensis, which Abbey one Robert
a Nobleman of that Country had then lately built, and then began the Order of
the Monks of Saint Bernard: but to say the truth, the Cistercensian Monks, and
the Bernardine are all one, saving a little in their habit; for the Bernardins
wear a black gown over a white coat, and the Cistercians all white, and yet
the Bernardins wear (most commonly) every festival day the habit of the
Cistercians, to show the beginning of their Order, as Seb. Franckin witnesses.
Seb. Fran. Chron. folio 470.
These Bernardine Monks have their Abbeyes, for the most part, in some pleasant
valley near to some river side accommodated with woods and groves, as an
ancient Poet well observed in these verses: Semper enim valles Syluestribus
vndique cinctos
Arboribus, Diuus Bernardus, amaenaque prata
Et fluuios, etc. -- amabat.
That is to say: In valleys and groves near some river side
The Bernardine Monks do love to reside.


The Celestine Monks.
About some fourscore and four years after, one Petrus Morone^us (who had
been formerly an Anchorite, and afterward Pope, and called Caelestinus the
fifth) erected an Order of Monks, and called them Caelestini. His Order was
confirmed in the Council of Lions by Pope Gregory the tenth, who gave them
many privileges and indulgences, they observe the rule of Saint Benet. An. Dom.
1294.
This Sect or Family did afterward increase so fast, that within few years,
he himself did consecrate six and thirty Cloisters for them in Italy, wherein
were six hundred Monks: afterward they came to inhabit all Christendom.
Their first coming into England was in the year 1414. Surius in Caelestino,
tom. 3. de vitis Sanctoru^.
Vide Tho. Walsingham, George Lilyus, and Balaeus, Centuria 7. cap. 50. in
Appendice.

There is also a Confraternitie or Brotherhood of this Order. Their Institutor
gave his Monks, among other things, this caveat, Tunc Caelestinus eris, si
caelestia mediteris, that is to say, Thou shall be a Caelestin in deed, (that
is, a heavenly man) if thou will always meditate upon heavenly things. They
wear a kind of a Skie-coloured habit over a white coat, and do never or
seldom eat flesh; and have their Monasteries in some fertile and pleasant
soil, and most commonly a mile or two from any Town or City.

Of the Gilbertin Monks and Nuns.
THe Institutor of this Sect was one Gilbert of Sempringham, a Knights son,
borne at Sempringham in Lincolne-shire, his fathers name was Iocelin. This
Gilbert was a man very deformed in his body, but very studious and learned, and
withal very superstitious, as most men then were. After such time that he had
spent some certain years in France in study, he repaired back to England,
unto whom many people resorted, by reason of the great fame of his holy life.
And in a very short time he erected thirteen Cloisters of Friars and Nuns,
whereof the chiefest was at Sempringham, Anno 1148.
wherein were (as Balaeus witnesses) seven hundred Friars, and eleven hundred
Nunns. Capgrauus and Scropus in Chron.
And about the year 1148. he went again into France to Pope Eugenius the
third (who then lived at Auignon) to have his Order confirmed; who admiring
much at his devotion and forwardness, confirmed his Order. From thence he came
back to England, and gave his Friars and Nunns a Rule, which he had formerly
taken out of Saint Benet and Saint Augustines Rules. Of these Religious
Votaries chastity, one Nigellus Wireker, an ancient Poet, wrote these ensuing
verses: Nigellus in speculo stultorum.
Quid de Sempringham, quantum aut qualia dicam
Nescio; nam nouares me dubitare facit.
Hoc tamen ad presens, nulla ratione remittam,
Nam necesse nimis fratribus esse reor,
Quod nunquam nisi clam, nulla sciente sororum
Cum quocunque suo fratre manner licet.


Thus I find these Verses of Sempringham Englished many years since: What
should I much prate,
An order it is begun of late
Yet will I not let the matter so pass,
The silly Friars and Nuns, alas,
Can have no meeting but late in the dark,
And this, you know well, is a heavy warke.


The same Poet wrote likewise these Verses. Canonici Missam tantum, reliquumque
sorores
Explent officij debitajura sui:
Corpora, non voces, murus distinguit in vnum.
Psallant, directo Psalmatis absque mero.
That is to say: The Monks sing the Mass, the Nuns sing the other,
Thus do the Sisters take part with the Brother:
Bodies, not voices, a wall does disseuer;
Without devotion they sing together.


And of the Nuns he wrote thus: Harum sunt quaedam steriles, quaedam
parientes,
Virgineo tamen nomine cuncta tegunt.
Quae pastoralis baculi dotatur honor,
Illa quidem melius, fertiliusque parit.
Vix etiam quaenis sterilis reperitur in illis
Donec eius aetas talia posse negat:
That is to say: Some Nuns are barren, and some bearing best,
Yet all are Virgins at principal Feasts:
She that is Abbess as does her befall,
In fruitful bearing is best of them all.
Scarce one shall you find among the whole rout
That is unfruitful till age comes about.


But now adays (God be blessed) this Sect among others is quite extinguished,
for since the dissolution of the Abbeys here in England, which was in the
reign of King Henry the eight, or to say the truth, since the beginning of the
Reign of Queen Elizabeth, these Gilbertins were never heard of.

Of the Bethlemit Friars.
Balaeus in Appendice.
ABout the year of our Lord 1257. the Bethlemit Friars began to peep into the
world: Their first dwelling was at Cambridge, and their habit was like the
Dominican Friars, saving that these did wear a star in their breast wrought
upon their habit, in memorial of the Star that did appear at the time that
our Savior was borne in Bethlem.

There were so many Sects of Monks, Friars, and Nuns at that time upon a
sudden started up in England, that the Commonwealth was so oppressed and
exhausted by them, that it was not able to relieve them, or to say the truth,
to satisfy their exorbitant and greedy desires. Idem ibidem.


The Robertin Friars.
WE read that one Robert, who had for a certain time been an Heremite,
forsook that kind of life, and erected an Order of Monks at Guaresburg or
Waresburg in Yorke-shire, about the year of our Lord 1137. Capgrauus and
Balaeus Centur. 2. cap. 63. de Script. Brit. in Apendice.

The Heremits of Saint Paul.
THis Order of Heremits began in Hungary under the Rule of S. Austen, about the
year 1215. their first Institutor was (as they say) one Eusebius Strigonensis.
Panuinus in Chronich.
It was confirmed in the year 1308. by Cardinal Gentilis, Legate to Pope
Clement the fifth.

Idem ibidem.
The Canon Regulars of Saint Mark began at Mantua in Italy 1230.

Of Ieromite Monks.
JEROME the son of Eusebius, borne in the Town of Stidonium in the Province
of Dalmatia, after such time, that he had spent many years at Rome in study,
repaired to the Province of Judea, and there built him a Cottage near Bethlem,
where he lived many years in fasting, praying, and writing, whose divine
works are still extant. Whereupon many other men afterward, by imitation
indeuouring to lead that kind of solitary life, called themselves Hieronymiani
or Ieronymiti, but (alas) they were far contrary to him either in life,
discipline or doctrine. From Saint Jerome (or to say the truth, from these
Hieronymiani) the Ieromite Monks do borrow, or usurp their first origin or
beginning, and do pretend (though most falsely) that this great Doctor was the
only man that first erected their Order, and gave them their Rule. They wear a
kind of a sandy colored habit down to their heels, and a cloak of the same
color, likewise to the ground: some of them wear shoes and stockins; and
others, that are more hypocritical, wear sandales. They have great Abbeyes
and large possessions, and abound in wealth, wheresoever they live. And their
chiefest dwelling is in Italy and Spain, for in other Countries they have but
a few or no Monasteries at all. The truth is, one Carolus Granellus, a
Florentine, was the first Author of this Sect, who lived many years after
Saint Jerome; and he was the first that built an Abbey for them in the hills
of Fessulana in Italy: howbeit, there are others that attribute this
Institution to Redo, Earl of Montegranello, and that they observed at the
first the Rule or Order of Saint Austen of Fesula, and that Pope Gregory the
twelfth ratified and confirmed their Order. There are others of them, that
brag, that Saint Jerome instituted this Order, when he lived in the wilderness
of Judea, and that Eusebius Cremonensis did increase and augment this family.
To conclude, they themselves cannot tell who was their Institutor. They are now
divided into two Sects, that is to say, Hieronymiani Eremitae, and Hieronymiani
Simpliciter, England (God be praised) is not troubled with these Ieromite
Monks, and therefore I will proceed to survey the rest of these disordered
Orders, making as much speed as I can, to come to speak of the Mendicant or
begging Friars, with whom (I am afraid) I shall be more troubled than with
these rich Monks and Friars.

Of the Canon Regulars of the Order of Saint Augustine.
THere are diverse opinions among the Papists concerning the first original or
beginning of these Canon Regulars, and the Mendicant or begging Augustine
Friars; and therefore the question is not as yet decided: for there are very
many learned men, which hold that Saint Augustine was never the Author or
Founder of either of these two Sects, or of any other Order of Friars.
Nevertheless, these Canon Regulars do not only affirm that Saint Augustine,
when he was Bishop of Hippo in Africa, did reduce all the Canons of that Church
to this order and discipline that they now profess to observe: But also some
of them do very impudently brag, that their Order was instituted by the
Apostles before Saint Augustines time, and that this holy man did but renew it,
and did never institute any other Religious Order besides theirs. The Mendican
Augustine Friars do stoutly deny it; and say that their Order, and none other,
was instituted by this great Doctor, as hereafter shall be declared.

These Canon Regulars do wear long white cloth coats, open before, down to
their heels; underneath they wear doublets, breeches, shirts, and white
stockins, shoes or slippers. Over this coat (which is bound with a girdle)
they do wear a short surplice to their knees, and over that a little short
black cloak to their elbowes (like a woman's riding cloak) with a little
cowle or hood fastened to it, and a black corner-cap, or a broad hat, when
they walk or go abroad; and their crowns shaven like other Friars.

They have great Monasteries like Princes Courts, and great lands and revenues,
and are very rich. And have many Cloisters in Italy, Germany, and Netherland;
but in France, Spain, and other Catholic Countries, they have not so many.
Moreover, they are divided into many Families, as Canonici Saluatoris, and
Scopetini, whose Authors were Iacobus and Stephanus Senenses. This Order did
Pope Gregory the eleventh approve and confirm, about the year 1408. Some
report that one Franciscus Bononiensis was the first Institutor of this Sect,
in the time of Pope Urban the fifth, in the year 1366. and the other two did
but renew it, being almost abolished.

There is another Family of these Friars, called Frisonaria, near the City of
Luca in Italy, which was erected and augmented by Pope Eugenius the fourth, who
gave them many Privileges, Indulgences, and Pardons; they are called of some
Lateranenses. And withal, there is another Family at Venice, and another at or
near Cambray in the Low Countries, instituted by one Laurentius Instinianus,
Patriarch of Venice, in the year 1407. and confirmed by Pope John the two and
twentieth: these wear a purple Habit, and a black Cloak over it.

These Canon Regulars had heretofore many Cloisters here in England, whereof
one was in that place which is now called Saint Mary Spittle: But I never knew
or heard of more than two English men of this Order that are now living, and I
think they are too many by two; but howsoever there is neither of them guilty
of much learning.

To conclude, there were and still are diverse other Friars and Nuns that did
and do profess to live under the Rule (as they say) of Saint Augustine: as
the 1. Dominicani. 2 Serui Beata Maria Virginis. 3 Brigidiani. 4 Iesuati. 5
Canonici Regularis Sancti Georgij. 6. Montoliuenteses. 7 Hieronymiani Eremitae.
8 Hieronymiani Simpliciter. 9 Cruciferi. 10 Scopetini. 11 Antoniani seu
Hospitalarij Sancti Antoni. 12 Trinitarij. 13 Seruitae. 14. Feruerij. 15
Fratres B. Ioannis Hierosolymitani. 16 Crucifericum stella. 17 Fratres Sancti
Petri Confessoris de Magella. 18 Sepulchritae, seu fratres Dominici Sepulchri.
19 Fratres Vallischolariorum; whereof some are as yet extant, and some Orders
quite dissolved and abolished. 20 Victoriani. 21 Gilbertini. 22 Eremitae S.
Pauli, quos alij Augustinensibus annumerant. 23 Fratres de Poenitentia. 24
Coronati. 25 Hospitalarij. 26 Milites diut Iacobi de Spata.
And many more who do differ both in Habit and Exercises, as also in Rules and
Precepts of life, as Alfonsus Aluaris de Gueuarra, one of their Writers
witnesses.

Of the Monks called Praemonstratenses.
THese Monks descended down from Heaven (as they themselves brag) in the
Bishopric of Laudan, at a place which they call Praemonstratum. The Author of
this Order was one Northbertus a Priest, borne in Lorrain, who patched up an
Order or Rule for his new begotten Monks out of Saint Augustines Rule, which
was afterward approved and confirmed by Pope Calistus the second. Bruschius
and Polydor.
They wear a long white cloth Coat open before, and a linen Surplice over,
and over that a long white cloth Cloak, a corner Cap (or a Hat when they go
abroad) of the same color, and underneath all, Doublets, Breeches, linen
Shirts, Shoes, and white Stockins. These Monks have lands and revenues to
maintain themselves, and are rich wheresoever they live. This Sect began about
the year 1170. and had Abbeys likewise in England, but at this instant I am
persuaded there is not one English man of that Sect.

Of the Cruciferi, or Crucigeri, or the Cruched Friars.
THis Order of Friars is more ancient than all the former Orders, if ye will
believe them. For they say, that Clitus, Saint Peter's Disciple, and the third
Bishop of Rome after him, was warned by an Angel to build for them a house to
entertain all those that fled thither for the Christian Religion sake: which
he with all speed performed, so that in a short time, many godly men repaired
thither and were entertained, who for many years afterward bare a Cross in
their hands in memorial of the death and passion of our Savior. A thing
unlike to be true, that Clytus should be warned by an Angel to build a house
for a company of lazy Friars, to entertain all those that fled to Rome for
the Christian Religion sake; whereas the very name of Monks or Friars was not
then, or many hundred years after either known or heard of in the Church of
God. And withal, the persecution was then so great in Rome, that the Saints
themselves were constrained to forsake the City, and therefore it is not
credible that other Christians should repair thither for relief and succor
in their distress and persecution.

There are others of opinion, that one Cyriacus Patriarch of Jerusalem, (and he
whom they report to have showed S. Helen, Constantine the Great's Mother, where
the Cross was whereon our blessed Savior was crucified) was the first that
instituted this order in memorial of the invention of the Cross: and that he
gave order that these Monks should ever afterward carry a Cross in their
hands. And that this Cyriacus was afterward martyred by Julian the Apostata,
and therefore their Order became almost extinguished. But Pope Innocentius the
third, about the year 1215. did revive it again, and ever since it has
flourished. And Pope Pius the second commanded them to wear a sky color
Habit. But now this Order of Friars wear a Cross of red cloth or Scarlet
fixed to their Habit on their breast, and wear black. Matthew. Westmonast. and
Balaeus.
These Friars do likewise live by their Lands and Revenues. They had a
Monastery heretofore at Tower Hill, where you may see the ruins of it; and
that place is called by their names to this day. Their first coming into
England was in the year 1244. and their first Cloister was at Colchester.

Of the Trinitarian Friars.
Sabellicus Enne. 9. l. 4. Polydor. l. 7. c. 4.
IN the time of the same Pope Innocentius the third, the Friars who are called
Trinitarians, began to show themselves to the world. One Johannes Matta, and
one Felix Anchorita who lived a solitary life in France, were warned in their
sleep (as they report) to repair to Rome to the Pope, and to seek for a
place of him, to build them a Cloister. Is not this fine Iugling?
And this good Pope (forsooth) in the mean time was warned in a vision to
entertain them, which he did, and ordained that they should wear a white
Habit, with a red and a sky color Cross wrought on their breasts in the same.
Their charge was to go and gather Money to redeem Christians, that were
Captives under the tyranny of the Turks and Infidels, and therefore they were
called Monachi de redemptione captiuorum, that is, Monks of the redemption of
Captives. But these good men, so good forsooth were they, they aimed at another
kind of redemption: for they have, and still do, purchase Lands with the
Money that they have gathered, and as for the poor Christian Captives, if they
do suffer for Christ's sake, they shall have reward, but let them expect no
redemption from them.

These holy Friars scorn to have any Saint for their Patron; for they say,
that the blessed Trinity gave them their Rule and Order; as is to be seen by
these Verses which they write or paint in great capital Letters in all their
Couents. Hic est ordo ordinatus,
Non a Sanctis fabricatus,
Sed a solo summo Deo.
That is: Our Order was instituted
By the Eternal Lord of Host;
And not by Saints, or mortal men,
As other Friars boast.


The first coming of these Friars into England was in the year of our Lord
1357.

Of the Friars of the Order of our blessed Lady, which they call in Spain, Los
frayles de nuestra Senora de Merced.
ABout the year 1285. ( Martin the fourth being Pope) one Philippus Tuscius, a
Florentine borne, and a Professor of Physic, did erect this Order of Friars.
Pope Benedict the eleventh, and many other Popes after him did approve it, and
gave them many Pardons, Indulgences, and Privileges. They have many Couents in
Italy and Spain, and are very rich; but in France or any other Countries I
think they have few or none at all. They wear a white Habit, and are
maruellously well devoted to the blessed Virgin, and have many revelations from
her, as they themselves report; but all is but mere hypocrisy. Sabellious
says, That this Order increased so fast, that within some few years after
their first institution, they had in Italy 48. Cloisters wherein were more than
1500. Monks and Nuns.

Of the Order of Saint Briget.
SAint Briget, a noble Princess of Swethland, being a widow, did institute an
Order of Friars and Nuns, and coming her self to Rome, obtained of Pope Urban
the fifth, a confirmation of the same Order or institution, that is, that both
Sex should live together in one Cloister, having a wall between them; and that
the Nuns should lie in the uppermost chambers, and the Friars underneath them,
and the Church to be divided in like manner. But I am afraid that the Friars
do sometimes lie uppermost, and the Nuns undermost, if that be true (as I
fear it is) which I have read in that little Pamphlet, which is entitled, The
Anatomy of the English Nuns of Lisbon. These Friars and Nuns wear a gray
Habit, and abound in wealth. They have a Covent at Monachum in Bauaria, another
in Collen; another near Calcar, at a place called Maria in Bosco, or Marie in
Busse in Cleueland; another in Isle or Insula in Flanders; and another of
English Nuns in Lisbon in Portugal, who had heretofore a great Covent in
Midlesex, at a place called Sion, which is now the Right Honorable, the Earl
of Northumberlands house; and another they had in Swethland, before the
reformation: but now they are expulsed thence. I never knew or heard of any
more Couents that they have or had. Their Rule is patched out of Saint
Augustines Rule.

Of the Minorite Friars, otherwise called Boni homines, or Good men.
THese Friars do challenge for their Patron Saint Anthony of Paula: they wear
a moorish color Habit, and never eat Flesh, Butter, or Cheese; but feed on the
best Fish, and Oil, the finest Bread and purest Wine, the best Spices, Fruits,
Herbs, and Roots that they can buy for money. They are infinite rich in Lands,
Revenues, and Money. Their Superior they call father Guardian, and have many
Monasteries in Italy, France, Spain, and some in Germany. Richard Duke of
Cornwall, and brother to King Henry the third, being elected King of the Romans
by the Electors of the Empire, took his Son Edmund with him into Germany,
who upon his return into England, built a Cloister for these Monks at
Barkamsteed, three and twenty miles from London, which was in the year 1257.

Of the Carthusian Friars.
I Am now come to the Carthusian Friars, whose first beginning was in the year
1130. their first Founder was one Bruno, borne in Collen in high Germany, and a
Professor of Philosophy at Paris in France, at which time it happened (as they
say) that a certain friend of his (who was reputed to be a godly man, and
famous for his learning and preaching in that City) happened to die, and as they
were singing of the office for the dead (as the manner is among the Papists)
when they came to repeat these words, Dic mihi quot habes iniquitates; this
Bruno being then and there present, the dead man cried out, Iusto Dei iudicio
damnatus sum, that is, I am damned through the just judgment of God. Whereupon
this Bruno being stricken with such a fear, began to consider, that if such
a good man (as that was, in the judgment of the world) was damned through the
just judgment of God, what would become of him and many thousands more, that
were far worse than that man was in man's judgment; and therefore with all
speed left Paris, and took his journey, together with six of his Scholars, to
live solitary in some Wilderness; and not long after came to the Province of
Dolphine in France, near to the City Gratianopolis or Grenoble, where he
obtained a place to build him a Monastery on the top of a high stupendous
hill, called Carthusia, from whence this Family took name. This place one
Hugo, then Bishop of Grenoble, gave them, who afterward became a religious
Friar of that Order. They wear a long white cloth Coat loose, with a Cowle and
a long black Cloak over when they go abroad, which is but seldom, white
cloth Stockings, and a hair Shirt (as they say) but credat qui vult, let him
believe that will; for mine own part I believe it not.

The Lay-brothers (for so they call all those that are religious men and no
Priests) wear a short Coat or Iacket of a reddish colored cloth down to
their knees. They never eat Flesh, Butter, or Cheese; but the best Fish, Eggs,
Oil, Honey, Fruits, and the purest Wine that they can get. They fast (as they
say) the sixth day of the week with Bread and Water, to bring the flesh in
subjection to the spirit. They are enjoined (I mean the Priests) to a
perpetual kind of silence, for they must not talk or converse one with
another but at certain days in the year: none of them are permitted to go
abroad out of their Monastery, but the Prior and Procurator, unless it be some
of the Lay-brethren, who go abroad now and then about the affairs of their
Cloister; for they are very rich and have great store of lands, corn, cattle,
flocks of sheep, and herds of goats and swine, and many servants. They permit
no woman kind to come within their Monasteries or Churches, lest with the
sight of them they should be tempted to lust for them. Truly it is an
excellent thing, if they can keep the affection of their minds correspondent
to their outward gestures, and tame the flesh by living idle and solitary; the
which Saint Jerome (who took great pains, and lived a far more austere life
than they do) could hardly perform, as he himself testifies. They never eat
together but on Sundays or Festival days, and then every man has his
several portion, but all alike (as the fashion is among all Monks and Friars,)
Every Priest, Deacon, or Subdeacon among these Carthusians, has a little house
or Cell, and a little garden to himself, where his bed and study is, and where
he is always, but when he is at Church. There is a partition wall between
every Friars house and garden and another. When they are in their houses or
Cells, they must lock their doors fast, that no man can come at them, but some
of the Lay-brethren (that have liberty to go up and down the Cloister at
their pleasure) for they are the under-officers, who bring them their portions
of meat and drink, and do deliver it in at a window or hole that is by their
doors, in the wall; but they must not go into the Cell, nor speak together,
unless it be upon extremity.

This Order was instituted about the year 1080. as I told you before, and
confirmed by Pope Alexander the third, about the year 1178. since which time
they have been spread over all Christendom, and still are under the Catholic
government. Balaeus Cent. 2. cap. 63 de Scrip. Brit. e^ Tho. Scrop^.
They came into England about the year 1180. and at Witham, near Bath, built
their first Cloister. Afterward they came to London, and had a fair sumptuous
house at the Charterhouse, and another at Sein near Brainford. They began very
poor, but now they are as rich as Princes.

They should not by their rule be more (in one Covent) than twelve Religious
men, besides the Prior and the Procurator, and eighteen Lay-brothers, and a
convenient number of hyndes or servants, who never come into the Quire (where
the Prior and the other Religious men that are present sit) to hear Mass or
any spiritual exercise, but sit in another Quire below the other by themselves.

Of all other Orders of Monks and Friars, these do lead the solitariest life,
and are less troublesome or burthenous to that Commonwealth where they live.
And withal I find but few or none of them to have been Canonized Saints by
the Popes; for they are none of these Miracle-mongers; I mean these Carthusian
Friars do never (as they themselves confess) neither alive or dead work any
miracles. And the reason is (as they say) because heretofore about the year of
our Lord 1175. A loud lie.
a certain Monk of this Order being dead, wrought many miracles at his tomb
or sepulcher, and therefore many people resorted thither. The Prior perceiving
that the concourse of the multitude did much trouble and disturb the Monks
quietness and devotion, or rather that much wickedness was daily committed,
as well by those people, as also by the Monks, and withal of the concourse of
many beggars that resorted thither: to prevent this mischief, he came to the
place, where the dead Monk lay, and commanded him, upon pain of disobedience
to obey him, now being dead, as he had formerly done in his lifetime:
Bonifacius, Ferrarius, and Antoninus Tit. 15. cap. 22.
And withal, afterward not to work any more miracles, the which the dead
Monk straight way obeyed. And never since the Carthusian Friars wrought not any
miracles either living or dead.

They have a Chapter general yearly in the month of May, at Carthusia, where
the first institution of their Order was, and where their first Cloister was
built, which is (by report) a famous thing. To this Chapter do two Monks out
of every Cloister (that is of their Order in all the world) repair, where they
do consult about the affairs and propagation of their Order and Family; and
after that they have continued there some fortnight (as I have heard) they
return home every man to his own Cloister.

There is a Covent of English Friars of this Order at Mechlin near Bruxels;
they are very rich, and were in great hope, when his Majesty was in Spain, to
have recovered their Cloisters and Revenues in England. But now of late, I
hear say (the more is the pity) that they, as well as others of our English
Monks, Friars, and Jesuits, yea the holy Nuns, are fallen into a consumption
(or rather desperation) if it be true, I would advise them to send for Don
Diego Sarmientes, Conde de Gondomar, to administer physic unto them: for he
is (if I am not much deceived) the best Doctor to touch their pulse, and to
purge their ill humors (as for their purses he has done it already) and to
say the truth, he is the man that is best acquainted with their diseases.

All these former Orders, or Sects of Monks and Friars, do abound in riches,
and do more resemble Princes than Religious men. Their Monasteries are most
sumptuously built, and situated in the fattest ground, and the most plentiful
fields of the Country, near some pleasant River. Have they not all the
pleasures that the Country can afford? Do they not feed on the choicest meat
and drink, yea carouse of the purest wine (in bowls and goblets of gold and
silver) that can be got for money? Have they not their Orchards stored with the
delicatest fruits that can be had? Oh how are their Gardens contrived with
pleasant walks, and furnished with infinite variety of sweet and medicinable
herbs and roots, and with most curious and costly fountains, springs,
statues, groves and thickets? Do they not rest upon beds of down, and pure
sweet linen? How are their Celles hanged with cloth of Arras, and other
curious and costly tapistrie? Have they not their white Island-dogges, munkies,
parots, and other prating birds, to sport and recreate themselves withal? With
what stateliness do they ride abroad in their Caroches, or upon their great
horses or mules in their foot-cloathes? What reverence do they exact (or at
leastwise expect) from all sorts of people? Have they not their Monasteries,
Orchards, Gardens, walks, groves, fountains, and fish ponds compassed about
with a high thick stone or brick wall, to the end that none may discover
their secret knaueries, or participate of their pleasant walks? Are not their
gates always locked, that none can come in, except it be their special
friends? Have they not whole Manors, Farms, Granges, Vineyards, Dayries, and
great flocks of sheep, herds of cattle, hogs and goats, yea all kind of
poultries, corn, pastures, and other provision of their own, far more than
will serve their turn? How costly are their Chalices, Corporas, Copes,
Vestiments, and other Church-furniture? In what pomp does an Abbot sing Mass,
and his Monks assist and serve him? To conclude, wheresoever there is any Abbey
or Priorie, there do Whores and Bawds dwell and resort by whole hundreds. And
that this is true, all honest Travelers that know Italy, Spain, France,
Germany, Netherland, and other Catholic Countries, can bear me record. And is
this (judge you) to forsake the world, to mortify the flesh, and to spend the
time in holy meditations and prayers? Or is it not to carry the world, and all
the pomp, pleasures and concupiscences thereof with them into their Cloisters
and Monasteries? As their holy Father the Pope would have Orbem in Vrbe, Rome
to contain all the World.

Having treated (though briefly) of the rich Monks and Friars, it remains now
for me to speak of the Mendicant, or begging Friars: and lastly of the
Jesuits, whom (in regard they are such eminent men in the Church of Rome, and
withal good soldiers and singular good miners, and well experienced in powder
plots, and fire-workes) I will place in the reareward of this Regiment of Monks
and Friars, and in the latter end of this Discourse. I will therefore
(according to their antiquity) begin with the Augustine Mendicant Friars,
because they challenge the first rank or place among the Begging Friars:
wherein I shall not (as I hope) do the other Friars any wrong, seeing that
they have the first place of all these kind of Friars in all Processions,
Burialls, and other Assemblies whatsoever.

Of the Augustine Mendicant Friars.
THese Mendicant Friars do challenge to be the first Order of Religious men
that S. Augustine did erect or institute; which was (say they) when he lived in
the wilderness, and therefore are called Augustiniani Eremitani, or Heremite
Augustine Friars. The Canon Regulars do utterly deny it, in so much that the
most part of their own learned men do suspect that neither the one or other
was ever instituted by that learned man S. Augustine, as I told you before, as
appears by these ensuing verses, which were written many years ago: Mendici
fratres induti vestibus atris,
Augustinus ego nomen habere nego.
These begging Friars, that in black are clad,
Nor name, nor habit, from Saint Austen had.
Balaeus Cent. 7. cap. 89. in Appendice etc.
They came into England from Italy about the year 1252. At which time there
began such a grievous plague at London, and over all England, that the like was
never known before.

But now to the matter: It is most certain that these Canon Regulars, and the
Mendicant Augustine Friars, were both of some other men's institution. For many
men in those days (under a counterfeit show of piety) did a long time after
the days of S. Augustine, live for some certain time in wildernesses and
solitary places, and in the end gathered themselves together into one Family,
under the name of this holy man, and called themselves Augustiniani Eremitani;
because they professed (forsooth) to imitate him in their Discipline and rule
of life; though indeed they were, and still are mere Hypocrites, and quite
contrary to S. Augustine in sanctity of life, learning and Religion. And by
this means, these shauelings became to be the first Order of the rout of
Begging Friars, whereof they are not a little proud.

But truly I see no reason why these men should live thus by the sweat of other
men's brows: for it is well known, that S. Augustine whom they brag (though
untruly) to be their Patron and first Institutor, did not live idly by begging,
as they do, but was a very painful man, and a great Doctor or Teacher in Gods
Church, as his Works do testify. And withal, it is most apparent that our
Savior Jesus Christ did never beg; neither did his Apostles or Disciples live
lazily and idly by othermens labors, as Saint Paul testifies of himself,
saying, 1 Cor. 4.12.
Et laboranimus operantes proprijs manibus; We labored, working with our own
hands. And S. Chrysostom says, that the Monks of Egypt got their living with
their own hands, as the Greek Monks do (for the most part) at this instant:
yea S. Francis (whose Family or, to say more plainly, whose Sects are spread
over the face of the earth) would have his Friars get their living by their
handie work, as appears by his last Will and Testament. But alas, now adays,
it is no less than blasphemy, to say that Monks and Friars must work, nay,
they hold them no better than Heretics, that would have such holy men to
follow the institution of the Apostle, that is, 2 Thessalonians. 3.10.
That he that would not work, should not eat.

These Mendicant Augustine Friars do wear a long white coat of cloth down to
their heels all loose, with a cowle or hood of the same, when they are in
their Cloisters, but when they go abroad, they wear another black coat over
the other, with another cowle, both their coats are then bound close to their
bodies, with a broad leather girdle or belt, which girdle is a very holy thing,
if you will believe them; for they call it S. Augustines girdle; and many lay
people do wear it for pure devotion sake, because (forsooth) it has some
singular great virtue. I have seen many great Princes wear it, namely, Q.
Margaret of France, and others, whom for brevity sake I forbear to name. This
leather Belt is given to none but unto those that are their special good
Benefactors, and such as pay dearly for it, which brings them in no small
benefit. Nevertheless, these holy Fathers have been a long time, not so well
thought of; because Doctor Martin Luther (who was sometimes a Friar of this
Order) did revolt from the Sea of Rome; but yet of late they begin to flourish
again, and are exceeding rich, especially in Italy and Spain.

The Augustine Friars in London (which was built for them by Humfrey Bohum
Earl of Hereford and Essex) and many other Cloisters in England did heretofore
belong to this Order of Friars, and therefore some Englishmen of late took
this holy habit, whereof Father Thomas Witherhead, alias Tomson, alias Tom
Poet, alias Tom Tobacco, a great Father, and yet but a Homunculus, a man a
little bigger than a Dwarf, was the first. A man of an extraordinary great
knowledge in choosing of good Tobacco, and no mean Actor, as the Children of
the Reuells could once tell, and withal a piece of an English Poet; for Latin
he had never any. This good father received this habit of the Prior of the
Augustine Friars at Louain in Brabant, and afterward was made Priest, and then
sent into England, to convert (as I think) Balladmakers, Players,
Tobacconists, and Tinckers. His fatherhood being at Louain in his Nouiciatship,
or in the year of his Approbation, wrote a letter secretly unto a special
friend of his, that then lived at Bruxells, requesting him of all Love, to send
him an ounce or two of Tobacco, and a few pipes. The Gentleman willing to
pleasure him, took his journey from Bruxells to Louain, which was about twelve
English miles, and brought the Tobacco and pipes with him; and upon his
arrival to Louain, repaired to the Augustine Friars Cloister, to speak with
Friar Thomas; but (alas) it would not be granted, because that he was a Nouice,
and for fear that the party (being an Englishman) was not a Catholic; yet
in the end, Friar Thomas perceiving that it was his friend, commended him so
highly to the Prior, and the Master of the Nouices, for a good Catholic
Gentleman, and with much ado obtained leave to speak with him.

The Gentleman being permitted to come into the Cloister, saluted the Prior,
and the rest of the Friars, with such complements, that the Prior gave Friar
Thomas leave, not only to converse with him privately, but also to show him the
Cloister, Garden, the Church, and the Relics. The Gentleman giving the Prior
many thanks, walked together with Friar Thomas into the Church, where Friar
Thomas and another Friar that was the Sacristan, (or he that had the charge of
the holy things) showed him (among many other Relics) one that was the
holiest of all; which was a little bit of rotten flesh, as big as a shilling,
enclosed in a silver box covered over with a cristall-glasse, which holy
Relic (as they said) had wrought many miracles, and had been for many years
in great honor in that City.

The Gentleman being very desirous to know the whole history of this holy
morsel, for his better edification, requested them to certify him of the
truth. The Dutch Friar told him, that there was heretofore a young man dwelling
in Midleburgh in Zealand, who having bin at Confession on Easterday in the
morning with an Augustine Friar, went home and did eat one morsel of Bacon,
and drunk too much, and afterward came to the Church to receive the blessed
Sacrament, which was no sooner put into his mouth, but the fellow did vomit it
up again transubstantiated into flesh, which the holy Friar perceiving,
demanded of him what he had done, who confessed his great offense in drinking
and eating before the receiving of the Sacrament, and asked God and our Lady
forgiveness, and afterward became a Friar of that Order.

This Sacrament which was so miraculously transubstantiated into the visible
body of Christ, was put into the Reliquary. And afterward when these religious
Friars were thence expulsed by the Heretics, this holy Relic was
miraculously preserved, and conueighed to this Cloister at Louain, where it
has been ever since worshipped with no less adoration than the Sacrament of
the Eucharist. O admirable hoggish Relic, a piece of Bacon worshipped for the
Body of Christ! Nay, they have not been ashamed to print a little Treatise of
the miracles it has wrought.

From thence, Friar Thomas brought this Gentleman to a Chamber in that
Cloister, where they did use to entertain strangers, and puts a Faggot on the
fire, for it was in the winter time; and then began to taste of the Tobacco:
but for fear that the other Friars should smell it, his Fatherhood stood upon
a stool in the Chimney to blow up the smoke, which came out of his Nosthrils
like the smoke of a Brewhouse.

Within a while the Gentleman departed, and not long after Friar Thomas was
found tardy, taking of a Pipe of smoke, and for fear of being put to some
extraordinary penance, his Fatherhood made such an eloquent Oration in
commendation of this Indian herb, that he persuaded the Prior, and the rest of
the Friars to take a Pipe of Tobacco, which they did, and liked so well of it,
that they have used it ever since: and I make no question, but Father Thomas
will be had in a perpetual memory in their Books for that his good
instruction.

There is another famous English Father of this Order, his name is Father
Baldwin, a man likewise guilty of no great learning. This good Father was
sometimes an Apprentise to a Goldsmith in London, afterward in the City of
Antwerpe he became an Augustine Mendicant Friar. I saw him there traversing the
street with another Friar, but I did not speak with him, for I was going in
haste a Ship-boord toward Holland, for it was the last day of the late Truce,
that was between the King of Spain, and the States of the United Provinces. I
was told that he is now in England, and it may well be, for I think the Friars
of Antwerpe had rather have his room than his company.

At Grenoble, a City in France, there was a Friar of this Order, who in his
talk and gesture seemed to all men to be a very religious godly man: But
(alas) his fortune was bad; for as he Sodomitically meddled with one of his own
brethren, a Friar of the self same Order, he was taken doing the deed: but
this horrible fact being forgiven him upon his denial, he was at another time
apprehended, imprisoned and punished, for being under a Rock nigh the foresaid
City of Gronoble too familiar with a queen.

Another Augustine Friar, and a Confessor, having heard the confession of a
Flemming, enjoined him in his penance to go on Pilgrimage to the Idol of
Loretto, to offer his gifts at her Altar, and crave her intercession to her Son
Christ Jesus; and in the mean time this holy Father slept with his Wife, and
being taken naked in bed by the Officers of the City, they let him go to his
Monastery, without any further trouble or punishment, because he was a grave
Father and an eloquent Preacher.

I have read that a Friar of this Order was imprisoned in Rome, in the year
1580. for the wilful murdering of three several persons at several times,
and yet was never executed, for he was a famous Preacher and a great
Whoremonger.

These Augustine Friars have a wooden Crucifix in their Monastery near
Burgos in Spain, that yields them no less than six or seven thousand Crowns
yearly. This Crucifix (as they themselves report) was made by one of the
Apostles, and was afterward found upon the Seas near the Coast of Spain,
together with a Scrowle or Schedule written in good strong Parchment,
signifying the virtue and holiness of this wooden Christ. And from thence it
was (with great joy and devotion) brought to this Cloister, where it is set up
in a little Chapel, and had in great honor, See the iugling of these Friars.
and has wrought (as they say) many strange Miracles, and is much frequented
by the Country people, who offer very largely unto it.

This Crucifix is as big as any reasonable man, and most artificially carved
and painted, it has a false Beard, and a Periwig of a Chestnut color hair,
and artificial nails set on both hands and feet.

They make the ignorant people believe that those artificial hair and nails
of the Crucifix do grow, and that it does sweat Water and Blood every Friday,
which drop down into a great silver Basin that is always under the feet of
the Crucifix. Moreover they set Wheat in their Garden, which is a bigger grain
than any other ordinary Wheat; of this Wheat they report a wonderful story:
For they say, that when Adam was driven out of Paradise, he took a whole
handful of the Ears of the Wheat that did grow there, and carried it away
with him into the world, and of this kind of seed is there Wheat, which they
grind in a little Mill made for that purpose; and of the Meal, and the Water
and Blood that the holy Crucifix does sweat, they make little Cakes as big as a
dry Fig, which they sell for a quartillo a piece, which is as much as three
half pence in English money. They have the length of the Crucifix in blue
silk Ribands, with these words painted in silver letters, La Medida del Santo
Crucifixo de Burgos: that is to say, The measure of the holy Crucifix of
Burgos. These Ribands they sell for twelve pence a piece; for they say that
they have many virtues, and are good for a hundred diseases, and above all the
rest, they are a present remedy for the headache, and for weomen that are in
labor of childbirth. Nay (if all be true that these Friars report) there is
never a Quack-saluer in Christendom, with all his Oil, Salues and Waters,
that does cure so many diseases as these Ribands do. And as for their little
Cakes which they call Pancillos, they are precious things for all interior
Diseases, and rare Antidots against all manner of poison: and withal, as long
as any one does carry one of them about his neck, either in a clout or a silver
case, the Devil can have no power over him.

The Chapel (where this Crucifix is) will scarce contain twenty persons, and
is made like a Chamber seeled over, without any windows at all; and the
Crucifix is made fast to a wall over the Altar, having the head close to the
feeling, there hang three silk Curtains before it of three several colors,
viz. blue, red, and white. They do use (when they do show this wooden
Christ) great reverence, for they kneel all down with great devotion and
silence; and then one of the Friars very softly draws the first Curtain, and
afterward says a Pater and an Aue, and in like manner the second; but when he
comes to the last, and that El Santo Christo de Burgos, The holy Christ of
Burgos (for so the common people do call it) begins to appear, they lift up
their hands and cry like Baals Priests, Senor Dios mio ayuda me: O my Lord God
help me. This cry (which endures about half a quarter of an hour) being
ended, then they kiss the ground three times, and deliver their Beads unto the
Friars, who have forked sticks in their hands, on which they put their Beads,
and rub them against some part of the Crucifix, and afterward put them to the
mouth of it, to the end that some virtue may be transferred from the Image unto
these Beads. This being done, one of the Friars does cast some holy Water upon
the Beads and the People; and then they cast the Beads upon the Altar that
every one may take his own; in the mean time a holy Friars stands with a
silver Basin in his hands to receive the offertories of these fools; and in the
Porch as they go forth, there sits two rewes of Friars with Tables before
them, on either hand a Table; one of them sels those Ribands, another those
little Cakes, some begs Money to say Mass before the holy Crucifix, another to
buy Oil, and Wax Candles to burn before it; to conclude, they beg for to
light our Lady, and the holy Sacrament, and for twenty such like uses.

This Chapel is always locked, saving at such time as they say Mass, and
they never say any Mass there, but when some fool paies for it; neither do
they show the Crucifix but at Massetime. But if one brings a good Offering,
they will let him see the holy Crucifix at any time. I came there upon a time,
in company of one Master Daniel Powel, to see this wooden God, but the
Chapel was so full, that with much ado, we stood without the door, where
we saw all their Ceremonies; and had much ado to refrain from laughter, to
see their howling, crying, and apish behavior. But when we went forth, the
Friars looked strangely upon us, because we would give them no Money. They
have not been ashamed to set out a book in Spanish, of the History and
miracles of this Crucifix, which I have both seen and read, and is still
extant.

Of the Carmelite Friars.
THese Carmelite or cormorant Friars, pretend to have their first institution
at Mount Carmel in Syria; where Elias and other Prophets heretofore lived
solitarily. But (God knows) there is great difference between the Carmelite
Friars, and Elias and those old Prophets. In this Mount (say they) lived a few
Hermites scattered here and there, who were afterward gathered together by
Almericus Bishop of Antioch, who built them a Monastery in that Mount near
unto a Fountain, in which place (they say) the blessed Virgin Mary gave them
their Rule and Order; from whence they borrow (or rather usurp) the name or
title of Fratres ordinis beatae Mariae Virginis de monte Carmelo: that is,
Friars (forsooth) of the Order of the blessed Virgin Mary of Mount Carmel. This
their first apparition into the world was about the year 1170. in the time of
Pope Alexander the third. But because these Friars, had not then any settled
Order or Institution for Discipline, Manners, and Ceremonies (which is a thing
of no small moment among the Papists) it was of most men held and reputed as
abortiue and illegitimate. And therefore most of their own Writers are of
opinion; that about some certain years afterward, in the time of Pope
Innocentius the fourth, one Albertus then Patriarch of Jerusalem gave unto
these men (who then lived in the wilderness) certain Rules or Orders, which he
had taken and patched out of the Rule of the Monks of the Order of S. Basil;
and withal ordained that they should wear a party-colored habit, that is to
say, white and red, made in the form of a Mantle; which they then dreamed, to
be like unto that which Elias did use to wear. But afterward Pope Honorius
the third interdicted them to wear that Habit, as being not well befitting
their profession; and therefore a black long habit and a cowle was given them,
and over that a long white robe or cloak, as best agreeing with Virginity,
which is without any spot or blemish: but mark I pray you their hypocrisy.
Afterward they transported themselves out of Asia into Europe, where they have
ever since labored by all means possible to magnify and advance their own
Order, and the Kingdom of Antichrist. And to that end, one Cyrillus a Grecian,
the third general Prelate of this Order (by the Popes setting on and advice)
did affirm to have received a new Gospel and a new Revelation from Heaven,
written with Gods own finger, in silver tables in the Greek tongue; wherein
(among other blasphemous and damnable Doctrine) was written, That God the
Father had reigned during the time of the Law, and God the Son in the time of
Grace, but after the coming of the four Orders of Mendicant Friars, (to wit,
the Augustins, Carmelites, Dominicans, and Franciscans) the holy Ghost began to
reign, and should reign until the end of the world; and that all such as
would believe this new Gospel, should be saved. So that if it had not been
for Valdensis, and other good men, that God (in his great mercy) did stir up
in those days, to resist such a palpable impiety, Note well the drift of
Antichrist.
there had been now no mention of Jesus Christ in the world, for his purpose
was to abolish the new Testament, and to advance his deuillish doctrine.

This is the second Order of Mendicant Friars, which is in such credit and
reputation among women, that they are by their Offerings grown very rich: for
they brag (although most falsely) that the Virgin Mary is their Patroness, and
therefore women do dote upon them, for the blessed Virgins sake, who is the
honor of their Sex: and by this means they were, before the Reformation,
settled in most of the chiefest Cities of Christendom, and still are in all
popish Countries. If one do discourse with any of them, about their antiquity;
oh then they will brag, that they are ancienter than any other Order of Monks
or Friars: for (say they) our Order has been ever since the time of Elias,
and the blessed Virgin did renew it, and gather us together into Cloisters.

They have many Pardons and Indulgences granted unto them from many Popes:
whereof one is, that none of their Order or fraternity shall lie in the Popes
Kitchen (I would have said Purgatory) no longer than the next Saturday
following their death, as appears by their Theses or Theological questions
printed at Paris in the year 1601. which are cited by Master Moulins in his
Defense of the Catholic Faith; which Theses I likewise read in Tours. We have
some Englishmen of this holy Order, and partakers of those divine Graces and
Indulgences, I never knew any but Father Symons, and Father Richard Studder.
This Father Studder was made Priest at Collen in Germany, he took the Habit,
albeit he understands not the Mass nor the Rubricks, yet he can nose a Pipe
of Tobacco as well as any Friar in England (except Father Thomas Witherhead)
and threatens one day or other, to be Dominus factotum, in the black Friars at
London, which did heretofore belong to this holy Order of Friars; for he and
Father Simons do claim to be the lawful successors of the old Carmelite
Friars that heretofore lived there. If their congregation do increase, I make
no question but these two Pillars will be Prouincials here in England, and
share the Kingdom between them, as the Benedictin Monks and Jesuits have
already done.

But in the mean time I will leave them, and return again to speak a word
or two of their Order. There was heretofore great discord among these Carmelite
Friars, about the observation of their Rule, from whence there did arise a
great schism among them; so that they were divided into two Sects, that is to
say, Obseruantes and non obseruantes; and great stir there was between them,
as you may read in the last Eglog of Baptista Mantuanus, a Friar of this self
same Order. But in the end those that called themselves Obseruant Friars were
put to silence, until of late years that a Spanish woman, whose name was
Tereza, undertook to reform this disordered Order, and having gathered
together a company of discontented lazy Friars, and Nuns of this Sect, she
gave them a new Rule, which they affirm to be their ancient Rule, and called
the Friars Carmelius, and the Nuns Carmelinesses. Their Habit in color does
not much differ from the other Friars and Nuns, saving that it is courser, and
a little more reddish, and that they wear neither linen Shirts, Smocks,
Shoes or Stockins, but wooden Clogs or Sandals, and never or seldom eat
Flesh as yet, but how long this pretended austerity will continue I know not.
They profess to lead a holy life; and therefore are in great favor with the
vulgar people, who out of their blind zeal do dote upon them, as they do
upon any new Order of Friars or Nuns: for they partly know the hypocrisy of
the old Order of Monks and Friars, and do hope that these and such new Sects
will prove better; and therefore they do contribute to their relief, so much
the more willingly; but before it be long, they shall find them to be no better
than the rest, but rather far worse, and greater Hypocrites, yet in the
interim, they will be sure with their counterfeit holiness, to cheat them of
their money, and to furnish themselves against a rainy day, as the old Proverb
is.

It is not many years ago, that this new Sect of Carmelin and Carmelinesse
began, and now they have Cloisters, in all the chiefest Towns and Cities of
Spain, Italy, France, Germany, and Netherland, that are under the Catholic
Dominion. Nevertheless, they could not have their Spanish Patroness
sanctified, though they made great suit to the Sea of Rome. But I think it was
because they had not Vnguentum Indicum, to bestow upon his Holiness; howbeit,
she was Beatified many years ago, which is the next step to be Sanctified.
And when lame Ignatius, the Patron of the Jesuits, was Canonized by Pope Paul
the fifth, these Carmelins were almost mad, for anger and grief, that their
Patroness was not placed among the Saints, as well as he; And therefore they
printed a book of her life, and counterfeit miracles, stufft with such
detestable lies, and blasphemies, that it would grieve any good Christian to
read it. And then the Popes sweet Worship, for quietness sake, and at the
Catholic King of Spains entreaty, Sanctified this she creature, to the no
small joy, comfort and benefit, of all these Carmelins and Carmelinesses. Ever
since which time, the common people (that are addicted to this Order) do so
dote upon this new sanctified Creature, and her spiritual babes, that they
think nothing that they have too good for these holy Carmelin Friars, and
Carmelinesse Nuns.

Thus you may see how his Catholic Majesty of Spain is constrained to play
the broker between these Spanish shauellings and the Pope, to have his Spanish
Machiauillians and their Patrons Canonized Saints, when, God wot, it is to be
feared, that they are all damned in hell. For if you will well observe, the
Popes have for these forty years Sanctified none but Spaniards, or at least the
King of Spaines subjects; as for example, S. Carolus Boromeus, Archbishop of
Milan, and sometimes a Capuchin Friar, Ignatius de Loyola, S. Tereza, and some
three or four more, have been placed into the Catalogue of Saints, to the
great honor of Spain (forsooth) and to his Catholic Majesty's no small
charges, and the Popes great profit.

But truly, I wonder that his Holiness does not Sanctify Father Parsons,
Father Garnet, and the rest of those Sulphurian-gun-powder Traitors, yea
Francis Rauiliac, that murdered Henry the fourth of France, seeing they were
all his sworn babes, and the King of Spaines Ministers and Agents.

Of the Dominican Friars.
IN the time of Pope Innocentius the third, one Dominicus Calaguritanus, a
Spanyard borne, and one Franciscus Afisius, borne in Vmbria, a Region of Italy,
did strive which of them should exceed the other in sanctity of life, but I
may well say in hypocrisy.

This Dominicke was first a Canon (or a Prebend) of a Cathedral Church in
Spain, who afterward forsaking that function, (together with some few
companions, as superstitious as himself) did institute a new Sect of Friars,
and prescribed to them an Order, and certain Rules for discipline and manners:
and gave them for their habit a long white coat down to their heels,
woman-like, as all Friars wear, and a black coat, or cloak over that down
to the ground, together with a round cowle, or a hood to their coats of the
same color.

The maine point of his Order was (as he then pretended) to have his Friars to
preach the Gospel of Christ unto all Nations throughout the world: for
preaching in those days was out of use. What he or his Friars did then, I know
not, but I am sure that now a days, they preach not the Gospel, but Legend of
lies, Popish Traditions, and foolish Ceremonies.

Invent de la hist. de France par. I. de Seres. Polyd. Virg. de rerum invent.
Hospin. histor. Monach.
There was in those days, a sort of poor people (called Albigeois) gathered
together about the City of Tholousa in France, and were going to Rome, to the
Pope, to sue for a reformation of many abuses, that then were (and still are)
among the Popish Clergy. These poor people, did Domini^ke and his followers
most barbarously murder, and afterward repaired to Rome, where Pope Innocentius
received him with no small joy and admiration. But this Pope shortly after
dyed, and Pope Honorius (that succeeded him) approved Dominicks Order, about
the year 1110. and this the third Order of the four principal Orders of
Begging Friars. These Friars came first into England in the year 1221. This
holy man was canonized a Saint by Pope Gregory the ninth; and his worship was
the first inuentor or founder of the Inquisition, and the Friars of his Order,
are as yet the Inquisiters in all Italy. Saint Dominick (if you will believe
his Friars) wrought more miracles than Christ; for they write many blasphemous
and ridiculous things of him in his Legend; whereof I could recite many: but
for fear that I should rather surfeit, than satisfy you, I will produce here
one or two, and so pass over the rest.

La vida de San. Domingo.
A certain man was possessed with Devils, whereupon Saint Dominick bound about
his neck certain Relics, whereof some of them were no better than shitten
clouts at the least, whose perfume the Devils could not abide, and therefore
cried out that they would depart: But good Saint Dominick would not believe the
Devils, until the Relics became sureties for them.

Ibidem.
Another time as the holy man preached, certain women were amazed at his
doctrine, and cried out that if he said true, they had served a strange Master;
the holy man bade them be quiet, and they should see what strange Master they
had served. Whereupon comes in an ugly Cat with fiery eyes, showing her
hinder-parts unto them, which was very filthy to behold: at last he leapes
into the Belfrie, and left such a smell behind him, that had almost choked
them all.

Ibidem.
It fortuned also upon a time that a Nun called Mary, had a sore thigh; for
which, she prayed to S. Dominick, because she durst not pray to God: who
pitying the Religious Votary, that was so well devoted unto him; came unto her
when she was asleep, and anointed the place, and healed the sore. But now
leaving the Saint, I will proceed to survey his spiritual babes, the Dominican
Friars.

Ouo prognatus eodem.
In the year of our Lord 1470. one Allen of the Frocke, a Friar of this Order,
was the first that devised and composed the Rosarie of our Lady, who
(neglecting the Gospel of our Lord and Savior) he preached it abroad, and so
his book was published, wherein are related many miracles of the Virgin Mary,
wrought by virtue of this Rosarie: wherein he says, That upon a time, the
blessed Virgin Mary came unto his chamber or Cell; and having a ring made of a
lock of her own hair, she, by delivery of it, betrothed her self unto him,
kissed him, and offered to him her paps to be handled, and sucked by him; and
finally conuersed with this sweet Friar Allen, as familiarly as a spouse is
wont to do with her mate. O sweet Jesus, what true Christian is there, that is
not astonished at the hearing of these horrible blasphemies?

These Dominican Friars do make a great benefit of this foresaid Rosarie: for
in every Town or City that they have a Covent, there is a fraternity of the
Rosary, consisting of the Lay people of either sex, who do pay to them a good
sum of money at their first entrance into the same fraternity, and a yearly
pension besides, to say Masses for them, and the souls of the Brethren and
Sisters of the fraternity that are in Purgatory*

Of all other Begging Friars, these are the Richest, and best scholars. And
therefore the Jesuits, and they, can never agree: for they wrote many railing
books and libels against each other; and in their Sermons especially, they do
exclaim and rail the one on the other.

A certain Jesuit preaching upon a time, told his Auditors, that he had seen
a Vision, which was thus: He thought that he had been in Hell, and that he saw
there some of all sorts of men and women, as Popes, Cardinals, Archbishops,
Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Monks, Friars, Priests, Abbesses, Prioresses and Nuns;
yea Emperors, Kings, Princes, Noblemen, Knights, Gentlemen; to conclude, all
manner of men, women, and children: but he saw there never a Jesuit. And
therefore praised God, that had given him grace to be of the Society of Jesus;
and not of any other Order of Friars; or of any other vocation, profession or
calling whatsoever. So that all his Sermon was in commendation of the Jesuits.

These two learned Sermons were preached in the year 1600. as a Student of
Padua in Italy witnesses in a Pamphlet which he writ in the Italian tongue,
about the year 1607. it is entitled Condolenza de un Studente de Padua a 1.
Patri Iesuiti. par. 2.
The next Sabbath day, a Dominican Friar came and preached in the selfsame
place, and told the people, that he had likewise dreamed, or seen a strange
Vision, and that he thought he had been in Hell, and saw there the souls of
all sorts of men and women; yea of Friars of his own Order, but saw never a
Jesuit there; whereat he wondered, and was so amazed, that he could not say an
Aue Maria, or a Pater noster; and repented him a thousand times, that he had
not been a Jesuit. In the end he demanded of a little Devil, what was the
reason there was never a Jesuit there, seeing there was some of all other men,
women, and children, yea of all other Orders of Religious men. The Devil told
him, that the Jesuits were by themselves in another hell, underneath that:
for, said he, they come hither so fast, and are so many, that Pluto and the
rest of the Devils could scarce rule them. The Friar replied, saying: I would
wish Pluto to have a great care, to search them with speed, for fear that they
have conveyed hither, some gunpowder with them; for they are very skillful in
Mine-workes, and in blowing up of whole States and Parliament-houses; and (if
they can) they will blow you all up; and then the Spaniards will come and take
your Kingdom from you; whereat the Devil laughed, and the Friar awaked out of
his sleep. And was not this good sound doctrine (I pray you) to edify their
Auditors withal?

In Spain the Dominican Friars bear a great sway, for the Kings Confessor is
always a Dominican Friar; yet a Jesuit is the Queens Confessor; both their
Patrons were Spaniards, and therefore so much the greater Saints. It was my
fortune about nine years ago, to come upon a Holyday (I think it was S. Isidors
day) to hear a Sermon, which a Dominican Friar preached in commendation of
this Spanish Saint; who extolled him so much, that he preferred him before S.
Peter. This Saint was (as he said) once King of Andaluzia in Spain, and
forsook his Kingdom, and became a Bishop. Others do write, that he was
driven out of his Kingdom by the Moors, and then became a Bishop. This Friar
citing that place of the Gospel where our Savior says, Whosoever shall
forsake father or mother, wife or children for my name sake, shall have it a
hundred fold in heaven; then Peter said, Master, we have left all to follow
thee; what shall we have? Our Savior told him; that they should sit upon
twelve seats, and judge the twelve Tribes of Israel. The Friar cried out like a
mad man, (as sometimes their fashion is in their Sermons) Pedro Pedro, que
aveys dexado? vna barca podrida, etc. Peter, Peter, what have thou forsaken to
follow Christ? an old rotten boat, and a few torn nets? But our Spanish Saint
forsook a kingdom, Calla Pedro, hold thy peace Peter, and give the upper hand
to our Saint: a certain English Gentleman standing by me, told me in my care,
this Saint forsook his Kingdom when he could not keep it any longer.

Being in my lodging in the City of Valencia in Spain, upon Shroue-sunday in
the afternoon; there came in two Dominican Friars, and a man that carried a
great paper-book and an inkhorne in his band. The Friars demanded of the
good-wife, if she would have her name written in their book? The woman told
them, that her husband had been taken twice prisoner by the Moors, and that
she had spent almost all that she had to pay his ransomes; and therefore
desired them to excuse her for that time: whereupon the Friars departed away in
a great rage. I maruelling to see them depart so discontented, asked her the
reason: she told me that these Friars had in their Cloister, a vial full of
the milk of the blessed Virgin, and that the most part of all the women of
that City and Country near adjoining did use to write their names in their
book, and in the Lent-time to come to them for a little of the milk. And why
(said I) would you not let them write your name in their book? she answered
me, because she was not able to give them money; for (said she) the poorest
woman does give them two crowns, and yet they have not above a little
thimble-full of milk. Then I began to question with her; and demanded of her,
how long had these Friars this milk? and how much might it be in quantity,
that could serve so many women? what was it good for? and withal I told her,
that I did much wonder, that it consumed not, and how they could get enough to
serve so many persons: for the City is very great, and in my conscience,
sixteen of the best kine in Cheshire cannot give at one milking, so much
milk, as would suffice to give every woman in that City, and the Country
thereunto adjoining, a thimble-full of milk: Then she began to tell me, how
that these Friars had a little vial, full of the milk of the blessed Virgin,
for many years ago; and in the time of Lent, they used to power one drop of
it, into a great quantity of white goats-milke, the which it sanctified being
stirred together; and yet the milk in the vial does not waste or diminish.
The Poet, perhaps, meant this milk, when he said: Ouo prognatus eodem.
Mill licet sumant, deperit inde nihil:
Though thousands take, and none say nay;
Yet nothing wastes, or wears away.
This milk (say they) is good for a thousand diseases; and for young children,
when they are newborn, before such time, that they did suck of their mothers
breast. Moreover, whosoever took of this milk, must spend the same, within the
space of one whole year, next after the receiving of it, from the Friars, upon
pain of excommunication: And that it was worth unto the Friars of that
Cloister, one year with another, above four or five thousand crowns. And is
not this, I pray you, fine cheating and cousening? And yet in Spain and Italy
it is death to speak against their impostures and iugling tricks; and are not
these simple ignorant people in a miserable and lamentable bondage and slavery,
that live in those Countries?

I dare say, that there are more than forty Cloisters of Monks, Friars, and
Nuns, that pretend to have of the milk of the most blessed Virgin Mary, which
they keep as a holy relic, and show it in a vial, to be adored and
worshipped of such ignorant fools as will bring a good offertorie with them;
but I never heard of any that made sale of it in this fashion, but those Friars
of Valencia.

I wonder how they came by this Milk, or the like Relics of our Savior, his
Mother, and the Apostles, which they and other Friars and Nuns pretend to have:
for there was neither Monk, Friar, or Nun, in the world, for many hundred
years after the time of our Savior, his blessed Mother, and the Apostles. I
know what they will say, Forsooth, the holy Angels of God did bring it them, as
they did transport the house of the blessed Virgin out of Palestina into
Dalmatia, and thence to Loretto in Italy. Oh horrible lies! do not these
impudent and brazen faced liers deserve the Whetstone of all other men? And yet
it is heresy to contradict them. A learned Doctor says, Consuetudo peccandi,
tollit sensum peccati, the custom of sinning, takes away the sense or feeling
of sin: In like manner, all Monks, Friars, Jesuits, popish Priests and
Nuns, yea the Pope and all his Cardinals and Prelates (because it is their
common trade to cogge, cheat, and lie) make no scruple of it; because (I say)
it is their profession, and the profession of their grand Master the Devil.
Nay, I imagine that some of them do think they speak truth when they lie,
according to the old Proverb, Vsus promptus facit, Practice makes a man expert.

What an infinite number of Money does that Idol, which they call La Virgien
Santissima de Atocha (by Madrid in Spain) bring yearly to these Dominican
Friars, in whose Church it is to be seen? I mean the goodly Image of the
blessed Virgin Mary. I make no question, but some of our curious English
Gentlemen, that did attend his Majesty in his voyage into Spain, have seen
this rich Lady: let them then report, how many great silver Lamps hanged up
with silver Chains, some worth one hundred pound, some more, some less, with
Oil of Olives still burning in them; what store of silver, yea golden
Chalices, silver Patents, Candlesticks, Basens, Ewers, and other
Church-furniture of gold, silver, veluets, silks and sattens, great Torches
made of pure Be wax, some of them of one hundred pound weight? What silver
Ships, silver Armor, Eyes, Hands, Arms, Thighs, Legs, Feet, and whole bodies
are there to be seen? I omit to speak of wooden Crutches, that lame Beggars
offer, and leave there to honor this goodly wooden Lady, and all to cheat
fools of their money. Have they not in every great city or town of the old and
the new Castile, yea and Toledo, men of purpose, that go up and down the
streets all day long with a box in their hands fast locked, with the picture
upon it, of this holy Image of our Atocha Lady, and a little hole in the lid of
it, for men to put in their devotion, crying (like so many Costermongers or
Oisterwomen in London) Para Alumbrar la Virgien Santissima de Atocha, por amor
de Dios, as if they would say, Good people bestow your charity, to buy Oil and
Wax to burn before the Image of our Lady of Atocha, for Gods sake. Now this
fellow is either their servant, and has a daily, weekly, or a monthly pension
of them for his maintenance, or else he is one that paies them a yearly rent
for it. I omit also to speak, of what infinite sums of money, is sent unto
them daily and hourly out of every corner of Spain, to fay Masses before this
Lady. I think in my conscience that this goodly Image does bring in yearly,
one way or another, above four or five thousand pound sterling, to this one
Cloister of Dominican Friars, which are most commonly one hundred and fifty. To
conclude, there is never a Cloister of Friars, as well of this Order as of
other Orders, but they have one Image or other, to deceive the silly ignorant
people of their money, as I mean to show (God willing) more fully hereafter:
for I do purpose to speak more at large of their rotten Relics, and other
popish trash in another Pamphlet.

These Dominican Friars do get an infinite sum of money with the Fraternity
of the Rosary; for every one of the Lay People of either Sex (that is of their
Fraternity) must pay them a good round sum, for their first admittance, and a
certain annual sum, to say Masses for themselves, their friends, and the
souls in Purgatory; and these fools are to have nothing for their money, but
to be partakers of the superabundant merits of these Friars; which they call
Supererogations, that is to say, Good works that the Friars have performed,
over and above that, which they are obliged, to merit the Kingdom of Heaven
for themselves, and the brethren and sisters of their Fraternity. And withal,
they have procured many Pardons, Privileges, and Indulgences from several
Popes for themselves, and for the Nuns that are of their Order, and withal,
for all the brethren and sisters of their fraternity, as may appear by the
Copies of the Popes Bulls, which are fixed upon Posts and Pillars in their
Churches. Yea, for every Mass that is said upon any of their priuileged
Altars, they draw one silly soul by the heels out of purgatory, if all be
true that they say.

I showed you before how Dominick and his Mates were Murderers; let us now
descend and survey his ghostly children, and how they have behaved themselves
all this while: whom (if you view well) you shall find, not to be inferior to
their bloody Patron; but to have exceeded him; for he murdered but a company of
poor silly people, but his Friars have not spared Emperors and Kings, whereof
I could bring you many examples; but, for breuity sake, I will content me only
with two or three, referring the Reader to the Histories of several Nations,
written by men of their own Religion, and are extant to this day.

A Friar of this Order poisoned the Emperor Henry the seventh in the
Sacrament, or their breaden god.

Another Friar of this same Order poisoned the Emperor Henry of Lutzenburgh
likewise in the Sacrament, at the command of Pope Clement the fifth. The reason
was, (as Baptista Ignatius and Sleidan affirm) because the Emperor grew too
strong in Italy. But these Friars got not much by the bargain, for many of
them were afterward slain by the Emperors Soldiers.

James Clement, another Friar of this holy Order, did most shamefully murder
King Henry the third of France, which fact, was not only ratified and allowed
of at Rome; but highly commended by the Popes sweet holiness and others; for
Mariana one of their Writers says, That that young man (meaning the said
Friar, James Clement) being of a simple spirit and weak body; but one, in whom
a greater virtue had confirmed strength and courage, got himself no small
renown by killing that King, accounting it a memorable act. And he accuses
them of barbarousnesse and cruelty, Meaning the Suizers of the Kings Guard.
that coming, gave so many blows to a man that was dead before. And withal
he assures, that in his face it might have been read, how joyful and glad he
was (amidst all his blows and wounds) that with his blood, he had bought the
liberty of his Country; for he had learned (says he) of Divines, Jesuits and
Friars.
with whom he had consulted, that the Tyrant (meaning the King) might justly be
killed: Vide Mariana in 2. Regum, lib. 1. cap. 6. page 53. and 54.

O infamous and perverse wretched Writer! do thou commend that villainous
Traitor, that murdered his natural Sovereign? O detestable crime, and so
horrible, that there is not a name so cruel or abominable as may sufficiently
express it! Damnable Monks, Friars, and Jesuits, do you read in the holy
Scriptures, that it is lawful for any one to murder, I say, not only his King,
but, even the basest man on earth? The Law of God forbids us to defile our
hands in humane blood. And God also commands in the Book of Deuteronomy, to
take the Homicide from the very Altar, and to slay him; but as for Kings, he
has given a particular privilege; as the Lord says by the mouth of the
Psalmist, You shall not touch mine anointed; much more, you shall not kill him.
David also forbear to lay hands upon King Saul, his enemy, albeit he had him
at advantage. Did the Apostle teach you to murder Kings, when he said, Obedite
praepofitis vestris etiam discolis? (...)
Dare you thus tread under feet the Law of God, to which in words you vaunt
your selves (though falsely) to be so zealously affectionate? Shame fall upon
you, mischievous and traitorous Hypocrites, are not your Monasteries and
Churches Sanctuaries for Murderers? Deny it if you can. The very Pagans shall
condemn you in the latter day: for albeit they were ignorant and knew not God,
yet they carried such respect unto the Princes of their lands, as to term
them (in reverence) the living portraiture of the supreme Divinity. Hearken
what one of their Poets said, Rex est Imago animata Dei. If they be wicked, yet
you ought to observe this good advertisement, which one gives: Principes boni
voto quidem expetendi, quale cunque tolerandi sunt. But leaving these Traitors
to their wickedness, I return now to the matter.

Friar John de Roma, another good religious man of this Order, and one of the
Inquisitors of Spain, did prosecute the poor Protestants of Mirandula, and
other places of Spain, that he caused Boots to be filled with scalding hot
Oil, and drew them on their legs, both to bring them to confession, and to
confess where their money lay hid.

At Chalon in France, there lived in a Covent of this Order, two reverend
Fathers, that were in outward show like Angels of Heaven; nevertheless they
loved the female Sex so well, that they made them a Cave in a Rock not far
from the City, to entertain two young whores, where they purposed to perform
their Monastical vow of Chastity. But their often walking from their Cloister,
to this sanctified Cave, bewraied them at the last, and made them infamous
among the people, and in the end they were taken tarde, but not punished, for
fear of giving scandal, and that the Protestants of Geneua should not hear
thereof. That Cave is called the Iacobins Oratory to this day, in mere scorn
and scoff of Monks and Friars. And (God be blessed) the most part of the
Townsmen, at this instant, are good Professors of the Gospel.

There are some English, Scots, and Irish of this Order, dispersed here and
there in foreign parts; and some also lurking in England, and other places
within his Majesty's Dominions, whereof I knew two in Xeres or Sheres in
Spain, the one a Gentleman well descended; but a Roaring boy, fit to keep
company with any English collapsed Lady: and the other a mere Hypocrite: the
Spaniards called him Santico, a little Saint. He got more money with his
counterfeit holiness, than any six Friars in that Cloister; for he never lay
in a bed (as they reported) but upon a matt in the Church, neither did he put
off his Habit, but lay therein: his name is Father Thomas, a singular good
Philosopher, but no Latinist. A kinsman of his came to visit him very poor,
and almost naked: and this good Father (after such time that he had reconciled
him to the Church of Rome) procured for him a new suit of apparel, cloak, and
all things else, Gentleman-like, and yet paid never a penny for them, but
promised to clear the score with Masses, De Profundis, and Diriges. I wonder
whether our Salemen in Burchen Lane, or Saint Thomas the Apostle will take a
Trentall or two of Masses of him for a new suit. But I would advise him not to
go on the score with them, if he gives them no better payment than Masses,
lest he be clapped with a Mase on the breast, with the old word I arrest you sir,
when he shall not be weary, unless it be of the Sergeants company.
Nevertheless, I doubt not but that there are some good Catholic Tailors about
London, that would not stick to trust a holy Friar with a Secular sure, rather
than he should want. And withal, if our English Catholic Ladies and
Gentlewomen will love him as well as the Spanish Senoras did, then his
Father-hood need not to go upon trust. And I hope that his Reverence has
crammed his purse with Spanish pistolls before his departure from thence.

Of the Franciscan Friars, otherwise called the Gray Friars.
THis Idol whom they call Saint Francis, professed at the first the Rule of
Saint Augustine, and wore that Habit that the Augustine Mendicant Fries now use:
But afterward, being somewhat scrupulous (remembering how our Savior had
commanded his Disciples (when he sent them forth to preach the Gospel) not to
wear two coats, or to carry any bag or wallet with them) he wore a long gray
coat down to his heels, with a Cowle or a Hood, and a Cord or Rope about his
loins in steed of a girdle, and went bare foot, and lived in the Wilderness,
on the top of the Appenine hills, at a place which they now call Auerna, where
he received (if you will believe them) the marks of the wounds that our
Savior had in his hands, side, and feet. Afterward he gathered a company of
lazy Friars together, and built them a Covent at Asylo, a Town in Vmbria, a
Region of Italy, and called his Friars, Fratres Manores, or Minorite Friars.

Pope Honorius, who succeeded Innocentius the third, approved of his Order, and
gave them many Privileges, Pardons, Indulgences, and Graces. And afterward
Saint Francis died, and within two years after, Pope Gregory the ninth
canonized him a Saint, which was in the year 1129.

There was never any Order of Friars, that increased like this Order; for there
is never a City or Town of any worth, under the Catholic Dominion, but that
these Friars have a Covent; and before the Reformation, they had Cloisters in
all the Countries of Christendom. And here in England they had many famous
Couents, whereof Christ-Church in London was the chiefest.

What this man, whom they call Saint Francis was, I know not, it may be he was
a good zealous man, and yet superstitious according to the time. But this I am
assured of, his Friars are as great Blasphemers, Hypocrites, and Gluttons, as
any in the world whatsoever. And whereas it is reported of him, that he first
professed the Rule of Saint Augustine; but because he was scrupulous, and would
not wear two Coats, or carry a Wallet, he erected another Order: I conclude,
it was a very poor excuse. But admit it to be true, then his Friars are not of
the same opinion, and they observe not his Rule, for they carry Wallets over
their shoulders from door to door daily through all Cities, Towns, and
Countries wheresoever they inhabit, as hereafter shall be proved. And as for
the marks of our Saviors wounds, which his Friars affirm and brag that he had
in his body, I think it is but a loud lie. For Saint Paul should rather have
them than Saint Francis; for the Apostle says thus of himself, Ego stigmata
Domini nostri Jesus Christi in corpore meo porto. And yet it is apparent that
the Apostle had them not, but spoke that in another sense. And yet the Friars
of Saint Francis his Order, usurp that sentence, and attribute it only to
their Patron. For in their Churches wheresoever any Picture or Image of Saint
Francis is, you shall find those words under written, Ego stigmata Domini
nostri, etc.

But shall I tell you what a good Iouiall Augustine Friar told me of this Saint
Francis, as I traveled with him and another Friar of his Order, upon a time
between Bayon and Bourdeaux in France, among other questions to pass away the
tediousness of the way; I demanded of him, if he did believe that Saint
Francis had those marks in his body. He answered me, That he had certain
marks in his body, which he received not from Christ, but from Saint
Dominicke, for if you will (said he) hear me patiently, and not laugh, I will
resolve you in that matter. I promised I would.

Saint Dominick and Saint Francis (said he) were both great friends, and kept
company for a long time. Dominick was a Scholar and a great Preacher, and
Saint Francis a dolt, a great Gurmund and a Glutton, as all his Friars are. It
fortuned upon a time, as they were both together, that a good Lady or
Gentlewoman (that was much devoted to religious Friars, as many women are) sent
them a fore-quarter of Veale upon a Saturday night for a present, requesting
the two Saints to pray for her. The next day Saint Dominick was to go to a
certain parish Church a mile or two from home to preach, and Saint Francis and
Friar Gyles were to stay at home to play the Cooks (for Saint Francis and his
Friars, were ever fitter for the Kitchen than for the Pulpit.) But before such
time that Dominick and his Mate departed, Friar Gyles, according to his
directions, laid the shoulder of that Veale to the fire to roast, reserving the
breast for their Supper. And so Saint Dominick and his Friar repaired to the
Church to preach, where he made a long Sermon, of purpose that his fellow,
Friar Diego, should have time enough to gather the benevolence of the people
for Saint Dominick, as the custom is in most Catholic Countries, to collect
for the Preacher, if he be a stranger.

In the mean time Saint Francis and Friar Gyles (being very hungry) began to
feed upon the meat as it was upon the spit, so that bit after bit, they eat it
all up to the very bare bones. Within a while after, Dominick and his brother
Diego came home, having their stomachs in folio, and seeing the meat all eaten,
Saint Dominick, being overcome with anger, snatched the broach, and in a
sustian fume ran at Saint Francis: But the good man, having nothing to defend
himself, was thrust with the spit into the side, and through both the hands,
and in the end, closing with Dominick, was likewise thrust downward through
both his feet, and then the holy man fell down. The other two Friars were not
idle all this while, for they cu^t each other, as if they had been a couple of
Car-men; but Friar Gyles (like a tall Soldier) banged poor hunger-staru'd
Diego, as if he had been a stock fish, till he was almost blind.

In the end, Dominick being better pacified, his choler being ouerpast, and
fearing that if this combat should be discovered, that it would tend to their
disgrace, and a great scandal to their profession, entreated Saint Francis to
forgive him, and to be friends with him; promising very faithfully, that he
would in recompense thereof, the next Sunday, and ever afterward, preach and
avouch in his Sermons, That our Savior Jesus Christ had appeared unto Saint
Francis, and had in token of his extraordinary love to him, imprinted in his
body the marks or five wounds that the Nails and the Spear had made in his
body upon the Cross.

Whereupon Saint Francis was contented, and Dominick, and himself, together
with Friar Gyles and Diego, were reconciled friends, and Dominick powered Balsam
into the wounds, and the good Saint went never abroad until they were all
healed. Friar Giles with all speed made ready the breast of veale for Saint
Dominick and Friar Diego; who the next Sunday and ever afterward preached of
the marks that our Savior had given unto Saint Francis.

But afterward the Dominican Friars, perceiving that all men did believe all
this to be true, that Dominick had preached of Saint Francis, and that the
Franciscan Friars did fare the better by reason of those supposed marks, which
their Seraphicall Patron Saint Francis was thought to have received from
Christ, and were more honored of the common people, and reputed to be holier
men than they; envying and repining at their prosperity, they revealed the
whole knauerie, though too late. And this is the reason that the Franciscan and
Dominican Friars do hate one another. Hitherunto are the words of the
Augustine Friars. But since that time I have read this selfsame History in a
little French Pamphlet.

Now concerning S. Francis himself and his miracles, if you will believe his
Friars, Christ and his Apostles never wrought half so many nor such strange
miracles as he did. They write of him such abominable lies, and horrible
impious blasphemies; yea such ridiculous and absurd ribaldries, that I am
ashamed to rehearse them, left I should offend your chaste Ears; and therefore
I will produce you but one or two, and so pass over the rest with silence.

There was (say they) a woman that did long to eat of her own childs flesh,
and being not able to forbear any longer, and having fit opportunity (her
husband being from home) she killed her own natural child, being a boy of
two years old, and did roast a quarter of him, and afterward eat it. Within a
while her husband came home, and perceiving what had happened, drew forth his
sword, and would have killed her. Whereupon the woman being well devoted to
Saint Francis, called unto him for help; who presently came, and stood
between her and her husband, and took the other three quarters of the child,
that were not eaten, and restored him again alive, all safe, sound, and
complete, as he was before, into his fathers hands, which child became
afterward a Friar of good Saint Francis Order. Yea, the miracles of Saint
Francis are far beyond those of Christ or his Apostles: for Francis tamed
wild beasts; he preached unto a Wolf, and converted him from his cruelty,
calling him by the name of his brother Wolf, and made the town of Engubia and
him friends, who of long time before had been at contention; Vide lib.
Conformit. S. Francisci.
and for the assuring of the peace, he made his brother Wolf to give him his
faith, in the marketplace before the Magistrates; and afterward the Wolf
went up and down the City, and took his meat from door to door. I wonder
S. Francis did not make his brother Wolf a Gray Friar. But I suppose the
English Catholics will not believe this to be true, that the Franciscan Friars
would ever write such lies of their holy Patron. And yet I would entreat them
to look into the holy book of the Conformities of S. Francis, and there they
shall find all this, and much more: as how the birds of the air would come
flying, and the beasts flocking about him, to hear him preach, and how the
Nightingales, and other birds, would come and help him to say Mass, and sing
his Office, and would answer him verse for verse. All this is not invented by
me, but written in that book, and defended by them to this day. And
therefore, I would wish those that understand not the Latin tongue, to buy a
little book entitled The Alcaron of the barefoot Friars; which contains a
heap of blasphemies and lies, taken out of the book of the Conformities of
Saint Francis, which Pamphlet was printed at London by William White, 1603.

They are not ashamed to report that S. Francis was transformed in such manner
into Christ, that the one could not be known from the other, but by their
different habit, as Friar Horacio Turcelin affirms, in these ensuing verses:
Exue Franciscum tunica laceroque cucullo,
Qui Franciscus erat, iam tibi Christus erit:
Francisci exuvijs, si qua licet, indue Christum
Iam Franciscus erit, qui modo Christus erat.
Which verses are thus Englished by that worthy and Reverend Divine, Mr. John
White, in his Way to the true Church, in the Epistle to the Reader: Strip
Francis from his coat and cowle all naked, and you shall see,
He that even now Saint Francis was, to Christ will turned be:
Again, put Francis coat and cowle, on Christ (now mark the liar)
He that even now was Jesus Christ, will Francis be (the Friar.)


Moreover, these Franciscan Friars do affirm, that the Virgin Mary, by the
merit of her Virginity, saved all women, to the time of Saint Clare, (who was
the first Nun of Saint Francis Order, and his most dear Companion:) as Christ
saved all men until the time of Saint Francis, as appears in that book,
which is entitled, Flosculi Sancti Francisci; which blasphemous book,
Vergerius did answer. But what followed? his Answer was condemned as
heretical, in three several Indices of books prohibited, by the Popes sweet
holiness; and last of all, by Pope Clement the eight. Vide annot. Vergerij in
Iudic. lib. prohibit. Anno 1559 page 9. And Discorsi sopra gli fiorreti di S.
Francisco lit. D. another Italian book. And is not this horrible blasphemy,
to make not only the Virgin Mary, but also Saint Francis, and Saint Clare,
equal to Christ? Neither do the Jesuits come short of these wicked
blasphemers; for they attribute as much unto lame Ignatius, their Patron, as
hereafter shall be declared, when I shall come to treat of the Jesuits.

There was printed at Bononia in Italy, An. 1590. a book entitled Liber
Conformitatum vitae Beati ac Seraphici Patris Francisci, written by one
Bartholomeus Pisanus, and published by one Hieronymus Bucchius; of which book,
it is affirmed, in the title page, that it is Liber Aureus, a golden book. In
this golden book is written, that Copia literae a Pisano generali Capitulo
directa ad mitium l^b. Conformitat.
Christus ipsum Patrem Franciscum sibi per omnia similem reddidit and
conformem: Christ made Friar Francis like and conformable to himself in all
respects. And that Lib. 3. Conformitat. 31 fol. 303. col. 3. and fol. 306. col.
4.
In monte Aluernae Franciscus cum Deo and Domino Jesus Christo vnius spiritus
efficitur: In the mount of Aluerna, Friar Francis was made one Spirit with God
the Father, and his Son Jesus Christ. And, that Friar Francis said, that the
words of Christ, Matthew. 25 40.
Quod vni ex minoribus meis fecistis, mihi fecistis: That which you have done
to one of these my little ones, you have done it unto me; were spoken by
Christ, first, Literally, and secondly, Particularly, of his Lib. 1. Fruct. 1.
fol. 13 col. 3.
Minorite Friars. And that Lib. 3. Conformitat. 31. fol. 300. col. 3.
Beatus Franciscus titulatus fuit titulo Jesus Nazarenus Rex Iudaeorum: Friar
Francis had the title of Jesus of Nazareth King of the Jews. And that Lib. 1.
Fruct 1. fol. 13. col. 2.
Nemo fuit Minister and seruus Christi vt Franciscus, and ipsius perfectus
imitator: Christ had never such a servant as Francis, there was never any man
who imitated Christ in so perfect a manner as Friar Francis. Again, Lib. 1.
Fruct. 9. fol. 112. col. 4.
Similis Beato Francisco and suo ordini non est inuentus, qui seruauit ad
literam legem excelsi: There was never such a person heard of, as sweet Saint
Francis and his lazy disordered Friars, who kept Gods Law literally. Yea, Lib.
2. Conformitat. 17. fol. 228. col. 1. and Conformitate 25. fol. 272. col. 2.
B. Franciscus totum Euangelium ad literam obseruauit: Saint Francis kept the
Gospel literally: Nec apicem vel vnicum transgreditur, nec iota: He brake not
a tittle of it, nor a iod. These and many more fooleries and blasphemies are in
that book. Again, Director. Inquisit. par. 2. q. 8. test Capuccino in
Euchirid. Eccles. fol. 236.
Quod B. Franciscus est ille Angelus, de quo dicitur in Apocalypsi, vidi
alterum Angelum habentem signum Dei vini: That Friar Francis was that Angel,
of whom it is written in the Revelation, I saw another Angel which had the
seal of the living God: And also Quod Prophetia Apoc. 7. fuerit ad literam de
B. Francisco, diuinitus Domino Bonauenturae Cardinali ostensum. They affirm
likewise, Capuccinus lib. citato.
Quod B. Franciscus semel in anno descendit ad Purgatorium, and extraxit inde
animas illorum qui in hac vita fuerunt de ordine suo, seu de ordinibus per cum
institutis, and ducit ad Paradisum: That Friar Francis descends once a year
down to Purgatory, and brings thence all the souls of them, who in this world
were of his Order, or any other Order instituted by him, and caries them to
heaven with him. Moreover, they bring Christ in, speaking to Friar Francis, in
these words: Lib. 3. Conformit. 31. fol. 306. col. 2.
Sicut ego in die obitus mei ad limbum accessi, and meritis ac virtute
stigmatum Passionis meae, omnes animas quat inueni extraxi; Sic volo quod tu,
vt fis mihi conformis in morte, sicut es in vita, in die Natalitij tui, vadas
quolibet anno ad Purgatorium, and omnes animas trium ordinum, scilicet,
Minorum, Sororum Sanctae Clara, and continentium, 3. ordinis quos ibidem
inueneris, in virtute and efficacia tuorum stigmatum, eruas, and ad gloriam
Paradifi perducas: That is to say, Even as I (meaning Christ) at the day of my
death, went to Lymbum (that is the place where they say the souls of the
Patriarchs were) and by the merits and virtue of the marks of my passion,
brought thence away with me, all the souls that I found there: so is it my
will and pleasure, to the end that you should be conformable unto me in all
things, when you are dead, as well as when you are living, that you would (upon
the day of your nativity, every year) go down unto Purgatory, and bring
thence, all the souls of those of your three Orders, that is to say, of the
Minorite Friars, of the Nuns of Saint Clara, and of the Chaste, and of the
third Order, by the virtue and effect of the marks, that you have received
from me, in your body, and so bring them all to the joy and glory of heaven.

Also they affirm, Capuccin. lib. citato.
Quod nullus potest damnari qui deserat habitum B. Francisci: No man can be
damned who wears the habit or livery of Saint Francis. And that Christ
himself revealed it to Friar Francis: Lib. 1. Fruct. 9. fol. 130. col. 4.
Quod nullus qui moreretur in tuo habitu, esset damnatus. Yea, Quod Ordo B.
Francisci in perpetuum durabit: That Saint Francis his Order should continue
till doomes day. And again, this Friar Francis is by them highly commended for
three notable acts. 1 Antonin. hist. part. 3. tit. 24. cap. 2. sect. 8.
First, for gathering worms out of the way, that they should not be trodden on.
2 Pisan. Conformit. lib. 1. Fruct. 10. lib. Conformit. 13. fol. 140. col. 1.
Secondly, for calling all manner of beasts, as Wolves, and Asses, etc. his
brethren. 3 Vide Canum loc. Com. lib. 11. cap 6.
And thirdly, for taking lice off beggars, and putting them on himself, yea
into his own bosom.

These and a thousand such ridiculous fooleries, horrible blasphemies, and
palpable falsities, do they report of this Friar Francis, and all to make the
doting vulgar people, to honor Friar Francis more than Christ, and
consequently to be beneficial unto them, which indeed is all the scope of
their cheatings and cozenages: what should I say, there are more lies and
gross blasphemies (if more could be) written in the Legend of Friar Francis,
than there are in the Turks Alcaron, or the Jews Thalmud.

Leaving now this Idol Francis, on whom the foolish Papists so much dote, I
come to treat (and that in a word or two) of his sweet spiritual babes, or
Friars, who are divided into six several Sects, and as many Sects of Nuns,
that agree no better than Dogs and Wolves, or Bears and Tigers; for there is
no more love or amity between them, than there is between Christians and
Turks; no not so much: for each of these several Sects does allege, that
Friar Francis was the Institutor of his Order, and of no other Order, but
theirs, and yet they differ in their Habit, and in their Rules and Discipline;
yea in singing their high Masses, and saying their private Masses, their
Canonical hours, and all their other Ceremonies whatsoever: nay they will not
once speak together; unless it be in railing, and indecent manner.

At the first appearing of these Franciscan Friars, there was but one Sect or
Family of them; but in progress of time, there happened such a divorce, and
schism among them, that afterward to this day, could never be pacified: for
they did contend and strive about that, which they never had, that is to say,
about their sanctity and godliness, but, to say the truth, they strove who
should excel each other in superstition and hypocrisy. And therefore some of
them professed to observe and keep the Rule of Francis more strictly than the
rest did, and to live a more austere life, than their other Brethren; for they
then did, and still do, make more account of Francis, than of Christ: Vide
Hospin. de Origin. Monach.
And therefore they called themselves Fratres obseruantes Ordinis Sancti
Francisci: that is, Obseruant Friars of the Order of Saint Francis.

This Schism began, when one Crescentius de Eseyo was General of the
Franciscans, about the year of our Lord 1205. At which time some of these
Friars called themselves, Fratres obseruantiores Ordini Sancti Francisci, and
propterea meliores: Friars (forsooth) that strictly observed, and kept the Rule
of Saint Francis; and therefore so much more holy, and better. But the
forenamed General put them all to silence. Nevertheless, within a while
after, they began to breed again in the Province of Narbon in France, about
the year of our Lord 1317. and afterward in other Provinces. And about the
year 1352. they made suit unto the Pope, by the intercession of many great
Personages, that whereas their Rule or Order, had bin glossed and commented
upon by diverse Popes, quite contrary to the will and meaning of their Patron,
Saint Francis; and was so kept and observed of all the whole body of their
Sect; that his Holiness would appoint them some place, where they might live
strictly, according to the literal meaning of their Rule, without any gloss
at all. Whereupon, the Pope appointed them four Cloisters, where they should
live; but prohibiting them, not to exceed the number of twelve, in one
Cloister. But within a while Pope Innocence the sixth, did revoke this decree or
privilege. Yet for all that, the Institution of these Obseruant Friars, was
not altogether extinguished, or abolished; for some few Relics or dregs
thereof did still remain; albeit they were cruelly persecuted, of the
Conuentuall Friars, and of their General, Prouincialls, and Guardians; and
withal, pursued and censured by many Provincial Counsels. In the end, they
solicited and besought the Council of Constance, in the year 1414. to
protect and defend their Order or Family, and to grant them leave, to observe
and exercise the strict Rule of Saint Francis, and to permit them to have a
General, Prouincialls, Guardians and Vicars: Vide decretum Constable. Council. pro
fracribus de obseruantia. dat. Constable. 9. Calend. Oct. Anno 1415.
All which the Council very willingly did consent unto. And this and many
other things, these Obseruant Friars got to be decreed, in the same Council,
in the nineteenth Session.

Within few years after, in the time of Pope Eugenius the fourth, in the year
1431. at which time the Generall-ship of the Franciscans was vacant; one
Albertus de Sartiano, who had been appointed by the same Pope, Vicar General
of all the Order of Saint Francis, did aim to be General of all the Order, by
the means and assistance of Pope Eugenius. And therefore a Chapter general of
all their Order, was called and celebrated at Padua, where these Friars
(contemning the Popes authority) did elect one Antonius de Russionibus, to be
their General. Whereupon this Albertus forsook the Minorite Franciscans, and
joined himself to the Obseruants; who presently made him their Vicar General,
with power and authority also, to do all that belonged to the place or office
of a Minister general. In whose time, a general Schism, or an universal
defect or discord began in this order, as Petrus de Cruce, in his
Antiminorica witnesses. In fine, they made over their faction, not only a
General Minister, but also Prouincials, Guardians, and other Officers,
scorning and contemning the Prelates of the Conuentuall or Minorite Friars;
yea, condemning them all together, and calling them wicked and unjust
infringers and violaters of the Rule of Saint Francis; and profane, impious,
and notorious sinners, and extolling themselves to the Heavens, for godly and
just religious men, and the strict keepers and obseruers of the Rule of
Francis, and always his obedient children, and the Elect of God.

Hospin. loco supericus itato.
These holy Obseruant Friars would not then, nor as yet, touch any money; but,
Per interpositas personas auidissime accipiunt; by their Collectors, Receivers,
and Treasurers, they most greedily accept and scrape all they can get. Then
they did (or at least) wise made a show to abstain from flesh altogether, and
did eat nothing but raw herbs and roots, and did wear wooden Clogs in stead
of Shoes; and never ceased to rail against the Conuentuall Friars, who
possessed money, fed upon all kind of Meat, and wore Shoes and Stockins: as
Franciscus Modius, ironically in their persons and names testifies in these
Verses: Nos reliquo auctoris discernit ab ordine nostri
Non tam vestitus, quam ratio ipsa cibi;
Nam reliqui certis cupiant, cum posse diebus
Carne vti, and pingui de petasone vorent:
Elixisque nec abstineant, assisque ferinis:
Et quacunque caro cocta placere potest.
Nos solis ventrem latrantem pascimus herbis:
Crudum and delitias saepe vocamus olus.
That is to say: From loose Franciscans, we distinguished are,
Not one jot in our habit, but our fare;
To feed on flesh, in flesh-daies are their wishes,
Gammons of Bacon are their daily dishes:
Venison they devour, both sod and roast,
And baked meat of all sorts them pleases most:
With herbs we stay our stomach when it barks,
And raw thin broth our Capons is and Larkes.


But they did not long persevere in this austere kind of life, for now adays
all their delight is to fare deliciously, and to cram their fat guts with the
best dainties the Country yields, and wear Shoes and Stockins. These
Cormorants, and fat-bellied Mates, will preach Christ crucified, poor, naked,
and hungry, and command fasting, and other Christian exercises; but themselves
will never practice any one of them.

This Order of the Obseruant Minorite Friars was confirmed by the Council of
Constance, the Sea of Rome being vacant, and afterward by Pope Eugenius the
fourth, Pius the second, Paul the third, Sixtus the fourth, Innocentius the
eighth, and Alexander the sixth. Petrus de cruce in Anti^ inor^a.


Afterward, through the opinion that men had of their singular sanctity or
holiness, they began to increase wonderfully; in so much that within a short
time they had in Italy twenty Cloisters, wherein were six score Friars: and in
the latter time of Bernardin, who was of their Order, and a very famous man in
those days, they had three hundred Cloisters, and were more than five thousand
Friars. From Italy they came to dwell, in all the Towns and Cities of
Christendom, yea out of Christendom, among Turks and Jews, in all quarters.
King Edward the fourth brought them into England, and King Henry the seventh
augmented their number, in whose time they had six famous Cloisters in England,
whereof Christ-Church in London was one. Baleus and Polydor lib. 7. cap. 4.

This Schism between the Minorite Friars was prophesied (as I have read) by
one Guido, a Friar of their Order, long before that it began. Their Habit is of
a more darker gray than the Conuentuall Friars.

But now there are many other Sects of Friars that challenge Saint Francis for
their Patron, whereof the Capuchins, Recollects, Penitentiarians, and the
French Franciscans, whom they report Saint Lewis King of France to have
erected, are the chiefest. Every one of all which does challenge to be of the
institution of Saint Francis, and to live according to his Rule and Discipline.
And do exclaim one against another most shamefully, in so much that there is
no more love and amity between them, than between Christians and Turks, no
not so much; for Christians and Turks will confer and traffic, yea
sometimes eat and drink together. But Saint Francis, his holy ghostly
children, will not so much as speak a good word one of the other.

The other Sect of Friars, that claimed Francis for their Patron and
Instituter, who were called Amadeani, Minimi, Reformati, fratres de Euangelio,
Chiacini, Paulini, Bosiani, Gaudentes, fratres de portiuncula, etc. are now for
the most part either united to the Obseruants, Recollects, Penitentiarians, or
Capuchins, or else quite dissolved and abolished.

Those Friars that Francis did institute, as I find in their own Books, were
enjoined to labor for their living, as appears by his last Will and
Testament; but now a days these lazy Lubbars scorn to work, and live by
begging: yea, it is no less than Heresy, to say that Friars must work.

Their Patron (among other things) commanded them to wear but one Frocke or
Coat, and not to carry either Bag or Wallet: and yet these holy men never go
abroad without a great Wallet over their shoulders, as big as a Sack; I speak
not of their sleeves, which are as wide as they may well carry a dozen of white
bread in either of them. And besides the Capuchins, Recollects, and
Penitentiarians, do wear short Clokes over their Frocks. And withal, every
one of them all has two Coats or Frocks to shift himself withal when he
pleases.

Those Friars that are called Conuentuales, or non obseruantes, do wear a
long whitish gray Coat or Frocke, close before, down to their heels, with a
Hood or a Cowle to cover their heads, the lower part reaching down round about
their shoulders and breasts; and over this Habit they wear a Girdle made of a
Cord with many knots tied on it, which they call Saint Francis Girdle, which is
a holy thing, as they say. Underneath this Habit, they wear Doublets,
Breeches, Shirts, gray Stockins, and Shoes. They have Couents in Italy, and
Germany, and in no other Country, and Lands and revenues to maintain
themselves, and do very seldom beg publicly, but privately, and therefore
have all things that they want brought unto them.

The obseruant Franciscans do wear the self same kind of Habit, saving that
it is a little a more dark gray; and profess (as I told you before) to lead
a more austere life than the Conuentuals, for they have no Lands or Revenues,
other than the Wallet or Scrip, neither will they touch any money; but they can
command money at their pleasure, as I have formerly told you. They flourish in
Italy, Spain, France, Netherland, and many other Provinces.

The Penitentiarian Franciscan Friars, do affirm that Saint Francis did
institute three Orders, that is to say, The Obseruant Franciscans, themselves,
and an Order of Nuns, which are called Clarissae, or Claristae; who take their
names of one Clara, that was a very superstitious woman, and Francis his Mate.
These Penitentiarian Friars, have but very few Couents, and those in Italy and
France. They pretend to do penance for themselves, and for others, especially
for their Benefactors, and such as are married folks. They wear no linen, as
they say; neither doublet, breeches, or hose, but only a little pair of linen
drawers, to save their privy members from their course Habit; in stead of
Shoes they wear wooden clogs under their feet, bound over with leather
straps. Their Habit is made of a very course cloth, and close before, reaching
down to their heels, with a Cowle close to their head made of the same; and a
gray Rope, made of hair, full of knots (in stead of a girdle about their
loins.) They never ride when they travel, but go a foot. Withal, they have
a great wooden pair of Beads, with a wooden Cross at the end, tied to their
Girdle before them.

There is another Order of Franciscan Friars in France, which they call the
third Order of Saint Francis; which (as they say) was erected by Saint Lewis,
King of France, after his return from the wars of the holy Land. These
Friars have no lands, but may possess money: and of all the Franciscan Friars,
these are the most dissolute; for they are common Whoremongers, Gamesters, and
Drunkards. They have no Couents, but only in France, where they lived for a
long time in no great reputation; but now of late, many of them are reformed
(forsooth) and are turned either Obseruant Franciscans, or Recollects. In their
Habit they do differ little or nothing from the Obseruants. Their Churches and
Cloisters are (like the Conuentuals, and the Obseruant Franciscans) very fair
and spacious, built like Christ-Church in London.

Recollect Friars.
The Recollect Franciscans are a kind of reformed Obseruants, and do differ
little or nothing at all in Habit from the Penitentiarians; but in their Rule,
Discipline, and Ceremonies, they are quite contrary the one to the other. This
Sect began of late years, and yet they have at this instant Couents in all the
chiefest Towns and Cities of Italy, Spain, France, and Netherland. There is a
Covent of English Friars of this Order at Doway, in the Low Countries, who are
maintained by the benevolence of our English Catholics in England. It is not
above five or six years since it was built, and yet they begin to increase
apace, for they have their Provincial and Collectors here in England, as well
as the other Friars, Priests, and Jesuits. These Recollects must handle no
money, but they may possess it, and receive and dispurse it, by their
Collectors, Receivers, and Dispencers: yet our English Friars may handle and
possess money, when they are in England; for they have a dispensation from the
Popes holiness, to handle and possess both gold and silver.

Capuchin Friars.
The most holy and renowned Sect of all the Franciscan Friars, are the
Capuchins; who wear the like Habit as the Recollect and Penitentiarians do,
saving that in stead of Shoes, they patch three or four leather soles under
their feet, tied over with leather straps; and on their backs, upon their
Habit, they wear a piece of another old Habit sewed to their Frock, in token
of humility; because (forsooth) they will not wear a new Habit, without that
patch, forfeare that the world should imagine them to be proud. And yet, who is
prouder than these Hypocrites in heart, though not in habit. Moreover, in their
holy greasy stinking Cowle, they differ from all the other Franciscan Babes;
for these men wear a long Cowle or Hood, sewed to the neck, or collar of
their Frocke, very small at the end or top: I never beheld a Capuchins Cowle,
but I must needs think of a crying Bird, which some call a Lapwing, that
breeds and lives upon Heaths and Moors; for this Foul has a tuft of Feathers
upon the head standing upright, and so is the Capuchins Cowle. And truly I may
well compare these Capuchins to Lapwings, not only for their heads, but also,
because the one is very subtle and crafty for to protect and defend their young
ones, and the others for the propagation of their Order or Sect.

This Sect began near about the same time, that the Jesuits did start up,
which was about the year of our Lord 1540. Their Author or Institutor was one
Godefridus Veraglius of Buscano in the Province of Piemont in Italy, under the
Dominion of the Duke of Sauoy, who was the first General of their Order.

This Godefridus, albeit that in his youth, he had lived in the thickest
darkness of superstition, yet afterward (being inspired with divine grace)
forsook Popery, and embraced the truth of the Gospel: for coming upon a time
in company of Cardinal Carrafa (who was sent as a Legate from the Pope to the
French King) he forsook him and his Religion at Lions in France, and went from
thence to Geneua, where (being instructed and confirmed in the Christian
Religion) he remained for a certain time; and afterward coming back to
Buscano, his own Country, as he was traveling thence toward Angeronia (where
he was chosen to be their Minister) in his journey at a place called Borgesio,
he was apprehended, and thence brought to Turino (where the Duke of Sauoy
keeps his Court) where, after such time that he had constantly professed, and
defended the truth of the Gospel, he was burned alive to death before the
Court gate, in the year of our Lord 1557. Martyr. lib. and Hi^oria Eccl.
refo^m. in Gal. Reg. lib. ^. ^l. 158 Gal. Edit.


These Capuchins, nor the Recollects, or Penitentiarians, never sing high
Mass, but all private Masses; neither do they sing, but only recite their
Canonical hours, or use any Organs or Hymns, or any Copes or Surplices, as
the Obseruant, and non Obseruant Franciscans, and other Monks and Friars do;
but they read their Office, or canonical hours, leisurely and distinctly:
yea, they read so leisurely, as one may write every word they speak; and to
say the truth, they cry or whine when they read, much like poor French
Beggars, when they beg alms at men's doors. Moreover, the Quire, or the
place where they sit, to recite their Office or Canonical hours, is behind
the high Altar, in the upper end of the Church, with a partition wall between;
in which wall, right over the midst of the Altar, there is a great hole, or a
window of Crystal Glass; through the which, they may see the elevation of
their breaden god, I mean their Sacrament, when it is elevated at time of
Mass. Their Churches are not very spacious, but very neat, and most commonly
they have therein but one Chapel or two at the most, wherein is but one Altar
set up to say Mass.

Here I would have you to understand, that all these Sects of Friars formerly
mentioned, or to be mentioned in this Treatise, have several Ceremonies; or to
say more plainly, apish tricks, in singing or saying of the Mass, and other
divine Service; as for example, the Capuchin Friar that serves at the Mass,
that is to say, he that plays the Clarke (who most commonly is a Lay-brother,
and no Mass Priest) does always from the time of the Sacrament, until the
Offertorium, that is to say, until the Priest does offer it as a Sacrificium
placabile pro vniuis and defunctis, an acceptable Sacrifice for the living, and
for the dead, (to wit in Purgatory) yea if they be well paid for Cow and
Calfe: the Friar (I say) that serves at Mass upon his knees, must stretch out
both his arms right forth cross wise, so that his body may be like a
Crucifix, and for his pains he shall obtain a great reward in Heaven, and
does questionless merit (say they) either the delivery of a soul out of
Purgatory, or else at leastwise some relexation of the pains of the same.

Carolus Boromeus, Archbishop and Cardinal of Milan, was once a Capuchin
Friar, and afterward (by dispensation from the Pope) was promoted unto all
these honors. And whithin a while after his death, sanctified by Pope Paul the
fifth. He was the first man that this Pope caused to be enrolled in the
Catalogue of Saints. This Canonization brought into the Popes Exchequer more
than twenty thousand pounds, as I have heard the Milanesses themselves credibly
report. I saw upon the ground where his body had been buried, For it was taken
out of the grave again, upon the Popes command, to make Relics of it.
(which was within the Cathedral Church of Milan, before the high Altar) more
than two bushels of gold and silver in a great heap, enclosed with in a great
high iron grate, where no body could come at it, which was the offering of
simple ignorant people; all which, and much more, was for his Holiness. To be
brief, this was the first (as I think) of all the Capuchins that have been,
as yet sanctified. But Pope Paul (perceiving the profit to be so great) did
afterward canonize half a squadron more, whereof limping Ignatius, the Author
or Instituter of the Sect of the Jesuits, was one.

Is it not an absurd and a base thing, for Dukes, Princes, Noble men,
Gentlemen, and other wealthy men, without any want or compulsion, to become
begging Friars? Would you not think such men mad? and those that give them
alms, no better than fools? I know there are some that will not believe this
to be true: and yet it is most certain, for I will name you two or three that
I knew. The first is Duke Ioyeux, a French man, a great enemy to the Professors
of the Gospel; and one, that for many years had borne arms against King
Henry the fourth of France, our gracious Queens Father, in the civil wars
of France; who, when the wars was ended, became a Capuchin Friar, being then
above fifty years old, leaving all his estate to his only daughter and heir.
I have seen him in his Habit with a Wallet over his shoulder, in company of
another Capuchin, beg from door to door in his own Country, in that
Province wherein he was borne. But what is it that Monks and Friars cannot
bewitch men to do? They made him change his Christen name, and call himself
Friar Angel, afterward he was made a Mass Priest. In the end, this Father
Angel, and one Father Arch-Angell, otherwise Father William Barlow, an English
Capuchin Friar, who is now living in Paris, went to Rome to the Chapter
General of the Capuchins, about some nineteen years ago; and in their
return home, this Duke-like Capuchin fell sick of a burning Fever, and died
about Sauoy. Alas, good Friar, he was not used to go such a voyage on foot, as
Roan in Normandy is from Rome, being above a thousand English miles.

The other is the Duke of Ascots brother, a very proper young noble man, who
together with another noble man's son of Spain (whose name I forget) by the
persuasions of the Capuchin Friars, privately departed from the Archdukes
Court at Bruxels, and without the consent or priuity of their friends, became
Capuchins. I could relate here many such examples, if it were not for breuity
sake.

There are many English men of this Order, both in France and Netherland, and
most of them Gentlemen's sons of good reckoning, and some of them now lurking
about the Court and City, not in their foolish Capuchin Habit, but like
Gallants, endeavoring to seduce his Majesty's subjects from their duty to God,
and their allegiance to their Sovereign. And one above all the rest is too
much frequent in the Court, but I would wish him to walk more narrowly, or
else depart quickly.

There is (almost) never a Town or City in those popish Countries, but the
Obseruants, Recollects, and Capuchin Friars have Couents; and in some great
Cities the Capuchins have two or three, as in Rome, Milan, Paris, and other
Cities. And yet they have neither Lands or Revenues, but what they get by
begging. Nevertheless, they fare more like Princes, than such men as they
profess themselves to be: for albeit they touch no money, yet have they their
Collectors, Receivers, and Dispencers, to receive and dispurse money for them;
and to buy any thing that they want. For if any man or woman will bestow any
money upon them, they will send for their Receiver to take it, and to write
down in a Book how much it is; for he must make them an account, once every
year, of all that he has received and dispursed. And as for Bread, Wine,
Wood, and other things that they stand in need of, for the provision of their
Couents, they have more bestowed upon them than they can well spend.

Besides this, they have in every Town or City where they dwell, particular
benefactors, who give them a monthly stipend, and do still procure them more:
for they are of their Fraternity, and partakers (forsooth) of their
super-abundant merits. These men have a stock in money, which they do
privately, and under hand, employ and put out to use for the good of these holy
Friars. Withal they beg twice or thrice a week, and in some Cities daily,
with Wallers and Bottles over their shoulders: all that is given them, whether
it be Fish, Flesh, Bread, Fruits, Herbs, Roots, Spice, sweet Oil, or any thing
else, they bring home either on their shoulders, or else upon an Ass. Where
you must note, that these, and all other begging Friars receive no scraps, but
whole Loaves of the purest Bread, and of the best Wine, and the best provision
in the house. Neither do they beg in any humble manner, as other poor
people, but in an imperial arrogant sort, and (without any reverence) they
rather command than crave; and unless it be good alms, and given them with
cap and knee, they care not for it: for all these Monks, Jesuits, and Friars,
rich or poor, are as proud as Lucifer, though not in their Habit, yet in their
gesture and behavior: and if any man pass by them, or speak unto them,
without his hat in his hand, and with a low reverence; yea in Spain and Italy,
unless they honor them, and kiss the sleeves of their Habits, they hold them
little better than Lutherans and Heretics. Except they be some great
Personages, who indeed are more ceremonious, and obsequious, and do flatter
them more than the common people. And also that their Copes, Vestments,
Chalices, and other their Church Vtensels, are far from temperature, yea
exceeding in sumptuousness; let all those that have seen them bear me record
if this be not true.

Moreover, all Mendicant Friars, at their first coming to inhabit in any
Town or City, will in outward show seem to be Saints, humble, meek, and
good to the poor; the which does purchase them such reputation among the
common people, that they will contribute very liberally toward the building of
their Couents, and all other things that they need. In the mean time these
unsanctified Fathers (like so many Emmets) while the season serves them, will
bestir themselves, as being not ignorant of that saying of the Poet: Dum aestas
annique finunt componite nidos.
They will be sure to cramme their coffers with gold and silver, and to provide
against a rainy day, (as the old proverb is) while the good market lasts, and
while their counterfeit sanctity is blasted up with the vain breath of the
doting vulgar; who are bewitched with their hypocrisy and pretended holiness;
for if you will believe these hypocritical Friars, (and all other Friars, of
what Order soever they be of, but especially the Franciscan Friars) all that
they wear about them is holy, yea all that they eat, drink or touch, is
sanctified; their greasy Cowle, Habit, Sandalls, and especially their knotty
girdles, which they call S. Francis Cordon, or Girdle, has many virtues; and
therefore they have a fraternity of this holy rope, of the Lay people, of both
sex, which brings them in yearly, no small profit; for all those that are of
this holy fraternity, do wear this Cordon, and have many graces and
privileges for their pains, as I told you before. But I pray you, observe what
one wrote many years ago of these Friars Habit: Cordula nodosa, pes nudus,
capa dolosa,
Hac tria nudipedes ducunt ad Tartara fratres.
The knottie rope, bare feet, deceitful Cowle,
Bring barefoot Friars into hell to howl.
And another says. Buchan.
En tunicam fluxam nodosa cannabe cingit,
Cum melius fau^es stringeret illa suas.
The knotty rope that binds that Slouens coat
Were better used, being tied about his throat.


They will never (or seldom) give any of their broken meat, or their
superfluity, to any of their poor neighbors (except it be a little piece of
dry bread, that is given them, which they themselves scorn to eat) but will
give it either to Whores and Bawds, or to strangers, and then they will make
them eat it in their Cloisters, because they would not have their neighbors
and benefactors to know that they have any thing to spare, but rather want,
than abound: for if they did know how princely they fare, they would not be so
liberal unto them as they are, nor send them such presents of the best flesh,
fish, or fowls that they can get for money; when they themselves, and their
wives and children, are content to live at home with courser and meaner diet. I
protest to you, if I should relate unto you, all the impostures, hypocrisies,
deceits and villainies, that I have my self both known and seen among them,
this pamphlet would be boundless, and my labor endless; but I am content to
recite but a few for brevity sake.

I had an Hostess at Orleans in France, that sent two great Carps in the Lent
time, (which cost her two French crowns) sod in wine together with a dainty
delicious sauce, for a present to the Capuchin Friars, desiring them to pray
for her, for she was great with child, and near her time: And yet she her
self, and her husband, together with their children and family, had but
pease-pottage, and a few salt hearings, for their dinner. But now what did the
Friars send her again? Marie, a very holy thing; a little picture of S.
Francis, sewed in an old clout, or piece of one of their old habits; wishing
her to wear that (tied with a tape or riband) about her neck; for it had some
celestial virtue; and above all the rest, it was exceeding good for women in
the time of their labor of childbirth. O the blindness of these poor people,
that cannot see themselves guld by these Impostors and Montebanckes!

Truly the Capuchin Friars and their Nuns, or holy Sisters whom they call
Capuchinesses, yea all the whole rout of begging Nuns and Friars, do profess
to live very austerely, nay and Angelically, and to spend their time in
watching, praying, fasting, meditations, and also punishing their bodies, to
bring them in subjection to the spirit. But to say the truth, they live very
dissolutely; for they spend the time in banqueting, quaffing, whoring,
cheating, begging and idleness; for I dare boldly say, there are no greater
drunkards, gluttons, whore-mongers, (yea Sodomites) beggars, Impostors and
Hypocrites in the universal world, than they are; for they will eat until
their panches are ready to crack; and carowse until they cannot see, go, or
stand; and then they begin to quarrel and fight, and break one another pate;
as for whores, alas, they have their choice, and none of the meanest, but rich
men's wives, young virgins, and votary Nuns: whereof I could produce here no few
examples, but I will forbear all. And lastly, their only profession is
begging, and cheating the simple people, as all men do know.

A Franciscan Friar, lodging in the house of a Gentleman of Perigot in France,
found the means to lie with his wife upon her purification; See a book
entitled A Looking glass for Franciscan Friars in French.
the women thinking at the first, that it had bin her husband: but afterward
perceiving it was the Friar, for very grief (after that she had discovered all
to her husband) while he was pursuing after the Friar, who was fled, hanged
herself, and in the mischance overthrew her child down dead to the ground.
Not long after her brother coming to see her, found her dead, who (imagining
that her husband had done the deed) flings out of doors, and meeting her
husband returning home (having not overtaken the Friar) drew his rapier upon
him, and so wounded one another to death; so that by this means, this Friar
committed shameful fornication, and was the occasion of the untimely death of
these four persons.

The Franciscans of Argentinum, or Strasburgh in high Germany, heretofore
accustomed to steal away men's wives, and keep them in their Cloisters, like
young Nouices, cutting off their hairs, and shauing their crowns: Ibidem.
In the end, a Butchers wife going along the street in the habit of a Friar,
together with another Friar her mate; her husband met her, and (having well
eyed her) laid hands upon her, and the holy Friar; and by that means recovered
his wife, and discovered the Friars knavery; who were (for these and other
heinous crimes and offenses) banished that noble and famous City, and never
after received or entertained there again.

Another good religious man of this Order, and an English man, who borrowed the
name of Father Gray; for these Monks, Friars, Jesuits and Priests, are like our
proud punkes of London; who (as they say) are all Knights or great Gentlemen's
daughters (who were undone by their elder brothers, that wilfully consumed and
wasted their portions) and therefore are the more either to be honored, or
pitied; albeit they are some poor Mechanical men's daughters. In like manner
(I say) our English Monks, Friars, Jesuits, Seminary Priests, and all other
fugitives, do change their own names; and assume unto them the name of some
noble or ancient family of England, yea of those that are true professors of
the Gospel; and this they do, because under color of that honorable name,
they would not only walk securely, and without any suspicion or trouble, but
also perpetrate any villainy: for every generous spirit will love and honor any
man that is honorably descended; especially if his behavior and carriage be
good and correspondent to his honorable name or family. But now again I will
retreat to Father Gray, from whom I am a little digressed.

Father Gray, about fifteen years ago, lodging in one Mr. V. his house in
Sheere-lane near Temple-barre, in London, grew so far into his Land-ladies
favor (who was then a young wanton gossip) that he persuaded her to break her
vow of wedlock, and to forsake her wedded husband, and that which is worst, to
yield to his carnal desires, and in sum, to forsake all her friends and
kinsfolks, and to follow him. Whereupon, she by his persuasions (very
foolishly) conveyed certain plate, and other goods, in trunckes and chests,
privately away out of her husbands house, according to this Friars counsel and
direction; purposing to depart privately away with this holy Friar unknown to
her husband, unto whom she had formerly vowed both faith and loyalty. But see
the spite, a Pursuyuant, that had intelligence of this Father Grayes faculty
(though not of his knavery) came and took him and his sweet Land-lady, as they
were privately consulting about their journey, and brought him (albeit he
spared her for her husband, or rather for her friends sake) to Newgate, and
(having well perused all his letters and notes) he understood all their
knavery. But yet for all this, the honest woman would not forsake Mr. Gray,
neither believe that he was a poor begging Friar; but a Knights brother of
Northfolke, whom for honor sake I will not name; because he is none of their
sect, and one whom I honor; and yet this good Friar afterward confessed, that
he never knew that Knight, or was any way allied unto him; but it was true that
he told his Land-lady, that he had five hundred pounds yearly in good lands in
Northfolke, and yet he confessed afterward that he was never there, but was
borne in Duram. Oh the chastity and honesty of Monks and Friars! All this I
know to be true; for I was an ocular witness of all this that I delivered unto
you.

Another Franciscan Friar of Perigot in France, hid himself in a Brides
chamber, and found the means to lie with the Bride, before her husband came to
her; and yet escaped, for all that the household could do, when they heard of
it: and are not these holy and chaste Religious men? judge you.

Another holy Friar of this Order, near Lions in France, married his brother
Friar, in the habit of a Scholar, to a rich widows daughter, making them
believe he was an heir to great revenues, and sent to Lions, as it were, under
his tutelage: but within a while after, the mother and the daughter discovered
his shaven crown, and so he was apprehended, and sent to the Magistrates to be
punished.

In the year 1607. at Madrid in Spain, it was my fortune to fall out with an
Irishman, whose name was Master James Field. This man in his anger hired two
Picaros, or Rogues, to murder me: And as I was going through a certain street
home to my lodging, I met with another Irish Gentleman, that loved me, who told
me that a friend of Mr. Fields, and one of those Picaros were pursuing after
me, and that he, and the other Picaro, stayed at the upper end of the street to
murder me, and therefore wished me to look to my self, or else I should
hardly escape. Whereupon (giving him many thanks for his friendly love and
warning) I stepped into a little Church, that was belonging to a certain Covent
of Nuns of the Order of Saint Clare, who wear the habit of S. Francis, and
sat down in a dark corner of the Church; for it was late, and almost night,
thinking with my self, that these my enemies would within a while be gone: for
they knew not (as I supposed) that I was there. But within half an hour
after, there came into the same Church two Recollect Friars, which in Spain
they call Frayles descalcios de San Francisco, that is, barefoot Franciscan
Friars: and having said a Pater noster, or an Aue Maria, one of them rose up,
and went unto an Iron-grate, that was in the lower end of the Church, and there
rang a little bell; by and by there came a Nun unto him, and after two or three
words of complements, as the fashion is in those countries, he sent this Nun to
call another Nun, who came presently; who being no sooner come, but this
Religious Father began to hug or embrace her through the grate; and upon a
sudden the Church door was (with a pully which went through the wall into the
Covent) locked fast. When I saw how the matter went, and fearing (having
escaped one danger) lest I should be discovered, and so fall into a worse, and
be murdered by these Nuns and Friars; or at leastwise accused of Sacrilege, I
threw my cloak over my head, (for fear they should perceive my band) and sat
as quiet and as mute as a fish, making as though I slept. In the mean time
both the Friars got into the Covent, but which way I know not; for there was
never a door for them to enter; and besides, my cloak was over my eyes that I
could not see: but this I am sure, that I saw them both within the grate, and
four or five Nuns whispering together, for I could not hear their discourse.
From thence they went to some other place, and what they did I know not, but
leave it unto others to consider. For my part, I was constrained for mine own
safety to stay there until the next morning; and as soon as the door was
open, I departed, and was never discovered.

In the month of August 1613. I was coming from Venice toward Netherland,
and at Padua I met with a young man named Cornelius Vander Brugg, borne (as he
said) near Berg Saint Wenego in Flanders. This man was traveling the
selfsame way, as I was, and was very glad of my company, and my self
likewise of his: and so traveling on our journey we came within four or five
miles of Trent, and by reason the heat was so great, that we could not travel
any further until the coolness of the evening, we slept a little out of the
way into a thicket of bushes, to refresh our selves in the shade, until the
heat of the day was past; where we had not bin very long, but we fell both
asleep. About two hours after, I heard some people hard by in the same
thicket, quarrelling and railing, as if they had been so many Tankard-bearers
at Holborne-conduit. I wondered who they were; and was half afraid they were
Banditi, or Robbers by the high way; yet creeping upon my hands and knees,
softly through the thicket, I espied there six Capuchin Friars, sitting down
upon the ground, with good meat before them, and each of them with a great
wine-bottle by him; two of them were Germans, and the rest Italians. The
quarrel was about a bottle of sweet wine, that was drunk up by some of them
while the others slept. The Italians accused the Germans, and they stood upon
their Innocence; one of them a lusty tall Friar, swore in the Dutch tongue,
by an hundred thousand Sacraments, that he would beat two of the other Friars,
as soon as they came into Dutch-land; for they were going toward Bauaria and
Austria; but the Italians understood him not. I came back to my friend, and
awaked him, and brought him to the place where I had formerly been, that he
might both hear and see them: who blessing himself, stood amazed to see the
Capuchin Friars (whom he thought to have bin Demi-saints) to rail and wrangle
in that sort for a bottle of wine, and would have reproved them, if I had not
very earnestly entreated him to the contrary. In the end they arose up, and
would have fought, if the other two had not stood between them, and persuaded
them to be quiet. And thereupon they departed. Within a quarter of an hour
after we also went on our journey, and ouertooke them, still brawling and
quarrelling: But when one of them had perceived us to be so near, and had
given them notice, they began to recite their Canonical hours, and one of
them said, or rather roared out, Deus in adiutorium meum intend, and the rest
answered, Domine ad iuuandum me festina; and so proceeded on in the repetition
of their hours, of purpose to make us believe, that they were praying, and not
railing and fighting: for they knew not that we were in the Thicket with them.
And so we saluted them, and passed on our journey, but my companion (being a
Romish Catholic) was ashamed to see their hypocrisy; and swore, that if he
had not seen and heard all that past between them, he would never have
believed the Capuchins, of all other Friars, to be such gourmans and great
hypocrites.

A Franciscan Friar at Tournay, was one of them that persuaded a villain to
kill the Prince of Orange, telling him that his fact was commendable and
meritorious; and so assured him, that if he were put to death for the same, In
Martyrum numero collocatumiri, he should be counted a Martyr.

These idle lazie-packs are not good for any honest employment, as the
Emperor, Charles the fifth, testified of them: for when the General of their
Order in a brauado, offered two and twenty thousand Friars to assist him in his
wars, none above forty, or under two and twenty years old; the Emperor
answered, That he would not have them; by reason that he should have need of
two and twenty thousand Fleshpots: intimating thereby, that they are fitter,
by far, for the Kitchen, than for any labor or service.

In Orleans, a City in France, a Presidents wife died, who was a noble virtuous
woman; Sleydan. lib. 9.
and upon her deathbed ordained that they should carry her to be buried
without light, without any Masses, singing the office of the dead, or any other
pomp or ceremonies as the Papists use; as indeed she was buried in the
Monastery of the Franciscan Friars. But see what followed: within a few days
after they began to hear in that place horrible noises, until one of these
Masse-mumblers showed the people the breaden god. When this was once spread
abroad among the people, one said he heard it, one said he understood it, and
another said he saw all.

The President (being the woman's Husband) hearing this, came thither himself:
then one of the Friars begin to conjure and bind the spirit to answer to his
questions; and asked if she were in Paradise? and there was no answer made. He
asked if she were in Hell? and yet there was no answer. In the end, he asked if
she came from Purgatory? and then the Spirit made a great noise against the
wall. Then did the coniuring Friar ask the spirit, if he was such a one?
naming many and sundry persons that were dead long ago, and yet there was no
answer heard, nor any noise; but when he named the woman that was buried
without pomp, then the Spirit made two great rushings against the wall. Then
the Coniurer asked, if she was condemned for this or that cause: and in the
end the Spirit said, Because she was a Lutheran, at which time was heard three
great rushes against the wall.

The Husband, being a wise and a circumspect man, marked every thing, and made
as though he had much marvelled at the matter, and desired the Friars to come
and sup with him, and the next day caused a hundred Masses to be said for his
wives soul, and to light a world of wax Candles; the Friars roared and howled,
they sent their Saints into Purgatory, wet the grave with holy Water, and
perfumed it with Frankincence: and when all was done, he carried the Friars to
dinner with him; and in the mean time sent the Officers to the place where
this deceit was done, where they found certain Vaults, and there within were
three Spirits, or to speak more plainly, three young nouiciat Friars, whom the
Officers led away, into the place where the other Spirits were at dinner, who
(when they saw their knavery discovered) as men all dumb, began to look one
upon another, and with shame enough, were punished afterward, and rewarded
according to their demerits.

At Vercelle, a Franciscan Friar desirous to get money, under color of
Religion, entised a rich Widow to satisfy his lust, and carried her away with
him to Naples, and from thence to other Cities, until he had cheated her of
almost all she had, and then turned her loose home to her friends.

Another religious Friar of those, which they call the Minorite Franciscans,
put into the heads of foolish women this opinion, That they must give to the
Church the tenth of all things, and even in like manner the tenth night, as
they lie with their husbands.

All these several Sects of Friars, that pretend to observe the Rule, Order,
and Discipline of Saint Francis, have holy Sisters or Nuns of their Order or
Sect. Albeit heretofore there was not any Order of Nuns that observed the Rules
of Francis, but only the Claristans, or those of the Order of Saint Clara. Yet
if you will suruay them now adays, you shall find rich Nuns, and begging Nuns
of the Habit of Saint Clare, who wear a gray Frocke like the Obseruant
Franciscans. The Conuentuals have their Nuns, the Penitentiarians theirs, and
the Capuchins their holy Capuchinesses Sisters. Though they make never so great
a show of forsaking the world, of mortifying the flesh, and bringing it in
subjection to the spirit, and to lead an austere life: yet there is not any
Order or Sect of Friars whatsoever, that has not Nuns or holy sisters
(forsooth) of the same Order and Habit; for it is no complete Order that is not
Vtriusque, Sexus, consisting of Friars, and Nuns or Sisters, kind and loving
bed-fellowes.

Of the Theatines.
IN the time of Pope Clement the seventh, a certain company of superstitious
men in Italy, near Rome, did use to meet together at certain hours in the
day, in Gardens, Woods, or some such solitary places (forsooth) to meditate and
pray, and to perform such other offices of piety; and therefore called
themselves Diuini amoris Sodalitas: a Sodality or Society of the divine Love;
whereof the chiefest was one Ioannes Petrus Carrafa, who lived among them many
years, upon whom, the Emperor Charles the fifth bestowed the
Arch-bishoppricke of Brundusium, the which he refused to accept of; choosing
rather to lead his life among those religious men, in praying, fasting, and
contemplation, than to trouble himself with any worldly promotion. Within a
short time after, three other famous men in those days joined with this
Carrafa, viz. Caietanus, a Gentleman borne at Vicentia, who was Protonotarius
Apostolicus: Bonifacius, a Gentleman borne in Piemont: and a noble man of Rome,
whose name was Paulus. These four men (considering how the Roman Clergy men
did then err and go astray, yea so absurdly degenerate from their ancient and
primate sincerity and purity, to the great detriment and scandal of the
Christian Religion) consulted together how they might prevent the future danger
that houered over the Church, and how they might restore the dignity of the
Clergy to its ancient splendour and credit, and afterward keep and preserve
it: and therefore they gave and put all the wealth that they had to be spent in
common among them, as every one of their society should have need or occasion
to use the same, with a full resolution (having cast away all worldly cares) to
spend the residue of their lives in the service of God, by fasting, praying,
meditating, singing of Psalms and divine Hymns, to the praise of God,
imagining that to be the best way to restore all things to their ancient purity
and integrity; and therefore they were called Presbyteri Regulares. But because
that this Carrafa had rejected that Arch-bishoppricke, and undertaken such a
course of life, to the great admiration and wonderful amazement of all men,
they were called in the Italian tongue Theotini. This Carrafa, with his dignity
and authority, gave them their first institution, and did greatly increase this
Society.

Afterward this good man was created a Cardinal by Pope Paul the third; which
great dignity, this great despiser of worldly wealth, and refuser of
Bishoppricks, most willingly and gladly accepted, and coming to Rome, received
the self same Arch-bishopprick which he had formerly refused. And so this Fox,
refusing mean promotions, because under color or pretense of holiness, and
austerity of Religion, he aimed at greater, first was created Senator of Rome,
and within a short time after Pope, and called by the name of Paul the fourth.
Panauinus.


This egregious fellow of the Society of the Divine Love, this contemner and
despiser of the world, and restorer of the splendour of the ancient order of the
Clergy, studied all the rest of his life no other thing but to hoord up gold
and silver; all his cares and meditations were how to extirpate and root out
all peace and concord out of the world, to move wars between Christian Kings
and Princes, and to set all Christendom in a combustion.

To be brief, these Theatines do differ very little in Habit from the
Jesuits, for their shirt bands are scarce to be seen, so are the Jesuits, and
likewise in all the rest of their Habit they concur one with another. They
are very rich, for they hear Confessions, as the Jesuits do, and thereby
delude the people to give them money and all things else that they want; and
yet they beg never, or seldom publicly, but have all things necessary for
provision brought unto their Couents. Nevertheless, this Order or Sect is as
yet very obscure, and not known in no other Country than in Italy, for ought
that ever I saw or heard of, and therefore I will speak so much the less of
them.

Of the Friars that are called the Fathers of the Congregation of the Oratory.
THese irregular Priests, that call themselves Fathers of the congregation of
the Oratory, sprang up of late years, and lived likewise very obscure, until
about some six or seven years ago that they began to flourish in France. In
their Habit they differ but a little from the Jesuits and Theatins; and in some
towns (where the Jesuits have no College) these Oratorians do teach young
children. Their congregation does (for the most part) consist of rich Rectors
or Pastors of parish Churches, unless it be those that are the Lay-brethren,
yea I have known some Bishops of this Congregation. But most of their Priests
have Benefices. They have a marvelous great house in Paris, not far from the
Kings Palace, which did heretofore belong unto one of the Peers of France,
whither the King, Queen, and many Princes and Lords do often repair to hear
Mass and Sermons, in so much that they are very rich and in great reputation
thorowout all France. And therefore the Jesuits do have them the more, and
not without a cause: for since that they began to be so gracious with the
King, Prince, and commons, the Jesuits began to lose a great part of their
former credit and reputation.

To conclude, they are as superstitious, and as idolatrous as any other Friars
whatsoever; yea, they maintain the self same position for murdering of Kings
and Princes, as the Jesuits do, and therefore no less dangerous than they
are. But howsoever, under color of humility, sincerity, and sanctity of life,
they deceive the world, cram their purses and enrich themselves. There are both
English, Scots, and Irish of this Order.

Of the Barnabists.
THese Barnabists, or rather Barrabists, are a company of poor Priests, that
wanting means, gathered themselves together, and called themselves Fathers of
the congregation of Saint Barnabie, they are as yet very obscure; but in time I
make no question but they will be as famous as the Jesuits or Oratorians. But I
wonder why they call not themselves Paulists, of Saint Paul, as well as
Barnabists of Saint Barnabas, seeing Paul was the great Saint in my opinion.
But the truth is, all popish Priests love not Saint Paul, because his Doctrine
is quite repugnant to theirs, otherwise they had erected an Order of Friars
under his name and patronage long ago.

Their Habit differs little or nothing from the Oratorians, Theatines, and
Jesuits, and they keep Schools in some Towns as well as the Jesuits. The
vulgar people begin already to dote upon them: for (as I told you before)
every new Sect of Friars or Nuns is at the first in great request. Ovid lib. 3.
de Ponto.
Est quoque cunctarum nouitas gratissima rerum. This Sect is not yet often
years standing, neither is their Order as yet confirmed.

Of the Fullians Friars.
THese Friars are called by the name of Friars of our blessed Lady of the
Fullians. They wear a course Habit of white cloth. This Congregation began
about that time that King Henry the third of France was murdered by Iacques
Clement, a Dominican Friar, which was about the year 1587. they are of the
Order of the Cistercensis, whereof I formerly spoke. They lived very obscure,
until such time that King Henry the fourth of France was likewise murdered by
Francis Rauillac, in the year 1610. since which time they built them sumptuous
Monasteries and gaudy Churches in all the chiefest Cities in France; and are in
great credit and estimation, especially among great Ladies and Gentlewomen,
with whom they are (if you will believe the other Mendicant Friars) too
familiar. They have a fair Cloister, and a fine delicate Church at Paris, and
also in most Cities of France (and no where else) built by great Ladies, who
do resort there daily to hear Mass and Sermons, and to have some other
spiritual conference with these holy Fathers. The other rout or rabble of old
begging Friars cry out with wide mouths upon these new vpstart Sects; for they
say, that they do seduce their Benefactors to bestow upon them, the charity
and benevolence, which they were wont to have, and therefore they are ready to
starve. But to say the truth, these several Sects of Mendicant Friars have
undone the poor; for they are increased of late to so many Sects, that the
poor people can get nothing because of them. For in those Catholic Countries,
the Parishioners are not taxed or constrained, to pay toward the relief of
their poor, as the manner is in England, or among the Protestants in those
Countries. But the Friars say, Give us your benevolence, and we will bestow
upon the poor. And by this means the poor are neglected, and these Priests
of Baal well fed and provided for.

It is a marvelous thing to consider the blindness of the Romish Catholics,
that cannot perceive the manifest hypocrisies, practices, and impostures of
their Priests, Monks, Friars, Jesuits, and Nuns; and how they are cheated daily
of their goods by these Locusts, who do increase so fast, that I do imagine
they will in the end wax infinite. For I dare be bold to affirm, that there
are in France at this instant more Monks, Friars, Jesuits, and Nuns, by three
thousand, then there were when the last King was murdered; yea, within Paris
and the Suburbs thereof, or near thereunto, there is between thirty and forty
Monasteries and Colleges of Monks, Friars, Jesuits and Nuns, built since that
Kings death: and all those live by begging, either publicly or privately; for
a man cannot go through any street in the City, but he shall see Monks and
Friars by couples trudging here and there; and where there is any profit like
to ensue, there will they flock like so many Ravens to a dead carcass. And as
it is reported, that Aphrick does every new Moon engender strange Monsters; in
like manner the Church of Rome does ever and anon produce new Babylonian
Monsters; I mean new Sects of Friars and Nuns, to perturbe and trouble the
peace of our Jerusalem.

The Author of the Congregation of the Fullians was a Cistercensian Friar, and
their Rule is composed out of that Rule the Cisterciens do profess to
observe, but somewhat more strictly, (as they say) but to say the truth, they
are all one, for the Fullians are a kind of reformed or Mendicant Cistercians
(forsooth) and therefore the greater Hypocrites.

Of the Jesuits.
THe origin or beginning of this Society, is but of a new institution, not
much above fourscore years since, whereof the Founder was one Ignatius Loyola
borne in Biscaya, a Region in Spain, who had been formerly a Soldier, and
borne arms at Pampelona against the French; where he was maimed with a hurt
that he received on both his knees, whereof he halted ever after.

His Order was confirmed by Paul the third, in the year 1504. Maphaeus in vita
Ignat. Bellar. in Chronolog.
And himself Sanctified by Pope Paul the fifth, in the year 1622. not for his
holiness and sanctity of life; but for an infinite sum of money given unto
the Pope by the Jesuits; and withal, because the Duke of Bauaria (by the
wicked practices and deuillish policy of his spiritual children the Jesuits,
and the help of the King of Spain) had taken the Palatinat from the Prince
Elector Palatine, the true and lawful owner thereof.

This Ignatius ordained that all those of this his vpstart Society should call
themselves Jesuits, or Patres Societatis Jesus, Fathers of the Society of
Jesus. And the reason is (as the Jesuits report) Sermon. Valderama. page 10.
because our Lord Jesus, who being the Savior of our souls, from the time of
his Nativity into the world, unto his death, never dealt in other business,
than in that which concerned our salvation: So the life of our Ignatius, was
wholly bestowed about the saving of souls; the life of Jesus was manifested in
his miracles, and Ignatius was transformed into him, whose name the Jesuits
bear.

And again, as this good Father was going to Rome, for to obtain the
approbation of his Order, Maphaeus in vita Loyola. lib. 2. and Rib. l. 2. c 2.
and finding himself much perplexed about that which might befall him there,
Jesus appeared unto him carrying a Cross, and in the same vision, God the
Father was seen recommending this new Society unto his Son, who promised
him, that he would be propitious and favorable unto him at Rome. And Valderama
infers Sermon page 48.
that upon his arrival to Rome, the Pope having well considered Ignatius
hands, he found them all printed with the name of Jesus; whereupon he said,
Digitus Dei hic est, The finger of God is in these hands. And therefore these
speeches fortified the holy man, and gave him occasion to name his Company the
Society of Jesus.

But indeed it is apparent that this title is proper to all Christians in
general, as Saint Paul (speaking to the Corinthians) witnesses, saying; 1
Cor. 1.9.
God is faithful by whom you have been called to the Society of his Son
Jesus. And again Saint John; 1 John. 1.3.
To the end our Society may be with the Father, and with his Son Jesus
Christ. And yet the Jesuits go about to prove, by these former passages our
of Saint Paul and Saint John, that their Society has been ever since the
time of our Savior: And not new, as many Writers (yea of their own Religion)
do prove: Watson in his Quodlib. p. ^00. and Sparing discourses. p. 36.
for Pope Sixtus quintus conuenting the General of the Jesuits, upon a time,
before him, demanded why he and his Order called themselves Jesuits: who
answering, said, That they did not call themselves so; but Clerks of the
Society of Jesus. Then the Pope replying, said, But why should you appropriate
unto your selves to be of the Society of Jesus, more than other Christians
are, of whom the Apostle says, Vocati sumus in Societatem Filij eius; We are
called into the Society of his Son? But the Jesuits General made him no
answer.

Constable. Prouinc. lib. 1. de Consuetudine eius autem.
And again, the reason why we are called Christians of Christ, and not
Jesuits of Jesus, is this, says Lindwood: Christ has communicated unto us,
what is signified by his name Christ, that is to say, Unction; but he has not
communicated unto us, what is signified by his name Jesus; for Jesus signifies
a Savior; and it is his property to Save, and no man else, as the holy
Scriptures do witness. Locor. Theol. lib. 4. cap. 2.
And Melchior Canus Bishop of Canary, says: That that Society being the
Church of Christ, they that attribute that title unto themselves, are no better
than the Heretics that do vainly boast, that the Church is no where abiding
but with them.

The Jesuits on the other part affirm, that the Society of Jesus was founded
at the very point of his admirable conception, uniting in his divine person his
humanity with his eternal nature: Sermon. de Vaderama. page 10.
And that that was the first society that God had with men; And the first
College thereof was the Womb of the Virgin Mary; And that it was but renewed of
late, for diverse reasons, and among the rest; Bellarm. de Monach. lib. 2. cap.
6.
because that that fervor which is found in the beginning of a new Order,
exciteth men to piety, which by little and little waxing cold, it is needful
that new should be raised, whereby that new may be entertained. But as for the
original of this Society (say they) it is very ancient. But if this be true, I
wonder why the Evangelists, or the Apostles, or any of the Fathers of the
Primitive Church, or any other Writer until within these fourscore years,
never made mention of this famous Society and noble College. But indeed to lie
and blaspheme is the ordinary trade of the Jesuits.

Let us return once again to our Martial Saint Ignatius, indeed the first
Institutor of this Judicial Society, of whom they report wonderful things;
and among the rest, they observe that his name has its signification from
fire, wherein they find many, yea infinite mysteries. First of all, as the
Psalmist says, According to thy name, O Lord, so is thy praise throughout all
the Earth, thy right hand is full of Justice: As much, think I, may I say of
Father Ignatius, which signifies a Saint composed of fire: Sermon. de Vald. page
10.
and that in one of the names proper to God, Our God is a consuming fire: And
on the other side (says he) I perceived, that in his right hand he carries
the name of Jesus, who was our Savior and Satisfaction.

And another says, Sermon. de Deza. page 112.
That in these last times God has spoken unto us by his son Ignatius, whom
he has constituted heir of all things, and in whom nothing is wanting, but
only the word, whereby he made all ages. Oh horrible blasphemy!

Valderama preached, Page 74.
That when Saint Ignatius plunged himself in the water up to the very chin, in
the cold winter, for to divert a young man from certain filthy desires, one
might say, that Spiritus Domini ferebatur super aquas, the Spirit of the Lord
was carried upon the waters.

The same Preacher in another place says, Page 10^.
That when this Saint resolved to quit the Soldiers life, the very house
wherein he then was, moved, the walls shaked, the posts and beams trembled,
and all that were in it betook themselves to flight, and ran out of doors as
fast as their legs could carry them: even as when some strange eruption of
fire, does suddenly break out with furious flames in some high mountain: So
when this interior fire began to be discovered in him, who before was cold and
frozen in the things of God, it lightened forth in such sort, that it caused a
thousand fears, a thousand amazements, a thousand firings of houses, etc.
There was never any Aetna, or flaming mountain that did the like. Hitherto are
the words of Valderama.

Truly I am of opinion, that this fire was transferred after his death unto his
Society; (it may be upon his prayers and intercession) seeing they do
participate so much of it; for out of the fervor of their mercenary Religion,
they have ever since exercised the trade of incendiaries in all places; and not
contented with a thousand fierings of houses, made by their Institutor, they
have set all Christendom on fire: neither is there any Kingdom,
Commonwealth, City or Province, which they have not enflamed with wars,
seditions, and persecutions; and therefore Ignatius may be properly compared to
Mount Aetna, the very mouth of Hell, and the Jesuits unto himself in that
respect: Virg. Eglog.
Sic canibus catulo similes, sic matribus haedos
Noram: Sic paruis componere magna solebam.


This Saint has wrought more miracles than ever any man did; for Valderama
says, Sermon. Vald. p. 1^.
That it was no marvel if Moses wrought such great miracles, for he did them
by virtue of the ineffable name of God engraued in his Rod: it was no marvel
if the Apostles wrought such miracles, seeing they also did them in the name of
God: But that Ignatius, with his name written in paper, should do more
miracles than Moses, and as many as the Apostles, etc. is that which shows so
wonderful unto us!

Idem page 55.
The Jesuits by the merit of Ignatius can cast out devils ding dong. For it
happened one night, that the Devil had almost strangled him, and twice or
thrice, he beat him cruelly: but since the good Saint had a full revenge of
him: for it has been often seen by experience, that after many prayers have
been made, many Saints inuoked, many and sundry Relickes applied, the last
and best remedy has been, the Image of blessed Ignatius, laying it on the
patient, or one of his Signets, showing it unto him, and saying, Per merita
Beati Ignatij abi hinc Spiritus malign: By the merits of blessed Ignatius I
command thee, evil Spirit, to be gone: And presently he departed. And is not
this a powerful, yea a victorious Spanish Saint, that now dominiers over the
Devil, that was wont to beat and abuse him before? Vine el brauo Spaniol, que
haze la barba al Diablo: Oh brave Spanyard that dare shake the Devil by the
beard.

In his Sepulcher was heard most melodious singing: Idem page 89.
yea his Sepulcher seemed a new heaven, and the Angels descended down in whole
Squadrons, to play the fiddlers, albeit no Angel ever appeared unto him in his
lifetime, yet the blessed Virgin, Saint Peter, the eternal Father, and his
Son carrying his cross, appeared unto him. And the reason was, (says the
Author) because it arrived unto him at his death, as it arriueth unto great
potentates of the earth: As long as a King is in his Palaces and houses of
pleasure, the Guard suffer none to enter, but men of note, unless it be some
necessary attendants: but when the King is dead, and that he is laid on an
Hearse in the great Hall of the Court, then every one is admitted to come in.
As long as Ignatius lived, there was none but Popes, as S. Peter; Emperesses,
as the Mother of God; or some Sovereign Monarch, as God, and his Son, which
had the favor to behold him: but as soon as he was dead, every Courtier
belonging to the Eternal King was admitted, all the celestial people ran to
see him, Angels, Archangells, Thrones, etc.

It is now among the Papists, as it was heretofore among the Heathen people:
for they had many gods, as Apollo, Jupiter, Mars, Mercury, Aeolus, Neptune,
Pan, Cupid, etc. And goddesses likewise, as Minerua, Pallas, Venus, and the
like. And every one of them their distinct office: as for example; Apollo was
the god of Wisdom, Mars the god of War, Aeolus the god of the Winds, Neptune
of the Seas, Pan for Shepherds, and Cupid the god of Love. Minerua was the
goddess of Learning, and Venus the goddess of Love. The Papists have as many
Saints which they honor as gods, and every one have their several charge
assigned unto them by God, for the succor of men, women and children, yea over
Countries, Commonwealths, Cities, Provinces and Churches; nay to help, ones,
and bones, et caeterapecora campi, al manner of beasts, as S. George for
England, and other Countries, S. David for Wales, S. Andrew for Scotland, S.
Patricke for Ireland, S. Denis for France, S. James for Spain, S. Antony for
Italy, S. Mark for Venice, S. Roch for to cure the Plague, and for Sheep, S.
Antony for Swine, and for fire, S. Lucy for the Toothache, S. Petronel for the
Fever, and S. Martin for the Itch: Moreover, S. Valentine for Lovers, S.
Chrispin and Crispianus for Shoo-makers, S. Clement for Bakers, Brewers and
Victualers, S. Sebastian for Archers, S. Nicolas for Butchers, and an hundred
more, some assigned to this office, and some to that. But would you know what
office has our Limping Ignatius: in good sooth, an office well agreeing with
the humor of a Spanyard, who loves to be conversant with the female sex; for
he is become a Midwife, for thus says one of his own Children: Sermon. Vald: p.
51.
Blessed Father Ignatius does assuredly, and most readily assist all women that
are in labor; for this vigilant Pastor does always accompany the sheep that
are great with young, for to help them to be delivered, as it is written in
Esaias, Foetas ipse portabit, that is to say, He will look to the Ewes for to
have their wool and their lambs. For you must lay the blessed Fathers Signet
unto the patient, and she will soon be rid of her pain: and the only sight of
his name has given eyes to the blind, hands to the maimed, and legs to the
lame, has consumed the stone in the kidneyes, and very easily brought women to
bed.

By this it seems, that this Saint has shouldered the blessed Virgin out of
doors; for all good Catholic women were wont to call unto her for help in
that extremity. And it is not long since I read in a Catholic book, how the
blessed Virgin, her self, came accompanied with two Angels to visit a Lady
Abbess that was gotten with child, and or the preservation of her honor,
commanded those two Angels to deliver her of her burden, and to carry it to
an Hermit, to bring it up, which in time became a Bastardly Bishop, it may be
he was a Spanish Bishop; for they are all, (or the most part) Bastards. Cum
sec. part. Sermon. discip. de tempore. Magun. apud Ioh. Albinum Anno 1612.


I marvel how the other Monks, Friars, and Priests can brook, that S.
Ignatius should play the Midwife, considering that a great part of their
maintenance does depend upon women that are great with child; for they come
often unto them, with money in their fists, and many other good gifts, to have
Masses said for their safe delivery. But above all the rest, the Augustine
Friars of Burgos in Spain, who sell the measure of their Crucifix at so dear
a rate, because it is a precious Relicke for many diseases, especially for a
woman that is in labor. And is not this a great hinderance to the Franciscans
that have S. Francis Cordon, and likewise to diverse other Religious persons,
that have many precious Relickes of wonderful virtue, especially for such
women that are in labor of childbirth. Why do they not sue and implead
against the Jesuits, for Monopoly? And besides, it is against the Popes profit:
for many good Ladies (especially in Italy) when they are great with child, do
vow (if they can have a safe deliverance) to go on pilgrimage to the Image of
the blessed Virgin Mary of Loretto, and there offer some costly thing unto her
Shrine. All which comes into the Popes Exchequer. And I am sure, that the
Montebanckes shall all fare the worse, and Mid-wiues nothing the better. But
because I would not be too tedious, I will leave this halting holy-hee
Midwife, and descend to survey his spiritual Babes, I mean the Jesuits, the
maine pillars of the Antichristian Synagogue of Rome, the Intelligencers of
Spain, the Incendiaries of Christendom, and Belzabubs chief Agents.

Among all other Orders, of Monks and Friars, though the Commonwealths
(wherein they live) are exceedingly exhausted by them in matters of charge
(especially in Italy, and the Spanish Dominions) as being (in a manner)
compelled to reedifie their ruined Cloisters and Couents, to build them new
from the very ground, and from time to time to repair the same, to furnish
them with costly Images, and rich furnitures, and daily to supply their wants,
as well in yielding them victuals, as in satisfying their exorbitant demands,
which are infinite (of which, who so denies any, is presently reputed to be an
Heretic) yet all is nothing in comparison of that which by the Jesuits, they
are compelled to endure; who have now gotten that hand over them, that the
chief Magistrate-ship and places of dignity, are not granted, but unto such,
as shall be by their likings allowed, and by their authority confirmed; neither
without their advice and counsel dare they determine of any great matter,
concerning either government or policy. There is not any man's business, but
they must have an oar in it. They never place themselves any where, but in the
midst of goodly rich Cities; for as one says, Opulentas civitates vbi sunt
commoditates, semper querunt istipatres. Where they wring themselves into the
fairest Palaces, in some of them dispossessing by violence those to whom they
pertained. As for example, their Colleges at Antwerp, the one belongs to the
society of the Merchants of Aquisgranum: and the other to the society of the
English Merchants of the Staple, and was called heretofore by the name of the
English house, where English Merchants and their Factors lived, until such
time that they were tyrannically abused by the Spaniards and their adherents.
Moreover, their Colleges at Bruxels, and at Paris, are detained by them from
the true owners thereof. I could name an hundred more of these their
usurpations, to prove their intrusions into Cities, Towns, Castles, and
Noble-mens houses; but this shall suffice in this place.

Their Churches are rich and sumptuous; their moueables and household stuff
magnificent, rather than decent, their gardens pleasant, spacious, and
delightful, their garments fine and comely; Hi patres nigri, sunt semper been
vestiti: Their gesture proud and stately; their fare plentiful, and of the
best: And in fine, they are not tied to any rising in the night to their
devotion, or the like hardness, to which other Friars and Religious Orders are
subject: for they go (or may go) to bed at eight of the clock at night, and
rise between five and six in the morning. For their holy Father Ignatius would
not have them subjects to singing day and night. And the reason is (forsooth)
even as the Angel wrestling with Jacob, said Let me go, for the day
appears; signifying that he had many droues of sundry kind of cattle, that
he had children in his train, and was to provide meat for some and drink for
others, so that to such a man that had such a charge upon him, it was fit the
night should be allowed free from contemplation: so it is not possible for them
to bestow the day in the Quire, that are to furnish the flock with pasture and
clear water; for then they should be incapable of guiding so many foolish
ignorant beasts as are committed unto them; or of setting all Christendom in a
combustion: or of enlarging of the Kingdom of Antichrist and the Spanish
Monarchy: or of enriching of their own society: or of a thousand things
besides.

Their first Mass begins about eight of the clock in the morning, and a
private Mass does continue not above half an hour. And as for high Mass (or
a singing Mass, which endures a whole hour) alas they never meddle with it,
or with such bauling stuff; for the private Mass is the fairest flower in
their Garden. Unto which a Jesuit comes forth, so attended on by Nouices, and
in as great gravity (or counterfeit holiness) as the Pope himself, when he is
in his Pontificalibus.

They are the greatest Intelligencers and Statesmen in the world; and albeit
they should not by their Order receive any other Office or Ecclesiastical
dignity: yet now of late, by dispensation from the Popes sweet Holiness,
Bellarmine and others have been promoted, some to be Cardinals, and others
Archbishops and Bishops. And withal, as they order the matter, for their
credit and reputation, they take the name of a Jesuit not to be any whit
inferior to the title of a Bishop; for they are not subject to any Ordinary,
or to the controlment of any Bishop or Legate whatsoever, but only to the
General or Provincial of their own Order, who is always a Spaniard, or one
of the King of Spaines subjects, and who never lightly comes among them: and if
he do, he is a brother of the Society, and will find no fault for fear of
giving scandal.

Now among all other their policies, they have one that surpasses all the
rest. For wheresoever they remain, they take upon them to teach and instruct
children, as well of noble men, as also of inferior persons, professing to do
the same freely and without reward: wherein they deal so carefully, that the
Parents do not account their childrens time misspent; but also do reward
them highly. And the Jesuits make thereof a double benefit; for first they
bind the parents of the children to be their friends and favorites: secondly,
as for the scholars, they strike into their tender capacity such a reverence
of themselves, and withal do distill into their minds such points of
Doctrine, and such an opinion of their holiness and integrity, that the same
never (or very seldom) wears away, but rather increases with their years,
according to that of the Poet: Quo semel est imbuta recens seruabit odorem
Testa diu. --


That is to say, The vessel will long retain, the taste of the first liquor
it first held or contained. Which is undoubtedly of no small moment to the
strengthening and upholding of their faction and society.

Moreover, sometimes (as occasion and opportunity so falls out) they do
persuade such of their Scholars as are rich, and that have their means in
their disposing (their Parents being dead) to enter into their Order or
society, and to give and enfeoffe all that they have upon their Colleges
whereof I could bring here many examples. There dwelt heretofore in Lisbon in
Portugal a very rich Merchant, that had no more children than two sons, who
went to School to the Jesuits; whereof the youngest they had persuaded
(secretly and unknown to the father) to make a solemn vow to be one of their
society, and to give them all that portion that his Father should bequeath him.
It fortuned within a year or two that this Merchant fell sick, and being past
all hope of recovery made his Will, and bequeathed all his estate between his
two sons, giving unto the elder brother the better part. The Jesuits (whom
in that Country they call Apostolos, Apostles) hearing how the matter stood,
presently repaired unto this sick man, under color to administer unto him
some spiritual comfort; and there they dealt so cunningly with him, that they
persuaded him that his eldest son was a very deboist young man, and given to
many vices, and such a one as would spend and waste all that he had given him;
and extolled and applauded the youngest for a virtuous religious youth, a good
Scholar, and one that would surely be a good man, and a great prop or stay to
his family or kindred; so that by their iugling tricks they got the sick man
to revoke his former Will, and to make a new Will, and to bequeath the most part
of his substance upon his youngest son, which being done, the man shortly
after died, and the Jesuits received the younger brother into their society,
but not as yet publicly but privately.

Within two days after, when the dead Corpse was carried to be buried, the
Jesuits put some of their society, and the younger brother, and soldiers well
armed to keep possession in the Merchants house; whom when the elder brother,
upon his return home from his father burial (being altogether ignorant of the
Jesuits fraud, in procuring his Father to make a new Will) saw, demanded of
them what they did there, and would have entered into the house; they bade him
stand back, telling him that they were put there to keep possession for the
Apostles. For the Apostles, said he, I think verily if our Savior Christ had
had such warlike Apostles, he had never been taken by the high Priest, and the
Scribes and Pharisees, and so evil entreated as he was. In fine, he was
constrained to take what it pleased the Ignatian Apostles to give him; and they
had the most part of the Merchants substance.

It is a thing worth the observing, to see how busy and diligent they are when
they hear of a wealthy man or woman that lies sick and in danger of death.
This is their chiefest harvest and Optimae praeda. Then they commend unto him
the poverty of their College, and the merit he shall gain by dealing liberally
with them, as being for ever to be remembered in their Masses, as one of their
Benefactors. The Mendicant Friars, especially the Franciscans, and they have
been in Law together in Spain for many years, about this visitation of the
sick men, in articulo mortis. The Jesuits said that it appertained unto them;
because their profession is active, and to be always stirring among the
flock, and to do good to the world abroad: whereas that of the Franciscans,
and the other begging Friars, was contemplative, and so by consequence most
decent that they should contain themselves within their Cloisters. The Friars
on the other side replied, that their profession was Meekness, Innocence,
Poverty, and to do good unto all men. As for the Jesuits, that they are
proud, ambitious, aspiring, entermedlers in matters of state, men of great
riches, and covetous of more, and therefore by no means to be admitted to such
as lie at the point of death. The matter has been much argued of, and greatly
debated in Spain and Rome. And all the other Orders of Monks, and Friars were,
and still are vehemently against them; and they have been openly inueighed
against in the public Schools of most of the Universities of Italy, Spain,
France, Netherland and Germany: yet notwithstanding they are so strongly backed
by the King of Spain (whose turn they serve again in other matters) that
howsoever the cry go against them, they prevail and hold their own still.

Moreover, they have so cunningly wrought, that wheresoever they are, they
only are the general hearers of all Confessions, diuing thereby into the
secrets and drifts of all men, acquainting themselves (as I said before) with
their humors and imperfections, and making (as time and occasion serves) their
own use and benefit. And yet if some poor person come unto them to confess,
they will seldom or never hear his confession; and if they do, they will
hardly absolve him of his sins. As for examples sake, a certain Gentle in
Madrid in Spain, to try whether the Jesuits would confess poor folks, sent
his man upon a time to their College, in the night time, to entreat them they
would send one of their Fathers to confess a poor man that lay a dying in the
street (albeit there was no such matter) but the Porter told him, that all the
good Fathers were gone to take their rest and could not come: by and by he sent
another man to entreat them to come to receive the confession of a great rich
Cauallero, whom they knew to have lain sick for a long time; whereupon two of
them came forth presently, but when they were a little from home, his men, by
his appointment, beat the two Jesuits soundly and took away their clokes from
them.

But by the way, seeing it comes so well to our purpose, I will tell you a
pretty story that happened heretofore in the Low Countries. A Merchant, whose
name was Hamyel, being sick at Antwerpe of a consumption, the Jesuits knowing
him to be a man of great possessions, and without children, presently repaired
unto him under color of spiritual consolation, laying before him the vanity
of this life, and the glory of the world to come; with sundry other
persuasions, as of all men living, they have their tongues most at will: and
commending unto him their Order, as of all other the most meritorious, perfect,
and acceptable to God, and to which their holy Father the Pope, and his
Predecessors, have granted more Indulgences than to any other order of Religion
whatsoever. In so much that they brought the poor man (being of himself
simple) into their Society, thinking there was no other way to be saved: so as
before hand he infeoffed their College with his land, which was two hundred
pounds a year, giving them much goods and rich moueables; and when he had so
done, died within three months after the same. His next heirs, by counsel of
their friends, put the Jesuits in suit; against which, though they opposed
themselves with all vehemence, yet to their great shame and reprehension,
sentence was given against them by the Royal Council of Mechlin; which Court
has authority to determine definitely, both in civil and criminal causes
without appeal. Notwithstanding they would not so give over, but by the
means, aid, and support of one Pamele, a President and chief Favorite of
theirs, they appealed from thence to the Council of Estate at Bruxels, getting
the cause after sentence given to be removed; a thing there unusual, and
scarcely ever heard of before, where the process was hanging for a long time:
yet afterward the Jesuits, to their great shame, were constrained to compound
with their adversaries.

Another time, a rich and wealthy Merchant of the same City, whose name was
John Baptista Spinola, a man then known in most Merchant Towns in
Christendom, but one in that point, whose devotion and scrupulosity ouerwent
his wisdom, coming to them to confession, and telling them of some unjust
gain, with which he felt his conscience touched; they presently (with sundry
terrifying speeches) told him that he was in the state of damnation, out of
which he could not be delivered, until such time that he had made
restitution, as well of that confessed, as of all other money and goods that he
had by usury unlawfully gotten, laying before him, Quod non dimittitur
peccatum, nisi restituatur ablatum: with sundry other such sentences, whereof
they have good store. In fine, they put the man into such fear of conscience,
that he yielded to make restitution, if so the same might be done without his
undoing, discredit, or shame. Whereupon to comfort him again, but indeed
fearing lest if they dealt too rigorously and roughly with him, they should get
nothing; they told him, that if in stead of all such interests and vsuries,
with which he found his conscience burdened, he only would be content to
deliver unto them some such sum of money, as without his undoing, he thought
he might conveniently spare, they would take it upon their souls, to see the
sum employed upon good, virtuous, and charitable uses, to the greater merit
and benefit of his soul, and as a thing more acceptable unto God, and less
scandalous to the world, than if he should make restitution to whom it
appertained, and had been by his usury interessed. Whereupon the Merchant
being well satisfied in conscience, gave them the money, and they him their
absolution. The Capuchins afterward made great suit unto this Merchant to
become a religious man of their Order, and to make a distribution of his goods
among them: he made great show to be very willing for a while, but in the and
he deceived them, and falling to his old bias, did not stick to tell unto some
of his private friends this former tale, and by that means the Jesuits iugling
came to light.

They have persuaded the last Duke of Bauaria, this Dukes Father, to become one
of their Society, and to make them a College of his own Palace at Monachum, to
build them a stately Church, all the Pillars, Arches, and the Porches being of
fine Marble, and the whole Church covered over with fine Copper, adorned within
and without with many curious and costly Images, Pictures, Tablets, and the
Vtensels belonging to the Altars of gold and silver, Copes and Vestments of
cloth of gold, cloth of tissue, and curious imbroideries. And withal to
infeoffe whole Towns, Castles, and Manors upon their new College; his son
and heir being constrained to live in a mean house in the same town, with
such small pension as his father had formerly assured upon him. And albeit the
old Iesuited Duke had surrendered this government of the Country unto him, at
his first entering into their Society, yet he durst not do any thing without
the Jesuits advice and approbation.

The old Duke (being a silly, zealous, simple, well minded Prince) was wont to
entertain into certain Chambers, or Lodgings in his Court (appointed for that
purpose) all such Pilgrims as traveled that way, with meat, drink, and
lodging of the best, for three days and three nights: and this was the manner
of their entertainment. At the gates of the Town, among the Soldiers that had
the guard, for it is a Garrison Town, there were certain Officers to receive
all such Pilgrims as had good Letters of commendation, or testimony that they
were Romish Catholics, and bound to Rome, or any other place of pilgrimage
upon devotion, or else returning homewards, which Officer was to conduct these
Pilgrims presently upon their arrival to a certain lodging in the Dukes
Court, where was another man of purpose to receive them; but before that they
entered into their lodgings, they were brought into a room, where every man had
delivered unto him a clean Shirt, a long Wastcoat made of red Cotton, a pair
of new black Canuasse breeches, a pair of new linen Stockins, a pair of
Slippers, a black Gown, a Girdle, a black Cap, and a little stick in his
hand: for they were to put off all their own clothes, and to put on these,
which being done, they were showed the way to the Church, there to say a few
Aues and Paters, and then to return to their lodging to dinner or supper,
according to the time of the day that they came thither. These poor men had
meat sent them from the Dukes own Table, and served in by his servants, and
the best Wine and Beer that the Country did yield; besides, every man lay
alone in a good Feather-bed, with sweet fresh linen (more like a noble man
than a Pilgrim) where they remained for the space of three days and so many
nights. Moreover, the Duke came himself sometimes, and washed these poor men's
feet in warm water with sweet herbs, and dried the same with sweet damask
Napkins: when they were to depart, they had Shirts, Shoes, those Stockins and
Breeches which they had formerly worn, a Pilgrims staff, and money in their
Purse according to their wants and quality.

And when the Duke became a Jesuit, it was agreed between them that the
Pilgrims should have the self same entertainment there for ever; which indeed
they had as long as he lived. But as soon as ever the breath was out of his
body (albeit they had means given unto them by the Duke, not only for their
own maintenance, more than that was sufficient, but also to entertain the
Pilgrims) these unconscionable Machiuillians, who can never abide any poor
body, gave straight order at every gate of the Town, that no Pilgrim, or any
other poor man should come in, but send their Letters unto them, the which if
they like of, they mark with a private mark, that they may know if they come
thither again, and then they write their names and Country in their books of
Record, and perhaps send these poor creatures three pence or a groat, after
such time that they make them attend three or four hours for it. The
Polonians and some Netherlanders, that did use to go that way to Rome, do
give them many a bitter curse for their uncharitable dealings with them: but
they care not, for there is none there that can control them: nay, this Duke
dare not offend them, and whatsoever they do or say, is a Law.

They have at Bourdeaux, in Aquitania, built their College upon the land
belonging to an Hospital, that appertained to the Pilgrims that go to Saint
James of Compostella; and in the end, because they would enlarge their College,
they pulled down the Hospital, and got into their hands all the revenues
thereof, undertaking to the Magistrates of the Town, and overseers of the
Hospital, to maintain the same in far better manner than it was kept
before. But now these Usurpers will admit none to have a nights lodging there,
but such as have special Letters of recommendations from some of their
Society. All which I know to be true; for I have been told by more than a
hundred poor Pilgrims of several Nations, of these their vnchristian-like
dealing with them.

The Magistrates and Clergy of Turnay in the Low Countries, would not by any
means receive them into their Town, albeit they had the King of Spaines
Letters Patents. In the end, under hand, they got one of their Factors, an
Antwerpian Merchant, to buy them one of the fairest houses in the City, and a
whole rue of houses besides; where they built their Schools, and taught maugre
all the Magistrates, the Bishop, and all the Monks, Friars, and Clergy men
whatsoever. Yea, they have there now two Colleges and a Seminary, where they
lodge and board Noblemen, Gentlemen, and rich men's children, which brings them
in no small profit.

The Magistrates and Citizens of the Town of Isle or Rissel, alias Insula, in
the confines of Flanders, received the Jesuits into their City with such
honor and respect as is to be admired at, and yet they required their kind
courtesies most basely. First, the Magistrates and the inhabitants assured unto
them an annual rent of about two hundred pounds sterling. And because that
there was no spare place in the Town that the Jesuits did like of to set up
their rest, the Magistrates, with the common consent and charges of all the
Citizens, about the year 1608. brake down a great part of of the wall,
rampire, and a great bulwark of the town, and damped or filled up the Mote,
and took in above a hundred acres of ground into the Town, enclosing and
fortifying it again with a high strong brick wall, rampires, bulwarks and
another mote, and there built them upon their proper cost and charges a goodly
sumptuous College, magnificent Schools, furnished with fine pleasant Gardens,
Orchards and walks, yea with all necessary offices, in so much that they
brought water into every office in the College. I omit to speak of a
marvelous fair Church, adorned with all necessary vtensills thereunto
belonging. And all this in less space than two years.

Moreover, this new plot (which was thus taken in) was divided among the
chiefest men of the Town, where they built the goodliest houses in all the
City, because (forsooth) they would be near these holy Fathers, to have their
spiritual comfort, and consolation in time of need. The Jesuits being thus
seated and settled like Princes; the first thing was that they did, to requite
the Citizens great love, and extraordinary charges. They procured unto
themselves from the King of Spain, the Archduke, and the Archduchesse Letters
Patents, that they should have for every barrel of beer that is drawn within
that Town two shillings nine pence farthing, which is for every quart pot two
Liards, or half a Stiuer, which is about an halfe-peny half farthing English,
and does amount to a great sum of money yearly, considering the greatness of
the Town, and the multitude of the people that are the Inhabitants thereof.
Albeit the Assise which they were constrained to pay (before that time) for
their beer, was as much in equal portion, to the King, and the Archduke, as
they did pay to the Brewer; from which the poor beggar was not free, but if he
did drink, he paid so much unto the King, as he did to the Victualer. And yet
these unconscionable and covetous Jesuits, did for their benefit and better
maintenance, procure this other imposition to be laid upon the Inhabitants,
notwithstanding the former extraordinary love and kindness which they received
from them: Both which assise of the beer, the poor inhabitants have been
constrained to pay ever since, as well to the King, as to the Jesuits; by
means whereof, and other their politic cheating and cosenage, they are become
not only exceeding rich, but also odious to all the Towns and Country there
adjoining.

And besides, whereas the inhabitants of this Town, had been for many hundred
years free, and exempt from all forfeiture or confiscation of their lands and
goods to the King, if any of them had committed any felony, murder, treason, or
the like; their bodies being only liable to the Law, and not their lands or
goods. Now these Jesuits (perceiving that the State-house, the Town Charter,
and all the ancient Records of the Town had been some certain years before
burnt, by occasion of fire) procured underhand a Patent to be granted to their
College, of all forfeitures and confiscations whatsoever, that should happen to
fall due to the King, within that Town and the liberties thereof; and having
so done, they began to seize upon the land and goods of all such as were
convicted for any of these or the like crimes or offenses. The Magistrates of
the Town, and all the rest of the inhabitants, with one consent did oppose the
Jesuits, as intruders, usurpers, and common perturbers of their Privileges and
Liberties: whereupon the Jesuits commenced their suit against the Magistrates,
and all the inhabitants of the Town, in the higher Courts; wherein the
Jesuits would have surely prevailed, if that a certain Religious man (as I
think) a Canon Regular of the Order of S. Augustine, that lived in an Abbey
about six miles from the Town (and yet in the territories of the same) had not
found out in the Library there, an old book of Histories or Antiquities in
Manuscript, written many hundred years since; wherein was contained, among
other things, a Copy of the Charter of this Town of Lysle: which being showed
unto the Council of State, the Jesuits, with much shame and disgrace, had a
definitive sentence given against them, never afterward to intermedle with the
Privileges and Statutes of the Town, and to pay cost and charges besides. Oh
the honesty of these holy men of the society of Jesus!

John Chastell was taught and persuaded by the Jesuits, to murder Henry the
fourth of France, and yet some Papists would deny it, if they could, because
they are loath to make the Jesuits odious: and yet others did help to erect a
pillar of stone near to the Kings Palace in Paris, whereby so much was
signified. But the Jesuits when they were recalled again into France, from
their banishment, got leave of the King (upon the Queens request) to deface
it, some few years before the King was murdered by Rauillacke.

In the year 1607. The Jesuits procured the Emperor Rodulphus, to prescribe
that ancient Imperial City Donawert in high Germany, and to give it in prey
unto the Duke of Bauaria, who came privately with four or five thousand men,
and took it and ransacked it, and afterward put a strong garrison therein,
altering their Laws and Customs, and debarring them of all their former
Privileges whatsoever, in so much that the chiefest men in the City, were
constrained to abandon both house and home, and to seek after another place to
inhabit. I came through this City within three months after that the Duke of
Bauaria had taken it; and it grieved my heart to see into what miserable
bondage the poor Citizens were brought, and all through the deuillish practice
of these irreligious Machiauills, who then did tyrannize over them, like so
many Turks or Infidels; for they managed the whole affairs of the City, the
Governor which the Duke had placed there over the soldiers, stood but for a
cipher; for he durst do nothing without the consent of the Jesuits. The
Magistrates were all put out of their charge and offices; and other base,
poor, mechanical fellows appointed in their places, far unworthy the high
dignity of Consuls or Burghemasters in such an ancient free and noble City as
that is. The soldiers were billeted in all the Protestants houses, and not in
any Papists house, where they dominierd like so many devils, making hauock of
all that they could come by; and yet the Protestants were constrained to pay
them their wages besides. What shall I say? The Jesuits, in effect, did
command and control the whole City, as they pleased. They banished their
Ministers, and compelled the inhabitants either to go to hear Mass, contrary
to their consciences; or else forsake the City, and live in exile. And yet
this is nothing in comparison to that the Protestants of Aquisgranum have
endured, and yet do suffer.

The Emperor Charles, (surnamed the Great) hunting upon a time in the Forest
of Arden, found out certain Bathes or hot waters, in which place he built a
very fair City, and called it Aquisgranum, and gave it many privileges and
great freedom: among other things, he ordained that all other Emperors, his
Successors, should be crowned there, and that the Imperial Diadem (which is
now kept at Franckfurt upon Main) should be kept in this City. Here likewise
he built (among other Churches) a very fair Collegiat Church, endowing it
with great revenues; within a Chapel of this Church the crafty Clergy men
(observing the ignorance of the people in those days) set up an Image of the
blessed Virgin Mary, which they affirmed to work great miracles, by means
whereof, and of the hot Bathes, this City came to be very famous, and haunted
by many people; for many that were visited with sickness and diseases, came
from far and near to this vp-start Lady, and the Bathes. Besides, all the
Copper that is brought from the upper parts of Germany to Netherland, or these
parts, is first brought thither to be refined. In fine, when the mistie fogges
of superstition began to disperse, and the glorious sunshine of the Gospel to
appear, it pleased God in this City (among others the neighboring Towns and
Provinces) to call some to the true knowledge of his word, in so much that the
most part of the inhabitants thereof (the Monks, Friars, Nuns, and the other
Clergy men excepted) in a short time became Protestants, and had Ministers, and
a Church in the midst of the City. The Priests and Friars perceiving how the
number of the Protestants began to increase daily more and more; that this
counterfeit Lady was fallen sick, and could work no more miracles, because
the Protestant Ministers had discovered their deceits and trumperies, and
spoiled their market; and withal, that the people came not with their
offertories unto them, as in former times; which was to their no small loss
and hinderance; They (I say) plotted how to prevent this danger, and first they
intended to bring the Jesuits into the City, but this could not be; for the
Protestants were more in number than they; and withal, there was an equal
number of Magistrates of either Religion: for there were two Protestant
Burghemasters, and two Papists. Then they practiced how to betray the City to
the King of Spain; but their treachery was discovered; and the Protestants
betaking themselves to their arms, prevented it; and the Duke of Cleue (who
was then Protector of the City) at their request, put in a garrison of
soldiers to defend them from the King of Spaines forces; who never after
attempted any thing against the City, until after the Duke of Cleues death;
at which time by the treacherous plots of the Jesuits, who were privately
lurking there, sent an army secretly under the conduct of Spinola, and took
the City by treachery, and not by force of arms, or valor; and sets a
garrison of four thousand men therein, all billeted or lodged in Protestants
houses; and they themselves constrained to abandon the City, or else to live no
better than those that live under the cruel tyranny of the Turks. And as for
the Ministers, some they put to death, others escaped away to Holland, and
other parts. Those of the Protestants, that ever had been Burghemasters, that
they found, they put likewise to death, and many other of the Townsmen, that at
any time withstood them, upon any former tumults or commotion, fared no better.

I came to this City in the month of December 1616. where the next day I
beheld (to my no small sorrow) a most lamentable tragedy, which was as
follows. As I would have departed away, I could not, because the Ports or
Gates were locked, and all the soldiers in the Town (but only those that had
the watch) drawn (in their full complete arms) to the Marketplace, which is
very spacious, and as big as Smithfield in London. In which Marketplace, there
was a scaffold set up hard by the State-house; unto the which they brought a
proper young man (about six and twenty years of age) bound, having a Jesuit
on either side, who mounting the scaffold, with a very sweet and cheerful
countenance, kneeled down, and said a short mental prayer; then rising and
looking about him, espied a friend of his, hard by the scaffold, unto whom he
cast his cloak, entreating him to deliver it unto his wife; who was in a
corner of the Marketplace a far off, together with many other women and
children upon their knees, making the most lamentable noise that ever I heard,
and desiring God to judge their cause. This man lifting up his hands, pulled
off his hat, and making a low reverence toward those women, and many other
Protestants that stood by them, with a loud voice desired them all to pray for
him; and desired God to forgive him all his sins, for Christ his sake;
signifying further unto them, that the Jesuits had promised to save his life,
if so be that he would confess his sins, and receive the Sacrament, the
which (said he) I did, being drawn thereunto by their fair promises and
persuasions, and the entire love I bare to my wife, children, and kinsfolks.
But now I am heartily sorry for it; and then kneeling down again, asked God and
the Reformed Church (with tears) forgiveness, for (said he) I do from my
heart renounce all Popery, and will die a member of the Reformed Church,
wherein I was brought up. Whereupon the Jesuits persuaded him to recant those
words, and to call to the blessed Virgin Mary for help: but he would not,
saying that he was sorry for that which he had already done. And within a while
he kneeled down again, and the Executioner after that he had tied a
hand-kerchiefe over his eyes, with a sword struck off his head; whereupon the
Protestant women and children made such a lamentable cry, that it made some of
the Papists themselves weep, and pull their hats over their eyes.

This being done, they presented to the view of all the beholders another
pitiful spectacle, more lamentable than the former: A poor old man of about
threescore and ten years of age, whose name was John Balkbern^r, who being not
able to go, by reason of his long imprisonment, which was above two years in a
Dungeon (as I was told) where none of his friends was permitted to visit him,
or to administer any comfort unto him, having been racked and tortured three
several times: This man had been one of the Burghemasters of the Town, and
ever opposed himself against the Jesuits, and the Spanish faction, in the
defense of the Liberties of the City. Him they brought (supported by the
Hangman and his man) to the scaffold, accompanied likewise with two Jesuits,
and when he was got up the scaffold, all the drums in the City were beaten,
and the Trumpetters did found their Trumpets being set all round about the
scaffold; because that no man should hear what this poor dying-man said: who
lifting up his hands and eyes often toward heaven, in the end kneeled down,
and received very patiently that fatal stroke, the Executioner smiting off his
head, as he had done the former. Whereupon the Protestant women and children
made such a great cry as they had formerly done, which made many of the
Papists, yea the Governor himself (who was a Germane) to weep and shake his
head. The Magistrates of the City, and the Emperors Delegats sat in a gallery
on the side of the State-house, to see the execution; which being ended, they
withdrew themselves back into the State-house, where was a great feast
provided for them. Good God how merry were the Jesuits, Priests, and Friars all
that afternoon; I protest to you, I did see with mine eyes above twenty of
them crossing the streets so drunk, that they could scarce go or stand, and
when they met the Hangman they shook him by the hand, as though he had been
some great Dutch Here, or Lord, telling him that he had performed his part
wonderful well, which made the Rogue so proud of his office, that I heard him
wish, that all Protestants had but one head, and he the striking of it off:
unto whom a townsman that was a Protestant, answered, saying, that the
Protestants had but one head, which was Christ Jesus their Savior, unto whom
(said he) thou base Varlet, shall one day give an account for thine
uncharitable wish; and they that set thee on work this day, for spilling of
innocent blood. Whereupon some Priests that stood by, and heard his words, went
presently to the Magistrates, and accused him, and presently caused him to be
apprehended and put in prison; what became of him I know not, but I have heard
that he was banished, and that he lives now in Emden. Since that time the
Jesuits have caused a pillar of free-stones to be erected in that place where
the scaffold was, with the portraiture of the Hangman striking off this man's
head, with this inscription in great capital letters, viz. Sic pereant qui
hanc Rem-publicam and Sedem Regalem spretis Sacrae Caes. Maiestatis edictis
euertere moliuntur.

Ad damnandam memoriam Ioannis Balckberner in vltimo tumultu Anno MDCX. hic
excitato.

Inter perduelles Antesignani.

Columna haec ex decreto D. D. Subdelegatorum Sanctae Caesaris Maiestatis iussu
III. Nonas Decembris, Anno MDCXVI.



They procured the King of Spain (without any right or reason) to send Spinola
with an army to take Weesell, one of the Hans Cities, being at peace and amity
with him, and little fearing any such perfidious treachery, where they have and
still do use such tyranny, that it is as good for the inhabitants to be under
the Turk as under the Spanish government. This City was rich and had great
traffic and commerce with high Germany, the States Countries, and all
Netherland. But it is now beggerd by means of the Jesuits and Spaniards their
protectors. For as soon as Spinola had put a garrison of six thousand horse and
foot into this City, the Jesuits likewise came thither and were placed in the
chiefest house in the City, which did heretofore belong to the Duke of Cleu^,
who was protector of it, and afterward to the Marquess of Brandenburg, his
lawful heir and successor. This noble City, wherein the Gospel of Christ was
truly and sincerely preached, is now become a stinking Sinagogue of Antichrist,
and a prey to Jesuits and Spaniards, who were not content to make hauock of
almost all they had, contrary to the composition made between Spinola and
them, when they yielded the Town unto him, but also ravished their wives and
daughters before their eyes, neither will they suffer them to make sale of
their houses, and carry away that little they have left them, and to permit
them to depart to some other Country or City to seek their fortune; but compel
them to stay there, and to labor and toil (like so many slaves) to maintain
them. They have the best Chambers and Beds in their houses, and they themselves
are constrained to lie upon Mats and in straw: they have all their household
stuff at their command, and they themselves are compelled to wash, scour, and
do all manner of drudgery for them. The poor Inhabitants must of necessity
provide Fiting, Candles, Salt, Vinegar, and Water for them gratis, and attend
on them with cap and knee, or else be stabbed or well beaten. And albeit that it
was agreed between the States of the united Provinces, and the King of Spain,
that the Protestants of Weesell should have free liberty of conscience to use
their Religion, in respect the Jesuits, Monks, Friars and Papists of Emerick
have the like at their hands; yet they can never go to Church or Sermons, and
especially when they sing Psalms, but they mock and abuse them, either by
hurling of stones in at the windows, or some other villainy.

In the year 1619. (coming from Venice to Holland) I came to this City, and
arriving at my lodging, where I was very well acquainted; the good man and his
wife, who knew me, fell a weeping, telling me they had never a bed to lodge me
in, for we have six Spaniards (said they) that lodge here, and the rest of our
beds they sold and purloined away; and then they showed me their house, and how
they had sold all their household stuff; for they had neither Brass, nor
Pewter, nor any thing to dress their meat but one iron pot, for the rest were
earthen: they lay themselves upon a straw bed, more like Beggars than Citizens.
The day was far spent, and I weary, that I could go no further, and
therefore I resolved to stay there that night, and to lie upon a board or a
bench. While I was comforting of the old folks as well as I could, there came
in a Spanish Soldier that had lost his money at Dice and Cards in the court of
guard, and would have borrowed a Dollar of the good wife, who told him that she
had none for her self; besides (said she) you owe me ten Gilders (that is
twenty shillings in English money) I thought you would have paid me that first,
for I was constrained to pawn my bed to get money for you, and ever since my
husband and I have lain upon straw, which we never did before in all our life
time; whereupon the Spaniard, Senor Iuan de Nauarra (for so was his name)
called her Puta Vieja, old Whore, and a thousand such names, and shook her
almost all to pieces; then, leaving her crying, took the pottage pot and
filled it half full with water, and put a great Brick-bat and a piece of
rotten Cabbidge into it and laid it over the fire, and went out into the yard
and brought in three or four great Fagots and other wood, and made such a
great fire, that I was afraid he would have burned the house; and thus he
continued burning of Fagots and Billets (which are very dear there) for the
space of two hours, and would have burnt more, had not she gone forth and
borrowed of one of the neighbors two shillings to give him, for fear that he
would have burned all her wood; albeit, I think in my conscience that he did
burn in that time more than did cost her eight pence. But when he had the
money, away he went, and then she took off the pot, and threw the stone and
rotten Cabbidge away, and made something ready for our Supper; but before that
we could make an end, two other Spaniards came in, and without bidding or
inuiting, sat down with us and took part of that little we had, and then
went away without offering any money, or saying so much as we thank you.

The very same night, another Spaniard would have the old woman after ten of
the clock to go and fetch him a whore; and because she would not go, he
gave her three or four blows with his Musket rest, and would have broken her
bones if another whore of his acquaintance had not come in (hearing the old
woman cry) who pacified him, and lay with Senor Laurencio (for so was his name)
that night. O the Religion and conscience of these Catholic Spaniards, that
tyrannize far worse than the Turk, wheresoever they get the upper hand!

But now to return again to the Jesuits, who are the only commanders of this
City, whose words are Laws, yea Oracles among the Spaniards. They preach and
catechize young children twice or thrice a week, yea the Soldiers do take
protestants children by force, and bring them to the Jesuits to be instructed
in popery. Alas, if I should tell you all the wrongs and misdemeanors that the
Jesuits have committed in this City and elsewhere, this Pamphlet would grow to
be a great volume.

The next Summer, after the death of the Emperor Matthias, the Jesuits of
Liege kept a great solemn funeral for him, which was as near as I can
remember in this manner* First, a noble man's son that was one of their
Scholars, being very richly attired, riding upon a great horse, with an
imperial Crown on his head, having a Canopy carried over him borne by six men,
attended on with a great train, representing the person of the King of Spain;
another in the same manner representing the King of France; others the King of
Bohemia (that is now Emperor) and all other Catholic Princes. Every one of
them having a guard of Soldiers both horse and foot, all being the Jesuits
Scholars. They were all drawn out in their divisions Souldier-like, having
their Captains and other Officers (who were Jesuits) to lead them on, in a
great market place which is by Saint Paul's Church: from whence the counterfeit
hearse was brought forth, carried and accompanied with many Mourners, with that
state and Ceremonies as great Princes are wont to be brought to their last
home. After that followed these Kings and Princes severally accompanied with
their train and guard, having their banners carried before each of them placed
by Heralds. Then came the Breaden god, their Sacrament, carried by a Jesuit
under a Canopie, borne by four scholars in white Surplices singing: after
that followed the Image of the blessed Virgin Mary very curiously wrought
(wherein wanted neitheir cost nor art) carried upon men's shoulders accompanied
with many Jesuits and singing men: and last of all came Wickliffe, John Hus,
Jerome of Pragus, Martin Luther, Calvin, Beza, M. Bucer, P. Martyr,
Oecolampadius, Zuinglius, Bullinger, Melancton, Fox, and Master Perkins, all
bound with iron chains, and led and guarded with a squadron of Devils: who
made the Monks, Friars, and other Clergy men to skip for joy, to see those men
that had writ en against them to be led captive by Lucifer and his Angels. The
Hearse being thus attended by so many Kings and Princes, the Sacrament, the
blessed Virgin, and the black guard marched forward to the Jesuits College,
where they all entered and fell to their prayers: here might you have seen
Hus, Luther, Beza, Perkins, and the rest; yea, the Devils with their Beads in
their hands say Paters and Aues for the Emperors soul. Truly I marvelled much
to see the Jesuits permit those whom they call and condemn for Heretics to
enter into their Church, and to accompany the blessed Sacrament, and the
blessed Virgins Image; yea, in my opinion they abused those Catholic Kings and
Princes who were then and there represented, to intrude those men into their
company, whom they never affected or loved; and that which is worse, to place
Devils to bring up the rear of their army.

All these Soldiers were the Jesuits Scholars, and taught and instructed in
military Discipline by the Jesuits themselves, who are every where martial
men, and given tam Martiquam Mercurio: for in every Army, Leaguer, Garrison, or
Navy that any Catholic King or Prince has, there the Jesuits will be as
busy as an Attorney in Westminster Hall in the midst of a term. Hij
Palladi oratores, noui Philosophi, in Castris non in Claustris versantur. They
had rather to be stirring abroad and follow the Camp, than be confined within
the circuit of a Cloister. And therein they do imitate their Father Ignatius
of infamous memory, for he was a Soldier, and so are they: yea, in every one
of their Colleges they have Armor and munition to furnish many thousand
Soldiers; and besides, there is not any one of them but knows how to use his
Arms, as if he had been a Soldier all the days of his life. To conclude,
this funeral or Obsequies did cost the Parents and friends of these young
Jesuitical Kings and Princes (by report) above two thousand pounds sterling.

What shall I say? The Jesuits have been the utter ruin and overthrow of Don
Sebastian, the last King of Portugal and Algarbes; for through their policy
and wicked counsel he lost his Crowns and Kingdoms, and in the end his life.

They have been the chiefest cause of all the civil Wars, Massacres, and
troubles in France, since the death of Henry the third of France, to this
present time.

These seditious infernal Locusts have been the only occasion of those bloody
wars between the King of Poland and the great Duke of Moscouia or Russia;
and again, between Poland and Swethland.

Have not the Jesuits been the cause of the loss of Voltalin, the upper and
lower Palatinate? And have they not been the cause of all these Wars,
Bloodshed, Commotions, Dearth, Famine, Persecutions, Rapine, Miseries,
Calamities and Destructions that have happened in Italy, France, Germany,
Bohemia, Netherlands, the seventeen Provinces, and other neighboring
Countries, Cities, Towns, and Common wealths, these forty or fifty years and
upwards?

I omit to speak of their several treacherous designs against Queen
Elizabeth of famous memory, or of the Gunpowder treason, or how that they have
been these twenty years banished out of all the territories of the Signory of
Venice, for their impostures and lewd practices, and for being common
disturbers of the peace and tranquillity of the common wealth. Neither how they
have incroached upon the privileges and liberties of most of the famous
Schools and Universities of Italy, Spain, Portugal, France, Netherland,
Germany, Poland, and other Catholic Countries. But I will speak a word or two
more of their Colleges, Churches, Schools, and manner or method of teaching,
and so conclude.

First of all, I would have you to understand that they receive none into their
Society, but such as are either descended of great parentage and good friends,
whose greatness may countenance their designs, and procure others to be
beneficial unto them; or such as are wealthy, to enrich their Colleges; or
learned and witty Scholars, who by their works and writings, are like to
advance the credit and reputation of their society; or some Tradesmen to be
their Lay-brethren and Officers of their Colleges; or else some cunning fly
knave or crafty companion to be their Porter, upon whose truth and fidelity
they may assuredly rely and depend: for the Porter must be a smooth tongued
fellow, and as true as steel, or else he is not for their turn; neither will
they put him into that office, before such time as they have had a long trial
and experience of his wit and fidelity; for he knows more of their knavery
than all the rest of the society, except it be the Rector and two or three
more: besides, what gift or message soever is sent unto any of the College, it
must come first to his hands; for the College gate is always locked fast, and
he has the key tied to his girdle.

Every Jesuit in their Colleges has some employment or office; as for
example, some are employed in writing books of controversies, or otherwise;
whose works never come to the Press till the father Provincial, and the best
Divines, and the best learned men of their society of that Province, yea of the
next Province, and most commonly their General (who lives always at Rome) do
peruse, correct, and amend the same; so that they never print any book in any
of their names, without the mature counsel and advice of their superiors.
Which (in my opinion) would not do amiss, if the Divines of the reformed
Church would do the like among themselves.

Some of them that have the gift of preaching, do study their Sermons, the
Fathers, and School Divinity, and attend to hear Confessions and say Masses,
albeit all those that are Priests are Masse-mongers: others do trot here and
there abroad about the College affairs: and others, who are Lay-brethren, have
imploiments enough either at home or abroad; for some of them are Tailors, and
are ever making of new Habits, or else mending of old for the other Fathers and
Lay-brethren. They have Physicians, Apothecaries, Chirurgians, Barbers,
Printers, Tailors, Shoomakers, Cooks, Washers, Bakers and Brewers (if they
live in a beer Country) of their own order and society. And so have all (or
the most part) of the other Orders of Monks and Friars in all popish Countries,
especially in Spain and Italy, and therefore poor Tradesmen get little or
nothing by the Jesuits, or any other Monks, Friars or Nuns whatsoever.

The younger sort of them do teach children the Latin and the Greek tongues
(except it be in Spain, where never or seldom the Greek is taught in the
Jesuits Schools, or elsewhere, except it be in some Universities.) And they
divide their Shools into five Classes, that is to say, in the first the
Accidence, or Introduction to the eight parts of speech, and the declination of
Nounes and Verbes, which they call Figures: the second, the Grammar: the third,
the Syntax: the fourth, Poetry: the fifth, Rhetoric. But if it be in an
University, then they have other Classes and Lectorers, for Logic, Philosophy,
Divinity, and all the other Arts. Now in every Class there is a Jesuit that
teaches. The Scholars do remove or proceed once every year (which is after
their vacation, about Michaelmas) from one Class to another, for they are
ordinarily no longer than one year in one Class. And every Schoolmasters is
appointed by the Prefect of the Schools, how much he must read and expound
unto his Scholars every day; for he must give them no more, nor no less than
the ordinary Lesson. And withal, he teaches Greek Grammar, and other Greek
Authors, together with the Latin.

The Jesuits do every other year extract out of such Authors as they like
best, as well Latin as Greek, such selected places as is most commodious and
fitting to read to young youths, and do print the same in their own
Colleges, and sell them at a very dear rate to their Scholars, appointing to
every Class such other books, besides the Grammar, as is fit for their tender
capacity. Their Grammar, and all the rest of their school books are of the
Jesuits own collections. They teach still the self same Grammar in all their
Schools, in what Country soever they be; but in the other books, whether they
be in prose or verse, they differ, and every second year they alter all their
school books, except the Figures, Grammar, and Syntax, of mere policy to
utter the more books, and consequently to gain the more money, for they have
very many Scholars, because they do not permit any Latin School besides
their own in any town or City where they reside.

In the three lower Classes they appoint two several Emperors, the one they
call the Emperor of the East, the other of the West, as it was heretofore in
the time of Charles the Great, and others, when the Empire of Rome was divided
into two parts between two Emperors, whereof the one was called the Emperor
of the East, and kept his Court at Constantinople; and the other the Emperor
of the West, who commonly now adays resides at Prague in Bohemia. Now the
Jesuits, that are the Schoolmasters, do divide their Scholars in every
Class equally between these two Emperors, appointing unto every one his own
subjects, who are likewise divided into several offices or callings, as
Consuls, Senators, Patricians, Knights, Plebeyans, and the like. These
Emperors (who most commonly are some great men's sons) do sit Maiestically
in very fair Chaires or Stats, having their Scutchions, Banners, and Mottos
drawn out very curiously, at the end of a lance, fastened to the wall over
their heads. And the Consuls, Senators, and the rest of the chiefest men do
sit according to their dignities, places, and offices, every one having his
Scutchion over the place where he sits.

In every Class the Schoolmasters does appoint eight or ten (and sometimes
more or less, according to the number of the Students) Scholars whom they
think fit, for extraordinary pregnancie of wit and learning, to be Prefects
over the other Scholars who bear no dignity or office in that Class, and to
hear them recite their Lessons, and to give up the names of such as are not
perfect therein to the master, who inioynes them to some public or private
penance, as to sweep the School, to stand upon his feet for a certain time
in the School, to say so many Paster Noster, or Aue Maria upon their knees, in
the open street before their Church door, to copy out of some book so many
lines or pages, and the like penance; for they whip them never publicly in the
School, but send them to the Father Prefect, who gives them correction
privately in a little room which is by the School for that purpose; for the
boys had rather undergo private correction than a public penance; because
those that pass by will laugh and hush at them; neither will they either
correct them or impose any public penance upon any, unless he be a mere
block-head, that will not learn, or one that has committed some extrordinary
offense or crime.

Moreover, the Porter at the time appointed that they should come to the
Schools, rings a bell, and at the very last toll all the Schoolmasters come
out together, and go every man to his own Class, and there stay till the
bell rings again; and then again at the first toll, they and the Scholars
come out, for they must not break the Orders and Rules of the School.

In the morning, after they have been at School an hour and a half or
thereabout, the same bell rings, and then they go to Church to hear Mass,
which endures half an hour, and then they return to their Classes again.
But in some Countries (when the days are long) after Mass they go home to
breake-fast, and within half an hour after they come to school again. Every
day (or every other day) they have disputations in the three lowermost Classes,
where the boys do challenge and provoke one another in the declining of
Nounes, Pronounes, Verbs, or Participles, or in coniugating of Verbs either in
Latin or Greek. And this they do for to get one another place, which breeds
such emulations among them, that it makes them of their own accord study both
night and day, some to maintain their places, seats and dignities; and others
of mere school ambition, to aspire and ascend higher. But none must (as I
have heard) challenge or provoke the Emperor, or the Senators, but those that
are next in dignity unto them, so that those of the Plebeyans cannot ascend to
the Senate, or any other place or dignity but by degree.

When two of them have done disputing, the Master gives his judgment, and then
other boys start up, and crave leave of the Master to challenge their
adversary to the combat, who permits those two (whom he pleases) to enter into
the List; and thereupon these two companions stand up and cross themselves
first, before they begin to oppose one another.

The Jesuits have another pretty trick how to make their Scholars study, and
bring in profit for themselves: that is, They will sometimes give unto their
Scholars both a private or a public Premium, a reward, which does not only
animate and encourage the boys to study, but also oblige and enduce their
parents to recompense the Schoolmasters. But unto great men, or rich men's
sons, they do use to give the best Premia, or rewards, because they do
expect in counter-exchange a great recompense: to the poorer sort they give
little Pictures of Saint Ignatius their Patron, of the blessed Virgin Mary, or
of some Saint that they most affect. But on the richer sort they bestow Beads
and Books, or some costlier Pictures.

Every Saturday in the afternoon, all the Scholars of their several Classes
do meet together in a great spacious room, to be catechized by one of the
Jesuits, who is appointed to expound Canisius Catechism, and to strike or
infuse into their tender capacity such damnable points of doctrine as they
please; as, that it is a meritorious deed to murder Kings and Princes, being
excommunicated by the Pope. To equivocate, cog, lie, cheat, and that a Roman
Catholic is not bound, or tied to keep faith with Heretics, meaning
Protestants. And a thousand more of their Jesuitical positions, which I for
brevity sake do forbear to treat of. Into this catechizing School none are
permitted to enter but only their own Scholars, for it seems they are
ashamed to let men of understanding know what good instructions they give unto
their Pupils. But howsoever, those points of doctrine they strike into their
capacity in their tender age, the same very seldom wears away, but rather
increases with their years, as daily experience teaches us.

I would to God that the Church of England, which professes the true
Orthodoxall Religion, would be as careful to have her children instructed in
their nonage, in the truth of the Gospel of our Savior Christ Jesus, which
leads them to salvation; as that false Mountebanke Synagogue of Rome, the
Chair of Antichrist, and the son of perdition does, to hurl them headlong
to hell and damnation. And therefore I would wish all religious and painful
Schoolmasters to take a course, that those Infants which are committed to
their tutelage be (before all things) well instructed and taught the Christian
Doctrine, and the Principles or grounds of the true Religion.

Moreover, the Jesuits Scholars must not reveal unto any man those points of
Doctrine that are taught them in their catechizing Schools; for if they do,
they must confess it to their ghostly Father (who is a Jesuit) and most
commonly the Prefect of the Schools, when he comes to be shrift, which is once
every month, and then he is sure to have some extraordinary penance inflicted
upon him, and ever after to be branded and noted for a Tell-tale out of the
Schools. But such as will swallow down this golden poisoned bait, and prove a
good Proficient, oh he is a good boy, and shall not want his Premium; for
indeed this day is the ordinary time, that they bestow their best Premia, or
Rewards upon their Scholars. Oh the subtilties and trumperies of these
Loyolists, to seduce these simple youths to their diabolical and Antichristian
doctrine.

And whereas they take upon them to instruct and teach children freely, and
without any reward; I dare boldly speak it, they get six times more than if
they would keep a mercenary School, for it is but a poor School that brings
them not in yearly above five or six hundred pound sterling. But their
Schools in great Cities and Universities are worth a great deal more, for it
is an ordinary thing to see seven or eight hundred Scholars in their five
inferior Classes; and therefore in those Colleges where they teach all the
Arts, and where there are twelve Classes, and every Class a Master, there are
not most commonly less than a thousand or fifteen hundred Scholars, who are
still soliciting their parents and friends to be bountiful to their Masters
the Jesuits: and they themselves, when they come to inherit their Lands,
Patrimony, or Portions, will likely be beneficial to them, and still favor
and protect their society and faction to the uttermost of their power. Yea, the
poorest of them all, that are not able to bestow any gratuity upon them when
they are young and their Scholars, when they are come to age and preferment,
will not be ungrateful to them of whom they had their learning and education.

And again, the Jesuits do speak to their Scholars, whose Parents are rich
(if they dwell in the same Town or City) to persuade them to frequent their
Churches to hear Masses, and to come to them to Confession, and withal to be
of their sodality, to the end they might the better diue into their secrets,
and participate of their wealth, which is the maine matter they aim at.

And whereas all other Monks and Nuns make three Vows, that is to say,
Chastity, Poverty, and Obedience; the Jesuits (to the end to give a push
beyond all other religious Orders) add one more; which is, that they shall at
all times be ready to run and trudge from one Country to another, like poor
Rogues, to what part soever it shall please the holy Father the Pope, and their
Father General to send them; yea though it were to the worlds end, and murder
Kings and Princes to merit Heaven. And withal, all other Monks and Friars do
make these three Vows but once, which is after that they have been in the
Habit one whole year, which they call the year of approbation or nouiceship,
at which time they make their profession; yet the Jesuits will have their
Nouices to serve them two years in their nouiciat before they make their
Vows; which first Vows they call Vota simplicia, single Vows, because they
can (as they say) dispense with them: for after a man has been a Jesuit
twenty or thirty years, they may (if they please) put him away and exclude him
out of their society; whereof I have known many, yea among our English
Jesuits I have known some, namely one who went by the name of Master Floyd,
who lived at Paris not long ago, and is now but a Secular Priest, albeit he
was for many years a Jesuit; the reason is (as I think) because he, and
those that they put out of their society, were not wicked enough to keep them
company: or else do put themselves out of the society of the Jesuits when
they perceive their villainy.

But when one has been trained up many years in their Machauillian School,
if he be for their turn, then he makes those Vows again, and then he is a
professed Iudaist, which is not without a long proof and trial of his
integrity and devotion to their Order, and to the rearing up of the Spanish
Monarchy; and then, and not before, they will acquaint him with the hidden
mysteries of their Order. For in some Colleges there are threescore or
fourscore Jesuits; and yet not above three or four professed Jesuits; yea
albeit they wear all one kind of Habit, and fare all alike. And in many
great Cities they have three Houses: First their Domus Professa, wherein live
none but professed Jesuits: secondly, their College, where they have their
Schools, wherein the Rector, and one or two more of them are Professed, and
none else: And lastly, their Nouiciate, where all their young Nouices are kept,
and mewed up, under the government of a Rector, and two or three more professed
Machiauills.

Having treated of all Monks, Friars, and Jesuits, and of their beginning,
proceedings, and present estate in particular; It remains now for me to speak
a word or two of their impostures, and cozenage in general, but more specially
of the Mendicant Friars and Jesuits, which may serve as a Caveat or
Premonition, to show with what brazen faces, and palpable lies and grossness,
they proceed to subvert, and overthrow True Religion; and yet justify
themselves to the world, to countenance their wickedness, though never so
foul and heinous. I omit to speak of their Doctrines, Schoole-questions,
Ceremonies, the Popes Supremacy, and many other such matters of controversies,
which have been so often disputed by many, and confuted by our learned Divines.

But leaving those matters unto others far more sufficient than my self, I
will speak no more than I have seen, and known of my knowledge to be true,
or can bring sufficient authority; and then I will draw to a conclusion.

First, I would have you to understand, that these Monks and Friars, do most
ambitiously and arrogantly brag that this, or that holy Saint, was the first
Institutor or Founder of their Order or Religion; As the Ieromite Monks brag
of their pretended Patron S. Jerome: the Benedictins of S. Benet: the Austen
Friars of S. Austen; the Dominicans of S. Dominick; the Franciscans of S.
Francis, and so of the rest. Others more ambitious than they, have mounted up a
little higher, as the Trinitarians, who would make the world believe that their
Order was first instituted by the blessed Trinity, who gave them their Rule by
a divine revelation, whereof they brag not a little, as may be seen by this
Rithme, which is written in capital letters over the door of their Cloister,
in the Suburbs of Arras, in the Province of Artois in the Low Countries; and
many other places, as I told you before: Hic est ordo ordinatus;
Non a sanctis fabricatus;
Sed a solo summo Deo.


The Carmelite Friars do boast that the blessed Virgin Mary gave them their
Habit upon Mount Carmell; together with a Scrowle, wherein was written their
Rule and Order of life and manners.

The Jesuits scorn to derive their Order from any Saint; no not from lame
Ignatius their Founder; but from Jesus, whose Companions they are (if you will
believe them:) for they style themselves Patres and Religiosi Societatis Jesus,
Fathers and Religious men of the Society of Jesus; his companions and
play-fellowes; but they play foul play with him; for they hitherto have and do
still play the thieves with him, in robbing him of his honor and glory, the
which they attribute unto the blessed Virgin, Popish Saints, Images, and the
like trash. O horrible blasphemy! Horresco referens. These great titles serve
them for a cloak to cover their hypocrisies and abominable impieties. But let
us return to the matter, and I doubt not but I shall make it yet a little more
manifest unto you, how far the Jesuits do differ from the Lord Jesus and
likewise the other rabble of Friars, from their pretended Patrons, for these
borrowed titles of honors are none of their own: Ovid. lib. 3. Metamorph.
Nam genus and proauos, and quae non fecimus ipsi,
Vix ea nostra voco.
Iuuenal. Satyr. 8.
Stemmata quid faciunt, quid prodest Pontice longo
Sanguine censeri, pictosque ostendere vultus
Maiorum, etc.
Si coram Lepidis male viuitur?
Ausonius in Solonis Senten.
Pulchrius multo parari, quam creari nobilem.
Senec. in Herc. furente.
Qui genus iactat suum,
Aliena laudat.


These Iuglers have many ways and tricks to cheat men of their money, besides
that which they get by begging, as by sale of their private Masses,
Confessions, lying Miracles, Pardons and Indulgences, Relics,
Confraternities, and the like. And withal, by persuading other men that are
rich, to become Friars of their Orders; and sometimes they do seduce young
Merchants and shopkeepers, to break with their Creditors, and underhand to
purloine and sell away other men's goods, and to offer or give them all the
money, which they have, or can borrow, and then they will entertain them into
their Orders; and perhaps send them away privately unto some other Monastery of
their Order in some other Province, to be taught and instructed in their Rule
and discipline, for one whole year, which they call the year of Approbation
or Nouice-ship: for after that one has been a year in any Cloister either of
Monks or Friars, (the Jesuits only excepted, who have two years of
Approbation) if he be willing to persevere, and to lead a Monastical life, he
makes his profession and those three Vows, of Chastity, Poverty, and
Obedience: but how well they perform and keep these Vows, God, and all those
that are well acquainted with their Iuglings, do know full well. Now, if a man
enter into any Order of Monks or Friars, no man dare trouble him, for all his
debts are paid, though he owed ten millions; for then he is a holy man, though
never so wicked a knave before; and to arrest him, is no less offense than
sacrilege. Now let us speak a word of all these in order.

First of all, these Monks, Friars, Jesuits and Priests, do get a world of
money by their Masses: for they have men that sit all day long, in some place
in their Churches, (especially in Spain and Italy) with a great paper-booke,
like a shop-book, upon a table, to write down the names of all such that bring
money, to have Masses said, and how many Masses they would have said, and
wherefore; whether for the living, or for the dead, or for their good success
in their journey, or to obtain their desire against their enemies, or for
their good intents; or for their friends, either living, or for their souls in
Purgatory: or for their health; or for their cattle, herds or flocks; or for
the Popes Holiness, and the extirpation of the Gospel, (which they call
Heresy) and the exaltation of their Catholic Religion: or for a woman that is
great with child, that she may have a speedy deliverance; and sometimes that
the child may prove to be a boy; and a thousand such matters: for they will
say Mass (or at leastwise they will promise to do it) for any thing, if you
will give them money. If your head do ache, or if you have pain in your teeth,
or in your belly, or if one be in danger to lose his eyesight, or his hearing;
or if you are troubled with the cholike, the gowt, the dropsey, or the French
P. or the like: bring Monks, Friars, Jesuits, or any other Popish Priests
money, and they will mumble a Mass for you: nay they will do you more good
(as they say) than all the Doctors of Physic, Montebancks or Chirurgeans in
the world can perform. The price of the Mass is set down by the Popes
holiness. In Spain and Italy it is two shillings, in France a shilling, in
the Low Countries, Germany and Poland, eight pence or nine pence, and in some
poor Countries six pence; for the Protestant Ministers have spoiled their
market. In England now adays, the ordinary price is a shilling, nevertheless
none, or few at all, will offer them so little; because that our Monks, Friars,
Jesuits, and other Popish Priests, are in more danger than those foreign
Clergy men; and withal have no other maintenance, but their Mass and breaden
god (unless it be such as are entertained by noble and rich personages) and
therefore they do use to give them a piece, or half a piece, to say as many
Masses for them as they please. And indeed our English collapsed Ladies, and
others of their sex are more bountiful unto these holy men, for they give
these busy hornets, ten or twenty pounds at a clap, to say a Trentall or two
of Masses for them, and for their friends that are in Purgatory.

Secondly, it is worth the observations, upon what slight pretense they ground
the necessity of Auricular Confession, deceiving the ignorant people, with
their smooth and plausible impostures, wherein (they say) the Priest cannot
remit sins, unless men will confess them unto him. Then which Proposition
nothing can be more false; for the Priest may preach, and publish Remission,
or Retention of sins to those, whose faults he knows not; and those men by a
faithful application of what they hear, may receive the Remission of their
sins, who never revealed them to the Minister, but confessed them unto God
alone: Ric. a Sancta vict. de Clauibus.
Sola enim cordis confessio poenitenti ad salutem animae sufficit veraciter.
Which kind of Confession, is truly and only necessary unto Salvation, for (as
Cassander says) there had been no controversies about this point of
Confession, had not some ignorant and importunate Physician corrupted this
wholesome Medicine with their drugs of Traditions. Est enim multis inutilibus
traditiunculis infecta, etc. quibus conscientijs quas extricare and leuare
debebant, laqueos iniecerunt, and tanquam tormentis quibusdam excarnificarunt.
By which means, they have made it only a snare, to entangle and inuolue the
simple and ignorant people, and an engine to entrap and torment, not to ease
the conscience of all those that seek unto them. And thereby they diue into
the secrets and drifts of all men, acquainting themselves with their humors
and imperfections, making (as time and occasion serves) their own use and best
benefit.

And it is most certain, that manifold absurdities and abuses are committed
under the color of Auricular Confession: It being a thing which the Church of
Rome, without any warrant of Gods Word, and quite contrary to the practice of
the Primitive Church, has taken up at her own hand. Distinct. 5. de
Poenitentia. Petrus Oximensis, sometimes Divinity Reader in Salamanca. And
Bonauenture, and Medina were of the same mind. Histor. Tripart. lib. 9. cap.
35. Socrat lib. 5. c. 9. Zozom. l. 7. c. 16. Ni^pher. lib. 12. cap. 28.
For their Canon Law in the Gloss says, That Auricular Confession was taken
up only by a certain tradition of the Church, and not by any authority of the
old or new Testament. Yea their own Divines have taught (that not many years
ago) That Auricular Confession had the beginning from a positive law of the
Church, and not from the Law of God. And withal, that the Primitive Church did
not use it, is most apparent, as appears by the act of Nectarius, Bishop of
Constantinople, who when as Auricular Confession did first begin to creep in,
put it down in his Church, and all the Bishops of the East did the like in
theirs; as being not only a Novelty, but also so far from being a sovereign
medicine for sin (as the Papists do hold it) that it was found rather to be a
nurse for sin; Churches being converted into Stews, Confession playing the
Pandor unto the Priest and his Penitents, there to parle and consult (I mean
under Confession) how to effect and practice their carnal affections and
designs: which indeed was the chiefest cause that moved Bishop Nectarius, to
thrust it out of Constantinople, to prevent such wickedness. For in truth,
there is nothing that opens a wider gap, or way unto sin, than Auricular
Confession; because there are very many that care not what they do or say, but
think it sufficient (be they never so great swearers, slanderers or
blasphemers, or whatsoever actual sins they commit) to go once a year to
Confession: And moreover, all the villainies and conspiracies which are either
intended, or practiced against either Princes, or Countries, are (for the most
part) opened, and consulted upon in Confession: for men not daring to open such
things out of Confession, and being desirous to have advice and direction in
them, propound such business in Confession, and then under pretense of
confessing their sins, they maliciously consult, how to effect and practice
their sinful purposes: so that it is an usual thing, among them, for men and
women to turn their Confession into bablings and curiosities, mingling
profane talk therein, about vile and absurd things, as one of their own
Writers says. Bi^ Canon. Lect. 77.


Now besides these absurdities, and notwithstanding that there is no warrant of
Scripture for it, neither was there any use of it in the Primitive Church:
there be diverse, and those very learned, that hold it not necessary at all. And
among others, Michael Bonon in his Exposition upon the 29. Psalm says, Page
256 Ed^. Venet. 160^.
That seeing Justification is the infusion of grace, whereupon sin is
remitted, it follows, that Confession is not necessary, either for the
obtaining of pardon for sins, or for our Justification; for according to the
true order of things, Confession in time follows Contrition: and therefore
seeing Contrition in it self is not without Justification, the said
Justification may be had without Auricular Confession. Of this mind was
Caietan. Tom. 3. quest. 8. art. 4. saying, That a man truly contrite and
sorrowful for his sins, stands clean in the judgment of God, and is a
reformed member of the Church Militant. And Peter Lumbard, in his fourth book,
Distinct. 18. and diverse others with him, hold, that the Priest has no power
to forgive sin, or to work any spiritual effect by virtue of the Keys, which
is the Tenet of the Church of England, which (not disallowing Confession upon
just occasion) notwithstanding, holds that the Priest cannot give the
penitent any spiritual grace, neither absolve him otherwise, than declare the
penitent, upon his true Contrition, to be absolved, through the mercies and
merits of Jesus Christ. This consideration of the little necessity men have of
Auricular Confession, and likewise, of the great absurdities and abuses
committed under Confession, should serve as a sufficient motive to withdraw any
discreet and judicious man's affections from the Church of Rome.

Again, if these Bald-pates do intend any Treason, murder, fornication, or
the like crime, they will be sure not to deal with any man but in Confession,
as I said before; and then if the party be content, and willing to yield, his
ghostly father ministers unto him the Sacrament, upon those articles agreed
upon between them; so that the party must not reveal this intended treason,
murder, or any other villainy, to any creature, upon pain of everlasting
damnation. I need not to insist much upon this point, or trouble you with any
far fetched examples. Garnet the Jesuit shall serve for all, who having
first of all persuaded and drawn in, yea fashioned and framed the hearts of
the other Traitors in the Gun-powder-treason, to put that hellish plot in
execution; First, he heard their Confession, then he absolved them of all their
sins, and afterward ministered the Sacrament unto them. Where you may perceive
how their Sacrament of Confession (or Penance, as they call it) served him for
a cloak to cover his treachery, or rather a net to catch such wicked
Traitors: and the other Sacrament (which they affirm to be the very body of
Christ) to be as it were a Signet, wherewith he sealed their mouths up close
(like so many Firrets) from ever revealing the same. Now if Garnet (our
Straw-saint) had been a true subject, or had any pity at all in him (much more
had he been innocent, as the Jesuits very impudently affirm him to be) he
would have either diuerted the other Traitors, his Gunpowder companions, from
their pretended deuillish purpose, or else revealed the Treason to some of his
Majesty's Officers or Magistrates: for no Priest (by their own law) must
minister the Sacrament of the Eucharist to any person whatsoever, before such
time that such persons, do first confess his or their sins to a Priest, and
receive full absolution and forgiveness of the same, from the Confessors own
mouth. I wonder with what conscience the Papists account Garnet a Martyr,
Eudaemon. Johannes Apol. pro Garneto.
and defend his damnable cause; when his own conscience forced him to confess
that it was for Treason, and not for Religion that he died.

Again, when their wanton lascivious Dames come to confess their sweet sins
of Lechery unto them, I make no question but these ghostly fathers will have
one bit for themselves, unless their father-hood be ouer-cloyed with such
diet: I sat many a time in their Churches, and have seen with mine eyes their
unchaste and wanton gesture and behavior in their confessions: for when their
female mates have any extraordinary matter to acquaint their ghostly fathers
withal, they will first of all come to the Porter of the Cloister or College,
and desire him to entreat such a father to come to the Church to hear her
confession; who presently comes to the Church, and sits down very demurely in
his Confessing seat or chair, where he couers his face with a hand-kerchiefe,
and through a little lettice window (which is right opposite to the side of his
face, in the side of the seat) they whisper together sometimes a whole hour,
and appoint where to meet together; and in the end (to make the standers by
believe that all their discourse is spiritual, under color to absolve her) he
lifts up his right Paw, and mumbles a Misereatur over her head, and so sends
her away: and thus they make the Church (which ought to be the house of
prayers) a Den of whore-mongers and thieves, yea a Sanctuary for murderers.

Moreover, none must repair to Confession without an offertory: And all such
that have committed any heinous crime, as murder, perjury, Sodomie, or the
like, must offer largely and liberally, or else the father Confessor will give
them no absolution; for where there is no penny, there is no Pater noster, as
the old saying is. Of this abuse among many others, certain Cardinals, and
other Prelates, writ unto Pope Paul the third, in the year 1538. for a
reformation, in these words: Vide Tom. 3. Council. per Crab. Editionis Colon.
1551.
Diximus Beatissime Pater non licere aliquo pacto in vsu clauium aliquid lucri
vtenti comparari: est in hac re firmum verbum Christi: Gratis accepistis,
gratis date. But in all other Editions, this and all these abuses, which were
printed and inserted in that place, were by other Popes commandment left out.
O the Iugling tricks of the Pope, and his Monks, Friars and Jesuits!

Again, they do persuade their Penitents, that they can with their
supererogations or superabundant merits, prayers and intercessions, satisfy
the Justice of God, for other men's sins; and that they have in themselves,
full power and authority to forgive them all their sins, of what nature
soever they be, whether mortal or venial, actual or original, etc.
nevertheless (say they) if they be heinous and notorious mortal sins, the
Confessor (if he absolues the party) must by his own superabundant merits,
that is to say, his good works which he has in store, over and above that
which is sufficient and necessary to save his own soul, satisfy Gods divine
Justice, and take upon him to discharge his Penitents sins, and to free and
acquit him of all sins, and the penalty and guilt for the same. Oh horrible
blasphemy! Do not these Impostors (as much as in them is) annihilate the
Passion and Merits of Christ? Do they not animate and encourage men to
perpetrate any villainy or wickedness whatsoever? For if one bring them money,
all shall be forgiven, all the score shall be wiped clean out of Gods books
of accounts, by these Ball-pates. But let them trust to the Popes, and his
Shauelings pardons and absolutions that will, I for my part will make my
confession to God, and desire his Divine Majesty for Christ's sake, to pardon
and forgive me all my sins and iniquities; for I am assured (having obtained
this absolution) I need not fear: and as for the Pope and his Clergy men's
pardon, I doubt that it will not pass current at that day, when all men (yea
the Popes worship himself, and all his Clergy) must reddere rationem; although
Pardons are sold in Rome, for Sodomy, Incest, Treasons, Sacrilege, Murders, and
all other abominable sins, as ordinary as Hogs at Rumford; yea oftener, for at
Rumford there is but one market day in the week, and in Rome every day in the
year is a free Mart for these Pardons, Absolutions, and Indulgences,
Bishoppricks, and Benefices; nay Heaven, and God himself, are there to be
bought and sold for money: for the Popes Treasury, or Shop (like hell gate) is
always open, and the price of Pardons (some to be granted to private persons,
others for whole Families, Kingdoms, and Nations) are there registered and set
down by his sweet Holiness in capital Letters, as by the books of Taxes
printed many years ago by the Popes own commandment and approbation may
appear. O is not this a goodly Mart, where all manner of spiritual wares are
vendible, as Baptista Mantuanus, a Carmelite Friar long ago witnesses in this
Distick. Eglog. 5.
Templa, Sacerdotes, Altaria Sacra, Coronae,
Ignis, thus, preces; Coelum est venale Deusque.
Temples, Priesthood, and Altars, so holy,
Frankincense, prayers, heaven, and its glory;
Yea holy Friars, nay God himself is sold
By the Pope of Rome for silver and gold.


Moreover, if any be sick (especially of the richer sort, for the poor are
none of their Clients) these shauelings will speedily repair thither, to
administer unto them some spiritual (but to say truth, spightfull) food, for
it is their ordinary custom to bring the sick parties almost to desperation,
because they would gull them of their money: the only comfort or consolation
that they will bestow, is to tell them that there is no other way for them to
expect, but damnation; unless they will deal liberally, and give good store
of money to good uses: to whom, I pray you? in good sooth to them to pray for
their souls, when they be broyling in Purgatory, and to sing Masses, Ad
requiem de profundis, and such like popish prayers to free them from thence.
For this hot scalding furnace, or Purgatory, is the best possession that the
Pope and his Monks, Friars, and other his Clergy men have, for it yields them
more profit, gain, rent, and revenues, than all the other benefices
whatsoever. Neither is there any Realm, Lordship, Land or Heritage, that
yields more profit unto their Lords and owners, than Purgatory ^oth unto
them. And therefore it is no marvel if they fear so much to lose it; for if
that should be taken away from them, they were quite undone and overthrown
horse and foot. O, all their care and chiefest study is to describe this famous
Country unto the common people. Verily, I think there is never a Geographer
(be he never so learned) that can so well paint and describe the earth, with
all the parts thereof, as these Mountebanks (I mean Monks and Friars, and
popish Clergy men) do draw out these infernal Regions, and those Low
Countries; but I wonder whether they speak by hear say, or that they have
been there in proper person, for they can tell of every little creek or
corner. Howbeit we see that the best Cosmographers do fail often times in the
descriptions of the earth, and of many Countries and Regions which are most
familiar and best known unto us. As for example, there is not almost a Country
better known than France and England, nevertheless we often times see great
errors in those Cards in which they are described. And therefore we may
conjecture that it may so chance in other Tables, Maps, or Cards containing the
description of the Heaven, Earth, and many other Countries unknown. But Monks
and Friars have the spirit to compose and make a Table or Map of these low
infernal Regions, yea better than the Painters have painted them out in their
Churches, or the Printers in the Shepherds Callender. And therefore I would
advise all that intend to travel into the Kingdom of Purgatory, to take a
Monk, a Friar, or a popish Priest for their guide; as Circes guided Ulysses, to
bring him to speak with Elpemenor; and as Sybilla brought Aeneas to the speech
of his father Anchises. Homer. Odyss. 1. and 11. Virgil. Aeneid. lib. 6. Ovid.
Met. l. 14.


But would you know who was the first that found out this hot Region or
Kingdom of Purgatory? have but patience and I will tell you. Mine Author is
Peter of Amiens, who wrote in a book of this discovery, in the time of Pope
John the eight, 1000. years after the passion of our Savior Jesus Christ,
that one Odillus Abbot of the Monks of Cluny, being in Sicilia, and hearing
oftentimes the noise, cries, and bewailings which were made continually about
the hill Aetna (which now is called in the Italian tongue Gibello monte) did
imagine that it came from the Devils; lamenting that the souls of the
faithful deceased were delivered from torments through the Masses, Vigiles,
Prayers, Sacrifices, and Offerings of the living Christians; he presently
declared the same to his Monks, and they all decreed together, that after they
had offered their Offerings the first day of November, and celebrated the
Feasts of All Saints in their honor, they would in like manner the next day
make prayers and supplications for the souls of all the faithful deceased.
And afterward, in succession of time, others received and allowed that manner
of doing as good and holy. The reason was (as I think) because the Poets and
the foolish common people imagined that there was a place there to descend into
hell, and the place in which the souls of the wicked were tormented for their
sins; because that in the same Mountain there is a perpetual fire which
always burns, and has done so of long time, wherefore they thought that the
damned were kept in those burning Gulfes. By this means, Odillus and his Monks
were the Authors that the Papists did and still do celebrate Feasts and offer
Sacrifices for the dead in the month of November, as the old Roman Pagans did
heretofore in the month of February, by the institution of Numa Pompilius, the
second King of the Romans. Ovid. Fast. l. ^. and Tit. Liuius. lib. 1. Decad. 1.


But this was at the first but an imagination of Odillus, yet afterward it
brought no little profit to his Covent, and to all Monks, Friars, and Priests;
for the second day of November is the best Mart or Fair they have in all the
year, and a time in which they make harvest and vintage all together, without
taking very much pains. And if the souls deceased had as much gain as they
have, they might be very joyful of that Feast, but all is but mere deceit and
couzenage of the Monks, Friars, and Priests, to gull the ignorant people of
their money. Others have dreamed of the Mountains of Island and Norway, and of
another hill there called Nadhegrime; yea, of another in Scotland, and of Saint
Patricks Purgatory, and therefore it seems there is more Purgatories than one.
But I think Trophonius his Den or Cave in Lebaida has engendered Saint
Patricks Purgatory: for Plutarch writes marvelous things that Timarchus saw
in the Cave of Trophonius, which does differ but a little of that which the
popish Priests do relate of Purgatory.

And truly, I think that they can bring no better proof to maintain their
Purgatory, than out of the Shepherds Calendar, Homer, Virgil, Ovid, or Dant.
And withal, it may be they conferred with Alcestis, Protesilaus, Hercules,
Theseus, Ulysses, and Aeneas, whom the Poets do feign to have been in Hell,
and those infernal parts; as Limbus Patrum, Purgatory, and the Elisian field:
and therefore have learned of them their Divinity; or it may be demanded
whether Lazarus told them any such news. For my part I think that cannot be,
for there was neither Pope, Monk, Friar, Priest, or Purgatory for many hundred
years after their time. Nevertheless, these Monks and Priests do make
Lazarus another Alcestis, Theseus, Ulysses, and Aeneas, to declare unto them
what was done in hell and the rest of those low Regions. But as Pythagoras,
Lucrecius, and Lucianus scoffed and mocked at the inventions of the Poets
touching their Hell; so may any man laugh at their foolish fancies, and at the
vain credulity and frenzy of the foolish ignorant people, who give credit
unto them: for there is nothing more unconstant, more foolish, more mutable, or
more ready to believe all lies, fables, or follies, than the common people.

And as the Cosmographers have divided the earth heretofore into three parts,
Asia, Africa, and Europe; even so do the popish Monks and Priests divide the
infernal Regions into Limbus Patrum, Purgatory, and the Hell of the damned;
and make them all inhabited and so full of poor souls, that there is not one
little corner but is full, especially Purgatory. But I think it is to be
coniectured, that the walls of Limbus Patrum and Purgatory, forged and built
heretofore by the Pope and his Monks, Friars, and Priests, were battered down
and burnt by Doctor Martin Luther, Master John Calvin, and others, that there
remains now nothing but Hell only. But these Mountebankes do teach still the
contrary, and do insist that all children that are borne dead, and all those
that die without Baptism (although borne of Christian Parents) go straight
into Limbus Infantium; where they have placed them apart, separated from Hell
and Purgatory; and that they shall never come thence, or to participate of the
joys of Heaven. Howbeit they commend nothing so much as Purgatory; for unto
the souls that go thither, they give Chambers apart, and keep them as
prisoners until they pay their ransom. And is not this good Doctrine? Verily,
I believe that these shauelings that maintain Limbus and Purgatory, are
inspired with the same spirit that Plato, Plutark, Orpheus, Homer, Virgil, and
Ovid were, who have so well described them, that it is not possible to paint or
set them out better.

To prove Limbus, give ear to what the Poet says, from whence likely the
Monks and Friars prove it as far as I think. Virgil. Aeneid. cap. 6.
Anon were voices heard, and piteous cries, and wailings shrill
Of souls of tender babes, and Infants weeping void of skill:
That pleasure sweet of life did never taste, but from their breast
Untimely death them took, and fortune grim has down oppressed.


He gives unto little children their Chambers apart, and that at the entering
into hell; the which he describes very horrible and fearful in this manner:
Yet sits a worse than hell it self, that sink hole deep,
Two times as broad descends, twice as headlong down right deep,
As heaven upright is hie, if men thereto from thence might peep.


Over and above that he adds two more, to wit, Purgatory and Hell, the which
he describes thus: It is (says he) a large prison, deep, dark, horrible,
and fearful, from whence those shall never depart which have been thrown
therein, and that is Hell it self, wherein the greatest and most grievous
sins and offenses are punished, and are insanable, and can by no means be
purged; and those sins are Sacrilege, Murder, Tyranny, Violence, execrable
Whoredom, and the like crimes; but chiefly those of Tyrants, Kings, Princes,
and great Lords, whom Plata (from whom proceeded this Philosophy) lodged all in
hell; because that in stead to be good Princes and Pastors, they have been
Tyrants and the deuourers of the people. And herein Plato and Virgil were more
pitiful than the Pope and his Clergy men are; for they were not so cruel
unto the little children, as these Caniballs are unto the poor children of
Christians: for they deprived them not altogether of joy and consolation, as
these bloody Impostors do. But as touching hell, I do not much mislike the
opinion of Plato, because it comes nearest unto the verity of the holy
Scriptures, and that he declares the just judgment of God upon Tyrants: for
it is good reason, because there is none that can chastise and correct them in
this world, and that they will not be in subjection either to God or man, but
do what they lift, they should have double punishment in the world to come.
And that they should vomit and cast up again great cruelties, violences, and
great injuries that they have committed in this world, because they neither
feared God nor judgment. Among which Tyrants, I may place the Popes, and their
Partakers, who have these many years tyrannized over Gods Church, far worse
than either Turk or Pagan.

Again, the Pope and his shauelings do lodge the rich people, and great
Princes and Lords in their Purgatory, and not in Hell, if they be Catholics
forsooth. And therein they differ from Plato and Virgil. But would you know the
reason, because there could come no profit unto Plato or Virgil of Purgatory,
as comes to these Alchymists; and therefore they were of a better conscience
than these are, for they did not seduce the ignorant people to enrich
themselves: for they do show by their writings that they had a certain fear
and knowledge of God; and (in some sort) more than the Pope and his Clergy;
because popish Monks, Friars, and Priests do watch over their dead bodies as
the Ravens do upon Carrion. And if they happen to meet with a dead man that
has his purse well crammed with money, wherewith he is able to pay his ransom,
they will be sure to make him understand who has eaten the fat: for they will
put him into Purgatory, from whence he shall not come out before they have
taken some fat from him. Nay, these hangmen will not suffer the poor souls to
be broiled and tormented of the Devils, but they will be their Executioners
themselves. And therein they take from the Devil that office that God gave
him. But I would advise them to amend in time, lest one day they themselves be
tormented in hell by the Devil and his angels.

Well then, among many Authors which they bring to maintain Purgatory, I
think Virgil to be one of the best they have; for he says thus, speaking of
the departed: Aeneid. lib. 6.
Moreover, when their end of life, and light does them forsake,
Then can they not their sins, or sorrows all (poor souls) off shake,
Nor all contagious fleshly, from them voids, but must of need,
Much things ingendr'd long, by wondrous means, at last out spread
Wherefore they plagued be, and for their former faults and sins,
There sundry pains they bide; some in the air do hang on pins,
Some fleeting be in floods, and deep in gulfes themselves they tire,
Till sins away be washed, or cleans'd fully with burning fire.
Each one of us our penance here abides, then sent we be
To Paradise at last, where we few fields of joy do see,
Till compass long of time, by course perfect has purged quite
Our former clodded spots, and pure has left our ghostly sprite.


The Heathens had but three drugs to free poor souls out of Purgatory, as
Ovid witnesses saying: Three times the old man washed was with water fair and
clear,
And with hot fire, and sulpher strong, he purged does appear.


But these Mountebanks have more, as holy Water, Sprincklings, Torches,
Candles, Howlings, Aniuersaries, and a thousand more, which (to avoid
prolixity) I will omit.

In their holy Water, and sprinckling of the grave, they do imitate the
Heathens and their Priests, who used in their purgations the sea water, with
which they sprinkled that which they would purge. Procl. de Sacrif. and Mag.
Of which Proclus, a Platonicall Philosopher yields this reason; saying, That
such water has property to purge because it is salt, and that salt has in it
some portion of the fire. That makes me imagine that the popish Priests for the
same cause do put Salt into their holy Water; for before they exercise or
conjure the Water, they conjure the Salt, and then they put it into the Water,
and then they conjure the Water. But I never read or heard that the Pagans did
ever baptize their dead men's graves with their water, as they do.

And as for their Candles and Torches, which they burn at noone day, I know
not what they mean, unless they will do as Diogenes did, who at noone day
lighting a Candle, and putting it in a Lantern, did seek for men in the
middle of the market, to give them to understand, that they were rather beasts
without understanding than reasonable men; and that he had much ado to find
out one wise understanding man among them, although be sought them with
Lantern and Candle. And should (...) have more occasion now adays (if he
lived among the Papists) to seek for one understanding man? for to what end
do all their Torches and Candles serve, but that they would imitate the
Heathens? who in the same manner used Candles and Torches at the burials and
funerals of their dead; for we read not in all the holy Scriptures, that ever
the true Christians used any Candles or Torches for the dead. And in like
manner the sprinkling of the holy Water they borrow of the Pagans, as Virgil in
the before cited place witnesses saying: When fallen his ashes were, which did
but a small space endure,
His relickes and remain of dust, with Wine they washed pure.
Then Choryney his bones they put in Coffin bright and close,
And sprinkling water pure, about his Mates three times he goes.
And drops of sacred deaw, with palms Olive on them did shake,
And compassing blessed them all, and this sentence sadly spoke,
To fields of joy, and endless rest, thy soul we do betake.


These popish Monks and Priests are like unto Smiths: for we see, when they
would have their Coals burn well, and to give great heat, they sprinckle them
with a little brush or besome wet or dipped in water: and so do these men
(imitating the Pagans) with a brush dipped in their holy Water besprinckle their
dead bodies and their graves; but I imagine these Monks and Priests drift is,
to kindle the fire of Purgatory, and to have it broile them the more.

Their howlings over the dead they learned from the Heathens, as the same Poet
testifies in another place, speaking of the burial of Polydorus. Aeneid. lib.
3.
And holy blood in Basins brought we pour, and last of all
We shrike, and on his soul, our last with great cries out we call.


And in another place, speaking of the Aniuersary that Aeneas did for his
father Anchises, says: He came from council, with him were thousands in mighty
throng
Unto his fathers tomb, in midst of all his Princes strong.
Two bowls of blessed Wine he cast in solemn wise on ground,
And milk in Basens twain, about the tomb he poured round.
And two of sacred blood, then all the grave he spread and laid
With flowers of purple hue, and thus at last full loud he praid.


A man may well compare these Monks, Friars, and Priests, unto Apes, for they
would counterfeit all the works of our Savior Jesus Christ; but to say the
truth, they come somewhat near unto the old Pagans. And indeed almost all
their doings are as those of the Apes, who do but little, and that by
imitation, and that evil and ridiculous. And let them say what they will, I
(for my part) do verily think that they have no better remedies for the
souls of those that are dead, than the old Heathenish Priests heretofore had.
And to tell the truth, they are like unto these Empericks that have but one
receipt for all diseases, and complexions, for all ages, times and Countries,
who kill more than they heal; and that is, their Mass^: that Sanctum
Sanctorum, with the which they can heal (if all be true that they say) more
sores, wounds and diseases, than all the Physicians, Chirurgians, and
Montebancks in Europe.

These Monks, Friars, Jesuits and popish Priests, will (when any come to
confession unto them) demand of them, if they are Witches, Sodomites, or the
like, because they do imagine others to be as bad as themselves; and therefore
many times in asking them that which they understand not, and never heard of
before, they teach them to practice some heinous crime or sin, the which in
former times they were not acquainted withal. Baltazar Earl of Castiglon (a
man renowned in Italy, both for birth and learning among many others his merry
jests of Monks and Friars, wrote in one of his books, how a Friar by asking an
Ostler some foolish impertinent questions, in his confession, taught him more
knavery than all the Monks and Friars of Europe could make him forsake; for he
gave him directions how to make every horse, Mule, or Ass that came into his
stable, so sick that they should not be able to eat any grass, hay, or
prouender, and to cure them again by means of a Smith, whom he afterward
made his partner in that mystery; so that, by this means, he got more money
for himself, his Master, and the Smith in one year, than they had gained in
ten years before; for one load of hay, and one quarter of prouender was more
than his Master could spend in a whole year. And he and the Smith (whom he
recommended to his guests for an extraordinary good Farrier) crammed their
purses for curing the poor ^ades, whom he had formerly infected and abused. I
would have inserted here the whole history at large, if it were not for fear,
that I should imitate that good Friar; and to teach our English Ostlers more
knavery than they have already.

Moreover in the time of confessing or shriuing, they entice or seduce honest
women and maids to yield to their carnal concupiscences. For in the holy time
of Lent, in the year 1623. one of the Canons or Prebends of the Cathedral
Church of Euereaux in Normandy in France, as he was hearing a woman's
confession, entised her to yield to his carnal desire, and so went presently
both together to a private chamber in his own house: where (as they were in
the very act) her husband and the Officers came and apprehended them; whereupon
the woman confessed her fault, and asked her husband forgiveness, and was at
the earnest entreaty of her neighbors, received into his house as before. And
the Priest committed to prison, by the Bishops Vicar General. I was then in
Euereaux in company with another English man, and many Irish men, and saw it:
and yet within a month after I met him at Chambery in Sauoy, going to Rome for
a Pardon (as I imagined) for his offense: it seems he had forgotten the old
lesson; Si non cast, tamen caute. And yet that was but a venial sin, and
but a trifle, if it had not come to light, which every petty Priest could
forgive and absolve him of: Vide Decret. cap. dilectissimus, causa 12. quaest.
1. and 4. lit. Clement. in prima part council.
for the Church of Rome has concluded many years ago, that it is better, and
a lesser offense, for a Monk or Priest to use another man's wife, than to marry.
Oh the chastity of these Votaries, and the wholesome doctrine of the Church of
Rome, the Whore of Babylon, and the son of Perdition!

Now let every discreet and judicious indifferent man judge, if it be good to
fill the world with these idle and slothful bellied persons, who (under color
of praying for others) do live most dissolutely; and withal, to nourish such
idle and lazy mates, only to howl in the Churches, and to mumble not only the
Psalms (as the ancient Heretics, named Eutiches, Psalliens and Messaliens
did, of whom the histories make mention) but also other superstitious prayers
full of heresy, trumperies and deceits, which are altogether contrary to the
holy Scriptures. For we do not find it written in the holy Scripture, that
there should be any Order of people ordained only to pray for others, and at
their charges, and to be maintained and relieved by them, without doing any
other thing; and to sing, when others weep, and withal to make merchandise of
prayers. For this office to pray for himself and for others, was given to all
the Church, and principally to the Ministers, whom our Savior Jesus Christ
has ordained, not only to pray for the Church, and to leave the preaching of
his Word to others, or only to preach, and to put the charge of praying to
others; but enjoined them to do the one and the other, as he himself did,
without using any Vicars in that, that they could or ought to do; as the
Disciples themselves have well understood and practiced. We have the winesse
thereof in the Apostles themselves, Acts.
in the election of the Deacons; for they said there manifestly, that their
office was to preach and to pray. And therefore, it is very hurtful and
pestiferous to all Christendom, to nourish and feed so many fat hogs in
idleness, under color and pretext of prayer, and of those Canonical hours
and Masses: for I think that none of the ancient Fathers and Doctors, did ever
allow of these fat bellies, and such howlings, and mumbling, and Canonical
hours; nor of such begging Monks and Friars, as the Church of Rome now does,
and that in such great number and diversity, the one emulating and hating the
other, like so many Bears and Dogs, as daily experience teaches us, and as
their own Quodlibets do show.

Truly those Locusts of whom S. John makes mention, Revel. 9.3.
do well express the Monks, Friars, and the Popes Clergymen, for those were
engendered of the smoke of the pit; so were these of heresies, ignorance, and
superstition: they destroyed the fruits of the earth; so these spoil the
Church and the Christian Commonwealth. And the Frogs mentioned by him in the
sixteenth Chapter and thirteenth verse, do well resemble the Jesuits, who
feeling the River Euphrates (which is meant by the Church of Rome) to dry up,
bestirre themselves with all their might, and are croaking like Frogs in every
corner, laboring day and night to maintain the Popes authority, and that
stinking Synagogue of Antichrist. But the best way and the best remedy to
correct their spiritual fornications, and to learn them to keep a good diet,
and to use sobriety, is (in my opinion) to damme up the mouth of Purgatory, and
take it quite from them, for if they lose that, they are all quite undone. As
certain soldiers heretofore answered some of these Bald-pate fathers, who
saluted them with a Pax vobis, Peace be unto you: they answered them, in stead
of Amen; Dominus auferat vobis Purgatorium, Holy fathers (said they) do you
pray that soldiers may have peace; and we on the other side pray to God, to
take from you your Purgatory, which is your Bull-begger, that you frighten
fools withal: and then you shall have no more to eat, or cloth your selves
withal, than we now have.

To conclude, all these shaueling Monks, Friars, and Jesuits, are manifest
hypocrites, and woe and sorrow will be their rewards; for they pretend
chastity, and live sodomitically; they suffer themselves over easily, to be
snarled by the allurements of the flesh; and yet they will be accounted holy
fathers, good livers, and the adopted children of Christ, forsooth. Indeed
fathers they maybe well called, for their bastards are almost innumerable, as
by these ensuing verses, written many years ago, by one of their own
religion, may appear. Non malesunt Monachis grata indita nomina patrum,
Cum numerant natos hic and vbique suos.
The names of fathers becomes Monks full well;
For every where their bastards they may tell.


But unless they reform their vicious manners and corrupt lives, I cannot
see, how these men may rightly be called the children and servants of God, and
the lawful inheritors of the incorruptible crown of eternal happiness. How
can they excuse themselves in the sight of Christ our Savior, that dissemble
thus with the world? Do they persuade themselves to be Virgins, and shall
obtain the incorruptible reward of virginity or chastity, because the world
does judge them chaste? Let people imagine of them as they will, hypocrisy may
not, nor shall not escape unpunished at the day of Judgment. Do they think,
that because they intrude themselves into Monasteries and Cloisters, that they
are able to keep themselves pure and undefiled, and are able to keep
themselves chaste and spotless? No surely, experience teaches us, and the
eyesight testifies, that Monks, Friars, Jesuits, Priests and Nuns, are no
otherwise able to refrain the lust of the flesh, than other men and women
living in the world. But these hypocrites say, that they live not in the world,
because that they are estranged and sequestered from the common assembly of the
secular people. I use their own words, but their deeds are contrary: They say
they despise the world, but yet they will not forsake the things of the world;
as high titles, good estimation, great credi^, large possessions, ample
revenues, full purses crammed with gold and silver, fair buildings, goodly
orchards delightsome walks, pleasant gardens, and a thousand things more. They
say they are not of this world; but yet the pomp, pride and glory of the
world, the vanity, wealth, felicity, bravery, and iollity of this earth, and
earthly things with daliance, pastime, eating and drinking excessiuely, and
other sensual delights and desires, serving to carnal appetite, they highly
esteem and magnify. And albeit they sequester themselves from the secular
people (which is most untrue; for they are (I mean the Monks and Friars, and
some Nuns) gadding here and there all day long, to beg, and about other worldly
affairs) yet their lives are no more holy, but to say the truth, their
conditions are far worse, they have vowed chastity, but who more unchaste than
they? They name themselves Virgins, but who more defiled and incontinent than
they? How periuriously they have violated their rash and unadvised vows of
continency, their own histories make mention. The artificial and secret
places and vaults, to keep their Whores and Concubines in, many places of
England do plainly testify to us all, that they were incontinent violatours
of their professed vows, and abusers of the people, in causing them to believe
that they were the chaft and undefiled members of the Holy Ghost. But truly it
had been a happy thing that there had never been either Monk, Friar, Jesuit
or Nun in the world, as by these Rithmes written by one of their own sect
appears: Puto vero quod prodesset,
Si in mundo nullus esset
Monachus vel Monialis,
Sieve secta Beghinaelis.
I think the world had happy been
If never in it had been seen
These three, a Mendicant, Monk, Nun;
Which have well near the Church undone.


And withal, Laurentius Agricola, did heretofore very wittily describe their
manners, I mean the Mendicant Friars, in these ensuing verses: Qui velit
immundum in mundo cognoscere mundum,
Exploret rasos, vestales atque cucullos.
Bis tres immensis abigunt clamoribus horas,
Quod superest ventri temporis omne datur.
Quaeris tu quid agant? Comedunt.
sternunt, potant que cacant que,
Ventris in his munus vertitur omne tribus.
That is to say, He that a world of filth in the world would know,
To shaueling, Nuns, and cowl'd Monks let him go.
Six hours with open mouths to Saints they prate,
But ever else, they on their bellies wait.
As how? thus; They eat, drink and let fly out,
One of these three, their bellies ay about.


And again, Nigellus Wircker, an ancient Poet, of whom I have formerly made
mention, wrote of them these verses. Qui duce Bernardo gradiuntur vel Benedicto,
Aut Augustini sub leuiore iugo,
Omnes sunt fures, quocunque charactere Sancto
Signati veniunt, Magnificent que Deum.
Necredas verbis, ne credas vestibus albis,
Vix etenim factis est adhibenda fides.
Quorum vox leuis, vox Jacob creditur esse,
Caetera sunt Esau, brachia, cella, manus,
Rursus in Aegyptum quam deseruere reuersi,
Dulce sibi reputant a Pharaone premi,
Carnis ad illecebras nullo ritente ruentes,
In foueam mortis carne trahente cadunt.
Which I read thus Englished. They that pretend to follow Saint Bernard,
Benet or Austen, which is not so hard,
False thieves they are all, seem they never so good;
Nor yet so devout in their cowle or their hood:
Believe not their words, nor apparel right white,
For nothing they do, that before God is right;
As gentle as Jacob in words they appear;
But all in their works they are Esau clear;
To Egypt again they are come to dwell,
Under great Pharaoh, fearing no peril,
They follow the Flesh, and seek no restraint,
Which will at the last with hell them acquaint.


Of all this rabble of Monks and Friars, a Poet wrote long ago. Nos numeri
sumus, and fruges consumere nati, etc.
We are a great number, and belly-gods borne;
Deuourers of victuals, consumers of corn.


What is their lives, but Pharisaicall, injurious, lascivious, lecherous and
Sodomiticall? They talk of heaven, but they walk not to heaven. They brag of
Chastity, but they keep Concubines, or else do much worse: they defile
themselves one with another. They speak of Justification by good works; but
they have no good works, but vice, as Sodomie, adultery, fornication, fraud,
tyranny, ambition, covetousness, and all uncharitableness: They talk of
Christ, but have no experience of him, nor any acquaintance with him: They
honor him with their lips, but their hearts hunger not after him: outwardly
they profess him, but inwaardly they pass not for him: In the hearing of men
they forsake the world, but in the sight of men they embrace the world. These
fat bellied Monks, Friars, Jesuits, and Nuns, say that they forsake the world
and the concupiscence thereof, but they carry it with them into the
Monasteries, for without doubt, it is not possible to see the world better than
in the Monasteries, where a man shall behold nothing else, but affections and
passions of mind, quarrels, discords, ambition, pride, hypocrisy, and the
like. Oh that men will suffer themselves to be thus mocked and deluded by these
Frierly shauelings, that endeavor as much as they may, in deceiving the people
with their counterfeit holiness, to live like Epicures, and to be esteemed
like Lordlings. Oh that men should credit these Pharisaicall hypocrites, that
more regard the pampering of their bodies, than the salvation of the souls of
men; which is the end of our hope and faith, yea, the very end of our life in
this life. Oh that men cannot see how they fight against the Gospel, and seek
to overthrow faith, with superstition, covered with the cloak of true piety.
Why do not men open their eyes and perceive, how these Masse-mongers daily
study to invent and find out some new toy or babble, therewith to draw the
common people unto them, who are so simple and ignorant, that they are straight
way bewitched with every new foolish and apish Ceremony, that these Iuglers
represent to their view? What Christian is he, that sees not their hypocrisy,
that understands not their fraudulent superstition, wherewith the foolish
people is inueigled? Is there any but blind buzzards, that think, that to
wear the weed or habit of Saint Francis, or to go clothed in that color, is
good against the quartane ague, and other diseases, and to be buried in that
habit, is the right way to go to heaven? And therefore the Emperor Charles
the fit, and his son, that ambitious King Philip the second of Spain, the
Count of Arrenbergh, the Lord Albertus of Carpi, Rodulphus Agricola, Longolius,
a Noble Roman, and many other great personages have been persuaded by the
Franciscan Priers, to die in Saint Francis his frocke. But what need I to use
so many words? These Monks, Friars, Jesuits and Popish Priests are come to that
point, with that opinion of holiness, that they have rid themselves out of all
other men's hands and aurhoritie, and have brought all other men under their
feet. They know not Christ, whom the Gospel does plainly set forth unto us,
which they keep in prison. And since they only had the handling of the book
of peace and liberty, the common people thought they had taken all their
doctrine out of that book, and with cursed and abominable lies, they take out
here a piece, and there a piece, and with strange and fearful false miracles,
and fained dreams of Purgatory, they keep the people in so great fear and
awe, that they are constrained to believe their blasphemous and wicked lies and
deceits. And withal, if we consider their laws, and the weight and heavy
burden they lay upon men's shoulders, we may truly say, that the Jews law is
far more easier than theirs. Thus have they turned Christian liberty into
slavery and bondage, worse than that of Egypt, if worse could be. What a
presumptuous boldness is it, to usurp the name of Saints, yea of the most
glorious and blessed Trinity, and that sweet name Jesus, which signifies a
Savior, and under those godly and most blessed names, to deceive the world?
under the forms of Angels, to work all their deceits and trumperies? Verily I
believe, that their cowles and ridiculous party-colored habits, were invented
by the Devil, to deceive the world withal; for if they were the same, they
pretend themselves to be, and would be accounted for, what need they wear such
foolish disguised habits or garments, more like women than men? the which (say
they) do signify that which they ought to be. And therefore I say unto every
hypocritical Monk, Friar, and Jesuit, Appare quod es, vel est^ quod appares;
Appear to be what thou art, or else be such a one as thou seem to be: for
it is a clear case, that where there is but a show, or signification of a
thing, the thing it self is not there. If they were so in deed, what need they
to be in show? Praestat esse, quam videri: It is better to be, than to make a
glorious show of being: and again, Quid simio prodest, leo si creditur?
Outwardly they are one thing, and inwardly another: of whom our Savior
forewarneth us in the Gospel, saying, That there should come wolves to devour
us clad in sheep skins; because they would not be known. The Devil is crafty,
and he knows how prone men are to believe every toy or trifle, every
counterfeit holiness and superstitious hypocrisy: he oftentimes transformeth
himself in his members to an Angel of light: he informs and teaches his
children to frame themselves after the manner of Hypocrites: he makes his
servants learned and expert in that art: he makes them to go bare foot and
bare legged, to wear shirts of hair, that by means of their outward austerity
in apparel and food (although all but mere deceits) the people may proclaim
and extol them as Saints, and honor them as Gods omnipotent: and finally
believe (whatsoever they teach them) their words to be Evangelical.

Much more could I say, but because I am persuaded these few examples may
suffice any judicious and indifferent Reader, I pass them over, and refer
him to the Histories of every age since their first creeping into the world,
yea when Antichrist chiefly reigned in the hearts and consciences of most men;
and when his doctrine, repugnant to Gods Word, flourished most in all quarters
of Christendom, yet God raised up some that spoke boldly in public
assemblies, and wrote against him and his Monks and Friars and their impious
doctrine. In their own books one may read how wickedly and hypocritically
the papisticall votaries lived; and daily experience teach us how incontinently
they live at this present. I will show you what nine famous and eminent men in
the Church of Rome wrote of them in a book, and exhibited it to the Council
of Trent, and to Pope Paul the third, desiring the Pope to have certain abuses
corrected and amended in the Clergy men, which book is extant in Tom. 3.
Council. per Crab. editionis Colon. Anno 1551. but in all other impressions
(through the thefts and deceits of the Monks, Friars, and Jesuits) left out
and suppressed.

In that Book, among many other things, the Monks and Friars were taxed in
these words: Alius abusus corrigendus est in ordinibus Religiosorum, quod adeo
multi deformati sunt, vt magno sint scandalo secularibus, exemploque plurimum
noceant. Conuentuales ordines abolendos esse putamus omnes; non tamen vt alicui
fiat iniuria, sed prohibendo, ne nouos possint admittere; sic enim sine vllius
iniuria cito delerentur. Nunc vero putamus vt omnes pueri, qui non sint
professi ab eorum Monasterijs repellerentur; that is to say, Another abuse is
to be corrected in religious Orders, because that very many of them are become
so deformed (in life and behavior) that they are a great scandal to the
secular people, and do much hurt by their lewd and ill examples: and therefore
we think it meet that all conuentuall Orders be quite abolished and suppressed;
not that we would have any of them injured, but to prohibit them to admit any
new men into their Orders; so that by this means they may be all soon
suppressed. And we think it fit that all boys (who are not as yet professed
Friars) be expulsed out of their Monasteries.

And again, Alius abusus turbat Christianum Populum in Monialibus, quae sunt
sub cura fratrum conuentualium, vbi in plerisque Monasterijs, fiunt publica
Sacrilegia, cum maximo omnium scandalo: auferat ergo S. V. omnem curam a
conuentualibus, eamque det ordinarijs, aut alijs, prout melius videbitur.
Another abuse does trouble the Christian common wealth, and that is in the
Nuns, who are under the custody and charge of the Conuentuall Friars; who, in
most of their Monasteries do commit public Sacrilege, to the great scandal
of all men. Let your Holiness therefore take away this charge from the
Conuentuall Friars, and give it to the Ordinaries, or some others, as you shall
see best. Now the names of these great personages that presented that Book to
the Council of Trent and the Pope were these, Gasper Cardinalis Contarenus.
Johannes Petrus Card. Theatinus, who was afterward Pope Paul the fourth.
Iacobus Card. Sadoletus. Reignaldus Card. Auglicus, otherwise called Cardinal
Poole. Fredericus Arch. Salernitanus. Hieronymus Arch. Brundusinus. Ioh.
Matthaeus Episcopus Veronensis. Gregorius Abbas Sancti Georgij Venet. F. Thomas
Magister Sacri Palatij.

Now you poor abused Romish Recusants, unmask and pull away the veil which
the Monks, Friars, Jesuits, and other Seminary Priests have put before your
eyes, and turn away your ears from their crafty illusions: break the bonds
wherewith they have captiuated you, and purge your brains with some good
Antidote against their charms: and then, not till then, shall you perceive in
what darkness, in what error, and in what captivity you have been so long
detained, whilst these cursed Hispaniolized Bald pates have governed you: then
you your selves shall be Judges how much you have lost of your beauty, of your
authority, of your wisdom, and of your lands, revenues and riches; yea, of
your honor and estimation in the common wealth: so that if you would (I say)
look back upon your selves, you should see that your visages are so changed
that you could not know your selves; nay, you would be afraid to behold your
own faces: and withal your neighbors, who were wont to pity your folly, do
now hiss at you, pointing with their fingers, and mocking at your desperate
rage and miserable stupidity, which has made you more savage than Medea
against your own innocent children, whom you most cruelly, and without any
humanity banish and transport over into foreign Countries, thereto be mewed
up (like so many Hawks) in Colleges and Cloisters, and withal wasting and
consuming your lands and riches to maintain these Impostors and cheating
Copesmates, who delude and deceive you with their charms, and feed you with
hope of the restoration, or at least a toleration of the Romish Religion, the
which you have long wished and expected for: but I hope that you are as near
now to obtain it as you and your forefathers were in Queen Elizabeth's reign.

Take patience a while, and hearken unto one that wishes your welfare in the
Lord, and one who has nor will relate unto you any thing which shall be
unreasonable, but wholly to your advantage and profit. Imitate therefore that
virtuous Prince Antigonus, who freely hearkened unto a plain country man (whom
he met with by chance) reprehending the vices wherewith he was attached: and
albeit he felt himself pricked to the quick, yet he took all in so good
part, that it turned greatly to his profit, correcting afterward that which
the good man had noted to be vicious in him; and being returned home to his
Court, he said unto his Minions, that he had learned that of a Peasant which he
never knew before, namely the truth, which his flatterers had kept hidden and
disguised. In like manner poor deceived Countrymen depart but a while from
these fraudulous and traitorous Monks, Friars, Jesuits, and Seminary Priests,
to learn, not of your domestical flatterers and deluders, but of a stranger
that is desirous for your own good and safety, to make you know the sincere
verity which this long time you have not heard of, for that you would never
give ear to any discourse but those of your deceivers, who continually
entertain you with fair words and great hopes, and all not worth a rotten
Fig.

The King of Spain seeing himself enriched with the spoils of other Kings
and Princes, not contenting himself with the prey, imagines that it should
serve him but as a Ladder to mount to the top of an absolute Monarchy. And
being as it were drunk with the greatness of his happy success, he began
to plot higher attempts in his spirit, as ambition never wants matter,
proposing England for the mark of his other enterprises; but knowing well that
he might not attempt openly upon it, and that herein force of arms might
turn rather to his damage than profit (as it did in the year 1588. and
likewise in the latter end of Queen Elizabeth's reign, when he sent forces
into Ireland to join with the Rebel Tyrone) he resolved to follow the advice
of Lisander; namely, Where the Lions skin is not strong enough, to patch it
with a piece of the Foxes. But then he imagined that nothing could more
securely, and more soon eleuate him to the top of this greatness than a
forcible Ladder of gold, underpropped with a more than Punick subtilty, and
masked with a false semblance of integrity and religion.

First of all he had a recourse unto a company of cunning Magicians who had
been engendered here in England, and other places of our Kings Majesty's
Dominions, but brought up, trained, and instructed in the proud and Magnificent
Palace of Rome, at the foot of the son of Perdition, or in some other of his
Seminary Colleges or Cloisters: whom having furnished in abundance with all
that was requisite for for their affairs, recommending unto them all his
designs (but with this prouiso, that they should especially keep themselves
disguised, and lurk under the mask of the Catholic Religion) then he
presently sends them into England. And these are those mischievous and
traitorous brood which you call the holy Fathers the Jesuits: a name truly
fatal and pernicious to every well ordered Monarchy and Commonwealth.

These Sorcerers, together with a whole regiment of Monks, Friars, and Seminary
Priests, as their Coadiutors and fellow-helpers, were presently received and
entertained with great applause, of you and all others the Partakers and
Pentioners of the King of Spain, who leave nothing undone that they make
themselves plausible unto you and your favorers.

Now these traitorous Jesuits, Monks, Friars, and Seminary Priests (who aim
at nothing else than to corrupt the fidelity of England, and to withdraw the
hearts of his Majesty's subjects from their obedience to their Sovereign; yea
finally, to pluck England, Scotland, and Ireland, from due subjection to his
Majesty, and to present them to this ambitious Philip of Spain) gained first
of all secretly those whom they knew to be best affected to the Spaniards, as
some of the Privy Council, Nobility, Gentry, and of his Majesty's Officers at
Court and elsewhere; and withal not few of our collapsed Ladies, in whose laps
these holy Fathers do often lay down their heads to take a nap: nay, which is
worse, they suborned and perverted many of the Clergy and Students of either
University, to join with them, who (O horrible shame!) make no conscience to
sell for ready money their Eloquence and Knowledge (which they ought to have
employed in preaching the Gospel, and instructing the simple people in the
fear of God, and obedience to their King) to corrupt the constancy and
fidelity of England; but Quid non mortalia pectora cogit aurisacra fames? What
is it that gold will not do?

These cunning Iebusites (or if you will Iudaists) are the King of Spaines
trading Factors and Dispensers, to distribute and pay his gold to his
Pentioners that lurk about the Court of England; so that by this means he
has still notice and intelligence of the estate of the Realm, and withal
they seduce the subjects, as Cambyses heretofore espied and deceived the
Ethiopians. These I say (by means of their mercenary tongues) omit no art that
may serve their purpose to suborne England, but use all means possible to make
his Majesty odious unto her, and him unto his subjects, in altering (as much as
in them lies) by their flattering discourses, the sincere amity and faithful
loyalty which English men have always entirely borne toward his Majesty and
his Ancestors: either aggravating every seeming petty imperfection above his
great perfection, blaming and accusing his government: or else in attributing
unto the King of Spain the glory only due unto our Royal Sovereign; and
withal, in all their Discourses, magnifying the greatness and virtues of this
ambitious Spaniard, whom they paint out accomplished with all the perfections
that may be imagined; and briefly, they forget nothing whereby they may
withdraw England (if they could) from her King, and withal gull you of your
money, to enrich themselves and their Colleges, Cloisters, and Seminaries, in
those foreign parts.

But some Jesuit, or one of that faction (perchance) may object, that nothing
moves the King of Spain to be at such great charges, to maintain so many
English Seminaries, Colleges, and Cloisters in those foreign parts, and to
transport from thence so many Monks, Friars, and other religious men into the
King of Englands Dominions, but only to conserve among you the Catholic
Religion. Ah poor senseless souls; for Gods sake give ear to what I shall
briefly recount touching him and his Predecessors actions in this point, and
then you shall plainly perceive whether the zeal that he bears toward your
Religion solliciteth him to be so charitable you unto as you imagine. Has this
great King, or his Father, or Grandfather, spent their treasures, or hazzarded
the lives of their subjects, only for the advancement of the Christian Faith
against unchristian Princes? nothing less. To verify this to be true, I will
produce you these two examples: Pope Gregory the 13. proposing himself to the
aid of certain Christian Princes, to make an enterprise upon the Persian, for
the augmentation of the Church of Rome, requested that ambitious Philip King of
Spain (this Kings Grandfather) to give him some succor, which he not only
flatly denied, but which is more, would not lend any of his Galleys, albeit the
holy Sea of Rome offered to charge them at her own charges.

Moreover, how dealt he with the late King of Portugal, Don Sebastian, whose
death all Christendom had sufficient cause to bewail: who (desiring to assist
Mulei Mahumet King of Fez and Morocco, against Mulei Maluco his brother, who
had expulsed him his Realm, a work surely worthy of so noble a Prince, and
aduantagious besides to the Church of Rome, for the good conditions he had
compounded with the stranger) required Philip his Uncle to succor him in that
expedition; who accorded, that he should have fifty Galleys equipped, and
four thousand fighting men: which Mulei Maluco the other brother perceiving,
incontinently offered Philip certain Towns on the Sea side to desist from his
promise; which he speedily accepted, not shaming to break his oath sworn to
his Nephew, to contract alliance with a barbarous Infidel: so much did avarice
reign over him, as to cause him to violate the Laws of God and men: but he
was paid with the same money that he lent, for sending his Ambassador Vanegas
to take possession of the Town of Rarach, and others promised unto him: the
Barbarians mocking at his treachery and perfidiousnesse, constrained the
Ambassador by force of the Cannon, to retire sooner than he was willing. But
it may be you will say he bare himself politikely in these two actions, to
conserve and maintain his own estate, as if humane policy were to be
preferred before the Law and honor of God. I but for all this, he has showed
himself a very zealous Catholic, and has carried a particular respect
toward those that make a strict profession of his own Religion: well, but let
us see if that be true. After that he had invaded the Kingdom of Portugal,
and that among infinite other Ladies, he had banished into Castile the wife of
the Agent of Don Antonio, the lawful King thereof, his children, and Mother in
Law; he drew three of his sisters, chaste and religious Nuns, out of the
Monastery of Saint Clare at Lisbone, and confined them likewise into Castile.
But he has dealt marvelous mercifully with them in saving their lives, albeit
servile and miserable. Yea, but since the women are thus dealt with, the men
must be handled a little more rigorously, and surely herein he has thoroughly
acquitted himself, witness a religious Friar named John, of the Order of
Saint Dominick, who for embracing the liberty of his Country, was hanged in the
I Will of Madera. Another Friar, Hector Pintus, of the Order of Saint Hierome, was
committed to the hands of certain soldiers in Castile, where he was
afterward impoisoned. Friar James de Noronba, another Dominican Friar, and
brother to the Earl of Mira, was so cruelly beaten by the soldiers (that were
of his guard) that he died. A Doctor named Friar Augustine, of the Order of
Saint Augustine, and one Friar Emanuel Margues, a Franciscan Friar, were both
chained together with Rouers and Thieves in a Galley, which was afterward
taken by the Turks, under whose cruelty, I leave it to your Judgment to
imagine, what torments these two Friars suffered. Friar Gregory of the Order
of S. Augustine was also captiuated in the Galleys. Lewis Soarez a Trinitarian
Friar, having been tortured with a thousand torments in prison, was afterward
banished. And Friar Anthony Senenses, was constrained to lurk secretly in
hills, woods, and wildernesses, to avoid the bloody rage of this Philip King
of Spain. And briefly thousands of others, who were either drowned, strangled,
empoisoned, imprisoned, or constrained to abandon their natural Country,
friends, goods, lands and revenues.

Again, many of them were compelled to fly into England, France and other
Countries; who declared the cruel barbarism of the Spaniards. But for what
occasion, or to what end were all these cruelties committed? Because these men
were true Patriots, and knew the qualities and nature of a Spanish Usurper; and
therefore left they should move the people to recover their liberty, he used
them thus. I speak not of an infinite number of the heads of their Nobility,
wherewith the gates of their Towns and Cities were stuffed, and replenished
daily. Yea, but he has fully gratified all those that were favoring him in
the usurpation of the Kingdom: Surely, according to their merits, and the
bounty of a Spaniard, a people, who most commonly love Treason, but hate the
Traitors when their own turns are served: He made them know, when they
demanded recompense for their service; that albeit they had sold and betrayed
their Country, yet he was nothing in their debt; and that a man was ill
advised, to buy that which is his own. Behold the fair reward of their
treachery, and the good payment of their sale. Christian Var de Vegua
Governor of the Castle of Saint John, experienced this to be true (although
too late) who (for a good annual pension promised to him, during his life)
delivered that place to the Spaniard; and in stead of enjoying this promise, he
was incontinently banished for ten years into Africa, to make war against
the Moors. And if you desire to know further hereof, behold the request which
those traitors presented unto the said King Philip; beseeching him to keep his
promise: You shall find it in print in the later end of the Justification of
Don Antonio (the true King of Portugal) touching the wars which he made
against the same King Philip: so that if he left any (having chased away the
rest) of the Nobility or Gentry, he and his Successors have held them short;
that they are (as it were) in captivity, and continually in danger of the
Inquisition, which is as bad (if not worse) than under the Turks captivity.

Were these the effects of a King, terming himself so great a Catholic? was
this the reverence he bears to the holy Apostolic See? was this to show
himself The sole Protector and Pillar of the Christian Church, as he
impudently vaunted in his titles? Was this to be the true Pastor of the people,
as Homer writes of the Prince Agamemnon? is this to be like the good
Householder? was this to vanquish his will, to handle those rigorously, whom he
had conquered by force of arms? No, no: and therefore as Demosthenes
heretofore persuading the Athenians, to resist Philip King of Macedonia,
exhorted them, not only to repulse the Usurper, but consequently to chase and
banish out of their City certain Orators, whom (by rewards) he had drawn
unto his faction: In like manner, I advise you (my loving Countrymen) to avoid
and eschew future inconveniences, to exile and cashiere from you these
pernicious Jesuits, Monks, Friars and Seminary Priests, if they will not
amend, contenting themselves to preach the Gospel of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ; as he has enjoined his Apostles, whose Imitators and Successors
they saine themselves to be. Go (says he) thorowout the whole world, and
preach the Gospel unto every creature: he commands them not to meddle with
the estates of Kings and Princes, to seduce their people, or to cause them to
revolt against them, or to cause their doctrine to be observed by arms,
committing cruel and bloody butcheries and inhumane man-slaughters, or to
murder Kings and Princes: or to blow up houses of Parliaments and the whole
estate of a Kingdom, as these your traitorous Jesuits, Monks and Friars have
to you and your forefathers no small dishonor and damage done, or (at
leastwise) would have done.

The Lord of his infinite goodness and mercy illuminate your understanding,
that you may truly know him, and perfectly love and embrace the light of the
Gospel. And that for Christ Jesus sake our Lord and only Savior: To whom,
with the Father, and the Holy Spirit, be given and ascribed, all Honor and
Glory, Laud, Praise, Dominion, Power and Dignity, from henceforth for evermore.

Amen.
FINIS.

