EPIGRAMS OF That most witty and worthy Epigrammatist Mr. JOHN OWEN,
Gentleman. Translated by JOHN VICARS.

Epig. 233. Lib. Singu. Authors have Auctours of Good-Name or Shame, As
Readers Looks to Writers Books do frame.

LONDON, Printed by W. S. for John Smethwicke, and are to be sold at his Shop
in S. Dunstanes Churchyard under the Dyall* 1619.

TO THE MOST HIGH, HOPEFVLL and Happy CHARLES, Prince of Wales.
Epig. 7. Lib. Ter. Priorum Sex.
GReat Britains great Hope, Parents sprouting Vin
Fathers and Mothers Half, by Princely Line,
Wel-nigh vn-pattern'd Pattern of rare Parts,
Who^, though Few equal, All Love in their hearts:
These Princely Parts, whence had they this great growth
From Fathers Loins or Mothers Paps? From Both.
Be still, (as the art) Parents Idea right;
Let none thee equal in such Princely Light:
That being Virtues Prince and Principal,
Heaven may Thee Bless with Bliss Angelical,
Most heartily desires your Graces most humbly Devoted, JOHN VICARS.

THE TRANSLATOR to the most Worthy and weldeseruing Author.
TRue Imitation of men's worthy Deeds
From Love of them (as I suppose) proceeds:
Yet many-times Ambitious Emulation
May in such Actions stain True Imitation.
But unto me, Love was the Golden-Spurre,
If otherwise, I might just shame incur:
For what I should I could not; what I could
I here have done, though far from what I would.
Thy wit therefore brave Epigramatist,
To praise condignely, in me cannot consist.
Yet that I Epig. 2. Lib. Pri.
may not Envious be deemed,
Not caring though I be a Fool esteemed.
Some thus I Praise, and thus their praise do write,
I Will none Disprayse, most undone pass my might.
Excuse herein (kind Sir) what is Mis-committed,
And pardon me, if ought be Ill-omitted.
Thine in the unlimited limits of Love, IO. VICARS.

To the Courteous Readers.
ANteus-like I long have fought a fight:
But, find in conflict a Superior might.
Often have I wrastled, but still foild and felled
By* my Competitor am far excelled.
Witness my weakness in this last assault,
Forced here and there to tire, retire and hault.
And marvel not, (kind Readers) though I sweat,
Having to do with this Alcides great.
Whose Policy and Power I have found such,
As ere to equallize is too-too-much:
But here is my comfort, though those Champions fought
With Ire most dire to th'Death to fight it out,
Yet our Contention is with sweet desire,
My Authors Love and Thine how to acquire:
Which if I gain, as it is my Hope I shall,
I Will not thus fly, but try another fall.
Thine I. V.

EPIGRAMS. To the Prince.
I, Not for Fashion, but for Favors sake,
From Thee Prime Prince my Proeme here do take.
Out of the first Book. Epig. 1. Lib. 1. Sex Librorum.
EPIG. 1. To the Lady NEVIL.
THat this my Book, where't comes, may Patrons find;
To the Readers It, My-selfe to Thee's assigned.
EPIG. 2. To the Reader.
REader, do^n't Praise, nor disprayse All I write;
Lest so I blaze thy Want of Wit, or Spite.
EPIG. 3. To JOHN HOSKINS, I. C. of his Book.
MY Booke's the World, my Verses People be;
There Is few Good-men, Here, few Good strains you will see.
EPIG. 4* To the Lady MARY NEVEL.
IF that opinion of Pythago^as
Be true, that Spirits one to another pass;
Then, Venus, Juno's, Pallas, Souls most rare,
By Beauty, State and Learning, in Thee are:
Such Three in One are seldom seen or found,
Many are rare for One; Three have Thee crowned.
EPIG. 5. To the same Lady.
AS Phoebus fair, shows, shines in the Air;
as Light in the Sun most bright:
So in thy face, with Princely Grace,
Dwells Virtue with Delight.
For, whosoere but comes Thee near,
To Look on Thee, Thee Loves;
Thy Beauty, Bounty, wondering at,
So precious he approues.
EPIG. 13. Love.
Loves first approach, Delights sweet So^g does sing;
But in departure She Woes sting does bring:
So, the sweet streams of Springs to Sea which hie,
Mixed with Salt-waters, taste vnsauerily.
EPIG. 6 To Master THOMAS NEVEL, Son to the foresaid Lady.
IN thee, do shine such Gifts worth admiration;
That, though All-T^ue, they pas^e al true relation.
Who Children praise, their Hopes not Hap do praise,
Thy Hap, not Hopes, thy wit, thy worth does blaze.
EPIG. 9. To the Lawyer.
IF He be Blessed, that Knows of things the Cause;
O* What is He that Pleades a Cause by Laws.
EPIG. 11. To Degenerous, Generous AVLVS.
I Gnoble, Noble, Aulus, owes
All, to's Progenitors;
And his Successors, sure, I think,
Will never be his Debtours.
EPIG. 12. Against Hernick.
HErnick, thou Boughtst a Fool for 20* pound:
To Buy Thee at that rate, I Would not be bound.
EPIG. 14. To D. GILBERT.
Do say, the Earth stands Not? that is admirable;
Thou wast at Sea, sure, when thou writ'st this Fable.
EPIG. 15. To Phisicians and Lawyers.
Our Sores and Sickness, Galen made thee wise,
And thee Justinian, our great Fooleries.
EPIG. 19. To LINVS.
THE ast Books good store, but thee more Learned I'de-hold,
If the adst such store of Bags full crammed with Gold.
EPIG. 20. To a Noble young Gent.
FRiends wish their Friends long Lives to Live,
But, None their Death desire;
As one should wish a sore Dis-ease,
But Never would Cure requi^e.
EPIG. 23. Against MARCUS.
WH^t meant'st thou Marcus, stiffly to maintain,
That Naught in Nature Empty does remain?
Since thou thy self have such a huge great Head,
Of Wit most void and wholly Emptyed.
EPIG. 26. To PHYLLIS.
IF Love be Fiery (as Lovers say and hold)
Thy fiery Love is then (alas) most cold.
EPIG. 31. Prophets, Poets.
PRophets, do truly things to come foreknow;
Poets, things past in Fictions false do show.
EPIG. 32. Of Life and Death.
AS Rivers pleasant So^rce to the Salt-Sea hastes;
So, day by day Life unto Death still wastes.
It Is sweet to Live, but (oh) it is dire to dye,
Thus sweet with bitter ends Mortality.
EPIG. 36. Of Life and Love.
THough every Action to an End does bend;
Yet Life and Love do hate their proper End.
EPIG. 38. The Housband, and the Cuck-old-Maker.
Housband. Fie on this Life, I took a Wife,
Her Love Another got;
So, you poor Bees with Hony-knees,
Your pains are others Lot.

Cuck old-Maker. O, This is brave, I Sons should have,
Yet Others take my Be their fathers.
Due;
So, you poor Birds do hatch young Broods,
For others, not for you.

EPIG. 39. New Rhetorike.
WHo so wants Gold, in vain does hold
An Argument with any;
He Is best Linguist, that has his fifth
Well filled with Make-way Money:
Not Sillab'lls, but Siluer-bells,
Now, make the rarest ring;
Homer, ar't poor? then stand at Door,
Though thou can sweetly Sing.
EPIG. 42. Against BORBONIVS the Poets Trifles.
WHat thou call'dst Trifles, but not thought so much,
I call not Trifles, but I think the are such.
EPIG. 48. To the True Statesman.
THough for thy Country it be praise to dye;
Yet, for her Good to Live, 's more dignity.
EPIG. 55. The Courtier.
IF thou be Good, Better in time,
Not Greater, thou may be:
If thou be Great, thee Greater then,
Not Better, Time may see.
EPIG. 58. A Secret against Hoary-Haires to Bithynicus.
THat, in Old Age thy Hair may not wax- Gray,
Baldness in Youth (o rare!) is the right way.
Probatum est.
EPIG. 63. Against Pontia.
ALL Cuck-olds, cast in the Sea, Pontius would have:
Learn first to swim (quoth's Wife) thy self to save.
EPIG. 68. Venus.
Love comes and goes, retyres, returns,
As Sea's do ebb and flow,
How comes it Love's so like the Sea?
How? Venus thence did g^ow.
In Venus is Variety,
Sometimes She Nill, She Will;
Therefore with Mouing-Planets placed,
Not with Stars standing still.
EPIG. 70. Woman.
WOman as Weaker or more Mulier, quasi mollior.
Soft is said,
Yet Eve of the Bone of Man, not Flesh was made.
EPIG. 71. Affinity twixt Lawyers and Phisicians.
THe Lawyers and Phisicians case
have near Affinity;
For, others Ruins make them Rich,
No doubt most Lawfully.
These Suck the Sick, for Potions, Pounds,
For Law Those Lands purloyne:
These promise Health, and so get Wealth,
Those Quietness for Coin.
EPIG. 82. Of the Day.
THe Day, with one-eye far more things espies,
Than Night can see with more than Argos-eies.
EPIG. 87. A Good Man.
THings that be Rare, are ever Dear,
And of great price esteemed:
Then sure (I think) an Honest-man,
Most precious may be deemed.
EPIG. 89. Against PAVLINVS.
PAulinus, when thy Friend Asks ought of thee,
Thine answer is, Tomorrow come to me.
Would have me give thee Thanks for what I borrow?
For thy Good-turne I Will give thee Thanks to morrow.
EPIG. 92. A Machiuilian.
COgge, Counterfeit, as thou shall see
Both Time and Place require,
That when occasion's offered,
Thou may have thy desire:
Yea, now He Is Wise can Temporize,
His hoped prey to catch;
For Gold and Gain, who will refrain?
All seasons well to watch.
EPIG. 101. Death.
WHat Death is, do thou ask of me?
Till Dead I do not know;
Come to me when thou hear'st I Am Dead,
Then what it is IN shall show.
EPIG. 102. A Client.
THe Client going-Home, may sing by the way,
And needs not fear the thief to bid him stay:
For Lawyers do for Fees so filch their coin,
That many times, they scarce know where to Dine.
EPIG. 104. Children and Fools tell True.
CHildren and Fools (our Proverb says) tell true,
As who shuold say, the are Fools the truth that show.
If thus they will have it, yet the are Knaves that lie;
I Will be Truths Fool, let them love Knauerie.
EPIG. 106. Against Ball'd-pates.
BAll'd-pate, my Hairs I never could numerate,
Nor thou thine own, there is None left on thy pate.
EPIG. 115. Backe-biters, Flatterers.
A Naxagoras was wont to say, that Snow
Was Black, more Black was Anaxag'ras Heart.
Many such Envious Elfes this Age does know:
The flattering Fox, with his dissembling Art,
Praised the Whiteness of the Cole-blacke Crow;
Such fawning Foxes are (alas) too many,
Who, for advantage Praise and Dis-prayse any.
EPIG. 117. An Herculean Labor.
TO Curb the Courage, and Wives Tongue keep-vnder,
May well be called, Hercules thirteenth Wonder.
EPIG. 123. Of Bardella a Thief.
THe Theife Bardella being Judged to Dye,
A Friar gave him Ghostly Exhortation:
Good-Brother (says he) Dye most joyfully:
For thou shall Sup in Heavens blessed Habitation.
Sir (quoth Bardella) I must Fast this Day;
Take you that Supper in my sted I pray
EPIG. 1^8. Answer to Cynthiaes Epistle.
THy Paper white, thy Letter black came to me,
This thy foule-Hart, That thy white skin does show me.
EPIG. 129. To Sextillian Sp.
SExtillian, when thy Father thee begot,
To Get thee, then, his mind (I think) 'twas not;
Himself to recreate, not thee Create,
Was all (I judge) he then did Cogitate:
If, more the Gift, than Giuers mind be praised,
Then, sure, thy Life to him is not engaged.
EPIG. 131. Saturnes three Sons.
Divines are doubtful, Lawyers lewd and ill,
Physicians foul; yet these the World rule still:
If such ill Governors the People nurse,
No marvel, then, though all grow worse and worse.
EPIG. 137. Against Pomponia.
POmponia did a fickle feather wear
Upon her head; feathers do Soldiers fit.
True, and She this for Mars his Love did bear.
This shows, that Mars in Venus Lap may sit:
Though on their heads our Helle^s feathers have,
Marvel not, for, it is Paris favor brave.
EPIG. 146. Virtue in the Middle.
A Gallant Dame, scarce of good Name,
In The midst twixt two Men went,
Virtue, as here it may appear,
Her place had lost or lent.
EPIG. 150. To his absent Love.
I Burn poor wretch, and so much more
Am burnt with Loves desire;
By how much I am further off,
From my Loue-burning Fire.
EPIG. 16^. A Problem of Horns.
WHen Wives defile their Husbands marriage Bed,
Why wears the harmeles Husband Horns? He Is Head.
EPIG. 168. To the Reader, of himself.
MY breuity, though some may Sloth esteem*
Yet to be brief, most Labor I do deem:
Much madly I speak not, with vulgar sort;
Though mine perhaps be foolish, yet it is short.
EPIG. 170. Of Himself.
Ask and Receive, so James the Apostle says,
O that King James to me would use that Phrase*
FINIS.
EPIGRAMS.
Out of the second Book.
EPIG. 4. To the Lady MARY NEVELL.
IN Tables fair, our fading forms are painted,
That what 'ith face would fade, in Them may dure;
To paint in Tables I am unacquainted,
My Verse shall pourtray what power can procure,
That what Frames cannot, Verse may keep untainted,
Yet, none but rare Apelles that can do;
And, none but great Apollo this can show.
EPIG. 10. A true Trojan.
THe Trojans Troy being brought t'annoy, grew wise;
Himself, this Trojan, who does not agnize?
EPIG. 16. To the Lord High Treasurer of England.
A Faithful Treasurer thou art
Unto thy King and State;
Than all rich Treasures, I, thy Faith
More precious estimate.
EPIG. 24. To Richard Vaughan, once Bishop of London.
THose Preachers are to be esteemed best,
Which Do the things they Teach ought to be Done;
Thou wast a Bishop learned best and blessed,
Doing what thou had Taught men should not shun.
EPIG. 29. To Sir Philip Sidney.
HE which does Deeds in Books to be expressed,
Or things worth reading rarely does Indite,
Is blessed; but thou who did both these more blessed,
Thou, Deeds worth writing, Works to read did write:
Thy Writings do thy Learning intimate,
Thy Virtuous Deeds thy Virtue demonstrate.
EPIG. 32. To the Right Honorable Lucy, Countess of Bedford.
THe Light to thee (sweet Lu^y) gives a Name,
Which through the wo^ld shines to thy datelesse fame.
The Luster of Illustrious Parents wrought-Thee
Thy Wit, thy Virtue, to this Light have brought Thee*
EPIG. 33. An Honorable Gold-Ring: To Henry Goodyeer, Knight.
NObilitie's the Gold, Virtue the Stone;
For ever may thou by this Ring be known.
EPIG. 35. To D. B.
IF he Liue-well, that Lives a Quiet Life,
If Wisdom 't be, that Wisdom be concealed,
Then thou Liu'dst-well, whose Wit and Wisdom rife
The more thou hidst, the more thy worth revealed.
EPIG. 40. The Strength of England to the Prince.
ENglands safe Gates, are her Cinque Ports;
Her stately Ships, her Walls;
Her Camps, the Sea; Bulwarks, her Corpse;
Her Heart, her Generals.
EPIG. 41. The Terrestrial Globe.
THe Earth and Sea one Globe do make,
And who would this suppose?
Earth firm Remaynes, the Sea Remooues,
Earth's fast, Sea ebbes and slowes.
EPIG. 42. Vn-Healthy Healths.
BY how much more thou Healths do drink,
So much less Health thou haste;
Thousand such Healths take thou, for me,
That Health by Healths wilt waste:
To wisemen, that, is Healthiest,
To drink no Healths at-all;
What Health can be in drinking Healths?
When Men like Beasts must crawle.
EPIG. 43. The Divine, the Politician,
The Divine. WHat profits it that thou do know,
Unless another know it?

Politician. What boots thy Knowledge unto thee?
If thou to others show it.

EPIG. 52. The Lover.
Unconstant- Hope, most Constant- Fear:
Vain- Pleasure vanishing;
Joy and Annoy, Honey and Gall,
Love bitter-relishing.
EPIG. 55. The German-Death to Polynicus.
DEath,'s Not to be; so Seneca does think,
But Dutchmen say it is Death to Cease to Drink.
EPIG. 61. The Niggard, the Prodigal.
PRodigalls, are fre^-hearted Rhetoricians,
Niggards are hold-fast-close and slye Logicians:
The Clutch-fist Churl by Logic understand,
By Rhetorike the Spend-Thrifts Open-hand.
EPIG. 65. The Earl of Dorset his Adagie, Neither furiously, nor fearfully.
DOubt all things wisely, wisely Hope for all;
Of all Take-heed, that thou may fear no fall.
EPIG. 66. Sir Henry Neuill his Adagie. Wish no vain thing.
NO vain, nor vile thing wish to have,
This Counsel is both wise and grave:
For, base things are of base esteem,
And wisemen, vain things, naught worth deem.
EPIG. 69. To his Friend.
I Will not be a Foe to any,
Nor be familiar with too many:
And twice I will not Love my Friend,
But whom I Love, I Will Love to the end.
EPIG. 70. Money ouercomes all.
SErpents that crawle, Fish in the Sea,
Yea Beasts and Birds of the Air;
From Males and Females and All things,
Love, once, did Conquest b'are:
But Gold the King with his Silver Queen,
And Wealth their Eldest-Sonne;
With power, Now rife, to win the Prize,
And it from Love have won.
EPIG. 73. Adultery and Fornication.
THE Adult'rer and the Cucko^l, diff^rent be,
As Comedy is from a Tragedy.
EPIG. 74. Of Hercules to C. D.
WHom, never force nor fence of strongest arm*
Could fell or quel, is va^quisht by Loves charm;
Who? proved so strong to wrong Al^^des great?
'Twas Love, but not by force but foul deceit:
He flew Leaena, Lena could not tame,
Monsters could never; his Mistress wrought his shame.
EPIG. 85. Erasmus Fooleries.
THat old Erasmus, Foolishness, did praise;
That, Foolishness, his wits fame much did raise.
EPIG. 90. Against Unfaithfulness.
TRusting false words, I learned to distrust:
False Hope has forced me fear, and that most just.
EPIG. 94. Wisdom.
Who Is wealthy? Wisemen; who are Poor?
Rude Dolts, and Sots unwise;
If I be wise then, qui^kly, I
To Riches may arise:
But tell me, Now, what Man is wise?
The Rich; who Fools? the Poor;
Then, if not rich, though wise, I may
Go beg from door to door.
EPIG. 96. Against a certain Drunkard.
IF Gold could be as easily Drunk,
As for it most men Thirst;
Sellers of Gold their Paunch would be
Stuffed, till their Bellies burst.
EPIG. 99. Anger or Wrath.
IT seems, that Aristotle used
To ^all Wrath, Virtues Spur;
Because it Spurs, Spurns virtuous men,
As being Enuies Curre.
EPIG. 106. To a certain Dyer waxing-old.
THy Beard, which once was Black, is now turned white:
But that is by Nature, not by Arts bent slight.
EPIG. 120. Against a great Clerk.
Sick- stomakes, much do swallow down,
But Little do Dig^st;
So, thou know much, but yet, in thee
Small Wisdom is expressed.
EPIG. 124. Against an Harlot.
OH, I could wish thou were less fair,
Or else were better given;
For, worser things than Harlots fair,
There are not under Heaven.
EPIG. 127. To Claudius, and Linus.
Ungodly Claudius, to be Good,
Wants nothing but a Will:
Lewd Linus, also, wants naught
But Power to be Ill.
EPIG. 131. Against Covetous and Lame Alanus.
IF thou to Lame Al^nus, Gi^e,
Than Thanks, ^xpect no more;
In Thanks, th^n* like Centimanus
He Will be; though Lame before:
But if thou Give, and some Reward
Expectest for the same;
Then, though in Power Centimanus,
He Will be most Weak and Lame*
EPIG. 142. Against Marcus a Lawyer.
THe Lawyer Pleades his Own not Clients Cause,
Yet Clients Mon^y he to London draws;
Not for Himself, but for his Lawy^rs Fees,
This Lawyers get how ere the Client Lees:
The Law is plain, the po^re man's Cause in doubt,
Thus Lawyers Gain must hold the Client out.
EPIG. 148. Sir Francis Drake his Epitaph.
THough Pop'ry should (which Heaven forbid) re-raigne,
They could not (Noble Drake) dig up thy Grave;
Thy Bones to burn, as once with fell disdain,
They did against good Luther rage and rave:
Thou need^^ not fear (I say) Romes wrath, for why?
Thy Bones in the Bottom of the Sea do lie.
EPIG. 165. The King, the People.
AS, when the Head with Wine's overcome,
The F^et trip to and fro*
So Princes that Illiterate be,
Their Subjects overthrow.
EPIG. 166. The Senate.
THe King does Reign himself alone,
Why then Rules he not All?
He which both Rules and Ruled is,
Rule others better shall.
EPIG. 168. Of Diet, to I. H. Knight.
IF thou Old Age with healthfull-dayes,
Desire to enjoy;
Use Food as Phisike, Phisike a^ Food,
Neither of both to annoy:
For Phisike, taken as 'twere Food,
The Health does strangely wrong;
But, Food, as Phisike wisely used,
Does Life in Health prolong.
EPIG. 173. The five Senses.
THe Senses five, as Servants wait on Man,
To Please his Will, or win his Will to Pleasure,
Who use them With or Without Wisdoms Measure,
Their Profit or Dis-profit publish can.
EPIG. 179. The Objects of the Senses.
MY Hearing, Sight, my Smell, my Taste, my Touch,
Do me affect and me infect as much.
EPIG. 185. The Phoenix, the Viper.
THe Phoenix, Dying does her young Regaine;
The Vipers brood does breed her forced-bane.
EPIG. 186. The Silke-Worme.
MY Art drawes-out my Heart; my Toombe, my Toil;
My Work workes-out my Life; I Spin my Spoil.
EPIG. 194. Manuring of the Ground.
THough Vile thou be, yet Useful thou art,
And for Manuring good;
For thou unto our Aliment,
Art Nutriment, though Mud.
EPIG. 196. The Parret.
IF lawfull't be, of things to inuert the name;
With prattling Parret, Prater is the same.
EPIG. 206. The Soldier.
Wars wounding Weapons hurt not so my He^^t,
As unarmed Venus pierces with her Dart.
EPIG. 208 The Lovers Tears.
AS Wood sends forth much sap, when burnt in the fire:
So, Lovers weep, when Crossed in Loves desire.
EPIG. 213. Echo.
NO Art can Grave or Paint Man's Voice in Table,
Echo reflected Sounds to express, is able.
EPIG. 214. The Looking-glass.
NOt famous Phidias, nor Apelles rare,
Can Carue or Paint Motion, thou wilt it declare.
EPIG. 215. Echo and the Looking-glass.
Echo has nothing but a Voice to Live,
The Mirreur nothing wants, if Voice you give.
FINIS.
EPIGRAMS.
Out of the third Book.
EPIG. 2. To the Lady Mary Neuil.
THou, who Vn-borne, the Burden wast
Of thy then parient-Stemme;
Now, being borne, her Beauty art,
Even Parents joyful Iemme.
EPIG. 3. To the Reader of his Book.
I Fear (kind Reader) lest my Verse displease thee,
Carpe thou (fond Momus) it shall never disease me.
EPIG. 8. Basilicon Doron, to the King.
WHat need we Pen this Pen-mans praise,
Or write his Works rare worth;
Whose Praise the Work, whose Work the Author
TO each other full set-forth?
EPIG. 13. Of Virtue.
TRue Virtue, Praise, does nothing prize*
Though Honor her attend;
As Shadows on the Body wait,
When Is ra^es Sol forth does send*
^or, ^ertue is Substantial,
Glory, but glittering show;
As Bodies are Essential,
Shadows no Substance true.
EPIG. 20. Union.
VNion's Divine; Diuision's Devilish found,
For, there is one God, but Devils do abound.
EPIG. 21. Three Tempters.
Our Life, three subtle Sophisters retains,
The World, the Flesh, Satan, who ore the^ reigns:
Satan's an old Logician; the other two
Are Rhetoricians, and much skill can show.
EPIG. 23. Man to Man's a God, a Wolf.
MAn unto Man a God, a Wolf is known,
The one in Christ, in Adam tother's shown*
For, Christ both God and Man, to Man's a God,
Adam a Wolf to Man, Gods plaguing Rod.
EPIG. 28. The Misery of this Life.
LOng-Life, though weak and wretched, Man desires;
That is, to be a Wretch he Long requires:
Weak, wretched Irus dies against his will;
That is, he would have Lived most wretched, still.
EPIG. 29. Of Nature and Grace.
A Gloomy-Moone-Light, is our Natures Light:
But Grace does Glister, like the S^n most bright.
EPIG. 30. A Catechism.
TWice Six believe, for Se^en things pray,
Ten things perform, and Li^e for aye.
This Catechism use aright,
And thou shall see Heavens glorious Light.
EPIG. 31. The Rich-man.
WHat is the Cause, few Rich, to H^au'n do go?
'T's a Costly-Iourney, they will not much bestow.
EPIG. 34. The Holy Ghost.
AS, Pigeons Li^e on Houses white,
And there-about abide:
So, God above, pure- Hearts does love,
And with them will reside.
EPIG. 36. Of the King.
A Light-lesse Sun, is Law, without a King;
A King without a Law, is nothing less:
Men mark the King, Kings Men by Laws redress:
Thus, Laws and People, Kings in order bring.
EPIG. 41. God-Man.
GOd could not feel, nor Man alone Death quell,
Christ, God and Man, did Both; as Scriptures tell.
EPIG. 4^. Death.
THe Bad fly from, the Good do Death attend;
Death's the End of Woe, or Woe without an End.
EPIG. 44. A Miracle.
LEt others, Wonders wond'rously admire:
I, God their Author most to extol desire.
EPIG. 45. Adams Fall, Man's Thrall.
BY Adams Fall, Man's Soul did fall,
In The power of the Preacher;
His Flesh to Phisike, and his Goods
To the Lawyer, that Gold-Reacher.
EPIG. 46. To Adam.
THe Devil, Deaths-Dam, Eve and Adam
With Apple did deceive;
With his All-Haile, their Joys did fail,
And Edens bliss them leave.
EPIG. 48. The Tempter.
AS, Mice make Holes in Walls to get their prey:
So, Satan Finde^ or Makes in the Heart a way.
EPIG. 49. Mortification.
THat thou may Live when Dead thou art,
To Dye, yet Live must be thy part;
Learn first to Dye, then, ere thou Dye;
This, Sinfull-flesh will Mortify.
EPIG. 51. Against thee-onely have I sinned Psalm 51.
SVbiects, against God, the King, the Laws, offend;
Kings, only God, because Kings All transcend.
EPIG. 52. Prayer.
AS, Christ did Heavens vn-op't Gates penetrate:
So, Prayer by Faith must pierce Heavens fast bard Gate.
EPIG. 53. Mary Magdalens Tears.
HEr wandering Eyes, which viewed each Vanity,
She bleares with tears, and weeps most bitterly;
The cause (I judge) such brinish tears to bring,
Was, that the Eye was Sins first Fount and Spring.
EPIG. 55. Methusalem is Dead.
TO Liue-Long, is not Life, to Live is Life:
What is 't to Liue-Long, then? to Dye from strife.
EPIG. 56. Of Law and Justice.
THe Judge, not Justice, has the most resort:
It Is strange; since Lawes-way's Long; Justice path Short.
EPIG* 57. Intemperance.
SInce, most desire a Long Life to enjoy;
By Luxury, why do we Life destroy?
We feign would Live, yet will the means refuse;
We wrong our Health, and then Phisicians use.
EPIG. 60. Liberty.
IF He be well, which has what he can wish,
Why then do Men for stinging Serpents fish?
True Liberty, amongst Virtues bears the Bell;
He may Live as he Will, which Will Live Well.
EPIG. 63. The Cross of Christ.
THe Cross bore Christ, and Christ the Cross did bear;
It Him, He, It bore, us to rid from fear.
EPIG. 64. Of Religion.
REligion, is a Tree, fruitful and fair,
And must be planted in each Good Man's Heart;
The Root, is Labor, and the Fruit most rare,
Is Honor, every Godly-Mans Desert.
And, well is it said, Men first were Gods by fear;
For, to fear God is Piety's first part:
Religions Root is b^^ter, better on high,
For, Feare's her Fount, her Riuer's Charity.
EPIG. 66. Marryed-folke.
MAn, Love thy Wife, thy Housband, Wife, obey,
Wines are our Heart, We should be Head always.
EPIG. 67. Study.
SOme men grow-mad, by Studying much to know:
But, who growes-mad, by Studying Good to grow?
EPIG. 69. The Blessed Virgin.
HEr Makers Mother, Gods dear Spouse,
The Daughter of her Child;
A Maid, yet Wise; Mother, yet Maid;
Was Blessed Mary mild.
EPIG. 74. Liberty of Speech.
SOme, hold it the only Liberty to Prate,
But that is true Freedom Speech to Moderate.
EPIG. 75. A Problem to Marcus.
WHat profits it, or Good or Bad to be?
Since, little difference twixt them Both we see,
For, Bad are punished justly as by force;
The Good by Might, as if by Lawful course.
EPIG. 78. To Christ.
Our Hold-fast Anchor, and safe Ship
Of Faith, our Sea of Love;
Earths sauory Salt, Celestial Sun,
Our Soules-Health from above:
Thy Cross has Crossed Deaths great rage,
By thy Death, Death lies Dead;
And is it not strange that Death should Dye,
Or ere be vanquished?
EPIG. 79. Self-love.
THey, which the faults of others quickly spy;
But at their own will wink with Selfe-Loues Eye:
How ever, Such, to Some may seem full wise,
Yet, greatest folly this in them descryes.
EPIG. 84. A Prayser.
BY Praising, Good-men Better be,
Praise, Bad-men worse does make:
Wisemen do grow more Cautulous,
Fool^s greater Pride do take.
EPIG. 92. Al-wayes the same.
ONe-God, there ever was and ere shall be,
Why then One-Faith amongst us have not we?
One-Faith, as does One Day, the world should light:
As One-God's in the world, and Sun most bright.
EPIG. 94. Christ's Wounds.
Christ's Wounds, to us, were rather Salues than Sores,
For, our Lost-Healt^, by them, He t'vs restores.
EPIG. 101. Christ the Way.
Would walk the Way which Leads to Life eternal?
'Twas Sent, it is Seen, in Christ thy King supernall.
EPIG. 104. Patience or Content.
Thou Would Dye, or not Dye; Death or Stays,
Or Comes; yet take thy Lot:
It Is Ill to Nill, as Bad to Will,
When thou should Dye, or Not.
EPIG. 109. Man.
THe Heart's a Hurt, procured by Care,
Our Corpse, Corruption dry;
We Are borne, but how? Often to be sick,
We Live, why? often to Dye.
EPIG. 112. Eloquence.
NOt many Weeds, but whol^some Herbs,
The fertile Grounds declare:
They Are Eloquent which Well can speak;
Not those which Babblers are.
EPIG. 117. O Times and Manners!
WHy thus do Men, M^nners and Times accuse?
When M^n themselves, Manners and Times abuse;
W' are Bad in the^, they wors^ by us do grow,
Yet, we complain that help to make them so.
EPIG. 120. Of Strife or Contention.
O, I could wish, I might so happy be,
Men, Strive to Love, not Love to Strive, to see.
EPIG. 124. Marryed-folke.
A House, us both in Discord cannot contain,
In Bed, we both in Concord do remain.
EPIG. 135. Christ.
AS Morning is Nights End and Days beginning:
So Christ is Deaths End and Saluations Spri^ging.
EPIG. 140. Of Sleep.
IF Sleep be Death, then Death than Sleep
Can be estee^'d noug^t else;
The more thou Slee^'st then, less thou Live,
This, plain ^xperience tells,
And is our Death but like a Sleep?
When Men have Slept, they Wake;
Then Courage Christian, Fear o Wretch;
Thee Heaven, thee Hell shall take.
EPIG. 147. Against Epicures.
Often have I heard both Young and Old complain,
That Love and Life don't Long-enough remain:
Life's Pleasure, Pleasures Life is short soon spent;
He Is wise therefore can leave both, with content.
EPIG. 148. Works.
GOod-men to Heaven, their Good-Deedes follow well;
The Wicked's Ill-Deeds, follow them to H^ll.
EPIG. 161. Sense, Reason, Faith, Love, God.
Sense, void of Reason, silly is,
Reason's bad, without Faith;
Faith's Nothing-worth, if Love it lack,
Love's good, if God it has.
EPIG. 164. Wisdom, Fortitud^.
It Is Wisdom, Evils to beware,
To bear them's Fortitude;
The Wise not bears, nor Valiant fears,
Harms borne and well eschew'd.
EPIG. 165. Labor.
HE which by Sweat, would have Men Eat,
And by their Labor Live;
If they take pain, with him to Reign,
Heavens Dainties will them give.
Epig. 168. Christian Aduerbes.
Not Adjectives but Aduerbes best can do:
Not, What-Good, Ho^-Well God has care unto.
EPIG. 171. Time.
TIme All Consumes, both Us and every Thing,
We Time Consume, thus, Both one Song do Sing*
EPIG. 172. Much Admonition to his Friend Michael Heydon.
Do nothing Rashly, Faintly; All with Heed,
Too-Late, too-Soone do nothing; All with Speed:
Nature, Thee faint, Wisdom Thee valiant makes,
Who? fears things fearful, which, Heed of them takes.
EPIG. 176. Honesty, Dishonesty.
GOod-men hate Vice, because they Virtue love,
That there is few-Good, this, then, does plainly prove.
Dishonesty is now so high ascended,
And Honesty so Low, so vilipended;
That in these Sin-full, Sin-foule days well-nigh,
It Is counted Vicious, to Live Virtuously.
EPIG. 178. Of the Soul.
Man's Soul Celestial is above the Skies:
For, with the Body if it Rise, it Dies.
EPIG. 180. Hell.
AS, Black by no means can be Dyed White,
From Hell to Heaven, so, None can take their flight.
EPIG. 192. Man.
MAn cries in's Birth, what Ioy's then to be Borne?
Why weep we at Men's Deaths as Men forlorn?
EPIG. 196. Wise Simplicity.
LIke harmless Dove, to Live in Love,
To all Men does belong:
Like Serpents wise, Live, I advise,
That none may do thee wrong.
EPI^. 206. Upon the Death of Charles Blunt, Earl of Devonshire.
WHether Sad-Passion, or sweet Praise to use,
An Elegy or Elogie to choose,
I doubt devise, such is my Love, thy Loss;
Oh, greedy Death to take Gold, leave us Dross.
Now thou art Dead many tr^ke much of Thee,
Good, Best; Bad, Worst; this, is well praised to be.
FINIS.
EPIGRAMS.
Out of one sole Book.
EPIG. 23. Against Marcus.
NAture has given two-Hands, one Tongue to Men,
They should perform more than they promi^e then
Thou Wilt promise much, naught give, but All delay,
As though thou had two Tongues, no Hands to pay.
EPIG. 24. The Romish Mass Priest, and Geneuian Minister.
Mass^-Priest. FOr Adultery no man should Dye,
Thus Baals Priest still cries;
His Neighbors Wife, he Loves a Life,
Himself has None; He Is Wise.

Geneuian Minister. For Adultery 't's fit Men should Dye,
Thus the Geneuian cries:
But what is the Cause he would have such Laws?
His Wife is fair; He Is Wise.

EPIG. 27. Against a Covetous Clyent.
WHat? doft thou grudge, because the Judge
Is Deaf and will not hear?
Thy- Selfe's to blame, who to him came,
And Feeling did forbear.
EPIG. 34. Against Linus.
THou wast my Debtour when I Lent thee Coin,
Pay me mine own, and then I will be thine.
EPIG. 39. Man is a Stage Player.
Man's Life's a Tragike Comedy,
Hope is his Argument;
The Prologue Faith; the Acts are Love,
The Stage Earths Continent.
And in this Manner, when, to Day,
Kings and Meane-Men do end their Play;
To Morrow, others take their Rooms,
Whiles they do fill up Graves and Tombs.
EPIG. 44. Neither in this World, nor in the World to come. Against Damiane.
WHether things Present or to Come, I mind,
Than thou, more Wretch, in the World I cannot find,
The World to Come auailes thee naught, The art Bad,
And being a Fool, no Good can here be had.
EPIG. 52. Against biting Momus or Carping Zoilus.
BAck-byter, why do thou thy Brother Bite?
In Envying what he has well effected,
In Carping-at what he has Ill-neglected,
Brothers, each Others Slips let-slip, not smite.
EPIG. 54. Against a Selfe-Louer.
Unto thy Neighbor, be as kind
As to thy- Self thou art;
Thou Wilt say I am, how is that? my Self
Am nearest mine own Heart*
EPIG. 63. Learning most neglected.
LEarned Apollo, once, vnshaued went,
But now, He Is Cut, sho^ne, torn and all-berent; space:
His Lovely face is, now, in such a Case,
As scarce it Smiles, once, in a twelue-moneths
Alas, he Dreams that Deemes Parnassus pleasant,
Honor (Arts Hope) is given to every Pesant,
To play on Phoebus Lute,'s to play the Lout,
Learning goes Lame (now) and is Sick of the Gout:
When D^l^s have Luck on Honors step to stay,
Let Scholars burn their Books and go to play!
EPIG. 67. It Is Better to Give, than to Receive.
Man's propertie's to Take, and Gods to Give,
Too few such Giuing-Gods in these days Live.
EPIG. 68. Against Ponticus the Clyent.
CLyent, art Sick of the C^thagran-Gout,
And nothing on thy Lawyer wilt bestow?
Of The Podagra He Is ill then, cannot stir out,
A Lazy Lamenes then does on him grow;
For if he be not both often Prayed and Paid,
Thy Caus^ for this cause shall be long delayed.
EPIG. 71. Philautus and Philaristo.
Philautus. THou do expect (my Philarist)
That I, a Gift should send;
Except my Self, Gift have I none,
This, I to Thee commend.

EPIG. 72.
Philaristo. YOu sent a Gift, and Nothing 'twas,
I, Nothing send to you:
You Gave your Self, your Self to you
I send-backe; so Adieu.

EPIG. 73. To Sir Henry Fanshaw, Knight.
IF Fortune had Allotted thee by Lot,
Augustus Empire or Mecoenas Store;
This Age had seen Poetick-Maro's more,
But, No Mecoenas, Maro is forgot.
EPIG. 78. A Heavenly Archer.
FAith, is our Shaft; our Bow-string, Hope;
Our Bow, is well-bent Love;
Our Length and Height is Heaven on high,
Our Mark, is God above.
EPIG. 81. To a Litigious Debtor.
Thou Art much perplexed and troubled day by day,
Not How thou May, but How thou May Not Pay.
EPIG. 91. Covetous Liberality, Against Acerra.
ACerra Gives to Take; to Give Takes not:
To Take's his Mark; to Giue's his Shaft and Shot.
EPIG. 92. Against the Romish Catholic.
IF any one would thy Religion know,
'T's Catholic, Apostolic, thou wilt say;
Catholic Love, (I think) to All thou wilt show,
But why do not for Catholic Faith pray?
EPIG. 101. The Souls Eclipse.
AS, Earth is Interposed, between
The Sun and Moons thick shade;
So Sin betwixt Me and my God,
Has Sep^ratio^ made.
EPIG. 112. From the Womb to the Tomb.
AS, Beasts in the Fields to be our Food do Fate;
So Worm^ling-Man is Borne to be Wormes-Meate.
EPIG. 119. Women's Tire.
YOur high-horn'd Laces, are more like
A Housetop than attire;
To Build, not Beautify their Heads,
Is Women's fond desire.
EPIG. 120. All-things are Nothing.
HE which made All of Naught, Himself is All:
And what God made of Naught, we Naught may call.
EPIG. 135. Funeral Sermons.
WE wrong Men Living, Praise them being Dead:
O Pleasant Death, o gloomy-Life so Led!
EPIG. 121. Anger and Patience.
AS Water cooles the Fires hot flame,
And Fire, Cold-water warmes:
So Patience Peaseth Angry minds,
Wrath moves the Dull to Arms.
EPIG. 143. The Body bids the Soul farewell.
FOr thee (o Soul) my Mother Earth I left,
And now, I must of thee be thus bereft.
The Soul bids the Body farewell.
And I, fond Fool, did God my Father Leave
For thee; who Now to Heaven will Me receive,
I must to Him, Thou must to Her depart,
From Heaven am I, from Earth derived, Thou art:
There, till we meet, we must Disioyn'd remain,
Till Earth Me thee; God Thee Me give again.
EPIG. 145. Hot-Waters.
Our trickling Tears express our private Love;
Love causes Tears; strange, Fire should Water prove.
EPIG. 147. Poor Comfort to his Rich Friend.
Unconstant Fortune Changes in short space,
Hence grows my Hope, thy Fear, ^uch is thy case.
EPIG. 153. To his Friend waxing-old.
THou lately wast a Yong-man, I a Child,
My Self a Yong-man now, Thee, Old I see:
Death, shortly, Looks for Thee, Old Age for Me,
Thy Lot's most Sure, but I may be beguilde.
EPIG. 157. To Pontilian.
POntilian, art thou jealous over thy Wife?
The art wise; but, art Not? then I say the art wise;
Watch Her, or Not, in vain is all thy strife,
For, if She list, She Will Fool thee before thine eyes:
But, She Is a ^ife most Loving, wise and just,
Who, though She could, never wrongs her Housbands trust.
EPIG. 160. London to I. W* Citizen and Goldsmiths.
EVen as, the Thames, small Spring^ and Streams Drinks in,
So, London, Wealth, from poorer Towns does win;
But, though the Thames to Sea Runs every Tide,
Silver and Gold at London still abide.
EPIG. 161. To William Cawley, a London Merchant. Debtour and Creditour.
THough in my Book, thy Name here be,
Yet, Mine in Thine, thou can not show;
For, more than Love, Thee Naught I owe,
This, I Will expect, and Pay to thee.
EPIG. 166. A Marriage-Song.
In The Day, thou art the Object of mine Eyes;
In The Night, Loves Subject thou shall be likewise.
EPIG. 168. To his Beloved.
I Love thee well, Now-Knowne, I loved the vn-kowne,
Thy fame did first, thy form now has me taken;
Love, now I know; I Love, not Loved, forsaken,
I know what is, I Love, not I Am Loved; o Moan.
EPIG. 169. A Younger Brother.
I Am Poor, it is true; my Parents, Me blame not,
Who before my Brother have not Me begot.
EPIG. 180. To Old Ponticus.
THou, which did never Do good- Deed,
But still add Sin to Sin;
When will thou these Bad Courses leave,
And to be Good begin?
O when I Dye, I Will Leave (say Thou)
To the Poor my Whole-Estate;
He that is not Wise, until he Dies,
I think is Wise too Late.
EPIG. 181. A Black-Moore in White Clothes.
O Rare seen Bird! much like a Swan most white,
Thy Clothes as Snow, thy Skin like Pitch in sight.
Epig. 199. Gold out of Doung.
VIrgil, from ^innius Doung, did Gold extract,
And our Phisicians do the selfsame Act.
EPIG. 205. To his Covetous Friend.
WHat Ric^-m^n have, it is All, their-owne,
From Friends, Themselves, they will Spare:
But yet they Haue-^ot, what they Have,
This is the Misers share.
EPIG. 208. Christ-Masse and Mid-sommer.
John Baptist, came in the Summers prime,
And Christ in the Winter season;
They, Fire and Water, both, fore-show,
And both, for holy Reason:
How well these Contrarie^ concur,
John's Fire, Christ's Water pure;
Gods Fire our Sins to purify,
Christ's Water, Sin to Cure.
EPIG. 214. Aesops Tongue.
OF all Man's Members, than the Tongue, there is none,
More Noble-Good, more Nimble Bad be known.
EPIG. 220. Hardened Wickedness Against Linus.
GOod-Wine (they say) makes Vinegar most Tart:
Thou, the more Witty, the more Wicked art.
EPIG. 240. Against Ponticus a Selfe-Louer.
Neither the Mind nor Eye themselves do see,
That thou thy- self shuldst Love then, how may't be?
EPIG. 241. A Quere.
O Would to God, that, that which Christ enquired
Of his Disci^les; what men of him spoke:
The same of Prince, Priest, People were desired,
Of their Good-name and fame survey to take:
If every one would this desire to know,
He Would Know he is Bad and Better, strive to grow,
EPIG. 242. Report, Error.
Errors by Error, Tales by Tales great grow,
As Small Snow-balls by rolling too and fro.
EPIG. 249. Of Himself.
SOme men there be, which say of me,
That I am not a Poet;
They say well, why? I do not Lie,
I write the Truth, I know it.
EPIG. 253. The Worlds Dungeon.
THis World's a Prison, Heaven as Walls does stand,
The ^aylour's Sin, Women our Iron-band.
EPIG. 259. The Bag.
AS, Birds with Bird-Lime commonly are caught*
So, wide-Bags are with Wealth well filled and fraught.
A Bag and Bird Li^e are m^^^h like in using,
This Hangs, that Holds, Birds, Gold, both safe from losing.
EPIG. 276. To the Lady Arbella Stuart.
IF Fame or Virtue did consist in Words,
In thy Praise I might Thousand-Verses write:
My Muse cannot Promote thy Glory bright,
Thy Virtue rather Grace to It affords.
EPIG. 138. Every one thinks his own fairest. Cic. Tuscul. Quaest. Lib. 5.
THy Neighbors Wife to The^, to Him thine's fairest:
Then, that is not true, that All think their own rarest.
EPIG. 255. Man's Condition.
TIll one Foot falls, the the other does not Rise;
So one Man's wrack, Another magnifies.
EPIG. 262. Two Contrary Courtiers.
AT Court these Copesmates dwell, though not the same,
Momus who All, Gnatho who Naught will blame*
FINIS.
EPIGRAMS.
Out of the six last Books.
The first Book. To the Reader.
Do marvel, why (since now adays Men use
Verses in praise of the Author) I't refuse;
My Verses need no Patron to protect them,
If Good they are Good; if Bad they are Bad, neglect them.
EPIG. 4. To the Prince.
THy Heart (in Breast, Hea^ts Chest) Sense, Reason, Will,
Thy Head, thy Wit, in Thee their Parts fulfill,
For, Reason, Sense; thy Wit, thy Will does guide;
Thy Head is by thy Heart well rectifide.
Wales had three Princes stiled-Great; thy Brother
Made-vp the fourth; in the fifth place Thou art the other.
EPIG. 6. Orpheus.
ORpheus, his Wife Redeemed from Hels hot flame,
Who e're knew Wife, for Husband do the same?
EPIG. 8. Whether Saint Peter were at Rome.
WHether or no, Saint Peter were
At Rome, is Disputable;
^ut yet that Simon has been there,
Is most Vn-refutable.
EPIG. 16.
Honors Etymo logic. Honors Genea logic.
EBricians, Hon; French, Or'; do Riches call,
Hence then we see Hon-ors original.
And since that Wealth is Honors Pedigree,
No marvel, though Rich-Asses Honored be.
EPIG. 19. A Regular Woman.
A Woman, to a Gen'rall-Rule,
We fitly may compare;
Why so? Those Rules do often deceive,
And so do Women fair.
EPIG. 20. Salomons Wish.
WHy did the Wisest King for Wisdom crave?
He had bin Wise to have wished Wealth to have.
He wished not Wealth, Wisdom was his best Prize,
Wisdom he wished, why? 'Cause he was not Wise.
EPIG. 24.
Blessed are the Power makers. Blessed are the Peace makers.
GReat Britains tottering State, affairs,
Munite' United be;
King JAMES our Gracious Peacemaker,
Power-maker blessed is He.
EPIG. 34. Irregularitie.
WHat I Require, I cannot Acquire,
And what I Can, I Nill;
Thus all Man's Life, is naught but Strife,
Now Nill, anon he Will.
EPIG. 63. To a Batchelour.
A Wife is Good, Better's a Good;
But Best is none at-all:
I wish the Best may be my Lot,
And none to thee may fall.
EPIG. 66. Three Delta's.
THat, in the Worlds-Sea thou may not Ship-wracke make,
These Delta's three, as Rocks, see, thou forsake:
Dis (worldly Riches) Devils and Delight,
These Three to the Spirit bear a mortal spite.
EPIG. 67. A Pair of Gallows to P. L.
A Thiefes Hope is a Rope, Death is his Due,
The Gallows all such Fellows does pursue,
But many escape? true, yet their Fates attend them;
And at the last, the horrid Hemp will end them.
EPIG. 72. Whether Bacchus be a God. To a Drunkard.
See thou not when thou art Drunk with dulcid Wine?
How Bacchus makes thy Head to the Foot decline:
Since, He low feet exalts, high Heads brings down,
This shows that He Is thy God of high Renown.
EPIG. 76. The Priest, the People.
THe Priests do Pray both Night and Day,
The Laymen they take pains;
These Plough the Soil, those Plough the Soul,
These Teach, those Tithe their Gains.
EPIG. 58. To the most Learned King James.
TO be a Poet-Good, (me thinks) is much,
To be a Good Man, is (me thinks) as fair:
To be a Good-King, (I suppose) few such;
Thou art Good Poet, Man and King, most rare.
EPIG. 44. Against Quintus a Dreamer.
I Often have seen thee, Quintus, in sad plight,
And mourn in the morn, when thou from sleep did rise;
Because thy dreams did never fall out, right,
And marvel not, for, daily thou tell Lies:
How then can Dreams the Truth to thee declare,
When all the Day to forge-Lyes is thy care?
EPIG. 8^. Deaths Indifferency.
Floods fight with Floods: so Man with Ma^'s at strife:
The Ocean strives in's Motion, Man in's Life:
Rivers once Run to Sea, have the same savor,
Death equals All (as Waves Waves) without favor.
EPIG. 86. Against Cinna a Phisician.
CInna cures sickness, how? he kills the sickly,
And what he does, he ( Iudas-like) does quickly:
Happy, thrice happy are his Patients, sure;
A tedious sickness they shall never endure.
EPIG. 92. To the Prince.
ALL Night I Dream of naught but Gold and Gain,
Thus am I Rich all Nigh^, a Wre^ch all Day:
With Gold make-good my Dreams sweet Prince I pray.
So, Reall-Royall-Rich I shall remain.
EPIG. 94. A Court Louse.
THe Smoo^h-boote Flatt'rer Runs about the Court,
And unto Prince and Peers does most resort:
So La^ines name the Louse for's many-feet,
Lice, much to the Body, most to the Head do fleet.
EPIG. 96. Against Galatea.
Hearts, yearly, change their snaggie Horns they say:
Thy Husbands Horns are changed euery-day.
EPIG. 102. Against Gellia.
WIth Papists, Gellia, thou did e're take part:
Worse art thou now, how? Catholic thou art.
EPIG. 103. Against Aulus.
WHen Aulus is a little Sick in bed,
Or has the Toothache, or distemp'red Head,
O would to God I were in Heaven, he will say;
So, the Heir for's Father, Would to God, does pray.
EPIG. 108. Against Festus.
FEstus, thou art old, and yet would married be:
Ere thou do so, this Counsel take of me;
Look into Lillies Grammar, there thou wilt find
Cornu a Horn, a word still vndeclin'd:
This Counsell's good; take it not as a mock,
For sure, I think, few old-men escape this Rock.
EPIG. 110. Against Cornelius.
ALthough Corn-elius know himself Cornute,
Yet he with patience, holds his peace, is mute;
Therefore, I think, he is not Cornelius,
But fitlier may be termed Tacitus.
FINIS.
EPIGRAMS.
Out of second Book.
EPIG. 5. What Love is.
A Iocund-Iayle, a wanton-warre,
A most unpleasant Pleasure;
A tottering Trust, a Bitter-sweet
Is Love; Mirth without Measure.
EPIG. 14. A Mathematical Instrument, called a Iacobs-Staffe, to Mathematics.
THy Iacobs-Staffe take unto thee,
I Will Genesis 28.12.
Iacobs-Ladder choose;
These Steps, more than thy Staff can show,
If I them well will use.
EPIG. 17. Death's Epitaph, to the Death of Death.
DEaths Los^e, was in Christ's Cross,
Thence never more rising:
Christ's Death, Deaths Death,
Christ's Cross, Deaths Tomb comprizing.
EPIG. 19. Of God and Man.
God is the Word, and by his Word,
God, All in the World has wrought:
Man vtters Words, Words Man's chief Mark,
than words, Man else is naught.
EPIG. 21. Of Fasts.
POpes in the Year, as may appear,
Do many Fasts ordain;
For to declare, that Who was a Fisher
Peter's Chair
They rightly do retain.
EPIG. 39. Socrates Wisdom.
WHen I was Young, I thought I All-things knew:
The more I now-know, more my wants I rue.
EPIG. 44. Earths Body.
EArths Sinews, are her Mettels rich;
Her Bones, are Stones most strong;
Water's her Blood; her Superfice,
Her Skin; Grass, her Hair long.
EPIG. 54.

The Religious Man. What Is Well-done, 's Ill-done, if too- Publicly.

Politician. What Is Ill-done, 's Well-done, if none do it Spy.

EPIG. 56. An English Proteus.
IN Clothes, we Thrift and Honesty refuse*
For Pride and Pleasure's All, Naught, Long, we use.
EPIG. 66. A Shrow Tamed.
Would Tame thy Wife? first, Tame her Tongue, as Dumb:
Who thus his Wife Comes-o're, shall Overcome.
EPIG. 74. Pride of Life.
MAn swe^s, although his Gran-Dame is the Earth;
Ear^h swells, although from Nothing it had Birth:
So, Man, as Mou^d; Him, past Himself does raise,
Mould sw^ls with Mounts; Man's Mind his P^ide d^splayes.
EPIG. 81. Eues and the Serpents meeting.
EVes and the Serpents Prattling, wrought our Sin:
Oh would to God; He Dumb, She Deaf had bin.
EPIG. 85.
Neither too great a Good one, Neither too little a Bad one.
A Giant-like, tall, stammell-Wife,
Though Ex^'lle^t, I Would not choose;
A Bad-condition'd, though a Dwarf,
I will as soon refuse.
EPIG. 88. Love is Blind.
LIke one another, Drunkenness,
And Love, are, in effect;
Drunkenness Blindes the Bodies Eyes,
Love Blinds the Minds aspect.
EPIG. 87. An Amorous Epistle.
NO Love is Hopeless, this makes Lovers free:
The Thing, not Hope, I Love; No-Thing but Thee.
EPIG. 91. A Christian Zodiac.
THE Apostles goodly Fellowship,
Are my twelve heavenly Signs;
My Zodiac, is perf^ct Faith;
My Sun, in Jesus shines.
EPIG. 100. To the Reader.
I Leave Narcissus when I Verses write;
When thou do Read them, banish Him thy sight*
FINIS.
EPIGRAMS.
Out of the third Book.
EPIG. 1. GOD the Beginning of All Things.
GOd was the first, in the first God did reside,
Before the first, after the first shall bide;
First without firsts, and from this first, each thing,
That first was made, did first-beginning bring.
EPIG. 4. The Art of Memory.
SImonides, found the Art of Memory,
But none the Art of Wit could ere descry.
EPIG. 6.
SAtan of the Woman Bought-vs; Christ re-Bought-vs;
Adam Impure, but Christ Most-Pure has wrought-vs.
EPIG. 7. The Praise of Liberality.
WHat e're we Give, does ever live,
Gifts follow Him that Gives;
The Giver and the Taker both,
By Gifts the better Live.
EPIG. 10. To Queen Anne.
Wife, Daughter, Sister, Mother to a King,
What rarer Titles may we to Thee bring?
With these four Titles, thou four Virtues have,
With what more Glory may a Queen be graced?
EPIG. 13. A New-Man.
Drive what thou did Derive from the Old-Man-Sinne,
Soon, to Refresh thy Flesh, from Sin, Begin.
EPIG. 14. Health.
EVen from my Heart, much Health I Wish,
No Health I Will Wash with Drink:
Health Wished, not washed, in Words, not Wine,
To be the best I think.
EPIG. 15. Forbidden-Fruit.
WHen Adam Ate Forbidden-Meate,
Deluded by the Devil;
He was not Evils Primitive,
But, worse than the Apple of Evil.
EPIG. 16. Trojans and Greeks.
THe Trojan says, I much do fear
The Greeks, when they bring Gifts.
Who is the Greek? The Poore-Man. Who
Are Trojans? Rich-Make-Shifts.
EPIG. 21. N. A.
N's first; A, follows; Naught than All Is more old:
That God of Naught made All, all Truth does hold.
EPIG. 23. Holiness is Healthfulnesse.
NO man can Long; Well, all Men may;
Yet no Man Will, Live, Well:
If thou wilt Live Long, endeavor then
In Virtue to excel.
A Bride is a Ship. EPIG. 25.
THe Taile's the Stern; Fore-Deck^ the Beak;
The Keele, the Belly is;
Her Wings, the Sails; a Bird, a Bark
Is then, not much amiss.
EPIG. 30. Against Pannicus a Rich-Asse.
THat Fortune favors Fools can thou not see?
Bele^ue thy Self, if thou wilt not Credit Me.
EPIG. 33. Homer.
Marvel not much though Homer blind tell Lies,
Since He by Hearsay went, not Sight of's Eyes.
EPIG. 35. Little, Nothing, Too-much, Enough.
THe Poor have Little, Beggars None,
The Rich Too-much, Enough not One.
EPIG. 37. To the Right Honorable, William Earl of Pembrooke, etc.
NOt Old in years, nor Young in each rare Part,
One of the Kings and Kingdoms Props thou art,
That on thee this great Grace thy King does Lay:
Or should I joy thy Merit? Beth I may.
EPIG. 48. Humility.
AS, Low-Dales bear more fertile Grass,
More Sterill Mountaines-high;
In Wisdom, so, Meek Minds do pass
Selfe-flated Subtilty;
The Mind's a Mount, our Will's a Hill;
The Mounts Top is Wills Wit:
Each highest Hill is Sterill still,
And Nimblest Wit vn-fit.
EPIG. 54. The Clyent.
IF to thy Cause the Judge shall Help apply,
Thy Knees to Him, Clyent, in-Cline wisely.
EPIG. 57. The Serpent, Eve, Adam.
THe subtle Serpent, heed-lesse Eve
Deceived, was not deceived;
Not Adam Her, She Him made fall,
Both thus of Joy bereaved:
Both Actiuely and Passiuely,
She therefore thus did Sin;
Deceived Her-Selfe, deceives Him,
Snared, Snares Him in Deaths Grin.
EPIG. 59. To Polydore.
O Polydore, to Men most Poor,
The Datiue-Case is best;
Your Ablative does them depri^e
Of Comfort, Ease and rest:
Giuers than Takers better are.
True, but these Ablatiues,
This Age does see too frequent be,
Seld' seen are Rich-Datiues.
EPIG. 60. To --.
ALas, poor Creature-Seruing two,
Thou art in woeful state:
One-Master, nothing has to Give,
Thy the other is Ingrate.
EPIG. 61. Threefold Continency.
WHen thou do any Ill-thing Hear or See,
Thy Windows, Ears and Eyes fast shut let be;
And that thou Speake-not unadvisedly,
Locke-fast thy Doors, thy Lips; thy Tongue fast tie.
EPIG. 62. Saturnes three Sons.
THree Sons had Saturn, Poets feign,
And of especial fame;
Hell was ones place, Riches his Grace,
Nummi-potent by Name:
The Second had in the Sea abode,
His Name Amni-potent;
To the Third was given his seat in Heaven,
Called Jove Omni-potent.
EPIG. 63. The Old Man speaks to the Yong-man.
MY Life is short, and Live I cannot Long;
Thine shortly will be short, though now thou art strong.
EPIG. 67. To an Angry-Man.
LEt Wrath and Anger with the Day decay,
Yet let them not with Phoebus next Day rise;
But as from thy Horizon Titan flies,
Unto the Antipodes; there let them stay.
EPIG. 73. The Lord loves Liberality.
THy Benefits, it not-be-fits,
When Given to count and tell:
God will them both Remunerate,
And Ruminate full well.
EPIG. 77. Heaven.
Heaven is Gods Spacious, Sp^cious Throne of Grace,
The Lords All-potent and All-patent Place*
EPIG. 80. Against Pontilianus.
Dogs on their Masters fawn and leap,
And wag their Tails apace;
So, though the Flatt'rer want a Tail,
His Tongue supplies the place.
EPIG. 81. To Distrust.
LEt none distrust (though Dust) Heavens light to see,
Nor none despair, though's Soul a shadow be*
Our Flesh is Dust, true, but o'th very same,
The glorious Body of Christ Jesus came.
And though our Soul in us a shadow be,
Yet it is the Idea of the Deity.
EPIG. 83. The Rich-Man.
THat Man's most' Retch which is most Rich,
The are often defiled that play with Pitch;
Men to be Great, not Good; desire
Greatness, not Goodness most acquire.
EPIG. 87. To the Jews.
The Law, is your Religion,
And ours is Faith most pure;
You, to believe, will not be-led,
Nor we Good-workes inure.
EPIG. 97. Riches.
GOld's the onely-God, Rich-Men bear Rule*
Money makes Majesty;
Rich-Pluto, not Plaine-Plato, now,
Speaks with applause most high.
EPIG. 98. Three Genders.
A Wife, although most Wise and Chaste,
Is of the Doubtful Gender;
A Queen, oth' Common; Foeminines,
Are Women small and tender.
EPIG. 99. ST. ST. a Sign of Silence.
ST, ST, Men say, Silence to signify:
S, Silence no^es: T, Taciturnity.
EPIG. 100. Where I Doe-Well, There I Dwell.
THat, is my Country, where I Am Fed, not Bred,
Not where I Am Borne, but where I Am best-bested.
Where I may have sufficient Sustenance,
And Live in Love, there is my Inheritance.
EPIG. 103. Actaeon.
ACtaeons Dogs, his flesh, bones, skin, ate clean:
His Horns remain in London to be seen.
EPIG. 112. A Paradox of Dreams.
Dreams which be Bad, are very Good,
Dreams that be Good, are Bad:
For, if my Dreams be Good, I grieve,
But, being Bad, I Am Being awakened.
glad.
EPIG. 119. Scoffing, Prudence.
WIt without Wisdom, is Salt without Meat*
Rude-Literature, Meat without Salt, to Eat.
EPIG. 123. Against a tedious Orator.
WHen thou have Said all thou will Say,
'T remaynes to Say, I Have Said;
This onely-word would please me more,
Than all the Speech the 'ast made.
FINIS.
EPIGRAMS.
Out of the three last Books. The First Book.
EPIG. 3. Lawyers and Phisicians.
Unless the One Deale-^raftily,
The Other Desperate be;
They Both may Eat on Beggars Meat,
And Li^e in Penury.
EPIG. 9. Against Tomasinus.
THe Praise, of prayse-lesse-Asses, some
Have writ, in these our days:
Amongst the rest, have been expressed,
O Tom-Asine, thy Praise.
EPIG. 10. Against Fabianus.
SOme-Men are Bald without, thou Inwardly;
Those want their Hairs, thy Brain-pan's almost Dry*
EPIG. 12. Dalilah.
SAmsons deceitful Dalilah,
His Strength in's Hair destroyed*
In these days, by such Dalilahs
Are many-men annoyed.
EPIG. 14. Birth.
TO Present things w' are Borne, Re-borne
To things to-come, we are;
Though that Be P^ime, yet Principal
Is this, and Better far.
EPIG. 18. Against Paetus, a Problem.
FAther, nor Fath'r-in-law, thou art, to all Those,
Which thy Wife bare thee; then, What the art who knows*
EPIG. 19. Against Pontiliana.
WHy wedded^t thou the ele^'nth day of Decemb^r:
Because, than this no day's more short, night longer.
EPIG. 22. Against Festus, an vn-Iust Judge.
WHat Judas or what Pilate did
Do thou, thou Judge vn-Iust*
With Judas if thou will not Hang.
With Pilate Wash thou must.
EPIG. 26. Against Colinus, Dying Intestate.
WHiles thou did Live, thou naught would give,
Thou Leau'st All, now thou can not Live;
Like Greedy Hog thy Life was Led,
Like Greazie Porke, thou now lie Dead.
EPIG. 36. From Bad to Worse.
He Is Dashed against Scylla, from Charibdis flying,
Which hopes to Salve hi^ Sore, by Phisike Dying*
Fools voyding Vice, the Contrary commit,
Are those to shun Strife, which on Lawyers hit.
EPIG. 47. Against a Foolish-Writer.
O, I could wish thy Paper were All-blacke;
Or that it did Least Spot of blackness lack
EPIG. 51. Females.
YOng-Wenches Coy, and Wanton are*
Faire-Maides, are Infamous:
Witty are Wily, full of Craft*
Lustful, Lasci^ious*
EPIG. 52. Four Law-Termes.
THe Lawyers have four Terms, to which they frame
A most significant and proper name:
First* Michelmasse, from the Angel Because on our Eng^^sh Gold was stamped
the Image of the Angel Michael.
Michael,
For Lawyers Purses then with Angels swell.
The next is Hill^ry a name most fit:
For this Term make^ the Lawyer m^rry, sit.
And Easter-Terme, like Churc^-mens ^aster-Booke*
Much Gold and Gain then to themselves they hook.
Trinity-Terme, so called, because the Law
Three Persons always does together draw;
To wit, ^he Judge, Lawyer, and Clyent poor,
Who travails up to pay the Lawyers-Score.
EPIG. 57. To Faustine.
THat my Booke's Good (thou Faustine) said to me,
If it be Good, would I my Book might be.
EPIG. 65. A Widow.
HE which for's Wife a Widow does obtain,
Does like to those which Buy-Clothes in Long-Lane;
One Cote's not fit, Another's too-too-old,
Their faults I know not, but they are manifold.
Epig. 78. Doctor Ios. Hals Vows and Meditations.
THou Vowed'st Vows, fit to be Vowed,
Worth Reading Works do write:
He Is blessed that Reads thy Vows, if he
To do them take delight.
EPIG. 95. The forsaken Lover.
EVen as Hellfire does Burn, but does not Shine:
So thine not Shines, but sorely burns my Heart:
But toward Thee, like Heavenly fire is wine,
It Shines on Thee, not burns thee, that is my smart:
Oh if thy Love still burn and give no Light,
My shining flame, it self will waste out quite.
EPIG. 98. The Epitaph of C^oesus and Irus.
Under this Stone, lies Croesus buried;
Where Is Irus then? Here, All are Poor when Dead.
EPIGRAMS.
Out of the second Book.
EPIG. 9. Wheele-Greace.
MEn, the Axeltree do Greaze, that they may n't screake;
But, Lawyers must be Greaz'd to make them speak.
EPIG. 17. Against a certain Drunkard.
MVch Prattling causes greatest Thirstinesse,
Thy Wife Talks more then Thou, why Drinks She Less?
EPIG. 49. Veni, Vidi, Vici. Christ.
INto this World, Celestial Caesar came*
Man's Mis^ry with Mercies-Eye He Saw;
He, Death O're-came to his immortal fame,
Then, Him, to's Throne of Mercy did withdraw;
He came, O're-Came, He Saw, foresaw all things,
All this He did, that we might Reign as Kings.
EPIG. 58. A Pure Sacrifice.
THis World was on^e the Temple of the Lord;
The C^osse, the ^l^tar; Christ the Sacrifice;
Christ, God and M^n, our High Priest paid the Price,
To the Altar like a Lamb fast bound with Cord.
EPIG. 71. Of the King, Law and People.
THe King's the She^heard; Men, are Sheep;
Laws, are their Pasture fair;
The Flock being Ill, the King^ great Skill,
By's Laws their Hurts repair.
EPIG. 78. The Devils Force and Fraud.
THe Devil, like a Lion fierce,
Runs all the World about;
Each wand'ri^g Soul that he may Slay,
Like Wind his Rage flyes-out:
Yea, like a Fox most f^audulent,
Satan spreads private Nets;
Thus whom by Force he cannot force,
By subtle Snares he gets.
EPIG. 79. Precept, Practice.
THe learned Preachers Words, though plain,
To Plaine-men Truth may Preach;
But Pastors pious Practice, does
A Holy-Life them Teach:
That Doctor is Diu^ne, indeed,
Which by Good-Workes, proves Words;
More Harm do Ill-Examples breed,
Than Good-Words, Good affords.
EPIG. 84. Against Couetous-Men. Sell all that thou have, and give it to the
Poor.
AH, Killing-Letter, Out-Alas,
What Is this? thus Dives cries;
What means the Holy Ghost? says he,
Sell All? can such be wise?
What means the Holy Ghost? Thou Wretch,
He means, what Thou never thought;
He will Give All unto the Poor,
And thou will Give them Naught.
EPIG. 87. Man, a Hunter, a Fisher, a Fowler.
MAn, Hunts for Wealth and Riches store,
Spreads Nets for Dignities;
And like a Fisher, sounds the Dep^h
Of Deepest Mysteries;
But whiles, fond Man does fish to know,
With Pride, Preferments watches;
And Auaricious, Riches seeks,
He shame and blame often catches.
EPIG. 26. Christ a Divine, a Phisician, a Lawyer.
CHrist, a Divine, Phisician, was whiles here;
In Heaven He shall a Judge most Just appear.
EPIG. 43. Baptism, to a Jew.
Baptism does Wash, but Circumcision Wound:
The Laws dire Launch, Christ's Washing makes most sound.
FINIS.
EPIGRAMS.
Out of the third-Booke.
EPIG. 9. Matrimonial Rule.
THe Nightly Government, is due
Unto the Female kind;
And unto Masculines, to Rule
In The Day, it is assigned:
And this we see Experience proves,
For Cynthia Rules the Night:
And Phoebus rays his Rule displayes,
Who in the Day shines bright.
EPIG. 10. Against a certain Proud-Woman.
A Feather over thy Head thou ha^t,
And Cork under thy feet;
Both these declare, though thou be fair,
Thee to be fond and fleet.
EPIG. 11. Faith.
MY Eyes in the Skies the twinkling Stars,
The Pole, Opinion spies:
So with mine Eye I view Heaven high;
My Faith, my God descryes.
EPIG. 13. Contempt of the World.
Would Live a Good-Life? then, this Life despise;
'T's a wretched Life this Life highly to Prize.
EPIG. 19. Knowledge, Love.
TWo things there be, which I must Know*
And two things I must Love;
God and My-selfe, God and my Friend,
These, Knowledge, Love, approve.
EPIG. 21. Of God and the World.
GOd is not in this World, the World's in God:
We are in the World, O, would we were in God
EPIG. 22. The right of First Fruits and Tithes.
GOd's Al^ha and Omega, therefore He
Must of thy Goods the Tithes and First Fruits, see.
EPIG. 50. Gravity, Leuity.
THough, Grossenes, Lightness, clean contrary be,
A Light-Head, Grosse-Head, I Would not wish to Me;
Both which are ^ad* and such a Wife I hate,
A Light or Lewd, a Gross or Grievous Mate.
EPIG. 52. Schoole-Diuines.
WHat profits all thy Learned-Skill?
If Virtue thou neglect;
Leave off to Search the Truth of Things,
And Good Things more affect.
EPIG. 58. Democritus, Heraclitus.
DEmocritus, Men's falls and faults,
In his Times, did Lament;
Hera^litus, Men's Foolishn^sse,
Did Laugh-at with Contempt:
And ever more such Wretches vile,
And Fools will still remain:
That, if they Lived, from Laughes and Tears,
They never could refrain.
EPIG. 60. Against Arrogant, Ignorant Linus.
A Twofold Ignorance has thee
O Linus, captiuated,
Thou Know Naught, yet Naught to Know,
Thou will not be Conceited.
EPIG. 65. Against a Covetous Niggard.
TO Count thy Coin is nothing worth,
TO Increase the Heape's as small;
As much to Multiply; Divide;
Then I Will thee wealthy call.
EPIG. 67. Against the Writers of this Age.
WE Crop the To^s of others Crop,
Old-Writers Works most rare:
The most of us which now do write,
Old-Writers Eccho's are.
The Authors Desire. A Good-mans Desire. EPIG. 69.
WIth Wealth I wish-not Bags and Chests to stuff
To^-much, Too-little's Ill; Enough's Enough.
EPIG. 78. Christ's Life and Death.
MVch has Christ Done and Much Endured,
All, for vn-worthy M^e,
His Passions showed Him to be Man,
His Actions, God to be.
EPIG. 79. The Wise-Mens Star.
A Star to Math'mat^cks unknown,
At Christ's Birth shining bright,
The Gent^le-Typing Wisemen led
To Christ the Lord of Light:
This Heavenly Guide di^ with them ^ide,
Till they found Christ their Ki^^,
Heaven grant I pray, Faith, my Star, may,
Me also to Him bring.
EPIG. 83. Of the Deluge and Worlds-End.
THe crying Crimes of Noah^ Times
For foule-Lust-burni^g Love,
Were Drowned and Drench't, that Heat wa^ Quenched,
With Water from above:
This Freezing Age of Frosty Love,
And Key-cold Charity,
Will in due Time, for this Cold Crime,
Make All with Fire to fry
By Compositions, thus Phisicians
Make Contraries to Cure,
And Heavens Phisician, Frost with Flames,
Water with Fire can Pure.
EPIG. 86. Of the Just and unjust.
PLeasure, the Good; but Pain attends the Bad:
This frights the Unjust; the other the Just makes glad.
EPIG. 88. Our Redeemer.
WOrth Sight, but Thee, in the World I nothing See,
And I am wise in nothing but in Thee;
My Sun thou art, by Grace Shine in my Heart,
Thou, Thou, alone my Sole, Sweet Savior, art.
EPIG. 91. A Paradox.
TO Hell, though every wretched Atheist goes,
In Hell's no Atheist; there, He, Hell well knows.
EPIG. 94. Difference betwixt a Good King and a Tyrant.
A Good- King marks what is godly, just and right,
A Tyrant minds his strict Command and Might;
I, Good- Kings Power prefer before Tyrants Pray,
The Ones threats are treates, the Others Pay's, Decay.
EPIG. 95. Against a certain --.
FOr Madmen Bedlem; Bride well's for a Knave,
Choose, wheth'r of these two, thou had rather have.
EPIG. 98: Life-Bloud.
MOses the Life of All, in the Blood did place:
My Life, in Christ's Blood has his only Grace.
EPIG. 100. Against a Foolish Writer.
THy Booke's aeternall (if such Books may be)
Beginning none, nor End of it I see.
EPIG. 102. Upon the Death of Prince Henry. 1612.
DEad is that Prince, whom Dead we may lament,
With Floods of Tears, till Tears last Drops be spent,
Our Albions Hope, Glory of Britains King,
Arts Prop, Wars Pillar, Virtues hopeful Spring.
To whom none e're came near, but his dear Brother,
Save his sweet Sister, never such Another.
A Prince much Honored Living; Loved when Dead,
Hi^ Nations Light, Delight, whiles Li^e He led.
Whiles I these things which Teare-swolne eyes sigh-out,
From both my Springs Tears gush-^orth all about.
Believe me (Reade^) if what is Grief thou know,
Sighs stop my Speech; I weep, Tears ouer-flow.
His Epitaph.
Herr^ lies (dry Eyes, read not this Epitaph)
Kings, Queens, Prince, Princess, Peoples hopeful Staff.
Omnis Gloria Deo debita.
FINIS.
To the Excellent Translatour of the EPIGRAMS of Master JOHN OWEN, Master JOHN
VICARS.
OWen does owe thee much, that thou have so
Transplanted these his Plants, and made them grow
Within our Soil: and we owe much to either,
TO Him that them set, to Thee that brought them hither.
Idem ad Lectorem.
Would thou know where Wits Quintessence does lie?
Read these few Leaves thou wilt see it by-and-by.
Nathaniel Hall, Gent.


