THE Pleasant Fable of Hermaphroditus and Salmacis. by T. Peend Gent. With a
moral in English Uerse.

Anno Domini. 1565. Mense Decembris.

To M. Nycholas Sentleger Esquyer.
WHen I had employed sometime in translating Ouids Metamorphos^s, and had
achyued my purpose in part thereof, intendyng to have trauayled further: I
understood that another had prevented me. And so, after that I had received
copyes thereof from the Prynter, I was resolved to stay my labor, and to
reserve that to the use and behofe of my pryuat friend: which I intended to have
made comen to every man. How be it because I know my self on diverse causes
aleged to your worship, being no less learned your self, then affectioned to
every commendable faculty, having nothing more fyt at this time: I thought it
good to gratefye you with some part thereof, and that not altogether under the
note and figure according to the text. Aplyenge also a moral to the Fable. And
because it has pleased you upon your good will, rather then for the
worthynes hereof, to accept and commend my Copye in writing: I am now therefore
bold to publysh it in prynte under the patronage of your name. The rather to
amend the volume of this other history. And thus neither my first labors shall
altogether syncke: nor I shall seem to abuse the writer, or reader of those
four books of Metamorphosis, which be so learnedly translated all redye. Thus
yours for his small power assured. Wis^heth you Galenes health, ye good fortu^e
which Policrates enjoyed for the most part of his life, and Nesters years.

T. Peend.
From my Chamber over against Sergeants Inn in Chancery lane. 1564.
The pleasant Fable of Hermaphroditus and Salmacis, by T. Peend. With a
mor^all in Englysh Uerse.
SAME Venus once by Mercurye
compress, a child did bear:
For beuty far excellyng all
that erff before him wear.
This noble child by name was calde
Hermaphroditus so,
Of both his parents names it is
deryued, Herm^s and Aphrodite, Andrognus.
as ye kn^.
His shape it did so far excede
the graces of all other:
That then the countenance of the child
might well dyserye his mother.
His portrature beuyne, it was
so perfect in each poyncte,
His noble lyms so fair to sight,
so set in every ioynte,
That he might seem Dame Natures w^rke'
as far for to excel:
As do the Gods the shape of men,
as ancient stories tell.
As to his face it was so fair,
and bright with bewtyes shine:
That it excelled the glysteryng beams
in Phoebus face deuyne.
A pattern plain to mend her moold
Dame Nature there might see.
Thereby appeard how merueylous
the works of god they be.
The Phrigian boy, ^amini^es son ^f Trois (...) ynge of ^roye.
by Thegle caught
on Jove tattend and wayght.
Liri^pes* son Narsisus fair,
Nymphe Echo her daynty bayte,
Not Atis fine, which was sumtyme
accepted well with love,
Nor yet the boy in incest got
which Venus so did love. Adonis ^^nne of Mirr^a (...) her (...) ^in^ra^.

Al these were not to be comparde
with young Hermaphrodite.
Nor Cupide sure his brother blind,
if Poets truly write,
Might not with him in shape compare,
but yet to fortune he
Was subject more then this, as we
by thend may plainly see.
For Cupide he does yet now live
a stoborne wytlesse boy:
But Hermaphrodite death at last
had power for to dystroye.
How be it by doleful dome, he lost
him self before he dyed.
Such was his lot. Yet seems it strange
one from him self to s^yed.
Some would not think that any man,
might change his nature so,
That from him self by desteny,
he might depart or go.
How be it the stranger that it seemd,
the rather did I choose
To write of him whose lot it was
by ill luck him self to loose.
Among a thousand stories which
are worthy to be scande,
In golden verse by skylfull pen,
I took this same in hand,
To show my ready will to you
till greater power in me:
As corespondent to my mind
like wise it may agree.
Wherefore the whylst I shall desyr^
your Maystershyp to take
This same, in worth of worthy warke,
and full account to make,
That want af will is not in me,
Though power thereto do not agree.
But now this son of Mercuryes
in Ida mount was fed,
And fostred: thear, full fyftene years
his life also he led.
And then desirous for to know
the state of countries strange,
All Licia land, by travail great
to Caria he did range.
Whereas upon a time, what with
his travail that was great,
And eke the weather being hot
he weryed then with heat,
And ready for to rest him self,
by chance he did espy
A well, with water fair and clear
as Crystal to the eye.
Which nether bushe at any time
nor wede it over grew.
Much like unto the well it was,
whereto Acteon drew,
When that Diana, and her Nymphs
al naked in the same
He saw, by chance as he did seek
his lately coursed game.
About this spring an idle Nymphe,
fair Salmacis did use:
Which even as soon as with her eyes,
the young man fair she vewes,
Straight set on fire: The smoldrynge heat
does strike unto her heart,
And through persed by the dynte,
of cruel Cupydes darte.
She straight desires with him to join,
her lust for to fulfill.
She tryms her self, and goes forth with
for to declare her will.
To whom when that she came: straight way
With comely grace she began to say.
O worthy child, whose shape does show,
(as it does seem to me.)
That surely thou some god, and not
a earthly wight should be.
Right happy are thy parents sure,
and eke the Nurce in lap
Which has the laid often times, and given
thy lovely lyps the pap.
But happyest of them both I say,
a blessed one is she,
Which as thy wife within one bead
might join her self with thee.
My dear, vouch^efe to here my ^ute,
grant my request I pray,
That if you be not married yet
then, then grant this I say,
That I may rest my happy lyms
in blessed bed with thee,
So I with Juno for to change
my state would not agree,
If thou be married, let me steal
one turn. My heart, my joy,
She said, and therwyth held her peace.
But lo the shame fast boy
Was dashed, and out of countenance clean.
he blushed as red as blood,
He wist not then what love did mean.
it would have done one good,
To see how well the blusshyng shame,
The amassed boy as it became.
Such was his lively countenance,
such was his comely hew.
Whom when the Nymphe had long beheld,
not able to subdewe
Her heat affection and desire.
not able to sustain,
The force of those so fervent flames,
she does attempt again
By other means to try the boy,
each practyce does she prove.
But naught at al could move his heart
being rude, as yet to love.
She seeks to embrace his neck,
and asks for a kiss.
But then the boy resystyng her
was moved much with this,
And said leave of these wanton tryckes,
no longer troble me,
Else will I soon be gone, and leave
the place and all with thee.
Then Salmacis afraid, did make
as thence she would be gone.
But in a bushe hard by the same,
she hyd her self anon.
The boy thought now that al was safe
from shame as yet now free
Does of his clothes, and thinks sure
that none the same does see.
And like a wanton Kyd he skyppes
and in the mead does run.
Then in the well, to bathe his feet,
he so at first begone
But thus at last the water clear
it does delyght him so.
He geues his body to the streams
and wadeth to and fro,
And further forth with softely foot
he does begin to go.
At last with arms out stretched he
his body clean does dyp.
By swi^ming, through the silver stremes
his yuery corpse does slyp.
The Nymph this while, beholding him,
no longer then could stay,
But of her mantel being thrown
she would leap in straight way.
The boy amyd the waves does swym
as white as any snow.
No swan could seem more white the^ he
that ever any saw.
The Nimphe her heart does pant with ^oy,
she scant abydes to stay,
Untyll her garments all were of.
she plyeth so her pray.
Even as the eger mastyue Dog,
whom scant his keeper stays,
But at the bayted Bear he stryues
for to be gone always.
Even as the Hawk does ba^e, when that
she sees the Partryge spronge:
So Salmacis, to her it seems
Each time it is to long,
That lets her from the pray. But lo,
as merry as a Pie,
The boy does friske and play, he thyncks
that none may him espy.
But as the ^are within her form,
when she does fear no ill:
The hounde is on her sodeynlye,
then pressed the fool to kill.
So Salmacis unto her pray,
into the water goes:
As though that then for all the world
her lust she would not lose.
Not to persuade him how she means,
as she did erst before:
But now sheys pressed her lust to serve,
or else to dye therefore.
She it to folly so full inclynde:
That nothing then might change her mind.
But lo the boy, as soon as he
did theare the Nymphe espy,
Even as the little Roche with sins
out reched fast both fiye,
The rau^nyng Pyke, which after him
in greater have does hye:
So up and down the spring they flete,
the one him self to save.
The Nymph, her joy by spoil does seek
of ^hother for to have.
The flyghtfull boy, like as the Hare,
for life the Hounde does fly,
The Nymphe always even as the hou^d,
when he does come so nigh,
That eue^ his nose may touch her heles:
he gyrdeth forth amayne,
With gaping mouth, being always like
his pray for to obtain.
The Nimphe did drive him up so near,
that even of force at last
He is compeld for to resyste,
and strive for him as fast,
Her rage by strength for to suppress.
she forseth on him so,
That weryed nyghe the tender boy,
he wotes not what to do.
To strive he is compeld, or else
to yield against his will
Unto his foe, which forces so,
her lust for to fulfill.
And yet some women say, that they
be innocents, god wot.
This nycy Nymphe does now dysplay
whether it be true or not.
In goodness simple sure they be,
Else subtle enough I warrant ye
So nyce and fine, before the time
this weakyng Nymph did seem,
That force and might to break an egg
in her ye would scantly deem.
And yet by force, she keeps now
the young man at a baye:
As in a corner does a dog
keep up the stryuyng graye.
And then at last espyenge well
advantage fyt thereto,
She catches him about the neck
as loathe to let him go.
Even as the Iuye wyndes about
the tree, so does she claspe
The body of the stryuing boy:
which trembled like the Aspe.
Even as the Crab in cruel claws
when he has caught his foe:
With grype does gyrd him so as though
he should not escape him fro.
Even so the Nymph (though Venus son
do as he may resyste.
In words protestyng plain how that
she shall not have her list.)
Yet hopyng well, with pre^^yng wayght
she cleueth to him so:
That though he strive and wrythe, she swears
he shall not from her go.
Wher^ore (thou froward hoy) the says,
now strogle on t^y fill.
But now by force I will obtain,
that shall content my will.
Thou shall not escape me sure. Go to
with stoberne stryuyng still.
With pressed lyps perforce to him
an hundred kysses she
Does give, whereby it may appear,
she lyked his company.
This said. Unto the heavens on high
she lifts up her eyes,
And says, o Gods that see all things
and sit above the skies,
^raunt that this wylfull boy
may never part fro me.
But let us still in one remain.
the Gods they did agree
To her request. And Venus then
being moved with their moan,
She did vouchsafe to join
their bodies both in one.
One countenance did set forth
a thing full strange to see,
A man and woman both
with one corpse to agree:
And yet the same no parfecte man,
nor woman for to be.
But now, when that Hermaphrodite
did see in water plain,
He entered like a man therein,
and should come forth again
But half a man. Him self he lost.
His fortune it was so.
Wherefore he lyfted up his hands,
and prayde his parents to,
That who so ever enters here,
his lot likewise may be:
That he to man and woman both,
in shape may so agree.
Their parents hard the plaint, y^ which
their doble shaped son
Had made, And so with virtue strange,
the spring was spread anon.
Thus both in wysh they did agree:
And now contentyd well they be.
NOw, Ovid here might seem to some,
a tryflyng tale to tell.
But yet it shows a worthy since,
if it be marked we^l.
The Poets use in pleasant toys
great wisdom for to s^ew.
A subtle sense this tale does bear,
al be it perceyude of few.
By Venus, son here understand,
such Youths as yet be green,
And from the spot of fylthy lust
the sprynglynges that be clean,
which yet have not enthrald the^ selfs
unto affection vile.
Nor know the poison strong, y^ subtle bait,
which lovers does begile.
Even such as newly have cast of
a boy, and entered in
A young man's age. Such one as does
to know him self begin.
Of age well able for to rule
him self without agu^de.
Such one as first into world
begins for to slide,
To learn and see the trades of men,
to chose the good from ill.
By young Hermaphrodite, such one
here understand we will.
By C^^ia, sygny^ye the world
where all temptations be.
Whereas the good and i^, always
together we may see.
By Salmacis, intend each vice
that mou^th one to ill.
And by the spring the pleasant sport,
that does content the will.
So that when any young man first
without a guide or stay,
Does enter in the world so wide,
unskillful of the way,
Not knowing yet the wylye bayte,
nor the temptations vile,
Whereby the subtle sort often times
the ^ely do beguyle:
He blyndly runs on each wheare,
and doubtryng of none ill:
Because him self he means none,
he thynckes that no man will
(do otherwise.)
And so, by pleasant shape of vice
deceived all unware,
He drownes him self in fylthy sin,
^ taken in the snare.
The more he strives, entangled once
the faster he is in.
Such is the nature of the ^ayte,
and sleyght of that same gyn.
But after that he is deceived:
by practy^^ to his pain,
More wise, always he will beware
to come in like again.
Then will be joy to see his wyshe,
on others in like sort,
Which plunged be in pensive pain,
whylst that they seek for sport.
A man is said to lose him self,
when reason quyte exilde,
Enthrald in slauysh we, he is
constrained for to ye^^de
To lust, and will. dame reasons rules
(which still should rule our race.)
Rejected quyte, to affec^yons:
we give the ground and place.
And like to beasts, esteming more
to serve our sensual ^ust,
And to adorn the body brave,
which shall consume to dust,
More lefe then for to deck the mind
which is imortall sure.
Such is our beastly nature blind:
so is our lust vnpure.
So we our chief and greatest Good,
the treasure of our mind,
Do lose, and so to slauysh lust,
our nature free we bynd.
And servants bond unto our will,
we warke our wretched woe.
So one may lose him self, and be
unto him self a foe.
So do we change the happy hope
of everlasting joy,
Even for the present pastyme, which
our selves does most anoye.
We change our nature clean,
being made effemynat.
When we do yield to serve our lust,
we lose our former state.
It is the nature of that well,
that fylthy loathsome lake,
Of lust, the strength from lusty men
by hydden force to take:
And so it may now plain appear,
the Poet thus did tell.
As many as hereafter shall
once enter in this well
Of vice. He shall be weakened so.
His nature sure he shall forgo.
Thus much here of, as my rude Muse
does understand the mind
Of Ovid, by this pleasant tale,
no further sense I find.
BUt now the fletynge fancyes fond,
and eke the shuttle wits:
The mad desires of women now,
their rage in folysh fyts
I will dysplay. This Nymphe, y^ boy,
did for his bew^y love,
For even the sodeyne sight of him,
did her affectyon move.
And Echo she Narcissus young
even for his bewtyes sake,
Did choose among all other youths
to be her faithful make.
Medea and Hypsiph^le,
did love ^ason so,
Even for his lovely face, that they
would from their countries go,
And leave their parents and their fre^des
to go, and be with him,
Which to them both, not long a go
had erst a stranger been.
Demophon by his semely shape,
did like fair Phyllys eyes.
And Dido she Eneas brave
therefore did love likewise.
And in like sort did end her life,
when that she might no more
Enjoy her joyful lust as she
was wont some time before.
It seemed death, what so did them
deuorse their lovers fro.
Fair Helen, Menelaus wy^e.
To Paris fine also
Did ye^ld, with him to Phrigian town
a stranger for to go.
To Paris arms her self she took:
And Menelaus old forsook.
The lusty gerle began to loathe,
such sage pastyme as he
Could make. She rather chose
with Paris y^nge to be.
The learned Sapho did some time
to comely Phaon sue
For grace. And Biblis, she
her brother did pursue
(For bew^ye that in him did shine.
She followed him therefore
So long: till that her faynting lims
could carry her no more.
King Nisus d^ughter dear also,
fair Sylla was beguilde,
By Minos yellow shinyng hear,
which as her foe in feilde:
Against the walls of Megaris,
did be are his seemly sheilde.
And yet king Minos wife,
was of another mind.
In Taurus black ill faced ^yre,
more pleasure she did find,
The captains rousy skuffe, black pol,
to her so fair did seem*
That she her husbands go^den hear
did not so much esteem.
The Emperor Othons daughter dear
A delasie did so
Regard the lively Al^ran,
that she with him did go
To countries strange* content
by hazard of her life,
Against the will of all her freindes,
for to become his wife.
With pryncelyke life, for him alone
an Empire she would lose.
With him to lead a simple life
much rather she did chose.
All pleasures in the world, in him
alone she then did take.
Al freindes, for him alone also
she gladly did forsake.
With him for need right well she was
contented coals to make.
To couche in cotage low,
on simple food to fare.
For all the world, excepted him,
she took no kind of care.
He was her bliss. Her joy was he.
And nothing else esteemed she.
And Hero fair unto her fear,
Leander fine did take.
And Thishe she did kill her self
for comely Pirames sake.
Orestes lively looks, did much
Hermione delyghte.
King Tancreds, daughter Gysmond, did
love Guistardes bewty bright.
The Nymphs did Hiacinthus, for
his seemly shape desire.
His lovely chere full, soon did set
their youthly hearts on fire.
And Juliet, Romeus young,
for bewty did embrace,
Yet did hy^ manhood well agree,
unto his worthy grace.
So seemly shape did love procu^e:
And Venu^ birds came to the lure.
(...) Aphrodite dame so coye
(...) love Adonis so,
(...) she with him, always
^^^tented was to go*
In slender hand, the craggy bow
she did vouchsafe to bear,
And run a huntyng after him,
to kill the flyghtfull Dear.
The stoberne boy, blind Cupide here,
with shaft, did strike his mother dear.
Sithe bewtyes grace, as pleasant bait,
these ladies did deceive.
What did Adonis mother, in
her father old perceive:
Why she should seek by incest vile,
Her mothers bed for to defyle.
What flynging fyt did force her so?
what mad desire does move
Her thus? why should she seek an old
and cancred lad to love?
And why did Phaedra sue unto
her boystous son in law,
Hypolite blunt (being rude to love)
unto her lust to draw.
Why did his ferce and frownyng face,
his hard complexion seem
To her a fair and manlyke hew.
what made her so to deem?
Sith beutyes goodly grace, sometime
so well it lyked her,
That the above her country, did
young Theseus prefer.
Her sister Ariadne aye,
his shape esteemed so:
That she her brother did betray,
and fled her parents fro.
Such be the fond and frantike fits
which in the blinded brain
Of wanton women often times,
with swinging swey does reign.
And Venus eke, which liked so
Ad^nis lovely grace,
Tha^ she from him would not
abide in any place.
In warlike Mars that blody knight:
Sometime also she did delyght.
Since she for comely bewty then,
these lusty youths did love.
To marry with dame Iunoes son
what od conceyt did move
Her so: to serve that grisly sire,
the Coper^mith deformde.
Whom Nature neither with good grace,
nor learning had adornd.
But even a rude and boystous carle.
whose color in his face:
A Croyden sangwine right did seem.
This is a doubtful case.
That she which erst did seek so much
for bewtyes goodly grace,
To love Adonis fair alone,
should seek sometime to embrace
Sir Vulcane, wi^h his drousie poll,
A smyth which did on stythy, towl,
I dare not sure disolue this doubt.
I fear to judge on this.
To have to do with gods above,
how do unge^ous it is:
Tiresias old, which was sometime
a Judge of Iunoes game.
In iestyng strife, for tellyng truth
the Judge did bear the blame.
He lost his sight, for iudgyng right.
O Judge unwise, thou know y^ price
Of telling truth, more was y^ ^uoth.
Tiresias, thou Prophet old,
which had the grace, for to unfold,
the secrets hyd of things to come:
Though Juno she, did make the blind,
Yet love to thee, was not unkind.
He did restore, as good therefore.
Thy lack of sight, thy knowledge does
Right well aquight. That is the troth.
For by the same, unto the skies,
Thy worthy name, it did arise.
How be it I, am not so bold
With judgment this for to unfold.
The Goddess gra^e I more regard:
Then hope, to have of loves reward.
For doubt of blame, I dare not say
Or show the same, which erst always
I thought. For sure, if I may chose,
Dame Venus love I will not lose.
Since me^ bear blame, for telling troth:
To show the same I would be loath.
Wherefore now I, will cease to writ.
And you hardly, by judgment right,
As one exempt from Venus might:
May be more bold, this to unfold.
And so to you, I leave it now,
that this most weyghty doubt:
At further leisure (when you list)
your self may find it out.
T. D. Peend.
That the unlearned might the better understand these, I have compendeouslye
noted the histories, and names not familier to our englysh phrase.
VEnus, Venus.
wife to Vulcane, feigned of the Poets to be the Godesse of love. And by another
name is called Aphrodite.

MErcurye, Mercury
the son of Jupiter and Maia, one of the daughters of Atlas. Whom the Poets
called god of eloquence, and is called Hermes, otherwise the messenger of
Jupiter.

Phoebus, Apollo. Phoebus.
And is taken for the Son.

NArcissus, Narcissus
son of ^iriope, a child of passing bewtye, which did so much delyght in his
own shape, as the Poets feigned, that he died for love of his own shadow, and
was turned into a flower.

PHrigian. Phrigian.
One of the Land of Phrigia.

CVpide, Cupide.
son of Bacchus and Venus, and is feigned of the Poets, to be the God of love.
And is called blind: because lust blinds judgments of men.

Echo. Echo.
A Nymphe, which loved Narcissus. And the sound that comes from the valleys
and hollow places, and does sound again syx or seven words, in some places,
by reason of the reuerberatio^ of the air. (as some say.)

Jove, Jove.
son of Saturn and Ops. King of Creta, and was feigned chief of the Gods.

IVno. Juno.
Sys^er and wife of Jove or Jupiter.

MEdea, Medea.
daughter of Oeta, King of Cholcus, which loved Jason. Who, when he had sworn
never to forsake her. She did help him to kill the Serpente, and win the golden
fleece. And so when she did pryuely go away with Jason, she kyled her young
brother Absirtus, and did pluck him in pieces, to stay her father which pursued
after her: and when she had lived many years in Greece, with Jason, and had
children by him. At last Jason forsook her, and married Glauca, daughter of
king Creon. Medea so refused, slew the sons which she had by Jason, and
setting his Palace on fire: she burned Glauca, and her father therein.

HIpsiphile, Hipsiphil
daughter of Thoas, King of Lemnus, which lo^ed Jason excedinglye, and bare
him two children at a burden.

Jason, Jason.
son of Aeson, whom Pelias his Unkell being king of Thessalye, did send with
many other valyente Gentlemen, to fetch the Golden Fleece. Which (the
aduenters there of achyeued,) by the help of Medea, he wan, and brought it away.

DEmophon, Demopho^
son of Theseus and Phaedra. Which returninge from the battle of Troy, was
by tempeste brought into Thracia, wheare Phillis daughter of Licurgus, then
Queen, received him, and after married him, which from thence went to Athens,
promising her to return shortly. Which when he performed not, Phillis not
able to sustain the ragyng fyttes of so fervent love. Honge her self on an
Almonde tree.

And so the Poets fained that she was turned into an Almonde tree.

DIdo, Dido.
daughter of Belus, king of Tirus. And wife of Sicheus: whom when Pigmalion
the king, and brother to Dido had s^a^ne for his richesse. Dido sailed into
Africa with his treasure, and theare builded the famous City of Carthage. And
afterward in love with Aeneas, when he had departed from her, to seek the
land of Italye: (according to Cassandra her prophecy.) she brake her neck
for sorrow, falling into the fire. etc. Or according to Virgill flew her self
with Aeneas his sword.

AEneas. Aeneas
A noble man of Troy, sonn^ of Anchises and Venus. Which escapynge with his
father, wife, and other his country men. After great travail, and many
chances: aryued in Italy, wheare after great battle he slew king Turnus, and
married Lauinia, daughter to king Latinus. And so became king of Italy.

HElena. Helena.
Begotten of Jupiter, in the lykenes of a Swanne, on Laeda wife of Tindar^s,
king of Laconia. And was for her passing beauty ^wyse stolen First by
Th^s^us, being but a gerle: and the second time being wife to Menelaus, by
Paris. For whom the Grecians warred ten years space with the Troyans. And so
Troy being burned, received her again.

PAris. Paris.
Son of Priam king of Troy, by his wife Hecuba, with whom when she was
great with child, she dreamed that she had brought forth a fyrebrande,
which should burn Troy: whearfore the king afraid, commanded that the
child should be killed as soon as he was borne. His mother Hecuba, moved
with motherly pytie, did pryuelye send him to a Shepard to be brought up. And
when he waxed a young man, Juno, Pallas, and Venus, Goddesses, stryuynge in
beutye for a golden Apple, whereon was written: be it given to the fairest They
were sent by Jupiter, to the judgment of Paris. To whom when Juno had
promised rule and kingdom, Pallas wisdom, and Venus pleasure, and the
fairest woman in the world. He gave the apple to Venus. And so after came in
favor with his father, and sailing to Sparta, he brought fair Helen away with
him. And so the battle of Troy began.

SApho. Sapho.
A woman of the I Will Lesbos, learned in Poetrye, being forsaken of a young man,
called Phaon, whom she loved: she cast her self from the hill Leucates, into
the Sea, and so peryshed by love of him.

PHaon. Phaon.
When he had carried Veenus over a Fery: she gave him to be the fairest, and
best shaped man alive.

BIblis. Biblis.
daughter of Miletus, which inflamed with detestable love of her brother
Caunus, when he forsook his country to avoid that myscheyfe: she followed him
till she dyed for fayn^nes.

SCylla. Scylla.
Daughter of Nisus, king of Megaris. Which for the love of Minos then
besegyng the City of Megaris, she brought to him a purple hear, which she cut
of from her fathers head. And that hear being on his head, he could not be
overcome, and by like destenye: with the hear, he lost his kingdom. And Minos
despised her for her mischeuous deed. And tyenge her with a cord to the end
of his ship: he hanged her in the water.

MInos. M^nos.
begotten by Iupit^r in the likeness of a white Bull, on the fair Europa,
daughter to Agenor king of Phaenicia. And for his justice is feigned of the
Poets to be a Judge in Hell.

ADonis. Adonis.
A young man of passing bewtye, whom Cinaras king of Phaenicia, made drunk by
polycy of his daughter, and a Nurce, ^egat on his own daughter M^rrha. whom
Venus loved.

Hippolitus. Hippolitus.
Son of Theseus, duke of Athens, by Hippolite. Whom when his stepmother
Phaedra could not win to her lust, she accused him to Theseus, as though he
would have oppressed her by force. Thes^us then trusting his wife to much,
desired his father Aegeus, a God of the Sea, that he would kill his son.
Wherefore when Hippolitus did ride in a Charyot by the Sea side, Aegeus sent
out certain monsters of the Sea, called Phoces, wherewith his horses afraid,
brake the Charyot, and rent him in pieces. But at the request of Diana,
Goddess of Chastytie (loving her chaste knight Hippolitus,) Aesculapius, the
first that invented Physyke: restored him to life again.

MEnelaus. Menelaus.
Son of A^reus, brother to Agamemn^n, and king of the City of Sparta.

VVlcane. Vulcane.
Son of Jupiter and Juno, which being borne ill favored, and liked not Juno:
he was cast into the I Will Lemnus, who are being noryshed with Apes, he became
lame of one foot thereby. And he is feigned to be the god of fire, and the Smyth
to make thunder boltes for Iupit^r. Which askyng to marrye Minerua, Jupiters
daughter, and Goddess of wisdom: he was denied. Wherefore Virgill (...) * The
Gods would not vouchsafe, Ne^ deus hunc men sa, Dea nec dignata cubili est.
that he
should at their table fyt.
And to her bed, the Goddess she
would never him admyt:
But afterward, this gay Squire married to Venus, when he had taken her a bed
with lustye Ma^s, the god of battle. He had framed such fine chains to bind
them, that they could not get a sunder: till he had brought all the Gods to
laugh at the game.

PAsiphae. Pasiphae
Wy^e of Minos king of Creta, which loved a stowte Captain called Taurus, and
conceived by him the cruel and deformed Minotaurus, who^ for his fiercenes, and
ill shape, the Poets feigned to have been half a man, and half a bull: and
therefore was enclosed in a Laberinthe, (made by the co^ynge Dedalus,) and
theare fed wych flesh of men.

HEro. Hero.
A maiden of synguler bewtye, of the City Sestos, in ^ellespont.

LEander. Leander.
A young gentleman of the Cyty Abidos, which a great River did deuyde from
Sestos, who are he was wont to swym by night, to his lover Hero, and so at
last was drowned.

PIramus. Piramus.
A young gentleman of Babylon which loved Thisbe.

THisbe. Thisbe.
A maid of synguler bewtye, which when she loved P^riamus excedyngly: And
they were kept a sunder by their parents, yet o^e night they escaped out, and
had agreed before, to have met under a tree without the town: Thisbe coming
thither first, saying a Lion? did fly into the wood, her rail being fallen
of, the Lion (...) it in pieces. Piramus coming after, finding the cloth
ren^e, thought that Thisbe had been denoured of some beast, and so (...) him
self. Which when Thisbe returning again did see: she killed her self with
the same swe^de.

OReste^. Orestes.
Son of king Agame^^ion. Which ^lew his mother Clitemnestia, because that
she for love of Aegisthus, had slain his father. And he married H^rmione. And
after being (...), (his most faithful friend Pylades keeping him) he came into
the country of Tauric^: Where, according to the custom, he should have been
slain, and sacryfysed. But being known of his sister Iphigenia, he slew the
king Thoas, and escaped with his sister. And after had his wits perfect
again.

HErmione. Hermione.
Daughter of Menelaus, and that Helen: so renowned for her bewtye, Which being
a gerle was married to Orestes. And when king Pirrhus, son of the valyante.
Achilles, had married her afterward. Hermione by letters required him humbly,
to claim his right and deliver her. And so Orestes slew Pirrhus, and received
Hermione again.

HIacinthus. Hiacinthus.
A young man, of passing bewtye.

MArs. Mars.
God of war, and son of Jupiter and Juno.

THeseus. Theseus.
Son of Aegeus king of Athens, and of Aethra, daughter to Pytheus, king of
the City Troezen. A puyssante knight, which did many great feats and
adventures: As Hercules did. Being but a young man, he fought with Hercules
against the Amazones, warfull women. He slew Creon king of Thebes, which
suffered not me^ slain in war to be buried. He slew Minotaurus, and
delivered his country, from the trybute of fourtene noble children, every nine
years, sent to Creta to be slain, for that the Cytyzens of Athens had slain
Androgeus, son of Minos king of Creta. He slew a monstrous Bull which had
spoiled the country Attica. He slew ^eyron, and Procustes, robbers. And
afterward with his faithful friend Pirithous he went to Hell to fetch
Proserpina, whom Pluto had stolen, from her mother C^res, Goddess of corn,
and Queen of Sicilye.

But Pirith^uis being slain by the three headed Hounde Cerberus, Porter of
Hell: Theseus was kept in prison theare, till he was delivered by mighty
Hercules.

ARiadne. Ariadne
Daughter to Minos, king of Creta, which by a botom of thread, taught Theseus
to come out of the Laberinthe, after he had killed her brother Minotaurus. She
forsook her country and followed him, whom he left in the I Will of Naxus* So
Bacchus the God of wine, took her to wife. And Venus gave her a crown, whereon
Bacchus se^ nine stars, and fyred it in the sky. And so the star is called
the Gnossian crown.

PHaed^a. Phaedia.
Daughter of king Minos, and Pasiphae, with her sister Ariadne did fly her
country, with Theseus: and became his wife, after he had forsaken Ariadne.

ADelasie Adelasie.
Daughter and only child of the Emperor Otho the third, so excedynglye she
was enamoured of the most valiant Aleran, son of a Duke of Saxony that she
procured him pryuelye to convey her away, which by the help of an old lady
her nurce, he brought to pass^. And afterward being robed of such money as
they had provided, they lived long in a wood, and made coals for their
living, and bare him seucn sons theare, and afterward by the valyante
feats of her eldest son, they were known to the Emperor* and so had his
favor again, and enjoyed the Empire after him.

IVliet. Juliet.
A noble maiden of the City Ve^ona in Italye, which loved Romeus, eldest
son of the Lord Montesche, and being pryuely married together: he at last
poisoned him self for love of her. she for sorrow of his death, slew her
self in the same Tomb, with his dagger*

TIresias. Tiresias.
An old Prophet of the City Thebes, in Boetia, a country in Attica. And is
now called Vanda^ia.

DIana. Diana.
Daughter of Jupiter and Latona, and sy^er of Apollo, and is called goddess of
hunting, and Chastytie. and is the Moon also.

Nymphs, Nymphs
were maidens which followed Diana, and worshyppyng her, did live solytarye, in
woods, by ryuers sides, and other pleasant places: to avoid company. And
chiefly used huntyng: to subdue the tedyousnes of time.

ACteon. Acteon.
Son of Aristaeus, by A^tonoe daughter of Camus, buylder of the City Thebes,
which after he had been a hunting, came by chance to a secret well or spryng,
where he saw Diana naked, wasshyng of her self. Whereat she taking
displeasure, turned him into a Heart, and so, as he would have returned home,
Inscius Acteon vidit sine vest Diana^, Atque suis canibus* etc.
he was rent in pieces of his own hou^ds. Ovid Epist. Acteon once ^vnwyttyng,
did
Dian^ naked* see:
Wherfo^e unto his Hounds, she made
Him then a pray to be.
All which was ^ained, for that he had spente his substance, and undone him
self by hun^ynge, and keeping of hounds.

GYsmonde. Gysmond
Only daughter of Tanc^ede, king of Sa^e^ne: which loved a servant of her
fathers: and being taken in adultery together, in a Cave in the ground the
king caused her lover Guistarde to be hanged therefore, and sent his heart unto
her* which imbracynge it, laid it on her breast, against her own heart, and
drank a cup of poison immedyatly, whereof dyenge: she desired that they
might be buried together.

FINIS.
Faults escaped
In A. the.6. page, in the margent, for Gaminides, read Ganimedes.

In the same page, the.7. line, for Narsisus read Narcissus. In A. the.7. page,
the.19. line, for worthy warke read worthier warke. In A. the.12. page, the.25.
line, for how read now. In A. the.14. page the 13. line, for the read that. In
the same page, the.14. line for weakyng read weaklyng.

In B. the first page, the.16, line for springlinges read striplinges. In the
same page, the.27. line, for into world read into the world.

In B. the.4. page, the.22. line, for the Poet thus did tell, read the Poet
truth did tell. In B. the.6. page, the last verse, for Sylla, read Scylla. In
B. the.15. page, the 21. line, for aduenters read adventures. In C. the.12.
page, the 15. line for Antonoc read Autonoe. In the same page, the same line,
for Camus read Cadmus.

Imprinted at London in Fletestreat beneath the Conduyt, at the sign of S.
John Euangelyste, by Thomas Col (well.)




