AN ANTIDOTE AGAINST PVRGATORY. OR Discourse, wherein is showed that
Good-Workes, and Almsdeeds, performed in the Name of Christ, are a chief
means for the preventing, or mitigating the Torments of Purgatory.

Written by that Virtuous, and Right worthy Gentlewoman (the Honor of her
Sex for Learning in England) Ms. JANE OWEN, late of God-stow, in Oxfordshire,
deceased, and now published after her death.

As Water does extinguish Fire: so Almsdeeds do extinguish sin.

Eccles. 3. Printed M.DC.XXXIIII.

TO THE WORTHY AND CONSTANT CATHOLICS OF ENGLAND: And more particularly, to
such, who be of the best temporal Means.
WORTHY and Noble Catholics: My charity toward the advancing of the spiritual
good of your souls, is the main Allectiue, inuiting me to write this small
Treatise, (pardon I pray the boldness of my Sex heerin.) The subject thereof is,
First, to inculcate, and make deep impressio^s in your minds, of the horror,
and most dreadful torments of Purgatory: Secondarily, to set before your eyes,
the best means to prevent, at least to assuage, and mitigate them: gratu^ opus
agricolis; A labor (I hope) pleasing to such, who are desirous to cultiuate
their own Souls, for gayning their spiritual and expected harvest.

That you believe there is a Purgatory, your own Catholic Faith teaches you;
therefore presuming that you rest immovable therein, without the least
fluctuation of judgment, I hold it were but lost labor, to spend any time in
prooffe thereof. Only I here covet, that you would deeply consider and
meditate thereof; and thereupon that you would withal meditate and put in
practice the means of avoiding the same.

Touching the terriblenes of the Torments of Purgatory, I have insisted in the
Authority of the most Blessed Cardinal Bellarmine; out of one of whose
spiritual books I have translated a whole passage concerning this subject, as
hereafter I shall more fully show. Thus I make him the foundation or
groundworke of this my ensuing Discourse; and the rest following I do build,
and erect upon this foundation: so as this Miscelene work of mine, may perhaps
resemble the statua of Nabuchodonozor, of which, part was gould, part silver,
and part of baser metal. So I am sure, that what is taken out of the learned
Cardinals writings in this my Treatise, is perfect gould or silver; what is
adjoined thereto by me, must (I willingly yield) endure the touch of the
learned, to prove what metal it is.

But now, to proceed a little further: I could wish you (worthy Catholics)
that you would have a feeling apprehension of the pains of Purgatory, though
yet to come. True it is, that the Time present, and the Time future are in
nature different; yet if a man could in some case, so lively paint to himself
the face of the Time future, as that it might appear to him, to be the Time
present, it were, felix Error, a happy mistaking or confusion of times, (to use
the Catholic Churches like Dialect of the sin of Adam, calling it, felix
Culpa:) For then would men apprehende the Future pains of Purgatory, as
present, (and certainly once they must be present;) and consequently, would
have a greater fear and dread of them, then commonly they now have. It is not
in man's power to deprive God of his incommumnicable Attribute of Justice, being
even of the Essence of God.

This then being so, why will you not seek to appease this his Justice in this
world, when small satisfactions will serve, rather then to perform those
satisfactions incomparably far greater in a more horrible manner, in the next
world, by enduring those Torments, which are not to be endured? And there to
endure them, donec reddas nouissimum Quadrantem, Matthew. 5. These are the words
of holy Scripture, and are understood in the judgment of the Ancient Fathers,
of a Soul lying in Purgatory, and therefore must be performed: which forcing
words, since they ought to be most dreadful to each Catholic, not performing
his satisfaction in this life, I have therefore thought not amiss (though I
grant in a most unusual manner) to set down in the lower part of every page;
that wheresoever the Reader shall open these few leaves, his eye shall
instantly meet with the said moving words, thereby to cause him to have a
more intense and serious meditation of them.

It is certain, that God is pitifully cruel (as I may say) since he is
content to turn Eternity of punishments, into temporal pains; But withal it
is no less certain, that a soul not performing its penance in this life
before its dissolution from the body, can no more immediately ascend to Heaven,
then the Patriarchs which dyed in Egypt, could be buried in the land of Promise.

Well now, the chiefest help for the preventing of the pains of Purgatory, is
the practice of Works of Almsdeeds, and such other actions of Mercy, as
hereafter in this short Treatise will more fully be proved. Works of this
nature are the only Oil, which is to be powered into a Repenting soul, whose
full satisfaction for its former sins, is not yet accomplished.

Gods sacred Word assures you, that you may buy Heaven with Good Works:
Venite possidete paratum vobis regnum; Esuriuienim, and dedistis ma^ducare etc*
Matthew. 25. Much more then, may you with Good Works (dyed in the blood of our
Savior, and not otherwise) buy out the pains of Purgatory. And though you do
find a reluctation in your natural dispositions to relinquish a part of your
state to that end, now in your life time; yet let that be made easy to you by
Grace, which is hard and difficult by Nature; that so it may be said of you, as
was said of Cornelius the Centurion, Act. 10. Eleemosinae vestrae commemoratae
sunt in conspectu Dei. For assure your selves, that the Grace of God ever
seeks a charitable Heart.

And by this means, you may become more rich in your graves, then you could
have been in your life time: Since to give away riches, in a man's life, for
the good of the soul, is to carry them away after his death. And in this
sense, they hold most, who have the most open hand in dispensing of their
riches; So true is that sentence, to wit, It is no small riches, for Gods sake,
to abandon riches.

But (alas) such are the pitiful times, wherein we live, and such is the
scarsity of Virtue among us, as that instead of practicing Works of Charity,
men are commended and praised, if only they forbear to practice works of
Injustice and Wrong. And thus we are glad to accept of a mere Privation of
Vice, in place of a Positive, and real Virtue. O the miserablenes of our
days! The very Beasts do not, nor can sin, nor can they do any wrong; are
they therefore virtuous?

Well, I humbly besecch you to have a settled eye upon your souls good, for the
preventing of future punishments; and remember, that our Savior in the
Gospel (Luc. 17.) commended the unjust Steward for hoording up for the time
to come; and shall then the slothful carelessnes of Catholics be vpbrayded
with that unjust stewards diligence? God forbid! But before I do remit you to
the perusal of this ensuing Discourse, I will put you in mind, that all Good
Works stream from Charity, and that without it, there are no Good Works.

Now, how necessary and efficacious Charity is in its own Nature, it being the
Queen of all virtues (the which who has it, cannot be damned, and who
wants, cannot be saved) I will not only refer you to the Apostles just
praises given thereof (1. Cor. 8.) but also to the learned and grave Judgment
of Cardinal Bellarmine herein, who thus writes (lib. 5. de aeterna Felicitate
cap. 6.) Audeo dicere, si oleum charitatis in animas damnatorum etc. I dare be
bold to say, that if the oil of Charity could distill down into the souls
of damned men, or into the Devils, we instantly should behold, both the
damned Souls and the Devils, to ascend out of their torments. As on the
contrary side, if this oil of Charity should forsake the holy Angels,
Apostles, Martyrs, Virgins, etc. they instantly would become lumpish and heavy,
and thereupon would desce^d into the lowest parts.

Thus you see, what this learned Cardinal censureth hereof. Do not then
slight and neglect the worth of this Noble Virtue of Charity; and particularly
the most healthful and fruitful effects, proceeding from thence; I mean Good
Works, Mercy, and pious Liberality employed upon others; ascertayning your
selves, that the next and most speedy help to procure God, to be merciful, in
mildly chastizing the relickes of your sins, and to mitigate your temporal
punishments, is to show your selves merciful to others; Beati misericordes,
quoniam ipsi misericordiam consequentur, Matthew. 5. I mean prompt and ready in
exercis^ng the Works of Charity; since silver in a large degree bestowed in
this manner, is the spiritual Water, which quenches the flames of Purgatory.

One thing here I wish you to remember, that every man (how young soever)
through the wingy speedines of timc, is even flying toward his grave. And when
he is once thither come, then has he bidden his last Adieu, or Good Night to
all the world. Therefore whiles the day lasts, employ your selves busily in
Good Works: So true (and withal wholesome) is that Counsel in Holy Writ.
Eccl. 9. Quodcumque facere potest manus tua, instanter operare etc. Whatsoever
thy hand can do, do it instantly; because neither any work, nor reason, nor
knowledge, nor wisdom, is beneath whither thou hastest.

And with this (Worthy and dear Catholics) I remit you to the perusing of
this little Treatise; Humbly beseeching his Mercy, that the reading of it may
beget great and worthy effects in you; And then I shall hope, that you will
vouchsafe me now and then, your charitable prayers; not only for the remitting
of the guilt of eternal damnation, due for my infinite sins; but also, if so
his Divine Majesty would vouchsafe me, (though most unworthy) so much favor
and grace, that I may escape this most dreadful fire of Purgatory.

Your Souls well-wishing Admonisher, JANE OWN.

The Contents of the several Sections ensuing.
SECT. I. OF the inexplicable pains of Purgatory, and of other Circumstances
accompanying the same pains; translated out of the spiritual Book of
Cardinal Bellarmine, entitled; De gemitu Columbae lib. 2. cap. 9. SECT. II.
Of the means to avoid, at least to mitigate, the pains of Purgatory. SECT.
III. A persuasory Discourse, for the putting in practice the means (which are
Good Works) for the avoiding the pains of Purgatory. SECT. IV. Certain
examples of Good Works, to be practiced for the avoiding of Purgatory,
propounded by the Author of this Treatise.
Non exibis inde, donec reddas nouissimum Quadrantem.

Matthew. 5. v. 27. Thou shall not go out from thence, till thou repay the last
Farthing.

Date Eleemosynam, and ecce omnia vobis munda sunt.

Luc. 11. v. 41. Give Alms, and behold all things are clean unto you.

Of the inexplicable pains of Purgatory, and of other Circumstances
accompanying the same; translated out of the spiritual Book of Cardinal
Bellarmine, entitled: De gemitu Columbae. lib. 2. ca. 9. THE I. SECTION.
AMONG all the Passions of the mind, there is not any, which has so great a
sovereignty, and command over man, as the Passion of Fear. The reason hereof
is evident, and even ingraffed in man's Nature. For every man takes pleasure
and delight in a sweet and quiet repose of his own being; and consequently
flies, and auoydeth whatsoever may endanger to hinder, or take away his said
quietness and rst; according to that Axiom in Philosophy: Omnis res cupit
conseruare suum Esse. And hereupon it ryseth, that the Passion of Love is
nothing so potent and preuayling with men, as Fear. For we experimentally see,
that most men are afraid to commit diverse impieties, more for Fear of
punishment to be inflicted by the Law, then for Love of God, or Virtue.

Now, to apply this to my present purpose. Whereas my project in these ensuing
leaves is, to awaken the hearts and minds of diverse Catholics for the
preventing, or at least lessening the pains of Purgatory by their good deeds
and works of Charity, performed in their life time; therefore I have in the
Front of this Treatise thought good to plant a Discourse touching the
incomprehensible torments of Purgatory, and other circumstances accompaning the
same torments; that so, such persons, for whose sake this labor is undertaken,
(as not being blindfoulded under the veil of careless negligence) may have a
greater Fear and Horror of the said torments; and consequently, may be more
watchful and sollicitous for their preventing of them, by their Almsdeeds,
and other such works of Charity.

Which kind of Fear was (as I may term it) the Genius of Reverend Antiquity,
causing the livers in those ancient times, to be so dreadful not only of the
torments of Hell, but even of Purgatory: So healthful to man's Soul is that
admonition of Holy Writ, 1. Pet. 1. Walk you in fear, during the time of your
earthly habitation. And upon this ground our Forfathers labored so much to
spread themselves in the doing of good works; and this with most just reason;
since he is truly rich, who is rich in good-workes: and the want of them is a
spiritual beggary. And therefore most deservedly is this Fear styled by the
Wiseman, The beginning of Wisdom, Prou. 11. as also by some others, The
Mother, and Daughter of wisdom; and so holy Job had just reason to say: I
feared all my works. Job. 9.

The Discourse prefixed touching the Pains of Purgatory, I have wholly taken,
and Translated out of one of the spiritual Books of the most Worthy Cardinal
Bellarmine, entitled: De Gemitu Columbae. lib. 2. chap. 9. Therefore when the
Reader peruseth it, let him remember, that it is Bellarmyne who speaks, not
I. In this passage the learned Cardinal relates certain dogmaticall
Miracles, touching the doctrine of Purgatory. I have thought it much more
preuayling to deliver the contents thereof in the Cardinals own words, which
are without any affectation of Oratory, or fyled Speech, then by any other
means or Method of my own, in altering the same. Since I presume, that the
speeches of so worthy, so learned, so pious a man (being an Ornament of this
presentage) will sway more with all good Catholics, by way of persuasion, then
any words of mine can effect; And certain it is, that who speaks
perswadingly, speaks Eloquently.

And I hold it a greater Honor, to become a poor Translator of any part of
his learned writings, doing thereby the more good; then to be accounted a
skillful Composer of Books, doing therein the lesser good. And with this I
refer the Reader to the passage of Bellarmyne by me Translated, wishing him not
to be diffident of the truth of the Contents thereof; seeing he may see, that
the Cardinal gives full credit and assent thereto; and also, in that he is an
over Material and Sensible Christian (as I may term him) who measures
matters of Faith and Religion, by the false yard of natural apprehension. And
great incredulity and dulnes it is, to think of things touching the soul,
only as he sees them, abstracting them from the trutination of Gods Justice
heere-after to come; themselves thus through supine heedlesnes falling upon
that dangerous sentence of the Wiseman: Ita securi viuunt, quasi Iustorum facta
habeant. Eccles. 8. They live as securely, as if their works were of the Just.
But what does there immediately follow? Hoc vanissimum. This is most vain.

The discourse of Cardinal Bellarmine, touching the inexplicable pains of
Purgatory.
THose Souls, who remain in Purgatory, do afford to us yet living in the
world, a great occcasion and matter of tears; in so much that a due
consideration and meditation of Purgatory may justly be termed a flowing well
of tears.

Now touching the pains of Purgatory, four principal heads or branches are
to be considered; from the which we may in part conjecture of the greatness of
those pains; and in regard of such their greatness, all good men may be the
more easily induced, to power out their tears in commiseration of their
Christian Brethren, who are in the mean time tormented with those pains.

The first of these Heads is, that the pains of Purgatory are greater and
more intense, then any pains, which men can suffer in this life. The second,
that the pains of Purgatory to them that suffer them, do for the most part
endure longer, then any pains of this life can endure. The third, that the
souls which lie in Purgatory, cannot help, or bring any ease to themselves.
The fourth and last Head is, that the souls which are in Purgatory, are of
huge number, and almost infinite in number. Now from all these different
passages, it is clear, that the souls in Purgatory are in a pitiful state,
and therefore most worthy of all commiseration; and that those men, who yet are
living, are no less then half mad and distracted in judgment, who during their
life time, are careless and negligent in satisfying for their sins, and had
rather descend (upon their death) to those places of Torments, then to be
depryued of any pleasure, while they live in this world.

And now to begin with the first, which is, that the pains of Purgatory are
greater, and more violent then all pains joined together, which in this life
we can undergo; this verity is confirmed by the authority of S. Austin in
Psalm. 37. who thus writes hereof: Domine, ne in indignatione tua arguas me
etc. O Lord do not chastise me in thy wrath and indignation; Let me not be in
the number of those, to whom thou shall say; Ite in ignem aeternum, go into
everlasting fire; neither otherwise correct me in thy anger, but that I may be
made such, as that my said correction shall not be needful to be increased
with that purging fire, in respect of such men, qui salui erunt, sic tamen
quasi per ignem, who shall be saved, but as by fire. And then a little after S.
Austin thus further inlargeth himself: Et quia dicitur saluus erit,
contemnitur ille ignis etc. And because it is said in the place above, they
shall be saved, therefore that fire is neglected and little feared. True it is,
they shall be saved by fire: grauior tamen erit ille ignis (says he) quam
quicquid potest homo pati in hac vita: Notwithstanding that fire shall be more
heavy and intolerable, then any pains, which a man can suffer in this life.
And you well know, what great torments diverse wicked men have here suffered,
and are able to suffer; yea good and virtuous men have suffered as much as the
former. For what pains or torments has any malefactor, thief, adulterer, or
any other wicked or sacrilegious person suffered, which Martyrs have not
suffered for their confession of Christ?

Therefore these Torments, which are in this world, are of a far more lower
degree: And nevertheless, you see, how ready and prepared men stand to
perform any thing commanded them, to prevent the suffering of them; with how
much more reason then have men to do that, which God commands them, that so
they may not undergo those (by many degrees more horrible) torments? Thus far
S. Austin, whose judgment herein many other Fathers follow.

Saint Gregory thus dilateth of the same point: Domine, ne in furore tuo arguas
me etc. Lord, do not chastise me in thy fury, nor rebuke me in thy anger. I
know well, that after the end of this lyfc some men's sins shall be expiated and
purged by the flames of Purgatory; others shall undergo the sentence of
eternal damnation. Nevertheless, because I do firmly believe, that transitory
fire to be more insufferable, then any tribulation in this world; therefore I
thirst not only not to be abandoned and remitted to eternal damnation; but
also I greatly fear, to be chastized in this temporal punishment of
Purgatory. Thus much S. Gregory. Of the same judgment herein, are Venerable Bede, in 3. Psalm Poenit. S. Anselme, in cap. 3. Ep. 1 ad Cor. S. Bernard de
obitu Humberti etc.

S. Thomas of Aquin l. 4. sent. d. 30. q. 1. art. 2. does not only subscribe to
the judgment of the former Fathers in this point; but he also further
maintayneth, that the least pain in Purgatory is greater and more
insupportable, then the greatest torment in this world; And yet notwithstanding
all this, we observe daily, that men are not afraid to contemn those most
insufferable torments in Purgatory, who cannot endure far less pains in this
world. But this is the blindness of man's corruption, which is much to be
deplored in this our vale of Tears.

To proceed further. S. Thomas proves this his former sentence and judgment
from this following reason: It is (says he) an inexpugnable and undeniable
truth, that poena damni, the pain of the loss, incurred by sin, is far more
grievous, then Poena sensus, then any pain of sense, or feeling. And it is
further most evident and confessed, that all those, who are in Purgatory,
during their stay these, do suffer Poenam damni, the pain of loss; that is,
the loss of the vision of God.

But to avoid the force of this Reason, it may be perhaps replied by some,
that the perpetual punishment of loss, to wit, to lose for all eternity the
sight of God (as such suffer, who are in Hell) is truly indeed a punishment and
the greatest of all punishments; but during the time of a souls staying in
Purgatory, the want of the divine vision and sight of God, is not properly to
be accounted a punishment, or at least not a punishment or pain more fearful
then those punishments, which Martyrs have suffered in this life; seeing that
we, whiles we live here upon earth, do not see God, and yet we are nor said
truly to suffer poenam damni, any pain of loss; because we shall see God in
due time, if so we purge and free our hearts from sin, as is our duty to do.
Yea the ancient holy Fathers, Patriarchs, and Prophets, who remaining in Limbo
Patrum, expecting the coming of the Savior of the world, did not as then see
God; and yet they were not afflicted with any poena damni, because they were to
see God in a prefixed and designed time. For thus Abraham answers to the Rich
glutton, Luc. 16. Remember son, that thou in thy life time receiuedst thy
pleasures, and Lazarus pains, now therefore he is comforted, and thou
tormented.

In which words, we do not find, that Abraham said; Lazarus was tormented with
poena damni, with the punishment of loss; but that he was in solace and
comfort, and consequently not in torment. And further, where S Simeon Luc. 2.
says: Nunc dimittis seruum tuum in pace etc. Now (O Lord) thou let thy
servant depart in peace, was not of opinion, that through death he should
descend to any most insupportable pains, but to a most sweet repose and peace.

To conclude S. Gregory l. 3. moral. c. 22. teaches, that the ancient
Patriarchs and Fathers during their being in the place, called Limbus Patrum,
did not suffer there any torments, but did find rest and quietness. The force of
this objection or argument is easily dissolved. The answer is this. Whiles we
are living here upon earth, we do not easily apprehend, how heavy a matter it
is, to want the vision and sight of God; both in regard, that what things we
apprehend by means of corporal phantasmes, and the ministry of the senses,
we do but obscurely understand, as also, in that we being softened and
cherished in corporal delights and pleasures, we solace and content our selves
therewith, and thereupon we are not much sollicitous and seeking after
spiritual contentments.

The ancient Fathers and Prophets, were not tormented with any poena damni,
pain of loss, in that they saw not God; because they well did know, that this
procrastination and deferring of enjoying the vision of God, was not occasioned
through any default in them, but because the prefixed time of that most blessed
sight was not yet come.

But here in our case, it falls out otherwise, since touching those souls,
who are condemned, and relegated (as it were) to Purgatory after the coming of
Christ, it is impossible, but that they should be in the highest degree
afflicted; for seeing they in that state are deprived both of body, and of all
corporal senses, they cannot take further delight in sensible objects, as in
meat, drink, riches, honors, in satisfying any carnal concupisce^ce etc.
but they wholly breath and thirst after the contemplation of the first Truth,
and their enjoying their Summum bonum, or chief good; for the obtaining
whereof, as for their last end, they well know that they were created.

Heerunto may be adjoined this other reason; to wit, that the souls in
Purgatory do well know, that the kingdom of Heaven is now made open to the
faithful Christians, and that the only hindrance of not present enjoying of
it, is only the guilt of pain, contracted through their own peculiar sins;
from whence it cannot but follow, that these souls are even offended and angry
with themselves, in that they alone are the cause of their long dilation and
deferring of their enjoying so great an happiness.

These souls may well be resembled to a man in great extremity of hu^gar and
thirst, though having a table before him furnished with all variety of meats,
wynes and choice waters; and yet the only reason and impediment of his not
feeding of them proceeds from some former miscariage of the said man, which
has deservedly caused this his delay in tasting of them.

We may add hereto, that the most ancient Fathers, Austin, Gregory, Beda,
Anselme, and Bernard, do not speak de poena damni, of the pain of loss,
which pain all acknowledge to be most great; but de poena ignis, of the pain
of fire; and this pain, they all with one consent affirm to be more horrid
and intolerable, the^ any torments in this life. For although here upon earth
the torment by fire is great, yet that fire, which is not maintained and
nourished with wood or oil, but is created as an instrument of Gods justice,
to burn and torment souls, must without all doubt be most violent, and sharp
in the highest degree,

Now, from the premises it is euicted, that though we would not acknowledge
poena damni, the temporary pain of loss, which is in Purgatory (to wit of the
loss of the vision of God for a long time) to be more insufferable then all
the torments in this life; yet that the punishment of the fire in Purgatory is
greater then any temporal afflictions in this life, is evidently proved from
the authorities of so many ancient Fathers above produced.

And because, there are many men, who can hardly be induced to believe any
thing, which themselves have not seen, God sometimes therefore has
vouchsafed, to raise certain persons from death to life; commanding them to
relate to others living, what themselves touching this pain have seen.

Among so many eyewitnesses (as I may term them) who have seen the torments
of Purgatory, I will allege only two, the one being a man, the other a woman,
whose testimonies therein are to be accepted without any doubt or diffidency.

The one then, is Drithclmus an English man; the history of which man Venerable Bede writes, and relates this accident, as a thing well known and evident to
himself, it happening in Bedes own life time, with great amazement to all of
those days.

Thus then Bid writes hereof in his fifth book of the History of the nation
of England cap. 13. His temporibus miraculum memorabile, and antiquorum simile
in Britannia factum est etc. In these times a most memorable miracle (and like
to the ancient miracles) did fall out in Britanny. For to incite the living,
touching care to be had concerning the death of the soul, a certain Man being
for the time dead, was after restored to life of Body, relating many things
worthy of remembrance, of some of which I have thought good at this present to
make particular mention. It is this.

There was a certain Househoulder, or Father of a family in the
Country-Norman, belonging to the Humbri. This man did lead with his whole house
a very religious life. Who being taken with a sudden infirmity and sickness in
body, and his pain more, and more increasing, he was brought to the hour of
death, and dyed in the beginning of the Night. But at the appearance of the
morning he returned to life again, and setting himself up in bed, all those,
who accompanicd that night the dead Body, through fear and amazement presently
fled away.

But his wife, who loved him dearly (though fearing) remained with him, whom
he did comfort in these words: Fear not wife, for I am truly risen from
death; with which this night I have been houlden; and I am permitted to live
again among men here upon earth; but not after the same manner as I was
accustomed heretofore to live, but after a far different sort. Hereupon he
presently did rise out of his bed, and went to the Oratory, or Chapel
belonging to that village, spending the most part of the day in prayer. He
instantly divided all his substance into three parts; of the which one part he
gave to his wife, another to his children, and the third he distributed to the
poor.

And, he with great speed freeing himself from all care of the world, came to
the Monastery called Mailros; and there taking the Tonsure, the Abbot provided
for him a secret cell, into which he entered; and there continued till the day
of his death, in such great contrition of mind and body, that his very life
(though his tongue had been silent) did speak, that he had seen during the
short time he was before dead, many things both fearful, and to be desired.
For he delivered the matter in this manner.

Lucidus erat aspectu, and clarus indumento, qui me ducebat etc. One of a
lightsome countenance, and bright in apparel, did lead me. We came unto a
certain valley of a great largenes and profundity, but of an infinite length.
That part of the valley, which was upon our left hand, was most terrible
through scorching flames; The other part thereof was no less terrible through
extremity of hayle, frost, snow, and wynds. Both these wide passages of this
valley were full of souls, of men and women, which seemed to be tossed to and
fro (as it were) through force and violence of boisterous storms. For when
they could not any longer endure the violence of so great an heat, the poor
miserable souls did cast themselves into the midst of that insufferable
cold, above related; and when as neither there they could find any rest, or
ease, they then again leaped into those inextinguishable flames of fire.

And whereas an infinite multitude of poor souls I saw thus to be tormented
with this unfortunate vicissitude of torments, and without any intermission or
ease, I began to call to mind, that perhaps this place was Hell, of the
intolerable torments whereof I had before heard much spoken. My Conductour (who
went before me) answered to my present thought, saying; Do not so think, for
this place, which thou see, is not that Hell which thou supposest. Now the
vision of Hell, and after of Paradise, being explayned, which for breuity I
omit; the Conductour thus further said to the person raised from death: Scis
omnia, quae vidisti? do thou know all these things, which thou have seen?
The raised party said, No. I do not know them. To whom his Conductour thus
replied: That great vale, which thou have seen most dreadful for flames of
heat and fire, as also for insufferable cold, is that place, in which the
souls of all those are to be purged and chastized, who in their life time
delayed from time to time to confess their sins, and to makc satisfaction
for the wickedness by them perpetrated; and yet in the very last hour of their
life, obtained true penitency and contrition for their sins, and so departed
out of their bodies; which souls because they made confession of their sins,
and had penitency of them (though at the last hour of their death) do yet
belong to the Kingdom of Heaven. And many of these poor souls are much eased
by the prayers of the living, by Almsdeeds of their friends, by their strict
fastings, and especially by the celebration of holy masses in their behalf; so
as by these means diverse of them are freed from their torments before the day
of Judgment.

Venerable Bede thus further adds hereto; Cum ille incredibili austeritate
Corpus suum vexaret etc. When as this man raised to life, did afflict his body
with incredible austerity, praying, and praising God with hymns, he then
standing in water frozen through cold with ice, his fellow Monks would say to
him; It is wonderful, o Brother Drithelmus, that thou art able to endure such
asperity of cold; He then replied, Frigidiora vidi, I have seen much more cold
places. And when they in like sort said to him; mirum, quod tam austeram tenere
continentiam velis etc. It is wonderful, that thou will keep this austere
co^tinency in meats etc. He answered: Austeriora vidi, I have seen greater
austerity. And in this sort, through an indefatigable desire of the joys of
Heaven he tamed and subdued his old feeble body until the day of his death, he
much profiting many by his persuasions and conversation of life. Thus far S.
Bid in his relation of this history.

Now, that the contents hereof are most true, I little doubt, because it is
agreeable to the sacred Scripture, in the book of Job cap. 24 Ad nimium
calorem, transeunt ab aquis niuium: from waters of snow, they pass to overmuch
heat. Again S. Bid (a Venerable and most godly man) records the same, as
happening out in his own days and lifetime. To conclude, there did follow out
of this vision great spiritual benefit, the which God is accustomed to draw
and extract out of such miraculous events, and not curiosity or vanity, but the
health of many souls by their conversion to penance and virtue. In this next
place will I come to the testimony of a most admirable woman, her name was
Christina, whose life is written by Thomas Cantipratensis of the order of S.
Dominicke, a man most worthy of credit, and who lived in the days of the said
Christina.

The same is in like sort witnessed by that Venerable man Iacobus de Vitriaco
(l. de vita and rebus gestis B. Mariae de Oegnies) a pious and learned
Cardinal, who in a book of his makes mention of diverse holy women, and
particularly of this Christina Mirabilis, whose life he relates most briefly
in a short Compendium. Now this Virgin Christina does thus speak of her self,
instantly after she did rise from death to life in the sight of many then
living: Statim vt e corpore excessi, etc.

Presently after I did leave my body, certain Angels of God, being ministers
of the light, received my soul, and brought it to an obscure, dark, and
horrid place, being full and replenished with the souls of men and women. The
torments, which I did behold in that place, were so extreme, violent, and
insufferable, as that they cannot be delivered, in any words. I did see there
diverse, with whom I was acquainted, whiles they here lived upon the earth. I
did much pity those poor miserable souls. I demanded of my Conductours,
what place this was, for I did imagine that it was Hell. They answered, that it
was the place of Purgatory, reserved for such sinners, who had obtained true
penitency of their sins before their death, but had not yet performed any
actual satisfaction for their Crimes in their life time committed.

After this, my Conductours brought me to behold the punishment of the damned
in Hell, where also I did find certain persons known to me in their life time.
After this I was conducted up to Paradise, even to the Throne of the divine
Majesty, where I did behold our Lord wellcomming me. I rejoiced excessiuely
thereat, as being then persuaded, that I should there remain with our Lord for
all eternity. But he presently answered me, saying: Most welcome daughter,
thou shall with out all doubt finally stay with me, but here I put to thee an
election, of which of these two things thou had rather make choice, to wit,
whether thou had rather now stay with me for all eternity, or else to
return unto the world and earth again, and there resuming thy former body to
suffer pains, though without any danger to thy body, by which pains thou
may free and set at liberty those souls, which thou behoulding in
Purgatory, did commiserate and pity, that so by this means, men and women
yet living upon the earth, through the example of thy penitent life, abstayning
from commiting more facinorous Crimes, and performing in satisfaction of them,
what they ought to do, may in the end (being enriched with store of merits and
good deeds) be converted to me.

Now I, without any pause or delay answered, that I had rather return to my
body under the former condition proposed to me; and thereupon our Lord taking
it well, that I showed my self so ready in the choice, commands my soul to
be restored to its body. In the performance whereof it was wonderful to
behold the incredible swiftnes, and celerity of the blessed spirits. For even
in that very hour, when it is said in the Sacrifice of the Mass, (which was
then offered for me) Agnus Dei, O Lamb of God etc. my soul was placed before
the divine Majesty, and at the third time of the saying of the foresaid words,
Agnus, Dei; the Angels restored me to my body. And thus the matter stands
touching my departure out of this world, and my after return to life; since
all this was done concerning my being restored to life, for the chastizing of
men, and their amendment in manners and conversation.

Therefore I would entreat all persons, that they would not be troubled, or
affrighted with such things, as they shall see in me. The things do exceed man's
understanding, which (God commanding) shall be performed in me. Neither have such
events at any time happened among mortal men.

Thus much did she speak. And then the writer of her life adioyneth these
words following, concerning her Cap. 6. Tum vero caepit illa exercere etc. Thtn
she did begin to exercise and put in practice such seuerities, for the
performance of which she was sent by our Lord: She did voluntarily enter into
burning Ouens, and was tormented in those fyers; so as through the straytnes of
the place and pains, she made a fearful and horrible noise; But after she
came out of those places, there was not to be seen in her body any print, or
mark of such her burnings.

And then the foresaid Author thus further proceeds in his discourse Cap. 7.
Sub aquis Mosae fluminis hyberno tempore, cum rigerent omnia gelu etc. She very
often and long stood in the waters of the river Mosa, in winter time, when it
was congealed with frost, remaining there in such manner six days, and more.

And then a little after the foresaid Author thus further says, cap. 9.
Interdum in aquis orans etc. She sometimes praying in the waters, was carried by
them upon the wheel of a water mill, and so in most horrible manner was borne
about with the wheel thereof, being notwithstanding perfect and unhurt in all
the parts of her body.

And the Author thus more writes, ibid. Surgebat quandoque medijs noctibus,
and totius Oppidi Trudonensis canes in se concitans etc. She often times rising
about midnight, would stir up against her all the dogs of the town of S.
Truyen, she running before them following her, like a swyft Dear, through
certain obscure places full of briars and thorns, in so much, as she was
pricked and her skin torn in diverse places, as that no part of her body was
free from wounds; and yet after her sheeding of much blood thereby, no prints,
scarrs, or marks of any wounds or pricks were to be seen in her body. Thus far
the forsaid Author.

Now, that this his Narration of all set down, was most true, appears
several ways; First, because, as I said above, he had Iacobus Bishop and
Cardinal of Vitriacum, (a most grave man) to bear witness thereof. Secondly,
in that the author of this History did relate passages done in his own life
time, and in the same Province, wherein himself lived, seeing he was Bishop,
and suffragan to the Archbishop of Cambray. Thirdly, in that the matter and
History it self even publicly (as it were) deposes and auerreth the truth
hereof; to wit, that her body was so after conformed and strengthened by divine
power, as that it should suffer pain by fire, and yet should not be dissolved;
should receive wounds and sheed much blood, and yet no prints of those wounds
should appear.

In this sort this most blessed woman lived, not for the space of few days
only, but during all the time of forty two years, after her return to life.
And lastly; because by this course of her life she converted many to true
penance and compunction of their sins, and after her death was glorious and
eminent for miracles: therefore God by such examples above insisted upon, would
stop the mouths of such incredulous persons, who are not afraid sometimes to
demand, Who has returned from Hell? who has seen the torments either of
Hell, or Purgatory?

Behold here, we have two faithful Witnesses, a man and a woman, who have
seen the most bitter and insufferable torments of Hell, and Purgatory; and
therefore such men do wholly rest inexcusable, who do not bleeue these points:
and yet those men are more inexcusable, who believing these and such like
examples, do not withstanding neglect, and contemn them, forbearing to make
satisfaction for their sins to God, in fasting, mourning, and bewayling the
most poor state of their souls. But let us come to other heads above
specifyed.

The second Head was, the long and daily sufferance of the pains of Purgatory.
I grant, that there is a writer (otherwise of a great name and worth) who did
maintain, that not any soul remained tormented in Purgatory above twenty
years, yea perhaps not above ten years; notwithstanding the use of the
Catholic Church teaches the contrary, which prescribes Anniuersary
Sacrifices of the Holy mass to be offered up for souls de parted, not only
for ten years, but even for a hundred years, and more.

This point appears further from the vision, which we related above out of
Venerable Bede, which shows that many Souls are to remain to be tormented
in Purgatory, even till the day of Judgment And the same verity may receive its
further warrant from the authority of Tertullian, a most ancient Author, who
speaking of Purgatory under the name of Hell, thus writes, l. de Anima cap.
17. In carcerem te mandet Infernum etc. Hell may send thee to that prison, from
whence, until thy sins be expiated, thou shall not depart, perhaps till the
day of thy resurrection.

But S. Cyprian Epist. 2. l. 4. discourses of this point more perspicuously
and plainly, thus saying: Aliud est pro peccatis longo tempore cruciatum
purgari igne etc. It is one thing to be tormented with fire for ones sins,
during a long time; and other thing, to have purged his sins through a man's
own sufferance and severity of life. Which point receaueth its further proof
from the vision of blessed Ludgardis, a most holy and eminent Virgin, whose
life was written by Thomas Cantipratensis above mentioned, who had written the
life of Christina Mirabilis. And because the matter is of Consequence, and
concerns much (by way of example) the Prelates of the Church, I will here set
down the words of the Author himself, which are to be found in the second
book of the life of holy Ludgardis (apud Surium tom 3. 16. Iunij.) The words
are these.

Hoc fere tempore Dominus Innocentius Papa tertius etc. About this time
Innocentius the third, being Pope, after the Council of Lateran was
celebrated, departed this life, and did presently after appear visibly to
Ludgardis. After she saw him compassed about on all sides with a great fire,
she asked him, who he was. He answered, that he was Innocentius the Pope. But
she replying with grief said, What, is the Common Father of us all, thus
tormented for so long a time? He answered, I am in these flames for three
causes. Which Crimes of mine had justly deserved, that I had been punished
with eternity of torments; but that through the intercession of the most holy
Mother of God, (to whom I did build and consecrate a Monastery) I had
repentance of my said sins. And so it is, that I have escaped eternal
damnation; Nevertheless I shall be tormented with most cruel pains, even till
the day of Judgment. That I am permitted to appear to thee, thereby to
entreat thee to procure prayers and suffrages to be said for me; this favor
the mother of mercy obtained of her son in my behalf. And at the speaking of
these least words, he instantly vanished away. Ludgardis did make known this
his necessity to her sisters, that he might be helped with their prayers. But
Ludgardis herself taking great commiseration of his poor state, did undergo
wonderful austerities for his relief. Let the Reader take notice, that
Ludgardis did acquaint us with those causes of this man's torments, which we for
the reverence of so great a Pope, have thought good to conceal.

Thus much the former Author, touching the vision of Ludgardis, which example
has often affected me with great fear and terror. For if so laudable a Pope,
who in the eyes of men appeared not only good, but also holy, and worthy
imitation, was in great danger of being eternally damned in Hell; yet in lieu
thereof is to be punished with most insufferable flames, even until the day of
judgment; what Prelat may not fear? Who ought not to search most narrowly,
into every corner of his conscience? For I am persuaded that so great a Pope
did not commit any mortal sins, except he committing them under the show of
some good, was therein deceived by his flatterers, and such his Domestics, of
whom it is said in the Gospel, Matthew. 10. Inimici hominis domestici eius: A
man's enemies shall be they of his own househould. Therefore as being taught by
this great example, let us all labor to make most diligent inquiry into our
consciences, for fear they be not erroneous, though to our selves they appear
right and sincere.

But let us return unto that point, from which we have digressed. It is not to
be doubted, but that the pains of Purgatory may be extended to ten, twenty, a
hundred, yea to a thousand years. But let us grant for the time, that those
pains should endure but ten, or twenty years; who is able to endure most
dreadful and inexplicable torments for the space of twenty years without any
intermission or ease? Now, that those burnings are to be without any
alleuiation or rest, appears from the vision, which we have above related,
out of Venerable Bede.

Certainly, if a man were assured, that he should continue afflicted for the
space of twenty years, without any intermission or relaxation, with the pain
of the Gout, or of the stomach, or the Headache, or toothache, or of the
Stone; and that he could not by reason of such his dolours, take any sleep or
rest; no doubt such a man had rather make choice to dye, then to persevere, and
live in this miserable case. And if choice were given him, whether he would
remain for twenty years without any respiration and ease in those foresaid
pains, or would suffer loss of all his state and goods; Certainly he would
with a most ready mind, seek to be deprived of all his temporal means, that
so thereby, he might free himself from so continual and cruel pains: with
how much more reason then, ought every wise man to make choice of undergoing of
Penance, accompanied with its fruits, which fruits are, watching, Prayer,
Fasting, Alms deeds, and especially tears, which are a sign of true Penance?

Now if we add to the acerbity of these pains and the long continuance of
them, this third Calamity; to wit, that the souls in Purgatory can in no sort
help themselves, their infelicity and misery is much increased thereby. For here
among men conuersing on earth, there is hardly to be found any one so depressed
in misery and calamity, but that either by flight, or by resistance, or by
mediation of friends, or by appealing to another Judge, or by humbly beseeching
the mercy of the Judge, or by some other means, he may free himself in some
measure from the vexations, with which he is environed.

But (alas) in Purgatory the Souls can do nothing, but only patiently suffer
their punishment. True it is, that Holy Men living here on earth, may pray for
the dead, may offer up alms, and other satisfactory works for the souls in
Purgatory. But this privilege is not granted to the souls themselves being in
Purgatory, except by a certain Privilege to some few, and this most rarely;
to wit, to appear to living men, and to beseech aid and help by their
charity. Therefore the state and condition of those souls are most miserable,
who being in those torments, cannot beget any ease or help to themselves, or to
the souls of their Father, Son, Brother, Mother, sister or wife* or of any
other friend lying in Purgatory.

But perhaps, It may be here suggested, that few are those Souls who come to
Purgatory, and therefore the punishments there inflicted, are not much to be
apprehended, but in a sort to be slighted, and smally regarded. But to this I
answer, that the souls which lie cruciated and tormented in Purgatory, are
innumerable; and so many, as that the number of them is sufficient to move and
stir up mercy, though their torments were far more easy and light. This is
evident, seeing we are instructed a little before from the history of Venerable Bede, that Drithelmus did see an infinite number of souls in Purgatory, as
also from the life of Blessed Christina, that the place of Purgatory was a most
vast and huge place, replenished, and filled with souls.

Neither can it be otherwise, seeing nothing that is defiled, and contaminated,
can enter into the kingdom of Heaven, but they only, are able to penetrate
unto the sight of God, (which is a light, and in whom, there is not any
darkness) and to that place of infinite purity who are truly holy and
immaculate, and are members of that Church, in which there is not either
macula, or ruga, spot, or wrincle, Ephesians. 5. Now, who these men are, are most
rare and most few; and therefore it follows, that all others, who belong to
the number of the Elect, are to pass through the torments and pains of
Purgatory.

Now, from all the former passages of this discourse, it may necessarily be
gathered, that the Dove has just cause daily to lament and mourn for so many
members of hers, which with an infinite desire thirst after their heavenly
Country; and yet are in the mean time detayned from thence by intolerable
flames of fire, and are cruciated and afflicted with most bitter and
inexplicable pains.

Thus far does the Godly Cardinal Bellarmyne discourse of these former four
Heads, touching the Nature of Purgatory Which discourse (in regard both of his
Learning and Sanctity) ought to sway and prevail much with all such good and
pious English Catholics, who are sollicitous, and careful of their own
souls good. Now the Author of this Treatise will conclude this first Section,
by adjoining a Reason drawn from School Divinity, which demonstrateth that
the pains of Purgatory are far more atrocious and intolerable, then any
pains or torments of this life can be. It is this.

Three things do concur as well to grief or pain, as to joy. To wit;
Potentia, Obiectum, and Coniunctio vnius cum altero (as S. Tho. p. 2. q. 31.
ar. 5. says:) An intelligent, or at least a sentient Power, or Faculty; a
convenient Object to that Power; and an Union or Conjunction of the Object with
the Power. Now as concerning the Power, doubtlesly Potentia rationalis, a
Rational Power or Faculty, is more capable of pain or grief, then Potentia
animalis, a sensible Faculty, or Function; For if we respect Apprehension, or
knowing, the Understanding in a Rational soul, is (as it were) a main
Fountain; the Sense but a small River. So far as concerns the Appetite or
Desire, the will of a Rational Soul is a maine Fountain also; The Appetite,
(being inferior to it) is but like a small River. Seeing therefore the naked
soul it self, is immediately tormented, the grief thereof ought to be the
greatest, in respect of the Patient; for here in this life not so much the
soul, as the body is tormented; and by reason of the pains of the body, some
grief and dolor passes into the soul.

Now concerning the Object; The fire of Purgatory must be far more violent,
horrible, and intense, then the fire in this world is; seeing that fire is
created, and instituted, as an instrument of Gods Justice, who would show his
power in the creation of it.

Lastly, touching the Conjunction of the Power with the Object; the Conjunction
of the Soul with the fire in Purgatory shall be most strait and (as it were)
intrinsecall. For here in this world, where all things are corporal and
bodily, there is no Conjunction made, but only by the touch of the Extremities,
or utmost parts of the bodies, and the Superficies of things; whereas in
Purgatory, the torments and fire thereof, shall penetrate most inwardly the
very soul it self. Thus far, touching this first Section.

Of the means to avoid, at least to mitigate, the pains of Purgatory. SECT.
II.
Having in the precedent Section, showed out of the judgment of the most
learned Cardinal Bellarmyne, the atrocity of the pains of Purgatory, and some
other Circumstances acco^paning the said pains; in this next place it is
convenient to set down the means, through force whereof the said pains may
receive some alleuiation and mitigation: I imitating herein the Physician, who
first inquireth into the disease, and after prescribes Medicines, for the
curing of the same.

These means (according to the Doctrine of the Catholic Church) are these
following: To wit, the most holy Sacrifice of the Mass, Prayer, and
Almsdeeds, or good works; according to those words of S. Austin (sermon. 32.
deverb. Apost.) Orationibus sanctae Ecclesiae, and sacrificio salutari, and
Eleemosynis non est dubium mortuos adiuuari; It is not to be doubted, but that
the Souls of the dead are helped by prayers of the holy Church, by the
healthful Sacrifice, and by Alms deeds.

With whom accords S. Chrysostom (Hom. 41. in 1. ad Cor.) saying; Iuuatur
mortuus non lachrymis, sed precibus, supplicationibus, Eleemosynis. A dead man
is helped, not with tears, but with prayers, supplications, and Almsdeeds.

With which two former Fathers, Venerable Bede (to omit many other to avoid
prolixity) does conspire in these words. (l. 5. hist. c. 13.) Multos, preces
viuentium, and Eleemosynae etc. The prayers of the living, Alms-deeds, Fasting,
and principally the Celebration of the Mass do help many who are dead, that
they may be freed from their torments, before the day of Judgment.

But of these three several kinds of Suffrages for relief of the souls in
Purgatory, I will chiefly insist in showing the force and efficacy of good
works, or Almsdeeds. In the explication of which point I will first rest in
the Authority of the Sacred Scriptures; Secondly in the judgment of the ancient
Fathers. And First, touching the sacred Scriptures, I will allege diverse
passages thereof, which although they prove immediately the great virtue of Good
works, and Almsdeeds, for the gayning of the Kingdom of God, and remitting
of the punishment of eternal Damnation; yet (as the Logitians phrase is,) a
fortiori, they much more prove, that the Temporary punishments of Purgatory,
may be taken away, and (as it were) bought out by the price of them.

Now, to begin with the testimonies of Gods Holy writ, we first read thus
therein: Eleemosyna ab omni peccato and a morte liberat, and non patitur animam
ire in tenebras. Tob. 4. Almsdeeds free a man from sin and death, and
suffer not the soul to descend into darkness. And in another place we read:
Sicut aqua extinguit ignem, ita Eleemosyna extinguit peccatum. Eccl. 3 As water
does extinguish the fire, so do Almsdeeds extinguish sin. Yea Alms deeds,
and Good works are so powerful, as that our Savior after he had charged the
Pharisyes with diverse great sins, yet thus concludes, Luc. 11. Verumtamen
date Eleemosynas, and ecce omnia munda sunt vobis; but notwithstanding, do you
give Alms, and behold all things are clean unto you.

And which is more, Gods holy word exte^deth the virtue of Almsdeeds even to
the Gentills and Heathens, for thus we find it said to Nabuchodonosor, who was
a Pagan: Hear my Counsel (O King) and redeem thy sins with Alms, and thy
Iniquities with works of Mercy. Dan 4.

Now, if Good works of Charity, and Almsdeeds, performed even by Heathens and
wicked livers, be so much respected by God; much more then, Good works of
Christians and good livers, are accepted of God, not only for the preventing
the pains of eternal damnation, but also (which is less) of the temporal
pains of Purgatory.

To come to the ancient Fathers: S. Cyprian calls Eleemosyna, Solatium grande
credentium, securitatis nostrae salutare praesidium: Almsdeeds a great solace
of the faithful, a healthful safeguard of our security. Again the said
Father, sermon. de Eleemos. Sicut lauacro aquae salutaris Gehennae ignis
extinguitur, ita Eleemosynis and precibus nostris delictoru^ flamma sopitur; As
the fire of Hell is extinguished through our washing in that healthful water
(meaning at the time of our Baptism) so the flame of our sins, is abated by
our good works.

To whose judgment S. Ambrose alludeth in these words. sermon. 31. Eleemosyna
quodammodo animarum aliud est lauacrum etc. Lauacrum semel datur, and semel
veniam pollicetur; Eleemosynam autem quoties feceris, toties veniam promereris.
Almes-deedes is a certain kind of Baptism etc. But Baptism (meaning the
Sacrament of Baptism) is but once administered, and but once it promises
forgiveness of sins; But as often, as thou shall do some act of Almsdeeds,
so often do thou procure forgiveness of sins.

S. Chrysostom thus auerreth, Hom. 25. in act. Apost. Non est peccatum, quod
non possit purgare Eleemosyna. There is no sin so great which Almes-deed
cannot purge, and take away. And more: Omne peccatu^ infra illam stat: All
sin is under Alms deeds; meaning that Almsdeeds, and Good Works can
extinguish the greatest sin.

To conclude, S. Leo thus writes of this point, sermon. 5. de Collectis:
Eleemosynae peccata delent, mortem perimunt, and poenam perpetui ignis
extingunt. Almsdeeds do blot out sin, destroy death, and extinguish the pain
of perpetual fire.

Thus we see, what wonderful efficacy and virtue both the Holy Scriptures, and
the Ancient Father ascribe and attribute to works of Charity and Almsdeeds;
from whence we may infallibly conclude; that since such good-works are of force
to extinguish the eternity of Hell fire, much more the temporary flames of
Purgatory.

Here now I hold it expedient to answer two Objections, which such men who
are in slavery to their riches, not having the magnanimity and resolution to
part with their silver to any good and charitable uses, either for their own
souls good, or for the benefit of others that are needful, are accustomed to
insist upon. The first is, (say such men) My goods are my own, therefore I am
not obliged to give any part of them, but to what end my self best pleases.
Their second argument and more potent is, I have wife and children, I am bound
by the Law of God to provide for them, and after my provision for them, I shall
have nothing remaining to bestow upon good and charitable uses.

To the first of these two Objections I answer; First, if we should dream for
the time that a man's temporal goods were absolutely at his own disposal, and
that therefore it were in his power, whether he would give any part thereof to
good uses or no: to this I first say, that admitting for the present, that a
man had sole dominion over his own goods, and might dispose of them, as best
pleases himself; yet certain it is from the former authorities, both sacred
and humane, that, that man who is so wholly drowned in his temporal state, as
that he cannot endure to part with some reasonable share of them to pious uses,
shall hardly enjoy Heaven (for without Charity a man cannot be saved) much
less, shall he never escape the pains of Purgatory.

Secondly, I affirm, that it is a false ground to maintain, that a man is so
sole a Proprietary of the goods he possesses, as that he may, as his own
passion and appetite carries him, dispose of them without giving any part
thereof to needful and charitable uses. And that this is most true, I produce
in proof thereof the Authorities and words of these Reverend Fathers following.

To begin with S. Bernard, who thus speaks to rich Men, in the person of the
poor (in Ep. ad Episc. Senonensem) Nostrum est pauperes clamant etc. The poor
cry out, It is ours, which you wastfully spend; That is taken from us most
cruelly, which you (rich men) wast vaynely.

S. Gregory writes in this sort ( in 3. part Pastor curae admonit. 22.)
Admonendi sunt etc. Men are to be admonished, and instructed, that the earth,
of which we all are, is common to all men; and that therefore it affoardeth
nourishment to all men: in regard whereof they but invayne and without cause
repute themselves to be innocent herein, who peculiarly challenge to
themselves, the common gift and liberality of God.

S. Austin (Tract. in Psalm. 147.) Superflua diuiti, necessaria sunt pauperi;
res alienae possidentur, cum superflua possidentur. Those goods, which are but
superfluous to every rich man, necessarily belong to the poor; Another man's
substance is possessed, when superfluous riches are possessed.

S. Chrysostom (Hom. 34. ad populum Antioch.) Non ad hoc accepisti etc. Thou
have not received thy riches, to consume them in wastfull expenses, but that
thou should bestow much of them in Almsdeeds. And again in the same place:
Tuarum rerum etc. O man, thou art but a dispenser or steward of thy own
substance; no otherwise, then he, who dispenses and distributeth the goods of
the Church.

S Jerome (vide Gratian. did. 42. Can Hospitale:) Aliena rapere conuincitur,
qui vltra sibi necessaria retinere probatur? He is convinced to take even by
violence, those riches which belong to others, who is justly accused to retain
to himself more, then is necessary to his state.

S. Basil (in orat. in illud, Destruam horrea mea:) At tu nonne spoliator es,
qui quae dispensanda accepisti, propria reputas? Art not thou even a Robber,
who take those things and that substance for thy own, which thou have
received to distribute to others? The bread which thou have in thy house,
belongs to the Hungry man, the Coat to the Naked man etc. Quocirca tot
pauperibus iniuriam facis, quot dare valeres: Wherefore, thou do iniure so
many poor men, how many thou art able to relieve.

For greater breuity I will conclude with S. Ambrose, sermon. 81. Sed ais, quid
iniustum est, si cum aliena non inuadam, propria diligenter seruem? O impudens
dictum! Propria dicis? Quae? And then after: Non minus est criminis, quam
habenti tollere, cum possis and abundes, indigentibus denegare. But thou will
say? What injustice is it in me, if so I do not invade other men's substance,
but reserve my own proper riches only to my self? O impudent and shameless
saying! Call thou them thy proper riches? Which be they? It is no less a
crime, to deny to give to the poor, when thou art able to give, and do
abound; then to take riches from those, who already do enjoy them. Thus far
touching the Fathers Judgment in this point, wherewith to shut up the mouths of
worldly and covetous men.

Now, for the better understanding of the former Authorities, we are to
conceive, that those who possess riches, be indeed true Lords over them, if so
they be justly obtained and gotten: if the Comparison be here made in respect
of other men; yet with reference to God, they are not to be accounted Lords, or
absolute Proprietaryes, but only dispensers of them. For God created all
things, and ordained, that some men are rich, others poor; yet not in that
sort, as some should be so rich, as that they shall abound with all
superfluities; and others want necessaries, without having relief from those
who are welthy. The reason hereof being, in that God being the Father of all
men indifferently, did creat the world and all things therein, for the Common
profit of all men; and therefore who retain superfluous riches to themselves,
without distributing part of them to good and pious uses, do contrary to the
will of God therein, and consequently do sin.

Now, to come to that other excuse, that men are obliged to provide for
Children, and that therefore they have nothing to spare for any good uses,
thereby to redeem themselves from the future fire of Purgatory. And in thus
Apologizing for themselves, they can readily allege that place of Scripture,
1. Tim. 5. Si quis suorum, and maxim domesticorum curam non habet, fidem
negauit, and est infideli deterior; If any man has not care of his own, and
especially of those of his household, he denies his faith, and is worse then
an Infidel.

To this poor reason, shadowed under the veyle of natural affection, and
Paternall care, I thus answer. I do not disalow a moderate care to be taken
for the provision of Children; for he were an inhumane monster who should
neglect the same. But this is it I say, to wit, for a man to be on the one side
so wholly absorpt and drunk in a thirsty pursuit of temporal riches, for a
superfluous advancement of his own children; and on the other side, to be
wholly negligent, careless, and incurious for the preventing of the horrible
flames of Purgatory.

This I say, is that, which may well be styled an insensible Lethargy in men.
The Extremities I altogether dislike, the Mean I embrace. And according to
this (O Catholics) your over great solicitude in these matters, diverse of you
will make superfluous provision and charges in erecting a second House for a
younger Son, and the like; because they are near to you, as being
Proseminated from your own loins; But your own poor souls in the mean
time you wholly forget, as if they were but strangers to you, or (as the Phrase
is) but of the half blood: such cecity and blindness in men is greatly to be
pitied.

Be not unnatural to your selves, in being natural to your Children. Let your
own Souls (which are more near to you, then any Children) have at least a
Childs Portion. When you look upon your children, look upon them, not with
an eye of an ouer-indulgent, but of a Christian Father: And then may each of you
say to your selves in an inward reflexe of your judgment: I love you all
dearly, with a Paternall love, but I love my own soul, more dearly. I will
provide for your temporal means in fitting manner, and according to my
degree. But shall my over much care of your temporal advancement impouerish my
soul? O, God forbid!

What pleasure will it be to my poor soul, lying burning in the most
dreadful flames of Purgatory, for bestowing of that superfluity of means,
which being otherwise bestowed for the good of my soul, might have redeemed me
from those flames? Will your selves think intensly, of my such calamitous
state, incurred by my over great love toward you? and accordingly will you
work means, by prayers, suffrages, and Almsdeeds in my behalf, for the
lessening of those my torments? O, I fear you will not. And this I may
probably gather, from the careless negligence in this point of many children
toward other parents being now dead. And how can I promise to my self more
from you, then we see by experience, other dead Parents have received from
their living children? Let this be your speech in the secret Closet of your
hearts, concerning your children.

There is no Parent so kind, who would be content to suffer daily torments and
rackings, to redeem his son from the like torments, to which by co^miting
some flagitious Crime he stands subject and obnoxious. Is not then that Parent
(I will not say half distracted, but) of most weak judgment, who shall
labor, and covet certainly to undergo most horrible torments (and
inco^parably far greater, then this world can affoard) and this not for freeing
his son from any pains at all; but only that his children may live in a more
lautious, opulent, and full manner, then otherwise they should, though
competent, and sufficient means would notwithstanding be left unto them?

For is it not infinitely far better for the Pare^t, to leave his children, in
fitting degree and quality, furnished with temporal means, and withal
himself, by distributing a good part of his state in his life time to
spiritual ends, wholly to prevent, or at least partly to diminish the pains of
Purgatory; then to leave his issue in greater affluency and abundance of
worldly riches, and himself to continue many years in that insufferable
conflagration of fire; the grieuousnes whereof truly to conceive passes our
conceit? O, Ante faciem frigoris eius quis sustinebit? Psalm. 147.

Thus far I have thought good to draw out, and enlarge this Section, in
stirring the mould about the root of this ordinary pretense, and excuse of
Parents providing for their Children; by reason that most Parents (to the great
prejudice of their own Souls) do shaddowe their want of Christian Charity to
others under this pretext; and thereby they make their own Children to become
Enemies to themselves: and so it falls out to be most true, as is above
alleged by the foresaid illustrious Cardinal: Inimici hominis, Domestici
eius. Matthew. 20.

Yet before I conclude this Section, I only say; although according to the
judgment of the Philosophers; No man knows, what kind of love that is which
Parents bear to their children, but he that has children; notwithstanding
before I would endure an infinity of torments for their greater and more full
advancement, I would in part lessen my temporal State, for the good of my own
Soul: for though Children be most near to their Parents, yet that sentence is
most true: Tu tibi Primus, and Vltimus.

A Persuasory Discourse for the putting in practice the means (which are good
Works) for the avoiding of the pains of Purgatory. SECT. III.
IN the two former Passages are laid open, First the Horrid atrocity of the
pains of Purgatory; Secondly, the means how to prevent, at least to lessen
and mitigate them: It now follows, that I spend some leaves in a
Paraeneticall (as I may term it) or Persuasory discourse, thereby to inuit
Catholics to put in practice the said means, which are conducing for the
preventing of those temporary direful flames. And whereas these my speeches
are directed chiefly to such of you Catholics, which are most slothful and
sluggish in the prosecution of the same means, I mean, in the performance of
Good Works. Therefore I must here entreat you, to pardon my rudenes of
style, since it best sorteth to point forth (for words are the Images of
things) your most deplorable state herein. Dangerous wounds (you know) must
have deep incisions; And matter of Tragedy (for I account yours to be such) is
to be delivered in mournful Accents. Never ought we in this case to forbear
the touching of the member affected with a hard hand. O no. The Apostle
indoctrinateth us otherwise, in those his feruorous and fiery words, 2. Tim. 4.
Praedica, Insta, oportune, importune, argue, obsecra, increpa etc. To such
Catholics, which are feruorous in the performance of good and pious Actions,
this my speech does not extend.

But here now I hold it convenient to marshall and range such men into
several kinds, to which men this my Admonition belongs. The first kind of
these are such, as are yet Schismatikes in the present course of their life,
and other Catholics, who hertofore perhaps have lived for many years in a
Schismatic state. Touching the first kind of actual Schismatikes;
admitting, that before their death, they become truly penitent of their former
continuance in Schism; for otherwise their souls are infallibly to descend to
Hell, not to Purgatory.

But admitting (I say) the best; to wit, that they do dye in true repentance of
their former sin, which only must proceed from the bou^dles Ocean of Gods
mercy; Yet, what inevitable Torments, and for how many years, do expect the^
in Purgatory, if otherwise they seek not to deliver themselves thereof, in
their own life time by good works? This point will best appear by
discovering in part the atrocity of Schism, and a Schismatic life. For the
better explayning whereof I will insist in the Authorities of the Holy
Scripture, and the most ancient Fathers.

And to begin with Gods word, we thus read, Galat. 5. The works of the flesh
are adultery, fornication, and Sects: (meaning thereby Schisms) They which
shall do such things, shall not inherit the kingdom of God. And in respect of
the state of Schism, the Church of God, is styled in sacred Writ: One
sheepfould (Joan. 10.) One body (Romans 12.) One Spouse, (Cant. 6.) and one Dove.
But now Schism, as coming of the Greek verb (...), scindo, deuideth that
which is one, into parts: Therefore as a member cut of from the whole body,
cease to be a part of the said body; so a Scismatike by open profession of an
Erroneous Religion, impugned by the Church of Christ, cease thereby to be a
member of the Church of Christ.

To descend to the Fathers; Mark how they pensill out a Schismatike, or
Schism: I will urge but two or three for breuity. S. Austin then thus writes
(l. de fide and Symb. c. 20.) Schismatiks though they believe the same points,
which we believe; yet through their dissension they do not keep fraternall
charity; therefore we conclude, that a Schismatike belongs not to the
Catholic Church, because he loves not his neighbor. Thus S. Austin.
Fulgentius thus teaches, (l. de fide ad Petrum c. 38. and 39.) Firmissime tene
etc. Believe for certain, and doubt not, that not only Pagans, but also Jews,
Heretics, and Schismatikes, who dye out of the Catholic Church, are to go to
everlasting fire. To conclude, S. Cyprian thus auerreth (l. 4 Epist. 9. ad
Florent.) Qui cum Episcopo non sunt, in Ecclesia non sunt: who agree not with
the Bishop (meaning the supreme Bishop and Pastor of the Church) are not in
Gods Church.

Thus we see, what is the judgment both of Holy Scripture and of the ancient
Fathers, passed upon the most dangerous state of Schismatiks. From whence we
may infallibly conclude, that supposing the best, I mean, that Schismatiks do
finally repent and dye in state of Grace, which is most doubtful, considering
their long inueterate Schismatic lives; yet what imminent temporal torments
(even hanging over their heads) are ready to rush upon them, instantly upon the
separation of the soul from the body, and to seize upon their souls, for the
satisfying of Gods Justice? But seeing the state of Schismatikes is so
desperate and dangerous, I am to be pardoned, if I sharpen my pen more
peculiarly against the Schismatikes of our own Country.

Hear then, you Schismatikes of England, who for saving your temporal goods,
will endanger the loss of all eternal good; How much do you dishonor (yea
vilify God) by perseuering in your Schismatic state? Assure your selves (You
Schismatikes) that it is not in your power to command at your pleasure, over
Time and Repentance. God calls every one, but how often he will call, no man
knows; and be you afraid of that fearful Sentence of his Divine Majesty: My
People would not hear my voice, and Israel would none of me; So I gave them
up to the hardness of their hearts. Psalm 81. O most dreadful Relegation!

But admit, God will give you time to repent; yet the strength of your Arms is
to weak to bend that Virgam ferream of Gods Justice, by the which he punishes
with eternal damnation final Irrepentance, and chastizeth sin (if so all
such points be not with good works cleared before in this world) with temporary
(but most insupportable) pains of Purgatory.

But yet to make you to cast a more feeling and intense Introuersion upon your
own most deplorable states; Suppose a Native Subject should through some
temporal respect and end, bear himself most traitourously toward his King,
daily perpetrating some Act of disloyalty, and ever banding himself openly
with other his professed Enemies: how could this Man in reason think, that his
submission could ever be sufficient for his after reconciling to his
Sovereign, and obtaining Grace and favor, and future advancement to honor
and Dignity? especially if the King were of that severe disposition, as that he
was ever accustomed to punish (though often in a lower degree then the offense
deserved) each act of Disloyalty and Disobedience committed against him?

And is not the state of a Schismatike far more desperate and dangerous? This
man commits spiritual Treason against the Divine Majesty, by his daily
communicating in Prayers and rytes, with the Preaching Members of an erroneous
Church, Gods designed Adversaries: How then can he expect, with his so much
gauled Conscience, to arrive to Heaven without extraordinary acts of Mercy to
the poor, and other works of Piety in this world, or of suffering most
exquisite and invtterable torments in Purgatory? Considering God is just, and
severely chastizeth every sin, committed against him; Behold (says he by
his Prophet Isay) I will be revenged upon my Enemies, and will comfort my self
in their destruction, Isa. 1. And again: God shall rain snares of fire upon
sinners; Brimstone, with tempestuous winds, shall be the portion of their Cup.
Psalm. 11.

Poor wretch (I mean poor Schismatike) how will thou be able to suffer these
insufferable pains, and this for many years at the best; that is, if finally
thou dye in true Repentance of thy former Schismatic Course, who with such
anxiety, toil, and impatie^ce art accustomed to endure the pain of the
toothache, or other torment in this world? And is the Schismatike so sensible
of a little pain in this life, and yet hopes he shall not be sensible of
infinitely greater pains in the life to come?

Therefore now in time raise your selves out of this spiritual Lethargy, and
awake; since the longer you continue in this your desperate state, you do but
all that time (admitting you finally dye repentantly) even heap fuel together
for the nourishing of your flames in Purgatory. Remember the Wisemans saying,
Eccles. 10. Languor prolixior grauat Medicum. You cannot but know, that during
your state in Schism, you are wholly deprived of Gods Grace, by which we make
claim to Heaven; (Gratia Dei, vita aeterna. Romans 6.) since you wilfully
deprive yours selves of the benefit of the Sacraments of Gods Church; which
Sacraments our Savior has instituted in his Church, as the ordinary means,
or Conduits, for the deriuing of Gods grace into man's soul.

Well, I will close this point of Schismatikes with this one asseueration: To
wit, that a poor Motley fool (be you not offended, for I speak the truth) to
whom God has afforded only the use of his five Senses, is in far more happy
state, then you Schismatikes are. This man (though most despicable in the eye
of the world) as through want of the use of Reason, cannot merit; so he cannot
demerit: You through your abuse of Reason, do not only, not merit; but in lieu
thereof you increase the heap of your sins, through a daily coaceruation of
your Schismatic Transgressio^s. This man is infallibly freed from the pains
of Purgatory, much more of Hell: You are assured to suffer the pains of
Purgatory at least, God grant (through your final irrepentance) not the pains
of Hell.

Briefly this man through the benefit of his Baptism, has his Original sin
cancelled; and as for Actual sin, he stands not obnoxious thereto: You are
indeed freed by your ablution in that sacred Font, from original sin; but
then you repeal the worth and Dignity thereof, by your actual perpetrating of
mortal sin. I speak in the sight of God, I had rather be one of these
poore-rich fools, so to call them, (for he is rich, who is assured of his
inheritance of Heaven) then to be the greatest, and most welthy Schismatike in
England; being resolved to continue year after year, in this his most wicked
course of Schism; Quid proderit homini, si vniuersum mundum lucretur, anima
vero suae detrimentum patiatur? what shall it profit a man, if he gain the
whole world, and loose his own Soul? Matthew. 16.

Well, in this next place to touch a little upon such, who are at this present
actually Catholics, yet have perseuered many years in a Schismatic state,
before they were incorporated into the Catholic Church; what satisfaction and
deeds of extraordinary Mercy to others are they bound to perform, to peeuent
the pains of Purgatory, or else to endure them for many years? This partly
appears, from the ugly state (so to call it) of a Schismatike, above in part
described. And if he will not perform such abstersive Acts of penance in his
own life time, by contributing, showing pity, and relieuing of others; let
him take heed, he fall not upon that dreadful sentence of the Apostle, Iac. 2.
Iudicium sine misericordia ei, qui non fecerit misericordiam. Judgment without
mercy is to fall to him, who will not practice mercy.

Alas! Are you not men? Must you not once dye (and how soon God knows:) And
are you not then to render a most strict account for your fore-passed lyfetime,
even to him, of whom it is said for his most exquisit and narrow search into
our sins, Scrutabor Jerusalem in lucernis. Sophon. 1. I will search the
sins of Jerusalem with a Candle. And will you then be so negligent, and
careless, in preventing that dreadful time? Since God is no accepter of
Persons, neither will Riches, Worldly pomp, nor any other such glorious
miseries help a soul ready to depart out of its body, for the delivering it
from Purgatory, except great Almsdeeds (besides other penitential works) be
performed in the life time.

Well then, my poor, and dear Catholic, who for many years, through thy
wicked dissimulation in matters of Religion, have most highly offended God;
Imagine thy self, that at this very instant, thou were lying upon thy death
bed: (that bed, I say, which the Prophet calls, Lectum doloris, (Psalm. 40)
the bed of grief,) worn away with pain and sickness, and not expecting to
escape, but looking every minute for thy last dissolution; How would thy
Judgment be altered? and would thou not thus (in all likelihood) reason and
dispute with thy own Soul? True it is, I thank God, of his most infinite and
boundles Mercy, that as a straying sheep, I am at length brought into Christ's
sheepfold, and I hope to dye (through the benefit of our Saviors passion, and
of the holy Sacraments) his servant, and in state of Grace, and finally to
enjoy the interminable joys of Heaven. But alas, though the guilt of Eternal
damnation (incurred by my long former Schismatic life, and by my many other
infinite sins) as I hope, through Gods infinite mercy, be remitted; yet
temporal punishment due for all my former said sins, in most inexplicable
torments of Purgatory does expect me.

My poor Soul must continue in those burning Flames (how many years, his
divine Majesty only knows) for the expiating of my said sins, before I can
arrive to Heaven. When I was in health, enjoying my temporal state in all
fulness, how easily with a voluntary relinquishing of a reasonable part thereof
to pious and religious uses, could I have avoided (at least mitigated) these
now imminent and unavoidable torments? Good god! where then were my Wits? The
very plowman prouides for the time of Winter; yea the Ant (to the which we are
sent by Gods word (Prou. 6.) to be instructed) hoords graynes of Corn for his
after sustenance; And have I so negligently carried my self, as to lay up
beforehand no provision, against this tempestuous and rugged future storm? O
beast, that I was! Sweet Jesus, how far distant were my former course of life
and daily actions from ever thinking of this unavoidable danger? I have lived
many years in fulness of state: I have been laboring in laying out good
sums of Silver, to heap land to land for my Children to inherit. I have lived
(perhaps) in a most profuse or wastfull manner; I have spent to much, to gain
the deceitful favor of the world, in sumptuous apparel, exceeding my state,
in keeping an over wastfull house, and in over great and unnecessary Attendance
about me. By means of some, or all of these extrauagant Courses, I have spent
much; And yet not once did I ever think to bestow the twentieth part of these
superfluous charges to pious uses, for the preventing of those flames, which
within few days (perhaps few hours) my poor soul must suffer.

O wretch that I am, that have thus senselesly so neglected this fearful day!
Here now my former pleasures, and Iollity are come to their last end and
period. Gods Justice must, and will be satisfied; since nothing defiled and
contaminated (except all the rust thereof be before fyled away) can enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven. Whither then now, being encompassed on each side with
such thorns of danger, and anxiety, shall I turn my self? To the world, and
my former pleasures thereof? O God, the remembrance of them is most nauseous,
and distasteful to me; since the fruition of them is a great cause of my future
pains. To my former greatness and fulness of my temporal state? O, that I had
been so happy, as to have made true benefit in time, of that Mammon of
Iniquity, my wastfull spending whereof must give fuel to that fire! And we are
taught, that, Diuitiae non proderunt in die vltimo. Prou. 11. To my Friends,
Kyndred, and former familiar acquaintance, which I shall leave behind me in the
World? Woe is me, they are as wholly negligent of their own souls danger,
concerning this point, as my self have been. How then can I expect them to be
solicitous and careful of mine?

To thee then alone (most merciful and heavenly Father) who art Pater
misericordiarum, (2. Cor. 1.) and who do crown us in misericordia and
miserationibus (Psalm. 102.) I do fly. Who tookest mercy of the Woman of
Canaan, of Mary Magdalen, of the Publican, and of the thief hanging upon the
Cross. Between the arms of thy ineffable Compassion I cast my self. Lessen,
(o Lessen) for thy own honors sake, and the bitter passion of thy most Dear
Son, my Savior Jesus Christ, these temporal pains, which now want for me.
Let my present Compunction and Contrition of all my former sins (through thy
mercy, and Sons precious death) arrive to that ascent and height, as that my
Savior may say to me with the good thief; to day thou shall be with me in
Paradise. So shall thy Mercy thereby ouer-ballance thy Justice; For to speak
in the Churches Dialect; Plus potes dimittere, quam ego committere: and it is
my Comfort, that I read in holy Writ; Suauis est Dominus vniuersis, and
miserationes eius super omnia opera eius, (Psalm. 144.) Our Lord is sweet to
all, and his mercy is above all his Works.

O that I had been so happy, as to have followed the wholesome aduyce, given to
me by way of Presage in a little Treatise, entitled, An Antidot against
Purgatory: I then did read it, but with a certain curiosity, as thinking it
nothing to belong to me. But (alas) I now find it to be a true Sybill, or
Prophet of my future Calamitous state.

Well then, seeing my own hower-glasse is almost run out, let me turn my
speech to you (Dear Catholics) in my health my chiefest Familiars; and with
whom I did most consociate in my former pleasures. There is no difference
between you and me, but the time present, and the time to come. You all must
once be forced to this bed of sorrow, and be brought to your last Sickness. To
you then, and to all others, who are negligent in providing against this Day, I
do direct this my charitable Admonition. You are yet in health, and perhaps as
improuident in laying up spiritual riches against this fearful day, as my
self have been. O change your Course, whiles there is time. Let my present
state preach to you, and suffer these my last dying words to give life to your
future Actions; since they preach feelingly whose Pulpit is their Deathbed. Be
not in the number of those sensles creatures, who are buried so deep in earth,
as that they have no taste or feeling of things to come; Nolunt intelligere, vt
been agant. (Psalm. 35.)

Do now therefore (Dear Friends) do now, what you can. Now while you have
time, heap up together, that spiritual Wealth, which will buy out all ensuing
pains; and turn the Current of your former superfluous Charges, into the
fair stream of pious works, that so it may affoard you water, for the
quenchinge of those raging Flames. Consider how you shall be conuented before
the severe Judge, from whom nothing can be hidden, of who^ the Prophet says:
Tu cognouisti omnia, nouissima and antiqua. (Psalm. 138.) He is not appeased
with gifts, nor admtiteth excuses, who out of his boundles mercy remitteth to
us (upon our true repentance) the pains of eternal damnation; but yet
chastizeth us with temporal punishment to satisfy his Justice: misericordia
and veritas obuiauerunt sibi, iustitia and pax osculati sunt. Psalm. 81.
Therefore now begin to spread your selves in works of Piety. Lessen your
temporal Pomp, descend in outward comportment under your selves, and let your
sparing charges by this means saved, serve to redeem you from those horrid
flames, which are hereafter to invade you.

To these, and the like disconsolate and Tragical lamentations in the inward
reflexe of thy foul (my dear Catholic) shall thou in thy last Sickness be
driven, if thou seek not to prevent the danger in time. Therefore Remember,
that he is truly Wise, who laboreth to be such in his health, as he wishes to
be found in Gods sight, at the hour of his Death.

But now to come to you other Catholics, who though you ever lived within the
bosom of the Catholic Church; yet the state of many of you is otherwise most
deplorable, who though you dye in state of grace (though many hundred
Catholics, through their own vicious lives and final irrepentance do not)
yet your Case (with reference to the torments of Purgatory) is lamentable. Most
of you are wholly heedles and negligent in seeking by your good Works, and
Almsdeeds to avoid Purgatory. How many of you, whose means are great, might
without any stay after your Death, even post to Heaven by your Religious
dispensing of a good part thereof; whereas others, through want of temporal
means so to be distributed, must stay long in Purgatory? O, that Man should be
so treacherous to his own Soul!

It is daily observed (even with grief to all Zealous Catholics) that many of
you are ready to lay out great sums of silver for the increasing of your
temporal states; That others of you, who are devoted to the contentments and
pleasures of this World, to dissipate a great part of your living in fruitles
charges: Some in gallantry of apparel, others at Dyce, in Running-Horses, in
keeping wastfull Christmasses; your selves and your Company feeding most
lautiously upon all variety of curious meats and wynes, whiles in the mean
time your poor souls perhaps remain, even hunger-starued (as I may say) for
want of spiritual nourishment. In all which courses it is be feared, that
many, even mortal sins, are by you committed, of the which, though you after
have purged your selves by the holy Sacrament of Confession, yet what
reckonings are there remaining touching the temporal punishments attending
such your sins? which either in this world must be taken away by great
satisfaction performed by you, or else all such rust must be purged and burned
away in the Horrible Flames of Purgatory.

Therefore it is not a simple Imprudency; It is not a weakness of the
understanding; It is not a bare mistaking of the judgment: But it is mere
Lunacy and Madness in you, thus to advance temporal respects either of gain or
pleasure, before the preventing of those insufferable torments. And if any of
you, who are of great states, do leave a hundred pounds at your deaths to be
prayed for, O, you think, you have made a large and ample satisfaction for all
your sins, and that after those Prayers are performed, you are sure instantly
to go to Heaven. A self flattering, and credulous conceit! Think of the
custom of the Venerable Bishops of the ancient Church, who were used to tie a
sinner to perform penance seven years, for the committing but of one mortal
sin: How much different was their Judgment, from your Judgment herein?

Again, what small a proportion has this so niggard an Almsdeeds of yours,
with that of the man restored to life, and recorded by Venerable Bede, who gave
the third part of his goods to the poor, the rest to his wife and Children; of
whom Cardinal Bellarmyne did above speak in the first section of this book?
Or how stands your Charity to good uses with reference to Zachaeus, spoken of
in the Gospel, Luc. 19. who after he had seen Christ, gave instantly the
half of his state to the poor. Truly I speak in all sincerity; I knew two
Gentlemen in England, who were but Esquyers, (though of good states) and yet at
the time of their deaths (besides many other most good and holy works done by
them in their life time) the one of the^ did leave to good uses fifteen
hundred pounds, and the other a thousand Marks. Therefore let such Catholics,
who are careful of their Soules-good, be virtuously emulous of such men's
devotion and charity; and let them remember, that saying of S. Chysostome
(sermon. 37. ad pop. Antioch.) Non dare, sed copiose dare, Eleemosyna est. But to
proceed.

If any of you, upon your just Demerits, were to be racked for diverse months
together; or if any of you were in the highest degree afflicted with some
Corporal pain; what would you not give (if it were in your power) to redeem
your selves from these torments? And yet the first of these pains might endure
through the Clemency of the Prince, but few months (perhaps but few days) the
other could not endure many years, through the extremity of the pain (for
nullum violentum est perpetuum:) And will you then be so leaden, stupid, and
dull in judgment, as willingly, and affectedly to undergo (it being in your
power, by abandoning in your life time a little Dross, to prevent them) such
pains for many years (perhaps for many hundred of years;) in reference and
comparison of which, all the greatest torments in this world (in the judgment
of the ancient Fathers) are to be reputed, as shadows, or tipes of pains?
where is ma^s understanding, where is the light of his Reason? But it seems,
they are exiled, and in their room, are embraced a most sordid and earthly
respect of temporal, and fading vanities.

Therefore I may well here demand; Are such persons Catholics? Are they
Christians? yea are they men? who thus be trample withal carelessnes, and
supine neglect the good of their own souls, and rauell out their time in idle
toys and pleasures? Alas! what are riches, greatness of state, a needles
fruition of temporal pleasures, or that, which you call your reputation and
honor (which withdraw many from doing of good deeds) able to perform?

Sir John Oldcastle being exprobated of his Cowardlynes, and thereby reputed
inglorious, replied; If through my persuyte of Honor, I shall fortune to loose
an Arm, or a Leg in the wars, can Honor restore to me my lost Arm, or leg?
In like manner I here say to you, Catholics: Can your Riches, your worldly
pomp and pleasures, or antiquity of your House, and Family redeem your Souls
out of Purgatory? Or can this poor weak blast of wind or air, which you call
your reputation (consisting in other men's words, passed upon you) cool the
heat of those burning flames? Nothing less, since these toys (through your
abuse of them) shall serve, as bellows, the more to blow the Flames of
Purgatory.

I will urge one reason, which shall make you (negligent Catholics) to blush,
and withal to grow pale; for it shall force you to be ashamed of your
incredible negligence in this great business here treated of; and it shall put
you (if so Gods grace be in you) in extreme fear of your future Calamity. I
will take it from the examples of certain most learned, pious, and ancient
Fathers. The Fathers shall be these following, S. Austin, S. Ambrose, S. Gregory,
and S. Bernard; all whose pens were guyded by the Holy Ghost.

S Ambrose through the extremity of his fear of the flames of Purgatory, thus
writes ( Sermon. 20. in Psalm. 118.) I shall be searched and examined as lead, in
this fire, till all the lead be melted away etc. S. Austin through his
fearful and strong apprehension of this fire, thus breaks out in words ( in
explic. Psalm. 37.) O Lord, let me be made such, as that my Correction shall not
be needful to be increased with that purging fire, in respect of such men, qui
salui erunt, sic tamen quasi per ignem. And again S. Austin thus further says
( l 50. homil. 16.) O how happy are they, that who living well, and contented
with necessary riches to their bodies, liberal of their own, chaste in
themselves, and not cruel to others, do redeem themselves from this fiery
Furnace? Of which fire the said S. Austin thus says: in Psalm. 27. Grauior erit
hic ignis, quam quis potest pati in hac vita. This fire shall be more
intolerable, then any man can suffer in this life.

S. Gregory thus writes ( in Psalm. 3. Poenit.) I esteem the purging fire
(though it be transitory) to be more intolerable, then all tribulations, which
in this life may be suffered; therefore I do not only desire, not to be rebuked
in the fury of eternal damnation; but also I greatly fear to be purged in the
wrath of transitory Correction.

Lastly, to come to S. Bernard, whose trembling pen through fear of the
pains of Purgatory, thus discourses: ( Sermon. de sex tribul. 16. and 55. in
Cant.) O would to God, that some man would now before hand, provide for my head
abundance of water, and to mine eyes a fountain of tears; that so perhaps the
burning fire should take no hold, where running tears had cleansed before.

And now to reflect a little upon the Worth of these four former alleged
Fathers; and then to draw our inference and deduction. S Ambrose for his
learning (he writing many books in defense of the Christian Faith) as also for
his sanctimony of life, obtained the title of being called (per Excellentiam)
One of the four Fathers of the Primitive Church.

S. Austin (gayning the like title) was of that eminency for learning and
piety, that S. Jerome, thus extolleth him: (Tom. 2. Ep. 25. inter opera
August.) I have always reverenced thy Sanctity with that honor, which is
fitting; and I have loved our Lord and Savior dwelling in thee.

Thus much briefly of S. Austin, whose infinite pains, labor, and study
(besides his extraordinary holiness in his conversation and course of life) in
writing of so many, and so great Tomes, with such wonderful perfection of
judgment and learning, and all in defense of the Christian and Catholic Faith,
might seem in the eye of many, to be sufficient to expiate the temporal
punishment due for his sins.

S. Gregory was our Apostle, first planting Christianity in England, and of
that Piety, as that M. Godwin the Protestant ( in his Catalogue of Bishops.
page 3.) thus commends him: That blessed and holy Father S. Gregory.

To come to S. Bernard: This blessed man (as Osiander witnesses in his Epitome
p. 309.) was an Abbot, author of many monasteries, both in France and
Flanders, instituting a Religious Order in Gods Church: Yea he was eminent for
working of Miracles; of whom in regard of his piety of life, even D. Whitaker
our Adversary ( lib. de Eccl. page 338.) thus celebrateth his worth: Ego qui
them Bernardum vere fuisse sanctum existimo.

Now, if these four most worthy shining Lamps in the Church of God (or rather
so many bright stars in the celestial Sphere) remarkable for learning, and
more remarkable for piety and devotion; they spending their whole time in
writing in defense of the true Religion; be tra^pling under their feet all
temporal Honors and Preferments; living most chastely in Purity of body; and
wearing themselves out in Fasting, Prayer, and severely punishing their own
flesh: If these men I say) notwithstanding all this their rigorous course to
flesh and blood did stand in such fear and horror of the torments of
Purgatory (as we see above, by their own words and writings, they did;) what
then (My dear Catholics) may be said of most of you, who enjoy the pleasures
of the world, pamper your bodies, live in great riches and abundance, and yet
do think to escape the flames of that fire? what is this, but madness and
incredible partiality in the highest degree; you being thus become Parasytes to
your own selves, in thus flattering your own most fearful state?

But it may be, there are some of you, who, so you may enjoy Heaven eternally
in the end, become thereby less careful of preventing the temporal pains of
Purgatory, sleighting the consideration of them. But S. Austin shall discover
this vanity, who thus discourses of this point, sermon. 41. de sanctis. Some use
to say, I care not greatly how long soever I stay in passing this fire; seeing
at the last, I shall attain to life everlasting. To which words S. Austin thus
answers: But alas, (dear Brother) Let no man say thus, for that this
Purgatory fire is more sharp, then any punishment, which in this life can be
seen, imagined, or felt. And whereas it is said of the day of Judgment: That
one day shall be as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day; how does
any man know, whether his passage through this fire be for days, months, or
perhaps years? And he, that will now be loath to put one of his fingers into
burning fire, ought to fear the torment of that fire, though it were but for a
little time. Therefore let every man labor with all his force, that he may
avoid mortal sins, which cast men into Hell; and to redeem lesser sins
by good works, so as no part of them remain to be consumed by that fire. And
then a little after in the same place: Who commit little, and daily sins, let
them not cease daily to redeem them with good works; to wit, by continual
Prayer, frequent Fastings, and large Alms.

Thus this blessed Father seriously meditateth in the secret of his soul upon
this point. What may we say of such men, as read this, and are nothing moved
therewith? Truly such men may be thought to have but the outward shape, or
faces of men; that is, they wear fair Clothes, they talk, they walk
together, they busy their minds in needles toys; but as for the true use of
Reason (wherein the essence of man consists) so far forth as it may become
seruicable to the advancement and spiritual good of their souls, they
participate in their actions more with beasts who want souls, then with
Rational Creatures: A grief not to be expressed, but in most deplorable
Threnes and Lamentations.

Nay, I dare be bold to say, that Beasts seem to have greater practice of
Reason, then diverse of these men have. Strike a Horse, or an Ass once or
twyce, or thrust him into a deep or dangerous hole, out of which he can hardly
get; he will conceive such Fear thereof, as that he will for a long time after
seek to avoid both the strokes, and the hole: And yet, where the Scripture,
the testimonies of the Ancient and holy Fathers, the several miracles
exhibited in proof of the torments of Purgatory, do fully proclaim the
horriblenes of those pains, diverse Catholics who are infallibly hereafter to
endure the same pains (if so they make no prevention in their life time) have
no Fear, no Sense, no Feeling thereof. O God, that Men should thus cease to be
Men, and Beasts (after a certain manner) should step in their place.

Well, I will conclude this my discourse to you (Worthy Catholics) humbly
beseeching you, even for the most precious, and bitter Passion of our Lord and
Savior, and for the future good of your own souls, to cast your eye upon all
the Premises set down in this small Treatise, and have a feeling Consideration
both of the extremities of the pains, and of the infallible authorities
proving the undoubted certaynety of those pains; and do not suffer your
judgments to fluctuate or waver, touching the certainty of them. Therefore, I
will only demand, Is there a Heaven? Is there a Hell? Is there a Purgatory? If
you believe these things to have a true and real being, (as no doubt
infallibly you do) where then (through your so much sleighting of them) is your
Judgment? If you hold them (as God forbid) but as intentionall and aerie
Speculations of the brain, where is your Faith? And a most miserable Election
it is, whether a man will be damned for all eternity, for want of practicing
necessary points of Christian Religion; or through want of Faith.

But before I end this passage I will turn my pen, but withal gentle, and
soften in part my style, in respect of the Persons to which I will direct these
few ensuing lines. To you then (great Catholic Ladies) and other Catholic
Gentle-women of worth (to whom in regard of my Sex, I may be the more bold to
speak freely) whose present Widdowed states by reason of your deceased
Husbands, stand enriched with more then ordinary affluency (during your lives)
of lands, money, and other temporal goods: You I say (Noble Ladies, and others
of Worth) though you be weak in Nature, yet know your own strength, and what
great matters during your Widowhoods you are able, through Gods assistance to
perform, for the freeing you from the flames of Purgatory: and remember, that
howsoever the nycenes and delicacy of diverse of you be such, as that in this
world, you can brook nothing displeasing to you; yet in the next world,
admitting you dye in state of Salvation, you must infallibly undergo those
horrible flames (so much spoken of in these leaves) except by your
charitablenes (and this in a most full degree) you redeem those pains.

O what good Works might you do during your Widdowhoods? And yet I fear, you
are most forgetful therein. Many of you (I know) are ready to bestow a hundred
Marks, or more, upon one gown; and that gown must not serve two years, but
another (as chargeable) must instantly be had. Again, some of you will be
content to lose a hundred marks, or more, in one night at Gleeke; and will
wear about your necks Jewels, worth many hundreds of pounds.

O cut of these needles and fruitles charges, and bestow a good part thereof
upon your Souls, with the preciousnes of good and satisfying works, though
your bodies in part be deprived of such glorious Ornaments. There is none of
you, but besides your greater sins, you daily commit lesser sins; for it is
said in holy Writ, Prou. 24. The lust man shall fall seven times a day. How
many idle, and vnnessary thoughts and words pass from you, but in one day? and
yet you must make satisfaction for every such thought or word, either here or
in Purgatory, before you can arrive to Heaven. For it is said, Prou. 19. They
shall render an account of every idle Word, in the day of judgment.

Now then in time of your Widowhoods, lay out a great part of your riches to
spiritual usury (as I may term it) for the good of your Souls. I did know a
young gentlewoman, now dead: she was left by her deceased Father two thousand
pounds, and better in portion. She intended to mary (and so before her death
she did) yet before she would subject herself, and her state to any man,
(besides diverse good acts before) she gave at one time (I speak of certain
and particular knowledge) three hundred pounds of her portion away, to the
brining up of poor scholars beyond the Seas; saying thus to herself; If I
shall be content to enthrall my self, and seauenteene hundred pounds at least,
to the will of a stranger, who I know not how he will use me; have I not reason
to give three hundred pounds away to my own Soul, for his sake, who will not
suffer a cup of could water given in his name, to be unrewarded?

This is an Example worthy of your taking notice of, thereby to put you in
mind, to remember to prevent the flames of Purgatory, during the time of your
Widowhoods. For if you be not solicitous thereof before your second marriage,
when your states are in your own disposal; it is much to be feared, that your
future Husbands will bridle you of all such (though most necessary) charges.
This Example may also be worthily a President for all other young Catholic
gentle-women of great portions, to provide for the good of their souls, before
they tie themselves in marriage to any one.

Well (Worthy Ladies) let a woman once preach to women, and since you are
Women. Imitate that Blessed Woman so much celebrated for her charity to others,
in Gods holy writ, Prou. 31. Manum suam aperuit inopi, etc. She opened her
hands to those that wanted, and stretched out her arms to the poor; and
thereupon it follows of her in the said word of God* Et ridebit in die
nouissimo; and she shall laugh at the last day, That is, at the day of her
death she shall rejoice: and so (Noble Ladies, and others) it is in your power
(if your selves will) to enjoy the like felicity and retaliation, for your
works of charity, with her. And with this I give a full close to this my
Exhortative Discourse.

Certain examples of good works to be practiced, for the avoiding of
Purgatory, propounded by the Author of this Treatise. SECT. IV.
THE first of these Good Works, so much wished by me, shall be not only in a
man's private Devotions and Prayers; but also by soliciting of others of our
Catholic Clergy (though even of their own most ready propension and loyalty
herein, I know they are not wanting) to pray for his Majesty of England, our
most gracious King, and for his worthy Queen, and their Royal Issue.

This is the Duty, which all Subjects (of what Religion soever) ought to
perform; and the performance thereof is a pleasing, and most grateful
spiritual Sacrifice to the Divine Majesty, and a good means (among others) to
expiate our former Transgressions; Thus shall each of us fear the Lord, and
honor the King. Prou. 24. And, give to Caesar, what is Cesars. Matthew. 22. For
if the Prophet Jeremy (sterned by Gods holy spirit, and therefore spoake the
truth) commanded the Israelits, being brought into Captivity to Babylon, to
pray for the good state thereof, saying to them; In the peace thereof, you shall
have peace. Ierem. 29. And if further also the Israelites be counseled by God
in his holy Writ, to pray for the life of Nabuchodonosor, and his son
Baltasar. Baruch 1. How much more Reason then, have all Priests, and Catholics
in England, even to besiege the ears of God with their daily and incessant
Prayers and impetrations, for the spiritual and temporal good of their King
Charles?

Since the Israelites then prayed for their Enemy; We pray for our Dread
Sovereign. They for him, who did lead them into Captivity: We for him, who
keeps us in liberty, peace, and tranquillity. They for a mere stranger and
Idolater; We being Christians, for our Native Christian Prince. Finally, they
for a forrayne Nation: We for our own Country, in which we are bred and
brought up, and to which we owe Omnes omnium charitates: So willingly we must
remember, that it is said, 1. Pet. 3. We ought to be subject to the King, as
excelling.

Therefore in regard of so worthy a work, which even in duty ought to be
performed by all English Catholics and Priests; I the poor author of this
Treatise, will make bold, though a woman to Personate all the English Priests
and good Catholics in my self, and will offer up to the Highest (in behalf
of us all) this our most zealous and daily prayer: God preserve with his eye of
Vigilance, and care our most Noble Prince King Charles, and his most
illustrious Queen, and most worthy Issue. God grant him to prosper in all true
felicity, both temporal and spiritual; and give him the Priuiledg that he may
in his Successors perpetuate his Issue from generation to generation: That so
of him it may be said with the Prophet, Psalm. 127. Filij tui sicut nouellae
oliuarum, in circuitu mensae tuae. And grant, that in the close of their lives,
they may all leave the Stage or Theater of this world with spiritual Trophies
and Triumphs, for the gayning of that Celestial Kingdom; in compare of which,
all the kingdoms upon the Earth deserve not to be Types or adumbrations. And,
to this my unfeigned Prayer, I wish all good English Priests, and Catholics to
say, Amen.

Now I will I descend to other pious deeds, and such as consist in charges of
silver. And here I will insist (by way of Example) in certain courses taken
by diverse of the more earnest Protestants, whose intentions therein (supposing
their Religion were true) are most commendable. I here may be the more bold to
rest in such examples (I hope) without offense to any Protestant Reader (which
willingly I labor to avoid,) because they are warranted by the Protestants
own practice, though in a different Religion. Therefore their actions for the
advancement of their Religion, may be a spur and incitement to us, to practice
the like actions for the Honor of our Catholic Religion, which is most
Ancient and infallible.

For no small dishonor it would be to us Catholics, that those words of
sacred writ should be auerred herein of them and us: Filij huius saeculi
prudentiores filijs lucis in sua generatione sunt. Luc. 16. The children of
this world are more wise in their generation, then the Children of light. For
shall such men, whose Faith even depresseth the merit of Good Works, exceed
the Catholics in the practice of their supposed Good Works? O no. Let
therefore our own practice of Good Works become a Scholia, to paraphraze our
doctrine, and belief touching Good Works. And how preposterous would it be,
that our Adversaries putting no confidence in Good Works, should nevertheless
in their own judgments be ready to perform them? We, who put confidence in
them, as receiving their worth from the Merits of Christ his Passion, and his
promise of reward to them (and not otherwise) yet should be slow in the
operation of them? Therefore may we not blush, that our own cold remissnes in
good actions, should become a foil to their greater seeming Actions of that
Nature?

Well then, to descend to particulars: We observe, that the more forward
Protestants, fynding Youths (though mere strangers unto them) of pregnancy and
hope to be Scholars, will strain themselves and open their purses, to
maintain them in our english Universities; that finally they may become
Ministers, thereby more and more to disseminate in the Realm their own
Protestant Religion. Now seeing the Catholic Religion is only true, for Vna
fides, vnum Baptisma, Ephesians. 4. how meritorious and pleasing is it in the sight
of God, for you to practice the like Charity to yo^g poor scholars of
hopeful expectation, for their bringing up in such places of literature, as
that when they have ended their studies, they may be serviceable in the
Catholic Church for the general good of others?

I instance (for example) in a pregnant young boy of seauenteene, or eighteen
years of age; This boy through want of means, for his better preferment is to
become a Seruingman, a Clarke, a Prentise, or at the best (indeed the worst) a
Minister; In all which states, considering the present streme of Protestancy in
England, his soul is in all likelihood to perish eternally, for his not dying
in a true Faith, and Religion. Now here observe the wonderful difference,
rising from the performing, or omitting of such a charitable deed. If such a
boy stay in England, then is his soul (as above is said) in great peril of
eternally perishing, through his professing of an erroneous Faith: If he be
Catholikly brought up, and sent over the sea's, he is to be instructed in the
only saving Catholic Faith, to the most hopeful Salvation of his soul.

If he be here sent to our English Universities, and finally become a Minister;
he then, not only loses his own soul, but is to be feared, will be the
cause of the everlasting perdition of many other men's Souls, by his
enuenoming, and infecting their Judgments with his own Religion: If he be
brought up in Catholic places, beyond the Seas, and proceed forward in his
course, he then (living according to the strict course of his undertaken
Profession,) not only saves his own Soul, but is a subordinate Instrument
under God, for the saving of many other men's souls partly by practicing his
function among such as be already Catholics; and partly by his persuasion (if
so he prove learned,) of others yet remaining Protestants, to embrace the Roman
Catholic Faith.

And thus if you observe, either the preventing of the great Hurt, and Evil,
which is in likelihood to come by the youths taking the one course of life;
or the great Spiritual good to himself and others, by his undergoing the
other State: You may think your silver employed to such an Act, to be most
happily laid out; Assuring your selves, that the work of the Evil here
prevented, and the Good here performed (and all originally under God, by your
means) shall find a great retaliation at Gods most merciful hands, both for
the increase of your merits, as also for the expiating of your sins, which
otherwise is to be performed in Purgatory.

Why then therefore should such of you, as be of the greater Rank and best
abilities, be slow in practizing works of this nature? Therefore now, while you
have time, lay wait by all convenient means to inquire after such occasions;
Especially when such a particular worthy Act may oftentimes be performed with
lesser charges, then diverse of you will bestow upon a good suite of apparel. O
the^, apparaile and inuest your Souls with such good works; and be less
chargeable in gorgeous attire for your bodies. I do assure you, if I had great
and abu^dant means for the practizing of the works of Piety, I had rather
make choice to distribute to this use of providing and maintaining of hopeful
youths in learning, to the end above expressed, then to any other particular
End whatsoever. For if neither any places of Residence beyond the Seas had
been provided, and furnished with sufficient maintenance for the bringing up
of English Scholars; nor that there had been any Catholics, who would have
opened their purses to this noble End, Catholic Religion had been utterly
extinct many years since, in England.

This Zeal of many good Catholics both dead (and no doubt, alive) in this
point, is the fuel, that has nourished, and kept in, the fire of Catholic
Religion in our own Country for many years past. Since if Youths were not
sent over to be (after their studies ended) created Priests, how could the
profession of Catholic Religion continue in these so great storms among us?
Therefore what a great and inexplicable comfort will it be to you in your last
Sickness, even for satisfaction of your temporal punishments, when you shall
remember, that whereas such, or such a pregnant youth was in the high way of
perdition, and of overthrowing his own, and other men's souls also, if he had
proceeded in his former intended Course of life; yet you (through your charity)
in laying out a little piece of money, did under God, thereby rescue the said
youth, even out of the Devils jaws, and have been a second means of saving
both the youths own soul, and of the souls of diverse others?

This being so, let me then entreat you (Most worthy Catholics) even for our
Saviors sake (who gave not silver (as is here only expected) but his most
precious blood, for the ransoning of all souls out of the Devils possession)
that you would cast a most serious, and intense consideration of this one
point. And thus far touching this particular kind of Almsdeeds.

Only this much more I will annex, as an Appendix to the former, that I could
wish the most able of you in temporal state, to have a feeling and sensible
touch of diverse well-disposed young gentlewomen; who through the decay of their
Parents state, not having sufficient portions left them to enter into Religion
(being of themselves otherwise most desirous to shake hands for ever with the
world, by taking that course) are forced to forbear that their most Religious
inclination, and for want of means to take some secular Course of life, either
by marriage, or otherwise.

Now here, how truly Worthy and Heroical a part of Christian Catholic
Munificene and bounty were it in you, by increasing their Portions, to supply
such their wants, and thereby to turn the channel of their otherwise
dangerous course? Which if you do perform, what have you done? This you have
done. You have caused a young Gentlewoman (otherwise exposed, and lying open to
the dangers of the world) to Cloister herself within a wall, there to spend
all her life time, in Chastity, Obedience, Voluntary poverty, and other
deuotio^s; rising at midnight (to forbear all other her austerities) when your
selves are taking your sweet repose and rest, to sing lauds to God, and to
pray for her benefactours, and particularly for you, who have been the cause
of such her most happy choice of life* she thus by your charity increasing the
number of those, qui sequuntur agnum; quocumque inerit. Apoc. 14. Here is an
Act deserving the true name of Christian charity, and such as shall be able
(through Gods most merciful acceptance thereof) to arm the Soul against the
Flames of Purgatory.

But to proceed to other sorts of good Deeds, practiced by the forward
Protestant* We see in most places of the Realm, that there are diverse earnest
Protestants, who seeing some neighboring places wanting preaching Ministers,
are ready to plant such men there; affording them large allowa^ce, and this to
the end, the more to dilate their own Protestanticall Faith, over much
already spread and disseminated. And hence it is, that so many Stipendary
Ministers are settled in several places of the Realm. Now, why should such of
you as be of greater ability, be inferior in Zeal to the Protestants herein,
as to suffer such vacant places, as are near to you, to be destitute of all
such instruments in the Catholic Faith? I doubt not but that diverse of you,
seeing a piece of land close by you, though rough and untilled; yet of it own
Nature (through small charges) most fruitful: I doubt not (I say) but that
diverse of you would be desirous, either to buy, or at least to take a Lease of
the said land, thereby to better your states the more. There are diverse wast
places adjoining to every one of you, wherein live many civil and moral men,
yet their understanding (in regard of any Religion) are but as Tabulae Rasae,
or unmanured land.

Now here, what a most worthy and Christian attempt, and endeavor were it in
you, to seek to plant spiritual laborers in such places, by whose pains the
seed of Catholic Religion might be sown in men's souls; since the Georgikes
of the mind (so to speak) are far more worthy and noble, then the Georgikes or
Agriculature of land? And would not then those sacred textes of Scripture here
be verified of you: Seminanti iustitiam merces fidelis, Prou 11. He that sows
righteousness, receaueth a sure reward: and again: Qui operatur terram suam,
inaltabit aceruum frugum, Eccl. 20. Who tilleth his land, shall increase his
heap of Corn; to wit Heavenly Corn?

O what a spiritual increase might such of you make, who have full and open
purses, by cultiuating of diverse of these barre^ places? And how forcible would
such pious endeavors be, for the expiating of the relics of your sins?
Therefore let not the Puritan Gentilmen, and others, exceed and ouergoe you in
their Zeal toward God (though Zeal not according to knowledge. Romans 10.) in
this point, who are most liberal in maintaining of their Preachers, and all to
plant their Errors, to the spiritual Danger of the souls of their credulous
and ignorant Hearers; But labor by secret means without contestation to the
present state (to which you ought ever to bear all duty and reverence) to
supererogate with them, in pious works of this Nature.

An other point, wherein we may well follow the steps of our Adversaries, is
this. The Protestant Gentlemen (though of very great worth and Rank) do often
send their younger Sons to our English Universities, providing that they may
become fellows of Houses; whose Terminus ad quem (as I may say) is finally to
become Ministers, and thereby to be promoted to great and rich Ecclesiastical
livings; in which store and abundance, England exceeds all Nations in
Christendom. Now to be emulous of our Adversaries proceeding herein: if
Catholic Parents would seriously ponder this point, no doubt they would be
more careful and willing to send over their younger sons to Catholic
Colleges beyond the Seas, then they are; not to become scholars, only thereby
to be advanced to spiritual livings (an over unworthy Allectiue) but to become
Priests, (that through sheeding of their blood) even after an Apostolical
manner, they may labor to reduce their own Country to its former ancient
Catholic and Roman Faith.

Now, such younger Brothers of Catholics, which have not their education
abroad, but only bred up in England; into what (for the most part) do they
finally resolve? They (for example) being left by their Parents Twenty, or
Thirty, or perhaps forty pounds Annuity (and sometimes less then, any of
these) what course do most of these after their parents decease, usually
undergo? To be in service to any man or Knight or Nobleman of worth, or to be
in any good employment abroad for their temporal advancement, many of them out
of a long habituated idleness, and as being at their own disposal and liberty,
will not. And what then commonly do they? Forsooth they rest content with their
own poor Annuities, burdening commonly their Elder Brother (if he be a man of
a good and kind Nature) for their diet; and they rauell out their years,
walking up and down, and domineiring among their Eldest Brothers Tenants and
Neighbors, with a Marlin, or Sparhauke on their fist, and a Greyhound, or
water spanell following them (the very badge, or arms of most younger Brothers
in diverse Shyres) hiding themselves for the most part of the day, in some base
Alehouse; and often becoming (through dissolution of life) Fathers, before
they be Husbands. But in the end (belike for fear their House, from whence
they descend, should be extinct for want of Heirs) they marry their
Sister-in-lawes waiting maid, or some other poor woman, and then they beget a
litter of Beggars, both burdensome, and dishonorable to their Family and Stock.

But now, if we cast our eye upon the other end of the balance: If such younger
sons of Catholic Parents (being of good wits) were sent over in their
Parents life time, and that when their minds and wills were of a supple and
waxen Disposition, as not being acquainted before (through want of years) with
any sin or Evil, and ready to receive the impression of Virtue and learning;
how serviceable to the Church of God in time, might such men become? For by
this means of education, many of them do undergo (as we find by experience) a
most holy Function of life; spending their whole age after, in laboring to
administer the Sacraments of the Church to Catholics, in reducing diverse
Protestants to the only true and Catholic Faith, and in daily praying and
offering up the most Venerable Sacrifice of Christ's body, for the souls of
their dead Parents, and others their living or deceased Friends. O quantum
distat ortus ab occasu? for so great is the Disparity between these two
different courses of Younger Brothers here set down; not only in the eye of
God, but even in the eye of the world.

And here by digression I will touch a little upon the Daughters of Catholic
Gentlemen. Here in England diverse of them (as well as the Daughters of
Protestants) take (through a blind affection, often cast upon some base man or
other) a most unworthy Course, to the unutterable grief of their Parents, and
overthrow of their temporal state. And if they be placed in marriage with their
Parents consent answerably to their Degree; yet if either the Husbands prove
unkind, or in course of life vicious; or their Children untoward and
licentious, what a vexation is it then to the Parents? And how do they
languishingly spend their days in inconsolable sighs and sorrow?

But now, if the said Daughters, being in their Virginal, tender, and innocent
age, be brought up in places of Religion, and that through the special grace
of God, and means of there daily education, they proceed and become Religious
women in the Church of God; How ineffable a comfort may this be to their
Catholic parents? Since they then by these means, freeing themselves from all
illaqueations and worldly entanglements, shall bestow the greatest part both of
Day and Night in performing, and singing Hymns of Praises to his Divine
Majesty, for the good of themselves and their Friends: To every one of which,
at the Close of their life may be said in the Catholic Churches Dialect: Veni
sponsa Christi, accipe coronam, quam tibi Dominus praeparauit in aeternum. (in
Collect. Natalit. Virg.

Thus far of this point. And I would to God, that Catholic Parents would
apprehend this Paragraph or passage with a serious and feeling consideration.
And thus far of these former Courses, in imitating the examples of our
Adversaries; which examples were most worthy of all commendation, being
incorporated in an Orthodoxall Religion. But yet here, in our Imitation of
them, I ever wish, that what is attempted in this kind (or else not to be
attempted) were performed (as before I intimated) with all sweetness, and
moderation, and withal dutiful Respect to the state of our Realm. Since I
hold it most repugnant to true Judgment and Religion, to undertake to put in
practice orderly things, by unorderly means; and therefore in all such our
spiritual endeauours let us remember, to show all duty and reverence to the
State, and that it is recorded in sacred Writ, ( Romans 13.) We are to be subject
to higher powers; seeing there is no power, but of God. And there again: Who
resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God. In regard of which
promptnes of our duty, I hope these examples, as being taken by imitation from
the Protestants themselves, will not be justly offensive to the grave
Protestant Magistrate.

There is yet another thing most worthy of your charitable commiseration. You
see, that the Catholics throughout England pay yearly great sommes of money
for their Recusancy; Among whom, there are many hundred of poor Catholics,
who are so ouercharged with these yearly payments, as that their mean Estates
are not able to support any long time such payments; of which his Majesty (who
is most prone to commiseration and pity) little hears in particular; this
being effected only by certain Subordinate Magistrates, adverse to our
Catholic Religion. And thereupon for their avoiding of the said payments,
imposed upon them, diverse of these poor men and women have forsaken already
(contrary to their conscience) externally their Religion, and are content to
come to the Protestant Church.

Now here I say, such of you, as be of great Abilities, how ample a field have
you to sow your merits and satisfactions in; I mean by contributing out of
your purses some yearly sommes to these poor Catholics, thereby to ease, and
lessen their yearly payments? In your worthy performance of this my propounded
Motion, you do not only help and succor them touching their bodies; but (which
is far more pleasing in the sight of God,) you so take pity of their souls,
as you prevent, that diverse of them do not Apostatate and forsake their
Catholic Religion, which perhaps through fear of want of means they would
do; And so you are become a secondary great Instrument of their final
Salvation.

And can you then otherwise think, but that God (who is mercy it self) and
who will take this Charity of yours as done to himself, would take the like
pity of your own souls, both for the preventing of your eternal perdition,
as also for mitigating your temporal punishments in Purgatory? For here our
Saviors words would be justified in you, Matthew. 25. Verily I say unto you, in
so much as you have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, you
have done it unto me.

In this next place, I will descend to acts peculiar only to us Catholics; and
such as do insist, and rest in offering up the prayers both of our selves, but
especially of the general Liturgy of the most blessed Sacrifice of the
Eucharist, offered up either for the benefit of our selves, or of others. Of
which most dreadful Sacrifice says S. Chrysostom homil. 25. in Act. Apost.
Hostia in manibus, adsunt Angeli, adsunt Archangeli, adest Filius Dei, cum
tanto horrore astant omnes. And to begin; Think what a worthy, and charitable
Act it were to concur by causing Sacrifices and Prayers to be made, for the
redeeming of poor Souls out of Purgatory.

There is no man of an Humane and sweet Nature, but he would commiserate a very
beast (much more a man) lying in extremity of pains. And this Natural Pity
is so grateful to our Savior himself, as that he pronounces, Matthew. 5.
Beati misericordes, quoniam ipsi misecordiam consequentur; Blessed are the
merciful, for they shall obtain mercy: So auaylable and behooffull is pity
and mercy to the performers thereof. But to proceed to another benefit of such
a pious deed.

If a prudent man, had a Cause of most great importance, to be tried before a
severe, yet most just Judge; And if at the same time, there were certain
persons in prison, whom that Judge did much respect, and to whose earnest
solicitations in any reasonable point, he would lend a willing ear: Now would
not this Suppliant lay wait by all means to redeem the said men out of
Prison, if so he could (who during their stay there, were put to daily torments
and rackings) as well assuring himself, that these Persons thus set at liberty
by this man's means (being men of most good and grateful Natures and
Dispositions) would be ready to speak to the Judge, and be earnest and
solicitous in his behalf? And then is it not most probable (if not certain)
that this man would speed the better in determining his Cause?

The case is here a like, and both are cast (as it were) in one mould. The
souls in Purgatory (once from thence released) shall become most blessed
Saints in Heaven, and shall be most pleasing and grateful to his Divine
Majesty; who cannot, nor will not deny them the grant of any thing, which they
shall demand, and petition for at his hands.

Every Catholic (as all other men) are to plead their cause before God, the
most just Judge: Yet for the more easy obtaining of their Plea, it is in the
power of each Catholic of good means (if his will be answerable thereto) to
procure, at least much to further, by his liberal charges bestowed for the
praying for the souls in Purgatory, the releasing and setting free of diverse
of the said tormented souls.

Now this being once performed, those then Happy Souls, shall no sooner leave
their Goal and Prison, and ascend to Heaven; but as even abounding with a
Seraphicall Charity, shall in recompense of so great a spiritual ease and
Relaxation procured to them, ever batter at the ears of our Almighty and
merciful Lord, with their daily and incessant prayers; that his Divine Mercy
would be most indulgent and pitiful to such men, for the preventing (or at
least mitigating) of their temporal pains, by whose means those souls had a
more speedy delivery from their torments in Purgatory.

Here then may a man, who is rich in temporal state (if so he be rich in
charity) lay out his wealth to an infinite increase of spiritual gain. O how
many peculiar Advocates and Intercessours of the then most blessed souls
(released out of Purgatory) might a rich Catholic purchase to himself, by
this former means, thereby to plead his cause before the Throne of Almighty
God, in his greatest need? And fools (I will not say Madmen) are all such,
upon whom God has bestowed abundance of temporal riches; and yet themselves
remain unwilling and slow in this spiritual traffic of a good and competent
part of their said temporal state and means.

But because this point of relieuing by Good Works the souls in Purgatory, is
of most great importance, both to the poor souls relieved, and the living
party performing such a most charitable work to them: Therefore besides what is
already delivered by me above, I will adioyne (as most moving any man of Piety
and Judgment) the discourse of the aforementioned learned and worthy Cardinal
Bellarmine of this point; who makes the ninth Chapter of the third book de
Gemitu Columbae, the subject hereof: Thus then that blessed man writes: We
have showed above, that there are very many, or rather innumerable souls of
the faithful in Purgatory; and that they are a most long time to be tormented,
almost with incredible punishments. Now here we will declare the fruit, which
may be gathered from this consideration. And certainly it cannot be doubted,
but if the ponderation and weighing of this point be serious, long, attent,
and full of faith and confidence; a most vehement commiseration, and full of
horror and fear will result out of the said consideration.

And in like sort it is certain, that an earnest and intense consideration of
the said point, will engender in us a vehement desire of helping the said
souls in Purgatory, by satisfactory works; to wit, Prayer, Fasting,
Almsdeeds, and chiefly by the most holy oblation, and Sacrifice of our Lords
body. And indeed it is most admirable to observe, how gainful a negotiation
(and this most just) may accrue unto us thereby. And this spiritual
negotiation may well be resembled to the proceeding of a man, who should
deliver one and the same silver (upon usury) to several Merchants; and yet
should receive a full and entyre Interest for one and the said Silver, from
every one of the Merchants.

Let us explayne our selves in few words. A man prays for the Dead,
attentively, piously, with faith, and great confidence of impetration and
obtaining the thing prayed for. This man so praying, by way of merit purchases
to himself the gain of eternal felicity and happiness: since Prayer is a good
work, and in that respect deserving eternal life, if it proceed from Charity.
Of which gain our Lord speaks in the Gospel in these words, Matthew. 6. Tu
autem cum oraueris etc. Thou, when thou shall pray, enter into thy chamber, and
having shut the door, pray to thy Father in secret; and thy Father, who sees
thee in secret, will repay thee; To wit, a Reward answerable to the merit.

Furthermore, this praying for the Dead, by way of satisfaction, does profit
the departed soul in Purgatory, for the which it is performed: seeing Prayer
is (amongst others) a laborious work, and therein it is satisfactory; and
consequently it is profitable for that soul, to which it is applied, according
to the intention of him that prays, and the Doctrine of the Church. To
conclude by way of impetration and humbly begging, it profits the said
departed soul, whose freeing from Purgatory, at least whose ease and
mitigation of those pains, is therein beseeched and desired. Since that, for
which Just men pray to God, through Christ, is easily obtained: Our Lord
himself saying Luc. 11. Petite, and accipietis etc. Ask, and you shall
receive: and again, Marc. 11. Quicquid orantes, petitis etc. All things
whatsoever you ask, praying, believe that you shall receive, and they shall
come unto you. And more, Joan. 16. Si quid petieritis etc. If you ask the
Father any thing in my name, he shall give it you.

Behold here a threefould gain, proceeding from prayer, made in behalf of
the souls departed. But there may be adjoined a fourth benefit: That is, the
souls, for which we pray, will not be ungrateful, when they shall arrive into
their heavenly Country; but shall answer and recompense our prayers, with
their like prayers in our behalf.

To proceed; Fasting being performed by us, and applied for the deceased,
obtayneth a manifould gain. For first, (as a meritorious work) it is
profitable to him, who fasteth, even by the testimony of our Lord himself
Matthew. 6. Tu autem, cum ieiunas, etc. When thou do fast, annoint thy head,
and wash thy face, that thou appear not to men to fast, but to thy Father,
which is in secret; and thy Father, which sees in secret, will repay thee.

Fasting also, as a satisfactory work, being applied for the dead, does help
the dead. For not without just cause, did David fast, with all his retinue and
train even till night, when he was aduertized of the overthrow of King Saul,
and Ionathas, and of a great part of the people of God.

To conclude, Fasting (in an other manner) profits the party so fasting; to
wit, in that the souls of the departed, when they shall ascend to Heaven, will
not be forgetful of their Benefactours; but will power out prayers for them;
and such their prayers, as proceeding from true Charity, shall be heard.

Now, in this next place, to come to Almsdeeds. This kind of good Work also
is accompanied with a threefould gain. For first, it profits the poor, to
which the Almsdeeds are given, and makes them to become our friends, that so
when we fail, they may receive us into eternal Tabernacles. Luc. 16. Again,
Almsdeeds being applied for the use of the souls departed, do bring a
refreshing and refocillation to the said souls; and consequently make them
also to become our friends, who having a title to the Kingdom of Heaven, will
no doubt help us with their holy Prayers and Intercessions.

Thirdly, Almsdeeds do (as I may say) bynd God to be a debtour unto us; for
thus the Holy Ghost speaks by the mouth of Solomon: Qui miseretur pauperis,
foeneratur Domino: Who takes pity of the poor, does put out his silver to
interest, even to our Lord. Prou. 19. And Christ confirms the same in the
Gospel, saying, Matthew. 6. Te faciente Eleemosynam etc. When thou do an Alms
deed, let not thy left hand know, what thy right hand does, that thy Almes-deed
may be secret, and thy Father, which sees in secret, will repay thee.

To descend to the most blessed Sacrifice of Christ's body and blood; It is most
clear and evident, that that oblation profits the party, who offers it up,
as a gift most grateful to God: It profits the faithful living, as also
the faithful souls departed. And that this is most undoubtedly true,
appears from the many most credible Visions or apparitions, manifesting that
the faithful souls in Purgatory, do desire and expect nothing more, then that
the most celestial oblation of the body and blood of Christ may be offered up
for their refreshing, or freeing them from their pains. Of which point read S.
Gregory lib. 4. Dialogorum. cap. 75. and sequent. Also the History of England
written by Venerable Bede lib. 5. cap. 13.

In like sort the Epistle of Petrus Damianus ad Desiderium, may be read; and
finally the life of S. Nicolaus Tolentinus in Surius tom. 5. ad diem 10.
Septembris: For to this blessed Priest appeared once a great multitude of
souls, who with tears and most lachrimall voices desired of him the
celebration of the most holy Sacrifice, as a principal Remedy for their pains
in Purgatory. Now from all the Premises, it is evident, that we may receive a
most preciable and incomparable gain, if we daily power out our prayers, for
the souls departed; or if we do distribute Alms to the poor, for the ease
and refreshment of their pains; or if we do satisfy for the said souls,
either by our Fasting, or other penitential works; or finally do celebrate the
most holy Sacrifice of the Mass for their delivery out of Purgatory. Thus far
learned Bellarmine discourses of this point. Whose words I would desire every
good Catholic Reader seriously to observe.

But to enlarge my self a little further, I could wish all of you of good
states, when just occasion is presented, that you would be most bountiful in
relieuing imprisoned Priests, and poor imprisoned Catholics. O how worthy an
Act is this, and how do you suffer in their sufferings? And you may then
infallibly interest your selves in the words of the Apostle, Hebr. 6. God is
not unjust, that he can forget your good works, and charity, which you have
showed in his name, and have, and do minister unto his Saints.

I well remember, that some twenty years since, a certain Prison having in it
some six or seven Priests, and far more poor lay Catholics, lying there in
great want; there was a Catholic gentle woman of good account, who taking
great co^miseration of their wants, relieved all the Catholic imprisoned
company, with weekly provision of meat for several months; and so she
intended still to continue this her Charity, but that she was shortly after
prevented by death. This was an Heroical and most Christian charity in her,
able no doubt (through Christ's merciful acceptance thereof) even to abate the
flames of Purgatory.

In like sort, I could wish all of you, who are careful to prevent the raging
flames or Purgatory, that what works of labor, or satisfaction, or Alms
deeds you inte^d to do, that you would not defer the accomplishing of them,
till the day of your departure out of this world; but perform them when you
are in health. The difference is most great between a work of Charity done at
the Hour of a man's death, and when he is in health not likely to dye.

For in the first manner, the party dying, gives away his goods to pious uses,
because he cannot enjoy them any longer. In the second, it is in a man's power
to keep his riches longer, and yet departing from them in his Health, he is
content thereby actually to lessen in his own days his temporal means, and
departs with them with cherefulnes and alacrity of mind; a circumstance most
pleasing to God, since we read) 2. Cor. 9. Hilarem datorem diligit Deus; God
loves a cheerful giver. In the former, the will of a dying man is not (for
the most part) in all things performed, either through the Covetousness of the
wife, Children, or negligence of the Executors: In this other, a man is assured
his will shall be performed; since he is resolved to make his own Hands, his
Executors, and his own Eyes, his Overseers.

Lastly, Almsdeeds do^ne after the first sort, do take effect only at the
death of the Party and not before; whereas they being distributed after this
second sort, they begin to work and obtain by degrees Indulge^ce, lessening
of the future pains, even from that hour, in which they were first bestowed:
So great a disparity there is between having a Candell going before a man,
lighting him the way to the Kingdom of Heaven, and having a Candell only to
follow him.

I am persuaded, there are very few of you so simple, who if you did owe great
sums of Money, and were infallibly to pay every penny of them, if other
course in the mean time could not be taken; But that if by prevention of time
(I mean by paying before the day of payment comes) you might be suffered in
lieu of the whole, to pay but the twentieth part, and thereby to be discharged
of the whole great debt; but that you would take course by all means possible
(yea by taking your silver up at Interest) for the present discharge of the
said twentieth part, so to redeem your selves from the payment of all the rest.
I do assure you even from the testimonies of all ancient and learned Fathers,
that it is in your power to redeem not only the twentieth part of your future
torments in Purgatory, but even the greatest part, and perhaps all, by your
charitable Deeds, liberality, and pious works, now done in your life time: And
will you then be slow in taking the like course herein? O insensati Galatae,
quis vos fascinauit? Gal. 3. But I will yet go further with you.

There are not many of you (I speak of such of you as are much devoted to the
world) but that, if you had a fair demayne of five hundred pounds yearly
worth, though not in possession; yet that it were infallibly to descend to you
and your Posterity for ever, after twenty years were expired: And that
notwithstanding it were in your Power and Freedom, to buy out and redeem the
said twenty years, thereby to have present possession of it; I say, there are
not many of you, but that you would strive, though it were by impouerishing
your selves for the time, and by living under your own worth, thereby to
procure means for the redeeming of the said term of twenty years.

Heaven is your Inheritance, after the guilt of eternal damnation is once
remitted; Yet thither it is impossible for you to arrive, until for certain
years you have performed your temporal punishments yet remaining. These
inexplicable punishments, which may endure for many scores of years, more then
twenty, (yea it may be for several hundreds of years) you may redeem perhaps
for less charges to your Purse, disbursed in your life time and health to
pious and religious uses (through Christ's most merciful acceptance,) then you
would be content to lay out, for the getting in of the former mentioned twenty
years. And yet how Dull, and Backward are most of you to undertake the same?
How can you here Apologize or excuse your selves? Is Heaven not so good, as an
earthly demaine? O men of little Faith! What a muddy disposition of the Soul
is this, which lies so groueling upon the earth, and wholly absorpt in terrene
thoughts and cogitations?

Well, ceasing to enlarge my self further upon the Premises, I earnestly
desire every one of you, to procure now in time of Health, the most Reverend
and Dreadful Sacrifice of the most blessed body and blood of our Savior to be
offered daily up, to two ends; to wit, for the spiritual good of your selves
and your Children; and secondly, for the preventing of your future pains of
Purgatory. And that you shall perceive of what ineffable virtue and efficacy
for man's soul, the offering up of that most dreadful Sacrifice is, I have
thought good to set down the Judgments of some few ancient Fathers,
pretermitting the greatest part of them, for greater breuity.

First then we find S. Cyrill of Alexandria Epist* ad Nestor. to write, that by
means of this daily Sacrifice, We are made partakers of the holy body and
precious blood of Christ. S. Austin calls the said Sacrifice, Precium
nostrum, Our price. Confess. cap. 13. And further the same Father thus writes
lib. 4. de Trinit. cap. 14. Quid gratius offerri etc. What can be offered up,
or accepted more thankefully, then that the flesh of our Sacrifice, should be
come the body of our Priest?

S. Chrysostom thus teaches, Homil. 21. in Act. Apostolorum. Hostia in
manibus etc. The sacred host being in the hands of the Priest, the Angels are
present, the Archangels are present, the son of God is present, cum tanto
horrore astant omnes, with so much fear and horror all of them are present.
S. Gregory Nyssene thus expressly writes, Orat. Cathech. c. 36. Fidelium
corporibus etc. That body (meaning the body of) Christ in the Sacrifice of the
Mass) is joined with the bodies of the faithful, that by the conjunction of
the immortal body, man may be made partaker of immortality. S. Cyprian thus
teaches of the offering up of the body, and blood of Christ in the holy
Eucharist (Sermon. de coena Dom.) Perpes est hoc sacrificium etc. This is a daily
Sacrifice, and is a permanent or perpetual Holocaust. To conclude the
forementioned S. Chrysostom thus writes (hom. 2. in 1. ad Cor.) Dum in hac
vita sumus etc. Whiles we are in this life, this mystery of the Eucharist
makes, that the earth it self, is a Heaven to us.

And now having showed out of the testimonies of the ancient Fathers, the
impreciable efficacy and virtue of the most Reverend Sacrifice of Christ's body
and blood, for the spiritual good of man's Soul; we may from thence conclude,
that the daily offering up of the said most dreadful Sacrifice (considering
the worth of him there sacrificed) is most auaylable and behoofull, both for
the souls of men yet living, thereby to arm and strengthen them with grace,
against all the temptations of the World and the devil; as also for the
expiating of man's Sins in Purgatory. Sweet Jesus! no other impetration, or
prayer is more piercing in the ears of God, then this; since here (for
remitting of our sins, and regulating our actions for the time hereafter with
divine grace) the Son pleads to the Father, God to God; And the same man,
is both the Priest, and the Sacrifice.

Yea this most Reverend Mystery of the Sacrifice of the Mass, is the very
center of Religion, and heart of devotion; by means whereof his divine Majesty
most bountifully imparteth, and powers out his favors and graces to our
souls: So certain and infallible it is, that our Prayers made in Union of
this divine Sacrifice (whether for our spiritual good during our Peregrination
in this world, or for the taking away of the pains of Purgatory,) have an
inexplicable power and efficacy: And therefore those men are great Enemies to
themselves, and their Children, who neglect this so sovereign a means, both
for their own and their Childrens advancement in sanctity and Virtue

Yet before I end this discourse, I must adioyne this ensuing Animaduersion;
that whereas most of the former examples of Good Works above alleged, and
instanced, aim at great and high points; sorting only to such to perform,
whose temporal states are great and rich, and to whom that admonition of S.
Chrysostom (above alleged) peculiarly belongs, Non dare, sed copiose dare
Eleemosyna est: Nevertheless we are to conceive, that the Charity of such, as
be but poor in temporal faculties though, never so small, are most pleasing
to his divine Majesty, for the mitigating of the torments of Purgatory. And in
this sense we must understand, that even the poor Widow in the Gospel, who
had but two mites, gave as much as Zachaeus, who contributed the half of his
great substance to the poor; because, though the widow had lesser goods to
give, yet she had the like will of giving; And though, that which was severally
given by them both, were unequal and diverse; yet the fountain from whence
they gave (to wit from a prompt and charitable disposition of relieuing the
poor) was the same. And thus did it fall out, that whereas the whole Widows
state was but small, yet the part thereof given, was great; Since he gives no
little, who freely and cheerfully gives a part of a little. And therefore the
foresaid S. Chrysostom accordingly thus teaches (Hom. 34. ad pop. Antioch.)
Eleemosinae magnitudo, non in pecuniarum multitudine iudicatur, sed in dantiu^
promptitudine. With whom accords S. Leo (ser. 4. de Quadrag.) saying, Ex
affectibus piorum, benignitatis mensura taxatur.

Well, I will close up this small Treatise with referring the Catholic
Reader, to the practice of a skillfull Physician, who can extract medicinable
and healthful Physic, out of hurtful and venomous drugs or herbs: So here
I most earnestly wish, that all good Catholics (according to the different
proportion of their states and power) would in their own life time, (for the
preventing or lessening of the torments of Purgatory) put in daily practice
that counsel of our Savior: Luc. 16. Facite vobis amicos de Mammona
iniquitatis, vt cum defeceritis, recipiant vos in aeterna tabernacula. Make you
friends of the Mammon of Iniquity, that when you fail, they may receive you
into eternal Tabernacles.

FINIS.
God save the King.

