JACOBS TROVBLESOME IOVRNEY TO BETHEL:

Containing a brief exposition, or excellent Treatise of the four first verses
of the 33. Chapter of GENESIS: Set forth by JOHN OVERTON, Master of Arts.

GENESIS 31. 3. Reuertere ad terram Patrum tuorum: and ad cognationem tuam, and
ero tecum.

AT OXFORD, Printed by JOSEPH BARNES, Anno D. 1586.

TO HIS MOST COURTEOUS, AND LOVING FRIEND, MAster WILLIAM BRENT: JOHN OVERTON
wishes grace, peace, and all true fe licitie in Jesus Christour Savior.
WORLDLY riches have I none where with to render the show of a grateful heart,
but of such meniall stuff as God has lent me, I present and dedicate unto
your good name, and friendly acceptance this little book (as the first fruits
of my study) entitled, Jacobs troublesome journey to Bethel. His brother Esau
came against him with four hundred men. Whereby is signified by these two
brethren, the miserable troubles between the malignant Synagogue of Satan,
and the militant Church of Christ: as also other matter very necessary to be
considered in this piece of Scripture. And though it be little in quantity,
and in habit sutelike according to the hability of the author: yet when I
gladly call to mind, and with no small comfort remember your unfeigned
friendshippes, and favors toward me heretofore at Ilmington, I cannot but
be ashamed of my self, that ability does not afforde my hand so much to
write, as my heart wills my tongue to utter how deeply indebted I am to
your great courtesy. But considering that your due and full reward is laid up
until another day, in an other place, by another man, of al fullness, and
ability, Christ Jesus the high Steward, and paie-master of all, I am to
request you til that time come, which I trust shall not be long, to accept my
good heart, which in all possible duty is and shall be yours bounden to
command. A small reward for such benefits, I confess, yet as kind, and
dutiful a mite, as the greatest valor of a farther sum. And since that the
most precious jewel in this world, which man can show, or give to man, is
unfeigned love, then truly the love that creeps when it cannot go, is
as well to be accounted of, and esteemed, as love, nay perhaps the rather than
when it carries a higher look, and a loftier countenance: for to say the
truth, benefits which are liberal for the gift, and grateful for the repay,
are in that respect said to be great, or little, as the affection of the heart
is great or little. But weying my vnhability, I am forced to say with Virgil:
Grates persoluere dignas non opis est nostroe.

This consideration therefore, as also your zeal in religion, and love of
learning, did altogether move me to pen this work.

And in this treatise is this especially to be observed, how Jacob, whereby is
signified the Church of Christ, has been maliced, and griuouslie burdened by
Esau, the malignant Church, from the beginning. All places are so fraught and
full of examples hereof, that we need not experimentes from far. Only the
Church of Rome in this place shall serve us in steed of many: which as long
as she was under persecuting TYRANTS, and sharpened as it were upon a
grynding whetstone, she was found, and truly called the only nurse, or
mistress of all godliness, and continency: in whom all the gifts of
Christian religion, and honest life did most abundantly excel, and most
brightly shine. But afterward (the case being quite altered) she began to
malice Jacob, and to lay grievous burdens upon his shoulders, chiefly, when in
steed of danger, persecution and vexatio^s; Riches, pride, sumptuousnes, and
alielenes their companion came in place, and crept into the Church. And when as
Bishops in steed of martyrs began to be persecutors of Martyrs themselves: and
the strength, and force of the gospel decayed, and weakened more and more, into
what wickedness and abomination that church did run, and fall, let every one
consider, and judge with himself: I am not able sufficiently to express it
according to the indignity, and heinousness thereof.

This example, and note (by the way) shall be sufficient for my purpose,
especially, for that the matter appears so plain, and manifest in all the
books of the godly.

And thus submitting my self and this small treatise unto your frindly
protection, and wonted favor, referring the faults rather to the simplenes of
my skill, then to my willing mind, and wishing you as great pleasure, and liking
in the reading, as it has bin some pain, and travel to me in penning: I
commend you to the direction and guiding of God his holy spirit, who grant
you prosperous success in all godliness. From my study at Welsborne, the first
day of April, 1586.

Yours with all dutiful endeavors, ever at commandment: JOHN OVERTON.

GENESIS XXXiij.
1 And as JACOB lift up his eyes, and looked, behold ESAV came, and with him
four hundred men, and he divided the children to LEAH and RAHEL, and to the two
maids.

2 And he put the maids and their children foremost, and LEAH and her
children after, and RAHEL and JOSEPH hindermost.

3 So he went before them, and bowed himself to the ground seven times, until
he came near his brother.

4 Then ESAV ran to meet him, and fell on his neck, and embraced him and
kissed him, and they wept.

IT has bin ever a thing common in the world, and not so common as noisome, to
all estates, that pride, envy, and covetousness, Envy, covetousness, and
pride, sows discord in the world.
should sow discord among the sons of men, to stir up not only princes against
princes, but also one brother against another. Whereof although 1. Reg. 1. 5.
there be many examples exta^t sufficient to instruct the^ that have any
docility, yet there is none of more importance than this of Jacob, and Esau,
set down by Moises. for in it who list may behold (as in a glass) the most
lamentable garboils between the malignant synagogue of lathan, and the militant
church of christ.

The two principal causes of the hatred The causes of the hatred of Esau
against Jacob.
of Esau against Jacob, is not unknown to them which have indifferently bin
conversant in the scriptures, namely the loss of his birthright and blessing,
wherein Genesis 25. Heb. 12.
none was to blame but himself, which contemned the one, and by preuoking his
mother, through his strange wives, was forestalled of the other.

In this portion of scripture the meeting Genesis 26. In what array Jacob put his
family.
of these two brethren is prescribed, and in what arraie poor fearful Jacob,
put his company to entertain that savage knight his brother Esau, honorably
using this courteous and humble demeanor as an ordinary mean offered of the
Lord, for the appeasing of his brothers wrath.

Although there be no great felicity in The holy ghost is not tied to a method.
divisions where the holy ghost is not tied to a Method, yet because this
piece of Scripture is in a manner divided to our hands, let us by Gods help in
this our explication, stand upon these four points only.

In the first place the injuries and miseries of Jacob, and so of Christ's
Church at these Gal. 1. 16.
days, whereof Jacob was then a figure, and the pomp and power of Esau: and so
of the sinagogue of Satan, which in our time, Esau did then represent, and to
be noted out of these words: And Jacob lift up his eyes and looked, behold Esau
came, and with him four hundred men.

Secondly the disposing of Jacobs family, is to be observed, because of his
discretion, The disposing of Jacobs people.
in these next words: And he divided the children to Leah and Rahel and the
two maids, and he put the maids and their children foremost, and Leah and her
children after, and Rahel and Joseph hindermost.

Thirdly we have to consider the courage, devotion, and humility of Jacob, in
The devotion, courage, and humility of Jacob.
this meeting, in this third verse: So he went before them, and bowed himself
seven times, until he came near to his brother.

Fourthly is set forth the unlooked-for loving meeting of Esau and the joy of
them The loving entertainme^t of Esau.
both in this fourth verse. Then Esau ran to meet him, and embraced him, and
fell on his neck and kissed him, and they wept.

The first part.
COncerning the first, we have to consider The fear of Jacob. Genesis 32.
of these words, Jacob lift up his eyes and looked, the miserable plight that
Jacob was in, which looked ever among when Esau should lay blouddie hands upon
him, and that the fear of his power, which was a little before reported to him
by the messengers, had smitten him to the heart, before he saw them, which
made him (no doubt) with terror to look up so often, so as he might see, when
he came, whom he most necessarily met, for it was in the way to Bethel,
whither God had commanded him to return: neither had he forgotten Ge. 31.
his Mothers advertisement when she sent him from home, that his Brother Esau
was comforted against him, meaning to kill him: which caused him greatly to
fear the invincible tyranny The tyranny of Death.
of death, which he thought to be at hand. For here, by the way, we may note,
how Death is daily ranging, and raging in the world sundry wales: the power
and force whereof which of the Patriarks or Monarchs of the world was once
able to withstand: no not the dreadful Majesty of Kings or Keasars could not
at any time have her at beck or check, no crafty conueiance or drifte in
Law, could circumuent her, no worldly wealth could bribe her, nor no
Pharisaical holiness, Religion of Bishops, Monkish austeritie or prayers of
Priests could ever entreat her. No citizens policy or handie crafts labor
could banish her of house or Town. Finally no strength of nature, no reason
of man could at any time resist or give her the foil.

This force, and great fear of death being stricken into Jacob, knowing the
malice of his barbarous brother, not unfournished with the power of vengeance;
It seemed good reason that it moved him to look up so often, but here he
showed his great infirmity, Jacob fainted in gods promises. Genesis 32. 28.
who did not stick to the promise of God, which he had received assuredly,
Cum hominibus proeualebis, that he should prevail with men, but did as it
may be said, so much faint by lifting up his eyes to his Brothers power,
which should have been fastened upon the covenant of the Lord, with whom he
prevailed: not that we condemn his forecast, and vigilancie in foreseeing the
danger that was like to ensue, but that it was likely, that this often
lifting up of his eyes, and his looking so longlie, proceeding from a
doubting and quailing heart, which should have been established in the oath
which GOD swear unto his Grandfather Genesis 22. and 26. 3. The promises entailed
to Jacob, spiritually.
Abraham, and his father Isaac, which was as it weere intayled unto him
spirituallie, in the decree of the Almighty, which decree his Father could not
alter, as well as he loved Esau, For so often as we distrust gods promises Ge.
25. 28.
when we have used the ordinary mean, we derogate from the glory of God, by
calling his credit in question, through our infidelity, which deserves no
pity at his hands, but to vee forsaken. Take Ge. 3. 12. We must beware of
unbelieving hearts.
heed therefore, that we have no evil and unbeleeuing hearts to depart from
the living God, by lifting up our eyes, and looking still with faithles
fearful hearts upon the violence of Esau, since God has said to the
maintainers of equity, Non derelinquam ie, nec deseram Joshua. 1. 5.
te, I will not leave thee, nor forsake thee.

We will proceed to the exposition of the other member of the first part,
before we go farther, that in the explication they may be used Jointly.
That which follows therefore contains the pomp and power of Esau: And
behold, Esau came, and with him four hundred men. The word John. 1. 36.
Behold, betokens demonstration. As John Baptist poynted at Christ passing
by with his finger saying, Behold the Lamb of God which takes away the
sins of the world. Here is noted unto us, that Jacob discribed Esau a far
off coming before he met him: which he might the better do, because he
came with so great a company, which did awaite upon him. Moreover this word
Behold in the Scripture prepares attention to some strange matter which
ensues. Such Recorick used Gods Angel, when he would declare that Elizabeth
being both Luke. 36.
old and barren, should bear a son: to both these uses it serves in this
place.

It follows, Esau came and with him four hundred men. This great retinew
Esaus retinew was of his sons and kindred.
of his, as may appear else where, was of his sons and kindred, which had
increased unto him of his Cananitish wives among the Hittites, men of great
account, Ge. 26. 34.
dukes, and nobles of the earth, living nevertheless of the spoil, as many do,
which bear their heads full high at this day.

In our judgment it may be thought that Moses mentioning-foure I undred men
does closely distinguish between the warlike marching of Esau, and the wearied
traueling of silly Jacob, which was combred with Women, Children and cattle,
in his journey. But to come to our purpose, we see here the misery of Jacob,
and the pomp, and power of Esau, to be considered. Esau martcheth The misery
of Jacob, the pomp of Esau.
forwards, with what purpose we know not: save that a man may conjecture by
the circumstances, that he came with a purpose of revenge against his brother.
For that rictous assembly would have made ante man in Jacobs case to suspect
no less, especially considering the place whence he came, even from among
the Heathen. It was very like that he returned Esau came from among the
Heathen.
from thence more deformed, then reformed, concerning his malicious mind: As
many of our countrymen have done from the other side of the Sea, feeding
vain men's fautasies with Italian graces, Spanish fashions, and french
courtesies, and very serviceable in speech, A Vostre commandemente Monsieur:
and are therefore become a byword unto the Devils in carnate.
world to be called Devils incarnate. To let pass that whereof we have no
certainty, this troup of men was easily able to ouermatch the weary, and
weak company of Jacob: and who would think now, seeing the great inequality
of their states, but that the birthright and blessing which Jacob had received
above his brother Esau, was a mere mockery:

This no question, is the Judgment The judgment of the flesh Romans 9. 8.
of the flesh, which esteems things according to the outward show: but Jacobs
promise was spiritual, with which he held himself well apaied, neither held
he himself beguiled, if it were fulfilled in his posterity, as shall be showed
in more due place. In the mean while though Jacob be despised, let us learn
with wise hearts, to esteem of things as they are. For God is not as man: if
he promise, he promises to the heart of Man. And without faith no man is
capable of his promise lawfully, but shall be accomptable for instruction.

This ever has been the condition Jacob, meant by Christ's church despised.
of Jacob, which is to be meant of Gods Church upon earth, to be vile in most
places in the eyes of the world, to be an underling, to be tossed from post to
pillor in all the members of the same, which might be proved by many
testimonies and examples, from Abel to Christ, and from Christ to this day:
but it were to carry sticks into the wodde, and to set up a candle where the
sun shines. On the other side, Esau, whereby is meant, the Esau termed the
Devils Church.
Devils Church: for we purpose to dwell a while in both the branches of this
comparison: for in such matter of teaching we have the Apostle Paul for a
warrantic; Gal 4. 24. The congregation of the wicked are mighue.
and therefore we may say, that the congregations of the ungodly are mighty,
the world goes on their side, they eat the fat of the land, they have the
best preferment, and offices, they live at ease, they aile nothing, and yet
they can scarce afforde Jacob the bare breathing of the air. In Sam. 2. 7.
this world they suffer no pleasant thing to pass by them untasted, their
Kyne cast Job. 21. 10.
no Calves, their Children dance in the streets, they drink wine in carved
bowls, Amos. 6. 4 5. 6. 7.
they stretch their limbs upon beds of Iuory: But none of them remember the
calamity of Joseph. Jacob is maliced, yea Jacob maliced.
Esau will come against him with four hundred men. It was so then, and is so
now: we have justified our fathers in all their cruelty. Gods Church is made a
Stockfish amongst them, and her Children are sent home by weepeing Cross. It
is 1. Cor. 1. 26.
no marvel therefore that Paul says, Not many wise after the flesh, not many
mighty, not many noble are called.

And here by the way we have to look in Iud. 3. 7. The wrath of God against the
Church of the Israelites.
(as in a glass most clear) how the church of the Israelites forgotte the Lord
their god, and served served Balaam and Astaroth, and therefore the wrath of
the lord was kindled against Israel, and he sold the^ into the hands of Cusan
King of Mesopotamia. Again Iud. 4.
the Church of the Israelits did wickedly in the sight of the Lord, and
therefore the Lord sold them into the hands of Iabin King of Canaan. God and
his Christ be as mighty and strong at this hour, as when his word was preached
in the Churches of Goletta, in Tunes, in Cyprus, in Rhodes, in Constantinople,
in Judea, in Macedonia, Ponthus, Bithinia, Cicilia, Phrygia, Greece, Egypt, and
the ends of the world. But Esau came against Jacob with four hundred men,
and defield Christian men's hands, and filled their fingers full of iniquity,
their lips spoke untruths, and their tongus uttered wickedness, Esau and his
company have made Esah has made christians forget God.
christians to forget the lord, and served Balaam of Rome, and Astaroth of
Florence. They be either superstitious idolaters, or Godless and thancklesse
Epicures, and worldlings. Esau his company came against Jacob to pray, and
spoil, to fill the land full of Usurers, bribers, and extortioners, and the Sea
full of Pirates, and robbers: therefore the Lord has hid his face from Jacob, to
be meant the Church of Christ, and has sold into Esau the Turks hands, not
only Constantinople, Christian kingdoms subdued by the Turk.
Cyprus, Goletta, Moldauia, Bulgaria, Hungaria, Strygonyum and Buda, but also
has opened thereby to the Turk, Christendom both by Sea and by land. No
great journey has the Turk from Buda to Saxony, and Demnarke: and how nigh
the Danes, and Saxons be to The Turk has no far Journey to England.
England, Englishmen should remember. No great Journey has the Turk, from
Goletta to Spain: and how nigh Spaniardes be to England, Englishmen cannot
forgette. Yet Jacobs family in England wants not a Captain and head, but
has a good and gracious governor, We have a gracious captain and Head in
England.
whom God preserve with Gods word and Sacraments, Peace, plenty, and all good
things. But it was not enough for the Israelits to say, Templum Domini: nor
for the Jews, Domine, Domine: nor for the Romanists, The Church, the Church:
nor for us, The Gospel, the Gospel: but we must do works worthy of the
word, and worthy of the Gospel. Ferte igitur fructus, bring forth therefore
Ma. 3. 8.
the fruits etc. Well, we read that Esau came against Jacob, and with him
four hundred men. Whereby we gather, that the congregation of the wicked and
ungodly are many and mighty, they have the world at will, they remember not
the misery of Joseph, and Joseph's misery forgotten.
Jacob is maliced. And can this great wickedness escape vengeance: no truly.
For whosoever is guilty, and so persisteth, shall hear his own condemnation.
The very ground groneth under the burden Esaias. 26. 21.
of Tyrants, and shall disclose her blood, and hide her slain no more.

And here we have to consider, how much of her own blood and of the blood
Rome came by her regiment by shedding of blood.
of strangers did Rome shed before she came to the regiment, and rule of the
world: but the blood of Gods Martyrs which they have persecuted cries for
vengeance to God, even as the blood of righteous Abel, which was slain by
wicked Kaine, Oh God of heaven never plague us again with that infernal
Synagogue of Rome: if there be any Christian heart do wish it, God open that
heart to the sincere acknowledging of his Gospel, and Rome could continue her
persecution no longer then God had appointed.
the embracing of his mercies in Christ Jesus. But when the time of their
tirannie and persecution was ended, no longer or farther could they go, as the
captivity of Babylon was appointed to continue threescore and ten years, and so
to cease.

And when Rome had aspired to the rule and government of the world, what
shameful oppression reigned on the earth, their own Chronicles make mention.
This did the Prophet Esaiah foresee, saying, Quid vobis accidit, atteritis
populum meum, and facies pauperum commolit is? Esaias. 3. 15.
What have you to do, that you beat my people in pieces, and grind the faces
of the poor (says the lord?) Audite quoeso capita Jacob, and Duces Israel,
nonne vestrum Mich. 3. 1.
erat scire iudicium? Hear, I pray you, you heads of Jacob, and you Princes of
Israel, should not you know Judgement's But they hate the good, and love the
evil: they pluck off the skins from them, and the flesh from their bones, they
choppe them as small as flesh to the pot. These were the complaints of Isaias
and Micha in their times. If they had lived with us, what The complaint of the
prophet Esaias, and Micha.
shall we think we should have hard at their hands? Jacob having experience of
his brothers malice, lifts up his head fearefullie, looking still for more
anger: For the burnt Child fears the fire.

David after Saul had darted his Jauelin at him, fled from his tyranny. And
gods 1 Samuel 18. 11. and 23. 43. Gods church persecuted looks for greater
troubles.
Church amongst us having already sustained many great injuries, lifts up
and looks with great fear and trembling for sorer oppression. But least any
man should think that she complains and lifts up her eyes without a cause,
let us consider by these few particulars, the wrong that is done to Israel.
The souls of the people are most precious jewels and tenderly to be kept (for
Acts. 20. 28. The souls of the people being precious jewels are betrayed.
they cost christ his life) they are neglected, nay they are betrayed into the
hands of the Devil. Although Esau himself (I mean the Pope) be banished by a
most noble and virtuous prince, yet the stincke that he has left behind him
has to this day infected many.

There are some that deny him in word, Unfaithful protestants. Ephe. 4. 18.
and yet build up his kingdom: For is not ignorance the pillor of his kingdom?
Has not the blindness of our hearts bin the chiefest weapon, with which he has
driven so Ignorance the pillor of the Popes kingdom.
many of us before him, as Oreu to the slaughter? Why then is Jacob (we mean
gods Church) with domb dogs, I mean domb Devils, so injuriously burdened: I
call the ignorant, and domb ministers, domb dogs, and not I, but the Prophet
Isaias. Esa. 56. 10.
And we call the ignorant usurping Ministers which fill up the measure of their
sins, with licencious life, domb Devils, which cannot be cast out, without
fasting, and prayer. Gods church burdned with dumb dogs. Mark. 9. 29.
For wherein are they not become unto us in steed of Belial? Alas, alas, poor
Jacob, how do thou mourn in thy ashes: why do men call thee blessed, since
thou art yet subject to the oppression of Esau?

Let us mark, I pray you, the power of these Traditionaries: Esau hinders the
reformation of Jacob.
they come out even to the number of 400, to hinder the reformation of Jacob:
and if any be desirous to know the cause why, Demetrius the siluer-Smith shall
aunsweare for them all, Sirs you know, by this craft, we have our goods. Acts.
19. 25.
Let Esaus Traditionaries descend into the consideration of their Canons, which
they so mightily defend, then shall they perceive in steed of reforming
malefactors, discipline bought out, and Discipline bought out for money. Hose.
4. 8.
so in the corruption of their consciences, making marchandizes of sin, Peccata
populi mei comedunt, They eat up the sins of my people, and lift their
hands to iniquity. And is this the friendly intertainment of Jacob? With what
face dare they look upon the Sun, which have let souls to farm to the
Devil: Let us speak the truth, and lie not: we stand even now in the presence
of God, who will not suffer us to escape unpunished, if we speak of the root of
bitterness like Esau Heb. 12. 15. Ios. 7. 15. A excommunicate thing in the
land.
It is said, there is a excommunicate thing, and before that excommunicate
thing be taken away, we shall not be able to stand against our enemies. what is
that pyonder Antichristian Esau, and that foul Dragon Re. 9. 10. 11. Abaddon
of Rome with his locustes.
Abaddon with his locustes has left his tail behind him, and is not the
sting in the tail: That is true, the wounded of Gods people shall show you.
That which superstition cannot do because it is in a great part weakened, (the
Lord have the glory for the same) Satan has committed Satan's authority.
to the spirit of Ambition, and Covetousness to accomplish. The time was when
Jacob came in the name of Esau, and Genesis 17. 18.
was blessed, but now is Esau stopped in with the smooth hands of Jacob, and
is Esau blessed, Jacob cursed.
cursed.

The time was when many seemed to melt at the misery of Sion. The time is, when
the selfsame men, ly frozen in their Zoph. 1. 12. The misery of Sion.
dregs in Babylon. When the kingdom of Satan began to increase after the
decease of Godly pastors in the Primitive Satan's kingdom increased.
church, idle and profane men usurped the place and took to themselves
condemnation by violence. These men being both unable, and unwilling
themselves to execute their office in teaching the people, put over their
charge to stocks and stones, and dombe Idols. To this end Gregory's error
pleased them well, That Images are Laymens books. Pope Gregory his error.


Thus wrapped they men's hearts in ignorance, and with the price of their
Idolatry The papists enriched by Idolatric.
built them Palaces, which threatened the heavens. Consider therefore, that
Erercise, and diligence, in hearing, and reading of Gods word taught, or
preached, brings men from ignorance, And again Erercise and diligence causes
men to have a credit in Religion, whether it be true or What brings religion
into credit.
false: for it never takes place and root in the people without diligence, as
it is to be perceived in the Acts and gests done in the time of Jeroboam, and
Roboam Kings 3. Reg 12. The Mass brought into credit.
of Israel and Judah. What brought the mass and al other Idolatry into
estimation, but daily saying and preaching thereof, with such laud and praise,
that the most ignorants knew what a Mass was worth? Fifteen Masses in a
Church were not enough for the Prestes of Baal to be said daily: And should
one Sermon in a day be too much for a godly and evangelical Minister? But
here some will say, labor is left and men's businesly undone.

Surely this is ungodly to be spoken: The sayings of the ungodly.
for those that bear the people in hand of such things, know very well, that
there was neither labor, cares, needs, necessities nor any thing else, that
could heretofore keep the from mass, though it had binsaid at four of the
clock in the morning. Therefore we may perceive the people were contented to
leese more labor, and spend more time then, to go to the Devil, than More
labor spent to go to the Devil, tha to come to God.
now to come to god: wherefore where daily prayer is said, not only in
churches, but also in private houses, the Parents, Masters, Children and
family shall find advantage and gain thereby at the years Daily prayer in
private houses.
end, though they hear daily a sermon, morning and evening prayer every day in
the weak.

Thus did Adam serve god, after he was Genesis 4. Adam served God.
called to repentance, and in steed of a minister, did teach his children, and
family, first to know their savior, and to serve god, in true faith, as
witnesses the oblation of his obedient son Abel. Seth and Enoch Seth and Enoch
called on god. Genesis 5. Heb. 11. Genesis 6. Noah the preacher of righteousness.
in like manner served God, for it is written of them, that they began to make
invocation to the name of the Lord.

Noah with his children and family was not only saved from drouning, but has
this true title to be called the preacher of righteousness.

What should we speak of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and Loath, which made invocation
Genesis 11. 12. 47. Heb. 11. Jacob and Loath preached gods word.
to the name of the lord, and in steed of preachers, taught the word of god
themselves, and retained the true faith surely grounded upon the said word,
and by good example of life, and doctrine, left the same to their families and
posterities: but when, as we have said, in the kingdom of Satan profane men
usurped the places of godly men, in the primitive Church, and had wrapped men's
hearts in ignorance and Idolatry, Men's hearts were wrapped in Idolatry.
they maintained Esaus Traditionaries with the gains thereof: but now (thanks
be given to God) in these latter times we have eased Jacobs shoulders of such
burdens, and have well purged our Churches from such abominations.

But yet must it needs be said, that Many ignorant ministers of the meanest
sort. Reg. 12 31.
there are put in the places of godly pastors many an ignorant, and dissolute
person: and our ministers for the most part, are as the priests of Jeroboam,
even of the lowest of the people. And this we have don, least we We love not
to have our faults reproved.
should hear hard things, least our ambition, and covetousness should be
reproved: and why should we not speak plainly and tell the truth: for filthy
lucre sake we have committed Sacrilege, nay we will say Sacrilege for Lucre
sake. Souls murdered.
more, we have murdered the souls of our brethren. Will any body put us to
our proof: Who will then seek for reformation when it is proved:

Many are patrones of benefices, and they Benefices sold to Symonistes for money.
sell that for money to the^ that will give most, among the wicked Symonists men
of little account, less understanding, and least conscience of al: and yet they
say we are no Church Church-robbers.
robbers, and we murder no souls.

Noblemen and men of worship (or else they bear lies) write their letters unto
the Bishops for admitting of unworthy persons to the ministry, yea such as
are of Unworthy persons admitted to the ministry.
the worser, and baser sort, far unmeet for that calling: neither learned,
godly, or zealous, but covet the rooms of godly pastors, to lead an idle
life, and for covetousness Christ's Church fraught with unlearned hierlings.
sake they may be well termed good cheap hirelings. Jacobs church is at this
day so fraught with them, that the learned which desire the office to set
forth the glory of God, and the edifieng of his people No place for the godly
and learned in Christ's church.
in the right knowledge of his word, can have no places to increase their
talents, unless they will be hirelings for ten pounds by the year, although
the living be worth to the parson or farmor, and hundred pounds by the year.

The common people say, that Spiritual men have too much, they keep no The
murmor of the people against the spirituality.
hospitality, they neither preach nor teach after they have livings, they
become covetous. They ware rich, and will not arise out of their nests, which
they think they have built in a rock. Those that should Psalm. 74. 9.
be ouer-seers of these, lie idle, not looking to their charge, they send
forth many to wait upon Esau, but few to wait upon Jacob. They which have
the places of punishing sin, have learned their lesson of the horsle aches
two daughters. A man Pro. 30. 15.
may travel some way, and find not a preacher Preaching decayed.
in fifteen Parishes, nor yet any Minister able to expound fire words of the
Scripture. Have we not then just cause, to take up the old complaint of Moses
Exodus 32. 21.
against Aaron? what did the people unto thee, that thou have brought so great
sin upon them? All these miseries of Jacob not withstanding, cast up your
eyes about, and you shall see a pomp like the pomp of Esau. What they were in
times past, that makes no matter to us: God Gal. 2. 6. Ezech. 33. 12.
accepts no man's person, their oulde works are forgotten. If they discontinue
I say many of them now, whether of Jacob or no, we can not tell. The Lord
knows who are his. But this we are sure of, they lift up themselves against
Israel, musling the mouth of the Oxen that tread out the corn: and coming
out 1. Cor. 1. 9. Psalm. 9. 12.
with four hundred men, some dumb dogs, some filthy Cananites, which The
proceedings of Jacob hindered.
have cast in their lots among thieves, to hinder the proceeding of innocent
Jacob. Will not God have all these things in mind, when he makes Inquisition
for blood: Can not he judge through the Job. 12. 13.
dark clouds? Yes, yes, God has not so conteinned the lifting up of Jacobs
eyes, nor colerated the ways of the scornful, that he should return to
visit them, and take them as he finds them. Nevertheless let us pray for
them, even the prayer of the Prophet, Give them, Lord: What Hose. 9. 14.
shall thou give them? A barren womb, and dry breasts: Let the children perish
for the sins of their fathers. As for Esau himself, let him drink, and be
drunk, and stumble, and fall, and rise no more. It is little enough that to
some we seem more sharp, than the matter requires. But I would to God we
were more touched with the ruin of Jerusalem, that Jacob, I mean Gods Church,
might find redress for these injuries.

Who is he amongst men, or what is A similitude of the church.
his name, which having one only daughter, most virtuous, and most beautiful,
adorned with most excellent qualities, the staff of her fathers comfort, being
betrothed to a worthy king of great estate, would not be drowned with tears,
and swallowed up with unmeasureable sorromes, if she were violently taken from
him, and given to a miscreant bastard, Iothsome and deformed person, being
infected with all manner of most filthy, and contagious diseases? And is not
this the case of gods church? How glorious is the Psalm. 45. 15. Ephesians. 5. 27. 2.
Cor. 11. 2. Christ's church committed to the ministers charge 1. Sam. 4. 11.
kings Daughter within? She has neither spot nor wrinkle: she is betrothed to
Christ: And by procksie he has committed her to the charge of his true
ministers. But lift your eyes, and look, behold, I say, and weep. For the arc
is taken from the Leuit: the spouse of Christ is committed to the hands of
filthy, unclean, and brutish persons: Reuelat. 9. 3.
Iuskish locusts are engendered of the smoke of bastard discipline, which are as
thorns to our eyes, and scorpions to out sides. The sheeprives stand by, and
look on, yet none of them stretches forth his arm to pluck the lamb from the
Eagle, nor the Turtle Dove out of the hand of the Psalm. 74. 19.
beast. And now we beseech you give sentence, are the tears of Israel as the
tears of an unconstant woman? Or has be not just cause to complain? But to
what purpose are the injuries of the Church laid before The injuries of the
church laid before us,
you, and compared with the injuries of Jacob? Forsooth to this end, that like
as the injuries already offered to Jacob, made him to fear farther violence,
and therefore to lift up his eyes, and look when Esau came: So it might appear
that the injuries offered to Gods Church may justly make it to fear farther
vengeance from God, and violence from men: and therefore to lift up their eyes,
and look when the Pope himself shall come. For let him come A number of the
Popes knights dubbed to maintain his kingdom.
to morrow, and we have dubbed a number of doltes for his purpose: He shall
need to alter neither the men, nor their orders: and if we have made idle
pastors, has not Gods church reason to lift up her eyes to see, when the Idols
themselves shall follow?

If we varnish his styrrops, will we neglect his sadle? If we be so desirous of
his discipline, will we make dainty of his doctrine?

The Turk keeps himself to his Alcaran, the Jew to his Talmud, or Kabala,
and the Pope to his Portuise. But if gods The true church of god accused of
singularitic.
church cleave to the singlenes of the word, refusing mixture, and seek a
service and administration thereafter, she is then accused of singularity, How
say you now? do not these things give Jacob good cause to lift up his eyes and
to look when Esau should come with four hundred men? Believe me, believe me,
if any Magistrate should go about to color these things, but not with the
covering of gods spirit, and say, what makes this to us? we may very well
say again, What make they then in the places of government in the Church of
Christ?

Therefore let the godly lift up the eyes of their hearts to God, and pray unto
him, from whom nothing is hid, that there may be a zealous reformation of
Jacobs troubles, We must pray for the reformation of Christ's Church.
and griefs, which is to be feared will not be, unles we cease from carnal
gospelling, oppression of the poor, covetousness, earthly minds, fleshly
Iusts, and not to be wise in our own selves, but to seek to be wise in the
lord. For he is the opener and mollister of all hearts which he turns. Knock
therefore, that the lord may open, seek that you may find, but see that you
knock, and seek aright.

The same god that opened the bowels of Moses toward his brethren, give al his
elect pitiful hearts toward poor Jacob, yea and to our own souls, that we
may in simplicity and rightnes of spirits, tacke our powers to the highest
pin, for the advancement of gods glory. Let this suffice We ought to lament the
miseries of Christ's Church.
for the first part, concerning the injuries and miseries of Jacob, and the
pomp and power of Esau: Now follows the second part concerning the disposing
of Jacobs family contained in these words.

The Second part.
2 And he divided the children to LEAH and RAHEL, and to the two maids: and he
put the maids and their Children foremost, and LEAH and her children after, and
Rahel, and Joseph hindermost.

Here is first to be considered and observed that difference which is The
difference between the faithful and the unfaithful. Genesis 31. 1.
found between the unfaithful and them that fear god with a confidence assured
in his promises. For although Jacob, otherwise feared the violenee of his
brother Esau, and bewraied his infirmity, even after God had comforted him, by
an host of Angels, and had given him victory in wrestling: yet was he not
amazed nor blasphemed Psa. 5. 5. and 62. 4.
god, like the wicked, with curses and most terrible oaths, of all fortes:
against who the prophet David cries out saying: The wicked blaspheme god,
swearing cursing, and lieng.
The unrighteous shall not stand in thy sight, O lord: thou hate the^ that
work iniquity. Thou shall destroy al the^ that speak lies: but how much more
likely is it, that the lord will destroy all them that speak blasphemy, and
abuse his holy name:

Saul verily blasphemed the name of the 1. Reg. 28. 8. Blasphemers punished.
lord, because he called not upon his name in his extreme misery, and trouble,
but asked counsel of a Pithonisse, was compelled to kill himself with his own
hand, after he had seen his people down right slain by the Phylistines his
enemies, and his sons lie dead in the midst of the people.

Ananias and Saphira his wife, lied to the Acts. 5. 3. 10. Liars punished.
holy ghost, and falling down suddenly to the ground, go with shame enough to
the devil of hell.

Senacherib swears and blasphemeth 4. Reg. 18. 30.
the name of the eternal God, before the walls in Jerusalem: but anon after
he for his labor was berest of his puissant army, and in his own gods temple
shot thorough by his son.

Iehoachim and Zedechias both kings of Judah, and blasphemers of gods name, 4.
Reg. 24. 20. 4. Reg. 16. 9. and 10.
are taken captives, and slain by Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon. Achas,
Iesabel, and the priests of Baal are clean wyped by King Iehu, because that
they under the color of God and godliness, persecuted the true religion.

The man that blasphemed the name of Leuit. 24.
God, was overwhelmed with stones to death.

The which examples of holy scripture, as they are terrible, and dreadful, so
are they written for us, to consider, that not the least part of our calamities
at these days do happen unto us, because of our detestable lying, cursing, and
horrible oaths, which few magistrates, parents and masters do go about to
redress as they should do. Magistrates and Parents must punish blasphemers.
Many blasphemous people in these days.
Wherefore the name of the living god is blasphemed with passing deep, and
horrible oaths of al sorts, and of al ages, so that it is verily to be
thought from the beginning of the world, was there never such blasphemous
people, as are in this wicked age of ours: and therefore are we vered with
unspeakable and endless troubles. The plague never goes from the house Eccle.
23. 12.
of swearers: For God is true and cannot ly, which says, That they shall not
escape Exodus 20.
scotfree, that take his name in vain. We should then be so true, one of us to
another, and careful to say the truth, that our communication should be yea,
yea, nay, nay. For whatsoever is more then this, is sin. Mat. 5.
The men of our time do not only take the name of God in vain, but do of
malice blasphemously defile it. It were therefore very godly, not only that the
magistrates, but also parents, and masters, in every of The duty of
houshoulders.
their private houses, would look to this horrible abuse of gods name, and
sharply punish those that are accustomably given to swearing, cursing, and
lying: and sincerely by good example and living, set forth the true worship of
god among their people, over whom they have charge: Or else, if this may not be
obtained at their hands they will be no worse nor godless then Caiphas: who
when he hard as he thought Caiphas. Mat. 26. Mark. 14. 10. 18. Luke 21.
blasphemy against the name of god, rent his clothes and cried that the
blasphemor was worthy to die. For assuredly unless Christian magistrates, and
governors of families do not very earnestly punish the Ungodly householders
worse tha^ Caiphas.
offenders herein: it cannot otherwise be said, but that they are a great
deal worse than that wicked Caiphas.

But now to come again to the effect of our matter, we may well perceive,
that Jacob although he was put into a Jacob in his crouble blasphemeth not God.
great fear and agony by his brother Esaus coming against him with four
hundred men, yet did he not by any means blaspheme god. or was amazed like
the ungodly: but behaved himself wisely. descreetly and prudently, in
disposing of his family, for the best safety and advantage, if ought had betyd
him more rigorously: whereas the wicked in time of peril are at their wits end,
and stand amazed like stocks, Job. 18. 11.
or else are driven into such brutish passions, that they be wray their
fearfulnes, (so far separated from discretion) that they never had any great
strength. Example hereof we have in Ahas, and his people, who at Pro. 24. 10.
Esau. 22.
the report of the coming of Aram against them, are said to be moved with
fear like the leaves of a tree shaken with the mind. It is true that the
wiseman says, Blessed is he that always makes himself Prouer. 28. 24.
afraid. For if we acquaint not our selves with mortification, and set before
We must acquaint our selves with mortificatio^.
us the terror of God, to be exercised and humbled in the time of peace, and
quietness, it is to be feared, lest when the storms of affliction beat upon us,
we be so affrighted as much some strange thing, that we shall not only be
beereft of patience, the Patience the principal exercise of faith. Deu. 28. 29.
principal exercise of faith, whereby we possess our salvation: but also be
disabled to use the ordinary means, set before us for our delivery, without
the which we shall not be able to escape the violence of our enemies. Moreover
if this disposing of Jacobs family be considered, as occasion will be given by
and by, we shall perceive the doubting of the man which we speak of in the
beginning. And these infirmities The infirmity of the Fathers not to be
excused. Genesis 30. 4. 10.
of the fathers we must not go about to excuse, neither in this, neither in
that, he begat children of Bilhah and Dilpah, his wives maids, whereof mention
is made, nor yet in his plurality of wives, least that I should justify a piece
of clay, and besides that prefer injury to many. Yet in one respect (although
I rejoice not in their sins) since God has so ordained that their Salvation
consists only in Gods mercy. 1. Cor. 9. 10.
salvation should consist in mere mercy, we may rejoice that they fell. For
example of gods mercy, for in raising them which fell in the beginning, is a
staf to hold them up, which are now bowed down with their infirmities. Not
that man should wound himself in hope of this salve, but that those which are
already wounded and know it, might not be to seek of the Chirurgian.

But to come near to our purpose, Jacob Jacobs discretion, and his wisdom not
in flesh nor blood.
not withstanding the fearfulnes of his heart, yet she weth he great discretion,
and wisdom in ordering of his business, as one purposed to use the best
ordinary means that was offered, and to leave the rest to the lord, And whence
had he this staiednes and wisdom in so trouble some a time: certainly neither
of flesh nor blood, but by the gift of God, without which no man can stand
upright in the evil day.

We read in this former chapter how he prepared himself to this purpose with
Man nothing without god. Genesis 32. 9. Jacob prepared himself with humble prayer.
fervent and humble prayer, for that is the tower of the faithful, and the very
ordinary way, and means, whereby god is moved to help us in our necessities:
and they which seldom use it, provide evil for their faith. Surely the good
success, that the Lord gave Jacob here (after the said prayer) should
encourage us to enterprise nothing before we have first craved the direction of
our god, and so much the rather, by this example, because it appears by the
tenor of this prayer and the politic disposing of his family being compared
with that which followed, and succeeded, that God God gave Jacob more tha^ he
asked. Psalm. 79. 13.
gave him more then he durst either ask, or look for, so plentifully received
he, his prayers rewarded home again into his own bosom. Our lesson by the way
is, that when we have poured out our spirits before God, craving any thing at
his hands, We must rest in gods providence.
we must so rest in his providence, that we do nevertheless use the ordinary
mean, and not lie still presumptuously tempting the Lord, as the manner of some
is. Thus did Joshua. 7.
Joshua work the will of the lord in his battle, and the fruit of his labor was
the fulfilling of his prayer. Yea when we have an assurance of that we ask at
the Lords hands, yet the example of Elias teaches us 1 Reg. 18. 24. Prayer
does exercise our faith.
to pray still, that our faith be not dull, and idle.

The conclusion of this note is, that if we will not have our wisdom to fail
us, when we most need it, let us not forget in the In our troubles we must put
the Lord in mind of his mercies.
searefulnes of our hearts because of our infirmity, to put the lord in mind of
his mercies, least when danger is laid upon us, our shadow of wisdom be
scattered into the clouds, and we crushed under (...)

Further more here is (...) care and love that this holy Patriat (...) The
christian love and care of Jacob toward his family.
had toward his family. The malice which was in Esau, he knew well, was but
against his own person. And therefore if his tender love toward his wives, had
not greatly prevailed wc him, he might have taken his flight to escape from
the hands of Esau: But he as a loving, and faithful father of a family, did not
only carry by it, but also put them in such array, as might best beseem the
intertainme^t of the lord Esau, or rather might best serve for the safeguard of
come of their lives, which was kindermost, by taking their flight, if Esau
should assault the foremost. This christian love Jacobs love to his wines, is
wanting in many husbands in these days.
of Jacob to his wives, and the godly care toward his family, is wanting in
many in these days, which range abroad not for any danger that drives the^,
but they go to seek it. If one that were in authority should examine many of our
young gentlemen, which have bound the^ to the unseparable knot of holy
marriage, what is the cause Vain travel.
that english ground cannot bear the^: why some of them shake the buckler in
Paris, and some other walk the streets in Venis: and Like husba^nd (...)
(...) they can give as good account of it, (...) wives which they have left
behind them, ca^ do of their unchaste behavior in England. But such marraige is
no more honorable than whoredom.

And here by the way we may well consider, The ungodly attire of weomen.
that Jacobs wives were not appareled, like to our wives in England in these
baies, more like Maskers, than Matrons, with heads compassed like to Rams
Horns, and frilled hairs, more meet for sparrowes to make their nests in,
than for christians to wear. If they were well disposed to read the scriptures,
they should learn what Saint Peter speaks of women-like apparel, saying: That
women's 1. Pet. 3. 3. 4. 5. 6.
apparel should not be outward with broyded hair, either in putting on of
gorgious apparel. But let the hid man which is in the heart, be without all
corruption of a meek and quiet spirit, which spirit is before God a thing
much set by. For after this manner, did the women in the old time which trusted
in God, attire themselves, being obedient to their husbands, even as Sara
obeyed Abraham and called him Lord. Cyprian that godly martyr writes this
Cyprian speaking against the unseemly attire of weomen.
of women, saying. Qua sericum and purpuram induunt, Christum induere non
possunt. Women that advance themselves in putting on silk, and purple, cannot
lightly put on Christ. And again, Foemine crines suos inficiunt malo
proesagio, capillos enim sibi flammeos auspicari non metuunt. They which color
their heirs with red and yellow begin to prognosticate of what color their
heads shall be in hell. And farther he says, Qui se pingunt in hoc seculo,
aliter qua^ creauit Deus, metuant, cum resurrection is venerit dies, ne artifex
creaturam snam non cognoscat. They which love to paint themselves here in this
world, otherwise than God has created them, let them fear, least when the day
comes of resurrection, the creator will not know them. And for these and the
like abuses the lord both punish our sins, one with another. We may here in
like manner object the example of Jacob with the peevish Papists, which upon
forged pretense of conscience, have left their Nature soil, their wives, their
children, their families, and have broken their obedience to their true,
lawful, and christian Princess: and when England is to hot for the^, are run
to roust at Rome. If Jacob had fled, he had fled from Esau, a tyrant. But they
in fleeing 1. Sam. 15. 10. 1. Reg. 11. 4.
are become like to Jeroboam, which fled from peaceable Solomon, to the
Egyptians. But they have a vow in Hebron like Absolon a traitor to his own
father. And can there be a more unconscionable act, then to break the loialty
of true subjects toward so loving a princess, and to make themselves slaves
to a infamous stranger? we may marvel with what forehead they may plead
conscience any longer. The manner, why Moses does so diligently report the order
of this array, is, that we might understand whom Jacob was most Jacob desired
to save some.
desirous to save (if any danger had bin) for the foremost were in most danger,
and likest to be slain first, if Esau had drawn Genesis 32. 8.
sword against them: and therefore he declares that the two Maids with their
children were put in the Fronttire, and Leah, and her children next, and Rahel
and her children hindermost. Only this note is here to be given, that when he
thought to provide for the escape of some, Joseph Joseph most precious in
Jacobs eyes.
his youngest son, and the only son of Rahel was most precious in his eyes,
and (no doubt) he was comforted in the hope which he had of him, even when he
was yet but a child: and therefore placed he him with his mother hindermost,
that he might escape with the first. Our instruction out of this example is
twofold. First we learn not to We must not be desperate in troubles.
cast off al care of business, though things go not forward as we would have
them, for that were to be desperate: but to do the best we can to save some,
though there be no hope to save all. Jacob looks not to save all, yea, he
fears to lose the most part: yet does he not set all at six and seven, as
one without care, or counsel; but has a respect to his posterity after him,
Jacob has a respect to his posterity. Ios. 14. 23.
expecting to himself nothing but present death. Likewise Moses, although the
Lord told him flatly, that none of the people which he brought out of Egypt
should enter into the land of promise, but Caleb and Joshua, thought not he had
lost his weary and long travel among the rest. For he knew that in time God
could accomplish his promise, much unlike to those peevish spirits, which if
the Lord follow not their Peevish papists.
humor, bid him take al (as it is in the proverb.) And the prophet shows,
that the Isay. 1. 9.
reserving of a remnant makes us that we are not destroyed, as Sodom, nor
consumed Sodom. Gomorrah.
like Gomorra. Our other lesson is, that they which are guides, especially
governors which should be as noursefathers and nourse mothers: not to put the
weakest Governors should be nurse fathers and nurse mothers.
to the worst, but to provide carefully for Joseph. But now the days are come
again that Joseph is carried away from his father, and sold into Egypt by his
brethren, where they cast him into prison. Notwithstanding his blessing which
his father Jacob gave unto him, was also repeted by Moses, as he then had a
carnal fruition of it, so shall be in the latter times (in his posterity)
obtain a spiritual possession of the same: Namely, the blessing of God, which
dwelt in the bush, shall be upon the Genesis 49. 26. Deuteronomy. 33. 16.
head of Joseph, and upon the top of the head of him, which was separated
from his brethren. If it be demanded why Judas Why Judas was not placed
hindermost.
was not rather placed hindermost for his safety, seeing that the scepter was
his by promise, and seeing that of his tribe should come the Messiah as
appears in his prophecy upon his death bed, the answer is Genesis 49. 10.
easy, for as per this was unknown to Jacob himself, who had not the
revelation before he was toward his death.

Now to the last note of this second part: you shall observe the notable
government of Jacob, how reverend a father of a family we may gather him to
have been, by this place, and of how great The notable government of Jacob.
authority in all his household. You have hard how they all went in great danger
of their lives. In which cases every one of us, is given to shift for our
selves, though it be to the breach of obedience. It is marvel therefore, that
they strove not who should go hindermost, and that every one coueted not the
place of most safety. Surely in that they were obedient, and stood in such
array as he thought good to set them, there is a notable president unto us of
his prudence, and authority, which had trained them up to this tractablenes: and
in them commendable A notable example of obedience.
obedience, which quietly kept their places assigned without brawling or
contention.

The like example was notable before Genesis 17. 23. Abraham's family obeyed him.
1. Reg. 2. 3. 4.
in his grandfather Abraham, to whom al his servants obeyed and were content
to have their foreskinnes cut, which was a grievous wound in the flesh, when
circumcision was ordained. Contrariwise Eli the high priest his two sons Hophni
Elies sons obeyed him not, and are slain.
and Phinees, because they obeyed not their fathers monition, when he rebuked
them for their wickedness, for lying with strange women, which waited at the
door of the tabernacle of witness were both slain by the Philistines their
enemies. Ely also Elie plagued for not correcting his sons.
himself because he did not sharply punish and correct his sons for their
wickedness, and disobedience, but did seem to winck at their sins, saying, Sons,
how is it that I hear such report of you, that ye make the lords people to
trespass against him: What became of Ely for omitting punishment? Surely when
he hard the ark of the Lord was taken by the Philistines, he fell from a stool
and brake his neck. Hoc scriptum est ad nostram doctrinam: These things are
written for our learning: And Parents must be reverend, to be reverenced.
that masters, and parents should learn by the example of the two godly
fathers, to be reverend, that they may be reverenced: and by Ely and his sons
to minister sharp discipline for notable offenses. And let them both by
nurture, example and discretion, go in and out before their family, that they
have them obedient in all the will of the Lord. For it must be observed, that
because both Abraham and Jacob went Genesis 18. 19. Abraham and Jacob did gods
will. Number. 22. 23.
about the will of their God, therefore they inclined the hearts of their family
to obedience. Otherwise, the very Ass, whereon Balaam rode, was disobedient
unto him, because he went about wickedness, and himself disobeied the almighty.
Thus we conclude this second part, wherein we have noted the discretion, and
staiednes of Jacob, whereby the danger not withstanding, he feared not like the
faithles Mammonists, the infirmities of the fathers not The Mammonusts fear.
to be excused, the preparation of Jacob by prayer, the love toward his
family, and how he sought to save some, not hoping to save al: how he tendered
the weakest, and his authority and government in his family. The lord power a
great measure of his spirit into the hearts of our guides to dispose the family
of Jacob discreetly for the preservation of Innocent Joseph.

The third part.
The third part is containing the courage, devotion and humility of Jacob in
his meeting of Esau.

3 So he went before them and bowed himself to the ground seven times, until
he came near unto his brother.

In the first member of this sentence where he says (so he went before
the^) Moses in this does declare the courage of Jacob, which like a good
captain led them the way cheerfully. In the second Jacob a good Captain,
goes before his family.
member when it is said, To have bowed to the ground seven times, is set down
his devotion toward god, and his humility toward his brother. In every one of
these we see nothing, but that which beseems so great a Patriarch, as Jacob
Jacob did that which beseemed a Patriarch.
was. First therefore you hear how he set himself foremost in the rank,
least by his fear, and towardlines, the rest should be discomforted. After
that the prophet David David slattereth himself in the flesh.
had put affiance presumptuously in the flesh, slattering himself in his ease,
that he should not be moved for ever, he was compelled to confess that when
God had hidden his face he was troubled, and to sing this new song: Lord of thy
good pleasure Psalm. 30. 28.
thou have stablished strength to thy mountain. That is to say, before and
fastened my Ancre upon my present wealth and peace, or I spread forth my sails
at my merigales of wind, I presumed upon my self. and depended not upon the
free favor of God: therefore in so doing the Lord by withdrawing his
countenance taught me, that my courage was but fool hardines, and in mercy
showed me a more sure hold, where to trust, even his mountain, to which his
good pleasure he has established strength. Now Jacob (we know) submitted
Jacob depended upon gods produidence.
himself wholly to Gods providence, being ready at all times to resign into
his hands whatsoever God had bestowed upon him. With this faith therefore Faith
looks God in the face.
which ever looks God in the face, who performs that he promises, he
goes boldly and courageously before his people. And surely if we have faith,
we are not afraid, Mat. 8. 28. Romans 5. 5.
and if we hope we are not ashamed. For the grimly countenance of the tirants
upon earth whom we behold with our bodily eyes, are not so terrible unto us, as
the Lord of hosts is comfortable, whom our faith, which is our spiritual eye,
beholds, armed for our defense in the heavens. But in this couragiousnes,
Jacob has companions but a few, for the heads of the people and governors of
the earth, are content to erceed others in wealth and ease, and from There is
no bridle ca^ keep us from covetousness. Esau coming, we shrink back.
the lururious pomp of this world, there is no bridle to pluck them back. But
when Esau comes, they are content to loose their place of dignity, they
strain courtesy there, who should go foremost. This is true in the governors,
this is true in the priests, they care not who go before them, when any danger
is at hand. But if there be any time at the length in which they may cease to
be apprentises to the Devil, let them not stop their ears against the great
pastor of the flock, which says, That Ioh. 10. 11.
a good she epheard gives his life for the sheep. After the decease of Moses
which courageously went before the people thorough a roaring wilderness, his
servant Joshua was raised up to continue their conductio^: and because he had
many barbarous Giaunts to suboue, and perilous exploits Joshua. 1. 5. 7. 9.
to atchiue, the lord drives him for wards often with this commandment,
Co^fortate, and Heb. 12. 13.
roborate valde. Be strong only be strong. And that he might make straight
steps to his feet, least by halting he should turn out of the way, he sets
this promise before him: Non derelinquam te, ne que deseramte, The promise of
God to Joshua.
I will not leave thee, nor forsake thee. And the same arm of God, which then
smote the proud and confounded his enemies before him, which cut Rechab,
Rechab. 2. Reg. 4. 12.
and wounded the dragon, shall in our days also wake up, if we will be strong in
Gods strength, to scatter Esau, and his four hundred men before us, as chafe
before the wind. But the same exclamation, which was wont to be in men's
mouths at the death of the faithful prophets agrees too well with our time. Oh
the charriots of Israel, and the horsemen of the same, for the true prophets
decay, and their prayer (...) Reg. 13. 14.
and prophecy was of more force than all our warlike munitions, and whose
spiritual courage was more mighty than the sturdines of the flesh. As for the
most part which remain, they are turned backward, they are like to the sluggard
which says: There is a lion in the street: yea many will rather lead the
dance to iniquity. The courage of Jacob was built upon Jacobs courage built
on faith. Heb. 11. 2. and 12. 1. Jacob a pattern of christian courage.
faith, therefore is he reckoned in the number of those fathers, whose steadfast
belief the Apostle says, Has compassed us with a great number of witnesses.
Well we see a perfect pattern of christian courage: the commandment of God
was of more force in him, to make him obey, than the peril that was instant to
make him afraid.

There was no other way to Bethell Genesis 13. 13.
whither he was commanded to return, but by Esau: should be therefore contemn
the voice of God which said, I am the god of Bethel, where thou annointest the
pillar (...) no: If God have said go to Bethel, we may not stay in Padam Aera^,
though Esau with four hundred men stay in the way, (as we shall find them in
the right We must obey Gods word.
way) yet must we go to Bethel. Obey the word of God, he is the God of Bethel,

It follows that Jacob bowed himself Jacobs devotion and humility.
to the ground seven times until he came to his brother. Here in these words
(as we have said before) is comprised the humility and devotion of Jacob. For
it is probable, and it is the judgment of many, that all this courtesy was not
given to Esau alone, but that he also in the way devoutly did humble himself
before God. This devotion as it is at all times most requisite, so do we then
most use it, and feel the most fruit of it, when any danger hangs over our
heads, and we know by experience, as many as have not put away the feeling of
Gods spirit with both their hands, that we are apt by nature to gather pride
unto our selves in the time of prosperity. And we then forget god most, when In
prosperity we gather pride and forget God.
be powers his benefits most beneficially upon us. Therefore both the lord
gather by the flitting of his children by afflictions, to set an edge upon
their prayers, that they may be keen to cut the clouds and come before him.
Some that are not of Our earnest prayers cut the clouds before God.
the stubberner sort he humbles in spirit, and makes them to go forth
sowing in tears, when he seems to bend the brows of his judgment upon their
terrified consciences. Others that are more unruly, he corrects with the
rods of men, and tameth Terrified consciences.
them with outward punishment, teaching them devotion in the schole of
affliction. Finally there is no dispensation given to any of Gods children. For
the apostle both set down appossitiue law. As 2. Tim. 9. 10.
many as will live godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer persecution. And when we
see the fruit of affliction in the person of Jacob, even devotion, and a
religious care of godliness, whereas to many of us, our ease and fulness of bread
has brought forth contempt and security, which of us having a spirit any thing
better than the spirit of a Pagan, will not wish rather to abide all God
corrects whom he loves.
his life under the correction of the Lord, the corrector of them whom he
loves, than by wallowing in such prosperity, which many are not able to weld,
to beco^e like a horse or mule, which has no understainding? Psalm. 32. 10
The prophet David brings in himself for an example, to confirm this
doctrine. Before I was afflicted, (says he) Ps. 119. 67. 71.
I went astray, but now I keep thy word. And a little after, It is good for me
that I have bin afflicted, that I may learn thy statutes. For this cause,
ought we all to lift up our weak hands to God, that our true repentance may
turn away his anger. In which he threatens to make our sun to go down at
noon, because he has Amos. 8. 9.
found us in the number of those, of whom Moses prophesied thus in his song:
He Deuteronomy. 32. 15.
that should have bin upright, when he waxed fat, spurned with his heel: thou
art fat, thou art gross, thou art laden with fatnes, therefore he forsook
the God that made him, and regarded not the strong God of his salvation.

Questionles, if Moses were now alive, Devotion in prosperity is the sister
german to the papisticall daughter of ignorance.
to stand by, and behold our insole^cy, he could not have met more iumply with
our sin. This is even the devotion that our prosperity has brought forth.
sister german to the papistical daughter of ignorance. But how much better were
it, if we would in the dais of our peace, draw our sleepy souls with violence
to the tribunal of god? The^ should not our devotion betied to affection,
neither should our righteousness be like the deaw, and the morning cloud. And
there we have to learn, that if god should never touch his child re^, who^ he
loves wc the rod Without affliction we forget God.
of his fatherly discipline, but to take the bitte between their teeth, and so
to run forwards and never to be plucked back, but as it were, always to fill the
belly like gluttons wc delicat meats, the ears full of music, to flow in
wealth, to excel in authority, to flo rish in honor, abou^d with friends,
richly appareled, guarded wc routs of serving me^, The vanity of the world and
worldlings.
had in admiration and revere^ce in the face of y world: but what the^ alas,
shall become of our miserable and wretched souls: therefore let us look, what is
don in our inward world, let us open I pray you the secret and inward eyes of
our hearts, the^ shall we well understand, that there is a far other world then
this, where far greater riches, and richer treasurs are found of the^, who
seriously We must look for the world to come.
and heartily travel to seek the^ out. Wherefore we must not murmor against god
for his loving correction, when we set greater force by the pleasures of this
world, then the observatio^ of his will and co^mandeme^ts.

Now concerning the humility of Jacob to his brother, it is evident in his
obeiza^ce which he made to him. In that he bowed himself before him, it was
the manner of the people that dwelt Eastward (among who^ Jacob had bin to be
curtous in such Jacob used the curtefie of people that dwelt Eastward.
kind of curtsy, in bowing themselves down before great personages. This
example serves us that Jacob held the patience of hope: and because he
believed, therefore he made no have but was content to be bu^bled to him, over
who^ his father in his prophetical blessing had ordained him Lord: not Genesis 27.
29.
because he distrusted that which his Father had spoken, but partly because he
understood it spiritually: and partly because y time was not yet come, in which
the king dom of Israel which was of Jacob, should exercise that dominion over
the Edomits, The Edomies were Esaus posterity.
which was the posterity of Esau. And although the wicked do usurp the
blessing of gone upon the earth the lawful use whereof Heb. 1. 2.
christ has restored to none but his brethren: yet the children of god are so
lifted up wc the riches of their hope, that wc an holy conce^pt they vouchsafe
not to give at tenda^ce upon this world, where they have Heb. 3. 13.
no abiding City, but ley for the world, where they look for one to come. Thus
shortly have we performed that we promised in the beginning.

But before we go farther, we have one The promises made to the fathers. Genesis
27. 29.
thing here to observe, concerning the promises made to the fathers. Isaac
said, Be thou lord over thy brethren: and let thy mothers children honor thee.
But for all that, Jacob stowyeth low to Esaus foot. Likewise to Solomon, it is
said, Thy throne O God is for ever and ever. But Psalm. 45.
he is no sooner dead, but ten Tribes are rent from his son, and given to a
stranger: 1 Reg. 11. 31.
and within 419 years after his posterity were captives in Babylon. So christ
promised to ratify the doings of Peter, but Mat. 16. 19. Gal. 2. 12. 13.
yet the spirit of God, which spoke in Paul, withstood him to the face for his
dissimulation. Notwithstanding in all these promises, the word of the lord
stands firm, and his truth re acheth to the heavens. In The word of God
stands firm. Many of the fathers bare the person of Christ.
the scriptures many of the fathers bare the person of Christ and of the
church, and in Christ or his church those promises the fathers saw then no
otherwise, than Abraham saw the days of christ, that is spiritually.
Concerning Peter's promises, I Aug. in Psalm. Peter's promises.
am of Augustines judgment, that many things are spoken to Peter, which have
not their full sense, but being applied to the whole Church, for the authority
of the keys, where of the Pope boaffeth, pretending Ioh. 20. 13. Greg. lib. 4.
senten.
succession from Peter, As it was given to Peter by name, so was it also given
to the rest of the Apostles generally without respect of persons: and so to
them only which persist in their doctrine. As for the Heb. 1. 8. Solomon was a
figure of Christ.
eternal throne promised to Solomon, the Apostle to the Hebrews shows that
it both properly belong to Christ, of whom he was a figure.

And as touching Jacob whose example we have in hand, the promise of his
soveraignity was fulfilled in David's days. 2. Reg. 8. 20.
from whose times the Edomites continued in subjection, til the days of
Iehoram: in whose time, they rebelled for the sins of the people. The Apostle
minding Heb. 7. 9.
to prove Melchizedech, of whose order christ was a priest, to be above Leui,
to whom tithes were due, reasons thus: The Priesthood of Melchisedech abouc
Leui.
To say the truth, Leui also which received tithes, paid tithes in Abraham, for
he was yet in the loins of his father, when Melchizech met Abraham. Even The
Edomites worship the offspring of Jacob.
so may we reason in this promise in the respect of Eau, that since the
Edomites which came out of the Ioines of Esau did worship the offspring of
Jacob: therefore Esau did worship Jacob, as Leui is said to have worshipped
Melchizedech. Nevertheless, to the outward appearance, Jacob is bowed down
before his brother, and disdained not, for he looked for the things he saw
not. And surely would to God, we had the humility of Jacob, Jacobs humility
proceeds of hope 1. Pe. 4. 1.
which proceeds of hope: for what though we be wronged of Esau! What though
the wicked do assault us injuriously? Have we not learned that therein is our
conformity Math. 11. 29.
with Christ, who says, For I am weak and lowly in heart? What though our
bodies be made even with the ground, so that the wicked go over us, and plough
long furrows upon our backs? What is all this to the injuries of him, which
nevertheless triumphed in patience? Only let We must stand to the defense of
the truth. 2. Ti. 2. 24. 2. Ti. 2. 2. The servants of God must not strive.
us consider where about we were: if we stand in the defense of the truth,
there is no ground to be given, but in all this, let us hold fast the rule of
the Apostle: The servant of God must not strive, but must be lowely minded.
Behold in this one man, a lively pattern of long suffering, faith, discretion,
and humility. He awaiteth the Lords leisure patiently, for the accomplishment
of his promise. He believes that he shall have dominion, his present
subjection withstanding: he disposes his family, and does homage to his
Brother. And he lost nothing by it. For it is possible, that many of Esaus
retinew, did seek more after ambition, and vain glory, than after the
honesty of themselves, or their Lord: As diverse Sicophantes, Sycophantes.
about great men do at this day, upon report that Jacob should be Lord over
their Lord. The which thing Esau had determined to prevent, by making hauock of
him, and all his, had not the Lord used the humble submission of Jacob, as a
mean, not to make them believe the Prophecy, whereby their outrage was
stayed. How ever it he, humility was in him a great virtue, By humility we
draw nees to Christ.
and most excellent: and it is that, wherein we draw near to the image of
Christ.

The Lord therefore of his mercy grant that we may imprint this lesson
deep in our memory, that the nearer we draw to the Lord, the more we be
displeased with our selves.

The Fourth part.
NOw in the fourth part remains the bulooked for loving meeting of Esau, and
the joy of them both are described in these words.

4 Then Esau ran to meet him, and fell on his neck, and embraced him, and kissed
him, and they wept.

Moses having declared how Jacob The success that god gave to Jacob.
bowed himself before his brother Esau, proceeds to them diligently by
circumstances, what success God gave to his devotion and humility, by
mentioning the running of Esau to his brother, his embracing him, his falling
upon his neck, his kissing him, and his weeping with him. Here we have found
the wise man Pro. 15. 1.
as good as his word. That soft and gentle aunsweres and lowly demeanor,
breaks anger.

There is no cause why any man should Esau his affection.
call Esaus affection toward his brother in question, before that the lord,
which can turn the streams backwards, and check God turns al things at his
will.
the raging of the sea, that it swel not above his pleasure, had mostified his
heart, and brought him again for a time to that natural love of a brother,
from which, otherwhiles both before, and after he had very barbarously
degenerat. With so much the more admiration, let us note this great alteration:
How God turns the hearts of the ungodly.
A cruel envious tirant to become gentle, and loving. But to whom: even to him
whom he purposed to murder. Before he came marching against him with four
hundred men to destroy him and his: Now he runs to him, that he might
prevent him with Brotherly greeting. Before he went to stretch forth his hand
to take him by the throat: now spredeth his arms abroad to embrace him. Before
he would fall upon him to kill him: and he now falls upon his neck to kiss
him. At the first, he wept for cursed heart (like a woman) when he had lost his
blessing, and afterward knitting his frowning brows against his brother (as
the picture of envy:) But now between sorrow, for their falling out, and joy
for their pure meeting and reconcilement, he falls forth into weeping. The
good nature of Esau was not of himself. The triumph of virtue over vice.


And truly here we have to note, that this came not of the good nature that
was in Esau, but was the only working of the lord, and the triumph that virtue
has over vice: that wheresoever she is most hated, there does she sometimes
show her self. And this is the great punishment, that God brings on the
wicked: Even as the Poet says, Virtutem vt videant, intabescantque relicta.
Virgil.
That though they Jove not virtue, nor cannot like to follow her: Yet shall they
pine away with a longing desire after her. And this I am sure strikes deep
Virtue wounds the conscience of the wicked.
and wounds the conscience of the wicked, that though they have set their
hearts as hard as an adamant stone, and made their faces, like flint to do al
kind of mischief: Yet God by his great mercy and grace, works throughout
their consciences, mollifieth their hearts to godliness: And so does cause them
to confess sometimes that the way of virtue is best. As for example. There was
never so unpure and dissolute an adulterer, but he has said sometimes, The
chaste body is best. There was never so great, and cruel a murderer, but
sometimes he calls to mind that God has commanded him: Thou shall do no
murder. Exo. 20.
There was never so blasphemous, nor vile a swearer, but sometimes he has
treambled at gods majesty. There was never man so proud, and ambitious, but
sometimes he remembers that he is but dust, and ashes. There was never such an
usurer, nor covetous wretch, but so^times he thinks his Gold and silver shall
canker, and Ia. 5. 2.
the rust of it, shall be a witness against him. There was never so riotous a
person, sumptuous, and prodigal, but sometime he condemns his own doing, and
says with the prophet David, Psa. 37. 12.
The unrighteous man boroweth and paieth not again. What should we say more:
For as it is in a wicked life, even so likewise in a corrupt religion. Truth
that is strongest, Truth in religion forces the papists to confess her.
Merits.
and overcomes all, in religion forces the enemy to confess her. For their
was never papist, that so magnisted merits, and talked of his works of
supererogations, but sometimes in his conscience he would surely confess, That
when he had don al, Luke 16. 17.
yet he was unprofitable. There was never any so great an enemy to faith, but
when his conscience was touched with the grief of sin, he would cry aloud,
Faith alone does justify. There was never papist Faith a lone justifies.
Fleshly worshippings.
(I am sure) yet so dronke^, that made so much of al his fleshly worshippings,
of organs, and singing, of altar, and altar clothes, of frankencense, sweet
smelling savor, of banners, and streamers, of goodly tunes and melodies, of
silver crosses, and chalices, but he has said sometime: Who requires Esai.
16. 12. Ioh. 4. 13.
these things at our hands? The true worshippers do worship in spirit and
verity. There was never papist, in so deep a sleep of pardons, and purgatory,
but he has Pardons, and Purgatory.
surely said, such weak engines can break down, but paper walls: And such
cold water, can quench but painted fires.

There was never Pope, nor general General counsels.
council so desperately bent to set up worshipping of Images, but their own
hearts have often cried within them: They have Psalm 115. 5. Images.
mouths, and speak not, they have eyes and see not, they have ears and hear
not, they have noses and smell not, they have hands and handle not, they have
feet and walk not. Thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them. There
was never papist so blinded Papistical superstitious Transubstantiation.
with the great absurdity of transubsta^tiatio^, but some times seeing the wine in
the Chalice, he has vin afraid to say, By this, and by nothing else, let my
sins be washed: and seeing the cake in the priests hands, Thou alone have
redeemed me, and alone by thee I look to be saved. This much we have spoken to
that intent, we may see the working of the lord in the hearts of al his
enemies. Refuse him, how they will in life, or religion, Papists do strive
against God and his word.
they carry day and night, a witness in their breasts against themselves, that
they rebel and strive not against flesh, and blood, but against God, and the
truth of his word.

Truly so may we see how god wrought in the heart of Esau, howsoever men talk
of the force of nature. We cannot impute it to any thing, but to the miraculus
doing of the lord: Who, though we be in the bottom of the sea, can command the
water, Esai 45. 15.
that it shall not drown us. And, though we Hos. 2. 18.
go through the fire, can keep us from burning. To this purpose speaks the
Prophet in the person of God: I will make a covenant for them with the wild
beasts, Hos. 2. 18.
and with the fowls of heaven, and that which creeps on the earth, and I
will break the bow, and the sword, and the battle out of the earth. And if he
have taken an oath of his domb creatures, that they shall not do his chosen
harm, much more shall he incline the heart of one man to be loving toward
another. Notwithstanding, Esaus gentleness was but a violent motion.
this was but a violent motion of Esau, and therefore endured not. For
afterward be slang away from his brother, and the spirit of envy returned
unto him, and possessed Genesis 36. Math. 12. 45.
him as before. It is nothing therefore, that many fond worldlings bost
themselves (if they have but one sparcke of humanity) seeing they are carried
about like waterles clouds, and have no continuance The wicked continue not in
goodness.
in that which is good.

When David both by word and deed, had witnessed his innocence toward Saul, At
1. Sam. 24. 17. David's innocence toward Saul.
what time he let him escape alive out of the cave of Engeddi, only cutting off
the lap of his coat: the envious tyrant, which persecuted him, being convinced
by open Saul weepeth for his injury don to David.
testimonies of his injury, lift up his voice and wept, acknowledging his
fault, which sought after blood without a cause. Such is the power of Gods
spirit, which expresses it self in the Godly, that the wicked many times are
ouercom by their virtues, whom they hate to death. Esau by all likelihood
supposed (for such is the manner of the wicked to think al men like affected
The wicked think al men like to themselves.
to themselves) that Jacob presuming upon his fathers blessing, would have
behaved himself stoutly, and disdainfully toward him; and therefore he
prepared to encounter with him. But when he drew near and perceived his
humility, he was enforced with tears to run, and embrace him. And How we must
deal with the froward.
learn we here, to deal with the froward discreetly. For, the maintenance of
christian concord, what greater foyson could Jacob have of his humble, and
lowly mind: his desire was only to escape alive, out of the hands of his
brother: but the lord did more for him the^ he desired. Behold Esau, in what
taking he is, he runs, he embraces, and he weepeth. But how now Esau: The
perplexity that Esau was in.
how comes this to pass, that you are so kind upon the sudden: Is this you,
which a little before was ready to burst with envy? I perceive, it is the
lord, that keeps the keys of al hearts, he opens and The lord keeps the
hearts of al men to do gods pleasure. Genesis 30. 26.
shuts at his pleasure. This roas the blessing, that alitle erst, god gave
to Jacob, Thy name shall be caled Jacob no more, but Israel: because thou have
had power with god, thou shall also prevail with me^. And now you see, he
prevails with his brother so mightily, that a heart of flint is turned into A
field won without bloodshed.
a heart of flesh. The glory of a field won by shedding of blood, had not
been comparable to the triumph of this victory, this was indeed to prevail
with men. So truly said our savior: When all things are Mar. 13. 31.
turned topsie turuie: yet the word shall not fail, but be accomplished.

But to return a little to the unstableness God makes the wicked instruments
to work his pleasure.
of Esau, we see how the lord can make the wicked, instruments to work his
pleasure, maugre their beards, though in their own kind they set up their
vristles against him. Esau shows himself wonderful courteous Esau courteous to
Jacob. Nu. 40. 18 20. Esaus posterity molesteth Jacobs children.
to Jacob, but his posterity would give his children no passage in time of
their misery. Wherein it appears, that he had rather suborued them to
malice, than erhorted them to peace with his brother. The egyptians which lent
to the Israelits (by Gods working) their Jewels, and their Exo. 12. 35 30. The
overthrow of the Egyptians.
raiment, within a while after, God hardened their hearts, were turned against
them to pursue them, till the Lord overthrew them in the midst of the sea.

The same people which would have made christ a king, and which strowed their
Ioh. 6 15.
garments in the way when christ passed through the streets, and greeted him
with Hosanna: the self same people, within a Mark. 12. 8 9.
short time after, were ready to stone him to death, and cried, Crucify him,
Crucify Io. 10. 31.
him, which had never offended them. Thus the inconstancy of the wicked
betraieth The inconstancy of the wicked.
it self: they think they have done God high service, when they have left one
or two shows of Christianity, though they return to their vomit. But we have
not so learned christ Jesus: Esau hates, Esau loves, and Esau hates again.
Nevertheless, although that the confidence, The friendship of the ungodly is
like the house of a spider.
which is put in the friendship of the ungodly be like the house of a Spider,
yet herein the loving providence of god shows it self, when he gives poor
Jacob a time of intermission from his tribulations and persecutions. And his
name is so much the more to be glorified in this, because where Jacob looked
for nothing, but thistles, he gathered sigs: and when the danger was most
dreadful, the lord as it were The lord does work by impossibilities.
upon impossibilities, that the knowledge of his power might be graven more
deeply in our breasts, replenished his heart with joy, and gladness. And that
their condemnation may be just, to whom be giucth no grace to believe.

After that the Jews had been threescore and ten years prisoners under the
Psa. 126. 4. David's prayer for the Jews.
king of Babel, the Prophet prays, That the lord would bring again their
captivity, as the rivers in the fourth: Showing that he which makes waters to
flow so abundantly, in baren and dry places of the wilderness, which to us
seems impossible, was also able to deliver his people from the bondage of
their enemies. Oh We must fear the lord with a holy fear.
that we feared the lord with a holy fear, and that we were right humble
before him like Jacob. Then should Esau have no power to hurt us, though we
were as a brand, half burned: yet should the Lord pluck us out of the fire,
and make us grow When we think god far off, he is most nigh to us.
to the bigness of a forest. Then, then should all the creatures of god cry
truce with us, when we do not deny the power of godliness, to be of one, and
true religion, professing christ rightly and his Gospel, extending We must have
truce with all men.
the same by our Godly life and conversation, and to become as members of one
body, whereof Christ is head. And as saint Paul did write this doctrine to the
We must al be members of one body. 1. Cor. 12. 12.
Corinthians: Even so he speaks to us of England. As the body (says he) is
one, and has many members, and all the members of that one body, being many,
are one body: even so is Christ also. The church of England as one has many
members.
This body of Christ his Church in England is one, and has many parts, English
men, Scotishmen, Dutchmen, Spaniards, Italia^s, Noblemen, Ministers, Lawyers,
Marchaunts, Farmors, Artificers, Laborers, and Poorfolke. And though they be
many, yet are they but one body, which by one spirit, are baptized into one
faith: Whether they be Jews or Grecians, bond or free, Englishmen or any
other of the before named.

If al were Nobles, where were then the If we were all of one vocation, there
were no common wealth.
Preachers: If al were Preachers, where were then the Lawiers? If al were
Lawyers, where were then the Merchants? If al were Merchants, where were then
the farmors, the poor and the laborers? One of these cannot say to another, we
need you not, least there should be division in the body.

Noblemen, Gentlemen, and Lawiers should not say, these Ministers have too We
must not despise one another.
much, they keep no hospitality, they neither preach, nor take pains after
they have gotten living, they eat of the milk, Idle ministers and Preacher's
reproved.
and cloth themselves with the wool, they become too covetous, not seeking to
feed the flock of christ whom they have charge of.

Ministers and Lawyers, and others should Ungodly and vnbrotherlie cruelty.
not say, many of these great men, and gentle men, their partners and servants,
do take away, and withold many men's freeholdes, Coppyholdes, and Leases,
goods, and chattailes at their pleasure. Take away goods by sea of Englishmen
and others, Papists and Protestants, such as come next to hand. They maintain
and set forth Backward papists in religion. Such as are of no religion.
such as are backwardes in religion, and look every day for Mariana tempora.
They are of Esaus decinue, making no account of religion: all is one to them,
if they serve their present turn.

Noblemen, Ministers and others should not say of the Judges, and Lawiers, that
they do nothing but talk, and take money, defend bad causes for money, pervert
judgment Laws wrested by crafty Lawiers for lucre-sake.
and justice, for rewards, make Laws doubtful, that they may expound them as
they will: and pick holes in good Laws, to make strife, and debate; for
increase of gain and lucre. Rich men should not say of The rich ought not to
revile the poor. The poor ought not to speak all of the rich.
poor men, they be idle persons, Roages, Uagabondes, Darlotes, burn them in
the care, hang the^. Nor poor men should not say of Rich men, these Cluttons
do nothing but eat and drink, they have many farms, many Lordshippes, many
houses, their hawks, and their hounds, they spend more tha^ many a good body.
They take such great fines, and rents. They spare themselves and their friends,
and so wring the poor subject in subsidies, tares, and such like paimentes:
that they be forced to live miserably.

Though faults be faults, and never Faults to be corrected in subjects.
Freedom of speech dangerous to religion and government.
so true, in respect both to be spoken of, and corrected in subjects of any
degree, by love and charity: Yet this late freedom of speeches at tables, and
such other private places tuching the states, may grow dangerous to religion
and government.

And surely even as that famous Demosthenes oration to the Athenians.
Drator Demosthenes did say in an oration to the Athenians, When the field is
lost, the Captains blame the soldiers, and the soldiers the Captains; the
foreward, the rereward: and the Battle, the wings. But if every one that
blames his fellow We reprove others when we are most blame-worthie our selves.
had done his own duty, all had been well. And so if such Noblemen,
Gentlemen, and others, as blame Ministers, Preachers, and Lawiers: such
Merchantes and farmors, as blame Noblemen, Gentlemen and others: and such rich
as blame the Every man must do his own duty. There are many godly and
virtuous
poor in England, would every one do his own duty, al would be soon well.
For God be praised for it, there be many good Noblemen, and Gentlemen, many
learned and godly Preachers, many zealous of all vocations, God be praised.
The godly being joined together in amity, the wicked cannot hurt them.
and virtuous Lawiers, Merchants, Farmors, and others; the which if they would
thoroughly agree together, and help one another in their vocations, and
callings, all Esaus Canonists and Traditionaries, and other had persons of each
degree, would soon either be reformed, or driven away, allothed and oppressed
should be at liberberty, superstitious A Egypt would be religious Judah, the
ruinous walls of the Church would glister with the Law and the Gospel, Jacob
and his family should have a free and quiet travel to Bethel, the people of
God would be brought again from Ephraim to Beersaba, from vice and error, to
the virtue and truth of the Lord God of our fathers, the Aposiles of Christ,
and his blessed Martyrs.

But alas, the posts of Christian concord The posts of Christian concord
defaced.
and amity, be dug up, the rayles broken, and the pales carried away. So
that poor Jacob, and his family, are in great danger. Esau comes against
them with 400 men. So that it is not for Matthew. 6. 22.
naught, that Christ says, The light of the body is the eye, then it is not
hard to discern by the strangenes of our steps, the blindness of eurcies. For
if our eyes were Hippocrites say they Jove the lord, and hate their brother.
single, I mean if we were not hippocrits, we would not say, we loved the
lord, and pet hate our brother: Neither would we fill the mouths of our enemies
with laughter, with this woeful dissipation, in which we are divided against our
selves.

The death of Saul and Ionathas was 1. Reg. 31. 5. 2. Reg. 1. 20. David his
sorrowful song for Saul and Ionathas.
the joy of the uncircumcised Philistines. Wherefore David sang sorowfully:
Tell it not in Gath, nor publish it in the streets of Ascalon, least the
Daughters of the Philistines rejoice, least the Daughters of these
uncircumcised triumph. And what shall we say? Is it not nough that we have
changed the covenant of our God, The enemies of christ laugh his gospel to
scorn. 1. Cor 3. 3. Saint Paul rebukes the Corinthians for dissenuons. Mark.
3. 24.
vulesse we make the enemies of Christ's cross to laugh his gospel to skorn?
Saint Paul when he hard of contentions among the Corinthians, asked them
earnestly thereupon: Are ye not carnal? and it is vehemently to be feared,
seeing that eur controversies have passed the bands of charity, least we also be
carnal. And it must be true that Christ says, Omne regnum in se diuisum
desolabitur. Every government divided within it self shall be ouerthrown. Jacob
and Esau run together and meet one another, lovingly. But we with all the rancor
of our unquiet hearts which boil over to the offense of many, run a silder:
one sort gives no place to the truth, another Our abuses declared.
raises slanders to strengthen the wrestes of discord to our shames (we may
speak it) the peace of the church is broken. Jacob and Esau embrace one
another, but we disgrace one another, reioising in their How we backbite one
another.
transgression, over whom we have power to insult. Jacob and Esau kiss one an
other, but we kick one another. They weep one upon another neck, but one of
us scorn another behind his back. And now I pray you tell me: Is this the fruit
of christianity? Is this the meed of 28. years labor, to make the sun a witness
against us, by suffering The Sun a witness against our wickedness. Ephesians. 4. 26.
Gal. 5. 15. Enme causes us to be consumed one of another. Mat. 6. 12. How we
do abuse the lords prayer.
it to go down upon our wrath?

Let us take heed (being warned of the holy ghost) lest while we bite one
another, we be consumed one of another. If we seek not to have peace with all
men (as much as in us lies) our daily prayer is that gods ve^gea^ce may light
upon us: seeing that forgiveness of sins we crave of the lord, is according to
the proportion of the forgiveness, which we extend to the^ yt have offended us.

If therefore we have any bowels of compassion in us, if there be any spark
of charity raked up in the ymbers of any Phi. 2. 1.
religion toward God, any loialty toward his church, or any christian
sobriety, temperance or lowlines in our selves, let us now cry truce, let us
meet together in charity, let us embrace together in godly We must now cry
truce and be in love and charity with all men.
unity, let us meet together in true penitency: Let us all (as one man)
return to the lord, that he may turn to us, and remember our wickedness no
longer.

The lord in the treasures of his rich We must pray for all magistrates.
mercy make the day star to shine bright in the barts of the magistrates, and
shape the hearts of the people to al godly obedience, that Jacobs wrongs may be
righted, and the tyranny of Esau may be suppressed: that the family of Jacob
may be discreetly disposed, We must pray for the concord and unity of the
church.
that his christian courage may not be abated, that his devotion and humility
may be sound and perfect, that his godly attoneme^t may be accomplished. So
that a christian concord being wrought in all sincerity and simplicity, of Gods
eternal tesTament, we al (as many as purpose to lift up pure hands without
wrath or douting) may one with another run with patience to the eternal throne
of grace, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

A PRAYER AGAINST the enemies of the Church of Christ, under the borrowed name
or speech of JACOB.
O Eternal God and most mighty shephcard of Israel, which command Jacob
thy Ge. 31. 3.
servant to return out of Mesopotamia to Bethel the land of his fathers, and to
his kindred, promising to be with him, and that he should prevail Ge. 32. 8.
with men: the which thy commandment he obeing, did according to that thy
promise cause him to prevail with Esau his Brother, who came against him with
four hu^ndred men, thinking to have ouerrunne him and his family. But thou
having the keys of all hearts to open, and shut at thy pleasure, do
miraculously, and as it were by impossibilities make the stony heart of the
most cruel, to become a heart of flesh, and the wicked to do thy will: we
therefore thy servants, O thou god of Bethel, do lift up our eyes to the throne
of thy majesty with an holy fear and faithful hearts, most humbly beseeching
thee to look down with thy merciful eyes upon Jacob (we mean thy Church) that
that excommunicat and Antichristian Reuc. 9. 10. 11.
Esau (we mean the pope) that foul dragon Abaddon with his locustes,
Traditionaries, Symonistes, and domb dogs, and al idle hierlings which are
careless of thy family, may be rooted out of thy vineyard, who go about and
practice by all possible means to deface and hinder the proceedings of Jacob
and of thy faithful servant, our gracious Queen Elizabeth, whom thou have
set to govern and reign over us, to set forth and maintain the preaching of
the gospel of thy son Christ Jesus, and to place in the roumes of Godly
Pastors, dumb dogs, Traditionaries, Esai. 56. 20.
and idle hirelings, which shall seek to fill their bellies, and not caring to
feed the beloved flock of thy son Christ, whom he has so dearly redeemed,
with his own precious blood: and also to break in sunder the unity, and concord
of thy catholic church, and this common wealth, which the godly learned
compare to a defece, about which there be posts, pales, and railes, that so
long as they be fastened the one to the other, so long they keep in and out all
things accordingsly: but if any of them be pulled away or broken down, the rest
are more easier to be ouerthrown: So that the wild boar Psalm. 70. 13.
of the wood, and beasts of the field may have their way to root it up, and
eat the grapes of the vineyard. Power out therefore, O omnipotet god, upon
thine elect, that as members of one body, whereof christ is the head, we may
profess 1. Cor. 3.
one true faith and religion agreeable to thy most holy words, having pityiful
hearts toward poorlacob, yea and to our own souls, we may also with Jacobs
humility, simplicity, and vprightnes of spirits rack our powers to the highest
pin for the advancement of the glory of god. To whom be all honor and praise
both now and ever.

Amen.

