A LETTER OF A CATHOLIC MAN Beyond the seas, written to his friend in England:
INCLVDING Another of Peter Coton Priest, of the Society of Jesus, to the Queen
Regent of France.

Translated out of French into English.

TOUCHING The imputation of the death of Henry the IIII, late K. of France, to
Priests, Jesuits, or Catholic doctrine.

Cypr. Epist. 55. ad Cornel. Haec est vera dementia, non cogitare, and scire,
quod mendacia non diu fallant. This indeed is madness, not to think and know
that lies do not long deceive. Permissu Superiorum: M. DC. X.

DEAR Sir, having understood by one of yours, that both you and other of our
friends there, have been much astonished of late with the sudden news of the
execrable slaughter of the Great and Potent Monarch Henry the IIII. King of
France: I nothing meruailed, the same astonishment being common to us here,
and I think to all the Christian world. But having further understood by the
reading of yours, that there with you, the same so detestable a parricide was
imputed commonly to Priests, or Jesuits, and by some to the Pope himself, but
by the most part to Catholic Doctrine: for answer The occation of writing
this letter.
of yours, I sent you first the Copy of a letter of a principal man, no less
then a Counselor of France, namely Monsieur du Wick the Governor of Cales his
brother, written by his own hand to a friend of his in Italy, which I my self
turned into English, word for word, as it was set down by him in French; where
he writes, that the miserable wretch that killed the said King, affirmed that
never any man persuaded him to that enterprise of his: the which (says he) we
all believed, because in all his examinations, and interrogations, even until
he was put to death, he perscuered still constant in the same assertion.

Besides I certified you of a certain Book which was written here in Italy
in answer of our Kings Book about the Oath, which being presented to his
Holiness, as it is said, was not permitted to be printed, because of a rash
assertion therein contained about the question of killing of Kings. For which
cause the Author thereof seeking to print his said book in Germany, was
through the prudency (as I understand) chiefly of an English Gentleman
remaining in those parts, forbidden likewise there to print it.

But things which since have happened, have made me less to marvel, that there
with you such things were spread: when as in France, yea in Paris it self in
the midst of so Noble and Catholic a City, in the eyes and ears of the^
that knew the contrary, and in the clear shining light of the truth it self,
the common enemy of truth has had so much power, as to find some impudent
instruments, to affirm and publicly to preach the same calumny. The Jesuits
injuriously slaundered.
But truly was it said, Fortior est omniu^ Veritas, and vincit: Truth is
strongest of all things, and will overcome at length: although for a while by
some violence it may remain oppressed, or disguised. For so even now in
France, in the said City of Paris, it is come to pass, that Jesuits which
were in part, although far of, calu^niated about that matter, being afterward
heard, and the truth known, not only have been justified and delivered from
such a false and injurious slander: but also honored and esteemed more the^
before, as most loving and loyal subjects to that Noble Monarch, which had
been in his life time always so loving and affectionat toward the^, as all
the world knows: And who at the very instant of so unworthy a calumniation,
employed themselves to honor the same King, as their most dear Father, in
tra^sporting with great sole^nity his own heart, bequeathed to the^ by himself
in his life time, and delivered the^ after his death by co^mandme^t of the Q.
Mother, Regent of France, to the Noble University de la Flesche, built for
themselves of late years by the said King of glorious Memory. And because I
have by good hap gotten the fight of a little Treatise written in the French
tongue, expressly in Co^futatio^ of the falsity, bego^ to be spread in Paris,
against the Jesuits, the which also does fully answer to the like calu^nious
oppositio^s, and false obiectio^s spread abroad by the treachery of the common
enemy of truth there in your parts: I thought it necessary to turn it into the
English tongue, that so the truth may there also be known to the honor and
glory of the author of all truth, and comfort, not only of the i^noce^t, but
also of al the^, that with true charity desire to know the truth, and maintain
the same.

A LETTER DECLARATORY OF THE COMMON Doctrine of the Fathers of the Society of
Jesus, conform to the Decrees of the Counsel of Constance: Written to the
Queen, Mother of the King, Regent in France. By Father Peter Coton of the same
Society, his Majesty's ordinary Preacher at Paris. 1610.
MADAME,
GOD ordained in the old Testament that the kidd should not be boiled in the
milk of his damme, to signify, as Philo the Jew does expound it, that one
which is already afflicted, is no more to be oppressed with new affliction.

According to the which rule, derived from nature it self, those of our
Society did hope, that with this doleful accident, the terror whereof has
shaken the two poles of the Christian world, they might have had at least their
breath free to sigh, after their incomparable loss: A loss, which is as
particular to them, as general and common to all. But it has happened to them
as to men which find themselves under the ruin of a house, where one stone
does not expect the other to cover and ouerwhelme them, upon whom it falls.
We were both in mind and body occupied about the transporting of that precious
gage, and remarkable pledge, which it has pleased your Majesty by the hands
of the Prince of Conty, to give consigned unto us, and to the which the Chief
Lords of France rendered the last honors: when some no welwillers of the
Catholic Religion, and of the^ of our profession, to purchase us in famy, and
to make their gain of our absence, spread abroad certain rumors, so far
from all likelihood and probability, that a man would never have thought, that
such ca-Iumnies could ever, even in any mad mood, enter into the thought of a
reasonable soul.

All this began by the occasion of a naughty book, the doctrine whereof has
Mariana his opinion condemned by all other writers of the Society,
been rightfully condemned by the Court of Parliament; some maintayning, that the
doctrine of the Book was the common doctrine of all Jesuits; others, that the
doctrine was so proper to his Author, that many of the same Society had written
the contrary, and altogether had condemned it some years ago in the body of
a Provincial Congregation: the which controversy men and the Court of
Parliament in France.
without passion did straight determine, co^cluding that this would be known by
disauowing thereof, and therefore that it was to be expected what we would say
therein. Whereupon I my self having been named particulerly, have taken
occasion at this present to take pen in hand, briefly to represent unto You
(Madame) as to Her, who is singulerly affectioned to the true Religion, most
interessed in the good of this whole State, and the most assured refuge that
innocence can have, that which the Doctors of our Society have written upon
this subject. Knowing that nether the greatness of business would easily permit
you of your self to seek them out, nor the small affection which backbiters
do bear unto us, would permit them to make you the true report.

And after that, I will show with the The Authors intention.
same breuity, what is the common sense and opinion of our Society, spread
through the whole world, touching the matter whereof we speak: Laying for a
ground of all, such verity as cannot be called into doubt, no not by them which
may be found most hateful and envious of this flourishing Crown. I mean that
the matter which was debated in the Council of Constance, and which afterward
has been declared more at large by the Catholic Doctors, touching the
expulsion of Tyrants, does not at all touch the happy, renowned, and most
honorable memory of him, of whom now we be wail the death; his life having
been as far from all blame of Tyranny, as it has been, and shall be always to
all the Monarchs of the Earth, a model of piety, justice, clemency, valor,
benignity, and fatherly affection toward his subjects.

Tolet.
First of al presents himself the most Illustrious Cardinal Tolet, a man of
rare learning, Spanish by nation, and French by affection, who in the 5. book
and 6. chapter of his Sum, teaches in express terms, That, it is not
lawful to attempt any thing against the life of a Prince, allthough he abuse
his Princely power: adding thereunto that to maintain the contrary, is an
heretical doctrine, condemned by the Council of Constance.

Bellarmine.
The most Illustrious and most learned Cardinal Bellarmine, answering to the
very same objection in the thirteenth chapter of his Apology to a Book of the
king of Great Britany, speaks thus: I have never read, nor heard it said,
that everlasting life has been promised to them that attempt against the life
of kings: but rather to the contrary I have read, that this proposition, Every
Tyrant may, and ought lawfully to be killed, was long since condemned in the
fifte^th session of the Council of Constance. True it is, that John Wickliffe
an Englishma^ whom the Protestants do so much esteem, and have put forth
his praises in the forefront of their Histories, taught, That no temporal, nor
Ecclesiastical Prince retayneth any longer his power and authority, after he
is fallen into any mortal sin: the which error of his, the said Council
condemned in the eight session.

Vale^tia.
Gregory of Valentia, a man of eminent learning, as is manifest by the
public testimony of Italy, Spain, and Germany, writing upon the sixty
four Question of the second Part of S. Thomas, and conforming himself therein
to the doctrine of other Schoole-Deuines, determines, in no wise to be lawful
to attempt against the life of the Prince, although he abuse his authority.

Salmer^
Alsonsus Salmeron in the thirteenth Tome of his works, expounding the
thirteenth Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, affirms the same, citing the
Council of Constance, and refers the fact of Aod, against Eglon King of the
Moabites, to the express and manifest commandment of God, whereof of no man
ought to be judge in his own cause.

Del-Rio.
Martin del-Rio, a famous man likewise in all kind of learning, in his
Commentaries upon Hercules Furens of Seneca, the 920. number, says; That, that
saying of the Poet is dangerous: and there alleges to the contrary, the
decree of the Council of Co^stance, which decree upon this subject cannot to
often be inculcated, repeated and declared to the People.

Heissius.
Sebastian Heissius in his Apologeticall declaration of the Aphorisms
attributed to the doctrine of Jesuits, shows by Mariana's own words, that
he has spoken out of his own opinion. And he himself perceauing that he did
exceed the Iimits of the common doctrine, acknowledged his doctrine to be
subject to error, and submitted himself to the censure of whom soever. And
by and by after he sets down his own, and the common opinions of all
Deuines of our Society, the which he opposes against the opinion of the said
Mariana.

Becanus.
Martin Becanus in the answer to the ninth Aphorism, remitteth the Reader to
the Council of Constance, showing that the lawful Princelooseth not his
superiority, although he become a Tyrant,

Gretser.
James Gretser Reader of Deuinity at Ingolstad, in his Book entitled
Vespertilio Haretico-politic us, answering to the obiectio^s which were made
him out of the opinion of Mariana, says with Heissius, That the common opinion
is to be followed, leaving that of Mariana, which he himself submits to
other men.

Lessius.
Leonard Lessius Reader of Deuinity at Louaine, in the ninth Chapter and fourth
doubt of his second book de Iustitia and Iure, affirms likewise, according
to the common sentence, That it is not lawful to enterprise against the person
of the Prince, although he should abuse his authority, grounding his saying
upon that advertisement of the Prince of the Apostles: Servants be subject to
your masters, and not only to them which be good and modest, but also to the
froward and ill conditioned. And after that he alleges the decree of the
Council before mentioned.

Serarius
Nicolas Serarius writing upon the thirteenth chapter of the book of Judges,
in his first question, does show that the fact of Aod cannot, nor ought to
serve the detestable Assassines, parricides, and murderers of their kings, for
their defense or example.

Azor.
John Azor in the second part of his moral institutions, the eleventh book,
fifth c^apter, and tenth question, does show him self yet a more rigorous
enemy of the bold and sacrilegious enterprises of them who attempt against
the (...)e of their Princes: where he teaches, that it is not lawful to go
about to kill, no not the^ who should have vniultlie invaded any state:
grounding his doctrine chifely upon this, that no man ought to be condemned
before he be heard, and without discussio^ of his cause, of the which noe
particular man can be a co^pete^t Judge.

Richeome.
As for Lewis Richeome, his Apology makes pere^tory proof of the
irreco^ciliable hatred which he bears to the doctrine of them, that teach
against the authority of kings: in so much that the L. Pasquier himself a
Critical Censurer of his works, having repeated his words in his third book,
and fifth chapter, praises him, and says, he cannot but love him, adding
these words: Yet I must needs honor thee seeing thee so to paint the Idaea of
obedience of a subject toward his King. A praise which he might have given to
many others of the same Society, who having examined this matter with S.
Thomas, and all the School deuines, do all conclude conformably to the
Sorbones, and to the Decree of the Council of Constance.

These then being the opinions and the determinations of these doctors, grave,
and principal men of our Society; what prejudice can the particular opinion of
one Mariana bring to the reputation of a whole Order? the which being,
according to the Institute, most careful to maintain all holy ordinances of
the Church, and bearing respect to the power and authority of Kings, who for
the temporal, depend on God only, has long time since disauowed the lightness
of this rouing pen: and namely in the Prouincial Congregation of France, held
in the City of Paris the year 1606. where The opinion of Mariana condemned in
a Congregation of the Society in France and mis liked by the General of the
same order.
more then this, the Reverend Father Claudius Aquauiua General of our Society,
was requested, that those who had written in prejudice of the Crown of France,
should be repressed, and their books suppressed. Which the said Reverend
Father did afterward very earnestly and exactly, being most sorry that by
ouer-sight, he being absent and knowing nothing, nor having seen the works,
one should use therein his consent: the words which he uses in his answer are
these. We have approved your Congregations judgment, and carefulnes, and have
been very sorry, that no body perceived the fault, until the books were
printed: the which notwithstanding we have presently commanded to be corrected,
and will use great care herafter, that such things happen no more.

And so it is, that now you should scarce have found so much as one copy of
Mariana, if it had not been for the pernicious liberality of the heirs of
VVechell, who are Malice of Protestants.
known to be of the pretended reformed Religion, and have printed the same
book at their own costs and charges: moved not so much, as it is to be
presumed, with desire to serve the public, as to hurt in particular our
Society. Some have thought that they have added somewhat of their own, others
have judged that the books of the first impression were yet worse, but this
controversy serves to no purpose: for although it were so, and that no body had
helped the first so imprudent pen, yet is there no cause, why that one man's pen
should more hurt the body of our Society, then the writings of John Petite, and
others his like, should hurt the Universities and Orders of which they were
Scholars, Bachelors, Masters, and Doctors.

But, Madame, seeing that I have here above promised to expound clearly and
distinctly, what is our opinion touching the question we have proposed: now I
come to it, which shall be the second part or this discourse.

1. All the Jesuits generally and particulerly will confirm, even with their
own blood, that they have not in this matter, or The general opinion of
Jesuits touching Kings.
any other, any belief, doctrine, or opinion, then that of the Catholic Church.

2. That amongst all sorts of government and public administration the
Monarchy is the best.

3. That such is the spiritual government of the Church, which is under the
Vicar of Jesus Christ successor of S. Peter: such is the temporal government
of the State and Realm of France, which depends of the person of the King
our Sovereign Lord and Master.

4. That the Kings are, as Homer calls them, the children and fosters of
God, or rather his own lively Images as said Menander:

5. That they are anointed, and therefore called the Christ's of our Lord, to
the end (as says Simeon the Archbishop of Thessalonica) that every one may
understand that they be inviolable, and should be respected as holy and sacred
things.

6. That it is a damnable heresy, as holy Irenaeus notes 1400. years ago to
think Tren. l. 5. c. 24.
that Kings are given to men casually: seeing that all power comes of God, and
therefore says S. Isidore of Damieta, in the most ancient pictures we see a
hand put out of heaven, which sets the Crown upon the head of Kings.

Romans 13. 1.
7. That he which resists kings or rebelleth against them, purchases to him
self his own damnation, according to the doctrine of the Apostle.

8. That obedience is due unto them, not for that they are virtuous, wise,
pote^t, or endued with any other laudable quality, but because they are Kings,
established by God himself.

9. That our Kings of France are the eldest children of the Church, enjoying
rare and singular privileges, above the common, of other Kings of the world.

3. Pet. 2.
10. That it is not lawful to deny to the^ obedience, and much less to
revolt against them, although they were vicious, froward, hard to suport, as
the same Apostle speaks.

11. That being such, we ought to pray for Baru. 1. 11.
them as the Prophet would have to be done for the prosperity of Nabuchodonosor,
and his son Baltazar, and that the afflictions, loss of goods,
persecutions, and other in commodities which are endured patiently, not
rebelling therefore against their Superiors, are things very acceptable to
God, and conform to the praise which in like case S. Paul gives to the
Hebrews, and to that ordinance which he has published in the Church, saying:
Every soul be subject to the Superior powers.

12. And therefore that not only it is not lawful to lay hands upon their
Persons, but that it is an execrable parricide, a prodigious trespass, and a
detestable sacrilege.

13. That the decree of the Council of Constance in the 15. Session ought to
be received of all and maintained inuiolably.

14. That the declaration of the Sorbon of the year 1413. and that also of the
4. of June of this present year is good, wholesome and holy.

15. That every one should stand upon his guard, and take heed of diverse books
that are spread abroad, contrary to the Laws, the reading of the which is not
only in this matter very dangerous, but so much the more to be feared, by how
much the Authors of them being to our great grief separated from the Catholic
Church, make no account neither of the Council of Constance, nor of the
Catholic Censures and Doctors above mentioned, yea rather (which is to be
lamented) they are the more obstinate in their opinions by opposing themselves,
and thereby they think to get the greater praise and admiration from others.

The pious intention of the Author.
I would cite books, quote the places, and allege the words, were it not
that it is far better that such things remain swallowed in the bottomless
pit of forgetfulness, and that it is more to the purpose to make known, that
innocence is far stronger then recrimination.

And for the same cause also I would have abstained altogether from this
aduertisment, had it not been to show thereby, that the body of our Society
cannot be infected by the opinion of one only person, the which has been so
authentically disauowed by the same: no more then those of the pretended
reformed Religion do not hold themselves any whit interessed by the erroneous
Doctrine of some of theirs, whom they reject, difauow, and condemn; being
willing to live with us under the Laws of our Realm, and with the obedience
and voluntary submission which we do render to the Scepter of our Kings;
persuading my self, that if they had the pen in hand which I have, they would
speak with us and thu^der out Anathema, with one common voice against those
infamous Authors. Which being maturely and wisely considered, as well by the
Court of Parliament, as by the sacred College of Sorbon, they have not made
any mention in their arrest and decrees of the Doctrine of Jesuits, knowing
very well as just judges and Doctors, that faults are personal, and that
there would be no innocence in the world, if the fault of one were imputed to
another: and that this has been a lamentable and incommunicable property of
the sin which the first man committed to have been extended upon others,
because his posterity was represented in his person, knowing also on the other
side by the frequent deposition of the malefactor, that Mariana had not in any
thing helped to this execrable parricide, nor could help, considering the
malefactor had not sufficient knowledge of the Malicious dealing.
tongue in which his book was written. Wherein is discovered the uncharitable
intention of those which spread abroad that he knew all the book by heart,
thereby to cast the public hatred of all this mischief upon others, then
upon the guilty.

This is it, Madame, wherein we do most humbly beseech you to employ your
Sovereign authority, and to ordain that all those writings, which are in
their beginning matches to kindle rebellion and within few hours become fire
bra^ds of sedition, be taken away from before the eyes of the French: you are
our Sovereign Lady endowed of God with high understanding, and with such
virtue as you have but few your equals, who does see clearly of what
importance it is, that we live all united, if not in one faith (such being
these injurious times) at least in fidelity, obedience, and mutual affection,
to the conservation of peace. We have a King which does represent unto us in
his young age, the wit and substance of the great Henry his Father your husband,
and the which with the increase of years will have (if it please God to
continue upon him his benign influences) his valor, his prudence, his
happiness, and his experience: it pertayneth to us to cherish this treasure; to
serve with all our hearts this great and little Master; to obey willingly You his
most worthy Mother, our Regent, and Mistress. And to the end that nothing do
trouble the union which only after God can conserve this potent Monarchy, and
make it all ways dreadful to her enemies; how much were it to be desired,
Madame, that none could perceive amongst us any backbytings, that the
impostures were banished, and the impostors received their recompense due to
their calumny; that hatreds were rooted out, and when any sinister report is
made, that each one suspended his judgment: and in a word, according to the
counsel of the Apostle, that all maintain inuiolably the band of Charity.

The Otacoustes and Prosagogides of this time are greatly to be feared: men
know also that your Majesty would willingly have such tongues receive their
recompense, of the ancient Quadruplators: but if they receive it not of me^,
they must expect it of the incuitable justice of him, that is the author,
protector, and at length remunerator of Innocence.

The Society most exposed to hatred.
Our little Society is amongst, and above all the religious families, the most
exposed to the hatred and calumny of them that will not take the pain to know
it: you know Madame how often the late King our good Master has favorably
defended it: and made it respected. You ca^ bear witness, and none better
then you, that wheresoever was that great Prince, there had we a King, a
Father, and a Protector: but alas he is here no more, that great Henry has
been violently taken away from us.

Oh France, the eye of Christendom, the rose of Empyres, the pearl of the
world, An Apostrophe to France.
how great is this thy loss? how horrible is this thy ship wrack? France the
favorite of heaven, the wellbeloued of God, who has taken from thee the mantle
of glory, which did cover thee? the Crown of honor which stood so high over
thy head? Who has so (oh chosen of God) who has so afflicted thee? But thou
our poor Society which did not subsist but by the benefit of that Monarch,
who has made thee so desolate? Who has abased thee so lamentably? who has
overwhelmed thee so miserably? The mischief is common to al, but it is in
singular manner proper to thee. The blow has strooken the whole body of the
kingdom, but it wounded thee almost to death: oh how true is it, and how
se^sibly do thou feel it, that the sorrow that can be expressed is not to be
called sorrow, and I which write these things, how just cause have I, yea more
then any other to let my self run into the accents of a doleful voice, and to
say, farewell the wonder of Kings, farewell the ornament of the world, our joy,
our glory, our honor; farwell the Father of the commonwealth, the restorer of
the State, the second fou^der and chief benefactor of our Society; farewell my
King, my Prince, my defe^der, you had given us in this vale of miseries the
repose that here could be had: rest you then in peace and remain for ever
amongst the lilies and the roses, free from the thornie care and solicitude of
this Monarchy: enjoy happily not earth but heaven: here you have been the
most eminent subject of the favor of god, be now there above, and for ever the
object of his mercyes; the Lawrells of this base earth were to much subject to
withering, your head expected others more fresh and flourishing: the victories,
the triumphs, the Empyres, which pertained to you here beneth, were to be
changed into a glory much more eminent; live then for ever enjoying that
possession so much desired: your happiness will make us breath, your absence
will make us sigh, and the place where we esteem you to be, will make us seek
after you: for relying upon the mercy of God, the woeful circumstances of your
decease have not deprived us of the hope to see you again in the shining
splendour of one common day, where we shall find the principal himself and all
the circumstances of this woeful divorce of ours: and during the irckesomenes
of this expectation, you, Madame, with the King his lively image will wipe away
some part of our tears, we will acknowledge his person in your persons, his
Crown in your Crowns, his Kingly authority in yours; and although all your
Subjects be obliged thereunto by all sort of duty, our Society being thereto
bound extraordinarily has given me charge to present before your Majesty the
most sincere vows of her fidelity, and the most affectioned offers of her
most humble service, the which (Madame) I do as willingly, as I can with
singular affection.

Your Majesty's most humble Servant, most obedient, and most faithful Subject,
PETER COTON of the Society of JESUS.

BY this letter is sufficiently laid open to the eyes of the whole world, the
iniquity of all those, that now a days are so desirous to find some kind of
fault or suspicion thereof in some one Jesuit or friend of theirs, thereby to
traduce and calumniate the body of the whole Order, although otherwise innocent
and wholly detesting the same, as if the will of the whole Order were
represented in the person of each one of them, no less then, in the person of
Adam only, was represented all mankind. The absurdity whereof is so manifest
that it requires not any further explication: for so scarce any community,
lineage, or ancient family should now be found in England, or France, or any
Country whatsoever, which has not often been ruined by one crime or other,
of true or false imputation, to some one of their body, contrary to that
indgement of God: Filius non portabit iniquitatem patris; and anima quae
peccauerit ipsamorietur.

This only was sufficient in that Catholic Country, not only to discover God
has turned this sla^der raised against the Society to the best.
the malignity and injustice of such farfetcht accusations, but also to obtain
for satisfaction of so public an injury public favor of the Prince, and
love of the people, with whose great applause the said Jesuits are now by
especial grace incorporated into the body of the University of Paris, and
begin to open their Schools, which may be accounted a very just remuneration:
seeing their first leaving of teaching came by a like fact of one man imputed
to their whole Order; although the same man was not so much as of their Order,
nor then, any of their scholars, but one that before in his life time had only
frequented their schools, chiefly because that it was found, that not only
they deserved not any such imputation for any fact or fault of theirs; but
contrariwise for their great affection and service, which always they showed
toward their King and Country, deserved all contrary commendations and favor
for that also besides their house wherein they dwelt before, besides the
College in which they began again to teach, they have begun to build the third
house for their Nouitiate, and that not only by the Princes grant, permitting
the same, but also with his own liberality allowing for the charges thereof.
This is the nature of virtue, the more to increase and flourish, the more it is
resisted and kept down.

Wherein it is to be observed, that although for defense of the Jesuits in
Paris, it sufficed (as by the fore said letter only The Society in fact and
doctrine as obsequious to Kings as any other Order.
it appears) that the opinion of Mariana was not the opinion of the Society:
which, as by the place there quoted, and by experience through the whole world
is evident, is, as much as any Order or Congregation may be, addicted to all
due obedience toward Magistrates, Princes and Kings; and do instruct their
scholars and hearers, and all that any ways depend on them, in the same
obedience, subjection, and reverence toward all sorts of Superiors, and
especially toward their Sovereigns. Yet that, which either for modesties sake
in defending themselves, or else for breuity in such a letter seemed best to the^
to omit, as not so much needful at that time (they having all the reason on
their side,) I thought good not to neglect, seeing it makes not a little more
for the full answer to yours about Jesuits and Catholic Doctrine; and this
is:

Mariana not resolute in the opinion for which he is condemned by the
Adversaries.
That Mariana himself, who by the adversaries was chosen amongst all the
Jesuits, as only guilty of that great trespass of killing of Kings, says
nothing but by manner of problem, examining the question pro and contra,
bringing the proofs of both parts: which being done, as he inclines more to
the one side then to the other, so does he not precisely determine any thing on
either, as absolutely true and certain, but as seeming to him more probable,
and therefore persuades not any man to follow one or the other opinion, but
contrariwise submits and offers himself ready to follow other men's better
judgment, and to thank them for it: his words being these, which every man
may read in the Author himself, Haec nostra sente^tia est, sincero animo certe
profecta, in qua falli possum vt humanus: si quis meliora attulerit, gratias
hab^am.

Mariana speaks only of Tyra^ts.
And this opinion that there Mariana does propose as indifferent, to be proved
or disproued by other men, what opinion is it? Is it of killing of Kings
whereof now the question is? Nothing less, he handles no such question* there
is no such doctrine in the Catholic Church. Whereof then speaks he in that
place? Of killing of Tyrants: for the which question the King of Spain to
whom the book was dedicated, and by whom it is both praised and privileged,
was never offended with the Author: nor yet Henry the IIII. late King of
France, as if such things had been written against them, they most worthily
thinking themselves far from any suspicion of Tyranny: for the which cause
also the Emperor Charles the fifth, was never angry with Soto, his
Confessarius, nor any other Kings have been offended with other Authors, who
heretofore have written an hundred times more, and more resolutely then
Mariana, in defense of the same opinion. Neither are they indeed to be esteemed
either true subjects, or wise men that find any fault with such men's writings,
as written against their Kings, thereby esteeming their own Kings Tyrants,
or such as worthily may fear to be taken for such.

Finally whereas Mariana about this Mariana his book and doctrine condemned for
hatred to the Society.
matter affirming the least of all men, is yet most of all, yea only amongst all
accused, and his writings therefore condemned and burnt with such severity and
rigor; it is manifest they could not be condemned for the doctrine they did
co^tayne, but for the Authors sake that wrote them: nor the Author himself so
injuriously used for his own sake, but for the coat he wears, and for the
badge of the name of Jesus, which both he and his book does carry. They are
enemies of that holy name, that condemned Mariana for any such Doctrine. They
are only the enemies of Jesuits, that so calumniously derived the crime from
one Mariana to all Jesuits. They are enemies to Catholic Religion that accuse
the Catholic Church of any such doctrine.

Satan the Author and Father of all Iyers and slanderers.
And hereby we may easily come to find the first offspring of all these
calumnies: the first and only author and teacher of all calumniators, is Satan
the head calumniator himself. Who knows not this ancient fraud and
accustomed fetch of that common enemy both of God, and all mankind, who has no
more potent means to resist the honor of God, to oppress his servants, and
hinder the progress of true virtue and religion, then to bring all good men,
as opposite to him, and his endeauours, into suspicion with Kings, and
Emperors, calling them in question for matters of State? So did he use Aman in
the old Testament as an instrument to bring into disgrace with King Assuerus
the people of God, dispersed throughout his Provinces, slaundering them for
seditious and contrary to the laws of his Realm. So Daniel was cast into the
Lions den, because he had done against the laws of the Medes and Persians,
forsooth he served and adored God almighty, whom they acknowledged not for
God. Likewise Antiochus held all for traitors, and An ancient devise to draw
matters of religion into crims of State.
violators of his Law, whosoever under his Dominions kept and observed the law
of God. Samuel therefore had good cause when he was sent of God to anoint for
King, David the son of Iesse, to be afraid that Saul would kill him, as
guilty of treason against his Crown, who already had the possession thereof,
and who afterward being possessed with a Devil sought continually to make away
David, although a true servant of God, and him, only under pretense of state.

Examples in the new testament
And in the new Testament what other means had the Devil to batter the
Gospel, and oppugn our Savior him self, then by the Jews, as his
instruments to accuse him before Pontius Pilate, to call him in question of
state, as seditious, and forbidding to pay tribute to Caesar, and calling
himself King; the which bare accusation without any proof is of such nature,
so potent, and so odious amongst worldly men, that be the fact never so false,
whereof a man is so accused it suffices to discredit and opresse him, be he
never so innocent, as may appear Our Savior called into question for matter
of state against the Emperor, and condemned for the same.
by that example of Christ our Savior, who was the most innocent of all men,
yea innocence it self. For although Pilate seeing him guiltless, endeavored
to deliver him: yet the malicious redoubling that accusation, and therewith
threatening Pilate himself, saying if thou let him go, thou art not a friend to
Caesar, they so terrified him with the only name of Caesar, that straight he let
himself be carried away, to the greatest act of injustice that was committed
since the world began. Wherein the Devil having had so good success, as to
have condemned Christ, and put to death the Author of life (but yet so, that in
fine all fell upon his own head, our Savior thereby being exalted in glory,
and all mankind delivered from the Devils tyranny) has still continued by the
same way, as most assured and effectual to persecute all Gods servants, and
true followers of Christ.

And therefore the Apostles following straight after, were forced also against
such calumnies openly to teach and command Christians to obey their Soueraigns,
and magistrates, to pray for them, to render them tribute to whom tribute
appertains, and honor to whom honor. After the Apostles the ancient
Doctors of the Church were also forced often to employ their pens, and show
that true Christians were not enemies of Emperors, but did offer sacrifices
for their state and prosperity: and yet because those Emperors, as worldly
and wicked men, preferred the least thought of their own estate before the
greatest reasons that might be alleged for the defense of innocence, always
such calumnies have prevailed, as first against the head himself, so after
against his members and followers.

Gods severe punishment upon unjust judges.
Although at length by the almighty power of God, truth has always had the
victory, and the Devil together with his instruments have been confounded. As
is notorious first in the old Testament by Aman, by the enemies of Daniel, by
Saul, and Antiochus their deaths: and in the new, by Pilate who died in
banishment, and by the whole nation of the Jews, who were first so miserably
destroyed by Titus and Vespasians army, and have always since remained as
vagabonds upon the face of the earth. Afterward what miserable deaths have
befallen all those Emperors that by such unjust ways have persecuted the
Church of God, under color of state, it were too long here to rehearse: it
will shortly come to your view fully set down in the second part of a learned
Treatise concerning Policy and Religion. So that allwaies they have been
inexcusable before God and man, who have concurred by power of Princes, to the
oppressing of good men, under the calumnious pretext of dealing in State
matters.

Heresies have first spro^g up in our days by rebellion.
But most inexcusable in this our days, is this calumniation objected by
Heretics to the Catholics, and Catholic doctrine, it being on the contrary
side proper to Heretics to impugn their Princes, and to Heretical doctrine
to maintain it as lawful, yea the only means whereby heresies have sprung up,
and Heretics first entered into the world, have been their rebellions against
their Magistrates, their lawful Kings, and Princes. The reason whereof is
manifest; Heresy being of her own nature a separation and division from the
body of the Catholic Religion, and therefore must needs begin with rebelling
against the Catholic Church, and consequently against their Catholic Kings
and Sovereign Princes. But the experience hereof is much more manifest: for as
Luthers, Zuinglius, Caluins, and all other heretics beginning of innovation,
came by teaching all their followers, that Princes may be restrained by force,
pursued, judged, and punished by the people, excommunicated, deprived, deposed,
and cast into hell by the Ministers, condemned and put to death by inferior
Magistrates, whenever in their opinion, they become Tyrants, and opposite to
the Gospel, as writes the Author of the book of Dangerous positio^s, in his
fourth and fifth chapter, and the Author of the Survey of pretended discipline.
Their practice of the foresaid doctrine has been too too well known through
the whole world.

The practice of Protestants in matters of rebellion.
For first in Germany, Luthers followers incited by such doctrine of his, took
arms and rebelled with such violent headines throughout all that Country
against their own Prince, that, as Sl^ydan a Protestant Author affirms, at
that only time besides the euersion of infinite numbers of fortresses, and
Castles, above an hundred and thirty thousand people were slain. And
afterward the followers of Luther dividing themselves into different sects of
Luther anisme, Zuinglianisme, Caluinianisme, Anabaptisme, new Arianisme, and
the like, with each of them followed every where new rebellions against their
Princes: as you may see, which way soever you look, either toward the North,
where you shall find fresh memory of their rebellions in Saxony, Denmark,
Sueueland, Polonia, and Transiluania: or toward the South in Zwitzerland,
Grisons, Sauoy, and their Confines, where Zuinglius himself in the Cantons of
Switzerland his own country was the chief stirrer of rebellion, and was
slain himself in the field. And at Geneua, Calvin, Beza and other Ministers
incited the Subjects against the Duke of Sauoy, and other their natural
Princes.

Toward the East the Heretics joined their forces with the Turk himself,
against the Emperor their Sovereign: and so Boscaine that famous Caluinian
Rebel, forced the said Emperor to leave him for his life time the Princedome
of Transiluania. Toward the west, to wit in France through the which I have
travailed some time, and there have spent some years of my age, I have seen
in all places where I have been, such pitiful ruins of Towns, and
Fortresses, and have heard recounted such Barbarous, yea rather Beast-like
cruelties committed in their rebellions, that the only memory thereof suffices
every where for a perpetual infamy and confusion of those that are there of
the pretended reformed religion.

In Flanders also, what part thereof has been free from the like ruins, and
massakcres effectuated by the^ that there rebelled against their natural
Sovereign, of whom as yet remains one part in Holland and Zeland? in
Scotland what seditious rebellious were stirred up first against the noble
Queen Marie Regent of Scotland, Grandmother to our Sovereign that now
reigns, by those stirring Ministers, Knox, Goodman, Dowglasse and others: and
afterward against Queen Marie Regna^t, Mother of our Soueraign by the Lords of
the Congregation as they called themselves, indeed Heretical rebels, with
direction of their Ministers, assisting them in person and all according to the
rules of their Ghospel, that is of Heresy, whose substance and nature is, as
before is said, to be of it self a rebellion against the Catholic Religion,
and Catholic Kings, and Princes. And to conclude with England, we have seen
that in five years time, or therabout of the Catholic reign of Queen Marie,
were broached and set on foot more Rebellions by proportion, then in forty
years of her Protestant Sister Queen Elizabeth next following her.

And this is the cause why in these Countries Rebellious doctrine proper unto
Protestants, and condemned by Catholics.
wise men discoursing of this matter, esteemed it a most ridiculous thing that
Luthera^s or Caluinists or any other Heretics should object to the Catholic
Church the doctrine of rebellion, and killing of their Kings and Princes, which
is a thing so contrary to al Catholic Religion, and so natural to heresy it
self as appears by the Counsel of Constance Sess. 15. where they are
condemned for heretics that do obstinatly hold any such propositions: that
every Tyra^t ought to be killed: and that he may be killed both lawfully and
meritorously, by any vassell or subject of his: and that by any deceiptfulnes,
or subtilitie: notwithstanding any oath or agreement made to the contrary: and
that without any sentence or judgment. These were the propositio^s of Wickliffe
then condemned by that Catholic Council: these are the propositio^s of the
heretics of our time, Luther, Calvin, Beza, Buchanan, and others their
companions, and by the^ most injuriously restrained in particular to the
Princes the^ living, as namely to Charles the 9. King of France, yea to the Q.
Mother and al her whelps, as they termed the^, that is, all her honorable
Children, the said King Charles with all his brethren: likewise Q. Mary of
England, and other Princes of Germany: which doctrine, and practice of the
heretics of our time, is condemned by the doctrine and practice of the
Catholic Church at this time: so that the heretics obiecting to Catholics
any such doctrine or practices, do but use the way of prevention, like naughty
women who knowing what is to be objected to them, will first of all in
scoulding object it to others.

And here coming to make an end of my Letter, I have thought good to ad one
thing in steed of news, and in few words let you understand, what is the What
strangers do judge and speak of the oath of allegia^ce and the proposing
thereof*
judgment here about the Oath that you call of Allegia^ce, the rumor whereof is
now spread through the whole world, and many books are abroad about that
subject: the wisest sort of men here, leaving a fide their judgments about
the questions themselves set down in that oath, to wit about the Kings
lawful right and title to the Crown, and of other foreign Princes
authority, as they say: leaving I say the discussing of them aside, they do
much disprove the only proposing thereof to subjects, to be by them confirmed by
oath. For say they, a King already in peaceable possession of his Crown, should
no more propose to his subjects the discussion of his rights and titles, for
that no man of any conscience can swear any such thing whithout perfect
examination, trial, and knowledge thereof, by the which he may be sure in
Conscience of swearing truly, and so the subjects are forced to enter into
diverse considerations of many circumstances which were more convenient for the^
to believe, the^ to examine, being such oftentimes that learned Lawiers coming
to discuss the^, are so doubtful, that neither they, nor the Princes the^selus
will be so bold to swear them; being content to remain in Lawful possession
against any pretender that shall oppose himself. Yea if by any such occasion
of question made about any such right, or title, war should chance to be
waged, the subjects are to believe their Princes and Countries cause to be
just, and may without any prejudice of their salvation, yea are bound to shed
their blood in such a cause: yet are not they bound, nor the Prince himself,
to take an oath, that his cause is just; and therefore it were great imprudency
for a Prince in such a cause, to tender such an oath to his soldiers: for so
he should find his companies much diminished, and thereof would follow that
evident absurdity, that if the soldiers of each side should swear their own
Kings cause to be just, all the soldiers of one side must needs be
forsworn, it being as Deuines do hold, impossible, that any wars should be
just on both sides, no more then in law that each part should have truth and
justice on his side, because that such questions that either by war, or by
Law are to be decided, do always consist in a contradiction, by affirming,
and denying one and the same thing: and by such oaths, as the one side must
always needs be forsworn, so the other must needs do ill in swearing
rashly such doubtful things.

The discussing of the Popes Authority not convenient.
Much less is it thought convenient to propose to subjects the examining of
the power and right of any foreign King, or of the Authority of the Pope
himself above Kings and Princes, not only for the same reasons, but also
because thereby many learned men which before were quiet, and without any
question yealded obedience to the prince, are not only forced openly to refuse
such an Oath pertaining to faith, about the Authority of Christ his Vicar upon
earth, but also openly to profess the contrary, both by word and writing.

Forced swearing more hurtful then profitable.
And such sort of Oaths that are taken by force, with doubt of mind, and
scruple of conscience, do rather hurt then good, even to that end to the which
they are given. For whenever any occasion should happen of showing their love
and affection toward their Prince, they would always be found most backward
that have been so injuriously forced to take such Oaths against their will, and
peradventure would dispense with themselves for the performance of them, as
unjustly exacted, and rashly made: and they would always be found most
faithfully in keeping all loyalty toward their Prince, who do offer themselves
most ready to swear the same, and do plainly refuse to swear any more. For
as this, they do refuse for their duty toward God: so that, they will perform
for their duty toward their King, and toward God that gave them him: Quia
omnis potestas a Deo est: and this is according to our Saviors prescript,
Reddere Matt. 22*
quae sunt Caesaris Caesari, and quae sunt Dei Deo.

This only all wise men in these parts do agree upon, wherein I assure my self
no man with you of any wisdom, will any way contradict, that every subject is
bound in Conscience to obey his lawful Prince, and that also to promise by
Oath when it shall be exacted. And such an Oath although in other Realms through
the whole world is not wont to be exacted of all subjects, but only of the
Magistrates and Governors of others; yet such occasion may fall out, that it
may stand with prudence to tender it to every one in particular: and such an
Oath of obedience toward his Prince and Sovereign, no good Catholic will
refuse, nor Catholic Doctrine does disallow.

Yours ever T. A.


