THE FIFTH LAMP of VIRGINITY: Containing sundry forms of christian prayers
and meditations, to be used only of and for all sorts and degrees of women,
in their several ages and callings; as namely, of Virgins, Wives, Women with
child, Midwiues, Mothers, Daughters, Mis^resses, Maids, Widows, and old women.

A Treatise very needful for this time, and profitable to the Church: now
newly compiled to the glory of God, and comfort of al godly women, by the
said T.B. Gentleman.

Matthew. 26. verse 46. Watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation: the
spirit is ready, but the flesh is weak.

Imprinted at London by H. Denham, dwelling in Pater noster Row, at the sign
of the Star, being the assign of William Seres. 1582

Christian prayers and meditations, to be used of and for all sorts and degrees
of women, in their several ages and callings.
A prayer for silence, shamefastnes, and chastity.
THERE is nothing that becomes a maid better than sobernes, silence,
shamefastnes, and chastity, both of body and mind. For these things being
once lost, she is no more a maid, but a stru^pet in the sight of God, howsoever
she disguiseth her self, and dissembleth with the world. I therefore most
humbly beseech thee, O merciful Father, from whom comes every good and
perfect gift, and without whom, we are not able to do any thing: that thou will so order my tongue, and dispose my talk, that I speak nothing, but that
becomes my state, age, and person; neither that I delight to hear any
talk, that might in any point move me to lewdnes or lightness, seeing that
evil words corrupt good manners. Give me also such shamefastnes, as may pluck
me away from the delectation, either of thinking, speaking, hearing, seeing,
or doing evil; that my whole delight may be in virtue, in godliness, in
eschewing idleness, in giving my self continually to some godly exercise; but
above all things, in thinking and speaking of thee, in reading thy blessed word
and heavenly law, which is a lantern to my feet, and a light to my paths.

Moreover, suffer neither my mind to be defiled with ^uill thoughts, nor my
body to be corrupted with any kind of uncleanness; but give me grace so to
order my self in eschewing idleness, and wanton wicked company, that my mind
being free from evil affects, and my body clear from all uncleanness; I may
be found a meet temple for the holy Ghost to inhabit. And if it be thy good
pleasure hereafter to call me unto the honorable state of matrimony, that I
may bring also unto mine husband, a pure and undefiled body, and so live with
him in thy fear, unto the praise and glory of thy blessed name,

Amen.
A prayer to be said of single women against all evil behavior, vice, and
vanity, and for the obtaining of modesty, chastity, and all maidenlie
virtues.
Almighty and everliving GOD, which art of a pure, chaste, unspotted, and
eternal essence: chaste minds please thee, and godly conversation thou likest
well. Wherefore I beseech thee, create in me a clean heart, O Lord, and keep
me from unclean cogitations, harlotrie, whooredome, and all impuritie. Take
from me a wanton eye, and let me not gaze upon the beauti^ or comlie personage
of any man, least I be taken in his snares; but give me grace to shun ill
company, least I come to shame and reproach. Turn away mine eyes, I say,
good Lord, from beholding a beautiful man, and keep me from immodest, wanton,
and effeminate persons, whose delight is all the day long in chambering and
wantonness, in excess of wine, vain pleasures, and all manner of wickedness and
riot. As for many idle words, much babbling, filthy speech, and scurillitie,
let them be so far from mine heart, that they never come once into my mouth or
lips. Preserve me, O Lord, and keep me from all the snares of Satan, from all
allurements, intisements, prouocations, and occasions of sin, and transgressing
thy most holy commandments; as namely, from pride, nicenes, sloth, and
idleness; from pranking, pricking, pointing, painting, frisling, and decking of
my self to appear piked, feate, gorgious, and gaie in the eyes of men: from
taking too much liberty to gad abroad to see and to be seen, or to prance in
pride arrogantlie; from haunting evil company, and resorting to bankets,
weddings, idle games, heathenish sports, and dissolute plays, and pastimes,
vain pleasures, and filthy dalliance and dansings, the extreme of all vices:
finally, from all envy, arrogancy, ambition, impudency, piertnes, boldness,
rashness, unshamefastness, dissolute laughing, excessive feeding, retchlesnes,
dissolutenes, deliciousnes, wantonness, lightness, inconstancy, curiosity, and
from all other evil behavior, vice, and vanity, good Lord, for thine holy
name sake deliver me: least of a member of Christ, I prove a member of the
devil, by following the works of the flesh, and loosing that inestimable
treasure of great price, mine honesty, chastity, and virginity.

Oh let me not, I beseech thee, with Dinah, Dalida, Salomen, and such like
dansing damsels, become equal with the ungodly, by plaieng the foolish
virgin, as they did, and in living ungodly or dishonestlie, to the shame and
great grief of my friends, and to mine own infamy, destruction, and
damnation: but grant, O good and gracious God, that both inwardly with a pure
conscience, clean soul, chaste heart, and unpolluted mind: and outwardly with
an unspotted body, holy vessel, and undefiled members, after the good
example of Sara, Rebecca,, Ruth, Judith, Susanna, the virgin Marie, and such
other godly women, I may Christianlie serve, worship, and glorify thee in
true faith, fear, and love, and in perfect chastity, shamefastnes, sobernes,
demure^es, modesty, measure, thriftinesse, scarsitie, diligence in house, care
of devotion, meeknes, holiness, purity, and all other virtues bodily and
ghostly: that when the celestial bridegroom, my Savior Jesus comes, I
having my Lamp replenished with oil, may with those five wise virgins be
found ready even at midnight to meet the bridegroom, and happily enter with
him to the wedding, there with thine elect virgins to taste of all the good
fatnes of the pleasures of paradise.

And if it shall please thee hereafter to prepare me for an husband, and to
call me unto the holy state of honorable marriage: assist me, I beseech
thee, that in thy fear, with honesty of body and good fame, not of
curiosity, or incontinencie, nor through sinister practice and privy
contracts; but with chaste and holy love, with continual prayer and lawful
means, and that with the consent and agreement of parents and friends on both
sides first carefully obtained, I may (even before the flower of mine age be
past, if it be thy will) enter thereinto, and be presented of them as a pure
virgin to Christ, especially considering that thou have therefore ordained
that state of life, that the virgin, which has not the gift of single life,
feeling her infirmity, and to avoid fornication, might marry, and take an
husband in the Lord: as also that mankind in chaste wedlock may be multiplied,
and that an holy Church (which both in this world, and for ever shall praise
thee) might be gathered and chosen.

And forasmuch, O Lord, as a prudent, a wise, and a godly man comes from
thee, and is thy gift; who only triest the hearts and reins, and know the
very secret cogitations and conditions of all men: provide I beseech thee, and
give me unto a man of understanding, of sound and Christian religion, of wise
government and behavior; of a good life and virtuous disposition: even such
an husband, I say, as may be faithful, constant, gentle, honest, tender, and
loving unto me; and godly, zealous, sincere and religious in thy sight: but
from an unwise, irreligious, unfaithful, and wavering minded man, from an
hasty, testie, rash, heddie, furious, bitter, angry, unthrifty and covetous
husband, good Lord for thy holy name sake deliver me; and grant, that
obteining at thy fatherly hands a good husband, even according to mine (or
rather thine) own heart, and being holilie coupled together in Christian love
and purity, we may both live together virtuously and quietly in thy fear,
without sin or shame, and also die in a good age godly and Christianlie in
thy faith, without eternal death and condemnation, through Jesus Christ our
Lord,

Amen.
Another.
LOrd, thou have commanded by thine holy Apostle, that we should abstain
from fornication, and that every one of us should know how to keep our
vessel (that is our body) in holiness, chastity, and honor, and not in the
lusts of concupiscence and uncleanness, as do the heathen which know not God.
I beseech thee give me grace to behave my self according to this thy holy
commandment, that in this my single life and state of virginity, I defile not
my body with whoredom, adultery, fornication, or with any other filthiness
and uncleanness; but so order my self with all honesty, sobriety,
chastity, and pureness of life, that I may glorify thee my Lord God, both in
soul and body,

Amen.
Or pray thus:
ALbeit, most merciful Father, marriage is honorable among all persons, and
the bed undefiled; yet forasmuch as partly for the tenderness of mine age, I
am not apt for holy wedlock, and partly through thine exceeding and above
natural gift (for none can live chaste, except thou give her that gift) I live
yet free from the sweet yoke of Matrimony, I heartily pray thee, that as I
have received of thee the gift of continency and virginity, so I may have
grace from thee to bridle my self from lusts, and from all foolish appetits:
and to frame my life in all godly and virtuous exercises both of the body and
mind: yea so go forth I pray thee to continue and increase this thy gift of
chastity in me, that I may the more freely and quietly in all godly
patience and sufferance serve thee, and care for those things that please thee
and pertain to thy glory; and also that I passing over the time of this my
young age in thy fear, in godly travels, virtuous labors, and maidenlie
behavior, may eschew all evil lusts, riotous resorts, and wanton company:
that when it shall please thee to call me to the holy and honorable order of
blessed wedlock, I may bring with me a clean, chaste, and undefiled body,
and so be apt and fit to live in that godly state of Matrimony, avoiding all
fornication, whoredom, and uncleanness, all dissension, strife, and debate,
that thou may bless me and my marriage; prosper my godly travels; send me
good success in all my doings, and make me a ioifull mother in seeing my
childers children, according to thy holy promise, which live and reignest
very God, world without end,

Amen.
For the grace of Gods holy spirit, to resist all sinful motions, and keep
pure the state of single life, pray.
OH Lord the king of glory, and God of all power and might, which have
promised to power thy spirit upon all flesh, upon virgins, maidens, and young
women, and to give the holy Ghost to thy children, whenever they shall ask
the same of thee in thy Sons name in their prayers: and allowest none to be
pure virgins and thy children indeed, but such as keep themselves unspotted
of the world, and walk before thee in the rule of thy laws, and obedience of
thy commandments. Oh Lord, thou know I would feign walk with thee from my
virginity, in righteousness and holiness. My desire is to walk before thee
in a pure conscience, chaste mind, and undefiled body. But alas, dear God, I
confess the corruption of my nature, polluted in the first woman Eve in
Paradise, is such; and my weakness and unableness to stand in temptation is
so much, and the custom of sin has gotten such dominion over me, that I am
not able of my self so much as to think a good thought, much less to do
any thing that is good and acceptable in thy sight. Wherefore, oh most loving
Father, take not thy grace and holy spirit from me thine handmaid; leave me
not to my self, neither forsake me, for then I am utterly ^ast away. For
thou see, O Lord, that if thou do but shadow thy self a little, and depart
from me, into how many grievous and horrible sins I fall; how much more
then, Lord, if thou should utterly forsake me, leave me to my self, and
take thy grace and holy spirit utterly from me? Therefore, oh most intreatable
God, I beseech thee consider my manifold imperfections, womanly weaknesses,
and miserable corruptions, which daily turn me out of the way, and draw me
from thee, and power down thy grace and holy spirit plentifully upon me
thine humble handmaid. Yea give unto me also thy most holy word, thy patience,
love, meekness, integrity, righteousness, justice, temperaunce, sobriety,
chastity, peace, long-suffering, faith, goodness, holiness, and all other
thy virtues, fruits of the spirit, and ordinary means, whereby I may be so
instructed, taught, and guided, governed, protected and defended in this my
single life and state of virginity, that I never offend against thy divine
Majesty, or mine own soul and b^ die, but that I may have power and strength
from thee continually to stand against all the secret assaults and open
temptations of mine enemies, both bodily and ghostly: yea grant, O dear
Father, that I may through thy mighty power working in my weak vessel, have
continual victory over all hellish hagges, and also triumph over them in all
their assaults and temptations, as many holy virgins and women have done in
all ages, so that together with them I may walk before thee in the pureness
of my virginity, with a good conscience, in perfect righteousness and true
holiness acceptable in thy sight, all the days of my life, according to thy
will, through Jesus Christ our Lord and only Savior and redeemer, So be it.

Another prayer in the behalf of all Virgins, or single women, for the keeping
of obedience, modesty, chastity, purity, and cleanness of living.
O Divine spirit, God the holy Ghost, which abhorrest, despisest, and fliest
from all uncleanness, filthiness and dishonestie; and which dooest
contrariwise both rejoice, and have great delight and pleasure to be resident,
and dwell in chaste, pure, clean, and virginal minds: I thine humble
handmaid meekelie beseech thee, both for my self, and all other virgins and
maidens, that as through thy benignity and gentleness, we bear and carry
about in this our weak, frail, and earthen vessels, the same most excellent
and notable treasure; so through thy goodness and favor we may keep and
preserve it safe and whole, unpolluted or defiled any manner of ways as we
ought. Make us gladly to reverence our elders, and by the good motherlie
admonitions and sincere honesty of the best and most godly women, to
institute, frame, and order our trade of living. Cause us also to bridle our
lusts and appetites, and continually to exercise our selves with labor both
of body and mind, in patience and sufferance, that we may be apt and fit both
for maidenlie and hus^ifelie affairs. Let us not give our selves to much
idleness, deintie fare, evil company, and dissolute pastime; and in all the
recreation of our spirits, let us beware of intemperancie and lightness, and
always use reverence, shamefastness, and modesty. Take from us, O God, all
niceness, wantonness, prodigality, and lasciviousness, especially in the
presence of our elders. Let us ever both in time and place remember our selves
to be women, and not beasts, yea young women, and not babes, and therefore to
take heed that our manners and conditions exceed the manners and properties
both of beasts and of babes: neither let us think our selves women or matrones
wise enough of our selves to teach our selves; but being free from all
selfe-weening, self-love, and presumption, let us rather know that we lack
as yet many instructions and godly lessons; and give us grace to learn them
at their hands, whomethou do appoint over us to govern and teach us, that
so we daily more and more pleasing thee with pure hearts and undefiled bodies,
may with those wise virgins, come unto that blessed life which knows no
corruption, in the which thou, together with the Father, and his Son my
loving Spouse, and heavenly Bridegroom, live and reignest one immortal and
invisible God, blessed and praised for ever and ever,

Amen.
Another prayer to the same effect.
MOst sweet Lord Jesus Christ my heavenly spouse, which art the glory of the
Father, and the brightness of the everlasting light, I thine unworthy
handmaid, beseech thee for thine incomprehensible divine Majesty, that thou will give unto me a godly preparation of mind, purity of heart, simplicity of
spirit, and cleanness and chastity of body. Oh kill I beseech thee sweet
Jesus, and utterly extinguish in me all inordinate lusts; pull out, and pluck
up by the roots what vice soever is in me, and take quite away whatsoever
displeases thee in me. So rule, temper, and dispose all both mine outward and
inward senses, as also all the force and powers of my mind, that through thy
grace I may refrain, preserve, and keep my self from all unjust, and
naughty works, from all evil cogitations and thoughts, from all wicked and
perverse purposes, wills, intents, and affections, which fight against thy
holy and blessed commandments. Grant moreover, that I may love thee above all
things; that nothing may delight or please me but thou alone; that I may seek,
will, desire, and covet nothing that is contrary and repugnant to thy
heavenly will, and good pleasure. Finally, grant O most gentle Jesus, that
here in this world, I may so godly live, and virtuously behave my self both
in this my single life, and afterward, that in the last day of my life I may
be found ready with the wise virgins, pure, holy, clean, and undefiled, and
so through thee the celestial Bridegroom most happily enter, and be carried
into the celestial country of ioies eternal,

Amen.
A prayer to be said for all virgins and maids generally.
O GOD, the former of our bodies, and the inspirer of our souls, which never
despisest any age; reiectest no sex; nor esteemest any estate or condition
unworthy of thy grace; but art the Creator and redeemer of all: defend with
the shield of thy protection all those thy servants and handmaids, whom it has
pleased thee to indue with the gift of continency, and virginity; that they,
which yet be free from the sweet yoke of matrimony, by the help of thy grace
subduing all sinful motions and concupiscences of the flesh, and being given
to all good works, and holy exercises both of the body and mind, may be
vnseparablie united to the love and obedience of thy Son their spouse, Lord,
and Savior Jesus Christ, We beseech thee also, O Lord, minister and give thou
unto them weapons of defense, not carnal, but spiritual, that thou governing
both their members and senses, sin and wickedness may never be able to bear
rule in them, nor prevail against their bodies or souls; and that they alwaie
living in thy fear, grace, and favor, Satan the friend to the bad, and so to
the good, may not be so bold to claim them as his, whose vessels thou have
consecrated, to glorify thy name in purity of life. O let the dew and
moisture of thy heavenly grace quench and assuage their natural heat: and
let the fire of perpetual chastity inflame their hearts and minds. Let not
their modest and shamefast faces be blotted with any reproach, neither let
security or negligence at any time be hurtful unto them. Take from them all
occasions of offense, and suffer them not to endure any open infamy; but let
there be in them a wary chastity, adorned and inarmed with a lively faith,
firm hope, and sincere charity, that their minds by thy gift being thus
prepared to continency, their virtue by the power of thy grace may be of force
to encounter with the suggestions of Satan, and vanquish all his mighty
assaults, and that by despising things present and transitory, they may ever
follow with desire, and at the last obtain the ioies to come. Finally, make
them, O Lord, always to prefer abstinence and temperance before banketing or
bellie-cheere, and cause them to give themselves to the reading of holy
scripture, to divine contemplations, and meditations, before feasting,
wantonness, and excess or riot; that being fed with praieng, filled with
instruction, and illuminated with watchings and holy exercises, they may
purelie perform and fulfill the office of true virginity, in this their state
of single life, and become meet spouses for the bridegroom. And lastly
grant, O gracious God, that thou thus defending and shielding these thy
servants both externallie and internallie with the spiritual weapons of thy
grace and holy virtues; they, and every of them, may be well able to pass
through the pikes of Satan's host, and run their race in all holiness, purity,
and honesty, without any offense to thee or the world, to the confusion of
Satan, and the exaltation of thy glory, through the same Lord Jesus Christ
their everlasting spouse, and our most blessed redeemer: to whom with thee, O
Father, and the holy Ghost, be all praise, honor and glory, for ever and
ever, Amen.

Of Uirginitie, read more in the beginning of the sixth Lamp,

A lamentation of any woman, virgin, wife, or widow, for her virginity or
chastity, lost by fornication or adultery: not unapt also to be used of any
Christian sinner, or sinful soul adulterated and fallen away by sin from
her spiritual spouse Christ Jesus.
CAP. I.
IN the bitter affliction, grief of mind, and torment of conscience, I go
about to speak unto him that sits upon the tribunal seat, accompanied with
the Saints in heaven. And how can I speak, when as the tongue is tied, and the
lips dare not once move or wag? The tongue does not his office; the throat is
dammed up; all the senses and instruments are polluted with iniquity: but I
will proceed on, and first I will fall to the ground on my knees, and make mine
humble supplication unto the blessed spirit, that he will help me seely
wretch, which dare not, by reason of the horror and superfluity of my sin,
crave ought at the hands of God. Yea, and I beseech you also, O ye Saints,
both holy men and women of God, living here, with watrish eyes and wet cheeks
soken in dolor and pain, to fall down before the mercie-seate of God, to
entreat and make intercession for me miserable sinner.

Woe is me, because of the sorrow of mine heart! Woe is me, that my soul is thus
afflicted! Woe is me, that am compassed thus on every side, and shut up in my
sin, and that there is no health in me! Woe is me, O mother, that ever thou
broughtest me forth a righteous woman to be conversant in unrighteousness; for
a religious woman to fall into extreme impiety; an heir of the kingdom of
God, but now an inheritour of the kingdom of the devil! Woe is me, O mother,
which broughtest me forth a perfect Christian; yet a wretch found walowing in
all impiety: a virgin beautified with honor and dignity; yet in the end
blemished with shame and ignomi^^^: a woman beset with many evils, and choked
up with infamous doings! Woe is me, O mother, which broughtest me forth, as an
high and lofty turret, yet suddenly turned down to the ground; as a
fruitful tree, yet quickly withered; as a burning lamp, yet forthwith
quenched; as a running fountain, yet by and by dried up. Woe is me, that ever I
was bedecked with all gifts and graces, and now seem pitifully deprived of
all.

But who will minister moisture unto the temples of my head? And who will give
streams of tears unto mine eyes, that I may bewail my self in this my
sorrowful plight? Alas, O chastity, how shall I bewail thee? Alas, O
virginity, how shall I lament thee? O all you my friends and kindred, tender
my case, pity my person, in that I am dangerously wounded. Pity me, O all ye
my friends and kindred, in that I am now become an abject person. Pity me, O
ye my friends, in that I am now with sorrow come to naught. Pity me, O ye my
friends, in that I have now trodden under foot the seal and cognizance of my
profession, and joined in league with the devil. Pity me, O ye my friends, in
that I am rejected and cast away from the face of God and man: it is for my
lewd life, that I am thus polluted and noted with open shame. Bewail me whom
the Angels have bewailed; bewail me whom all the Saints have bewailed;
bewail me whom every woman has bewailed. Bewail me O all ye virgins and
women under heaven, in that I am fallen from my glory, and have so wilfully
quenched the lamp of pure virginity. The Lord made and ingraffed me a
fruitful vine, but in steed of pleasant clustred grapes, I brought forth
pricking thorns; therefore bewail me also, for that in steed of grapes I
brought forth brambles. But let the welspring of tears be stirred up, and let
my cheeks be watered; let them flow upon the earth, and moisten it, for I am
soken in sin, and borne in mine iniquities. I see my virginity lament over
me. I see all joy sorowing for me. I see the spider over my seat building
with cobweb, by reason of mine absence. I see and behold my self all sorrowful
and pensive. Every creature sorroweth at my case: for I was wont heretofore
to power out praises unto God for them all. Alas, what have I felt? and how am
I fallen? Alas how am I thus come to naught? There is no sorrow comparable to
my sorrow; there is no affliction that exceeds my affliction; there is no
bitterness that passes my bitterness; there is no lamentation more
lamentable than mine; neither is there sin greater than my sin, and there
is no salve for me.

CAP. II.
WHere is that good shepherd of the souls? Where is he that went down from
Jerusalem to Jericho, which also salued and cured him that was wounded of the
Jews? Where is he that came from Judea to the City Sichem in Samaria, which
also there lively touched the woman of Samaria with her faults, and yet gave
her drink of his spiritual grace and life, to her and others conversion?
Where is he that in the Temple so mercifully delivered her that was taken in
adultery, and would not suffer her to be condemned to death as she had
deserved? Where is he, I say, that healed the sinful sinner Marie Magdalen, by
casting out of her seven Devils, and forgiving her many sins, because she
loved much, to her perpetual fame and glory? Seek me out also, O Lord, and
cure my wounds; deliver me from my deserved condemnation: heal me, O God, have
mercy upon me, and forgive me all my sins, which am fallen from the higher
Jerusalem; which have broken the vow I made in my baptism; which have
profaned my cognizance, and polluted the holy temple my body, in that I have
dealt too injuriously with thy blessed name. Alas that ever I was seduced;
alas that ever I fell against thy will and commandment. What shall I say? Or
what shall I do most wretched caitife that I am? I being defolate of so great
comfort, am vexed with sorrow for very grief of heart, that I am cast out from
the sight of thine eyes. Woe be unto me, from how great goodness, into how
great mischief am I fallen? Whether purposed I to go, and whither am I come?
Where am I, and where am I not? Whom did I study to attei^e unto, and what
evils have I obtained? I went about to lighten others, and behold I have
darkened my self. I endeavored to bring others from death to life; but alas, I
have brought my self from life to death. I that minded to present others before
God, have presented my self before the Devil. I that desired to be found a
friend, and a favorer of godliness and chastity, am found a fo, and a
furtherer of uncleanness and iniquity. I that should have set my self
against the assemblies of the wicked, and reproved their lewd doings, have now
found shame and the most pestilent wound of the Devil amongst the ungodly. I
that should have allured others to the knowledge of the Son of God, am now
become ignorant and unskillful in the diverse slaights of Satan, which
commonly entrap men and women.

Wherefore after much alluring and sifting, they promised me (unhappy woman)
crafty conueiances to avoid the subtlety of Satan; but afterward, the Devil
in the same night transformed into an Angel of light, reasoned with me,
saying, When thou art alone, get thee up, and go unto them, and if in case they
persuade or entise thee, then condescend, and harken unto them, do it, and
cease not, neither stagger thou at the matter, till they be satisfied. And
again, the Devil going before to prepare the way, whetted their wits to
devise mischief against me seely wretch: he sowed in their minds adultery,
fornication, dissimulation, and deceit; but I, oh unhappy creature, skipping
out of my bed at the dawning of the day, could not finish my woonted devotion,
neither accomplish my usual prayer and christian exercises, but following too
much mine own fleshly affections, folded and wrapped my self in the snares
of the Devil. I got me unto the bed of the wicked, and required of them to
perform the covenants in the night, which we had made the day before.

Oh seely soul! oh blinded heart! how did thou not remember thy promise and
vow made in baptism, to forsake the devil, the world, and the flesh? O
foolish mind! how did thou not bethink thy self what would follow? O
witless brain! how did thou not understand so damnable a defiance? O thou
sense of understanding (I say) where did thou sleep in such senseles
security? O but it was the Devil, which provoked thee so to slumber and
snort, that in the end he might slaie thine unhappy and wretched soul.

Alas, he bound my mighty men, and spoiled me of my knowledge; he bound my
mighty men and wounded me. I answered but in a word, and forthwith became
reprochfullie defamed: I spoke unadvisedly, and felt spite. The devil raised
an assembly of wicked ones about me; and when I consented to obeie their
filthy lusts, then pronounced he against me strait, this just sentence; M.C.
says he, has played the harlot; M. C. has committed adultery, and defiled
her fathers house, and her husbands bed.

CAP. III.
O Thou devil, what have thou done unto me? O thou devil, how have thou
wounded me? I bewailed sometime the fall of Dinah and Thamar; but now have I
felt far worse my self. I bewailed heretofore the fall of Aholla, and
Ahollibah; but now am I fallen much worse my self. I bewailed heretofore the
fall of Cosbie, Bersabe, Rizpa, Tamer, and the Leuits wife; but now have I felt
far worse my self. I have bewailed heretofore the state of all sinners; yet
now am I plunged in them all. For I have been more bold than Apam; more
impudent than Memphetica Potiphers wife; more shameless than Lots two daughters;
more wicked than Baara, or Salomen; and more bloody in persecuting than
Iesabel. Dinah, and Thamer, through violence offered them, were defloured
against their wills; but I with all greedines have most filthilie followed my
fleshly desires. Judith decked her self bravely of a right discretion and
virtue, for the safeguard of her people; but I for voluptuousnes and pleasure of
the flesh, to allure the eyes of all men, and catch the souls of the simple in
the net of sin, and snares of Satan. Susanna being secretly and forciblie
assaulted, sighed, and thought it better to cry, and shrich out, that she
might so fall into the hands of her enemies, and suffer death without the deed
doing, than to sin in thy sight by consenting unto their wicked wills; but I
both openly and privily have followed too much the devises and desires of mine
own heart, and too soon consented to those that have burnt in lust toward me.
It was Dinahs liberty that brought her to her fall; but it is mine own wanton
eyes, mine own rash tongue, and mine own wilful folly that has brought me
to this sinful fall and great confusion. And as she was the cause, that many
of the Sichemites lost their earthly possessions and lives; even so my lewdnes
has deprived me of the spiritual gifts, which sometime have flowed with
heavenly riches. And even as she being severed from her father and brethren,
and cleaving unto strangers and forreners, endured great annoie; even so I in
satisfieng the lusts of notorious sinners, have brought my self captive unto
captives, and made my self the bondslaue of sin.

For alas my parents live, yet am I an Orphan and fatherless. Alas my brethren
and friends are living, yet am I comfortless and freendles. Alas my husband
lives, yet am I a widow. Alas my children be alive, yet am I barren. Alas
every creature reioiceth, and I alone am forsaken and sorrowful. Alas O house
wherein I was gladsome. Alas O family wherein I sat full merry. Alas O holy
Ghost, thou spirit of purity, which heretofore came down upon me, why have
thou forsaken me? I am forsaken, and become desolate, because of the corruption
and filth of mine iniquity. Bewail me, O all ye virgins, that am defloured of
all virginity. Bewail me, O all ye womenkind, that am deprived of all
chastity and goodness. Bewail me, O ye blessed people of God, which am
banished from God. Bewail her that is bereaved of the holy Ghost. Bewail me,
that like a foolish virgin am thrust out of the wedding chamber of my spouse
Christ. Bewail me, who once was thought worthy the kingdom of God, now
altogether most unworthy. Bewail me that am abhorred of the Angels, and
severed from the Saints of God. Bewail me for that I am condemned to eternal
punishment. Bewail me, for that I am here languishing on this miserable
earth, and thus now tormented with the prick of conscience.

I do fear death, because I am wicked. I do fear the dreadful day of
judgment, for that I am damned for ever. I do fear the punishment, for that
it is eternal. I do fear the Angels, which ouersee the punishment, because
they are void of mercy. I do fear out of measure all the torments; and what
I shall do, I wot not, being thus on every side beset with misery. If there
be any man or woman which can, I beseech them now assist me with their earnest
prayers, and with their sorrowful tears. For now it behooves me to shed
infinite tears for mine infinite sins. Who knows whether the Lord will have
mercy upon me; whether he will pity my fall; whether he will tender my
person; whether he will be moved with my desolation; whether he will show
mercy unto me; whether he will have respect unto mine humility, and incline
his tender compassion toward me, as he has done to Rahab, Marie Magdalen, the
woman of Samaria, and the woman taken in adultery, besides many others?

CAP. IIII.
BUT I will prostrate my self before the thresholds and porches of the Church,
that I may entreat all people, both small and great, and I will say thus unto
them; Trample, and tread me under foot, which am the foolish salt, the
unsavory salt. Tread on me, which have no taste or relish of God; tread me
under foot, which am fit for nothing. Trample me under your feet as a
Iesabell, for I am a daughter of Sodom and Gomer, that deserves to obtain no
mercy, nor to have any pity or compassion to be showed unto me, but to be
quite forgotten, and put clean out of all remembrance.

Now let the virgins mourn and lament, for that their fellow virgin is
defiled. Now let the maidens and damsels mourn, for that their companion is
fallen. Now let the wives, widows, young women and matrons mourn, for that a
fellow sister is fallen. Now let all women both old and young, married and
unmarried, bond and free mourn and lament, for that an advancement of
virginity and womanhood is shamefullie fallen, and has broken her faith and
promise made both to God and man. Woe is me that I fell so lewdlie. Woe is me
that I fell most dangerously, and cannot rise again.

Assist me O holy spirit, and give me grace to repent. Let the fountain of
tears be opened, and gush out into streams; to see, if peradventure I may
have the grace worthily and thoroughly to repent, and to wipe out of the book
of consciences, the accusation that is printed against me. But thou, O Lord,
think not upon polluted lips, neither weigh thou the tongue that has uttered
lewd things, but accept thou repentance, affliction, and bitter tears, the
dolor of the heart, and the heaviness of the soul, and have mercy upon me,
and raise me up from out of the mire of corruption, for the puddle thereof has
even choked me up. Woe is me that sometime was a pearl, glistering in the
golden garland of glory, but now thrown into the dust, and trod in the mire
of contempt. Woe is me that the ^ault of God now lies in the dunghill. Woe is me
that the temple of the holy Ghost is thus profaned, and made a cage of
unclean spirits. Woe is me that thy holy house of prayer is become a den of
fee^ds. But how great streams of lamentations shall wipe and purify mine
humble heart? Now I will address my self and turn my talk unto God. Why have
thou lifted me up, and cast me down? For as thou have exalted me with the
divine word of thine heavenly wisdom; so me thinks, I stick in the depth
of sin, which my self have wrought. I had not committed this impiety,
unless thou had withdrawn thine hand from me; but it is thy pleasure, O
Lord, which art good, to do all things graciously: and I of the other side
being a foolish and frail woman, have foolishlie fallen.

But why, O Lord, have thou shut my mouth by thy judgments threatened in thine
holy word against adulterers and sinners? Have I been the first that herein
have sinned? Or am I the first that fell? Why have thou thus forsaken me, being
desolate and rejected? Why have thou thus banished me from among thy Saints,
and astonished me to read thy judgments and laws? What is he or she borne of a
woman that sins not? What man or woman is there now, or ever was conversant
here upon earth, and did none iniquity? This I say, because thou have thus
forsaken me. David, Bersaba, and the woman of Samaria, sinned too bad in thy
sight; yet after their repentance, thou receiuedst them in mercy. Likewise
Peter a professor of truth, and Marie Magdalen, after their fall, wiped away
their bitter passions, that they suffered, with salt tears, sleaing sin, and
purging away the ^enom of the serpent, not continuing long in the puddle of
infidelity; but they of favor were thought worthy of mercy. And this I
speak, to the end these things may take effect also in me miserable sinner.

CAP. V.
WOE is me, that I fell thus wickedlie! Woe is me, that my adventure in these
things was so unfortunate: but now I humbly beseech thee, O Lord, inasmuch as
I have felt far worse, call me back, O Lord, for that I tread a most perilous
and ruinous way that leads unto death. Grant me that good guide and teacher,
the holy Ghost, that I be not made a pricking hedgehog, and become an
habitation for devils: but that I may tread under foot the devil, which trod
me, and ouercomming his sleights, be restored again to my former health,
purity, and salvation. Remember not, O Lord, the iniquity of thine humble
suter, who sometime have celebrated unto thee the fruits of virginity.
Remember not, O Lord, the iniquity of me seely woman, who made answer too
soon with wicked language, and too rashly gave my consent to naughtiness.

Now, O all ye virgins and women, which behold my wound, tremble for fear;
let your loins be girt, and your lamps burning; and take heed that ye slumber
not, neither fall into the like crime; but take heed, watch and pray, and come
jointly, which have the same measure of faith; let us assemble together, and
rent our hearts, and provoke streams of tears to gush out of the temples of
our heads. For when these run and flow upon the face of the earth, there will
follow remission of sins, the pains will be avoided, and the torments shall
not be felt. I mourn, and am sorry from the heart root, O ye my friends, that
ever I fell from aloft. I have fallen and am bruised; there is no health in me.
Let all women lament over me, because of this my dangerous fall; let the
garlands and crowns of virgins lament over me, for that I am severed from
among their blessed assemblies. Let the whole Church of Christians lament and
bewail my woeful case, for that I am so ruinous, decayed and wasted. Let all
people generally lament over me, for that I have my deaths wound. I see the
clouds in the sky shadowing the light from me, and the sun hiding his bright
beams. And now ye do all see and perceive that my mouth is shut, and that
shame and confusion has covered my face. But bewail me, and lament this my
bitter sorrow; bewail me, which am in like case with the reprobate; bewail
me that am worthy to be trodden under foot as mire and dung of every one
that goes by the way; bewail me that am become nothing but rottennes and
worms; bewail me that am taken away and made a public example of reproach to
all women, and an inheritour of death and damnation, and all because I would
not understand the fear of the Lord, and live after his commandments; bewail
me that am transformed into a dog, a sow, and filthy goat, by trespassing
against mine own soul and body, by dishonesting my friends, and dishonouring
my God.

CAP. VI.
WHat shall I do that am thus beset with many mischiefs? Alas O death why
dooest thou linger? I had rather thou spite me and bear me malice, than pity
me. O satan, what mischief have thou wrought unto me? How have thou pierced
my breast with thy poisoned dart? Think thou that my ruin will avail thee
any thing at all? Think thou to procure unto thy self ease and rest, while
that I am greeuouslie tormented? Who is able to signify unto me whither my
sins be wiped and done away? or whither I have escaped the pains which
greatly I feared, and most justly deserved? Who is able to signify unto me,
whither I shall be yet again coupled and made companion with the virgins and
saints? O thou Lamb of God Christ Jesus my sweet and only savior, have mercy
upon me sinful woman, for that I am not worthy to hear the message of them
that bring such glad tidings, but presuming far worse prattises, have heard the
terrible threats of the Evangelists. Alas, O the bosom of Abraham, the
paradise of heaven, and presence of God, that I am deprived of. Alas that I
became partaker with the rich man of his condemnation in the horrible pit, and
partner of his thirst in the bitter place, full of sorrow and heaviness. Alas,
sweet Jesus; alas, O bountiful Jesus; alas, O mine only mediator, entreat the
father for me I beseech thee, that I be not cut off from the coasts of ^ion,
nor debarred of y^ bosom of my father Abraham, the which I have so greatly
longed after, yet not worthily, because of my great sin. For, behold O Lord,
I fall down before thy mercy seat. Have mercy upon me, which mourn thus out
of measure, which have horribly offended against heaven, against thy majesty,
against my friends, against the Church and congregation^ and against mine own
soul. Have mercy upon me the sinfullest woman alive, which have sinned too
bad in thy sight. Have mercy upon me the wretch of wretches, which have shed
my salt and bitter tears, whose miserable case every creature has lamented.
Oh Lord, why have thou broken down my hedge and strong holds, and taken away
thy grace and holy spirit from me; so that the wild Bore out of the wood,
Satan, has destroyed me; and the wild beast of the field has eaten me up?
Rid me, O Lord, from the roaring Lion. The whole Church and assembly of
saints does make intercession unto thee for me, which am an unprofitable
servant, and unworthy member thereof. The holy and unspotted Lamb Christ
Jesus thy dear and only beloved son, does continually and incessantly
entreat thee for me, which have greeuouslie offended both him and thee, O
blessed Trinity, that thou will show mercy unto the wandering sheep, which
is subject to the renting teeth of the ravenous woolfe. Save me, O Lord, out of
his mouth. Suffer me not to become the sacrifice of sin, but let down upon
me thy holy spirit, that with his fiery countenance, he may put to flight the
crooked feend of the Devil, that I may be brought home again unto thy
wisdom; that the bill of sin written against me, be^blotted out and
cancelled; that the sow may be washed from her filthiness; the dog eat of the
crumbs that fall from her masters table, and a sinner worsse than Marie
Magdalen, yea chief of all sinners, be saved. O let my lamentation cease in
the evening, and cause me to receive joy in the morning. Let my sackcloth of
sorrow be rent asunder; gird me with joy and gladness; let me be received
once again I beseech thee into the joy and favor of my God and father; let
me be yet thought worthy of his kingdom, through the earnest petition and
prayers of the whole Church of Saints, which soroweth over me, and humbles
her self continually unto thee: yea rather, through the only mediation, and
vehement intercession of my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: to whom with thee,
O Father, and the holy Ghost, be all honor, glory and dominion, for ever and
ever,

Amen, Amen.
Another lamentation of a woman that has lost her virginity and chastity: or
of a Christian soul polluted with sin.
O My soul, wash away thy sins, purge thee of thine iniquity, and make the
rest of thy life agreeable to the word of truth. O thou unhappy soul, yea
thrice unhappy woman, behold I say, whole mountains covered with thy sins,
and great valleys ouerlaid with thine iniquities. O my soul, once purged with
the pills of grace, endowed with the gifts of the holy Ghost, and espoused as
the most pure virgin to the faithful lover our savior. But out alas, what
have I done, or whom have I thought of? My savior was once my loving spouse,
because of my chastity; but now alas he is become a seueare judge to punish
mine iniquity. O unhappy remembrance of so great a loss? Why do thou so
aggrauate my grief? Or why does both good and evil thus torment me? Alas,
alas, is it not enough for mine evil conscience justly to prick me, and the
punishments due therefore to torment me, but must the remembrance of a good
conscience also, and the deserts due to the same condemn me? Fie upon thee
wretch, that thou art to lose so rich a treasure, which thou can never
recover.

O comfortless creature, why were thou so unhappy to lose that, which has
made thee to be pointed at of the righteous, and to be laughed at of the
ungodly? O lamp of virginity, how art thou quenched? Once I was a spouse,
but now an abject; late a souereig^e, but now a slave. Why have thou thus
prevented me? And in what a filthy puddle of iniquity have thou plunged me? O
fornication the defiler of my mind, and the destroier of my soul; why have
thou bewitched my mind, and enchanted my soul? Why have thou cast me headlong
from the throne of my savior, and placed me amongst the condemned souls of
sinners? O grief of griefs, why do thou thus sting? Because I have lost
such a jewel. O sorrow of sorrows, why do thou thus wound me? Because I
have lost such a treasure. Behold, behold alas what monsters haunt me. On the
right hand stands grief to torment me, and on the left sits sorrow to
condemn me; but yet I confess it is worthily: for thou O my soul have been
a traitor to God, perjured to Christ, and an adulteress to thy savior, and
therefore deservedly thou art fallen from the tabernacle of truth, to the
dungeon of the devil. O thou abject of God, and slave to Satan, nay rather,
the disdainer of the Deity, and embracer of iniquity! for thou O my soul,
lieutenant unto sin, first refusedst the service of thy savior, and (of
thine own accord) enthralledst thy self to the Devil. O miserable, yea more
than miserable change! Alas, what a palace have thou forsaken, and what a
prison have thou chosen? Alas what a savior have thou sold, and what a slave
do thou serve? Oh madness of mind, oh foolishness of heart, what have thou
done? What I say have thou done? Have thou forsaken thy sweet spouse and
savior, and embraced that ravening woolfe the Devil? Have thou lost thy
loving bridegroom, to follow the filthy fleshly pleasures of the world?

O sinful soul, how wretched is thy state? O wicked wretch, how sinful is
thy fall? Oh my God, whence proceed these irksome stings of sin? Or who can
make satisfaction for such heaps of iniquities? O thou miserable wretch my
sinful soul, why dooest thou not cast thy self headlong into the dungeon of
grief, which of thine own accord did throw thy self into the filthy
sinks of sin? O thou polluted creature, why dooest thou not bury thy self
in the bowels of sorrow, which so willingly wallowedst in the kennell of
shame? O thou sinful helhound, why dooest thou not drown thy self with the
waves of weeping, which have so often swoome in the seas of fornication? O
sting of sin! O rod of sorrow! O daughter of heaviness! torment me, scourge
me, plague me, crucify me, and trample and tread me as a filthy rag under
your feet. I have deserved it, yea I have sought it; for I have most
impudentlie contemned, yea and most arrogantlie provoked you, nay rather God,
not you; and therefore now show your authority in executing the guilty to
death, that ye may be revenged for your God. Let the sinful fornicatrix feel
the punishments she has deserved, and drink deep of the cup of shame she
has desired. O thou my sinful soul, it is now high time for thee to show the
fruits of repentance, which have so long straid from the fold of the godly
virgins, and erred from the paths of the righteous women. Bath thy self I say
in the sweet streams of repentance, which so often have wallowed in the
filthy puddles of unrighteousness.

O God of all consolation and security, I durst not sue for any favor at
thine hands, unless I had brought in my bosom a pardon for my sins,
procured by repentance in the death of Christ, which here with tears I
present unto thee, desiring thee good God of consolation (if again with the dog
I return to my vomit, and wallowe in my sins as the sow in the mire) then to
drive me from the country of the godly, and to banish me like a vagabond from
the court of my savior and spouse; yea I desire of God it may be so, and I
hope in Christ it shall be so. And although I am not worthy to lift up mine
eyes to heaven to call to my God for grace, by reason of the multitude of my
misdeeds, which always are as red as scarlet in my sight, yet am I not
unworthy with continual weeping and crieng for grace to loose them. For
seeing my soul is constrained through greef of conscience, to power forth
prayers to my God for his mercy and grace, it is meet it should be done with
great contrition of heart, and continual mourning. Consider therefore, O my
soul, what thou have done, and what plagues thou have deserved for losing thy
virginity. Ponder (I say) lament, and remember O my soul, before thou end the
short pilgrimage of this life, how thine adversary the Devil, like a roaring
lion, lies lurking in every corner to devour thee, and sends out his
messengers into all places to entrap thee. O my God, what do I see on earth
but engines to entrap me? What, I say, can I behold, but baits to entise me?
Alas, and out alas, what do I hear? A confession of mourners, a crashing of
teeth, and a great multitude of howlers. Woe is me alas. For me thinks I see
great flames of fire; huge balls of wild fire, and fornaces full of boiling
lead, and all approaching near unto me.

Alas, what means these strange cries of monstrous woormes? What devilish
spite does thus inflame them, and what fiery flame does so torment them? O ye
hellish hagges, frieng with heat, and frowning with fury; why are ye so
cruel to those that lie howling amongst you? Is there no mean, no remedy,
nor no end of this your punishments, and are these O my God the torments which
are prepared for filthy fornicators, and contemners of thy commandments; of
which I am one, yea the cheef of all sinners? And must I needs abide these
infernal plagues? Then O my soul, why art thou not afraid? And thou my heart
why dooest thou not rent in sunder? Alas, alas, how suddenly, yea and how
greeuouslie the serieants of sin now seem to arrest me? Alas I say, what
wicked actions mine adversary sin has found against me? But oh cruel
sin, whether will thou carry me? And thou my God, whither will thou lead
me? If I have committed this horrible crime which deserves death, O yet
remember I pray thee that thou art my Savior. If I have broken the bands of
chastity, O yet call to mind that thou art my redeemer. O my God, if I have
done any thing that deserves death and damnation, yet forget not how that thou
sheddest thy precious blood to save me. And therefore, O my merciful God, be
not so severe, in marking what is done amiss of me; but let thy mercy
prevail and cover all my secret and open faults. Remember thou saiedst by the
mouth of the Prophet, I will not the death of a sinner, but that he should
convert and live. My God, which can not lie, what meanest thou to say that
thou would not the death of a sinner, if thou throw him into the
bottomless pit of hell? Dooest thou mean that thou carest not for the death
of a sinner, when thou committest him to the slavery of the devil? Is this
thy meaning I say, when thou saiedst, I had rather he should turn and live?

I am a sinner, O my God; if therefore thou have no delight in the death of a
sinner, then who shall let thee to take compassion upon me silly woman? If
thou had rather he should turn and live, then who shall withhold thy
countenance from me sinful wretch? If the hugeness of my sins deserves a
wound, the care of so gracious a father prepares a salve. God forbid that the
wickedness of a sinner, repenting her of her sin from the bottom of her
heart, should surmount the mercies of so bounteous a Savior. O therefore
remember me most loving father, I beseech thee, because thou art my redeemer,
and take compassion upon thine unworthy handmaid, because thou art my
savior. Respect not, O my God, the justice due to so grievous a sinner; but
remember thy loving kindness toward thy creature. Remember not, O Lord, the
offenses of a sore transgressor, but call to mind the mercies of a loving
savior. I confess, O Lord, that my sins both old and new, deserves eternal
condemnation, and that no repentance is able to make satisfaction for the least
of my faults, and yet by faith I am assured of my salvation, because thy
mercies surpass thy judgments. Spare me therefore, O Lord, for my soul
appealeth from the seat of thy justice, to the throne of thy mercy. O deliver
me, because thou art almighty. Oh save me sinful woman, because thou art
merciful, and take compassion upon me, wretched woman, for thy beloved son
Jesus Christ's sake, who lives and reigns with thee and the holy Ghost, one
God, ever world without end, Amen.

God the Father of all comfort and consolation, bless, keep, and defend me
from all the illusions and suggestions of satan, now and evermore; also give
me grace to walk in thy fear, Amen.

Read more of this in the Queens meditation, page 10. and 16. 17. etc. in the
second Lamp.

A prayer of Marie Magdalens repentance.
O Good Jesus, the only hope of the penitent person, which opening the bowels
of thy compassion, and to declare and show a token of thy great love, did
graciously give absolution and pardon of all her sins to Marie Magdalen,
that grievous sinner, and sinful woman, at what time she touched with great
remorse and sorrow, stood weeping before thee, and pouring forth abundance of
tears, washed thy feet, and kissing them, wiped them with the hear of her
head, in token of her hearty repentance and sorrow for her forepassed sinful
life spent in adultery and uncleanness. O despise not me also I beseech thee
most merciful Jesus, which am a more sinful woman, and now likewise most
humbly with great remorse of conscience and sorrow for my sinful life past,
do prostrate my self before the feet of thy mercy, washing them with the
inward tears of contrition, and kissing them with the lips of devout and
earnest prayer. And vouchsafe, O sweet Christ, to make me meet to hear thy
voice so full of love and compassion, so full of elemencie, sweetness, and
mercy, which the same Marie Magdalen was made worthy to hear, that as hirs,
so also my manifold sins and offenses committed against thee, and thy whole
Church, and mine own body and soul, may quite be forgiven, and washed away
by thine only grace and merits, O blessed Savior Jesus,

Amen.
Another prayer of the woman taken in adultery.
O Most tender hearted Jesus, which so gently deliueredst the woman taken in
adultery, and so mercifully sentedst her away in peace, and uncondemned of
thee, from her accusers. Behold, my adulterous soul stands here before
thee, which so often has forsaken thee her true and faithful spouse, as she
has consented to the vile suggestions of the adoulterous and corrupt enemy.
Alas, my conscience accuses me, yea and all my lewd works and wicked actions
do all bewraie, and condemn me. But, O Lord, enter not thou into judgment
with them I pray thee, neither do thou remember mine old or new offenses, to
plague them as they deserve; but deliver me also a most sinful wretch, and a
woman corrupted and abused in adultery. Deliver me, I say, a woman altogether
guilty of horrible iniquities, from mine accusers, and being fully persuaded
in my conscience, that I am freely forgiven of thee, and from this and all
other my crimes and offenses absolved, pardoned, and quitted before the
tribunal seat of thy judgment, let me now depart in peace and uncondemned.
For it is thy property always to have mercy, and to spare sinners that
repent and turn unto thee, as I do hear at this present vnfeignedlie: yea,
there is no end of thy mercies and compassions to such as forsaking their old
sins, do vnfeignedlie seek and cleave unto thee: to whom therefore with
the Father and the holy Ghost be blessing, praise, power, and dominion, now
and for ever, Amen.

Of this matter read more in the latter end of the sixth Lamp, and in diverse
places of the seventh Lamp.

A prayer to be said of any damsel, daughter, or maiden child.
O Most merciful God, and heavenly Father, which have commanded me to honor
my parents, by whom I was borne and do live; for such obedience does please
thee, for thy beloved Son Jesus Christ's sake; and thou have promised to
reward the same with long life, manifold benefits, and heavenly blessings: I
humbly beseech thee O Lord, give to my parents, and all other that I am bound
unto in this world, a long life, and protect them from all miseries, hurt, and
danger. Also, grant me grace to obey them and all others, which have
authority over me, in deed, and in word, and in all patience, that I may have
thy benediction and blessing. Let me help my parents in their age, and never
grieve them as long as they live: and if their understanding fail, let me
bear with them, and never in my lusty youth despise them. Imprint in my mind
the pains, which my mother has endured for my sake, not only before I came
out of her womb, but also till I was of any discretion, for which cause, be
it far from me, that I at any time make her sad, or out of quiet, through any
my lewd behavior and disobedience.

Furthermore, O merciful God, and heavenly Father, I beseech thee forgive me
the sins of my tender age and youth, whereby I have, and do still offend both
thee, and my loving parents. Pardon them I say, O Lord, for thy mercy sake.
Remember not my rebellions: make me both to know my folly, and to be heartily
sorry for mine offenses. Place before mine eyes continually the example of our
savior Christ, which in his childhood was obedient unto his parents, thereby,
both teaching and showing to all children what their duty is. Keep me, O
Lord, from the wicked company of ungodly men, and when they shall entise me,
let me not walk in the way with them. Refrain my feet from their paths,
least I come into the dangerous and suspicious judgments of other folk, and
hazard thereby mine honesty, chastity, and good name and virtue, to the peril
and hurt both of my self and my parents. Increase, O Lord, not my years
only, but also my wisdom, chastity, shamefastness, soberness,
temperance, and all kind of virtue and obedience requisite in a godly child,
that I may grow in favor both with thee, and all good men and women, through
thy beloved Son our Lord and savior Jesus Christ,

Amen.
Another very necessary prayer to be said of any daughter or maiden child.
FOrasmuch as in thy holy word (O almighty God and heavenly Father) it is
said, that a wise daughter is an heritage unto her husband, but she that lives
dishonestlie, brings her father to heaviness: again, A daughter that is
bold or past shame, dishonors both her father, and her husband, and the
ungodly shall regard her, because she is not inferior unto them, but both her
father and her husband shall despise her, because of her foolishness: I
beseech thee therefore, take from me a stout stomach, an incorrigible heart, an
impudent mind, an unshamefast eye, and a bold countenance, with all other
vices, and marks of a reprobate and disobedient child, and in stead thereof,
give unto me a gentle spirit, a meek heart, an humble mind, a demure look, a
sober countenance, an affable and serviceable body, with all other good graces
and comely conditions of a chaste virgin, and godly child, toward her parents.

Oh suffer me not to be of the number of those shameless children, that stick
not to revile and curse their father and mother to their face, nor of those
stubborn and wicked daughters, which as the Prophet complains, do rise up
and rebel against their own mothers, setting their commandments at naught,
and utterly refusing to be corrected by them for their amendment. Yea far be
it from me, O Lord, with Lots two daughters, to make my father drunk to
uncover his shame: neither with curssed Cham, let me not rejoice or laugh at
the dishonor of my parents, especially since I know that my honor comes by
them, and that their reproach is in deed my dishonor. And though my parents
forsake me, and count me as a stranger, yet give me grace never to forsake them
utterly, nor to say of them as Leah and Rahel said of Laban their father, We
have no more portion or inheritance in our fathers house: but rather make me
through the gift of thy grace obedient and very willing to suffer for thy
sake, my parents to work thine and their wills in me, yea though it be to my
loss (if thou think it so good) without any resistance, striving,
grudging, or denial, even as Isaac did to his father Abraham, Iepthaes only
daughter did unto him, Lots two daughters unto their father, and the seven
children of the woman in the Machabees unto their mother, etc. that with these
virtuous and godly children, I may be blessed and have mine obedience crowned
and rewarded.

Moreover because thou O Lord, in the old law have straightly commanded, that
the daughter which loses her virginity, and plaieth the harlot in her
fathers house, should be stoned to death, yea though afterward she be married
to an husband (which beastly vice of filthy whoredom, fornication, and
unchastity, how greatly thy sacred majesty does abhor and detest by this
law, besides other examples of thy judgments mentioned in the scriptures, it
may and does easily appear.) Assist me therefore, I humbly pray thee, that
by watching and prayer, temperance, holy exercises, moderation and abstinence
from superfluous meats and drinks, and overmuch fi^e fare, which makes the
mind wax wanton and ouerlustie, I may so tame this my body, crucify my
flesh, and bring it into subjection to the spirit, with all the affections and
desires thereof, that I may never with Thamar pollute my fathers house, nor sin
against thy majesty, my friends, and mine own soul and body, by ouerpassing
the prescribed limits and bounds of honesty and chastity.

Give me grace, that I follow not the concupiscence of the flesh, neither
provoke my senses by unbridled liberty, with Dinah to abuse my self, and
trespass against my parents and friends to their hearts grief, against my
self to mine own public shame, and reioicing of mine enemies, and against
thee and my country, to other evil example and overthrow. Sanctify me, I
say, O holy father, that I defile not my self with carnal vices,
riotousnesse, bellie-cheere, nor unlawful pleasures. Suffer me not to cast off
thine holy spirit, thereby to make my body the house of filthy feends, which
carry away, and cast headlong all intemperat, unchaste, and secure or
retchlesse persons, into everlasting destruction, but drive far from my heart
all evil thoughts, from my mind all wicked concupiscence, and from mine eyes
all unchaste looks; yea, be thou ever so merciful unto me, O Lord, as to help
me continually with thy divine power, that the holy spirit, which thou did
power into me at my baptism, may bear the rule in all my members, and so
prevail over the flesh, and all the mordinate affections of the same, that
being renewed daily after thy holy spirit, I may the better walk in the
spirit, and serve thee in righteousness, obedience, and true holiness, all
the days of my life, to the honor of thy son, which is the most excellent
flower and crown of all pure virginity.

Finally, if hereafter it shall please thee not to continue in me the gift of
virginity or single life, or that my father or friends, thinking it uncomely
for me to pass the flower of mine age, to avoid all other further
inconveniences, shall judge it needful for them, respecting mine infirmity,
to marry me, and so to perform that weighty matter, and ease themselves of
so great a charge, care, and burden, by doing their duty betimes, and not
neglecting their authority and office, as Judah did toward his daughter in
law Thamar, to the peril and hazard of both their good names and honesty:
then grant, I beseech thee, O dear father, that I for my part not so much as
desiring marriage, much less to show my self to long therefore by any means,
may be content to leave all the care and charge of that business, wholly unto
my parents or friends, who no doubt love me no less, than I love my self. And
let me be fully persuaded, that they will provide no less diligently for me,
than they would for themselves, but much better, that all whisperings, close
communication, sinister practices, and privy contracts being of me utterly
eschued, as a thing most ungodly, and in deed far unbeseeming any Christian
child, yea as things abhorred even among the Infidels, I may after the good
examples of Rebecca, Leah, Sarah, and such like holy virgins, and obedient
daughters, most willingly allow and approve the authority, power, and
pruiledge of my parents and friends over me herein, and resigning all my will
to their wills, be very well content to be ruled by them in all things they
shall do in thee, as becomes a well nurtured, and obedient child, laboring
also by all earnest and fervent prayer, to further the matter, that I may bring
a chaste mind in a chaste body, unto a virtuous husband, to thy glory.

And grant, that my parents and friends also for their parts, as thou have
commanded, Deuter. 7, 3. may carefully endeavor by all possible and studious
diligence, to provide for me their daughter, a man of understanding, wisdom,
piety, and honesty; even such an husband, Lord, as is no Idolater, or
irreligious woorshipper of God, no Atheist, Infidel, or ungodly man, nor one
that shall let or hinder me from virtuous living, but such a one as is both
wise, godly, virtuous, holy and religious, one that serves thee, O God
sincerely, and lives in thy fear christianlie, and will gladly provoke,
exhort, and help me to live accordingly. Finally, grant I beseech thee, that
my parents or friends, without any respect of their own gain or commodity,
may seek me an honest husband, and marie me in thee, O Lord; neither let them
with covetous Laban sell me to their servants in recompense of their service,
as Leah and Rebecca were, nor yet with that hypocrite Saul give me under
pretense of favor, to snare and betraie the innocent, as Michal and Merab were
given to David. But considering that the knot of marriage cannot be lightly
loosed or dissolved, saving only by death, let them with great study, and
deliberation, with good aduisement and counsel do it, yea with such diligent
care, and faithful discharge of their own duties to thee, O God, with such
love and entier affection toward me their child, and with such due regard to
the man, unto whom they shall match me (as namely not so much for any his
external goods of the body, as chiefelie for the inward virtue and goods of
the mind) that in every respect it may be truly said they have very well
joined and married me in the Lord, to the reioicing of all parties, so shall it
come to pass, that they thereby shall not only procure unto me their daughter
perpetual joy, comfort and felicity, by causing my marriage to become easy
and well-liking unto me, but also provide by this means for themselves such a
son in law, as shall be a faithful friend, a daily succor, and continual
aid unto them, even in their old age, to their great comfort and thy glory;
which grant, O blessed God for his sake, who was most obedient, not only to
his blessed mother Marie, but also unto thee his celestial Father, thy h^lie
son Jesus, I mean, to whom with thee, and the holy Ghost, be now and ever
eternal praise and thanks, and universal power, rule and dominion, Amen.

You may read in the sixth and seventh Lamps more of the duty of daughters.

A prayer to be said of a daughter in law that is married.
FOr as much O almighty God, as through the corruption of our nature, the
common custom and opinion of most are, that all mothers in law bear a
stepmothers hate unto their daughters in law: and contrariwise, that daughters
in law for the most part, bear no great good love and charity toward their
mothers in law: the cause of both which hatred or enimitie, as it is found
vain and unchristian, so it seems to arise, when on the one side the mother
is discontent that all her sons love should be turned unto her daughter in
law: and when the wife on the other part cannot suffer any to be loved but her
self; as though the motherhood of the one were lessened by the daughter in
law, and the wifehood of the other, were minished by the mother in law; or as
though friendship were impared by the multitude of friends, when rather in
troth, it is the more increased, and strengthened by alliance and marriage, and
therefore either ought to bear with others infirmity, and charitablie to be
reconciled one to another, if at any time bralles, hatred, strife or discord
rise or chance between them.

Therefore to avoid the causes of this common hatred betwixt me and my mother
in law, and that we may the better live lovingly and christianlie together,
as becomes us, both before God and the world, to the good example of all
other; grant O God, I beseech thee, that my mother in law for her part may be
content, that her son my husband do love me his wife as his dear mate, and
inseparable companion, with whom he ought to dwell, without any displeasure.
Again, that I her daughter in law for my part, knowing my husband and I am
all one, may not only take and repute his parents to be my parents, but also
may be willing, and very well pleased that my husband do love her also as his
own mother, as unto whom he is greatly bound, and owes much loving
kindness for these great benefits received of her; I mean, his life, his
nourishing, and bringing up in the fear of God, but especially, because I
gladly do or would love mine own mother also, as nature thereto binds me,
and for that I both see and know how that by this my mother in law, as by an
instrument and means appointed of thee, I now presently enioie this my
husband, her son, for whose sake therefore at the least, I am bound both by
the laws of God and nature, (for so much as we are now no more two, but one
flesh) to love, cherish and obeie this my mother in law in thee, as if she
were mine own mother.

Grant I say, O gracious God, that my mother in law may love me her daughter
in law, no less than Naomie loved Ruth and Orpha, and that she may give me
good counsel, teach me, instruct me, pray for me, and do all such things as
may be an example unto me, both of godliness, chastity, and soberness. Drive
far from us all hatred, envy, brallings, and contentions. Suffer her not I
beseech thee, O Lord, to make any discord or variance between my husband and
me for any cause; but and if any chance between us, grant that she rather to
the uttermost of her power, by her wisdom, and good motherlie
counsell^giuing, may avoid it, and reconcile us again, that thus she bearing a
motherlie affection toward me, it may so come to pass, that both my husband
may be the more bound to love her, not only for that she is his dear mother,
but also because she has thereby been the cause of a great part of his
felicity, in that he has me both a more chaste, sober, loving, obedient, and
virtuous wife, and better agreeing with him, by the means of this her
motherlie instruction, and grave godly counsel; and also I be no less bound
to love her, and to bear none other mind toward her, than if she were mine
own mother, as Ruth did to Naomie, and Sara to Anna, by reason that I also
have by this her grave advice, and wise teaching, both gotten to my self more
knowledge, a^ made better, and have my husband her son more pleasant, loving,
and tender unto me. This grant not only unto us, O good father, but also to
all other mothers and daughters in law, for Jesus Christ's sake, our only
Lord and savior.

Amen.
Another prayer to be used of a daughter in law.
THou have commanded in thy holy law, O almighty God, that all children
should honor their parents as they will obtain the promise of long life, and
blessings of their parents upon earth, and contrariwise avoid thy curse, and
the curse of their parents pronounced against all disobedient and ungodly
children: grant therefore unto me, whom it pleases thee after the death of
mine own mother, to keep still as yet in the number and obedience of a child,
by giving me this woman to be my mother in law, in stead of mine own mother,
whom thou have taken unto thy self, that since I am now her child by adoption
and affinity, I may according to thy commandment, fulfill and do all that
duty, which I owe and is due unto her, even as unto mine own natural mother,
if she were here alive, and that not for a show or outward pretense of love,
but with true obedience, and due reverence, from the very heart vnfeignedlie,
because I know it shall be rewarded of thee whatsoever I do unto her, be it
good or ill.

O let me not be in the number of those wicked daughters in law, which as the
Prophet says, do impudentlie rise up, and contempt^ouslie strive against
their mothers in law. Let all contumely, despite, rancor, brallings,
tauntings, curssings, slanderings, reuilings, vpbraidings, with such other like
wicked and unchristian behavior, either in thought, word, or deed, of a
reprobate and accurssed child of Satan, be far from me, that so I may avoid
the plagues threatened, and obtain the blessings promised.

Take from me, I say, O Lord, all hardness of heart, evil custom, vain
opinion, churlish conditions, and disdainefull or coie behavior, neither let
me willingly grieve her, or in any thing be offensive unto her, as long as we
live together. O let me not, I say, through evil manners, lewd disobedience,
and perverse rebellion, be a vexation of mind to this my mother in law and
parents, as Judith and Bathcath, the two wives of Esau were to Isaac, and
Rebecca their father and mother in law, but give me grace after the good
counsel of Raguell, and the holy example of Sara his daughter, to obeie this
my father or mother in law, as she did Anna and Tobit her father and mother in
law, to honor her in deed and in word, and in all patience, and to use all
gentle, courteous, mild, meek, and sweet words, yea all childlike duty, and
christian behavior unto her for thy sake, that thereby I may win her good will
and motherlie favor more and more toward me.

Grant, that I knowing my father and she to be now all one flesh, as my husband
and I am one body, may reckon and repute her now also to be as mine own
mother, and to take my husbands parents for my parents, and so to love,
cherish, reverence, and obeie them in every condition, no less than as mine
own natural parents, that being serviceable always unto them, and fulfilling
in all points the roomth and duty of a good and godly daughter in law, I may
find them again the more to love, cherish, and prefer me as their own
daughter.

Let me not be displeased, if my husband love his own mother, but rather as it
becomes a good and a virtuous wife, if I see he does not behave himself
toward her like a natural son, give me both grace and wisdom quietly to
exhort him, and friendly to desire him to behave himself better toward her,
that she seeing and well knowing my chastity of body, my louingnesse toward
my husband, and my good will and gentle nature toward her, may through these
virtues (if she be cursed) alter her fierce mind toward me, and turn it to
good, and be the better content with me, never hereafter to hate me, either as
a daughter in law, or as a stepdaughter.

Finally, grant that after the good example of virtuous Ruths obedience to
Naomie her old mother in law, I may with great humility, entirely love her,
heartily pray for her, and dutifullie honor, serve, cherish, and obeie her;
yea, and to spare no painful diligence to do her all the good I possibly
may or can, in thee, and for thee: that thus obeieng, nourishing, and
susteining my mother in law in her necessities, none otherwise than if she
were mine own mother, and bearing patiently at her hands all infirmities and
miseries for thy sake while I live, may to thy glory, and others good example,
declare my good affection and great love that I bear toward her, as she that
stands both in awe and fear of thy commandments, and gladly endeavors to
obeie thee and my superiors in all things, according to thy word, and that
this my mother in law may also sometime worthily say of me to my praise and
others encouragement, as Naomie said of Ruth, namely, that I am better in
troth unto her, than seven of her own sons. This grant O God, for thine own
glory sake, and my comfort and commendation in Christ Jesus, to whom with
thee and the holy Ghost, be all honor, glory, and praise, for ever and ever,

Amen.
A prayer to be said of any woman, when she is woed of any man to be his wife.
O Lord God of our fathers, creator of heaven and of earth, the sea, and all
that in them is, which workest all things according to thine own purpose and
will, which rulest the hearts of all men and women, and disposest them after
thine own counsel, as seems best to thy godly pleasure. Oh good God, the
preserver of mankind, in thy great love, by thy godly providence, thou did
provide and give unto our first father Adam a fellow-helper, not only like
unto himself, but even of his own body and substance, commanding them to
increase and multiply, to the figuring and conjunction of thy dear son
Jesus Christ our continual and only mediator, and thy holy congregation, for
the which blessed be thy name for ever.

Oh thou God of all comfort, and father of all mercy, when thou art angry
with us for our sins, then show thou us mercy, and in time of trouble and
temptation thou forgiuest sins, to all them that call upon thee faithfully.
To thee therefore, oh dear father, I turn my heart, and direct mine eyes, as
thou have commanded us to do in all our needs and necessities; beseeching thee
to be merciful unto me, oh dear God, and hear me thy poor handmaid and
work of thy hands. Thou have made all mankind of the mould of the earth, and
have wrought in me and this man that now woeth me, according to thy good
pleasure. Thou have regenerated us by thy holy spirit, and new created us in
thy dear son Jesus Christ, unto good works, that we should walk in them; so
that we can not, nor may not come together in marriage after the manner of the
heathen, which be ignorant, and know not thee to be their God.

Now therefore O loving father, to whom all hearts are open and known, in this
beginning of our love, and conjunction of our minds, I humbly beseech thee, so
to order our affections, and rule our hearts and desires, that therein we seek
nothing but thy glory, and the profit of thy Church. Therefore in Christ's
name I pray thee, suffer us not to go amiss, but as a father, help and guide
us to a right marriage, in the which we may live honestly and prosperously,
even as we ought to thy honor: and either deliver us from all evil lusts, and
concupiscence of the flesh, and defend us from all slander and shame, whereby
any offense may be given to thy people; or else in thy good time take us out
of this earth and misery. Thou know, O Lord, that I have not fished with
poison, nor endeavored to allure him by deceipts and charms to love me, and
that this conjunction of our minds is not begun in us for voluptuousnes nor of
lust, but only in the fear of thee, and for the desire of Christian society
and mutual love, and the increase of godly fruit, to the profiting of thy
holy congregation. We know, O Lord, that it is thou only that prouidest the
marriage, that have the hearts of us both in thy hand, and that give the will
to consent and make choice, or ordinary election; and that thy counsel
stands not in any man's power, neither can any man alter or diminish thy
purpose. Wherefore I most humbly beseech thee, most merciful father, that if
this conjunction of our minds and love be thy work and counsel, that thou
vouchsafe, for the glory of thy name, to give us some token and true
certificate thereof, by the increasing, and steadfastly stablishing our godly
love in thee, that thou will perform the same in us in thy good time, to thy
glory, and our comfort, that we may the more perfectly love, and rightly
serve thee.

But if it be a false persuasion, or temptation of the enemy to deceive us,
and to draw us from thee; then good Lord, for thy dear son Christ's sake I
beseech thee, so to alter our love, and change our minds, so order and guide
us, that we may soon be certified thereof; that thereby we may fly all
occasions of evil, and the more zealouslie cleave unto thee, and in our trie^g
to stand steadfast in patience, so that neither self-will, nor the lusts of our
corruptions do deceive us: and if it be for chastening, which I confess we
have not only deserved, but sore and grievous punishment for our manifold and
grievous sins; yet for thy dear son Jesus Christ's sake, oh dear God,
which have said, that thou delightest not in our destruction, I most humbly
beseech thee, that we may by thy mercy come again into thy fatherly favor,
and after our great sorrow and heaviness, we may obtain perpetual joy and
consolation, and be received into the fellowship of thy faithful and fruitful
servants and Saints. Grant this dear father, for thy beloved son. Jesus
Christ's sake our only peace and mediator, So be it.

Another prayer to be used of any woman, before the solemnisation of her
marriage.
I Beseech thee, O father, which art neither made nor begotten, marry me now
and for ever unto thy son, marry me unto him in righteousness and
judgment, in godliness, in mercy, and in compassion: marry me, I say, unto
him in faith, that I may truly know thee my Lord and God, which wilt not the
death of a sinner, but rather that he repent and live.

O thou only begotten son of God, join me now, I beseech thee unto thy
body, that ingraffed in thee, I ^ay draw from thee the juice of life, and of
heavenly wisdom.

Defend me, O holy Ghost, and thine whole Church, against the rage of Satan,
the world, the flesh, and the devil, and let all things that I do, please
thee: for thou, O glorious Trinity art my husband, which love me, my God,
whom I worship, and the head whereunto I am subject. To thee be glory and
praise both of men and Angels now and for ever,

Amen.
Another prayer to be used of the man or woman, a little before they be married.
O Eternal Father of thy well-beloved son our Lord and savior Christ, which
art the maker and king of all creatures, we thank thee from the bottom of our
hearts, for that thou have not cast mankind fallen from thy grace through sin,
into everlasting destruction, as thou did the devil; but of thine
unspeakable goodness and secret counsel, thou broughtest forth thy son
Jesus, and made him an husband, that having taken our flesh upon him, he
might marry the faithful unto himself. Immortal praise and glory to thee,
for revealing this thy covenant to mankind from time to time by teachers, and
for calling us to his heavenly marriage, by thy ministers: we beseech thee, by
and for the same thy son, so to change and confirm our hearts by thy spirit,
that adorned with the wedding garments of righteousness, faith, holy love,
chaste minds, and good conscience, and without all hypocrisy, dissimulation,
and without the sin against our own conscience, we may approach to this
honorable estate of matrimony, and be found in the number of thine elect.

Let us now truly be espoused in faith and virtue, to thine heavenly spouse,
and be ingraffed in his flesh. Let us be two in one flesh, and so cleave to
him, that we may be one spirit, and so draw the heavenly motion of faith,
comfort, joy, and eternal life from him, that always we may be (though two
bodies) yet but one soul. Finally, our troublesome race being finished,
bring us with thine elect, unto thy visible company, that for evermore we may
remain in the spouse of the universal Church in eternal company and comfort,

Amen.
Another meditation and prayer, declaring how Christ adorneth the nuptial
feast with his bodily presence.
O Eternal, true, and almighty God, which at the first creation of the world,
after thou had made man an image of thy wisdom and goodness, bearing such
shape as thine eternal son at a time determined did take upon him, and
afterward of thy secret counsel, through thy word, did utter these words, It
is not good for man to be alone. Thy will it was that from a few, even two, the
whole multitude of mankind should proceed, and a sacred Church (honoring thy
name religiously, and sincerely delivering unto posterity to come, the true
knowledge of thy word) should proceed. Thy will it is, that both our weak
nature may live purelie in the lawful state of marriage, and thy Church
multiplied more and more through the generation of the godly.

O gracious God, which art pure from all spot of impuritie, and would that
the clear understanding of holiness should shine in us, that approaching unto
thee in prayer, we might discern thy goodness, from the nature of incestuous
and polluted gods. By thy chaste and holy spirit, we humbly beseech thee,
purge our hearts, that in an holy and chaste conversation we may be coupled
together to serve thee, utterly renouncing thine enemy the devil, which is
the author of incestuous laws, contrary to thy commandments; forbidding men
to marry for none other end, but that both the one by licentiousness of life,
might be forgotten, and flocks of wicked men through their lewd conversation,
be withdrawn from thee to eternal misery.

Be it far from us, O God, that so much as in thought we should either so
dishonor thy sacred majesty, or hurt our selves. And we beseech thee,
strengthen us weak ones with thy divine power, that we never be drawn from
thee our God through sinful desires of the flesh, which hinder our prayers,
the only comfort of the Saints distressed in this miserable life: neither
forgo the sweetness and joy of a godly conscience, through hardness of heart,
and horrible blindness, wherewith lewd livers are commonly punished, nor when
the course of this mortal life shall be cut off, we feel not those torments
appointed for the wicked, according to that terrible threat, Every soul which
shall commit these abominations, shall perish from among the people.

And thou, O son of God, which have ordained the love of married folks to be
a mystery of a wonderful and heavenly thing; instill into our minds and
breasts both sense of that celestial wisdom, and a true desire of our
coupling to thee. In thee a true and burning good will toward man (whose
nature thou tookedst on thee) is inflamed: such a comfortable affection of
unfeigned love should the chaste bridegroom bear toward his beloved wife, and
the bride likewise to her husband. Thou love and make much of thy flesh;
thou nourishest and dooest comfort the faithful ingraffed into thee by true
faith; and so should man and wife, being one ^^esh, love together heartily
without all dissimulation.

Behold, the Church, according to the ancient custom of espousals, lies
before the altar, beseeching thee to reconcile thine eternal father unto us,
and to receive us into thy society. O our spouse most heavenly, make us
partakers of that covenant, which thou entredst into with our nature. Blot out
all the filthiness of our sinful flesh by thy merit; transform us into new,
through thine holy spirit, and make us by the same spirit to be one with thee,
depending upon thee.

And forasmuch as thy divine pleasure is to have this heavenly marriage to be
celebrated among many troubles in this miserable life, where wine is not
always to be had, and the face of thy Church is many times like our water
pots, our frail bodies oppressed with evils, filled to the full with water and
tears; where also we are troubled, if we be not heard when we make our
prayers, and hardly we can bridle our selves with patience to expect thine
hour: assist and strengthen us, that these frail vessels of ours, in which
thy Church has her nest be not broken, through the malice of Satan, and rage
of tyrants. Grant, that in crosses and troubles of this life, we may
constantly depend upon thy counsel and assistance, and do that thing only
which thou have commanded, and graciously provide, that in that ioifull hour
thy servants and ministers may power out the sweet wine of thy voice, give
comfort in our greatest needs, and bring us to thee, which art the truth and
the life; so that when this temporal marriage shall take an end, we may
drink new wine with pleasure in the feast of thy father,

Amen.
Ecclesiasticus 15, verse 2. As a pure virgin newly married, does friendly
entreat her husband; so shall justice and wisdom being pure and undefiled,
greatly entertain her lovers.
Or thus: Wisdom, as a wife married of a virgin, shall receive or entertain
him that fears God, and keeps the law. Read more in the fourth Lamp,
page. 615.

A prayer to be used of a virgin newly married together with her husband, the
first night before they join together in the duty of marriage, after the
godly example of Sara and Tobias, who made and used the same before they lay
together, for the space of three days; as appears, Tob. cap. 8. 9.
A sentence out of Tob. cap. 6. verse 17. worthy to be called to memory of
all new married folks.
THey that receive marriage after such a fashion, that they shut God out from
them, and from their heart, and give themselves to their own lusts, even as it
were in Horse and Mule, which have no understanding: upon such has the devil
power.

Therefore when thou take an husband, and art come into the chamber, withhold
thy self from him awhile, and give thy diligence unto nothing but unto prayer
with him, that Satan may have no power over you, that ye may be received into
the company of the holy Patriarchs; and finally, that ye may obtain the
blessing and favor of God, even holy and sound children, the fruits of your
body; and kneeling on your knees, say one after another, as follows.

The Prayer, or petition.
Husband. BLessed and praised be thou, O Lord God of our fathers, and blessed
is thine holy and glorious name for ever.


Wife. Let the heavens bless thee, O God, yea the earth, the sea, the wells,
the floods, and all the creatures that be therein, praise and magnify thee.


Husband. Thou made Adam of the mould of the earth, and gave him Eua his
wife for an helper and stay.


Wife. Of them came mankind, O Lord, and thou have said, It is not good that a
man should be alone, let us make him an aid like unto himself.


Husband. And now, O Lord, thou know, I take not this my sister to wife for
fornication or voluptuousnes, but vprightlie in thy fear, for continency, and
only for the love and desire of children, in whom thy name may be blessed for
ever.


Wife. Thou know also, O Lord, that I thine handmaid am pure from all sin
with man, and that I have consented to take this my brother, whom thou have
kept for me to be mine husband, not for any pleasure or fleshly lust, but in
thy fear, and for the desire also of children, that in the seed of Abraham I
may obtain thy blessing in children.


Husband. Therefore have mercy on us twain, being the dearly beloved
children of our parents, and cause us to magnify thee more perfectly, and to
offer continually unto thee the sacrifice of thy praise, and of our health and
sweetness, for thy mercies extended toward us.


Wife. Have mercy upon us, O Lord, have mercy upon us, and as thou have put
away from us the enemy that persecuted us, and made us ioifull in thee; so
according to thy great mercy deal mercifully with us still, and grant that
we may come whole and sound each to other, and become aged together.


Husband. Thy blessing, O God, be now and evermore upon us, and upon both our
parents: and as thou, O Lord, of thy goodness, have joined us together, so by
the virtue and power of thy holy spirit, bless us, and multiply and increase
us, that we may together see our children, and our childrens children unto the
third and fourth generation.


Wife. Yea, let our seed be blessed of thee our most high and holy God, that
all people may know that thou only art God, reigning in all the earth, and to
be blessed and praised for ever.


Husband. Hear our prayers O God, and for thy holy name sake, grant our
request, through the intercession of our only mediator and savior Jesus
Christ our Lord.


Wife. Amen dear God, Amen.


God the Father bless us, God the Son bless us, God the holy Ghost bless,
preserve, and keep us: the Lord mercifully with his favor look upon us, and
so fill us with all spiritual benediction and grace, that we may so live
together in this life, that in the world to come, we may have life everlasting,

Amen.
Another very necessary and fruitful prayer, to be often used of all married
couples, for the obteining of a godly, loving, and quiet life, in that
honorable state of Matrimony.
FOrasmuch as it has pleased thee (O almighty God, the creator and anthor of
all things) to direct both our minds, rule our hearts, and call us from single
life, unto this holy state of honorable wedlock, whereby through thy mercy
we have not only escaped the entising snares of Satan our ancient enemy, the
evil example of the wicked world, and the unlawful lusts of frail flesh, and
so consequently the horrible judgments of eternal damnation, if so be that
we now inseparably live together, according to thy holy ordinance, and our
promise made each to other before thee and all the Angels, but also by this our
happy conjunction, we presently enioie and feel to our great comfort, the
ioifull jewel of a quiet conscience, free from all evil delights, in
filthiness of sin, and occasions of offense: we therefore thy humble servants,
here prostrate on our knees, according to our bounden duty, with pure and
thankful minds, acknowledging this great benefit to be in deed thy singular
gift, do meekelie render unto thy divine majesty most humble and hearty
thanks, evermore praising thee therefore, and saying: Blessed art thou, O our
God and heavenly father, which art the author of our marriage, and of this our
coupling together, and blessed be thy most holy and glorious name for
evermore; yea, let heaven and earth, the sea, and all the creatures therein,
praise, bless, extol, woorship, and magnify thy sacred majesty both now and
henceforth for evermore, Amen.

And now, O merciful father, considering with our selves what need we have to
be very circumspect, careful, and watching to do our duties, seeing how
woonderfullie, subtillie, and despitefullie the devil in these most perilous
days, deludeth, scorneth, forbids, and enuieth this holy state; and how
few matrimonies there be, without chidings, brallings, tantings, repentings,
bitter curssings, fightings, and diuorcings, which things undoubtedly (the
more is the pity) are commonly almost every where committed among all
estates, through the instigation of the ghostly enemy Satan and his impes,
who take great delight therein: for so much also as we are not ignorant how busy
that old adversary of mankind is, to banish the sweet love, inviolable
constancy, and pleasant concord, which to our continual comfort, should
always be betwixt us; and how in stead thereof, he busily labors, and
bends his principal craft to bring in horrible hatred, dreadful dissension,
unpleasant strife, irksome lothsomnesse, and bitter discord, evermore (as it
were from above ho^ering in the air) assaulting our nature and condition, and
never ceasing to lay crafty trains to catch us, and still assaieng to
attempt all things that may interrupt and hinder ou^ hearts desire, and godly
purposes, if we give him never so little entry, intending by this means,
either by voluntary separation, or compulsorie diuorcement, utterly to break
and dissolve this godly knot, so fast knit by thee, to most godly uses; either
else at the least continually to encomber it with diverse displeasures, great
greefes, and manifold miseries, to our (alas) no little anoie and peril, both
of body and soul, to others offense by evil example, and most of all to thy
high displeasure, and great dishonor and slander of the Gospel, which we O
dear God profess.

We therefore thy humble servants, being very desirous to avoid all these
miseries and snares of Satan our ancient enemy, and to live peaceably,
holilie, and comfortablie together in this holy state of wedlock, as
becomes us in the fear of God, first confessing our own infirmity,
weakness and unableness in any thing to resist or withstand as we ought so
vehement, mighty, and strong assaults, invasions, and temptations of the
devil: and secondly, knowing no other way or means how to prevent the
spiteful malice of so deadly a foe, but only in flieng by earnest and
continual prayer unto the throne of thy promised help and mercy, even
through the hope we have christianlie conceived in the promise of so ready
relief and happy help, made by thee to all that call vnfeignedlie upon thee,
in the name of Jesus Christ thine only son our savior. We, I say, thy
poor servants in this faith, presume and are bold to present our selves now
before the sacred seat of thy most high majesty, most humbly craving, and
heartily begging of thee, that for the same thy dear son Jesus Christ's
sake, thou will vouchsafe in mercy favorably to behold and visit us, and by
thine omnipotent power and puissant might, so repress, bridle, and restrain
thou the violent force, and piercing power of our ghostly enemy, and mortal
fo, which thus continually seeks to devour us, and most maliciously
endeavors, and spitefully practices by all possible means, to banish our
loves, to exile our ioies, to abandon our comforts, yea especially to dissolve
our unity, to cancel our bonds, and break our concord: that this our
marriage (thy gracious aid and ready assistance alwaie furthering the same,
and prospering it) may happily be free from all the wicked suggestions, cruel
assaults, and ungodly temptations of our deadly adversary, and also
delivered from all those evils, mischiefs, miseries, inconveniences, troubles,
and calamities, which Satan so busily labors to infect, fester and
entangle this our holy state withal. Give unto us, I say, O good Lord, the
holy help of thy grace, and Angelical aid of thy divine spirit, so to rule
and govern our hearts, and to knit and conioine our minds and wills together
in perfect love, unity, and concord, that we be at no time by any division or
bitter discord disseuered or divorced one from another, but may continually be
vigilant and careful both by daily inuocating upon thy holy name, and also
by all possible diligence, and earnest endeavors on both parts, to strive and
fight valiantly against all the temptations of Satan, and other the
enormities, evils, mischances, and miseries, whatsoever may happen unto us by
his pernicious instigations, wicked motions, and most perilous suggestions.

Grant, O dear God, that as we are now of necessity compelled by thy holy
ordinance to live inseparably together, being conioined by thy word in mutual
love and fellowship, as one body and one flesh: so we standing in awe of thee,
and setting thy holy fear ever before our eyes, may through the working of
thy grace live together holilie, godly, chastely, purelie, peaceably,
quietly, lovingly, agreeablie, and comfortablie, in all happy felicity,
perfect joy, sweet amity, perpetual charity, and continual concord all our
lives long; and that good Lord we pray thee, without any hate, debate,
chiding, bralling, tanting, threatening, disliking, repe^ting, vpbraiding,
irkesomnesse, lothsomnesse, abhorring, detesting, diuorcing: finally, without
any deadly dissension, bitter curssing, and unnatural fightings, or other
unchristian and uncharitable behavior; because in deed it is one of the three
things that so greatly pleases thee, a man and his wife to agree lovingly
together.

O Lord, let not the wicked vices of stiff stubbornenesse, wilful will,
froward fierceness, comberous testiness, mallipert checkings, sharp words,
and self-love be found to reign in either of us: neither suffer us, we pray
thee, at any time to give place unto the provocation of wrath, and hot hasty
furies of the mind, least thereby we begin unhappily to wea^e to our selves
the web of all woe, sorrow, and calamity (as many now adays do) by promoting
the wicked purpose of the devil, or by setting forward of his work, or
finally, by following his di^elish temptations, and the wrath of our hearts; in
giving place without any resistance, to every thing prejudicial and hurtful
to this our blessed state, and honorable degree. But give us grace rather good
Lord, we entirely beseech thee before all things, to take heed that by no
means we give any occasion to our ghostly enemy, to let or hinder our
prayers, and holy exercises, through dissension or discord, and diligently to
apply our selves stoutelie to resist evil, and to weed out by little and
little the noisome w^eds of uncomely demeanor, unchristian behavior, rude
manners, churlish conditions, evil dispositions, and ungodly extremities, out
of our hearts and minds, with the wholesome precepts of thy divine word, the
which give us grace diligently both to hear, read, meditate, and imitate day
and night, that in time we doing our duties each to other, as therein we be
taught of thee, may reap and feel the fruit thereof hourelie, to both our
comforts in Christ, and thy glory.

And because it cannot otherwise possible be, but that offenses shall sometimes
either be given or taken betwixt us, by reason of the manifold discommodities
that come with this commodity: suffer us not good Lord we beseech thee, to
stand stiff at any time in our own opinions, faults, or wilfulness; or to
maintain impudentlie and incorrigiblie our errors, by frivolous excuses, and
ungodly reasonings; neither yet busily to find fault each with others,
calling each for others duty toward our selves, and in the mean time
neglecting our duties both to thee, our selves, and others: yea rather give us
the grace of thy holy spirit, to acknowledge our faults and follies each to
other, with charitable forgiving one another, and mutual reconciliation, that
we may be well pleased, and contented one with another, and in all things each
of us bear and forbear others infirmities and weakness. Grant that either
of us may do our best, diligently to perform our duties one to the other, as
becomes, and we have vowed and promised; as namely, to pray heartily and
often one for another, to labor to the uttermost of our powers to frame, use,
and occasion our selves to softness, meekness, gentleness, lenity, and long
sufferance, bearing well in worth such ouersights, as chance and pass in our
life and conversation, and still drawing, during life, the sweet yoke of our
fellowship, equally in one concord of heart, and agreement of mind; so shall it
come to pass, that all strife and debate shall be clean banished, and
pleasant love, sweet amity, and continual concord shall be embraced of us; so
shall we have our hearts stayed in stable truth, and comfort in all perils and
necessities, and most happily pass through the dangers of the troublesome sea
of this wretched world in great joy and peaceable quietness, to our comfort,
our neighbors profit, and thy glory, which God grant.

Finally, if thus we do godly and christianlie use our holy state of
matrimony, we shall not only be armed on every side, the better to escape
the snares of the world, the flesh and the devil; but also enioie the ioifull
jewel, and most singular benefit of a quiet conscience: yea, so shall all
discommodities, worldly or ghostly, be taken away from us, and all things
both spiritual and temporal, turn to our commodity and pleasure. To
conclude, so shall our prayers be heard, and graciously granted unto us, and
God even our own God continually follow us with his benediction, and bless
us both within and without, at home and abroad, and give unto us all those his
good gifts and benefits, perteining or needful either to our bodies or souls,
which he has so often promised in his word, to power upon all such as love,
fear and serve him both here and in the life to come: the which good things
that they may the better be fulfilled, and more effectually happen and come
unto us here present in the due time, as thou see need, and we heartily wish
and desire; we humbly pray thee, O most excellent father, who art in deed the
very author of our marriage, to be now and always present with us by thy
grace and holy spirit, plentifully powered into our hearts, which may
perpetually continue love, concord, and charity between us, and luckelie
defend, keep, and maintain us in this honorable estate, that neither we be
overcome with any temptation, nor with any adversity. Finally, grant us thy
blessing, favor, and protection in this world, and in the world to come
endless joy and eternal felicity, through the only merits of our savior
Jesus; to whom with thee, and the holy Ghost our maker, redeemer and
sanctifier, be everlasting praise, honor and glory both now and for ever,

Amen.
Another prayer to be used of married folks, to live chastely and purelie in
holy matrimony, and to avoid the filthy lusts of whored^me.
FOrasmuch as (O heavenly father) we truly acknowledge thee an holy and
righteous God, our only God and maker, the knower most truly of our weakness
and infirmity, our ready and gracious helper, our guide and director to
holiness, and the only author of the blisfull state of matrimony, whereby
all thy chosen children might live in chastity and holiness, and avoid the
unchaste life of whoredom and uncleanness. Grant unto us we beseech thee, that
being called by the spirit unto that holy state for our lawful remedy, to
saiue our weakness, to quench the raging lusts of old Adam, and in holiness to
beget children for the increase of thy kingdom, we may live together therein
in thy faith, fear and love, dutifullie, lovingly, and peaceably with
modesty, in lowliness and chastity all the days of our lives: that both our
conuersations together in all respects being coupled with fear, and framed
with one consent, according to thine holy will, and to the godly edifieng of
others, representing by it, in all points the mystery figured between Christ
and the congregation, thou may have pleasure in our godly behauiours. Bless
us in all our enterprises, and make us fruitful and ioifull parents.

And to the increasing of our joy O Lord in thee, we humbly pray thee, that
thou will of thy great mercy give both unto us, and to the offspring of our
bodies lawfully begotten, thine heavenly grace, that as we most christianlie
endeavoring our selves to train them up in thine holy nourture and doctrine,
so they likewise by the infusion of thine heavenly grace, may have their
hearts prepared to receive and hold sure for ever the only word of
righteousness, that lightneth, cleanses, best rules, and most truly
directs the souls of the righteous, to the plain and most pleasant path
that leads to the life everlasting, through the merits of Christ Jesus thy
son our Lord,

Amen.
Another prayer to be used of such married couples, as where the woman is not
past childbearing.
O Merciful Lord, and heavenly father, which by thine almighty power have
made all things of naught; which also (after other things set in order) did
appoint, that out of man (created after thine own image and similitude) woman
should take her beginning; and knitting, ioining and sanctifieng Adam and Eve
together in marriage, did teach that it should never be lawful to put
asunder those, whom thou by matrimony had made one. O gracious God, which
have consecrated the state of matrimony to such an excellent mystery, that in
it is figu^ed and represented the spiritual marriage and unity betwixt Christ
and his Church, look mercifully with thy favor from heaven upon us thy poor
creature^, whom it has pleased thee in mercy to call from single life, and
to join by free consent together in this holy state of honorable wedlock.
And as thou, O eternal God, the giver of all spiritual grace, and the author
of everlasting life, did send thy blessing upon Abraham and Sara, to their
great comfort; so vouchsafe to bless us, O Lord, and to send thy benediction
upon us thy servants: yea, so sanctify us twain, and power plentifully upon
us the riches of thy goodness, so sow the seeds of eternal life in our minds,
and fill us with all spiritual benediction and grace, that as Isaac and
Rebecca lived faithfully together, even so we, carefully keeping thy
commandments, diligently obeieng thy holy will and pleasure, and always
guided by thy good and gracious spirit, may truly perform, and surely keep
the vow and covenant betwixt us made before thee and the congregation, and may
ever remain, persist, and abide in perfect amity, steadfast peace, and
continual concord, until our lives end. Grant also, that we may profitablie
and fruitfullie learn our several duties, either toward other, and both
toward thee, out of thy holy word, and in deed fulfill the same to the
furtherance of virtue, and avoiding of all offense, that so serving and
pleasing thee both in body and soul, as those godly men and women did, to
thy glory, and their perpetual renown, we (as persons highly in thy favor,
and shrouded always in safety under the comfortable wings of thy merciful
protection) may most happily, prosperously, and ioifullie, like fruitful
parents, seeing our childrens children, unto the third and fourth generation,
live long together unto our perfect age in thy holy love, and all godly
honesty, to our comfort, and thy glory, and at the last rest with them in the
bosom of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and be fellow-heires of the everlasting
kingdom in eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
Another prayer for all wedded folks generally.
O Most holy God, and merciful father, which of thy singular providence, and
wonderful wisdom, did ordeine matrimony in Paradise, and that in the
time of innocence, for the multiplieng and conservation of mankind, thereby
togather unto thy self continually out of godly families, an holy Catholic
Church, which may rightly acknowledge, serve, and celebrate thine holy name
for evermore, and deliver the true understanding of thee unto posterities, by
one generation to another. This thine institution did thy son, God, coequall
with thee, and coeternall, confirm and adorn in Cana of Galile, by turning
water into good wine. A notable honoring of marriage doubtless, for Christ
not only to be present himself at the nuptial feast, but also to set out the
same with the first miracle that he wrought after his nativity. Likewise, the
holy spirit does witness by the word delivered unto us, and says, that
marriage is honorable among all. And the same thy spirit reioiceth in three
things, which are commended both before God and man, viz. in the concord of
breethren, in the love of neighbors, and in a man and his wife that agree well
together; for such as be at variance, can neither call upon thee as they
should, nor please thee as they ought.

O eternal God, it is sufficiently apparent with what a rage and insatiable
hatred Satan the most deadly enemy to all thy works, does labor and set
himself to the breaking off, and overthrow of this thy sacred ordinance:
wherefore we beseech thee, impart thy favor, as unto us here present, so unto
all married folks elsewhere, that both we and they may acknowledge thee to be
the author and institutor of this knitting together in wedlock; and believe
steadfastly, that we and they are in a good estate, wherein we may please thee:
for having this comfort, we shall more willingly and cheerefullie discharge
the duties of our calling, in true confidence, and calling upon thy name. But
such as doubt of their kind of life, having their consciences wounded, and
minds troubled, can neither call upon thee truly, nor cheerefullie go about
and finish their affairs. Grant therefore unto us, and unto all and every
married body, that in true faith and confession we may retain the
indissoluble chain of wedded state, and the strong bonds of godly fellowship,
that we may love one another, and in the sweat of our brows eat our bread,
and bring up our children which thou shall give us, or have given us, in all
godliness, through instruction, and information of the Lord, and never fear
the cross, which accompanies this kind of life.

O work thou so, good Lord, that Satan by no means weaken and overthrow
this thine ordinance; nor that we married folks, wearied with the troubles of
wedded life, raise no mortal hatred among our selves, and so detest and
abhor this thine holy institution, and seek unlawful separations and
di^orcements: for else by this engine of incredulity, and snare of mistrust,
being comprehended, we shall easily rush headlong into enormous offenses, by
casting off the yoke of the Lord, and be carried through dissension into
horrible confusions of concupiscence, to adultery, whoredom, and wicked
forsakings, so long, till polluted with filthy spots, and defiled with most
horrible stains, we and they bring our selves headlong into everlasting
torments. Grant therefore, O most merciful God, that all being now at debate,
may come quickly to amity, and be reconciled in thy name, and being mindful
of the knot of marriage, and mutual bond made between them, may dwell and
live from hence forward peaceably and lovingly together in true faith and
fear of thy name.

Grant that husbands abusing their authority over their wives, do not
exercise tyranny over their wives; but rather love them, and dwell with them
according to knowledge, giving honor unto them as unto the weaker vessel, even
as to them which are also heirs of grace and life. Likewise grant, that
matrons and wines contemn not their husbands, denieng subjection, but rather
study by chaste obedience, and holy conversation and lowliness to overcome
them. Let neither hate other extremely, and so violate the state of marriage,
and bring themselves out of thy favor, through their discord and contention,
whereby their prayers be interrupted; for where neither part do their duty,
there must needs ensue first poverty, subtlety, lieng, and all impiety,
afterward a wounded conscience, and last of all, utter despair.

O most chaste God, which did therefore institute the order of matrimony,
that by the same both the weak nature of mankind might live purelie in lawful
wedlock, and an holy Church be gathered unto thy self, give thy blessing to
us, and all which are married, that we and they may have godly children, and
their wives prove like the fruitful vine, and their children appear like
the olive branches round about their table, and may see their childrens
children, the peace and safety of thy Church, the which Christ thy son
repairer of mankind, by taking our flesh upon him, has coopled to himself,
which lives and reigns with thee in the unity of the holy spirit, a God
blessed and praised for evermore,

Amen.
A prayer to be said of a young married woman, or, a Wife.
O Lord, forasmuch as thou of thy fatherly goodness have vouchsafed to keep me
from my tender age until this present, and have now called me from my single
life, unto the holy state of honorable wedlock, that I living therein, might
according to thine ordinance, bring forth children unto thy glory, give me
grace I most entirely beseech thee, to walk worthy of my vocation, to
knowledge my hus^and to be my head, to be subject unto him, to learn thy
blessed word of him, to reverence him, to obeie him, to please him, to be ruled
by him, peaceably and quietly to live with him, to wear such apparel as is
meet for my degree, and by no means to delight in costly jewels, and proud
gallant vestures; but alwaie to use such clothing, as becomes a sober,
chaste, and christian woman, circumspectly and warelie ^o look to my household,
that nothing perish through my negligence; and always have a diligent eye,
that no dishonestie, no wickedness, no ungodliness be committed in my house,
but that in it all things be ordered according to thy holy will, which art
worthy all honor, glory and praise for ever and ever,

Amen.
Another.
Merciful and gracious God, forasmuch as through thy grace I am placed in the
state of matrimony, and called to the charge of a family, wherein doing my
duty, I may please thee; give grace to me thy handmaid, that I may have ^hy
fear always before mine eyes, and love thee my maker and redeemer above all
things in this world. Next imprint within my breast an entire affection of good
will toward mine husband. Let me honor him, cherish him, and love him above
all men, and only, as my part is, and I have promised. Grant that my will,
according to thy commandment, may be in subjection to mine husband, and obeie
him in all equity, and that the hid man of mine heart be vncorrupt, with a
meek and quiet spirit, adorned with all kind of virtue: for after this manner
in time passed, the ho^ie women which trusted in thee, attired themselves, and
were subject to their husbands. Reform the manners of thine handmaid, and make
me in my conversation modest, and honest; make me in visage, shamefast; in
words, temperate; in wit, wise; in going, sober; in conversation, meek; in
correction, pitiful; in life, circumspect; in companie-keeping, wary; in
promise, steadfast; in love, constant; take from me all crabbednesse,
curstness, stubbornness, and shrewdness; and let me have an especial care
by virtue and friendly words, to mitigate the anger of mine husband, if at
any time he be displeased, and let me abstain from all such things as I know
will offend him.

Furthermore, give me grace to bring up my family and children (which thou
have or shall give me) in all honesty and virtue, to the honor of thy most
holy name, and my comfort. Assist me in like sort, that diligently I may
save, not wastfullie or negligentlie consume those things, which of thy mercy
thou have and dooest give to the maintenance of mine household; but grant that I
may do my duty to the uttermost of my power, whereby I may have to give to
the poor, and to relieve the needy. Bless us, O Lord, from vnthri^tie
servants, which will waste, and wickedlie consume that which painefullie we
have gathered. Also, make me patiently to suffer the troubles and affli^tions
of married life, and to continue in my duty, albeit manifold miseries do
arise, persuading my self, that by affliction my faith is tried. O Lord, unto
thy protection do I commend my self, my loving husband, with all ours.
Uouchsafe O gracious God, to keep us all from sin, shame and destruction,
through Christ our Lord,

Amen.
Another prayer to be used of any Noble woman, etc. when she is married, or
afterward.
O Most merciful Lord and savior Jesus Christ, which to express thy most
burning affection toward thy best beloved spouse the Church, have offered thy
self upon the altar of the cross, to sanctify and cleanse her by the washing
of water thorough the word, and to make her glorious for thy self, without
spot or wrinkle, or any such thing: and also coopled thy self to her, by
suffering upon thine own flesh the punishment which was due unto her. Join me
I beseech thee unto thy body, that ingraffed in thee, I may draw from thee
the juice of life, and of heavenly wisdom. Marry me for ever O sweet
Christ, unto thy self, in righteousness and judgment, in godliness, mercy and
faith, that I may truly know thee my Lord and my God, which wilt not the
death of a sinner, but rather that he or she repent and live. Give me grace
also, that I never delight in mine own beauty or fairness, and so play the
harlot, by following mine old lewd lovers, which promise me bread and water,
wool, flax, oil, wine, and drink, to entise me to folly; but make me with
a chaste body, and pure affection, to serve thee in chaste matrimony, and to
love my husband vnfeignedlie from my heart without dissimulation, so that he may
safely trust in me as in his true turtle, and sweet and dear companion; and I
may render unto him good for good, not evil for evil. Give me grace so to
keep my self in great fear of thee, that being well occupied in my
business, temperate in my words, faithful to my husband, well ordered in my
person, peaceable with my neighbor, honest among mine own family, and
shamefast among strangers, I may thereby conserve the reputation of mine estate
and degree, to thy glory especially, mine own renown and virtue, and others
good example.

Drive away Satan the mortal enemy to this thine ordinance, that he sow
not contentions and bralles between us. Cut off all occasions of debate, and
sinister suspicions, that so in a true conioining together of minds, we may in
this world live virtuously according to thy word. Defend me (I say, O dear
Christ) and thine whole Church, against the rage of satan, the world, and the
flesh. Do thou vouchsafe for ever to love, cherish, and comfort such as are
engraffed in thy flesh. Purge and wash me continually from my s^^nes,
filthiness and spots, through thy great mercy and merits. Finally, deck me
with thy gifts and goodness. Wash me with water, and purge me with thy blood;
anoint me with thine oil of gladness; put upon me the robes of righteousness,
and cover me with the glorious purple; adorn me with the precious stones of
virtue, and place upon mine head glory and honor, that all mine ornament may
be inward, and that I may please thee through living in thy faith and ^eare,
and hoping in thy mercy. For thou, O sweet Jesus Christ art mine husband, which
tenderly love me; my God, whom I worship; my head, wherevnto^ I am subject;
and my bridegroom, with whom I hope in heaven to reign eternally,

Amen.
Another prayer to be said of any noble woman, lady, gentlewoman, or modest
matrone married.
FOrasmuch as it has pleased thee, O heavenly father, of thine inestimable
mercy, to bring me to this high estate of dignity, and to put me in
possession of a place of honor as a matrone for other women to behold; grant
unto me, I humbly beseech thee, that in all my doings I may follow the
example of all virtuous and grave matrones, which are specified and described
for our example in the holy scripture; that is, to be as loving and obedient
unto my Lord and husband, as Sara was to Abraham, as Susanna was to Ioachim,
and as humble, loiall and wise as Abigaell was to King David, Hester to King
Ahesuerus, or the blessed and noble virgin Marie was to Joseph. Grant also, I
beseech thee, that I be neither proud, presumptuous, ambitious, disdainefull of
others in comparison of my self; high-minded, nor a boaster in mine own
blood, kindred, beauty, wit, or dignity, but with the noble Queen Hester, to
say, Thou know my state, O Lord, and that I hate this sign of preeminence
and worship, which I bear upon my head, what time I must go forth to be
seen, and that I abhor it as an unclean cloth, and that I wear it not when I
am quiet alone by my self; that bearing always an even mind, and having an
humble opinion of my self, as she that knows her self to be but dust and
ashes, and en^bled by thee, from whom alone comes the true nobility and
gentry, to so many as are borne of thee, and made thy children through faith,
I may lay away all pomp and pride, nicenes, tenderness, and disdain, and
ever set more by others, than by my self, yea, and think my self worsse than
any other in thy sight, to the end I may always live virtuously, holilie,
shamefastlie, soberlie, and chastely, in all meekenes, gentle behavior,
discreet conversation, prudence, wisdom, learning, virtue, and purity, both
in body and soul, both before thee and all men, as becomes a christian and
faithful woman, and such a one as will be a true imitator of Rebecca, Hester,
and the rest of those holy matrones and noble women mentioned in the
scriptures, that all other seeing my good example of life, may praise thy name,
and be encouraged thereby to glorify thee in their virtuous conuersations,
world without end,

Amen.
A prayer to be used of the wife that has a froward and bitter husband, as a
present remedy against the mischief of di^orcement and separation.
O Most wise and provident GOD, which in the beginning did create man in
thine own image, and out of him did make the woman, and did bring her unto
the man, that she might be an helper unto him; and therefore thou causedst him
to say and confess, that she was flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones;
thereby teaching him not only the holy and indissoluble band of love, unity,
and mutual society, that ought to be between man and his wife, as for whose
sake he ought to leave father and mother, and to clea^e unto her, but also the
most s^cred and blessed conjunction and knitting together of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and his sanctified Church and people; so that no man can break or
despise that bond and unity, but he must needs be guilty of presumption
against God, and of the wilful breach and contempt of his ordinance.

Wherefore, oh Lord, since it has pleased thee to match me in this most
honorable state of marriage, according to thy divine providence; I beseech
thee to make him an head unto me, and my self an helper unto him, according to
my creation, and as thy holy institution requires. And because thy holy word
is the only rule, and ordinary to govern and direct our lives; I heartily
desire thee oh good God, give this mine husband thy grace and holy spirit, and
so open thou his wits and senses, that having by the light of thy grace the
true knowledge and understanding of thy holy word in all discretion, he may
know how to walk in his vocation, both toward me his poor wife and
yoke-fellowe, and all others, as becomes him, and thereby become unto me not
so bitter a despiser and hater, but a true lover, sweet friend, and godly
governor.

Thou, O good father, see the great lack and necessity that I thine
handmaid have, of a wise guide, grave counselor, holy instructor, and
continual comforter. O therefore I beseech thee, look upon my trouble which I
endure; consider my reproof and reproaches that I bear in my bosom; pity my
misery, ease me of so great a burden, and relieve my great need and
necessity. Make this my husband I say, O dear God, a head, a veil, and
defense unto me for my preservation and safety: for if we thus bite and devour
one another, it cannot possible be, but we shall be consumed one of another.
Make him therefore tender, careful and comfortable unto me thy weak creature,
if it be thy good pleasure; and grant, that according to his promise made
before thee, and as thou have commanded elsewhere in thy holy word, he may
with perfect and holy love, cherish, nourish, and love me as his own flesh,
and as Christ loves his Church, and as she that is heir together with him of
the grace of life, that our prayers and godly exercises to the benefiting of
our souls and bodies, be not interrupted or hindered. Grant that he forsaking
all other, may cleave only unto me, as becomes, without separation, and that
he may dwell with me as a man of knowledge, and christian behavior and
government, to thy glory, my comfort, and others edifieng.

But alas, I must needs confess unto thee my God, that I am most unworthy of
so good a be^efit: for I have not walked in this most honorable state purelie,
and holilie, according to thy divine ordinance, whereby I have made my self
much more unworthy to have so precious a gift at thy fatherly hands: and if
it be thy good pleasure with frowardnes, bitterness, and unkindness, yea, the
hatred and disdain of my husband, thus to correct me for my fault, I most
heartily thank thee for it. And I beseech thee, so to order me in all things
in thy great mercy, that I never murmur or grudge impatiently against thee
for the same, nor do any thing either against thee or my husband, whereby thy
majesty may be displeased, my husband offended, or thy Gospel and people
slandered: but dear God, give me perfect patience, I beseech thee; and cause
thou me to pluck mine eyes from this my husband and yokefellow, in too
narrowly beholding his infirmities, and make me to behold thee my God in this
thine holi^ ordinance, and to look upon my self, and the wallet before me,
that I may see mine own slips and faults, and learn to pull the beam out of
mine own eye first, before I find fault with the mo^e in his. Grant, I say,
that we may lovingly, and with the spirit of meekenes, bear one another
burden; and that I for my part may quietly bear the frailty, infirmities
and faults of my husband, with more patience, mildness and modesty, than
hitherto I have, so that mine example may be to the comfort and commodity of
other to do the like.

Oh Lord, thou see the great corruption of my nature, and the pronesse
thereof to sin, and my weakness, infirmity, and unableness to stand in
temptation: lay no more on me therefore dear father, than thou will make me
able to bear, nor suffer me not to be tempted above my strength, but in the
midst of my temptations make such a way and issue for me to escape out of
dangers, that may happen by the instigation of Satan or his members, as shall
seem best to thy divine providence and wisdom, so as the same may be to the
furtherance of thy glory, the profit of the Church, and the comfort of my
conscience, by Jesus Christ mine only mediator and savior, So be it.

A prayer to be used of the wife for her husband, before, or in his traveling
by land.
TO thee, O Lord Jesus Christ, I commend my husbands going forth, and his
coming in; his iourneie, and his returning, beseeching thee happily by the
hand of thy grace, to lead him the way he is about to go (or ride) and
purposes now to take: graciously defend him O good God, from the crafts,
deceits, and lieng await of all his enemies, as well bodily as ghostly:
Mercifully keep and preserve him from all perils both external, and
internal, and finally, by thine ineffable clemency and grace, bring him
safe, whole, and unhurt home again from all danger, So be it.

Another.
O Lord which art the way, the truth, and life, thou have promised in the
holy scriptures, that they which put their trust in thee, and look for help
at thy hand, and take thee for their mighty defender and strong castle, shall
be preserved harmless, and walk in all their iourneie safely, and without
danger: for thou thy self wilt take charge of them, and shadow them under thy
merciful wings, so that none evil shall chance unto them. Yea, as thou did
send thy holy Angel with Abraham and Tobit, and with other thy faithful
servants to be their guide and defender, and to make their journey prosperous,
so will thou send thy blessed Angels with them that wholly depend on thee, and
with strong faith commit themselves to thy most godly tuition, which shall
safely keep them in all their ways, yea, and sooner hold them up with thine
hands, then they shall dash their foot against a stone.

This thine accustomed gentleness toward thy servants, and these thy loving
promises encourage methine handmaid greatly at this present to come unto thy
majesty, and according to my duty most humbly to beseech thee, that as my
husband now in thy name has taken this his journey upon him, so thou will
vouchsafe him thy mercy and grace, both in the beginning, entry, gate, and
ending of this his travel and journey, and that thou which art our God, wilt
keep him both going out, and coming in, and direct his feet that he err not
in his ways.

O Lord I beseech thee, give thine holy Angels charge over him, to keep him
in thy faith and ^eare wheresoever he goes, to take care for him, to defend
him from all misfortunes, and to bring him prosperously to that place where
his business lies. Let them guide him I say, O Lord, too and fro, throughout
all his journey, even as Tobit the younger was guided of the Angel Raphaell
unto Gabaell, habiting in Ragis a City of the Medes. O Lord our God, direct
thou his steps, that he fall into no peril either of soul or body. Bless
thou him, I say, in this his journey, and preserve him both from the claws of
thieves and murderers, and from the jaws of devouring beasts. Let him find
favor wheresoever he comes, and let him honestly be entreated in all
places; and his business being happily ended, and his journey prosperously
finished, do thou vouchsafe to bring him safely home again of thy mercy and
goodness, that I may praise thee.

In all his ways be thou present with him, as thou wast with Jacob, traveling
into Mesopotamia, and descending into Egypt. Likewise, as thou did conduct
the Israelites through the red sea, and through the uncomfortable and perilous
wilderness, going before them by day in a pillar of a cloud, and by night in a
pillar of fire, so be thou with my dear husband always in all places, and
lead him in all this his journey, and bring him home again in safety. Be
thou both his companion and conducter, O Lord: for into thy hands I commend
both his life, and all that he has. Finally, grant that I continuing his
faithful, trusty, and loving spouse here at home, he may find both me and
all his in good health and peace, both of body and soul at his return;
through our Lord Jesus Christ, which lives and reigns with thee in the
unity of the holy spirit, a God for evermore,

Amen.
A prayer to be used of the wife for her husband being a Captain or Soldier,
and gone a war-fare.
ALthough, O most sweet Jesus, there is nothing more commended and set forth
unto us in thy holy scriptures than peace, unity, quietness and concord, unto
the which also not only Moses and the Prophets, but thou and thine Apostles
also do therein diligently exhort; and contrariwise vehemently dehort and
dissuade all men from discord, enmity, malice and war, because nothing is more
seemly for man, than to embrace amiable peace, friendly concord, and quiet
amity: yea, the very creation, shape and birth of man proves evidently, man
to be formed and made unto peace; yet such is the monstrous malice of Satan
that old enemy of mankind, that he goes about like a roaring Lion seeking
whom he may devour, and with all manner of labor, sweateth to banish peace
from the children of men, and in sted thereof, violently to thrust in discord,
tumults, seditions, wars, bloud-sheading, manslaughter, destruction of realms
and countries, cities and villages, intending by this means, to make havoc
of all together, so that he furiously raging in his members, provoke many
times thy servants for the defense of their country, and the safeguard of their
wife, children, families, and people, to go on warfare, and to wage battle
with their enemies. I therefore most humbly beseech thee, to assist my
husband, and all such as justly attempt any wars against their enemies, and
mightily to defend them against their adversaries, that they may receive
through thy puissance, a glorious victory, and noble triumph.

S^nd thine holy Angel unto him and them, that he may pitch his tents among
them, and overthrow their enemy for them. Give unto my husband, and all
Captaiues and soldiers, thy grace so to behave themselves in the service of
wars with all godliness, honesty, and compassion, that thou mais^ have a
pleasure to be present among them, to be their chief and grand Captain, and
valiant defender. Suffer not him and his fellow soldiers to be discouraged for
the multitude of their enemies; but being armed with strong faith, let him and
them wholly depend on thee, the most mighty conqueror, with whom it is all one
to help in few or in many, and with that prince like warrior David, boldly
to say in the midst of their troubles, The Lord is my light and my defense,
whom shall I fear? The Lord is my health and the defender of my life, of whom
shall I be afraid? Though mine enemies pitch pauill^ons against me, yet shall
not my heart fear; though men of war rise against me, I will trust in the Lord
my God. And when thou have given him the victory over his enemies, give him
also a thankful heart, that he may confess to have got the victory not by
his horse, bow, nor gun, nor yet by his own strength and policy, but by
thine almighty power, and so be encouraged for ever after to magnify thy
holy name,

Amen.
Or thus.
OH Lord, the world is nothing else but a sea of trouble: here the devil
stormeth, there the world frowneth: on every side the flesh assaulteth us, so
that our life may well be termed a warfare, and our days a treasure of
dangers. Oh Lord, with the anchor of thy mercy vp-hold us, that w^e sink not
in the sea of this troublous time, but guide us with thy holy spirit, that our
lives may please thee, and we in our death praise thee, through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Defend, O Lord, the righteous cause of my husband thy servant, now
gone a warfare. Assist him with strength against his enemies, with the wisdom
of thy spirit, against the policy of man, that being thoroughlie armed and
guided by thee, he may fight manfully in thy quarrel, to the building of thy
Church, and utter rebuke of her adversaries. Without thee, O fountain of
goodness, and God of his estate, I know he can do nothing; arm him therefore
with thy grace, with the buckler of thy word and complet armor, that he may be
able not only to war with, but also ouer-match Satan his deadly foe, and all
his hellish band, that sets it self against thee and thine anointed.
Enrich him, O God, with thy mercy, that he may be able to take upon him the
white raiment of faith, and being clothed with it, may stand sure against the
foming ministers of the devil, that no storm may ouer-turne or dismaie him. O
Lord, keep thou him from all wrestling affections; from inordinate motions
defend him, O God, and let all discord be removed, whereby the Pellicane
children desirous of blood, may be disseuerd: but nourish, O God of love thy
babes with the spirit of patience, that he and they being of one mind, may do
their duties, apply their endeavors, and bend their forces and whole strength
to the reedifieng of our mother Sion the Church, which trauelleth with sorrows,
and sinketh in the mists of heresies, unless thou pull her out by the hand of
thy mercy; which do, O gracious God, I beseech thee, and plant the tree of
peace among us; let it flourish to the gladding of our hearts, that all
dissension cut off, we may be linked in one knot of christian unity, gathered
into one sheepfold, to be guided by thee our only and one shepherd. Let not
the members of thy body be sundred, but cherish and nourish them with a full
persuasion of brotherhood, in the unity of our savior, and thou our only
father; to whom with the holy Ghost be everlasting glory, praise and
dominion, now and for ever,

Amen.
A fruitful prayer to be said with tears of all godly women, in the time of
bloody battle, when they see their husbands, themselves, and their children
and family, city and country in danger of destruction and sacking. by the
cruel enemy.
O Lord our heavenly father, and everliving God, we thy wretched and most
miserable creatures confess and acknowledge, we have woorthilie deserved the
rod of thy correction and punishment, and do merit many sharp and bitter
stripes, that knowing thy blessed and glorious will, have of set purpose
contemned thy divine and heavenly precepts; for which cause, the sentence of
thy wrath is sharply kindled against us, man, woman, and child, even as it
has been against thy chosen people Israel, in the days of our forefathers,
who glorieng in their wickedness (as we have done) were plagued in the fullness
of thine indignation (as we justly are.) The sword of their enemies beset
them round about, and he mined them ^n on every side. The Iebusites, the
Ammonites, the Philistines, and the Ammorites oppressed them diversely, their
strong holds were rased, their cities were beseeged, their houses were
ransackt, their goods confiscate, and their riches were carried away by force
of the bloud-thirstie enemy. Their young men were led away captive, their
virgins were woefully defloured: but in fine, when thou O Lord God did behold
their hearty and earnest repentance and contrition, thou did withdraw thy
frowning countenance, and sent them speedy and safe deliverance. One while
thou Lord sentest them Moses, to bring them out of the servitude of Pharao, the
stony and stubborn hearted king of the Egyptians, another while Iepthah set
them free from the sword of the Ammonits, wherewith they were greeuouslie
afflicted. And to make thy power and excellent glory fully known, thou
gave Samson such fortitude to bridle the proud Philistines. Over and besides
these, thou of thy love and miraculous goodness, have made feeble women mighty
and victorious conquerours; namely, Debora was a shield to the people, Judith
comforted the distressed Bethulians, and cut off the head of proud Holophernes,
that thou good Lord, when thou beheldst their tears and hearty sorrow for
their offenses, did prepare thy self to go forth with their hosts: thou thy
self (I sat) with the breath of thy nostrels, did confound and overthrow
their enemy.

Even so good Lord, thou most mighty and merciful God, which art King of
glory, and Lord of hosts, the governor of all creatures, and the only giver
of all victories, whose power no creature is able to resist, and who alone art
able to strengthen the weak against the mighty, and to vanquish infinite
multitudes of thine enemies, with the countenance of a few of thy servants,
calling upon thy name, and trusting in thee. Be thou now present with us in the
fulness of thy divine power, to help and deliver us and thy people from the
cruelty of our enemies. And although our sins have instlie deserved to be
punished with the sword of thy vengeance, yea, though we women for our
abominable pride and filthiness, have merited to have all violence used against
us in all uncleanness by the enemy; as our virgins to be ravished, the womb
of our maidens opened and defiled, the thighs of our wives and daughters
discovered, and their wombs polluted, and all generally to be put to shame,
reproach, and confusion; yea to the slaughter, and to have our beds and bodies
bathed in blood, yet look mercifully upon us with the eyes of thy favorable
pity, who truly and earnestly repent us of our sins, and forget our corrupt
and most filthy o^fences. O let our contrite and sorrowful hearts be a mean to
move thee to have pity and compassion upon us, our husbands and children, and
to vanquish thy displeasure justly conceived against us and our husbands,
children and families, people and country.

Be thou present, I say, O almighty God with us, and our husbands thy
soldiers, in this time of our wars, great necessity and trouble; fight thou
their battles for them, set thy hand to help and assist them against the
enemy, be present with us, I say, in this time of peril and danger. Go thou
forth with our armies and hoasts, and fight thou on our side, then shall we be
assured to prevail. Let not the multitude of our furious foes dismaie us any
whit: for victory we do know consists not in the power nor strength of
many men, neither yet in the strength of horses, armor, nor weapons; but it
is thou, O merciful father, and mighty God, that give the conquest, where,
and to whom thou please. To thee therefore in this great perplexity, and
bloody battle, do we fly and appeal, beseeching thee of thine inestimable
love and kindness, for the love of our savior Jesus, to look upon our true
repentant hearts, and in the fulness of thy miserations and pities, to save our
lives from the sword, and our goods from the spoil, and deliver us and set us
free from the hands and power of our raging enemies; abate their pride, assuage
their malice, confound their devises, and to pardon all our sins and grievous
offenses, that being armed with thy defense, and preserved by thee from all
imminent perils, we vow and dedicate our hearts and minds wholly to walk in
integrity and newnes of life, to glorify thee the only giver of all
victory, which grant, good Lord, through the merits of thine only son our
savior Jesus Christ, to whom with thee and the holy Ghost, be attributed all
praise, power and dominion for ever and ever world without end,

Amen.
A prayer to be said of any wife or daughter for her husband or father, being
a Merchant-venterer, or otherwise making his voyage by Sea.
O Almighty Lord God and most merciful father, maker of all things, who by
thine insearchable wisdom, did create that mighty globe of the world, the
heavens, earth, sea, and all things else therein contained: vouchsafe I beseech
thee to be mine husbands (or my fathers) aid and defense in this his dangerous
voyage which he has presumed to take, reposing his only trust and confidence
in thy mighty mercy, to be delivered and preserved from all manner of dangers
and ieopardies, that may happen either upon the sea, or on the dry land.

Thou know, O Lord, and most merciful father, that all those that travel
by sea, are subject to the hazard of diverse calamities, either to be tossed at
the pleasure of the wind and waves, either to be dashed violently upon the
maine rocks, or to stick in the quicksands, or to be despoiled both of life
and goods, by the tyranny of pirates; but yet what cross or affliction soever
happen unto him, grant that he may acknowledge freely, that it is but a just
punishment for his and mine offenses, because from the first hour of our
nativity, we have been more apt and prone to follow the filthy appetites of
our own desires, than to exercise our selves in the true way of thine
undefiled law. Notwithstanding, what cross soever (I say) thou shall think
good to lay upon him; yea, though thou suffer him to be drowned of the waves,
and swallowed down into the deapth of the whales belly with Jonas (from which
good Lord deliver hun) yet let him not despair of thy mercy, for thou art the
same God forever, thy right hand is not shortened, neither is the greatness of
thy power diminished. When Jonas lay three days and three nights in the
whales belly in the sea, yet did thou at last (O mighties God) deliver him
safe and sound, and sentest him to preach thy name to the great city of
Niniue. Thou art yet the same God (I say) thou wast at that time, neither is
thy power abridged at all, and therefore, although my husband or father be
never so shaken with winds, turmoiled with tempests, tossed with the waves;
yea, although he were utterly devoured of the whale-fish in the bottom of the
sea; yet I confess, and so let him acknowledge, that thou art able to deliver
him from all these dangers; yea, from the very jaws of death.

To thee therefore do I thine unworthy handmaid, make my humble supplication
and intercession for my husband (or father) T.B. now passing the seas, unto
thee do I his seely poor wife (or child) S.B. power forth my fervent and
hearty prayers in my dear husbands or fathers behalf, because thou only art
the castle of both our comforts, and his bulwark, his watchman, his keeper
and defender, his sure rock, and hope of his salnation. To thee only and to
none other do I commit and commend him wholly body and soul, goods, ship,
fraught, and all that belongs unto him. Uouchsafe I beseech thee to bless
him, preserve and keep him in health, and give him grace so to behave himself
in this his journey, and at all times, that in no part he offend thy divine
majesty, or provoke thee to be angry with him. Direct his course safely unto
the haven and mart. Protect him and save him and all his from the cruelty and
force of the water-flouds. Lead thou him forth, and bring thou him in. Be
thou, O God, his only stay and defense, whether he sleep or wake, live or
die, sink or swim, upon the waters, as well as upon the land, and briefly
in all places, and in all times and seasons, shield and preserve thou him, as
my trust is in thee.

Thou know, O Lord, that this trade is not of his devising, nor yet
proceeding of any humane invention; but thou, O father, of thy mere mercy
did reveal the mystery thereof to thy servant Noah, in commanding him to
frame an Arc that might fleet upon the floods, wherein he and his family
only, to the number but of eight persons, were saved in the great deluge or
flood, when all the world else for the greatness of iniquity, perished
altogether, and were utterly confounded and drowned in the mighty waters that
ouerflowed the whole earth. Uouchsafe therefore I beseech thee, O most mighty
God, and merciful father, the ruler and governor both of heaven, earth, and
sea, with all the creatures contained therein, in thy mercy so to dispose the
wind and the weather, and to give my husband (or father) such success in this
his voyage and journey, which he has now presumed to take, only upon a sure
faith and assurance of thy mercy, that it may turn him to no danger, damage,
loss, or misfortune, but that he may alwaie be delivered from all the dangers
both of the sea, pirates, and enemies; and so, that he may be safely conducted
by thy merciful protection and assistance, and have a safe and prosperous
return home again into his country, as was righteous Noah in his arc, and
as may be most to thy glory, my comfort, and his commodity.

Behold I thine hand-maiden, whom thou have ransomed and redeemed, do cry
unto thee; yea even I, as now a s^litarie woman, left all desolate alone, whom
thou have with thy precious blood redeemed, do still cry and call heartily
upon thee for my dear and well-beloved husband, or father, according to my
duty, and thy commandment. Hear me, O God my savior, the hope of ^ll the
ends of the earth, and of all them that be in the sea a far off. Hear me, I
say, O merciful father: for now my dear husband or father, is conversant in
a troublesome sea, and perilous waters. O stand thou upon the shore of thy
heavenly country, and look at his perils. Lord save him for thy name sake,
that he perish not. Govern his ship with thy right hand by the help of thy
grace, that he perish not in the waves of the stormy sea, that the tempest of
the waters ^rowne him not, and that the deep swallowe him not up; but Lord,
grant him so to keep his course amiddes the vast seas, between the most
perilous rocks of Scilla and Caribdis, and to hold so with the anchor of
faith and hope in thee and in thy cross and passion, that he may escape the
danger of both those dangerous rocks, and be guided by thee the morning light,
and sea-star of day, son of righteousness, that he may come safe to land,
both outward and homeward, without loss of man, ship, or fraught: so will I
yield thee immortal thanks, and perpetual praises for thy fatherly benefits,
and my tongue shall record thy works of glory for ever and ever, which thou
dooest for the children of men, both upon the sea and land. Yet, O father, not
my will, but thy blessed will and secret counsel be fulfilled, both in him,
and in me: and I beseech thee set thy fear always before mine eyes, and indue
me with such plenty of thy grace, to strengthen my weakness and frailty in
falling, that in this my husbands or fathers absence, I may continue faithful
and godly in my vocation, and persist in faith, love and holiness with
modesty. Make me diligent to rule well my children and family, and to keep
them in all christian obedience, that I may get my self a good report of all
men. Let me abandon all vain pleasures and fond delights, which beguile
unstable souls. Make me to shun and avoid all unprofitable practices, all
idleness, s^oth and security; and let me be well given and disposed to all
huswifelines, sobriety, godliness, and chastity, keeping home, instructing my
household, and praieng continually day and night, because of my great
necessity, that so living purelie, and behauing my self christian^e in all
obedience toward thee, and loiall faithfulness toward my husband, or father, I
may give occasion to the adversary to speak well of the professors of the
Gospel, to thy glory, and my comfort in Christ Jesus, to whom with thee and
the holy Ghost be all honor and glory now and for evermore,

Amen, Amen.
When your husband, or father, is come safe home from his journey, give God
thanks therefore, and say:
I Thank thee (O heavenly father) for this thy great mercy and grace, which
thou have showed unto me thine unworthy handmaid, both in hearing and
granting mine humble requests, and also in leading forth and bringing in, and
causing this my dear husband, or father, to return and come home again safe
and sound in good health to my great joy and comfort. This I acknowledge and
confess, O Lord, is brought to pass even through thy mere mercy, gracious
goodness, and holy blessing, which thou of thy woonted clemency, and
bountiful liberality, give and extendest to all them that keep thy holy
word, and do thereafter.

Blessed and praised therefore be thy most holy name for ever; and I beseech
thee, O gracious God, grant now both unto my husband (or father) and me, whiles
we live here in this vale of misery (where we have no abiding, dwelling
place, or permanent city, but look for one elsewhere with thee in our
celestial home) a sure and quiet conscience, to love each other of us in thee
and for thee, and to serve thee, love thee, and praise thee with all our hearts,
with all our strength, and with all our souls, for ever and ever; through thy
son Jesus Christ our Lord, who is our only rest and peace, to whom with
thee and the holy Ghost, three persons and one invisible God, be all praise,
dominion and thanks for ever and ever,

Amen.
A prayer and thanksgiving to be said, when your husband (or father) with his
ship, is safely come home from his voyage by sea.
O Most merciful Lord, and heavenly father, I render unto thee most humble
and hearty thanks, for the manifold and great mercies which thou from time to
time have mercifully bestowed upon me, both for my soul and body. And amongst
other, O father, I thank thee for the good and prosperous success, which thou
in thy mercy have given my husband (or my father) in this his voyage and
journey, delivering him and his from all the dangers of the same, disposing all
things by thy good providence to a good and happy end, and now safely
bringing him, with ship and fraught, home into his own country and house, to
my great comfort, and his commodity. Let this thy fatherly favor, O Lord, be
both unto him and me a sufficient cause to move us continually to render
thanks unto thee, and wholly to depend upon thy merciful providence, both in
prosperity and adversity, and that we may so walk before thee, as thy glory
alwaie may shine in us, and that our tongues may be instruments of thy praise
at all times, and in all places, even all the days of our life; that we thus
living in thy faith, fear, and love, and in the obedience of thy holy
commandments, may pass the time of this our pilgrimage in peace, concord,
mutual love and amity, so that when the same is ended, we may live and
reign with thee for ever and ever,

Amen.
When your husband, or friend, is in prison and endurance, or otherwise
persecuted, or in trouble, and affliction, see that heartily you pray for him,
and say as follows.
O Lord, Father of mercy, and God of all consolation, which rulest and
disposest all things after thine unsearchable wisdom; and workest in thy
creatures, according to thy blessed will, which is alwaie good and godly,
howsoever blind and frail flesh judges of it. I know, and vnfeignedlie
confess thine omnipotency and almighty power. I know that thou art able to
do what thy good pleasure is. I know that thou bring down to the grave,
and fetchest up again. Thou punishest with poverty, and make wealthy
again. Thou throwest men into the dark dongeons, and loosest them out of
prison again, breaking even the gates of brass, and smiting the bars and
bolts of iron asunder. Thou dooest put down and exalt again. Thou woundest
and healest; yea, thou O Lord killest, and make alive again.

Oh, woonderfullie dooest thou work in thy creatures, especially in them,
whom thou have appointed to be vessels of mercy, and inheritors of thine
eternal glory. If they at any time greeuouslie offend thy divine majesty
(as we be all sinners, and ready at every moment to fall) thou dooest neither
long wink at their wickedness, nor yet ever cast them off from thy favor, but
like a loving phisician with some emplaister or salve, although bitter to the
flesh, yet wholesome to the soul, thou healest them, and like a tender and
gentle father, correctest them with some temporal punishment; that by this
means they escaping everlasting punishment, may repent them of their ungodly
behavior, confess their wickedness, fly unto thy mercy, and for ever after
be the more circumspect in treading the paths of thy holy law.

On this manner did thou handle the Israelits, when they offended thy
fatherly goodness. On this manner did thou deal with King David, and the
Prophet Jonas for their disobedience, with many other; whom notwithstanding
for thy mercies sake, after they had acknowledged their offenses, and called
upon thy holy name, thou woonderfullie deliueredst, and broughtest again as
it were out of the perilous seas, into the haven of quietness.

I therefore thy poor creature and sorrowful handmaid, perceiving in thy
holy word so large fountains of thy great mercies plentifully issuing out
toward all them that be of a contrite heart, and broken spirit, am bold
(notwithstanding mine vnwoorthines, by reason of my manifold sins) to come at
this present unto thee, and that for thy promise sake, most humbly he seeching
thee, that as thou deliueredst Jonas out of the whales belly, Joseph and
Daniel from prison, Peter thine Apostle out of ward and durance, David from the
hands of his enemies, Susanna from the power of her adversaries, with many
other: so in like manner, thou will deliver and set at liberty thy servant,
and my faithful and dear husband T.B. and that in such sort, that it may be
to thy glory, to his health, to the comfort of me his woeful wife, and
sorrowful children and friends, and to the reioicing of so many as
vnfeignedlie love thy blessed word.

And although, O God, I formine imperfection am not worthy to crave and enioie
so great and comfortable a benefit at thy merciful hands; yet I doubt not, but
for thy dearly beloved Son Jesus Christ's sake, thou will most favorably
hear me, most fatherly pity me, and most bountifully grant me this mine
humble request; and I again receiving this notable benefit of my dear
husbands deliverance at thy hand, shall not be unthankful, but continually
magnify thy holy and glorious name, which dealest so favorably with thy
servants, when they call upon thee in the name of Jesus Christ thine only
begotten Son, and our alone mediator and advocate, to whom with thee and the
holy Ghost, be all praise and honor for ever and ever,

Amen.
When your husband or other friend is delivered out of any trouble, look that
you give God hearty thanks therefore, and say:
SO often as I consider thy wonderful works, O blessed and heavenly father,
which thou workest of thine own good will, for so many as in their trouble
and adversity fly for refuge unto thy holy name, as unto a strong hold and
mighty fortress; I cannot but confess and acknowledge thy singular kindness
and unspeakable good will, which thou continually through thy fatherly
goodness bear toward thy servants, and for the same not merited of any, but
freely of thy mercy given, I render unto thee, according to my most bounden
duty, most hearty praises and entire thanks, in consideration whereof, the
children of Israel being in miserable captivity, lamentably lamenting before
thee their too much sorrowful state, by hearty prayers; after that thou had
delivered them from the land of servitude, brast out into exceeding great
praises, glorifieng thy most holy and blessed name, for their sweet and
comfortable deliverance. The Citizens of Bethulia likewise being in great
distress, called upon thy glorious name; and thou most mercifully deliueredst
them, and they again with merry voices and more ioifull hearts, soong unto thee
most hearty thanks. In like manner, when thou had delivered Joseph, Daniel,
David, Peter, and many other thy servants from their sorrows and calamities;
oh who is able to express with how ready and glad minds they magnified thee,
and thy holy name.

I therefore sinful woman, excited and stirred up with the godly examples of
these thy servants, knowing how greatly thou delightest in the sacrifice of
praise, confessing also (such is my beggerie) that I have none other thing
worthy to offer unto thy divine majesty, at this present addressed and
prepared to celebrate thy great mercies, do magnify thy blessed name, and
render unto thee most humble thanks, and immortal praise, that it has pleased
thee of thine exceeding goodness, the rather at the contemplation of my poor
prayers, to show thy favorable mercy, in the deliverance of thy servant, and
my dear husband T.B. unto my singular joy and great comfort.

For this thy benefit (most beneficial father) I so heartily thank thee, as
heart can think; most entirely be seeching thee, that thou will give him and
me, and us all, even so many as love thy blessed word, never to be unmindful
of this thy benefit, nor to commit any thing hereafter that should offend thy
fatherly goodness, or provoke thy wrath against us, least through our
disobedience we, after this, feel more bitter tokens of thy heavy
displeasure, than hitherto we have done; but in all our enterprises so to
behave our selves according to thy blessed will, that thou may delight in us
as a father in his children. And vouchsafe to bless us with all spiritual
blessings, to enrich us with the knowledge of thy heavenly word, and to work
in us a life conformable to the same, that other seeing our godly manners, and
christian conversation, may be encouraged to embrace thy blessed word, to
magnify thy holy name, and in all points to frame their life according to the
rule of thy holy commandments, through the inspiration of thy blessed spirit,
to whom with thee, and thy dearly beloved Son Jesus Christ, be all praise,
honor and glory for evermore,

Amen, Amen.
Prayers to be said of women with child, and in childbed, and after their
delivery.
A prayer to be used of a woman with child.
O Almighty and merciful Father, which of thy bountiful goodness have
fructified my womb, and of thy gracious blessing, have created in me a
reasonable creature; I most heartily thank thee, not only for this thy
gracious gift, but also for that thou have at all times, since I conceived,
preserved me from all perils both of soul and body, and have so moderated all
my nips, pinches, and pangs, that I have hitherto right well escaped them.

I acknowledge, O Lord, that justly for our ^infull transgression of thy
commandments, thou saiedst unto the first woman, our grandmother Eve, and in
her to us all; I will increase thy sorrow, when thou art with child: with pain
shall thou bring forth thy children. All our pains therefore that we suffer
in this behalf, are none other thing, but a worthy cross laid upon us by
thy godly ordinance, to the which with heart and mind I humbly submit my
self, trusting surely, and being fully persuaded in my faith, that thou
call none into peril and danger, but both thou can, and wilt at
convenient season deliver them.

Thou most gracious God have commanded us in all our trouble to call upon thee
for aid and help: and not only have commanded us, but also of thy merciful
goodness have promised to us good deliverance, saying, Call upon me in time of
trouble, and I will deliver thee. O good Lord, how greatly do these words
comfort my heart, and sustain my seely soul? Who would not greatly rejoice,
that knows certainly almighty God to be present with him in his trouble?
Says not God thus? Or ever they call (says he) I shall answer them. While
they are yet but thinking how to speak, I shall hear them. And in the Psalm,
I am with him (says God) in his trouble, out of the which I will deliver him.
What a comfortable Lord is this? He is more ready to help, than we to call
for help. He is more ready to give grace, than we to ask it. There was never
any yet that with a pure faith asked grace of his Lord, but he had it. Christ
says, Ask and ye shall have. Every one that asks, has. He that says
every one, excepteth none. Uerelie, verelie, I say unto you (says Christ)
whatsoever you shall ask my father in my name, he shall give it you. Our
savior Christ says this, and he is God, and shall not I hearken to my Lord
Gods commandments and promises? Uerelie I will stick surely to it: for sure
I am, that sooner shall heaven and earth perish, than Gods promises be
unperformed. For albeit every man naturally is a lier and deceiuer, yet God
is always true and just in all his words and promises. I will therefore make my
suit unto him, whom I need not go far to seek: for he is euerie-where present
with his elect, and is nigh unto all them that call upon him faithfully, and
thus will I pray unto him.

FAther of mercy, and God of comfort and all consolation, I thy poor
handmaid humbly beseech thee for Christ Jesus sake, and in his blessed and
holy name, that thou will vouchsafe to forgive me all my sins and trespasses,
that I have heretofore offended in against thy godly majesty, either in
thought, consent, delectation, word or deed; and that thou will hereafter
during my life, mercifully preserve me from transgressing of thy
commandments, and daily increase in me perfect repentance for my sins, a sure
purpose of amendment of my life, and a diligent study to walk in thy
commandments. Increase in me also a lively faith, a sure hope and charity.
Ingraffe in me humblenes of heart, meekenes of mind, cleannes of conscience.
Grant me that I may be wise, sad, sober, discreet, circumspect, and well
advised in all my saiengs, and that I may strongly overcome all the
temptations of mine enemies, the devil, the world, and the flesh, and that
whether I be sleeping or waking, eating, drinking, or whatsoever I do, all may
be to thine honor and glory. Grant me also that I may humbly reverence my
husband, and faithfully love him, and be obedient to all his honest, lawful,
and godly requests. And chiefly of all, grant me, O Lord, that I may fear
and dread thee: for well assured I am, that look how high the heaven is in
comparison of the earth, and so great is gods mercy toward them that fear
him. Look how wide the East is from the West, so far has he set our sins from
us; yea, like as a father pitieth his own children, even so is the Lord
merciful to them that fear him.

And as touching my deliverance of this burden, and thy gracious gift, I am
right well assured, that unless thou prosper my travel, all women's help, and
all physic is in vain: but my full trust is, that like as thou have created
this child in me, and have breathed into it the spirit of life; so at such time
as shall be feene most meet to thy most godly majesty, thou both can and
wilt prosper the child's birth, and my deliverance. In consideration whereof, I
humbly beseech thee of thy fatherly pity to strengthen me, in this my
dangerous labor and travel, and so sustain me, that I may patiently bear
all my throws, and pangs, and according to thy promise, suffer me not to be
tempted above my strength, but in the midst of my temptation, make a way to
come out, that I may bear it.

Increase my faith, O most merciful savior Christ, that I may constantly
believe thy word, which say, Ye shall be sorrowful, but your sorrow shall
be turned into joy. A woman when she trauelleth, has sorrow, for her hour
is come; but when she is delivered of the child, she thinks no more of the
anguish, for joy that a man is borne into the world. I be seech thee therefore
in the dangerous time of my travel, grant me speedy deliverance, and ioifull
beholding of my child, that I being a merry and ioifull mother, may render unto
thee honor, laud, praise, and thanks, for thine abundant mercies, and
gracious gifts and benefits.

And finally, above all things I beseech thy gracious goodness to endue my
child with grace, that it may be one of the number of thine elect, baptized,
and regenerated in the holy Ghost, and that at the years of discretion, it
may learn to know thee: and knowing thee, may trust surely in thy mercy:
trusting in thy mercy, may heartily love thee: loving thee, may fear to
displease thee: and fearing to displease thee, may be obedient to thy
commandments, and finally, atteine everlasting joy and felicity, through
our Lord Jesus Christ, which lives and reigns with thee and the holy Ghost,
world without end, So be it.

Another prayer of a woman with child before her travel.
O Almighty and merciful God, maker of heaven and earth, which for sin, have
enioined to me, and all woman -kind, a grievous pain, to bring forth
children, I mislike not this thy decree, but I acknowledge the same to be
holy, irreprehensible, and good: for all that thou have created and ordained
are very good. Wherefore I beseech thee, in the name of Christ thy well-beloved
Son, assist me in my pains, help me in the danger of deliverance, and
convert my mourning into mirth. In the mean season, keep thou me, with the
child in my womb, from all hurt and danger, Grant also, that my child yet
unborn, may come into this world sound and perfect without deformity. Protect
me likewise with thy favor, whereby I may escape all danger, fear, frights,
and untimely deliverance. Bring into my mind all my misdeeds and offenses,
that vnfeignedlie I may be sorry for them, and walk hereafter warelie in my
calling; and when the time of my deliverance shall approach, assist me with thy
grace, and bring out my child in good time well proportioned, according to
thine image, and restore me to my woonted strength if it be thy good pleasure.

Give also unto my newly borne babe, together with outward baptism, thine
holy spirit, whereby it may be regenerated unto everlasting life, admitted
into the society of thy saints, and continue in thy service, and godly
conversation evermore. O Lord God merciful father, into thine hands I commend
both my self, and my child, do with us as it pleases thee; thou have made
and redeemed me, therefore thy will be done. In thee will I trust, as long as I
shall live. Thou art my refuge in Christ our Lord and savior,

Amen.
Another prayer of a woman with child before her labor.
AL thy ways are just, oh dear father, and thy judgments are true
altogether: for worthily does man live in the sweat of his face, and the
woman bring forth children with much pain and travel, and with great danger.
Yea, O merciful father, this pain is not a sufficient punishment for the
grievous transgressions, wherewith we and our forefathers have transgressed
thy most holy will. The punishment in respect of our demerits is too small,
but in respect of our weakness, too great for us without thee to endure.
Wherefore, as I acknowledge, O merciful father this travel in childbirth,
which now approaches, to be a just reward of my manifold sins: so I acknowledge
also thy ready arm of defense, stretched out over me, and over all them that
call upon thee in faith. Grant therefore, O dear father, that I may in faith
pray, and wait for that time of my travel patiently: that I may endure it
when it shall be present constantly and thankefullie; knowing, that although I
then feel some taste of the reward of sin, yet I feel not all, and that little
which I then feel, thou dooest presently reward.

The which comfortable and glad issue, grant me, O Lord, if it be thy good
pleasure: and having received such fruit of my body, grant me moreover
wisdom and strength to bring it up in thy fear, and to travel as it were
again with it, till it be borne again into a heavenly life, to the glory of
thy holy name, and my great joy, so that it may finally in Christ Jesus, be
partaker of those blessings, which thou dooest plentifully rain down upon
the faithful and their seed for ever. And because I am not worthy to present
this my suite to thy heavenly majesty, of my self, a most wretched and
sinful woman; I offer it in the name of the righteousness, and in the strength
of my Lord and savior Jesus Christ, praieng furthermore as he has taught us
to pray, Our father, etc.

Another prayer of a woman with child before her travel.
OH most dear father, Lord of heaven and earth, which gouernest all things by
thy wisdom, so that nothing is done without thy providence. Thou causest the
wind to blow, the storms and seas to arise, and in their chiefest rage, with
a word thou stillest them again. Thou sendest fire, rain, and snow from
heaven, threatening great destruction, and yet not one of them can pass the
bounds that thou appointest them, so that they go, and do only what thine
almighty word has commanded them, the bounds and measures where of they may
not, neither are they able to pass: whereby most d^^re God, thine almighty
wisdom and power is manifest unto us in all thy works; but most chiefly in
the wonderful work of the forming of man, who of a marvelous small and
loathsome substance, is made a living creature, and nourished within the
closure and intrailes of the womb, and having a soul or mind infused into it
by a heavenly beginning, is alwaie desirous to be returned again, as out of a
strange country into his own.

Therefore, O heavenly father, I yield thee most hearty thanks, that thou have
vouchsafed to count me worthy, and made me the shop and receptacle of this thy
most excellent work. And I beseech thee, most loving father, that as thou have
given me aptnes and power to conceive and receive thy creature and workmanship
into my body, so thou would give me power and strength, to bear and to
nourish it, until it come to good perfection, and that I may safely bring
forth the same. Thy goodness, oh gentle father, did at the beginning appoint
and ordeine that this thy work of propagation, and bringing forth of man,
should be to us easy, pleasant, and without danger. But our sins alas, dear
God, through the disobedience and breaking of thy law and commandments, has
made it to be dangerous, painful, and full of peril, which thou did lay
upon our grandmother Eve, and upon all us her posterity, as a correction and
punishment for sin: and therefore I confess dear God, that through my
manifold sins, I have not only deserved this thy rod of correction, but far
sorer, and more grievous punishment, yea even thy wrath, were it not that thy
mercy exceeds all thy works, and thy tender love toward us is such, and so
great, that in thy justice thou think upon mercy, and have not only given
thy dearly beloved Son to shed his precious heart blood, to take away our
sins, but also have chosen us in him before the world began, to be thy
children, by whom thou have assured us, that thy fatherly care and godly
providence over us is so great, that even the very hears of our heads are
numbered in thy sight.

Wherefore, oh most merciful father, I am bold to run presently unto thee
with all my trust, hope and confidence, that thou have given me, praieng and
beseeching thee, for thy great mercies sake, for thine infallible promise and
truth sake, which never fail any that put their trust in thee, and for thy
Son Jesus Christ's sake, oh most mild and mighty worker, that thy clemency
may refresh and restore in me, that which my sins have hindered and corrupted;
and either take from me the great labor and dangerous travel that my sins
have deserved, and the fear that it has brought me into for the same, so that
I shall not need such power and strength, such care and industry as my
corruption now seeks and requires; or else so qualify, mitigate and order
all my throws, pains, pangs, and pinches of this my childbirth, that the
travel thereof do not surmount, nor overcome my strength, further than thou,
oh father wilt make me able to bear, and endure the same, or else increase my
strength, encourage my mind, and fortify my senses so, that I may without
mistrust, despair, or grudging against thy majesty, bear the labor to the
end. For my God and dear Father, I do know and assuredly believe, that all
my pains and throws are so in thy fatherly ordering and working, that only
so far forth shall they be painful and grievous unto me, and no further,
but as thy divine providence does appoint.

Assist me therefore, oh most dear father, with thy most cheerful present,
and ready help, and comfort me with thy holy Ghost. For dear father, as
thou did lay this rod of correction upon us for our sins, that we should
conceive in sorrow, and bear in peril: so Lord, thou of thy goodness did
promise, that we should bring forth. Therefore, oh most loving and pitiful
father, according to this thy holy promise, I beseech thee, send me good
deliverance of such a child, as may be to the praise of thy holy name, a
witness and testimony of thy good will, and blessing to this most honorable
state of matrimony, and also by thine holy institution of baptism, may be
made of the number of thine elect children, and heir of thine eternal
kingdom, by the merits and deseruings of thy dear Son Jesus Christ, in
whose name, I beseech thee furthermore as he has taught and commanded me,
saying: Our father which art in heaven, etc.

The same prayer more brief.
THY wisdom and power shine forth in all thy works, O Lord, but yet much
more greater, more manifest and more wonderful are they in the shaping of
man. Of how small beginning dooest thou make so marvelous a living thing,
infusing a soul into it, whose original is from heaven, to the intent he
should long to return thither, as into his country? And now that thou have
^^uchsafed to make me, as it were thy worke-house, wherein to fashion so
singular a work; I most humbly and heartily thank thee, beseeching thee,
that as thou have given me ability to conceive, so thou will give me strength
to the perfecting of the thing that is in breeding, that I may safely both
bear it, and bring it forth. Truly thou, O merciful father, had of thine
own goodness made this work of childbearing easy, but our sin has made it
sorrowful and full of danger. O most gracious worke-man, let thy pitifulnes
amend the thing which our sinfulnes has marred, and either abate my pain,
that I may not have need of so great strength, tendance, and running; or else
increase my strength, power, and courage, that I may be able to overcome all
the pains of my travel,

Amen.
The same prayer again in Meeter.
THY wisdom Lord in all thy ways,
and power great to perform it,
We cease to search, and only praise,
They pass so far the reach of wit.
And thus we muse and marvel much
at all thy works, and yet we find
No marvel nor no wonder such,
as daily forming of mankind.
Of such beginning, such an end,
and of such seed, such fruit to grow,
With David well we may contend,
to maze, to muze, and nothing know.
The matter earth, the shape from heaven,
does knit both soul and flesh in one,
Whereof such strife is them between,
from whence they canie, they would be gone.
And yet in all thy wonders great,
thy mercy Lord does far pass all,
Which dooest vouchsafe to work this feate,
in me poor wretch thy bond and thrall.
And as good Lord thou dooest me make
thy shop, to shape thy work therein,
Thy hand-worke so do not forsake,
but end the thing thou dooest begin.
Thy goodness Lord did once make light
this burden now, which sore does grieve,
Until which woe did wrap each wight,
the woeful work of woeful Eve.
That Eve has lost, let Christ restore,
that guilt has made, let grace amend,
Why should the fault of Eve do more
than grace in Christ? God it defend.
Oh Lord, the time approaches near,
that throws of Eve I must sustain,
And that I may the same well bear,
increase my strength, or less my pain.
Thy will this burden on me laid,
thy goodness eke will ease the same,
Where Christ has once the ransom paid,
why should the deed of Eve bring blame?
Thus O Lord I me in thy will
do put, eke wholly in thy hand,
I will not once swerve from thy skill,
to die, or live, to fall, or stand,
Amen.
Another godly and earnest prayer to be said of every Christian and faithful
woman, in the time of her travel or childbirth, used of the virtuous Lady,
Frances Aburgauennie.
Almighty God, my heavenly and most merciful father, I feel thy promised
punishment at this present to take effect on me, which for the gilt and
transgression of my progenitors, has been by thy divine majesty, justly
pronounced against me, and the whole generation of Adam. Great and intolerable
are these bitter pangs and pearsing pains, that in this my travel of
childbirth, I endure and abide. Now feel I as it were a cruel and sharp
conflict betwixt death and life; now feel I (O Lord) the rod of thy
correction, according to thy justice laid heavy upon me, for the use and
exercise of sin and iniquity; yet when it shall please thee good Lord look
upon me with the eyes of thy fatherly compassion and pity, and according to
the multitude of thy manifold mercies, be thou now present with me. Arm^ me, O
mighty God with perfect patience, ioifullie to bear thy correction, and in
the midst of these my sharp and bitter brunts of grief, give me grace still
to call upon thee.

Strengthen me a poor wretched woman, give me comfort and heavenly
consolation from above, and when thou shall think it meet and convenient, send
me safe deliverance, that I may enioie the fruit of my womb, the sight whereof
shall adorn and deck me anew with joy and gladness, otherwise, good Lord, if
in this season thou determine to take me hence unto thy self by thy messenger
death, to whose stroke all creatures (when thou think it meet and expedient)
shall bow, make me constant and faithful in thee, whose I am, whether I die or
live. Forget my sins and offenses committed by me against thee. Let the blood
of the Lamb Jesus wash away my deformity. Let the spots of my corruption be
purged, and taken away. Let my infected soul that is putrified therein, be
purified therein. Give me grace always, whether I live or die, to call upon
thee continually. Give me power to pitch my confidence only and alone in the
bloody wounds of Christ Jesus, to whom in this my distress I fly, and
appeal for remedy and comfort. Grant this O gracious God, which live and
reignest world without end,

Amen.
Another prayer of a woman being in travel.
LORD save me, or else I perish: Lord have mercy upon me a sinner. Pitiful
Jesus show thy mercy unto me, and let the light of thy countenance shine upon
me, that I be not swallowed up of grief and sorrow. Lord, sweet Lord, thou
sendest thy servants to call me to the marriage: the fatlings and oxen are
killed, and dinner is ready. Lord give me grace to come unto thee, that I
being freed from sin, and eased of sorrow, the fruit of sin, may marry thee
in the covenant of thy mercy, and banquet with thee face to face at the table
of joy in the heavenly Jerusalem. Lord, loving Lord, and gracious God, bless
the fruit of my womb, and take it into thy family. For I believe Lord, that
thou becamest of God, the son of man, to make it and all other, whom thy
father has given thee, the children of God thy heavenly father. According to
my faith therefore, O Lord, be it unto me. Open the door of thy mercy, and
lodge my child in the virtue of the covenant; that being my God, and the God of
my seed, I may glorify thee both now and ever, and offer up the sacrifice of
praise, and the fruits of a ioious spirit unto thee. Lord and father of heaven,
it is thy will that all men should be saved, thy will be done, and save me and
my child by thy mercy, I beseech thee,

Amen.
Another meditation in Meeter, to be said of a woman with child. made by. W.H.
In time of trouble call on me,
And I will then deliver thee.
THE time draws nigh, of bitter painful throws,
how long I shall the same endure, God knows.
O Lord my God, I humbly ask of thee,
make haste sweet Christ, and safe deliver me.
As I by sin, deserved have right well
such pain as this: yea more than tongue can tell.
Yet ah my God, turn not away thy face,
nor me forsake in this so sharp a case.
This womb and fruit that springs in the same,
have thou create to glory of thy name.
Oppressed with pain, O Lord, when I shall be,
make less the same, so much as pleases thee.
And grant good God, thy creature may proceed,
safely on live, with mercy at my need.
In Christ's name I will my travel sho,
now holy Ghost come comfort me in woe.
Come father dear, and let thy power descend,
O Jesus Christ thy mercies great extend.
Ah God behold my dolor and my smart,
sweet holy Ghost, my comforter thou art.
Take part with me, and hear my woeful cry,
Ex^uli me, miserere mei.
Amen.
In long and sore labor call earnestly upon God, and say to your comfort the
6. 38. 51. 102. 30. and 142. Psalms of David, commonly called the seven
penitenti all Psalms, or the Psalm of a peniten^ sinner:
Or else this 22. Psalm of DAVID following, called The complaint of Christ on
the Cross.
MY God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? It seems that I shall not obtain
deliverance, though I seek it with loud cries.
My God, I will cry all the day long, but thou will not answer; and all the
night long I make pitious moan, without taking any rest.
The mean time, thou most holiest seemst to sit still, not caring for the
things y^ I suffer, which so often have helped me heretofore, and have given to
thy people Israel sufficient argument and matter to praise thee with songs,
wherewith they have given thanks to thee for thy benefits.
Our forefathers and mothers were wont to put their trust in thee, and as
often as they did so, thou did deliver them out of their distress.
As often as they cried for help to thee, they were delivered: as often as they
committed themselves to thee, they were not confounded, nor put to any shame.
But as for me, I seem rather to be a worm than a woman, the doonghill of
Adam and Eve, the outcast of the vulgar people.
As many as have seen me laugh, have laughed me to scorn, and reviled me,
and shaking their heads in deriston at me, have cast me in the teeth, saying:
She is wont to boast and glory that she is in great favor with God,
wherefore let God now deliver her, if he love her so well.
By thy procurement, O Lord, I came out of my mothers womb, and thou gave me
good comfort, even when I sucked my mothers breasts.
Through thy means I came into this world, and as soon as I was borne, I was
left to thy tuition, yea, thou wast my God, when I was yet in my mothers womb.
Wherefore go not far away from me, for danger is even now at hand, and so
none in earth will or can help me.
Many bulls have closed me in both strong and fat, they have compassed me round
about.
They have opened their mouth against me, like unto a lion that gapeth upon his
pray, and roareth for hunger.
I am powered out like water, and all my lims losed one from another, and my
heart is melted within me as it were wax.
All my strength is gone and dried up like unto a tilestone, my tongue cleaves
to the roof of my mouth, and at the last I shall be buried in the earth, as
the dead be wont.
For dogs have compassed me round about, and the most wicked have conspired
against me, they wound even my very heart, hands, head, and feet.
I was so vngentlie entreated of them, that I might easily number all my
bones, and after all the pain and torment that they did to me, with grievous
countenance they stared and looked upon me.
They divided my clothes among them, and cast lots for my coat.
Wherefore Lord I beseech thee, go not far from me, but for-as-much as thou art
my power and my strength, make haste to help me.
Deliver my soul from danger of the sword, and keep my life destitute of all
mortal help, from the violence of the infernal dog.
Save my soul from the mouth of the lion, and take me from the horns of the
unicorns.
So will I show unto my breethren and sisters the majesty of thy name, and
when the people are most assembled together, I will praise and set forth thy
most worthy acts and deeds.
All that worship the Lord, praise him; all the posterity of Jacob magnify
him, all ye that be of the stock of Israel, with reverence serve and honor
him.
For he has not despised and set at naught his poor handmaid, because of her
misery, nor he has not disdainefullie turned away his face from her, but
rather as soon as his poor handmaid cried unto him for help, he heard her
by and by.
I will praise thee therefore with my songs openly in the multitude of people,
and I will perform my vows in the sight of them that honor thee.
The poor shall eat and be satisfied, they shall praise the Lord, that study
to please him, and as many of you as continue still such, your hearts shall
live.
All the ends of the world shall consider these things, and be turned to the
Lord, and all heathen nations shall submit themselves, and do homage unto thee
my God.
For the Lord has a power royal, and an imperial dominion over the heathen.
The most mighty and greatest of all them that dwell on the earth, have eaten,
and after that they have tasted the spiritual gifts of the Lord, they have
submitted themselves, and made humble suite unto him.
Yea, and all the dead, which are buried in the earth, shall kneel and make
reverence in his honor, because he has not disdained to spend his own life
for them.
They that shall come after us, shall honor and serve him. These things shall
be written of the Lord, that our posterity may know and understand them.
That they also may come and show these things to the people that shall be
borne of them, that the Lord has done these things, which be so marvelous.
The prayer in long and dangerous travel of child, to be used either of the
woman her self, or by the women about her in her behalf.
Have mercy upon me, O Lord, have mercy upon me thy sinful servant, and
woeful handmaid, who now in my greatest need and distres, do seek thee:
behold, with grievous groans and deep sighs, I cry unto thee for mercy.
Even now while thy heavy hand in chastening is upon me, do I power out my
soul, and make my pitious mo^e, and humble supplication unto thee my God, for
mitigation of my misery. For lo, thou see, how I pant with pain, and groan
through grief, and travel in sore labor before thee, together with all thy
creatures, sighing in my self, and waiting for thy ready help, and my
speedy deliverance forth of this distres. Oh Lord, am not I now that woeful
wight, who with all the sorrows of a traveling woman, am oppressed in thy
sight? Yea, thou see in what pitiful plight I am, drawing nigh toward my
travel, and hear me sorrowful wretch crieng out in my pangs, as she that
is destitute of all mortal help. Alas, how tediously do I travel of this
child: how pinching pangs do I justly suffer for my sins? I have a long time,
O Lord, held my peace, suppressing my throws so long as my womanly strength
will suffer. I have been quiet and still, and refrained my self, I say, as
much as I am able; but now alas, such and so intolierable is my grief, so
many and vehement are my throws; yea, so continual and tedious is my
travel, that without thee, I can not possibly any longer forbear, but am
forced through bodily pain, and inward grief, to shrich and cry alowd unto
thee, and that with tears, for speedy comfort and heavenly help, that she
which is in sore labor, may find mitigation of her pains, through thy mercy,
and being ready to bring forth, may be delivered through thy power. For
except thou, O Lord, make a way out, that which is conceived, can not be borne.

Oh Lord, this day is a gloomie day, a bitter time and terrible hour, a day
(or night) of anguish and tribulation, of sorrow and perturbation, unto the
very soul of thine handmaid: for the babe is come unto the place of the
birth, and lo, it seems that thou for my sins have shut up the doors of my
womb, and caused the babe to stand still like to be stiffled. What shall I
say, O my God, what shall I do? Have mercy upon me, O Lord, have mercy
upon me, and help me. Make a way out for my deliverance, for in me there is no
help, no strength, nor power to bring that forth that I have conceived. It is
thou only, O Lord my God, which have fashioned it in my womb, that must do
it. Oh therefore put forth speedily thine almighty hand, and help me, and
give me strength and patience to endure whatsoever for my sins it shall please
thee to lay upon me in this my sore labor.

O good God, thou that have promised to entreat those gently that bear
young, have mercy upon thine handmaid, and vouchsafe to show that tender care
and fatherly favor unto me that am full weak and feeble: help me speedily
that stand in great need thereof. For without thee, I confess there is no
deliverance nor salvation in the earth to be expected, neither can any
worldly means prevail any thing at all here in this action.

Oh Lord, thou art he that have drawn me out of my mothers womb long since,
and hitherto have had a tender care over me, so that thou have caused me to
look up unto thee, when I did hang yet on my mothers breast: so soon as I was
borne and came forth into this world, I was committed unto thee, and even then
thou did declare thy self to be my God and father. Now then, O Lord, when so
great miseries do approach and enuiron me, I beseech thee be not thou far from
me, neither forsake me which am destitute of all manner of succors besides.

Come holy Ghost, and regard the sorrows of thy hand-maiden: for behold, he
that is mighty has humbled me greatly. O blessed trinity, come visit a
wretch that now (as thou see) is entered into her secret chamber, and has
shut the doors about her to hide her self for a little while, until thine
indignation be ouerpassed. Come, I say, O glorious and almighty God, come
speedily, and through thy divine power work thou all our works for us here
in secret, that we may praise thee openly. For thou art my God, and my soul
has greatly longed for thee both day and night. Yea, with my spirit within
me do I heartily and earnestly seek thee, early and late; oh would God that
I might find thee whom my soul loves! For in the way of thy judgments, O
Lord, do I wait. I constantly abide in mi^e adversities, wherewith thou
dooest woorthilie afflict me, and put my trust only in thee, from whom I
expect speedy deliverance in thy good time. Thy sweet name, O Jesus, and the
remembrance of thee is now the thing that my languishing soul so much longs
for^ O come therefore unto me at the last, and comfort me; satisfy my longing
to the full, and deliver thy faithful handmaid, and sorrowful servant out of
this extreme sorrow, and easelesse pains, that I may no longer cry and
say, Why is my heaviness continual, and my pains so intolerable? How is it
Lord, that for no entreaty thou will not deliver thine handmaid from such
indurable greefes? How long shall I suffer the pains of the birth, and the
anguish of the travel? Now long Lord shall my bowels thus sound like an harp,
my bones and sinews be racked asunder, and mine inward parts be thus
greeuouslie tormented for my sins. Consider, O Lord, how I am troubled, how my
womb is disquieted, and my heart wambleth within me for anguish. Will thou have
no compassion on a wretch? Will thou cause me thus to travel still in pains
intolerable, and grief unspeakable? Will thou not bring forth that which
thou have formed, that I may be delivered of that which I have conceived?

Alas, O Lord, alas my God, yea my dear and only God, will thou not hear
the lamentable cries, and regard the inward tears, of a wretch that
trauelleth, and labors so sore with child, even the woeful voice ^ mournful
lamentation of thy handmaid, and daughter (I say, though unworthy,) that
thus all the day long sigheth, cries, and stretches out her feeble han^^
unto thee in heaven, calling for thy heavenly help and succor? Oh Lord,
spare me, oh dear God, have mercy upon me, and my babe! Shall I be the grave
of my child? Shall I give death the fruit of my body, for the sins of my
soul, and my first, (second, or third) (...), for the transgressions of my
youth? Alas, shall that perish in the womb, which is conceived by thee; or
shall it die in the birth, and not be borne, which thou have so mightily
fashioned? Have thou shut up the doors of my womb in thy displeasure, and
covered me with the shadow of death, that the birth may not come out? Will thou cause that to die in the birth, I say, which is the wonderful work of
thy almighty hand? God forbid, oh God forbid. Oh save me, and my babe, I
beseech thee, and let it not be as a thing borne out of time, either as an
infant which never saw the light; neither let it perish or be slain, so soon
as it comes out of the womb: but open thou the womb and bring it forth
safely, that I may set it on my knees, and give it suck with my breasts. Oh
finish the thing mercifully, which thou have begun so graciously in me, and
let me rejoice rather that a man-child is borne into the world; else why am I in
this plight? Woe is me now that ever I sinned; for how shall I be able to endure
all the sorrows and pangs of a traveling woman, which are now, or hereafter
shall be justly laid upon me. O Lord, thou see my heart faints, my face
looks pale, yea sounding with a sighing and gasping soul, I cry out, and
say, Alas that ever I sinned. Woe is me that ever I offended so loving a God,
so merciful a Savior, so dear a redeemer, so holy and blessed a sanctifier.
Alas for this day, which is so dreadful, that none may be likened unto it.
And out alas for the time of this perplexiti^, of this sorrow and grief, which
I now sensibly feel and endure, both in body and mind; for it is like the
day and time of Rachel. My sorrow and trouble may be compared to Phinees wives
trouble, my state and condition seems to me and others, to be not much unlike
unto theirs, I say; from the which nevertheless for thy great mercy sake,
good Lord, I beseech thee deliver me, and save me and my ^abe from the grave,
as my trust is in thee,

Amen.
Another.
O GOD make speed to save me, O Lord make have to help me. Make no long
tarieng, O my God, least I be like to those that go down into the pit. How
long, Lord, will thou forget me? How long shall I be plucked a sunder with
these griping greefes and pinching pangs, of deadly throws? How long shall I
a wretch expect thy gracious comfort and ready help? How long will thou
forget thy creatures, O Lord, for ever? How long will thou hide thy face from
thy handmaid thus being in misery? Shall my grief ever continue, and my
pains never cease? What is my power, O Lord, that I should endure such pangs?
Or what is my strength, that I may abide such throws? Surely, O God, thou
know my strength is not the strength of stones, neither is my flesh or bones
made of brass, or iron. For in troth there is in me no help, nor in any
mortal creature, any relief or succor; yea all strength is utterly taken
from me, and there is none that I can find to help me: therefore without thy
help, strength, and patience, it is impossible for me to continue in this
perplexity. Oh spare me therefore a little, that I may recover my strength,
before I go hence, and be no more seen. O Lord cast not away thy servant in
thy displeasure, but let it be thy good pleasure to deliver me. Make have, O
Lord, to help me. Will thou absent thy self for ever; or have thou shut up
thy loving kindness in displeasure? Is thy mercy clean gone, and thy promises
come utterly to an end for evermore? Chasten me, O Lord, and correct me; but
give me not over unto death, neither shut up my soul with the wicked in the
grave. Let not mine enemy say, So, so, I have devoured her. For I come unto
thee with those good women in the Gospel, and falling down at thy feet in
trembling and fear, I humbly beseech thee, saying, O sweet Jesus, O son of
David, O Lamb of God, that ta^e ^t away the sins of the world, have mercy
upon me. O Lord have mercy upon me that am grieuouslie vexed with nipping
throws: Lord help me, Lord hear me, and vouchsafe to grant me the thing that
I long for, and destre; that is, that thou my maker, and preserver, wilt
speedily come and comfort me, and mitigate these griefs, now after the time
that thou have plagued and tormented me with all thy storms: and in great
compassion have mercy upon me, and my seely infant, that it be not like the
untimely fruit, or like the birth that dies, and is borne together. After
this night, and hour of calamity ouerpassed, let the pleasant morning of
comfort luckily shine upon me, that by time I may hear and feel thy goodness
and mercy in obteining at thy hand a comfortable issue, and deliverance: for
in thee only is all my trust. Quicken me, O Lord, for thy name sake, and for
thy mercy and righteousness, bring my soul and body out of this distres, and
ease me of these pains, for I am thy servant. O come and comfort me thy weak
creature, in these mine afflictions, with the presence of thy holy spirit,
that even in death I may find life. For under thy protection and defense,
mercy and favor, do I wholly repose my self. Lord into thy hands I commend
my spirit, preserve and keep me, relieve, ease, and speed me, O Lord thou God
of truth; for thou have redeemed me. Thou have been my succor, leave me not
now, nor forsake me, O God of my salvation. What profit is there in my blood,
when I go down to the pit? Shall the dust give thanks unto thee, or shall the
grave declare thy truth? O therefore have mercy on me good Father, for thy
holy name sake, even for thy dear son Jesus Christ's sake, I say, have
compassion upon a wretch that calls upon thee in his name: and vouchsafe now
yet at the length, to show some good token of thy favor and mercy upon me,
and that for my good, and speedy deliverance, that they which hate me, may be
ashamed, and they that love me be comforted, and praise thee together with me;
because thou, O Lord, have had mercy on me, and helped me, and sent me a
speedy deliverance of this burden, and made me a ioifull and glad mother of
this child to thy glory. So shall my soul magnify thee, O Lord, and my
spirit shall ever rejoice in thee, O God my Sauioue: yea so shall I be ioifull
in thy salvation, and I will not cease to celebrate thy name among the saints,
and sing unto thee the sugared songs of Sion, to the perpetual praise of thy
renowned name, and erernall glory of thy most sacred majesty, world without
end,

Amen, Amen.
Prayers and thanks-giuings to be used of women in childbed, after their
travel and deliverance, and at their churching or purifieng (as they call it.)
O My Lord God, I thank thee with all my heart, wit, understanding, and power,
for that thou have vouchsafed to deliver me out of this my most dangerous
travel, and have sent into this world out of my woeful womb this child, a
creature of thine own fashioning, forming and shape, like unto the rest of the
children of thy creation; for which I am not able worthily enough of mine own
frail nature to give to thee condign thanks, praise, honor and glory, for
thy so great benefits showed unto me, in pulling me out from the pit-brinke of
death, easing and releeuing all my woeful sorrows, labors, pangs, and most
grievous throws, bitter anguishes, and unspeakable pains, which I could
never have escaped, without out thy most singular aid, help, relief and
succor. Wherefore I thy most humble handmaid, with steadfast and pure heart and
hands, do power out before thee my Lord God and only savior, these my simple
prayers of thanksgiving (the fruit of my faith, hope, trust, charity, and
assured confidence which I have in thee) assertaining my self, that now thou
have preserved me for a further trial of my vocation and service toward thee
in this vale of transitory life, wherein I may have time, by thy divine
permission and sufferance, to direct all my steps in thy ways, and to honor
and glorify thee in my soul and body with condign thanks, in reioising in
thy holy name, according to thy most blessed word, wherein thou have declared
that a woman, as long as she is in travel of her childbearing, she is
sorrowful, heavy, and full of anguish and intolerable pains; but as soon
as the child is borne, she learneth straight-waies to forget all her pains,
not remembering them any longer, and to rejoice, for that she has brought
forth a child into the world. Even so, O Lord, fares it with me thy poor,
humble, and obedient servant, now reioising, in that it has pleased thee to
make me a glad mother, in bringing forth this my child, whom now I do
present before the face of thy divine Majesty, with an earnest zeal of a
godly spirit, and most pure affection, praieng and beseeching thee, O
everlasting God, here to preserve this child, according to thy most holy
will, that it may enioie the benefit of all thy heavenly sacraments, to love
and serve thee in pureness of life, as a faithful member of the christian
congregation wherein thy name by it may be glorified, honored, and praised,
world without end,

Amen.
Another prayer and thanksgiving to be said of every faithful woman in
childbed, after the time of her deliverance, used of the virtuous Lady,
Francis Aburgauennie.
HOW much, and how greatly am I bound to laud, praise, and extol thee (O my
Lord God?) Even now was I assailed in my body, being a wretched and sinful
woman, with sundry and diverse dolours, and grievous gripes of perilous pains,
in such sort, that my agonies abounding, death himself seemed to me to knock
at the gates of my body; the rod of justice lay so heavy upon me, so that I
judged my self a creature more meet for the grave, whose clamor I thought
still sounded in mine ears, than to reap the benefit of life. By my pains,
Lord God, in this my travel, I am forced to confess and acknowledge, that
thou art just in thy promises, and ready to punish sin and iniquity. By this
my safe and sure deliverance, I am bound to acknowledge, that with thy justice
thou always frequeatest pity, commixing thy mercy and justice together, in
such sort, that I must needs confess thee to be most righteous and merciful.
I can not (O my God) but protest, that thou have dealt favorably with me; and
those pains which I abode, were laid upon me for my sin and wickedness, and yet
have thou not dealt severely with me, neither given sentence against me in thy
fury, which have justly deserved the same. For had thou, O Lord, respected
my deserts, I had perished everlastingly, and beeue utterly confounded.

My grievous groans thrown forth unto thee, pearsed the very bowels of
thine anointed son Jesus Christ, who beholding mine agonies and bitter
pains, became an intercessor to thee for me, through whose earnest entreaty,
and loving meditation, thou conuertedst thy displeasure to mercy, and for his
sake alone that died upon the cross for mine offenses, thou have assuaged my
torments, and in the fulness of thy bounty and loving kindness, thou have given
me a living soul to glad my heart; for the which, I am bound of right to give
thee hearty and humble thanks, humbly beseeching thee, being now faint and
feeble in body, to strengthen me in soul, mind and heart, that my tongue may
be the organe that may continually publish forth thine everlasting praise.
Grant this, O gracious God, for the love of thine only begotten Son Jesus
Christ, to whom with thee and the holy Ghost, be given all laud, power and
dominion, for ever and ever,

Amen.
Another prayer of a woman in childbed, after deliverance.
OF duty, O Lord, I lift up mine eyes and mind unto thee, and give thee most
humble and hearty thanks for thine infinite goodness, which have not only
beautified and blessed me most abundantly with common, rare, and wonderful
gifts and benefits: but even now also have vouchsafed of thy free mercy to
send me safe deliverance, and to give me this infant and child as a token of
thy love toward me: the which so great a treasure and blessing, though I be
not able to deserve; yet most loving father, for Christ's sake I beseech thee,
that thou will confirm thy favor more and more toward me. And take this
infant into thy tuition and defense, whom I offer present unto thee with hearty
prayer, and never suffer him to fall into such unkindness whereby he should loose
the force of thy grace: but that he may perceive thee continually to be his
merciful Father, through thine holy spirit working in his heart, by whose
divine power he may so prevail against Satan, that in the end obteining the
victory, he may be exalted unto the liberty of thy kingdom,

Amen.
Here you may say or sing to the glory of God, and your own edifieng, the
103. the 30. and the 116. Psalms of David.
A prayer to be used of a woman at her purification, or Churching.
O Eternal father of thine only son our Lord and savior Christ, which in
the commonweal of Israel, ordeinedst according to thy wisdom, and adornedst
with excellent statutes necessary for the state of mankind, and signifieng
secret and heavenly things, did make diverse laws concerning uncleanness, and
the keeping of women with child; and an other for the first borne, and that not
only to put us in mind of order in this life, and thankfulness toward thy
Majesty: but also to teach, that this our guilty and polluted nature, like the
foul menstruous cloth of a woman, is washed by the blood of thy son, which
is the first borne, thy substantial image, and the word sounding thy will,
whom from the heavens thou command to be harkened unto. Govern me by thy
first and only begotten son, and give unto me thy most defiled amd polluted
handmaid, thy holy spirit, that earnestly I may bewail mine unworthiness,
vileness, and uncleanness, ask help at thy merciful hands, be this day
purified both body and soul by the blood of thy Son, and be redeemed by him
unto true piety, holiness, and in^egritie which pleases thee, that through him
I may be presented unto thee with a pure and clear mind, and for his sake I
may be adopted into thy children, and find favor in thine eyes,

Amen.
Or you may give thanks and pray as in the book of common prayer, and say to
your self, or with the Minister, as follows.
FOr-as-much as it has pleased thee, O almighty God of thy goodness, to give
me safe deliverance, and have preserved me in the great danger of childbirth,
I therefore here in the Church and congregation, give hearty thanks unto thee,
O God, and say:

Psalm. 121.
I Have lifted up mine eyes unto the hills, from whence comes my help.
My help comes even from the Lord, which has made heaven and earth.
He will not suffer my foot to be moved, and he that keeps me will not
sleep.
Behold, he that keeps Israel, shall neither slumber nor sleep.
The Lord himself is my keeper, the Lord is my defense upon my right hand.
So that the sun shall not burn me by day, nor the moon by night.
The Lord shall preserve me from all evil: yea, it is even he that shall keep
my soul.
The Lord shall preserve my going out, and my coming in, from this time forth
for evermore.
Glory be to the father; etc. As it was in the beginning, etc.
Let us pray.
Lord have mercy upon me,
Christ have mercy upon me,
Lord have mercy upon me,
Our father which art in heaven, etc.

O Lord save me thy sinful servant,
which put my trust in thee:
Be thou unto me a strong tower,
from the face of mine enemy.
Lord hear my prayer,
and let my cry come unto thee.
Let us pray.
O Almighty God, which have delivered me thy most unworthy handmaid and
sinful servant, from the great pain and peril of childbirth. I heartily
thank thee, and humbly praise thy holy name for ever and ever. Grant me now
also I beseech thee, most merciful father, that I through thy help may both
faithfully live and walk in my vocation, according to thy will in this life
present, and also may be partaker of everlasting glory in the life to come,
through Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
Prayers to be said for women with child, before, or in travel, by the
Midwife, husband, or any other man, or woman.
THou, O Lord, art wonderful in all thy works, and whatsoever thy good
pleasure is, that dooest thou easily bring to pass; neither is there any
thing impossible with thee, that thou will have done. And albeit this thine
almighty power shows it self abundantly in all thy works; yet in the
conceiving, forming, and bringing forth of man, it shines most evidently. At
the beginning, O heavenly Father, when thou had made man and woman, thou
commandedst them to increase, multiply, and replenish the earth; if through
the subtle entisements of Satan they had not transgressed thy commandments by
eating of the forbidden fruit, the woman, whom thou had appointed the organe,
instrument, and vessel, to conceive, nourish, and bring forth man, through
thy wonderful workmanship, had without any labor, pain, or travel,
brought forth her fruit. But that which thy goodness made easy, sin and
disobedience has made hard, painful, dangerous, and (if thy help were not)
impossible to be brought to pass; so that now all women bring forth their
children in great sorrows, pains, and troubles. Notwithstanding, thou show
thy self unto thy creatures a father of mercy, and God of all consolation.
For that which through their own imperfection and feeblenes, they are not able
of themselves to bring to pass, thou thorough thine unspeakable power make
easy in them, and bring unto a fortunate end.

We therefore being fully persuaded of thy bent and ready goodness, of thy
present help, of thy sweet comfort in all miseries and necessities: knowing
also by the testimonies of thy holy word, how great and intolerable the pains
of women are that travel of child, if through thy tender mercies they be not
mitigated and eased, most humbly pray thee for Jesus Christ's sake thy son
and our Lord, to assist, and help (as all other women elsewhere in like case)
so especially this thy servant. S. B. here now in travel and labor; that by
thine almighty power both they and she may safely bring forth that by thy
goodness they or she has conceived, and that thy loving kindness may make that
easy and tolerable, which sin has made hard and painful.

Ease, O Lord, the pains which thou most righteouslie have put upon her, and
all women, for the sin and disobedience of our grand-moother Eve, in whom
all we have sinned; and give both unto thy servant here present, and unto all
such as have conceived and be with child, strength to bring forth that which
thou woonderfullie have wrought in her, and them. Be present now with her, and
them, in their trouble; according to thy merciful promise help her, and them,
and deliver them. Let thy power be showed no less in the safe bringing forth,
than in the wonderful framing or fashioning of the child. Make perfect that
which thou have so graciously begun in her, and them, so that it may come unto
good succes. Make her, and them, glad and ioifull mothers, that she, and they,
through thy goodness being safely delivered and restored to their old health,
and strengths, may live and praise thy blessed name for ever,

Amen.
Another prayer for a woman with child.
IN the beginning of the world, O father of heaven, after thou had formed man
of the slime of the earth, and yet prince over all creatures, it pleased thee
of thy goodness to create a woman of his side, as well for his solace, as for the
continuance of his seed: it was thy word unto them, Increase and multiply. This
increase was easy, but mother Eve has made it hard, by passing the bounds of
thy will, to all her posterity; so that the woman conceiueth and brings
forth in great pain, and painful travel, the fruit of her womb. In so
great pain, O Lord, in such extreme pangs, that unless thou quench the flame
of her sorrows with the water of comfort, it it impossible for her to bear
that into this vale of misery, which thou of thy goodness have framed, and she
conceived, Wherefore thou God of woonders, and father almighty of heaven, as
thou have by the slaughter of thine only Lamb, taken away the sins of the
wicked world, and condemned sin in the flesh: so take away the pangs of
childbirth, the fruit of sin, from all womankind, especially from this
woman, that bearing ioifullie that which she has conceived fruitfullie, and
thou have fashioned graciously, she may glorify thee most carefully, and
praise thee most thankfully, the only stay of her estate both now and ever.

Amen.
Another.
O Good true hearted Lord Jesus Christ, like as thou did comfort and deliver
thy disciples, and all elect and chosen men and women in all their need,
martyrdom, and pains, which they suffered of the tyrants wrongfullie, and
did also cure and heal them of their wounds, pains and smart, through hope
of the crown of everlasting life: even so vouchsafe thou (which art the help
of all them that call on thee in trouble and need) to deliver this poor weak
vessel, which is here bound with a fruit after thine own similitude and
likeness, notwithstanding that she has deserved in transgressing of thy holy
commandments, to bring forth her children in pains and woe, that she may be
made a glad and ioifull mother through the new creature with good speed, that
the child may have name and Christendom, and that the mother may be purified
to thy honor, and to her health,

Amen.
Another prayer for a Queen being with a child.
O Almighty father, in whose favor the virgin Marie was highly blessed among
women, by the birth of Christ thine only Son our Savior, who also by thine
omnipotent power, did safely deliver both her, and her cousin Elizabeth, and
also so mightily deliueredst the Prophet Jonas out of the whales belly, amids
the foming sea. Defend, O Lord we beseech thee likewise thy servant R. our
Queen with child conceived, and so visit her in and with thy godly gift of
health, that not only the child thy creature within her conceived may
ioifullie come from her into this world, and receive the blessed sacrament of
baptism, and enioie therewith daily increase of all princely and gracious
gifts, both of body and soul; but that also she the mother through thy
special grace and mercy, may in the time of her travel avoid all excessive
dolorous pain, and abide perfect and sure from all peril and danger of death,
with long and prosperous life, through Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
Another prayer for a Queen, Noble woman, or Lady with child.
O Most righteous Lord God, which for the offense of the first woman, have
threatened unto all women high and low, a common, sharp, and inevitable
malediction, and have enioined them, that they should conceive in sin, and
being conceived, should be subject to many and grievous throws and torments,
and finally, be delivered with the danger and ieoperdie of their life, we
beseech thee, for thine exceeding great goodness, and bountiful mercy, to
assuage and mitigate the straightnes of that law, and to embrace into the
bosom of thy favor and mercy, our most gracious sovereign Lady Queen R,
or our most dear sister A. P. C of P. being now at the point of her
deliverance; so help her now, O Lord, that without danger of her life, she may
overcome the sorrow and pain, and in due season bring forth a child, in body
beautiful and comely, in pregnant wit, notable and excellent, in mind noble
and valiant, so that afterward she forgetting the travel, may with joy laud
and praise the bountifulnes of thy mercy, and together with us praise and
bless both thee and thy holy name world without end. This, O Lord, we desire
thee, we beseech thee, and most heartily crave of thee. Hear us, O Lord, and
grant us our petitions,

Amen.
A general form of prayer for all women with child, and in childbed.
O Most wise God, eternal Father of thy beloved Son our Lord and savior
Christ, Creator and keeper of all thy creatures, which through thine excellent
wisdom and counsel, have enioined to womankind, that in pain and sorrow
they should bring forth children, whereby not only this world is replenished;
but a Church which does celebrate thy name for ever, is gathered unto thee. And
for-as-much as the pain of a woman in travel is most extreme, which makes
the Prophets many times to repeat the same, in exaggerating the afflictions
of punishments which the holy spirit does threaten unto the impenitent: we
beseech thee in the name of Christ thy Son, be merciful unto all women,
either with child, or in childbed; give them grace to call into mind the
decree and pleasure of thine heavenly will. Let them never strive against thee
through impatience, but in true faith, and invocation of thy name, suffer thy
cross quietly, knowing that by the seed of the woman, which has broken the
head of the old serpent, they are reconciled unto thee. In this seed which is
Christ, the curse is clean taken away, and blessing restored unto us, that
we may receive the promise of the spirit, and the inheritance of eternal life.

O almighty God, convert now the sorrows of women in travel into gladness,
that they remember not their pains with mourning, for joy that a man-child is
borne into the world. Comfort them in the midst of their anguish, and help as
well the mother as the babe, specially in the danger of deliverance. For if
thou blessed God be not present, they perish undoubtedly, all the world can
not help them in that extremity. O eternal God, which of the seed of man
framest the living infant in the mothers womb, and nourishest the same
congealed in blood, that the flesh within the time of ten months may take
shape, drawing nourishment from the mother; we are all the woorkmanship of
thine hands: we give thee thanks, Lord, for fearefullie and wonderfully are we
made, marvelous are thy works, and that our souls know right well. Our bones
are not hid from thee, though we were secretly made, neither our substance in
the inner parts of our mothers womb. Thine eyes did see our substance being
imperfect, and in thy book were all our members written. Thy hands have made
us, and fashioned us altogether. With skin and bones have thou covered us, and
joined us together with bones and sinews. Thou have given us life and grace,
and thy visitation has preserved our spirits. Grant we beseech thee to all
infants yet unborn, that knit together with their due veins and members, they
may come forth into this world sound and perfect without fault or deformity:
and grant that they being borne upon their mothers sides, may be ioifull upon
their mothers knees, and suck the milk of comfort out of the breasts of her
love, to the reioising of the mother. Stay the furiousnes of wicked spirits,
that they show not their tyranny upon young infants. Keep all women with
child, that no way being terrified, frighted, or troubled extreemelie, they be
untimely delivered.

Give grace also to the babes newly borne, that together with their outward
baptism, they may be received into the congregation of the faithful with
wholesome water, through the renewing and regeneration of the holy spirit,
which thou will plentiouslie power upon them through Jesus Christ our Savior,
that being justified by grace, they may be made heirs according to the hope of
eternal life, and become new creatures through him. Strengthen all women
delivered, and lieng in childbed, that being restored to their woonted
health, they may glorify thee their helper in the time of need, and learn
afterward to repose their whole confidence in thee, which art nigh unto all
that call upon thee, to all (we say) calling upon thee in truth. And if at
any time through thine unsearchable judgment an untimely birth, or unlucky
deliverance happen; so comfort, O merciful father, the mournful and sad
parents, that they faint not with sorrow, but believe rather that the woeful
chance is a trial of their faith, hope and patience. For thou art a merciful
and gracious God, forgiving our sins. Though thou art angry with our
wickedness, yet in thy displeasure thou remembrest thy mercy, that the troubled
may take comfort, and the afflicted find grace. For this do all thy servants
persuade themselves, that if they be tried, they shall be crowned, if they be
troubled, they shall be delivered, and if they be chastened, they shall be
saved, for thou have no pleasure in our damnation, which bring fair wether
after storms, and gladness after tears. Thy name, O God, be praised for ever,

Amen.
The same prayer more brief for women with child generally.
O Heavenly father, and eternal God, which through thine unspeakable wisdom
have enioined womankind, that in pain and sorrow they should bring forth
children, and replenish the earth: O Lord, we beseech thee give them grace to
call into mind this thy decree, and pleasure, and thereby patiently to bear
the grief and groans incident unto them. Convert Lord their sorrows into
gladness, through a luckie deliverance, and let them remember their pains no
more, for joy that a man is borne into the world. Comfort them in the midst of
their anguish, and help as well the mother as the babe, especially in the
danger of deliverance. For without thine assistance they perish undoubtedly,
all the world cannot help them. Grant to all yet unborn, that knit together
with their due veins and members, they may come into this world sound and
perfect, without all deformity. Stay the furiousnes of wicked spirits, that
they show not their malice and tyranny upon young infants. Bless all with
child, that no way being terrified, or troubled extremely, they be
untimely delivered. Give grace to all babes newly borne, that together with
their outward baptism, they may be received into the congregation of the
faithful, and be made new creatures, filled with the holy Ghost, even from
their mothers womb. Strengthen all women delivered, with thy virtue and power,
whereby they may receive their woonted health, and glorify thee their helper
in the time of need, learning afterward to repose their whole confidence in
thee, which art nigh unto all that call upon thee, even to all that call upon
thee in truth. And if at any time through thy sufferance and unsearchable
pleasure, an untimely birth, or (if without offense we may say) an unlucky
deliverance does happen; comfort, O merciful God the pensive parents, that
they despair not through sorrow, but think rather that the woeful chance is
a trial of their faith, hope, and patience; and so confess thee to be always
as good and gracious God, forgiving sins, and remembering mercy in thy great
displeasure, that the troubled may take comfort, and the afflicted find grace.
For thus do al thy servants persuade them selves, that if they be tried, they
shall be crowned if they be troubled, they shall be delivered if they be
chastised, they shall be saved: through our Lord Jesus Christ,

Amen.
A prayer to be said of every Christian midwife for hirselfe, before she
execute her office.
O Heavenly Father, which at the beginning did appoint woman to be the
organe, instrument, and vessel to receive, nourish, and bring forth man
through thy wonderful workmanship without any labor, pain, or help of
flesh and blood: but afterward through the sin and disobedience of our
grandmother Eve, have made that which before was easy, now to become hard and
painful, yea dangerous and impossible (if thy help were not) for them to be
brought to pass, and now as a mean have ordained man to be a god to man, and
made woman through thine unspeakable power working together with him, to help
and ease woman, which through their own imperfection and feeblenes are not
able in this case and time of their sore labor, to help themselves. For as
much as it has pleased thee among many other more worthy, to call me thy
most unworthy handmaid to the office of a midwife among the daughters of
Israel, and made me an instrument and means under thee to comfort them in their
sorrows, cherish them in their child-beds, ease them in their pains, and to
further them in their deliverance, with all possible pains and convenient
speed that I may, and can, in thee and for thee. I most heartily thank thee,
and praise thy holy name and majesty; beseeching thee of grace and virtue to
walk worthy of this my calling, in all holy obedience to thee, and thy word;
to thy glory, others profit, and mine own salvation in Christ.

And because I know and feel mine own weakness, and must needs confess how
that of my self I am far unable to discharge mine office, with such duty as
apperteineth, without the assistance and help of thine almighty power and
holy spirit, to strengthen me therein. For it lies not in the power of flesh
and blood, no nor in all the help of the world, to go through with so great a
work and weighty enterprise as this is: but it only and alone belongs unto
thee our creator, and maker of heaven and earth. Therefore bless thou so my
weak labors, and further my pains, that the fruit thereof may redound to the
praise of thy name, and profit of thy people, and their posterity. Take from
me all ignorance, negligence, slouthfulnes, slacknes, and disdain; yea from
all unmercifulness, rough handling, hardness of heart, contempt of others,
falsehood, cruelty, and bloudgiltines, good Lord deliver me: and in steed
thereof, make me wise-harted, skillful, loving, gentle, tender, pitiful,
cherefull, comfortable, helpful, painful, watchful, strong, able, ready,
willing, careful, diligent, and faithful, even for thy sake only, without
respect of filthy lucre, to pleasure all women at all times in my calling, to
the full discharge of my conscience and duty, both before thee and the world.

And, O Lord, to the end there may be found no fault in my ministry, nor anse
woman or child said to be hurt or perish in their travel, by my negligence or
ignorance; and that I may avoid all slander and reproach, I beseech thee, O
almighty God, work thou all my works for me, and that which thou beginnest by
me, finish it I pray thee also by me, to the glory of thy name, and give me
ever good luck, and prosperous success, through the power of thy spirit, in
all my womanly and lawful enterprises, enioined of thee as a necessary
business to be done, that they may come to a fortunate and desired end in
thee, as I heartily wish and pray. Finalie bless me, O God, with all thy good
gifts of grace, virtue, skill, and cunning, as thou did thy holy servants
Shiphra, and Puah, the two grave matrons, godly women. and famous midwiues of
the Hebrew women in Egypt; that I fearing thee more than men, as they did, and
being faithful to my patients, as they were, may not only move thee to have
mercy on me, and to prosper me in making my house to increase, as thou did
them; but also by mine obedience and upright dealing in mine office, thy people
may be multiplied, and the families of thy true Israelites increased, to the
praise of thy glory, the exaltation of thy power, and renown of thy name,
through Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
Another prayer to be said of the midwife, when she goes about to do her
office.
OH my celestial Father, be now merciful unto me thy repentant handmaid, and
sinful servant, fled from mine enemies unto thy help and succor. Impute not
unto me my sins for Christ's sake, for I have heard thy fatherly voice, and
yet it sounds daily in mine ears out of heaven, promising me and affirming
constantly thy self to be appeased, pleased, and at one with me, for thy
Son my sweet Savior Jesus sake, whom thou command me to hear, and
believe, who I am sure is made of thee my righteousness, my satisfaction, my
reconciliation, my peacemaking, my mediator and intercessour with his
prayers, my fulfilling of the law, my deliverer, and the whole wholly
accomplisher of all my just desires, and my savior Christ Jesus God and man.
In whose blessed and holy name at this present I attempt and take in hand to
do mine office, according to my vocation, for thy glory, and this woman's
profit, ease, comfort, and help, in thee: desiring thy gracious goodness, most
merciful Lord and Father, for thy dearly beloved son sake Jesus Christ, who
without all help of man was conceived and begotten of thee his father before
all worlds; and who also without any help of woman, was borne and brought
forth into this world for our sakes, of his blessed mother Marie the virgin.
For his sake, I say, vouchsafe to prosper it, further it, and to give it
happy increase, whatsoever I take now in hand justly and fortunately to
finish the same. O holy Father, work thou all our works for us here in
secret, that we may praise thy name openly before all people! O prosper thou
the works of our hands upon us! Prosper thou our handie work, and bless all
things which I take in hand with thy blessed increase, and let me do nothing
in this my action hurtful either to the mother or her babe; neither let me
seek mine own will, but ever to pray that thy will be fulfilled here now in
earth of us, as it is in heaven of thine angels. And lead us not into
temptation, but deliver us from all evils present, and to come:

Amen, Amen.
In doing her office, let the midwife pray thus with her self, and say.
I In the name of God, Amen, Prevent us, O Lord, in this action, and all our
doings, with thy most gracious favor, and further our labors with thy
continual help: that in this and all our works begun, continued, and ended by
thee, and in thee, we may glorify thy holy name, and finally by thy mercy
obtain everlasting life, through Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
Or else thus.
THE glorious majesty of the Lord our God be upon us. Prosper and direct thou,
O God, the work of our hands upon us. O prosper thou our handi-worke, and this
woman's labor, that we may bring forth more fruit in our age, to flourish
with praises in the Church of Saints to glorify thee,

Amen.
If the woman have very sore labor, and be long in traveling, and in danger
of death, then let the midwife, and all the women assistant about her, kneel
down, and pray one after another, heartily and ^arnestlie, as follows.
Midwife. O Lord remember not our offenses, nor the iniquities of our
forefathers and mothers, neither take thou vengeance on our sins, but spare
us, good Lord, O spare thy people whom thou have redeemed with thy most
precious blood, and be not angry with us for ever.


Women. Correct us, O Lord, and yet in thy judgment, not in thy fury, least
we should be consumed, and brought to nothing.


Midwife. Lord have mercy upon us.

Women. Christ have mercy upon us.

Midwife. Lord have mercy upon us.

Altogether. Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name, thy kingdom
come, thy will be done, etc.


Midwife. And lead us not into temptation,

Women. But deliver us from evil, Amen.

Mid. O Lord save this woman thy servant and handmaid.

Woe. Which puts her only trust in thee.

Mid. O Lord send her present help from thy holy place.

Woe. And evermore mightily defend her.

Mid. Let the enemy have none advantage of her.

Woe. Nor the wicked approach to hurt her.

Mid. Be thou now unto her, O Lord, a strong tower.

Woe. From the face of all her enemies visible and invisible.

Mid. Lord hear our prayers.

Woe. And let our cry come unto thee,

Amen.
Midwife. Let us pray.
O Most mighty God, our heavenly Father, we beseech thee look down
mercifully from heaven; behold visit, relieve, and ease this woeful woman thy
seely servant, which is grieved now with sore labor, tedious travel, and
bitter pains. Look upon her with the eyes of thy mercy, and extend thine
accustomed goodness to her now in this her perplexity. And for-as-much as her
pangs and pains seem unto us most extreme, and her travel very dangerous,
both to her self and her babe, give her grace we beseech thee patiently to
endure this thy cross of grief and groans incident thereunto for her sins,
and be thou present with her, O blessed God, to help both her and her babe in
this her sore labor. O comfort and ease her in the midst of this her anguish
and grief: for without thine assistance, undoubtedly she must needs perish,
for vain is the help of man; we, nor all the world can not help her.

O come quickly therefore we beseech thee good Lord, and help thou her in
this her great need and extremity: work thou all our works for us to thy
glory, and her comfort. Defend her from this imminent danger of deliverance.
Keep her in perpetual peace, hope, patience and safety. Strengthen her faith
and womanly weakness, and visit her, O Lord, according to the time of life, as
thou did Sara, Rebecca, Thamar, Hanna and Elizabeth thy holy handmaids.

Bless her, and preserve her we beseech thee, O Lord, that no way being
terrified, frighted, or troubled extremely, she neither murmur against thy
works, and say with Rebecca, Seeing my greefs are so great, why am I thus with
child? Neither faint through sorrow, nor be untimely or vnluckilie delivered:
but grant that in true faith, and continual invocation of thy holy name, she
may be saved, and now suffer thee quietly to work thy good will and pleasure,
according to thy divine decree and secret judgments upon her, either for her
sins, or for thy glory, and our example, until according to thy promise in
thy good time, she do receive comfort for her sorrow, mirth for her mourning,
gladness for her sadness, joy for her woe, even by mitigation of these her
miseries, ease of her anguishes, release of her labors, dispatch of her pangs,
deliverance of her burden, and speedy birth of her babe borne into the world,
through the might of thy mercy, and power of thy compassion, to the glory and
high exaltation of thy name, as both she and we most heartily wish, long for,
e^pect and desire, yea, and with tears and sighs do vnfeignedlie cra^e of
thee, and that through the only mystery of Christ his holy incarnation,
blessed birth, and painful passion, So be it.

For a woman that trauelleth before her time, and is in great peril, pray as
follows.
Almighty God, which in thy secret judgments did once strike the wife of
Phinees, being great with child, with such a sudden fright and fear, when she
heard that thy arc was taken by the enemy, and both her husband and her
father slain by thee with sudden death; that thou causedst her presently
through grievous pangs and bitter pains that came upon her in that instant, to
bow her self, and travel before her time, wherein with great sorrow she
died. We beseech thee in the name of thy dear son our savior Jesus Christ,
be merciful unto this woeful woman thy handmaid and humble servant, whom now
in thine unsearchable judgments thou have visited also, as it seems, with the
woeful chance of untimely travel, to the trial of her faith, hope, and
patience in thee. And let not this time of her sorrow, we pray thee, be unto
her as the time and hour of Rachel, and Phinees wives trouble was unto them:
but by thy mighty power and mercy deliver her therefrom, if it be thy will,
as her only trust is in thee. And to this purpose, stay, we beseech thee,
the furiousnes of the wicked spirits, that they show not at this time, their
tyranny and malice, either upon her or her seely babe; and so bless,
preserve, and keep both her, and it, that she may be no way terrified,
frighted, vexed, or troubled, either in body to faint, or in mind to murmur
and despair, through the extremity of intolerable pains; nor at this time
for any anguish be compelled to be delivered before her time, to her
discomfort. But grant that she may yet tarry quietly and patiently, until
the time be fulfilled, which thou in the course of nature full wisely have
set: at which time of life, and not before, we beseech thee, O Lord, then
certinlie to come again unto her, that she may duly and safely be
delivered, and her child come to life, to her comfort, and thy glory.

Nevertheless, if it shall seem good unto thee for all this, now in thy
secret judgments, either for her sins, or for thy glory, and our terror by
example, to hasten (through laborous pangs, and pinching throws) an untimely
birth upon her, or if it shall please thee to cause (without offense be it
spoken) an unlucky or unnatural deliverance to happen, as now unto her at
this time, as justly we confess thou may, if thou respect her and our
sins committed against thy majesty, and not rather thy mercy promised to
all that faithfully call upon thee, as we here now do) then not our wills, but
thy will, which is ever in all things best, be now and ever fulfilled and done,
both in her, and her babe, and in us, to the glory of thy holy name. Only
we crave of thee, and that in the bowels, and for the tender mercy of our
Savior Jesus Christ, that thou will yet grant her abundance of thy grace, both
patiently to abide thy fatherly correction, and faithfully to believe thine
infallible promises; so that for no pain, or extremity of torment or anguish,
either in body or mind, she may not be discouraged, discomforted, shrink,
faint, or fall from her faith or hope in thee: but thanking thee for all things
that may happen unto her, let her feel yet in her body such ease, and
mitigation of her pains, and in her soul and conscience such comfort and
consolation from thee, that she may assure her self of thy favor and mercy
in Christ, to have forgiveness of all her sins, together with the release of all
her miseries, and so after trial, this thy troubled handmaid may take
comfort, hoping to be crowned; and after trouble this thy afflicted servant may
find deliverance, grace, health, and everlasting salvation: through Jesus
Christ our Lord and only Savior,

Amen.
If the woman traveling be at the point of death, pray as follows.
O Most merciful God, which according to the multitude of thy mercies do so
put away the sins of those which truly repent, that thou remembrest them no
more: open thine eyes of mercy upon this thy handmaid, now in great danger of
death, who most earnestly calls upon thee, desiring pardon and forgiveness
of all her sins and offenses committed against thee, and thy people. Renew in
her therefore, O most tender hearted father, whatsoever has been decayed by
the fraud and malice of satan, or neglected by her own carnal will and
frailenes. Preserve and continue this weak and distressed member, in the
unity and bosom of thy Church, consider her broken and contrite heart, accept
her lamentable tears, mitigate her intolerable throws and pangs, assuage her
pains and greefes, and release her utterly of all her misery and woe, as
shall be seen to thy heavenly wisdom most expedient for her, and convenient
for thy Church. And forasmuch as she still calls upon thy holy name, and
puts her full trust to be saved only in thy mercy, impute not unto her the
manifold sins of her former life passed, but pardon them, and take her unto
thy high favor: through the bloody merits and dear death of thine only
begotten son Jesus Christ our savior,

Amen.
Or pray thus.
O Pitiful physician, and healer both of soul and body, Christ Jesus,
vouchsafe to cast thine eyes upon this thy poor sinful creature, our dear
sister M. B. who is here thy captive, bound with the burden of childbirth,
grief, and unspeakable pains in the chain of sin and death, for our
transgression in our grandmother Eve, turning this her weakness and grief, to
thy glory, and her health and safe deliverance. And vouchsafe, good Lord, to
send her patient sufferance, that she may steadfastly continue to the end in
these extremities, that she may with a true and perfect faith in thee, fight
now a good fight, and stand manfully against all the temptations of the devil
her mortal enemy, when she may no longer continue. O Savior of the world,
save her, which by thy cross and precious blood have redeemed her,

Amen.
Add this blessing.
THE almighty Lord, which is a most strong tower to all them that put their
trust in him, to whom all things both in heaven, and earth, and under the earth
do bow, and obey; bless preserve and keep this our sister, and be now and
evermore her buckler and defense, against all her enemies, and make her to
know and feel in her soul and conscience, that there is none other name
given unto man, in whom, and through whom, she may receive ease, comfort,
health, deliverance, and salvation, but only in the most holy, blessed, and
venerable name of our Lord Jesus Christ,

Amen.
A prayer of instruction to be used of the women in health, attendant about the
sick and languishing woman in sore travel, for themselves.
O Most merciful God, and most loving Father, we beseech thee have mercy upon
us, and aid us with thy grace and holy spirit, that we (which be yet in good
health and safety, and look according to the condition of our nature, for the
like hour of ad^ersitie, but with more mercy and mitigation of our pains,
than as it seems our sister here endures, if it be thy will) may learn to
fear and dread thee, may love and embrace thy holy word, and that we may set
thee before us as a scope and mark whereunto we may direct all our doings,
and that we boing always mindful of this thy cross and heavy judgment laid
upon all women in the loins of our grandmother Eve, for her and our
transgression, and evermore remembering the unspeakable pangs, intolerable
pains, and most bitter agony of death, may so prepare our hearts, and arm our
selves, that we may order all our deeds from hence-foorth in all holy and
chaste obedience, both toward thee, and our husbands. or heads, as well
becomes right christian women, and modest matrones, to thy glory; and as do
and and have done all godly women, which fear thee in all ages, that in the
end we obtain to be fellowheires with them of everlasting life, in the
kingdom of heaven, through the merits of our dear Lord and sweetest Savior,
Jesus Christ the righteous,

Amen.
Another godly and effectual prayer to be heartily said of the women
assistant, if the woman in sore travel or childbed lie in the pangs of death,
and be a passing this life.
O Lord God almighty, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, three
persons and one only God, the Lord of life, and the destroier of death, with
whom to be is life, and from whom to be is death, who as a loving father,
merciful redeemer, and friendly caller to repentance, have now visited with
the scourge of hard, painful, and grievous travel (or with untimely
birth,unfortunate deliverance) and sore sickness, thy most sinful daughter, yea
thy spotted creature, defiled servant, and grievous sinner S. B. to cause her
to know her self; and to confess her wickedness, and so to come to thee at
this thy calling, to know thee, and only to cry and call upon thee for
comfort. Now thou, O Lord, whose property is ever to have mercy, and freely
to forgive those that faithfully come unto thee, we thine humble handmaids,
with heavy hearts, most humbly beseech thee, look down from heaven with
thine accustomed eyes of compassion upon her, cast behind thy back her
innumerable and grievous sins, throw them all (both old and new) from her, as
far as is the East from the West, yea scrape the memory of them out of thy
sight, quite forget them, and freely forgive them her as her only trust is in
thee. O Lord be thou now unto her at her most time of need, a tower of
strength, a place of refuge, and a defensible God, to keep, strengthen, and
defend her from the danger of the devil, now readiest to disquiet her, and
destroy her; against desperation, now busiest to grieve her; against death,
now likest to strike her, and against hell now gaping to devour her.

Oh heavenly father, aid thou now her. Help her, and establish her in the
firm faith of thy truth. Comfort her now, O sweet Christ; and continue her in
the knowledge of thee her only savior, which art now in her extreamenes, and
pangs of death, ready to show thy self unto her, as her savior, crucified on
the cross to comfort her. Therefore now save thou her from sin, deliver thou
her now from eternal death, hale her from hell, embrace her, hide her in the
holes of thy bloody wounds, as thy dear dove, and bear her manifold sins on
thy back. And thou, O holy spirit, strengthen thou now her weak, fainting,
and sounding spirit against satan, that stands now nigh her to seduce her.
Say thou now to satan, Avoid satan, and command thy holy angels and blessed
spirits now to aid and assist her. Let thy comfort cleave fast unto her, thy
mercy keep her, thy grace guide her, thy pains ease her, thy cross relieve
her, and thy death revive her.

Oh almighty God, the giver of all health, and if it be thy good will to
lengthen her days in this life, to spare her for a season, to mitigate her
pangs, to ease her of her pains, to relieve her of all these woeful sorrows,
and most grievous throws, to deliver her of this most dangerous travel, and
send into this world out of her woeful womb her child a sound and perfect
creature, after thine own image, and so restore her to her former health, as
thou have done her and many others heretofore in like case, that she thereby
may once again visit thy temple, and be purified, sanctified, and dedicated
unto thy honor and glory, the commodity of hirs, and comfort of us all her
friends, kindred, and neighbors. Weio^fullie say, Thy will O Lord be done,
and not ours. But if it be not thy will so, but that she, according to her
instant desire, must now being prevented with untimely labor and birth,
through perilous travel, needs drink of the cup of Rahels and Phinees wi^es
potion, and go the way of all flesh; then, O Lord, thou in whose hands are the
hearts of all flesh, arm her, we humbly beseech thee, with thy perpetual
grace, peace, patience, and perfect confidence in thee; increase her faith,
help her unbelief, anoint her with the oil of gladness in thee, ease her of
her extreme pains, be thou nigh unto her, and drive the devil far from her,
aid her with thy holy angels, giving her grace so quietly to take this thy
fatherly chastisement and visitation in good worth, that in this her painful
life, yea and in the very end thereof, she with perfect memory and sure
trust, commending her self wholly to thee, may in heart ioifullie still say,
and we her dear sisters and faithful friends and neighbors for her, as
follows.

When she is departing, and yields up the ghost, then add and say this that
follows.
FEtch now again, Lord God Father, into thy holy hands, that which thy
puissant might has shapen; command thy holy angels now to aid her, and
safely to bring her to thee, and now place thou her amongst thy chosen
children, and blessed heirs in thine eternal kingdom, prepared for them that
are written in the book of life. Fetch now again, Lord God son, that which
thou of thy mere mercy have so wisely governed, and bought with thy precious
blood: now ioifullie receive her, and say unto her as thou saiedst unto the
penitent thief, This day shall thou be with me in paradise. Take again now,
Lord God holy Ghost, that which thou of thy only favor have lovingly kept,
and guided in this region of sin, and vale of misery, and now lovingly
lead thou her with Rebecca, and Lazarus, to eternal joy and rest. This grant
her, O holy and most blessed Trinity, good Lord almighty, three persons and
one very God: unto whom be all honor, praise, and glory, for ever and ever:

Amen, Amen.
Another prayer while she yields up the ghost.
THE mighty God of angels, and former of all things visible and invisible, in
whose hands is only life and death, light and darkness, and all the motions of
the soul and body, without thee most mighty God, all things had been
nothing, and of nothing, all things are made by thee: without thy Christ, and
thy blessed spirit, which is one coeternall Trinity, all flesh were accursed,
all consciences molested, and all souls utterly damned, from light into
darkness, from freedom into everlasting reprobation: but by Jesus Christ thine
only son, we thank thee dear father of all mercy, that now it has
pleased thee to take to thy mercy at this present time, our dear sister S. B.
whom thou have elected, consecrated; and now she shall by thy mercy and pity,
be sanctified unto thee in the death of Christ, to be a citizen of eternal
glory. Now we perceive that flesh and blood does forsake her, and all her
worldly strength fails her: now are the organes yielding up the heavenly
sound, her soul comes now unto thee, good Lord receive it to thy mercy,
into thine everlasting glory, where as Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, Sara,
Rebecca, Rahel, and the blessed virgin Marie, are continually. To thee, oh
heavenly Father, be incessant honor and glory, for ever and ever,

Amen.
After her departure let the women kneel down also, and give thanks as
follows.
Almighty God, with whom do live the spirits of them that depart hence in the
Lord, and in whom the souls of them that be elect, after they be delivered
from the burden of the flesh, be in joy and felicity: thou I say, O
merciful God, the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who is the resurrection and
the life, in whom whosoever believes shall live, though he die; and whosoever
lives and believes in him, shall not die eternally, who also taught us (by
his holy apostle S. Paul) not to be sorry as women without hope, for them
that sleep in him: we give thee hearty thanks, for that it has pleased thee
to deliver this woman our sister, out of the woeful miseries of this sinful
world, meekelie beseeching thee, O Father, to raise us from the death of sin,
unto the life of righteousness, that when we also shall depart this life, we may
rest in Christ, as our hope is this our sister does; and that it may please
thee of thy gracious goodness, shortly to accomplish the number of thine efect,
and to hasten thy kingdom, that at the general resurrection in the last day,
we with this our sister, and all other departed in the true faith of thy holy
name, being found acceptable in thy sight, may have our perfect consummation
and bliss both in body and soul, in thy eternal and everlasting glory, and
receive that blessing, which thou, O Christ, shall then pronounce to all that
love and fear thee, saying; Come ye blessed children of my Father, receive the
kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the world. Grant this we
beseech thee, O merciful father, through Jesus Christ our only mediator,
redeemer, and savior,

Amen.
A prayer and thanksgiving to be used of the mother, or women about her, after
the child is baptized.
Almighty and everlasting GOD, who have vouchsafed to regenerate this infant
by water and the holy ghost, and have given unto it forgiveness of all his
sins, and received it into the number of thy children, and heirs of eternal
life: I thank thee for thy gracious goodness, favor, and mercy toward it.
And I humbly beseech thee also, O Lord, to strengthen it so with thy holy
ghost the comforter, that it may lead the rest of his life according to this
good beginning. Let thy fatherly hands, I pray thee, be ever over it, and
bless ti, daily increase it with thy manifold gifts of grace, give it the
spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and strength, the
spirit of knowledge and true godliness: fulfill it with the spirit of thy holy
fear, faith, and prayer, and so lead this child in the knowledge and obedience
of thy holy word, that (being ever defended with thy heavenly grace) it may
continue therein for ever, and daily increase in thy holy spirit more and
more, until in the end he obtain the gift of everlasting life, in thy
celestial kingdom: through Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
If the child, or young infant, be very sick, and lie sore pained with any
grief, or whenever else it be visited with any dreadful disea^e, pray
over it, and say as follows. Lord hear our prayers, And let our cry come
unto thee. Let us pray.
O Merciful Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, the only begotten Son of the
living Father, redeemer of all men, through all ages; whose nature is pitiful,
not only to the strong and stout, but also to the weak and simple, as babes,
infants, and children; we here assembled most heartily desire and pray thy
glorious majesty, for this seely infant and child, which has not the
capacity to pray for it self, lieng here in pains and pangs of sorrowful
sickness, beseeching thy grace, that with y^ same pity wherewith thou
sufferedst the babes and children to come to thee in the Gospel, and laiedst
thy blessed hands upon them; thou will also respect with the same eyes of
compassion, and consider this poor babe, seely child, and weak infant, sore
grieved with sickness. Grant, we beseech thee, that as it bears, and here
shows the image of sinful Adam, by suffering for sin; so it bearing the
lively image of thy heavenly gift, may by thy grace be delivered and helped,
from that which now by nature it suffers. So that like as it is with us
partaker of thy holy baptism; so it may also with us be partaker of thy help
and consolation. And forasmuch as the pains of the same poor child seem
grievous and vehement; we beseech thee so mitigate the vehemency thereof, that
by the releeuing and easing of it, we also (especially his sorrowful parents)
may be comforted, dealing with it according as it shall seem good to thy
divine wisdom, whether by death to call it, or by life to restore it, so that
whether it go or tarry, it may be thine, and at the last with thine elect be
made partaker of that blessed resurrection. when thou shall appear. In whose
name we pray furthermore for it and our selves, as thou in thy holy Gospel
have taugth us, saying: O our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name,
thy kingdom come, thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven, give us this
day our daily bread, and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that
trespass against us, and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from
evil. For thine is the kingdom, the power and the glory for ever and ever,

Amen.
Thanks-giuings for women after deliverance of child.
A thanksgiving and prayer to be said of the father, so soon as he hears
that a child is borne unto him, and his wife safely delivered.
O Eternal God, and heavenly father, the creator and preserver of mankind,
thou know the frail and weak nature of man, and have in thy merciful
loving kindness for his comfort and remedy, ordained him the most honorable
state of marriage to live and walk in, commanding them to increase and
multiply, and have promised the fruit of the body to be a blessing, and a
witness of thine eternal council of this most honorable state, to all them
that love and fear thee. Wherefore, oh heavenly father, I most heartily
thank thee, that it has pleased thee to call me into this most holy and
honorable state of marriage, and have vouchsafed to give me this infant thy
creature, as a witness and testimony of thy good will toward the same, and a
token of thy promised blessing to thy children. And that it has pleased thee
also to deliver this thy poor handmaid my yoke-fellowe, and mother of this
thy creature, from the sin-plague of sorrow and peril, in bringing forth as
thou appointedst the same, to our grandmother Eve. And now, oh dear and most
merciful father, I most humbly beseech thee to give unto me, and to this my
yoke-fellowe or wife thy servant, thy grace and holy spirit, and so renew the
same in us day by day, that both we may live and walk chastely, honestly and
holilie, as becomes thy children to live and walk in so honorable a state
before thee; and that we may do our duties in education, and bringing up of
this thy blessing and creature in godly nourture and discipline, and in true
information in thee, oh Lord, and thy Son Jesus Christ: and also that this
thy creature may do his duty in harkening and obeieng; so that of no part,
any fault be found in us, that may give occasion to the ungodly to speak
evil of thy truth and holy name, nor of this holy and honorable state, but
rather that they which know not the truth, may through the example of our good
conversation, be brought to the knowledge of thy truth, whereby they may be
made members of thy Church, and praise thee for all thy benefits, through thy
mercy and loving kindness powered upon us. Grant this, oh most merciful father,
for thy dear Son sake, Jesus Christ, our only mercie-seate and mediator,
in whose name I pray thee, as he has taught me, saying: O our father, etc.

Here may be said or soong to the glory of God, and your edifieng, the 8. the
127. the 128. Psalms of David, and Benedictus: or the song of Zachary, which
he made at the birth of his son John the Baptist; as Luke, cap. 1. and in the
beginning before the Psalms in meeter.
Another thanksgiving to be used of the midwife, or women assistant, after
the safe delivery of a woman in childbed.
O Eternal and almighty God, thy power and might is to be praised and
magnified for ever: for in the greatest weakness of man, thy power is seen; in
his greatest dangers thy salvation is known. Therefore we praise thy name, and
give thee thanks for all thy great mercies and wonderful works; namely Lord,
we give thee thanks for thy mercy showed to this our sister at this time, in
bringing her, through many and great dangers of childbirth, and in giving her
the fruit of her body. It was thy hand, O Lord, that has done it: for it is a
work greater than all the wisdom and power of man. Dear father, we beseech
thee, ever hereafter to deliver the mother, and the child, out of all their
dangers, as may best make to thy glory, and their salvation in Jesus Christ
our Lord. Touching us, we thank thee for blessing our labors, and furthering
the works of our hands; beseeching thee, that we beholding thy outstretched
arm, and rich mercies, may be drawn by them to serve thee in fear and
reverence all the days of our lives,

Amen.
An other thanksgiving, to be said for the safe deliverance of any woman in
childbed, or at her churching, as it is called.
AMong other thy benefits, and those innumerable, which thou daily bestowest
upon us thy needy and poor creatures, this is not the least, O most merciful
father, that thou of thy tender goodness do vouchsafe for the conservation of
mankind, to preserve the women that are with child, and to give them safe
deliverance of their burden, by this means making them glad and ioifull
mothers. For this thy benefit and good will toward us, we so heartily thank
thee as heart can think; beseeching thee to work such thankfulness in the heart
of this thy servant S. B. and all other women in like case, by thy spirit, that
they being not unmindful of this high benefit of their safe deliverance,
wrought only by the savior of all mankind, may show themselves thankful
unto thee for this thy goodness, and never forget that thy present help, and
most sweet comfort, which thou mercifully shewedst upon them in their great
travels, labors, and pains, when they fled unto thy holy name for succor,
as unto a strong tower, bulworke, and holy defense. Go forth, O Lord, to make
them the ioifull mothers of many children: endue them with long life, that
they may see their childers children: and the children that thou give unto
them, make thou, as in age, so likewise in wisdom, and in the abundance of
thy holy spirit to increase, that they may have favor, both with thee, and
with all good men, unto the glory of thy most blessed name,

Amen.
The mothers prayer for her childrens good education.
O Eternal God, creator and preserver of all mankind, the giver of all
spiritual grace, and the only author of eternal life; I most heartily thank
thee, that it has pleased thy fatherly goodness to give me these thy creatures
the fruit of my body as a witness and testimony of thy fatherly favor and
good will toward this most honorable state of matrimony. Oh Lord, as thou
have given them unto me, so I beseech thee vouchsafe to give me thy gifts both
spiritual and bodily, that I may have competent wherewith to educate and bring
them up. Have mercy on me, oh Lord, and give unto them thy grace and holy
spirit, and open thou their wits and senses, and give them the true knowledge
and understanding of thy holy word, a loving affection, and obedience unto the
same, and a true faith in it. Give them wisdom, understanding, knowledge, and
discretion, docilitie, capacity, and facility to comprehend, take and receive
doctrine, learning, nouriture and discipline, that they may be made worthy
instruments of thy glory, and profitable members of thy Church, to the
advancement of thy glory, the edifieng of thy Church, and the comfort of my
conscience: by Jesus Christ our Savior,

Amen.
Another prayer to be used of every godly mother, for the godly proof of
her child; made for the Lady Lettice.
O Most merciful Lord God almighty only, which art gracious and good, as by
thy divine will and power this my child was formed and made a living creature,
consisting of body and soul, in the womb of me his natural mother, from
whom he is departed into this world by natural birth, weak and impotent, of
frail and sinful substance, by his own property inclined to ignorance and
sin; and now environed with thousands of malicious, mighty, and subtle
enemies both bodily and ghostly, which wait for the seducing and leading of
him to peril, death, and destruction, whereunto all mankind is prone; and were
it not for thy merciful grace and tuition, soon overcome. So be it thy will,
O most gra^ious Lord, in the abundance of thy mercies and love, for Christ's thy
dear sons sake, with thy fatherly eye to look upon him, and to bless him,
pouring plentifully of thy heavenly gifts upon him, that being preserved,
brought up, and nourished in divine knowledge, faith, fear, and obedience of
thee, through true profession of thy sweet son Jesus, in the sincerity of
the Gospel, he may grow rich and beautiful in all godliness and virtue, in
all his ways and proceedings, seeking the kingdom of eternal glory, through
firm and abundant faith, and holy conversation in Christ our savior, working
all righteousness, filled with meeknes, brotherly love, obedience, cheerful
hope, desire of heavenly things, contempt of the world, and mightily armed
with thy grace, and strengthened by thine assistance, to vanquish the power of
sinful flesh, and satan, that having victory in the end, he may ioifullie
triumph in thy presence, O God, with the rest of thy beloved saints, to give
honor and continual praise to thy most holy name in bliss everlasting:
through thy dear son our merciful Lord and Savior,

Amen.
Another prayer of the mother for her child.
Almighty and everlasting God, which of thine infinite mercy and goodness have
promised unto us that thou will not only be our God, but also the God and
father of our children: I beseech thee, that as thou have vouchsafed to call us
to be partakers of this thy great mercy in the fellowship of faith: so it may
please thee to sanctify with thy spirit into the number of thy children, this
infant, which thou have given me; to the end that he coming to perfect age,
may confess thee only the true God, and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ,
and to serve him, and be profitable unto his Church in the whole course of his
life; that after this life being ended, he may be brought as a lively member
of his body, unto the full fruition of thy ioies, in the highest heavens,
where thy son our savior Christ reigns with thee world without end,

Amen.
Another prayer to be used of the mother, for the good education of her youth
and children.
OH gracious God, in knowledging that thou love all things which thou have
made of thy goodness; and that thing cannot perish which is committed to thy
charge: now I come unto thee with my tender children, committing them into
thine hands, and desiring thee to cover them under the wings of thy provident
mercy. Hew and square the rough table of their hearts: of stony, make them
fleshie, that being softened by the deaw of thy blessings, they may bear the
seals of adoption in thy Son Christ. O Lord guide them in this dark vale of
vanity with the light of thy favor, that escaping the dongeon of sin, they
may walk in newnes of life, and lodge always in thine holy will. Imprint in
their hearts, faith, hope, humility, chastity and charity, that following
thee, they may be humble and meek, holy, virtuous, perfect and godly, as
thou art. Indue them with the spirit of fear, that they may kiss thee in
faith and lively obedience, and thou be never angry with them, but loving
unto them, as the mother is to her tender sucklings,

Amen.
Another prayer for the godly and virtuous life of thy child.
O Lord God, and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and father of all them that
believe, which have said by the mouth of Solomon the son of David, that an
indiscreet son is a grief unto his father, and an heaviness unto his mother
that bare him: and that the wise son makes a glad father, but an indiscreet
body shameth his mother; that it would please thee so to conduct and guide
this my son S. in his way, that he may acknowledge and confess that thou
art the author of his life, that he may serve and honor thee without fear in
all truth and righteousness, and growing in age, he may be mortified in spirit,
that he may be filled with wisdom, and that thy grace be with him. To
conclude, that by that means, keeping thy precepts, he may prolong his days
here upon earth, obeieng us his parents, whom thou have chosen as instruments
for to place him in this world. Give unto him, O Lord, such ease for the
commodity of this life, that under color of poverty, he do not covet or
steal other men's goods, and take thy name in vain, or trusting upon his
prosperity, he deny thee, and say, What fellow is the Lord?

On the other side grant him grace, that he may acknowledge that he that
ploweth is nothing, neither he that waters; but thou Lord which give the
increase. Finally, when thou shall deprive and take him from all the
commodities of this present life, give unto him the like constancy, as thou
did give unto thy faithful servant Job, who seeing himself afflicted on
every side, did never murmur against thee; but falling down upon the ground,
worshipped thy majesty, and blessed thy name: for all which things we his
parents pray thee in the favor of thy well-beloved Son, he, I say, who was
obedient unto thee, even to the death of the cross, our Lord Jesus Christ, to
whom be glory for ever and ever,

Amen.
A prayer to be used of any mother in law.
FOrasmuch, O merciful God, as it is commonly said, that step-mothers be
malicious toward their husbands children, and hate their daughters in law,
bearing no great love and charity toward them: I being very desirous to
falsify this report in my self, whom it has pleased thee now by marriage to
make a mother of so many motherles children, and that I may forever be free
from any least suspicion of such offense, and never found guilty or culpable
of like malice and hatred toward the innocent, do now most humbly beseech
thee of thy goodness, so to rule the fond fancies of my mind, and crooked
conditions of my corrupted nature, with the grace of thy holy spirit, that I
never be carried away with passions and braids of the mind, to play the
tyrant over these my husbands children, nor by any means show my self rough,
rigorous, hard-harted, or unreasonable toward them; but being guided with
discretion, reason, and good consideration, let me have compassion and pity of
their tender and weak age, yea let me love them I say heartily, and count
them even as mine own, knowing that friendship makes all things common among
friends, much more wedlock (being the highest degree not only of all
friendship, but also of all blood and kindred) does of duty require the same
in me; as also especially remembering, that undoubtedly my children shall
find such favor of others, whither I die or live, as I have showed to other
men's children. For look with what measure we meat, with the same shall we be
sure to be measured, as says our Savior, Which thing well considered, grant I
beseech thee, that I may vnfeignedlie love these my husbands children, and be
unto them that which I hear them call me so often, that is, a mother; not a step
mother, or mother in law, after the vulgar opinion, in word and outward show
only, but a mild, a gentle, and tender loving mother in deed and good faith,
comforting, cherishing, and instructing them even as their own natural mother
would. O let me never hate or abhor them whom thou have thus conioined unto me
in house, friendship, aliance and blood, and made to be brethren and sisters
unto my children. Neither suffer me at any time to wreake conceived ire,
wrath, and displeasure upon these poor orphans and motherles children, but
make me to use all motherlie courtesy, lenity, and good behavior toward
them, even as if they were mine own.

Also concerning my daughters in law that are married, let me not be discontent
that they are blood of their husbands more than I; nor think my motherhood
any whit diminished thereby, as she that would seek to win love, by hating
them that offend me not: but take from us good Lord I beseech thee, all
occasions of strife, contention, bralling, chiding, and unnatural fallings
out; and if any discord chance between us, make us also both most wisely
with all our might to avoid it, and speedily with willing minds to reconcile
our selves each one to the other again, as becomes us, that others seeing
our mutual love, concord, and godly behavior each to other, may by our good
examples take occasion worthily to glorify thee in using the like.

Finally, grant me grace that with Naomie and other godly women, to the
utmost of my power, skill, and ability, I may both love, cherish, and instruct
my daughters in law, giving them good counsel, and also do before them in my
conversation all such things as may be examples unto them both of chastity,
sobernes, and all manner of godliness and virtue, so shall it come to pass that
I (ruling mine affections modestly, and behauing my self courteously and
motherlie in deed toward these my children in law, as to mine own) shall not
only avoid the great number of troubles and miseries, which otherwise
cruelty and contention would bring upon mine head, but also by that means
obtain great love and reverence of these my children in law again toward
me, and procure to my self a most holy, delectable, sweet, peaceable, and
quiet life with my dear husband, to thy glory, and our eternal felicity.
Grant this, O father, for thy dear Son sake, our only Lord and Savior,

Amen.
The mistress or dames prayer for her self, and her family.
THy commandment is by thine holy Apostle, O most merciful Lord Christ, that
masters and mistresses should entreat their servants and handmaids gently,
putting away threatenings, and doing that unto them which is just and equal:
forasmuch as we also have a master in heaven, with whom there is no respect of
persons. Grant I most heartily pray thee, I may so order my men-seruants, and
maid-seruants, that I attempt none unrighteousness against them; but so use my
rule and authority over them, that I may always remember that thou art the
common Lord of us all, and we all thy servants. Again, that I may not forget
that we be all brothers and sisters, having one father which is in heaven, and
look for one glorious kingdom, where thou, with the father and the holy
ghost, live and reignest true and everlasting God for ever,

Amen.
Another.
TO have children and servants, is thy blessing, O Lord; but not to order them
according to thy word, deserves thy dreadful curse. Grant therefore, that as
thou have blessed me with an household and family: so I may diligently watch,
that nothing be committed of the same that might offend thy fatherly goodness,
and be an occasion of turning thy blessing into curssing: but that so many as
thou have committed to my charge, may eschew all vice, embrace all virtue, live
in thy fear, call upon thy holy name, learn thy blessed commandments, hear
thy holy word, and avoiding idleness, diligently exercise themselves every
one in his office, according to their vocation and calling, unto the glory of
thy most honorable name,

Amen.
Another prayer of dames or mistresses.
O Lord God almighty, our heavenly father and most merciful Lord, thou art my
life, my soul, and my body; yea all the good which I have, and all whatsoever
is mine, all that thou have given unto me, of thee have I received it. Make
therefore, and ordeine thou, O beloved God in heaven all them in my house, and
in my handling, down lieng, and vprising, after thy good will and pleasure,
thee to love, serve, and obey, every one to his profit. For I believe in thee,
in thee is all my trust, that thou will not forsake me, nor my husband and
children, nor any of my family and household. Defend us Lord from sin,
shame, and sickness, and from all evil. Send us thine holy angel, that he
may defend us in all our deeds and living, that he may lead us forth the right
way, that we may not talk, do, or think any thing against thy holy
commandments and will; but thereafter to live, worshipping thee, and praising
thee foreuermore: through Jesus Christ our Lord thy beloved son,

Amen.
Another.
O Gracious God, I commend unto thy protection my house, and all that thou have
given me; my whole family, my husband, and children; beseeching thee to give
me the power of thy holy spirit, that I may well and holilie rule, govern,
nourish, and bring up these my children and family, in all godly fear and
knowledge of thy holy word: and that I may be unto them an example of all
godliness and virtue, to the praise of thy holy name: through Jesus Christ our
Lord,

Amen.
Another.
O Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, father of mercy, and God of my life; I
beseech thee for thy son Christ's sake, have mercy upon me and mine husband,
and upon the household and family that thou have given me: and power thy
wholesome benefits upon us always sufficiently, for our living, for our soul
and body. O thou great rich husbandman, let thy great riches enrich our
poverty, thy mercy bear our sins, thy grace sustain and comfort our
frailnes, thy holy angel keep us from satan, and from all evil; that our
conversation may be honest, faithful, and plentious in all good works, and we
saved through the merits of Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
Another prayer to be said of all christiam masters and mistresses, both for
themselves and other in like condition.
ALthough, O Christ, thou most high Lord, all power both in heaven and in earth
be given unto thee of thy heavenly father; and albeit thou have given us a
commandment, that we should not desire to be called masters, or mistresses: for
we have but one master, which thou art, and all we brethren and sisters, having
one father which is in heaven. Yet forasmuch as thou, according to thy blessed
will, have appointed some superiors, some inferiors, some masters and
mistresses, some servants, and handmaids, some to command, some to obey, some
to rule, some to serve; and by this means such as be in superiority, have
obtained by thy holy word the name or title of masters or lords, mistresses or
dames, because they have servants and handmaids under them, and rule over them
according to thy good pleasure and godly appointment, which art the most
supreme power, and most excellent majesty, King of kings, and Lord of lords,
to whom all things both in heaven, and in earth, and under the earth, do bow
their knees, and give reverence and honor, whose praise also every nation and
language does advance and set forth, confessing that thou art the Lord Jesus
Christ, unto the glory of God the father: we most humbly beseech thee, which
art the greatest master, and most high Lord, to send thy holy spirit upon us,
and all such as are called masters or dames here in earth, and have
superiority under thee; that we, and they, remembering our selves to be thy
servants, and that we also have a master in heaven, with whom there is no
respect of persons, may put away all threatenings, all cruelty, all
unrighteousness, and do that unto our servants, which is just and equal. Grant
that we entreat not evil our servants, and handmaids, which work truly, nor
the hireling that is faithful unto us. Grant that we be not as lions in our
houses, destroieng our household folks. and oppressing such as are under us: but
rather that we cherish and love our faithful and discreet servants and maids,
even as our own soul; and by no means suffer them to be unrewarded for their
pains taking, nor yet at the last to be driven to beggerie for their true
service doing: but that we liberally rewarding them according to their
deserts, may show our selves to be thy true servants, which leauest no man
unrewarded, but give to every one according to their deeds: to them that do
well, and continue in well doing; glory, honor, peace, immortality, and
everlasting life: to them that do evil, and continue in the same;
indignation, wrath, displeasure, trouble, sorrow, and eternal damnation. Grant
therefore, O Lord, that we and all temporal masters and dames, may in all our
doings resemble thee, which art the heavenly and everlasting master; and so
behave our selves both toward our servants, and all other, according to thy
blessed will, that at the last day we may be found in the number of them, to
whom thou shall say; Come ye blessed of my father, possess the kingdom which
was prepared for you from the beginning of the world: Lord let it so come to
pass,

Amen.
The maid-seruants, or handmaids prayer.
ALl estates, O Lord, depend upon thee, king and beggar, magistrate and
cleargie-man, master and scholar, all come of thee, and me thou have made a
poor handmaid and servant, which I do not only willingly bear, knowing
thou have allotted me this calling; but also many ways I have to thank thee
for it. For thou have not only delivered me from the slavish service of
satan, but also dooest by this my yoke, restrain the wanton relics of
stained nature, preserving me from the pampering of the old man, in pleasures
and idleness. Secondly, that I am not servant or hand maid to any heathen,
Turk, or Saracene; but to a Christian, in such a place where thy Gospel is
preached freely and fully. Thirdly, and especially, because thou have
called me unto such an estate of life, as wherein I know I do well please
thee. For who lives after the Gospel, if not I, who get my living with the
sweat of my brows? I do not glory here in vain, but to thee therefore be the
glory, who have turned the curse into such a blessing. O Lord give me grace to
consider this, that I may be more diligent in my calling, more earnest in
serving thee than ever I have been heretofore: forgive me all that is past,
and guide me in all things to come, that I may never halt in my vocation, nor
do my service deceitfully to the eye, as a man-pleaser. Give me a sound and
perfect faith in thy sons blood, O father, wherein he has washed (of his
great mercy) my poor soul; that notwithstanding I serve a mortal man and
woman, yet above them in all things I may serve thee: to whom be all glory and
dominion, both now and for ever,

Amen.
Another.
O Christ our Lord and savior, which being the Son of the living God, yea
God himself from everlasting, did not disdain at the will of thy heavenly
Father, to make thy self of no reputation, to become man, to take upon thee
the shape of a servant and to obeie thy fathers commandment to the death of
the cross for our salvation, refusing no service, no travel, no labor, no
pain, that might make unto the comfort of mankind. I most humbly beseech
thee, to give me and all servants grace to practice thy humility and
obedience; that as thou most willingly did serve and obeie thy heavenly
fathers good pleasure, so I and they in like manner may with most hearty
affection, serve and obeie our bodily masters and dames, in all things that
fight not with thy blessed word; not with eie-seruice as men-pleasers, but in
singlenes of heart, fearing thee, O God, that whatsoever we do, we may do it
heartily, even as unto the Lord, and not unto men; forasmuch as we are sure,
that we shall receive the reward of the heavenly inheritance of thee, O Lord
Christ, whom also we serve, while truly and faithfully we serve our bodily
masters and dames. Grant that I thine humble handmaid, and so many as are
under the yoke of servitude, may count our masters and mistresses worthy of
all honor, that the name of God be not evil spoken of, nor his doctrine
standered, and that we may obeie them with all fear; not only if they be good
and courteous, but also though they be froward and testie, and please them in
all things; not answering them again, nor picking ought from them: but she
wing all good faithfulness and trustines toward them, that in all things we may
do worship unto the doctrine of thee our God and Savior; to whom with the
father, and the holy Ghost, be all honor, praise and glory, for ever,

Amen.
Or pray thus.
O Lord, we servants are commanded by thy blessed Apostles, that we should
honor and obeie our bodily masters and dames with fear and trembling, not
only if they be good and courteous, but also though they be hasty and
froward; and serve them not with the eye as men-pleasers, but with singlenes of
heart; not churlishlie answering them again, nor piking, stealing, or conueieng
away any part of their goods unjustly; but she wing all good faithfulness
unto our masters and dames, as though we served God, and not men and women,
Grant me grace, I most humbly beseech thee, so to serve and obeie my master
and mistres, and all other my superiors, that there may be found no fault in
me, but that I behauing my self vprightlie, justly, faithfully and truly in
my vocation, may do worship to the doctrine of thee my God and savior in all
things,

Amen.
Another prayer to be said of an handmaid, waiting woman, or maid-seruant.
Gracious God, and Lord almighty, which by the precious blood of thy Son
Jesus Christ, have redeemed me a miserable wretch, from perpetual slavery,
and pulled me out of the power both of sin, death, darkness, hell, and
damnation: I beseech thee grant, that I be never ashamed of this my servile
state and condition, wherein, according to thy good pleasure and will, I am
placed. Neither let me vnpatientlie murmur at any time against my mistres and
betters, nor enuiouslie detract from the estimation of them or others; but give
me grace to do thy will continually in singlenes of heart, as unto Christ,
with all possible good will, serving the Lord and not men. Suffer me not
malapertlie to vpbraid my master or mistres with their faults or infirmities,
when they rebuke me for mine; neither yet let me murmur, contemn, or despise
them, as Hagar the handmaid of Sara did her dame Sara that reproved her: but
rather make me, I pray thee, as loving, courteous, gentle, attendant, and
dutiful unto mine, as Abraham's, and the handmaids of Judith and Susanna were
unto them. O most merciful God, assist me I say with thy holy spirit, that I
may obeie these my carnal rulers and governors, not only if they be good
and meek, but also if they be evil and froward, and that with all fear, so
long as they command me nothing contrary to thy commandment. Because thou will have me to do so, neither let me be forced for any evil speeches, or
rough-handling of my dame, to fly or run away from her, as Hagar did from
Sara, to her no little sorrow and misery: but give me grace rather to humble
my self as a corrigible servant under her hands, to confess my faults, and
amend my manners and crooked conditions; especially knowing her power over me
to be of thee, and therefore that the severity of my dame should not make me
to neglect my duty and service; but patiently and constantly for thy sake
to endure my labors, and to tarry and abide out all my term of service to
the end, evermore calling upon thee by hearty prayer for her, and that thou will not suffer me to be hurt by any her evil dealing toward me, but
preserve and keep me always safe by thy power from all evil.

Furthermore, I pray thee, let not satan suggest or entise me to do any
evil or wicked deed unknown to my dame, to my dishonestie, or her damage,
thereby to cause strife or bralles to arise, either within or without, to my
self or others: but let it be a grief unto me to hear them by any
misreported or standered, or to see them by any means abused, and hindered or
hurt in goods or name. Give me grace always to obeie my good and courteous
governors, not with eye service, as a man-pleaser, but in singlenes of heart,
as she that more fears thee than flesh and blood. And make thou me so
faithful and trusty in all my business, that nothing be at any time either
marred or lost, of those things committed to my charge, either through my
negligence, or unthriftiness. O keep my hand, I pray thee, from picking,
filching, purloining, and stealing; and my tongue from curssing, taunting,
answering again, and evil speaking: neither let me with an evil eye, wicked
affection, careless mind, and ungodly intent, behold any of those things put
into my custody and keeping, nor vndiscreetlie diminish, impair, or lessen
them. Make me to be content with my wages, and when I shall depart, to go away
quietly, carrieng nothing of my masters or dames goods, to the value of a
mite, with me, but only that which is mine own. And in the mean while
increase thou my health, and grant strength to all my lims and members of my
body, I beseech thee, that I may by that means be the better able to earne my
wages, and do my duty, to the benefit of my master and dame, whom I serve,
as I heartily desire. Give me also understanding wisely to go about their
affairs and business, and prosper thou the works of mine hands, to the blessing
and enriching of them and their families.

Let the eyes of thy servant wait upon thee, O Lord my God, until thou, which
dwell in the heavens, have mercy upon me: and the eyes of thy handmaid
attend and look diligently unto the hand of her mistress, that my soul be
never filled with the scornful reproof of the wealthy, nor with the
despitefulnes of the proud. Make me true both in word and deed, unto those whom
I serve, and with all possible care and industry to declare my fidelity and
obedience, by my faithful, painful, and trusty service, and by preferring
still their business to mine own necessity. Make thou me godly, religious,
and holilie given to all virtuous exercises. Give me grace to pray often, and
heartily, for my master and mistress, their children, friends, and all their
family, and for the whole Church. And let thy holy fear be always before
mine eyes, to shun and avoid all occasion of sin and offense, both in my
self and others, that I may be worthily accounted in the number of those
godly servants and maids, on whom thou have promised to power thy holy
spirit, and that thou also my sovereign Lord and master, may testify for my
righteous and faithful service, by blessing my labors, and rewarding mine
industry and diligence, as thou did all the godly servants and handmaids
in the old time: and thereby give me ample occasion to laud and praise thee all
the days of my life. Finally, whatsoever I shall go about to do, do thou
vouchsafe to bless me, O God, and let it both be begun, continued, and ended
in thee, and also tend evermore to the glory of thy name, the wealth of my
master and mistress, the full discharge of my duty, and the increase of my
faith and blessing in thee, ever for Jesus Christ's sake thy son and my
savior, who being very God, equal with thee, laid aside his glory; and
being Lord of all, made himself of no reputation, and took on him the form
of a servant, willingly to submit himself to the most shameful death of the
cross, for our redemption: to whom therefore, with thee, and the holy ghost,
three persons and one God, be all honor, praise, power, rule and dominion, for
ever and ever,

Amen.
The poor widows mite, containing seven meditations, or prayers in meeter,
for the obteining of Gods mercy, and the forgiveness of sin against
desperation, to be said or soong^ gathered by William Hunnis, one of the
Gentlemen of her Highness Chapel, and master to the children of the same.
AH helples wretch, what shall I do, or which way shall I run?
The earth be wraies, and heaven records the sins that I have do^^
The gates of hell wide open stand for to receive me in,
And fearful f^ends all ready be to torment me for sin.
Alas where shall I succor find? The earth does me deny,
And to the sacred heavens above I dare not lift mine eye.
If heaven and earth shall witness be against my soul for sin,
Untimelie birth (alas) for me much better then had bin,
And now despair approaches fast with bloody murdering knife,
And wills me to end my greefes by shortning of my life.
Shall I despair? Thou God forbid, for mercy more is thine,
Than if the sins of all the world were linked now with mine.
Despise not then most loving Lord the image of thy face,
Which thou have wrought and dearly bought with goodness of thy grace,
And since the bloody price is paid, and bitter pains all past,
Receive my plaints, accept my spirit, and mercy grant at last,
So shall my soul rejoice, and still for mercy cry,
Peccaui, peccaui, miserere mei.
The second meditation.
THou God that rulst and reignst in light that flesh can not attain,
Thou God that know the thoghts of men are altogether vain,
Thou God which neither tongue of man, nor angel can express,
Thou God it is that I do seek, thou pity my distress.
Thy seat, O God, is euerie-where, thy power, all powers extend,
Thy wisdom cannot measured be, for that it has no end.
Thou art the power and wisdom too, and sole felicity,
But I a lump of sinful flesh, nursse of iniquity.
Thou art by nature merciful, and mercy is thy name,
And I by nature miserable, and thrall of sin and shame.
Then let thy nature O good God, now work his force in me,
And cleanse this nature of my sin, and heal my misery.
One depth good Lord another craves, my depth of sinful crime
Requires thy depth of mercy great, for saving health in time.
Sweet Christ grant y^ the deapth of grace may swallow up my sin,
That I thereby may whiter be, than ever snow has bin.
So shall my soul rejoice, and still for mercy cry,
Peccaui, peccaui, miserere mei.
The third meditation.
BEfore thy face, and in thy sight, have I, deuoid of shame,
O Lord, transgressed willingly, I do confess the same:
Yet was I loath that men should know or understand my fall,
Thus feared I man much more than thee, thou righteous judge of all.
So blind was I and ignorant, yea rather wilful blind,
That sucked the comb, and knew the Be had left her sting behind.
My sins O God to thee are known, there is no secret place,
Where I may hide my self or them, from presence of thy face.
Where shall I then my self bestow? Or who shall me defend?
None is so loving as my God, thy mercies have none end.
In deed I grant, and do confess, my sins so heinous be,
As mercy none at all deserves; but yet thy property
Is alwaie to be merciful to sinners in distres,
By which thou will declare and show thy great almightines.
Have mercy Lord on me therefore, for thy great mercies sake,
Which camst not righteous men to call, but sinners part to take:
So shall my soul rejoice, and still for mercy cry,
Peccaui, peccaui, miserere mei.
The fourth meditation.
MOst gracious God do not behold the number of my sin,
Nor yet consider with thy self how wicked I have bin.
But rather think I am but dust, or as the withered haie.
Which flourishes to day in feeld, to morrow shorn away.
My flesh rebels against the spirit, my spirit too weak is found,
By sin conceived in mothers womb, my soul first caught her wound.
My flesh is frail, too weak and vain, to do the thing I should,
And what I would not, that do I, contrary that I would.
Thou see, O Lord, how weak I am, not able for to stand,
Without the succor, help and aid, of thy most mighty hand.
And what is he that will not stay the man that's like to fall,
Or will refuse the sick to help, for help when he does call.
If thou will lay unto my charge, the burden of my sin,
O Lord the conquest is but small that thou thereby shall win.
For why, thy glory and thy praise in mercy does consist,
Unto the which I yield my self, to do with what thou list.
My soul shall trust in thee, and still for mercy cry,
Peccaui, peccaui, miserere mei.
The fifth meditation.
IF I demand what mercy is, thou God wilt answer me,
That mercy is the abundance great, of thy heavenly pity;
With which thou viewst the afflicted sort that on the earth do lie,
And what is this compassion then, but proofs of thy mercy?
Our fathers old the same have felt, and now in rest do reign,
And thou art still the selfsame God, for ever to remain.
Our fathers were conceived in sin, and so are we likewise,
Will thou compassion show on them, and children theirs despise?
One faith in Christ we all profess, one God in persons three,
As thou compassion had on them, compassion have on me.
Ponder O God, my hearts desire, most humbly do I crave,
And do away all my misdeeds, and so compassion have.
And as of sinners many a one, whose number is unknown,
Thou did vouchsafe to draw to thee, and make them all thine own:
So now vouchsafe most gentle God, likewise to draw me in,
And make me righteous by thy grace, forgiving me my sin.
So shall my soul rejoice, and still for mercy cry,
Peccaui, peccaui, miserere mei.
The sixth meditation.
MOst mighty God, I do confess ten thousand times and more,
Thou have me washed from my sin, and salued still my sore.
But I through sin am fallen again, and fowler now am made,
Than ever was the filthy swine, with mire over laid.
How oftentimes shall we forgive, each other that offend?
Seventy times seven, the scripture says, which signifies no end.
If man to man such favor show, that wretched caitiues be,
How much more thou, O gracious God, to them that call on thee?
It is thy nature to forgive, my nature can but fall,
Though thou be just in all thy works, thy mercy passes all.
What time a sinner does repent, and turn to thee at last,
All sins foredone, thou will forget, thy promise so has past.
Behold O God I turn to thee with sorrow for my sin,
And do repent even from my heart that I so lewd have bin.
Now wash me Lord yet once again, with fountain of thy grace,
That I among the sacred saints, with thee might have a place.
So shall my soul rejoice, and still for mercy cry,
Peccaui, peccaui, miserere mei.
The seventh and last meditation.
LIke as the guilty prisoner stands, before the judge so tried,
With quaking breath, and shiuering lims, his judgment to abide:
Even so, O God, before thy face, in fearful state I stand,
And guilty cry to thee my judge, and now hold up my hand.
Nothing have I to plead for life, no goodness is in me,
Of sin, deceit, and wickedness, guilty, good Lord, guilty.
Thus by thy righteous doom O God, and sacred law divine,
Condemnd am I to endless pain, through just deserts of mine,
Alas, what then is to be said, or what is to be done?
For mercy yet will I appeal to Jesus Christ thy son.
For never yet has it been heard, since first the world began,
That Jesus Christ did turn his face from any sinful man,
Which unto him for mercy came with sad repentant mind,
O Lord shall I then be the first that shall no mercy find?
Shall I be she thou will despise, that humbly commes to thee?
No, no, sweet Christ, thy promise is for to deliver me,
Wherefore my soul, be glad, and cry incessantly,
Peccaui, peccaui, miserere mei.
FINIS.
W. H.
A prayer to be said of a widow, immediately after the death of her husband.
Eternal and merciful God, father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according
to thine heavenly pleasure have taken now my dear and loving husband R. B.
out of this world, whereby I am a poor afflicted widow, and my seely
children fatherless: unto thee do I cry in this my misery, O mine assured
advocate; have mercy on me, a forsaken orphane, and after thy great goodness
pardon all my sins, which I have committed against thee. Turn unto me, O
Lord, and take mercy on me: for my soul is become a widow, and I am alone
and comfortless: look upon the tears of my widowhood, and behold mine
affliction and misery. Oh my Lord, now relieve my necessity, as thou did
relieve that widow of Sarepta, whom thou did most miraculouslie preserve by
thy prophet Elias. Take the like pity on me now, I say, until thou return:
ah show thy self unto me, that I may be comforted; assist me, behold my
necessity, and deliver me out of all my troubles. Grant likewise, that since
thou have taken away from me the veil of mine eyes, mine head and deer
husband, with whom I was preserved from all dangers, and of whom peradventure I
was unworthy: I may yet find favor now in the sight of all governors and
magistrates, whom in thy holy word thou have commanded to be as an husband and
guide unto me, that I be not iniuried by the ungodly, contrary to all reason
and equity. In like sort, let me find patrons and honest men, which will have
a tender consideration of this my present estate, and succor me at times with
godly counsel. Protect me, oh my God, from all false tongues, which are like
rasures cutting deceitfullie, and as the sharp arowes of a mighty man.
Deliver me, O Lord, from slander, and from the obloquie of wicked men, which
with poisoned words have bent their bow to cast down the poor and needy,
and to slay such as be of a right conversation. Furthermore, I beseech thee,
give me grace to live in this my desolate state of widowhood, chastely, and
godly, showing my self an example of godliness to others, and trusting wholly
in thy mercy at all times. Let me patiently and christianlie endure all
crosses laid upon me, and continue faithfully in making of supplications night
and day. Behold, as the eyes of a maiden are upon her mistress; so are mine
eyes bent upon thee my Lord God, until thou have mercy, Have mercy on me, O
Lord, have mercy on me, for I am full of reproach, and my soul is even as a
weaned child from the mothers breasts. Hear me, O Lord, as my trust is in thee,
for Jesus Christ's sake thy son our Lord and savior,

Amen.
Another prayer of a widow.
O Lord I thank thee, that thou have scourged me thus with the death of mine
husband. He was deer unto me, O Lord, even bone of my bones, and flesh of my
flesh; for whom I forlooke both father and mother, to cleave unto him. He by
the covenant of matrimony was made one body with me: thou gave him unto me,
and thou have taken him from me, blessed be thy name for ever. The bands of
death have sundred me from him for a while; but I hope, O Lord, by the power of
thy holy spirit, that nothing shall be able to separate me from thee mine
only Jesus, the only joy of my soul. Put the axe of thy mercy, to the
root of my wanton nature, and cut it off, that I do not marry the vanity of
this wicked world: but put upon me the garment of innocence, and tie about my
heart the jewel of faith, that I may only marry thee in the covenant of thy
heavenly father, loving Jesus, and have nothing to do with the adulterer the
devil, the father of deadly fornication. This is the only bed of joy,
wherein I will sleep, O Lord; and the only arc of all comfort, wherein I
will sail; till I shall see thee face to face: to whom be praise, and honor,
both now and ever,

Amen.
A prayer to be said of widows, for widows.
Gracious and faithful God, father of orphans, and judge of widows, which by
thy word have commanded that none injury be done to widows and fatherless
children: I beseech thee have pity on me desolate woman, and my poor
fatherless children, and upon all widows and orphans else where through the
world: be thou our patron and defender, and minister such things unto us as
thou know we daily stand in need of, whether it be meat, clothing, or else
what, for our sustentation. Let magistrates thy ministers relieve the
oppressed, judge the fatherless, and defend the widow against all oppression
and wrong. Grant that our patrons may fatherly look unto us widows, and all
men gladly and godly provide for us and our orphans. Moreover, give all men
grace for their parts not to hurt us or ours any ways, but to the uttermost
of their powers to help us: because pure religion, and undefiled before thee
is, to visit the fatherless and widows in their adversity, and to keep our
selves unspotted of the world. In like sort grant, that I, and all widows, for
our parts may at all times, and in all our afflictions, put our whole trust in
thee the living God, our Lord and father, and continue in supplications and
prayers night and day, avoiding filthy pleasure, uncomely gesture, and
indecent behavior, whereby either others may be offended, or our selves
defamed, or at the least suspected of lightness. Bless thou my fatherless
children, O heavenly father, together with all young pupils under heaven, that
by thy providence and fatherly care they may be honestly and godly brought
up in thy fear unto every good work, whereby they may always fear thee
their chief father, obeie their tutors and teachers, harken unto good counsel
and correction, and so increase, as in years, so in wisdom, both in the
favor of men, and of thee their God. And I beseech thee, O Lord, defend all
married folk, with their children, that through thy displeasure purchased by
their wickedness, they perish not with the sword, nor otherwise by untimely
death be dispatched, that their wi^es prove not widows, nor their children
fatherless. Oh bless us, Lord, with thy favor, even for Christ's sake thy
welbe^ loved son,

Amen.
The same prayer more at large to be used generally for all widows and
orphans.
O Most merciful and faithful God, father of orphans, and judge of widows,
look down from heaven, thou which considerest our labor and sorrow, and in
whose hands all our salvation does consist. The poor is left to thee, for thou
art the helper of the fatherles. The Lord does hear the desire of the poor;
thou preparest their hearts, and thine ear harkeneth thereunto, to help the
fatherles and widow unto their right, that the man of the earth be no more
exalted against the miserable, We beseech thee, O most righteous auenger, have
thou a consideration of all widows and orphans, and provide for them, by
ministering clothes and nourishment unto them. Have pity on them, in all their
perils and necessities; stretch out thine helping hand and deliver them, as
thou did that widow, whose pitcher of oil, by the Prophet Elias, thou did
so increase with thy blessing, that not only she delivered her children in
bondage for debt, out of the hands of her creditors; but also of the oil she
sold and had wherewith to susteme both her self and her children. For thou art
the Lord which carest for strangers, and releeuest the fatherles and widow,
but destroiest the ways of the ungodly. Thou art touched with care of the
afflicted, and despisest not the desires of the fatherles, nor the widow when
she powers out her prayers before thee. For the tears running down the
cheeks of the widow, ascend up into the heavens, and her cry against him
which wrings it out by oppression.

Grant therefore, O merciful God, that in the sight of all governors and
judges, they may find favor, and have equal judges and patrones of their
matters, that the judgment of the stranger and fatherles be not perverted, nor
the cause of the widow neglected, but that judgment may be sought according
to thy law, the oppressed helped, judgment given for the orphane, and the
widow defended. For thou have given a straight commandment unto all judges,
saying: Keep equity and righteousness; deliver the oppressed from the power of
the oppressor. Do not grieve nor oppress the stranger, the fatherles nor the
widow, and shed none innocent blood: for thou art the God which wilt avenge
thine elect that cry unto thee. Thou keep truth for ever and ever, doing
justice to the oppressed with wrong. Now therefore deliver thou, O Lord, the
fatherles and widow out of the paws of the ravening thieves, which eat up
the houses of the widows, under the pretense of godliness, and color of right:
deliver them (I say) out of the hands of wicked judges, which feign and invent
laws to suppress the poor, and to hurt the cause of the base among the
people, that widows may be a pray for them, and that they may rob the
fatherles; such perverse judges, O Lord God, in the day of their visitation
and calamity from a far thou will utterly destroy.

Appoint unto orphans and widows faithful patrons, which will be touched
with an earnest care of their welfare. And also, give us willing minds to
pleasure widows, and fatherles children, according to our ability to deliver
the poor when he cries, and the fatherles which has none to help, to
sustain and help him that is ready to fall, to comfort the widow, evermore
to be as a father to the fatherles, and from our tender years, to minister
instruction to the widows, and suffer them never to perish, but in blessing to
bless them, and to fill them with bread. For pure religion and undefiled
before thee, O Lord our father, is to visit the fatherles and widows in their
adversity, and to keep our selves unspotted of the world. For he which is
merciful toward the orphane as a father, and shows himself as an husband
toward his mother, in taking the defense of their cause upon him, he shall be
as an obedient son of the highest, and thou God wilt more favor him, than a
mother can pity her son: but they which despite the sighs and tears of the
widow, and keep back their loaf that the fatherles eat not thereof, and
suffer them to perish for want of clothing and apparel: yea, which lift up
their hands to afflict them, they shall greeuouslie be punished, their
shoulders shall fall from their ioints, and their arms be broken from the
bones of them. O merciful God, extend thy favor upon all widows, that at all
times, and in all afflictions they may trust in thee the living God, and
continue in supplications and prayers night and day, being diligent, in all
good works, not occupied in pleasures, neither wanton, light, idle, wandering
from house to house, no tatlers, nor busy bodies, no speakers of things
uncomely, nor giuers of occasion, whereby thy word may be blasphemed. Keep
all parents, that they being taken away either by war or untimely death,
their wives be not widows, and their children orphans, running here and there
a begging. Be thou their helper and comforter, even for Christ's sake our Lord
and savior,

Amen.
The orphane or fatherles child's prayer.
O Lord, so narowe is the mouth of charity, so consumed is the fire of
Christian love, that where the foxes have their holes, and birds their nests,
yet have we poor fatherles children and orphans, no place to rest our heads
on. As pilgrims we wander from place to place, and are driven with the wind of
pinching poverty upon the seas of this world to seek relief; but alas, and
woe to the world for it. The rich man deuoureth all superfluouslie, or else
hoordeth up to fill his garners niggardlie, so that Lazarus may not only walk
amidst the streets naked, but also lie begging at the gates sore, and yet go
without, even the crumbs that fall from the table, to ease the time of his
necessity. O Lord, therefore do I poor orphane fly unto thee; have thou
mercy upon me: for it is only thou which fillest with thy blessing every
living thing. I am better than a farthing sparrowe, O Lord thou know it, and
I acknowledge it to my comfort; feed my soul with the flesh of thy son, and
let me drink of his blood, that seeking first thy kingdom, I may in the end
be crowned with glory, and sit at the table of joy in heaven with thee. O
Lord grant this I beseech thee,

Amen.
The old woman's prayer.
O God of our fathers, and Lord of all grace, throughout all nations, all ages,
and generations past, present and to come, and which powrest bountifully upon
all flesh the treasures of thine heavenly virtue and wisdom, grant I humbly
beseech thee not only unto my self, which am now become aged, and full of
days; but also unto whomsoever thou have given the blessing of long life and
many years, to live in this vale of misery, to be mothers of many children,
to multiple upon the earth, to increase here thy kingdom, and to be as organs
and instruments of thee, preserved to set forth, as we ought, the glory of
thy majesty: that thou will vouchsafe always so to indue me, and all sage and
ancient matrones, with the spirit of truth, understanding and knowledge, with
thy fatherly wisdom, will to holiness, devotion, granitie, temperance and
constancy; that the inexpert, the iuniors, younger women, and inferiors, which
through want of time, the affects of youth, and void of the like gifts of
grace, can not deal as they should, for thy glory in the common wealth of the
Church, may yet by our sober, sound, and grave conversation follow us, as true
patronesses of piety, be ruled by us, guided, instructed, well trained up, and
christianly counseled, that unto us aged and grave matrones again, by such
just desert, and clear shining light of our good example, our due honor,
worthy estimation, condign worship, humble submission and reverence, may most
amply for thy glory daily redound toward us: so shall it come to pass,
that now at all times, and in all ages, from tender youth, to very old age,
through generations, and all posterities, thy holy name shall be magnified in
righteousness and true holiness, with all joyfulness, lauds, thanksgiving, here
and for ever in the everlasting world to come, through thine only free grace
in the merits most precious of thine only Son our Lord Jesus Christ,

Amen.
Ad this Psalm, or prayer.
O Lord, which woorkest woonders, which cheerest my heart with remembering thee,
and which inlightenest my youth; despise not mine old age, but make my bones to
rejoice, and my hoarie hears to wax fresh again as the eagle.

Cast me not off in the time of mine age: forsake me not now when my strength
fails me, but as thy mercy has come in the beginning of my life, so help
me now in mine old age and weakness, and let it finish the end of my course, to
thy glory, and my comfort.

For thou, O Lord, have been my trust even from my youth, upon thee have I
staid my self from the womb. Thou art he that took me out of my mothers
bowels, that did help me in my youth, and have preserved me ever since I was
borne and conceived.

Thou, O God, have taught me from my youth even until now; O therefore forsake
me not now in mine old age, and graie head: but as thou have begun, so continue
thy benefits toward me, that thy liberality may have perfect praise, and
that I may tell yet of thy woonderous works, and show thy power unto them that
shall come after me.

Have mercy upon me, O Lord, have mercy upon me: for behold, my life is
wasted, my days are spent, my years are past, my strength fails, and the
marrowe in my bones is consumed for age.

The beauty of youth is gone, the glory of age and graie-head is come: I have
been young, and now am old; full of days am I, and stricken in years: yet have
I seen nothing, no nor done any good in thy sight. I have spent my years as a
thought, or tale that is told; my days are gone like a shadow, and I am
withered away like grass.

The time of my pilgrimage is but grief and sorrow, few and evil have the
days of my life been: and I have not attained unto the years of the life of
my grandmothers, in the days of their pilgrimage.

The time of our life is threescore years and ten, and if we live till
fourscore years, yet is our strength then but labor and sorrow; for it is cut
off quickly, and we fly away: so soon can thou turn man to destruction,
and bring the sons of Adam to naught.

One day with thee, O Lord, is as a thousand years, and a thousand years in
thy sight are but as yesterdaie which is past, and as a watch in the night: and
our age is nothing in respect of thee.

Thy years, O Lord, endure through all generations, and thy days are without
end or beginning: yea heaven and earth shall perish, but thou shall endure,
they shall all wax old as does a garment, and as a vesture shall thou change
them, and they shall be changed, but thou art the same, and thy years shall not
fail.

But the days of men surely are determined, which he can not pass, and the
number of his months are known to thee: thou have appointed him his bounds
and term of years, which he can not go beyond.

Thou have numbered all our days, which vade away suddenly like the grass:
for we are soon dispatched, and easily consumed.

A man in this world is even like a vapor or shadow that quickly vanishes
away. For all flesh is grass, and the glory thereof as the flower of the
field, which flourishes in the morning, and afterward withers and vadeth.

Behold, our days are to be measured, they are as it were but a spanne long,
and our age is nothing to speak of.

Our age is folden together, and taken away from us like a shepherds cotage:
our life is cut off, and our days shortened by our sins, like the thread of
the weauer, which is suddenly broken off.

We are but strangers in this world, and soiourners, as were our forefathers:
our days on earth also are but a shadow; our life speedily goes away like
the weauers shuttle, and it abides not.

We are as nothing, Lord, in respect of thee; and verelie every man living is
altogether vanity, yea infancy, childhood, youth, middle age, and old age,
all are but mere vanity.

Wherefore, O Lord, teach me to number my days, that I may yet apply mine
heart unto wisdom: and bring forth more fruit even in mine old age.

O let me know mine end, and the number of my days, that I may be certified
how long I have to live, and what is yet to come.

Instruct me, O Lord, that being always mindful of my mortality, I never
promise to my self many years, nor long life in this pilgrimage of ours: so
shall I not live securely, deferring my conversion to thee from day to day,
nor yet put confidence in this frail and uncertain life, as did that rich
man, saying, Soul thou have much good laid up in store for many years, take
thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry; whose soul notwithstanding was taken
from him the same night.

But give me grace, that in thy fear I may daily prepare my self to depart
out of this prison and loathsome dungeon of my soul.

Now let me remember thee my Maker, in the days of my old age, and in the
years wherein I find no pleasure, but pain and grief, whiles the sun, the
light, the moon, and stars begin to wax dark, and the clouds of continual
misery seem to remain after the rain, to the increasing of my grief.

Now let me think on thee my Creator, whiles [my hands] the keepers of the
house [of my bodie] do tremble, and the strong men [my legs] do bow
themselves, and the grinders [my teeth] do cease or stand still; because they
are few, and they that look out by the windows [mine eyes I meane] wax dark
and dim.

Now let me remember thee, my Maker, whiles the door [of my lips and mouth]
begins to be shut, by the base sound of the milner, or grinding, [when my
jaws, I say, are scarce able to chawe my meat.] And I rise up at the voice of
the bird, or crowing of the cock [bicause I can not sleep.] And whiles all
the daughters of music [euen my windpipe and eares] are abased, and become
deaf, and not able to hear singing.

Whiles I am afraid to climb high, because of my weakness; and stoop down,
for fear least any thing should hit me. Whiles fear is in the way, and I
tremble as I go, and am afraid of stumbling. Whiles the almon tree [my head]
does flourish [with white heares] and the very light grasshopper is a burden
[vnto it to bear.] And whiles all lust is past and driven away.

Now I say, O Lord, even now yet let me call to mind thee my creator, before I
go to the house of mine age, or long home, [the graue] I mean, and the
mourners go [lamenting my death] about the streets. Or ever the silver lace
[the sinews and marowe of my back bone] be taken away: and or the golden
ewer or well [of that little yellow skin that covers my brainepan] be broken:
or the pitcher [of my two great veines] be cracked at the well [of my liver:] or
the wheel [my head] be broken upon the cisterne [of my heart, out of the which
the powers of life are drawn.]

Even now, I say, at the least, O my Creator, let me remember thee, before I
[which am but dust] do return again to the earth from whence I came; and my
spirit and soul return to thee, O God, that gave me it.

For all is but plain vanity, and nothing more certain than death: though
nothing more uncertain than the hour thereof.

Therefore let me have always before mine eyes an image and meditation of my
departure, the better to know the fleeting and vanity of this combersome and
uncertain life, that I may live to thee my God, being sound in faith, and
strong in hope, looking with cheerefulnes for the day of my departure, and the
ioifull appearing of thy son Jesus Christ my redeemer. And as long as I abide
in this tabernacle of my decayed and forworne body, let me with all study
minister to my faith, virtue; to virtue, knowledge, to knowledge, temperance;
to temperance, patience; to patience, godliness: until this tabernacle being
laid away, I shall pass over to my long home and dwelling place, not made
with hands, but everlasting in the heavens, where I shall be clothed with
eternal glory and immortality, when this my earthly house is put off, and
destroyed by death.

Grant also, O God, that trusting firmly to thy promises, I may be ready,
and glad to return from this vale of misery, to mine everlasting and
celestial country: for while I am in this body, I wander from thee my God.
For now I walk in faith, not in the full and perfect enioieng and possessing
of eternal good; wherefore, whether I be at home, or from home, let me
endeavor my self to be acceptable in thy sight.

Make me a faithful servant, and wise virgin, alwaie having the lamp of faith
ready light, and with the oil of thy grace and merits prepared in my hand,
and still looking for the coming of the bridgrome my Lord and Savior Jesus:
(for I know not when he will come, at the evening, or at midnight; whether at
the cocke-crowing, or in the dawning of the day) least by a sudden hour of
death I being overtaken, and as it were caught in the fowlers trap, I be found
unready, and have a repulse among the foolish virgins: but contrariwise, by
prudent watching in true conversion and repentance, I may continually covet to
be dissolved, and to be with Christ my redeemer.

Grant also, dear Father, that at the very point of death, having escaped all
hardness and temptations, I may triumph like a conqueror, and behold the
presence and power of thine holy spirit: and let my last words be that, which
thy son did utter upon the altar of the cross, saying, Father into thy hands
I commend my spirit: and when my spirit is taken from me, hear yet O God, the
groans of my heart.

And the hour glass of life and death being outrun and come, let thy servant
and handmaid depart in peace, because mine eyes have seen thy salvation,
which thou have prepared before the face of all people: a light to be revealed
unto the gentiles, and the glory of thy people Israel; through our Lord Jesus
Christ,

Amen.
Another prayer to be used of old women.
OH my sweet Lord Jesus Christ, my creator and reformer, which wilt that no man
perish, neither delightest in the destruction of souls: hear me wretched
woman, and inueterated sinner, which walowe in wicked life. The whole time of
my pilgrimage is threescore years: few and evil have the days of my life
been, and I am now placed in the dark evening of my life: neither look I to
attain unto the years of the life of my forefathers or mothers in the days of
their pilgrimage. I am full of years and days, I say, O Lord; but in deed
more full of vices and sins. Mine offenses are not a few, but an huge heap
of an innumerable sort of sins, neither are they small or venial sins, but
great, mortal, and deadly. My sinful conscience accuses me, and the large
abundance of mine iniquity beats my heart in pieces. This deceitful world,
in which I dream, and loiter, fails me, my forworne and withered body
threateneth my decaie. This house of claie waxes very ruinous in every part
thereof. The graie hears, a token of my manifold afflictions for sins, are
plentifully grown upon me, and my strength is quite gone; to teach me to
know the vanity and brittle state of this life. To conclude, my life is
short, mine end doubtful, my destruction horrible. Death now begins to
search me out every where; the devil does lay snares for me on every side,
time passes away, the houreglas is almost run, my candle is almost burned
out, and thine everlasting judgment draws on.

Alas, what shall I sinful woman do, for I have provoked thee my God, and all
other thy creatures against me; because thou knowing my forepassed sinful
life, dooest see nothing in me without spot and offense. I have shut my self
out of thy presence, when thou did call me to everlasting life; and I have
received that old enemy of my grandmother Eve into my soul, which persecuteth
me unto death; my conscience (I say) does vex me; the damnation to come,
which I have so deeply and often deserved, does fear me, which through mine
own merits or deserts I can not possibly put away or avoid. When I consider
it with my self, oh how intolerable is that horror unto me! When I do well
ponder and regard it in my self, oh how inevitable is death to be differred or
put away from me! that now am even a figure of death it self, and carry him
evidently about me, in my pale face, and lean lims; yea, so far am I from
flieng away from death, that as it seems, I rather now post speedily after
him. Moreover, to acquit my self before thee, I cannot possibly do it; for
that I have as many accusers as sins, as many witnesses as hoarie hears. Yea,
thou thy self my sweet God, who best know me, art my just accuser; thou art
the true witness of my deeds, thou art my righteous judge, and if thine
everlasting justice refuse me, then both thine enemies and also mine, with whom
I have plight the troth of my friendship, are my heavy accusers. No holy man
or woman, young or old, does speak for me, or in the life everlasting may speak
for me, and those that might in their daily prayers in this life help me
toward thee, I (alas) with all scornful reproach and contempt have cast them
away, and utterly refused their good company; but my very mortal
adversaries I have too willingly received, even into my bosom.

Now therefore being alone in secret, I lie flat upon the ground, destitute of
all help, confounded, and had in derision of all. Now in the last age of my
withered life, when my glory should be my graie head, that is, my wisdom and
fear of God joined with much experience, my reproach alas is increased by my
folly; and because I have not behaved my self justly and wisely before
other my iuniors, old age, that should be a crown of glory, when it is found
in the way of righteousness, and joined with virtue, is now turned into infamy
in me, and to be abhorred, by reason of my manifold sins and vices. For though
I have lived long, yet because I am waxed old in wickedness, I shall be nothing
regarded, and my last age shall be without honor through my doting defiled
life. To conclude, there draws on apase the day of thy fearful judgments,
in which all my deeds shall be tried and sifted to the uttermost and innermost
secret thoughts of my heart. My reproves shall be revealed, and my opprobrious
and shameful works shall be brought to light and openly seen, for that I
have been a barren and unfruitful tree, and being thrown into everlasting
fire, I shall there burn forever, and of those whom I have lewdlie accompanied
my self with, shall I be vexed, who also after the sentence of eternal
damnation given upon me, shall tear me, and without any intermission or end
most cruelly shall minister torments unto me, whom they shall not cease
crucifieng for evermore, neither will there ever at any time any way of
mitigation, ease, or mercy appear, or be found at their hands.

Wherefore, O loving Lord, and sovereign Savior, there remains now no more
unto me sinful woman, worn out with misery, but thy branching mercy to
rejoice my heart, to quicken mine appaled spirits, and to renew mine age as does
the eagle; for that in the same thy mercy, and through the same thy compassion
and favor, I (almost spent, wasted, and consumed to dust) do yet breath and
live to call upon thee, who art gentle, mild, and very merciful, both to old
and young, man, woman and child, and wilt not the death, no not of an old and
ancient sinner as I am. O be mindful therefore of me, my sweet God, because
thou art my creator, and I thine unworthy creature and handmaid. Do not loose
the works of thine own hands, through my grievous sins and lewd deserts. Thou
art my redeemer and savior, therefore save me sinful woman (through thy
grace, mercy, and favor) whom through thine own justice thou may
worthily cast away into damnation. O God be merciful unto me a sinner, and
grant pardon to her that repents from the bottom of her heart. O give not
forth (I beseech thee) the voice of thy sentence according to my demerits, but
like as thy mercy before has come in the beginning of my life, when thou
tookest me out of my mothers womb, so let it conclude the end thereof, when
thou shall turn me again into the mother of all things, to remain with thee
for ever, world without end,

Amen.
Another prayer to be said of an old Woman.
OH God, which continuest still the same, and dooest remain for ever subject
to no term of years and time, whose years shall never fail, and the
remembrance of whom eternally endures from generation to generation, worlds
without end.

Have mercy upon me thy sinful handmaid, for behold I (as all thy works else
both in heaven and earth) by little and little, am waxen old, as is the garment
by long use; as a vesture am I outworne, I say, and greatly changed. My
strength abateth more and more, I perish and consume hourelie, and am withered
away like mowne grass or haie. Howbeit, Lord, if praise be seemly in the
mouth of so old a sinner, or if rottennes and dust may presume to give thanks
unto thee; then lo, I thy wretched creature humbly laud and magnify thy
marvelous mercies extended toward me, from my first conception in my mothers
womb, until this present hour; yea, would God I could tell what to render
unto thee, O Lord my God, for all thy benefits toward me, which have not taken
me away hastily, nor cut off my days by death, as I justly deserved, but
let me run the race of this life, and suffered me to pass the tempestuous seas
of this dangerous world, and live unto so good an age.

Now therefore, as it has pleased thee in mercy to augment the number of my
years, to lengthen thus my days, and to satisfy me with long life here upon
earth, to my comfort (for the which I offer and pay unto thee the sacrifice of
praise:) so I call still upon thy holy name, beseeching thee to vouchsafe in
like goodness to grant me grace, that during the remnant of my race and little
time of being yet to come, I may live still to glorify thee, by endeavoring my
self dutifullie to further, and help not only the younger sort of women, and
my friends and kindred, but also my very enemies, and the Commonweal,
wherein I live, with such good council, wisdom, and discretion, as it has
pleased thee in mercy to reveal unto me, or by experience in this long course
of my life I have obtained; that showing my self a guide unto godliness, and an
example of virtue unto all, I may worthily have that honor and dignity
attributed and given unto me, which is due unto the image and portrature of
wisdom, unto a matrone of modesty, and to an instructor or teacher of
honesty and virtue.

Furthermore, take from me the foul vice of avarice, wherewith old age is most
commonly infected, and incline my heart unto thy testimonies, and not unto
covetousness; and grant that I may ever eschew and avoid all sloth, waiwardnes,
and lasciuiousnes. Teach me yet to number my days, that I may apply my heart
unto wisdom, and give me grace to weigh and consider diligently with my
self, what the graie hears in my head, and this my crooked and riueled body
postulateth and requires; even that I use apparantlie grave manners, and
virtuous conditions. O let me remember how that I do daily draw nearer and
nearer unto death; that mine out-worne body is bowed down toward the ground,
and that my grave is at hand, wherein by death I shall ere it be long enter to
be consumed into earth and dust, from whence I was taken, that knowing this my
earthly house and tabernacle shall be destroyed, I may lay aside all the
vain pleasures and delights of this wretched world, and give my self wholly
to look for death, and patiently in watching, fasting and praieng abide his
coming.

And because my life is now lamed with age, broken with infirmity, and
oppressed with sorrows, I come crieng unto thee oh merciful God, sighing in
my soul, and saying; Oh would God that thou O Christ, of thy heavenly pity,
having released the heavy burden of my sins, would command me thine
humble handmaid, to lay aside the fardell of this flesh, that I might pass
hence by death, unto the endless ioies of paradise. For now I ware weerie of
this painful, sinful, and corruptible life; I begin to loath and detest this
queen of pride, this mistres of all mischief, and handmaid of hell: yea
therefore in deed I sigh and groan, desiring that this ruinous and rotten
tabernacle of mine earthly house, wherewith I am yet clothed and burdened,
might be destroyed, to the end I might be clothed and compassed with the
building given of God, even with our house of unmortalitie, which is from
heaven, that mortality might be swalowed up in life. For I love rather to
remove out of this frail body, and to dwell with thee, O Lord: and with S.
Paul I heartily wish and desire to be dissolved, and to be with thee; for I
would feign see thee. And because no man can see thee, and live here, behold
therefore, O Lord, I can find in my heart to die here, and leave this life, that
I may see thee. Let me see thee, that I may die here, I desire not to live any
longer, I had lever die, that I may live with thee in the kingdom of heaven,
which is the blessed, the chaste, and holy life,prepared of thee, O father, for
them that love thee, where youth never waxes old, where life never wears
out, where there is no age, nor any misery or infirmity of age, where there
is no lame, crooked, or foreworne person, but all grow up to perfect men and
women, after the full measure of the age of Christ, there in happy eternity
and full surety of the incorruptiblenes of thine everlasting immortality, to
rejoice with thine elect saints, and praise thee for the gift of perpetual
bliss and happiness: through Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen, Amen.
A prayer to be said of any woman, generally for all women, that they may
have in remembrance the fall of their grandmother Eve, and be moved thereby the
rather to turn to God, and live in their calling according to his will.
FOrasmuch, O heavenly Father, as at the beginning when thou made man and
woman, thou did place them both in paradise, and there blessing them in their
state of innocence, did give them also a law of obedience in pain of
eternal death and damnation, to be straightly of them observed and kept;
which through the spite and sleights of satan, was most miserably broken,
working his purpose by the woman Eve, whom he foresawe to that special end to
be an organ and most apt instrument of al mischief, for her own destruction,
her husband Adams, and their whole posterity for ever. Because in her, our
grandmother Eve, as in the first transgressour, we are all spotted, have lost
our innocence, and have sinned to eternal death, and should therefore have
been damned for ever, unless through thy mercy, O God, in the promised
seed, the seed of the woman, Christ Jesus thy son, which brake the head of
the serpent, we did ground our assured faith and confidence to be saved.

I beseech thee, and that most humbly, O loving father, to have mercy upon
thine inheritance, the whole generation and offspring of our old parents Adam
and Eve; and so work in the hearts of all us women, that we especially may
have in our remembrance the original of our spot and corruption, of our
frailty, deadly fall, and most ready inclination to all wickedness: and to
cry continually unto thee, to attain such strength of thine heavenly grace,
through the working power of thine holy spirit, that the sleights of satan may
be prevented, and we inwardly purged of all bitterness, fiercenes, lightness,
inconstancy, idleness, pride, stoutnes, and of all impuritie, and wickedness:
and to live in our calling with meeknes, mildnes, peace, humblenes, quietness,
exercising all manner of purity, clennes, sobernes, godliness, and holiness, as
becomes unfeigned professors, and the true daughters of holy Sara, following
her example in all obedience and well doing, to thine honor and glory, and
our eternal salvation; through Jesus Christ thy son our everlasting Savior,
who lives and reigns with thee and the holy ghost,in all honor and glory,
worlds without end,

Amen.
A prayer to be said of all devout women, for the light of lady Virtues lamp,
and recovery of her friends and handmaids (grace, repentance, faith, hope, and
salvation) lost, and for the ransoming of their souls from the captivity of
sin.
O Most mighty God and heavenly king, vouchsafe to have respect unto us
miserable women, which are so wrapped in wretchedness in this world, that we are
altogether unworthy to be comprehended within the compass of thy compassion:
O Lord of all flesh, if it be lawful for us disobedient servants, to charge
thee our beneficial Lord and master, with thy friendly and undeserved
promises; behold then we thy hateful handmaids crave, that thou have no
pleasure nor delight in the death of us filthy sinners. Thou art the same God
thou were, when thou did redeem us with the precious sanguin oil of thy
dear son: thy grace is yet as great, thy goodness no less glorious, thy
power is invincible, thy divine Deity not diminished, thy bounty nothing
abated, and that which must be our only help, thy mercies as much manifold.
It pleased thy maiestic to send messengers into the world, that they might
encounter with the servants of satan; namely thy grace, lady virtues pilote,
to encounter with vain desires; repetance, to banish sin; lady virtue, with
her friends faith and hope, to drive away the dread of death and desperation;
and finally salvation, to prevent the force of the hellish furies.

But alas thou see, O Lord, how fraillie we have dealt with thee, and with
thy messengers: thou know likewise, that we have not been in readiness
willingly to receive or accept the light of lady virtues lamp, when it
shined upon us, to guide us in the way to everlasting life; but have too
retchleslie extinguished it with worldly vanities, and wilfully shadowed it
with our sins, whereby we have fallen from virtue; not she by us, but we by
wanting her, do vade: faith, not by us, but we with want of faith do faint:
hope, not by us, but we with want of heavenly hope do halt: they of
themselves are strong, but we without them are weaker than weakness it self.
Recover us in them, O God, that we (who now shame to show our selves in thy
presence) may find through Christ, some occasion of countenance, when we come
with our lamps of pure faith, cleerlie burning in our hands, to meet the
bridegroom, and implore thy favorable sentence in the great judgment day of
thy coming.

O vouchsafe yet once again to extend thy manifold mercies, for ransoming our
souls from the captivity of sin. We without thine aid, are miserable: we
without thy favorable regard, are more than miserable, and worse than woorst
wretched. Suffer not the works of thine hands, which thou have ordained for the
increase and multiplieng of thy kingdom, to be flames of infernal fire, and
to burn in the gulf of horrible hell, as we justly have deserned, for so be
astlie abusing our selves, and the gifts of nature and grace, which thou have
given unto us. It is thy power, not our privilege; it is thy grace, not our
goodness; it is thy mercy, not our merits, that must stand us in steed. To use
circumstances in our suit, O God, what avails it? Thou know our desire,
before we demand; thou know our want, before we wish; thou know what we
need, before we ask; thou know our suit, before we seek. O vouchsafe
therefore to supply what we sue for; hear us, and help us; make us worthy
to attain unto that freedom which we have forsaken: let thy mercy preserve
that which thy power has made, and wisdom beautified. Thy glory, O God,
shall be thine; if any benefit be ours, thou know our necessity, and we
hope thou dooest pity our misery.

Yet because it pleases thee to be prayed unto, we therefore come unto thee,
humbly in spirit, though frail in flesh. It is thou, not our s^lues, that
must make the flesh agreeable to the spirit. It is thou, not our selves, that
must overrule our nature with thy grace, our lusts with thy love, our souls
with reason. And although thou know how to bring it to pass, better than
can be surmised in our thoughts; we crave yet, Lord, that thou will graffe in
us thy grace, make us ready to repentance, let the light of lady virtues
lamp shine still on us, to guide us in the way to everlasting happiness.
Uouchsafe also to have favorable regard unto those, on whom the light of her
lamp has shined; and that such, on whom it has not shined, may be at thy
will and pleasure vnshadowed. Grant, I say, that wheresoever she courteously
offers the use of her lightened lamp, it may be friendly accepted both in
court and country. Let many buie it, but mo use it; let many crave it, but
mo hold it; and when they have it, let them not shadow or extinguish it with
worldly vanities, nor quench it with the water of sin: and when they receive
it, let them be in readiness, both to use and preserve it with all diligence and
willingness. Finally, grant that all may maintain the light thereof, not
only during their natural lives, but after to all posterity, at the
disposition of thy divine power and providence. Moreover frame in us a fixed
faith, to the fort of thy felicity. Let hope have only respect to salvation,
that we may supply the place thou have prepared for the wise virgins. Let thy
divine power direct the discontinuing of our souls captivity. Let thy pity
be pressed, to make thy mercy mitigate our misery. Let thy grace guide us, and
thy mercy O God obtain freedom for us, that our lamps being replenished
with the oil of thy merits, we may walk in the light thereof with hearty hope
to the gates of heaven, now wide open, to meet the great King, and all the
mighty multitude of angels, who with unspeakable glory shall come, ready to
receive us most royally, and entirely to entertain and accompany us to the
celestial palace and paradise of all pleasure, there with all the holy
company of Angels, Archangels, Powers, Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles,
Martyrs, Confessors, Uirgins, yea, and our own parents and Kindred, to enter
and sing psalms of praise, and songs of thanksgiving to thine immortal
Majesty, to whom with thy Son and holy Ghost, be everlasting laud,
perpetual praise, and greatest glory, both now and for ever,

Amen.
Another prayer made upon the similitude of the ten virgins, Matthew. 25.
O Lord Jesus Christ, thou good spouse and heavenly bridegroom, give me grace
like the wise virgins, both with a right intention, and upright dealing, to do
good works, and also to persevere and continue in the same watchfullie and
diligently unto the end. And because it is not sufficient, to have once given
my self to follow thee, unless I continue; do thou teach me wisely to make
provision in time, that having plenty of the oil of thy grace and gifts in
the lamp of my soul, I may never contemn thine honor, nor fail in the
midway; but being found ready and watchful, I may be thought worthy to
enter ioifullie with thee unto the wedding. I beseech thee also, O Lord, make
known unto me mine end before it come, and suffer me not to depart this life,
before I have confessed my faults, and thou have forgiven me my sins, that in
the hour of my death, neither thy wrath may fall upon me, nor the power of
darkness hurt or inuiron me; but let me be found such a one at the day of
examination and trial, as I did appear and show my self at the day of my
regeneration and baptism, through Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen, Amen.
A general Confession of sins, with a prayer for mercy and grace, very
necessary to be used at all times.
O Almighty God my heavenly father, I confess and acknowledge that I am a
miserable and wretched sinner, and have manifold ways most greeuoustie
transgressed thy most godly commandments, thorough wicked thoughts, ungodly
lusts, sinful words, and detestable deeds in my whole life. In sin am I borne
and conceived, and there is no goodness in me, inasmuch as if thou should
enter into thy narrow judgment with me, judging me according to the same, I
were never able to abide or suffer it; but must needs perish and be damned for
ever, so little help, comfort, or succor is there either in me, or in any
other creature. Only this is my comfort, O heavenly father, that thou did
not spare thine only dear beloved Son, but did give him up, unto the most
bitter and most vile and slanderous death of the cross for me, that he might
so pay the ransom for my sins, satisfy thy judgment, still and pacify thy
wrath, reconcile me again unto thee, and purchase me thy grace, favor, and
everlasting life. Wherefore, through the merit of his most bitter death and
passion, and through his innocent bloud-shedding, I beseech thee O heavenly
father, that thou will vouchsafe to be gracious and merciful unto me, to
forgive and pardon me all my sins, to lighten my heart with thy holy spirit, to
renew, confirm, and strengthen me with a right and a perfect faith, and to
inflame me in love toward thee and my neighbor, that I may henceforth with a
willing and glad heart walk as it becomes me in thy most holy commandments,
and so glorify and praise thee everlastingly.

And also, that I may with a free conscience, and quiet heart, in all manner of
temptations, afflictions, or necessities, and even in the very pangs of death,
cry boldly and faithfully unto thee, and say, I believe in God the father
Almighty, etc.

But O Lord God heavenly father, to comfort my self in affliction and
temptation with these articles of the Christian faith, it is not in my power;
for faith is thy gift: and forasmuch as thou will be prayed unto, and called
upon for it, I come unto thee, to pray and beseech thee both for that, and for
all other things necessary for me and thy whole Church, even as thy dear
beloved Son our Savior Christ Jesus has himself taught us, and from the
very botome of my heart I cry and say, O our father which art in heaven, etc.

A prayer for the Queens Majesty and the Realm.
O God, most excellent creator and preserver of all things, we cast our selves
down before the feet of thy majesty, and inwardly feeling how unworthy we
are to have our prayers heard of thee, we dare not lift up our eyes to heaven.

Nevertheless, whereas we are conceived in sin, and therefore (as all Adams
children) deserved untimely death, yet thy fatherly hand has brought us
forth, and caused us to be borne, yea and granted us to live in this blessed
time of thy Gospel, to the intent that dieng with Christ, we should rise
again to eternal life.

But alas (wretches that we are) we have deserved thy just indignation, by
returning to our old vomit; and yet thy grace surmounteth our sin,
continually calling us to thy sheepfold, by the voice of thy gospel. Blessed
be thy holy name for sending us that light, when we were in darkness; that
spiritual drink, when we were in deadly thirst; that heavenly food, when
we were hunger-sterued. And like honor and praise be ascribed to thee only,
O Lord, for giving us such, so wise, so zealous, so godly, and careful
governors of thy chosen Church of England, whom thou have raised up by the
light of thy gospel, to guide us in the same thy light, and to feed us with the
same thy heavenly food.

We magnify thy name day and night, for that inestimable benefit of thine,
bestowed upon us thy people of England, in calling thy chosen creature, the
nurse of this thy church, our Queen, and Governor, from worldly vanities, to
the care of thy kingdom, and into the communion of thy saints, by the
preaching of the Gospel; when we gave not sufficiently attentive, and
diligent ear to thy blessed word, albeit thou did correct her, and other
ingratfull creatures of this our nation, with thy rod; yet even in this point
also thy clemency surmounteth our double wickedness. For behold, when as thy
justice might have deprived us of her, thou of thine infinite mercy did
deliver her out of prison, set her free from the lions jaws, crowned her with
a diadem of gold, and put the royal scepter of this realm in her hand.

Moreover, O singular and most precious treasure of treasures, thou through her
means and ministry, have brought again Christ Jesus, once banished out of
England.

These, most merciful Father, be the principal jewels of thine inestimable
riches bestowed upon us; which the more excellent they are, the less are we
worthy of them; because we have misbehaued our selves toward thy majesty, in
daily sinning more and more against thee; in so much that feeling the same in
our conscience, we be driven well near to despair. But when we call to mind
thy sure and sweet promises in Christ's precious blood, we are thereby
refreshed, and recovering strength by hope, approach to thy throne boldly, not
offering any thing for the satisfaction of our sins, but only craving,
that the oblation of thine anointed, which is the iustifier and sanctifier of
all that are to be justified and sanctified, may make us clean, and so receive
us into thy tuition. And seeing obedience pleases thee better than the fat of
sheep; and the sacrifice of our lips, better than the flesh and blood of
beasts, grant that we may finish our mortal race in showing forth thy praise,
and keeping thy holy will.

And forasmuch as thou have thought good to set up thy servant our Queen, a
woman, and a frail vessel, over us, to govern this kingdom, and that she
must render an account thereof (a hard thing so to do) before the judgment
seat of thy Son Christ: send down, we beseech thee, O Father, send down
such grace from thy high throne, upon thy daughter our Queen Elizabeth, as
thou know most necessary for the performance and execution of so great a
charge.

Thou have given her Councellers; grant that she may use their counsel
happily: indue them with godly, righteous, and careful harrs, that they may
be both willing and able simply and faithfully to consult, and also
prouidentlie to provide, as well for thy church, as for her, and us her people.

It is thy grace, O Lord, that we her people renewed with thy word, do suffer
our selves to be nourished with the same: send forth therefore faithful
shepherds, godly and true teachers, to feed us: and drive away all hirelings,
and ravening woolues, from this flock of thine, and of thy son Jesus Christ.

Besides this, so bless us the sheep of thy pasture, that we may never deny
thee the chief honor, our Queen thy deputy her obedience, and our
neighbors mutual love.

Furthermore, of thy goodness maintain peace and tranquillity, defend our
Queen, her kingdom and country, from bloody wars: and especially protect
her, and us, from hollow hearts, and from civil tumults and conspiracies,
which have shaken the greatest part of Christendom.

And because the affliction of every poor creature apperteineth to her, in so
much as she is thine; inspire the magistrates under her with thy holy spirit,
that they may willingly and carefully maintain justice, and provide for the
relief of Christ's poor members, whose treasures both she, and we, and all
others are, whom thou have blessed with thy earthly benefits. Hear our
prayers, we beseech thee, for the sake of thy son Jesus Christ our redeemer:
to whom with thee, and thy holy spirit, be all honor and glory for ever,

Amen.
Morning and Evening prayers.
A prayer to be said in the morning.
Almighty and eternal God, my Creator and lover; I praise, adore, and bless
thee, for that in mine offenses and ungratefulness thou have so mercifully and
leisurelie forborne and suffered me to live even unto this hour, whereunto by
thy benefits thou have brought me, giving to me thine unworthy and
reproachful handmaid, both life and necessaries thereunto belonging,
appointing angels to be my keepers. O good God, who knows whether til evening
my life shall be prolonged, or what death is appointed for me: Oh merciful
Lord God, and heavenly Father, that I may with hearty repentance truly
repent my sins, and inwardly bewail that ever I offended thy godly
majesty; suffer not my soul to depart this body, before it be (through thy
mercy perfectly reconciled and adopted unto thee by thy grace) bedeckt with
thy merits and virtues, inflamed with perfect charity and acceptable unto
thee, according to thy will.

O merciful Lord Jesus Christ, if these things which I desire, do stand with
thy pleasure, grant them, I beseech thee, although I be not worthy to be
heard. Yield and give, I beseech thee of thine infinite mercy, that by the
merits of thy passion I may be purged from all my sins, and that at the hour
of my death I may be stricken with true and vehement contrition, and being knit
with thee in perfect charity, I may immediately die unto thee my sooeet
Redeemer, safely and freely, from all damnation. Nevertheless in all these my
requests, O best beloved Jesus, I do fully and wholly offer and resign my
self unto thee, to be altogether disposed and ordered according to thy will,
and to suffer for thy glorious name sake, desiring this one thing at thy hands,
that thou will remember my fragilitie, unworthiness, unstableness, and miseries;
together with thine own goodness and most charitable mercy, praieng thee never
to forsake or leave me, but that thou will always possess and govern me,
according to thy will,

Amen.
Another Morning prayer.
OH Lord my God, and most benign Savior Jesus Christ; who, when I was not,
did creat and make me capable of the sovereign and only good, and being
made a thrall and bondslaue through my forefathers trespass, did redeem me
with thy most precious blood, and loss of thy sacred life, abiding the
torments due to my trespasses, to acquit and rid me from the same. For these,
O Lord, and all other thine inestimable benefits; namely, for having
preserved me this night past, and all the time and days of my life hitherto, I
yield thee most humble, zealous, and obedient thanks, offering my self wholly
to thee, as I am wholly thine; beseeching thee also of thine infinite
clemency, to preserve me this day, and ever, from any ways offending thee,
and to direct all my thoughts, words, and works, to thine everlasting glory.
Mine estate and calling is, as thou know, O Lord, environed with many
difficulties and dangers; and through mine evil customs and wicked
inclinations, hardly can I, without thy special assistance, pass this day,
no not one minute thereof, without offending thee in manifold sins. Keep
under therefore, O Lord, my concupiscence, and refresh my conscience with the
dewes of thy divine grace. O give me strength, I pray thee, to fight the good
fight of faith, more coragiouslie and perseuerantlie than hitherto I have done,
and make thou me able to subdue all wicked suggestions of the enemy.

Truly Lord, here in humility and sincerity of heart, I protest never
willingly by thy gracious favor to offend thy laws and commandments any
more. I detest all sin, and whatsoever may any ways displease thy sacred
majesty. I desire to love thee, fear thee, and serve thee this day and
evermore, and to direct all mine actions to thine honor and glory. Assist me
Lord with thy grace, and enrich my poverty with the plenty of thy merits, for
in the union of that charity, wherewith thou discendedst from heaven in the
blessed virgins womb, and afterward offredst up thy self on the cross in
sacrifice for our sins, in the union of this thy incomprehensible charity, I
say, I offer unto thee whatsoever I shall do, think, or speak this day;
beseeching thee, through thy merciful goodness, to accept, govern, bless, and
enrich me, and all that I go about, in such sort as thy glory may be thereby
procured, my neighbors welfare occasioned, and mine own soul better
fortified and provided. To thee my sweet and only savior Christ, with the
Father, and the holy ghost, be all glory and praise everlastingly,

Amen.
A prayer for the Evening, when you go to rest.
O Most gracious Lord, and merciful Father, I thy sinful creature, and most
unworthy handmaid, prostrate in my heart before thine high majesty, most
humbly beseech thee of mercy and forgiveness of all my sins and iniquities
that I have this day committed against thee: yea and ever since the time that I
was conceived in my mothers womb unto this present instant: and most heartily
I thank thee, that thou have preserved me hitherto from all such offenses, as
I have not fallen in, and whereinto any other person through his own fault
and thy sufferance has fallen, into the which I also without doubt should have
fallen, had not thou with thy grace prevented me, saved me, supported me, and
sustained me. That I have fallen many ways, my great fault and blame it is,
for the which in most humble wise I ask mercy and forgiveness of thee. That
thou have preserved me, thy great goodness, mercy, and grace it is, for the
which with all my heart I thank thee. And now I beseech thee most merciful
father, that thou will no more be angry with me, neither henceforth forsake
me; but that thou will continually, not only assist, fortify, and
strengthen me, against the assalts of the devil, but also be my succor, and
defense in this night, and always to my lives end, against all sin and
iniquity. And that thou will vouchsafe also of thine abundant bountifulnes, if
it be thy will, to refresh my brittle body so with convenient rest this night,
that I may the more readily, freshlie, and promptlie with all diligence serve
thee to morrow, according to that state that thou have set me, and called me
unto; so that all my life may please thee, and through thine assistance be so
ordered and governed, that after this vain and transitory life, I may attain
the life everlasting: through Jesus Christ our Lord, So be it.

Or else pray thus before you go to bed.
O Lord Jesus Christ, whose bottomless goodness we have to thank for all
things, who have given the most clear light of the day time, as well to the
good as to the evil, to go about such affairs and business as we have to do:
and have mercifully given the lovely silence of the night for the strength of
our weak and feeble bodies, to be refreshed with lieng at rest, and to put
away the carefulnes of our minds, and for the asswaging of our hearts sorrows;
whereas to all them that love thee, thou thy self do much better accomplish
and perform all those things within in the heart, to whom toward all duties
and acts of godly conversation, thou do for their faith sake, much more
cleerelie show the lamp of thy light, than the sun shines bright unto the
world, and whom thy promises do not suffer at any time to wax weerie, the
comfort and consolation of thy spirit does much more effectually wash away
all heaviness of heart, than does the sleep of the body: so that the whole man
does not in any more safely, or more sweetly repose him self, than in thy
mercy, our most gracious Redeemer. I beseech thee, that whatsoever I have this
day committed or done through humane frailty and negligence, that has
offended thine eyes, thou according to thine accustomed goodness forgive it me.
And also grant thou, that this night to come, thou prospering, it may be luckie
unto me; thou being my keeper, it may be pure, and thou being my defender, it
may be safe from all mighty illusions of the wicked spirits: so that this rest
and sleep which I shall now take, may restore both my body and my soul more
fresh and lusty against to morrow, to ferue thee in the perfect obedience of
a Christian woman. And forasmuch as this life has not so much as any one
hour of assurance unto us, when the euentide thereof shall come, and the
sleep of this body and flesh shall grow upon us (out of the which we shall
not awake, until such time as at the angels trumpet, even the dead also shall
be raised) I beseech thee, that thou will at that time lighten the eyes of my
soul, so that the lamp of my faith may not then be extinguished with the five
foolish virgins, and I sleep in everlasting death: but contrariwise, with the
five wise virgins, having my lamp of pure faith cleerlie burning, I may be
accepted and peaceably rest in thee, unto whom even the dead do live, which
live and reignest with God the father, and the holy ghost, for ever and
ever, world without end, Amen. Our Father which art, etc.

Into thy hands, O Lord, I commit my spirit; for thou have redeemed me, O Lord,
thou God of truth.

Unto him that is able to keep us that we fall not, and to present us faultles
before the presence of his glory with joy; that is, to God, only wise, our
Savior, be all glory and majesty, dominion and power, praise and
thanksgiving, both now and for ever;

Amen, Amen.
A Table containing the several titles of every particular prayer comprised
in this fifth Lamp, whereby the reader may readily understand the right use of
the same, and apply them accordingly.
A Prayer for silence, shamefastnes, and chastity. Page. 1. A prayer to be
said of single women against all evil behavior, vice, and vanity, and for
the obteining of modesty, chastity, and all maidenlie virtues. 2. Another of
the same. 5. Another. 6. For the grace of Gods holy spirit, to resist all
sinful motions, and keep pure the state of single life. 7. Another prayer in
the behalf of all Virgins, or single women, for the keeping of obedience,
modesty, chastity, purity, and cleanness of living. 9. Another prayer to
the same effect. 10. A prayer to be said for all virgins and maids generally.
11. A lamentation of any woman, virgin, wife, or widow, for her virginity or
chastity, lost by fornication or adultery: not unapt also to be used of any
Christian sinner, or sinful soul, adulterated and fallen away by sin from
her spiritual spouse Christ Jesus, divided into six several Chapters. 13,
15, 18, 20, 23, 24. Another lamentation of a woman that has lost her
virginity and chastity: or of a Christian soul polluted with sin. 26. A
prayer of Marie Magdalens repentance. 32. Another prayer of the woman taken in
adultery. 33. A prayer to be said of any damsel, daughter, or maidenchild.
34. Another very necessary prayer to be said of any daughter, or
maiden-child. 35. A prayer to be said of a daughter in law that is married.
40. Another prayer to be used of a daughter in law. 43. A prayer to be said of
any woman, when she is wooed of any man to be his wife. 46. Another prayer to
be used of any woman, before the solemnisation of her marriage. 48. Another
prayer to be used of the man or woman, a little before they be married. 49.
Another meditation and prayer, declaring how Christ adorneth the nuptial feast
with his bodily presence. 50. A prayer to be used of a virgin newly married,
together with her husband. 53. A sentence out of Tobie, worthy to be called to
memory of all new married folks. ibidem. Another very necessary and
fruitful prayer, to be often used of all married couples. 55. Another prayer
to be used of married folks, to live chastely and purelie in holy matrimony.
62. Another prayer to be used of such married couples, as where the woman is
not past childbearing. 63. Another prayer for all wedded folks generally. 65.
A prayer to be said of a young married woman, or wife. 68. Another of the same.
ibidem. A prayer to be used of any Noble woman, etc. when she is married, or
afterward. 70. Another prayer to be said of any Noble woman, Lady,
Gentlewoman, or modest matrone married. 72. A prayer to be used of the wife
that has a froward and bitter husband. 73. A prayer to be used of the wife for
her husband, before, or in his traveling by land. 76. Another. 77. A prayer to
be used of the wife for her husband being a Captain or Soldier, and gone a
war-fare. 79. Another of the same. 80. A fruitful prayer to be said with
tears of all godly women, in the time of bloody battle, etc. 82. A prayer
to be said of any wife or daughter for her husband or father, being a
merchant-venterer. 85. When your husband or father is come safe home from his
journey. 89. A prayer and thanksgiving to be said, when your husband (or
father) with his ship, is safely come home from his voyage by sea. 90. When
your husband, or friend, is in prison and endurance, or otherwise persecuted,
or in trouble, and affliction. 91. When your husband or other friend is
delivered out of any trouble. 93. A prayer to be used of a woman with child.
95. Another of the same. 99. Another. 100. Another. 101. The same prayer in
meeter. 105. Another godly and earnest prayer to be said of every faithful
woman in the time of her childbed, used of the virtuous Lady Francis
Aburgauennie. 106. Another prayer of a woman being in travel. 107. A prayer in
meeter to be said of a woman with child, made by W.H. 108. A prayer to be said
in long and dangerous travel. 112. Another. 117. Prayers and thanks-giuings to
be used of women in childbed, after their travel and deliverance. 119. Another
used of the virtuous Lady Francis Aburgauennie. 121. Another. 122. A prayer to
be used of a woman at her purification, or Churching. 123. Prayers to be said
for women with child, before, or in travel, by the midwife, husband, or any
other man or woman. page. 125. Another. 127. Another. 128. Another prayer for a
Queen being with child. ibidem. Another prayer for a Queen, Noble woman, or
Lady with child. 129. A general form of prayer for all women with child, and
in childbed. 130. The same prayer more brief for women with child generally.
132. A prayer to be said of every Christian midwife for her self, before she
execute her office. 134. Another prayer to be said of the midwife, when she
goes about to do her office. 136. Another. 137. A prayer to be said of the
midwife and all the women about her, if the party be in long and sore travel,
and in danger of death. 138. For a woman that trauelleth before her time. 141.
If the woman traveling be at the point of death. 143. Another. 144. A prayer
of instruction to be used of the women in health, attendant about the sick and
languishing woman in sore travel. 145. Another godly and effectual prayer to
be heartily said of the women assistant, if the woman in sore travel or
childbed lie in the pangs of death, and be passing this life. 146. When she is
departing and yields up the ghost. 148. Another of the same. 149. A prayer to
be said after her departure. 150. A prayer and thanksgiving to be used of the
mother, or women about her, after the child is baptized. 151. If the young
infant be very sick, and lie sore pained with any grief, or whenever else
it be visited with any dreadful disease. ibidem. A thanksgiving and prayer
to be said of the father, so soon as he hears that a child is borne unto
him, and his wife safely delivered. 153. Another thanksgiving to be used of
the midwife, or women assistant, after the safe delivery of a woman in
childbed. 154. Another thanksgiving to be said for the safe deliverance of
any woman in childbed, or at her churching. 155. The mothers prayer for her
childrens good education. 156. Another prayer to be used of every godly
mother, for the godly proof of her child; made for the Lady Lettice. page.
157. 158. 159. A prayer to be used of any mother in law. 160. The mistres or
dames prayer, etc. 163. 164. 165. The maid-seruants, or handmaids prayer. 168.
169. 169. Another prayer to be said of an handmaid, waiting woman, or
maid-seruant. 170. The poor widows mite, containing seven meditations or
prayers in meeter, for the obteining of Gods mercy, and the forgiveness of sin,
to be said or soong, gathered by William Hunnis. 173. A prayer to be said of a
widow, immediately after the death of her husband. 177. 179. A prayer to be
said of widows, for widows. ibidem. The same more at large to be used
generally for all widows and orphans. 181. The orphane or fatherles child's
prayer. 183. The old woman's prayer. 184. 185. 191. 194. A prayer to be said
generally for all women, that they may have in remembrance the fall of their
grandmother Eve. page. 197. A prayer to be said of all devout women, etc. 199.
A prayer made upon the similitude of the ten virgins. 202. A general
confession of sins, etc. 203. A prayer for the Queens Majesty and the
Realm. 204. A prayer to be said in the morning. 208. 209. A prayer to be said
in the evening. 210. 211.
FINIS.

