ROMES RVIN. OR A TREATISE Of the certain Destruction of Rome and of
Antichrist before the end of the World. WHEREIN IS CLEARLY Manifested out of
the Holy Scriptures, Conferred with the History of the Papacy, that he has
but a short time.

A work published to strengthen the faith of such as suffer under him.

By J. P.

PSALM. 137.8. O Daughter of Babylon, who art to be destroyed: Happy shall he
be that rewards thee as thou have served us.

Printed, M.DC.XXIX.

To the Christian Reader.
IT has never been any part of my intent, Christian Reader, in the writing or
publishing of this little Treatise, to take on me after the manner of some
precisely to find out, and peremptorily to set down the verrie year wherein
Rome or Antichrist shall be destroyed, or to name the verrie Prince or Kingdom,
whose King shall be General at the Seidge, and ruin of that Babylon; the
work it self will both quit me of such fond presumptions, and witness that
my aim herein is not to get a vain glorious name of knowledge in such
mysteries; nor to fill the world with strong delusions, opinions and
expectations of improbable alterations; but rather for the honor of Almighty
God (now in these wavering and fainting times, wherein men's hearts fail them
for fear, that the prevailing adversaries will subdue all to Romish obedience)
to win men to an assured confidence in his promised meraies of deliverance;
and what they can, to serve and wait on his almighty power, and providence
with such just means, as he has appointed thereunto; espetially now when they
shall see it manifested by those undeniable testimonies, the prophesies of holy
Scripture, and Histories of the Papacy answering them, that Romes Ruin must
needs be approaching, and can not choose but fall out within a few years of
this present: which is sufficient for me to have manifested. As for those who
profess themselves Protestants, and yet in these dangerous times are so far
from affecting or approving such knowledge, that on the contrary they doubt
whether it be lawful and proffitable, to look into these Prophesies for the
time and means of deliverance, and overthrow of the adversaries; whether such
looking be not rather curiosity, folly, and presumption; whether courses of
justice and wars undertaken for the defense of the Gospel and overthrow of
Popery, and the Supporters thereof, be lawful or necessary; whether a peace
with them all is not much rather to be wished; and whether it be not much
better that Protestants and Papists should first join together against their
common enemy the Turk: In these and the like scruples, such as are not
partial and obstinate, may by a through reading of this small book receive
compotent satisfaction.

In the mean time, I answer noe more here to their suggestions, then this,
1. That noe man can more detest, then I do, all wars undertaken for desire
of spoil, territories and Empire, all not worth the life blood of one
Christian; knowing that the miseries, that ever follow the^, are great and
lamentable; that peace and mercy can never be sufficiently admired and
extended; but not toward Amalek or Romish Babel and her Champions, because
their destructions are commanded in holy Scriptures, and he is counted happy
that shall serve her as she has served others. 2. That it was lawful,
proffitable, and comfortable for the children of Israel in the time of the
captivity, Dan. 9.2.
to look, as Daniel did, after the time and means of deliverance, espetially
when the seauentie years were almost out; to look also into the Prophecy of
Daniel, for the last period of those several Beasts, and horns mentioned Dan.
7. and chap. 8. espetially for deliverance from Antiochus Epiphanes that little
horn chap. 8.9. for the time and end of the desolation he causes, expressly
noted verse. 13.14. and for the coming and salvation of Christ, and other
occurre^ts signified in those prophetical weeks of Daniel, chap. 9. Even as
old Simeon waited for the consolation of Israel; Luke 2. Mark. 15.43
and Joseph of Arimathea is said to have waited for the Kingdom of God: and
that therefore, it is as lawful now for all true Christians, beholding the
desolations that Antichrist, and his Adherents make, to look into the
prophesies of holy Scripture for the time and means of the deliverance, there
promised, espetially seeing that when Rome the cause of these miseries is
destroyed, Reu. 19.
it is said, Alleluia: for the Lord God omnipotent reigns: whereas, before
that, she reigned in matters of faith and salvation, Reu. 17.18.
and over the Kings of the earth. But then Gods Kingdom comes: this we are
taught to pray for, and commanded to Mat. 6.33.
seek. And therefore when after the writing of this small book, I had kept it
a long time, without imparting the sight of it to any man, I thought I could
now do noe less then publish it, with some few additions, and that indeed,
that such as see the miseries of the Church, and seek to redress them, may
strive to do it by that right means which God has prescribed, and not by any
contrary to that which God, that changes not, has in his Holy Word revealed
to be the only sure remedy, and that by which he has determined to redeem
his Church from Antichristian persecution, bondage and sub^ection.

ROMES RVIN. OR A Treatise of the certain destruction of Rome and of
Antichrist before the end of the World.
TO say nothing of their opinions in this point, who are either Popish or
newters, or lukewarm, or temporisers, or worldlings, or which are afraid of the
Popish armies; because every wise man will easily conceive that their verdict
in this matter must needs be partial, as proceeding from sinister respects,
or their own particular interests: I readily acknowledge that there are many
godly and learned men, greatly seen in the Scriptures, who yet are so daily
excercised in the finding of the meaning of those other places of Scripture,
which teach other points necessary to salvation, that they find little leisure
to look on such as declare things concerning Antichrist, or his overthrow. I
may not say that it is, because they care little to understand the truth of God
in these points: for I must leave that to God, who knows the secrets of all
hearts. Nevertheless if any of them, who have a good understanding, be so
careless herein; they may know that it is a fault, seeing the holy Ghost says
concerning the Revelation wherein these things are declared; Blessed is he
that reads, Renel. 1.3.
and they that hear the words of this prophecy, and keep those things which
are written therein: for the time is at hand. And again, Chap. 22.10.
Seal not the sayings of the prophecy of this book; for the time is at hand.
viz. when these things should be fulfilled. Whereby God warns all men to
look narrowly into this book, that they may thereby know the Dragon, Beast
and whore, and such evils as accompany them, that so they may the better
avoid them, and not partake of their sins, lest they receive of their
plauges; and that espetially when their deliverance and her ruin are at hand.

And as this care was necessary in those ages when the Reu. 12.
Dragon reigned, and the first trumpets sounded; so more espetially in these
times of the beast and whore: wherein the evil they do is a great deal
worse, and more dangerous to the Souls of men: for as much as notwithstanding
the light of the Gospel, all the world would still wonder after him, for that
holiness, power and munificence, which they would imagine to reside in him: and
even many of Gods people would be so loath to flee out of Babylon, that they
should be in danger of pertaking of her sins, and receiving of her plauges;
and should have need to be daily called on to make them come out from her. A
duty which as it was ever needful to be put in practice for the drawing of
Souls from her bewitching delicacies and deceites, so more espetially now when
her great abominations are by the refulgent light of Gods Word manifested,
and her last and greatest plauges must needs be approaching. For if when Saint
John wrote, it might be said, the time is at hand; how much more in these our
times, upon whom the ends of the World are come? and who may see, if we
either will see, or think it any such blessed thing to see, that the most of
those things which concern Antichrist, and the verrie declining of his
Kingdom, are already fulfilled; and thereby every man warned to wait with a
steadfast faith to see the rest accomplished; and not to put far away (as his
favorers do) those evil days, which shall befall him and his friends; and
as they do, who would feign make the World believe that he shall not be
destroyed till the end of the World; and are so loath to see any thing proved
to the contrary, that they doubt not to affirm that the time can not be so
much as nearly guessed at.

To whom it may be answered that the Lord would neither have said of the
beast, Aeuel. 13.
He shall have power to do forty and two months; and neither more nor
less; nor of the Kings his horns, They have received noe Kingdom as yet:
Chap. 12.19.
but receive power as Kings one hour with the Beast; but that he meant to show
us some certain time, which when his ruin should approach, might either be
perfectly, or at least verrie nearly found; as in Daniels prophetical weeks,
wherein every day stands for a year: and so questionless in these months,
which are also prophetical months, and which can not be literally understood
of three years and a half. For it follows from the Angels exposition, that
Antichrist is the seventh and eighth head of the seven hilled city, that is,
a head of government in a succession, Reu. 17.
as the Emperors were of whom he said, one is: Five are fallen, one is, and
the other is not yet come. Five of the Roman heads or forms of government were
fallen before, as Kings, Consuls, Dictatours, Decemuiri, and Tribuni Militum.
The sixth was in the time of Saint John; which was the government of the
Emperors haueing their seat in Rome. This head, so long as it should abide
there, would let the coming of Antichrist, who was to be the seventh head of
the same city, 2. These. 2. and Reu. 17.9.
as Saint Paul compared with Saint John shows, saying, only he who now
lets will let, till he be taken out of the way; he says not till he be
utterly fallen or destroyed, but taken out of the way, viz. removed; which came
to pass when the seat of the, Empire was removed from Rome to Constantinople,
and not before: for till then another domineering head could not rise to rule
in Rome. Therefore saint John says of the seventh, He is not yet come, and
when he comes he must continue a short space, And the Beast that was and is
not, even he is the eighth, and is of the seven. This seventh head, which is
the Roman government by Bishops, is said to endure but for a short space,
because of the wound, which it should soon receive by the Goths and Vandals;
which when it should be healed was not long to endure as a seventh head only;
but should also by reason of a new title and authority become an eighth head
and more absolute, that so he might rule and reign the rest of his long
time, and do all the greatest things ascribed to Antichrist.

This eighth head did accordingly begin in Boniface III. when he obtained to
be called universal Bishop; he then was the eighth, and yet of the seven,
viz. the seventh, because he seemed but to succeed the former Bishops in that
government, which they had after the seat of the Empire was removed from Rome,
and which they got by abusing the Canons of Nice and Sardica, as we shall see
by and by. Howsoever seeing Antichrist (ye see) is a head of government in a
succession (as the Kings, and after them the other heads were, that had lived
and ruled in Rome) these 42. months given to him, can not possibly be
understood literally. For indeed it is impossible that this seventh head
should rise, be seated, wounded, healed, and then become an eighth head, who
should first be admired and worshipped by all nations, and then make war by
himself and by his horns, overcome the Saints, yea the two witnesses, cause
an Image to be made and worshipped, and a mark to be taken by all, small and
great; yea do many other great things mentioned in the Revelation, and after
send to gather the Kings of the earth to Battle, and be taken; and all this
in three years and a half. Therefore out of all doubt in these months as
in Daniels weeks every day stands for a year; as the Lord said to the
Israelites, Number. 14.34
After the number of the days in which ye searched the land, even forty days
(each day for a year) shall ye bear your iniquities, Ezech. 4.6.
even forty years: also in Ezechiel, Thou shall bear the iniquity of the
house of Judah forty days, I have appointed thee each day for a year. So
it must needs be in these months, and so they signify 1260. years, as
some have iudiciously collected from Reu. 12.6.14. further also that these
years must needs begin when first the Pope had power to do, as a head:
which some think began in the time of Constantine the great, when he left
Rome, when (say they) he that hindered was taken out of the way. Some say
sooner, even from the time that Constantine came to the Empire and the Ethnic
government was overthrown or taken out of the way. Indeed it is verry
necessary that the time should be searched out when these 42. months began;
because that is the surest way to find out the time of his end and Final
ruin: but the time could not well begin from the time of Constantine, or when
the Ethnic government was overthrown, or taken out of the way. For by either
of these computations, the time should have been out many years ago, when
indeed diverse Kingdoms were fallen from the Pope and he had noe power to do
in them, as in England, Denmark and others, and so indeed as his power began
in some Kingdoms, before in others, so accordingly God would that he should
begin to loose it in some before in others. But yet he has had, and still has
much power elsewhere to do great things. Which has made some think that the
time he has had since, and shall yet have is given him for the time of the
wound, when (say they) he had noe power to do. But questionless they are
mistaken herein, as the sequel of this work will manifest.

And indeed they seem to me to begin the time to soon, I mean not so
much before he was a Beast, as before he had power to do. For the words* are,
power was given him to do forty and two months. So Beza, Aretius,
Piseator, (...).
Pareus and others read them, potestas agendi. And I can not find that either
he did much, or had much power to do before the time of Damasus a Spaniard,
who was chosen Pope about the year 366. others say 369. and sat till after
the year 380. then indeed he had some power to do, (as we shall see by and
by:) or at the furthest in the time of Syricius, near the year 386. or
thereabouts: to which time of Damasus in the year 380. if you add 1260.
years, which seems to be the time given him in the 42. months, they may
end before or about the year 1640. or at least within a few years after,
that is, if he had not this time of doing till the days of Syricius, or
Innocent. But it may be a little sooner, because Damasus might have power to do
some years before the year 380. And howsoever Rome may end much sooner then
the Beast: because her destruction seems to many to be by the fifth vial
Reu. 16. his by sixth or seventh; hers is first declared chap. 18. then his
chap. 19. But while we seem to cast up the time set forth in the Revelation,
this is to be understood to fall out thereabouts. First if the time of the
Beasts doing began in the time of Damasus or Syricius; and not before or
after, which now we will examine, as needful to be known in these
lamentable times, wherein the beast rages and prevails as if he were to
reign for ever; when indeed it is, because the Devil in him has but a short
time. And secondly if Baronius and others that I have followed reckon the
years right, as for ought that I can perceive they do; at least they go
near the mark; and so therefore may we.

As touching the first our Lord himself gives us light in two places of the
Revelation. For while he says of the Beast, Reu. 13. power was given him to
do forty and two months, he shows that there is a certain time when
they should begin, which time may now at the last be nearly pointed at, by
any that will take the pains to search the Histories, and to see when he first
had power to do. The second which is more plain, and does indeed seem to
show when these months were begun is set down, Reu. 17. Reu. 17.12.
Where it is said of the^ who are horns of the Beast; these have received
noe Kingdom as yet; but receive power as Kings one hour with the Beast: which
at the soonest they did not before the time of Damasus; Ammian. Marcel. lib.
28. c. 12. lib. 30. c. 4. lib. 29. c. 10.11.12.13. lib. 31. c. 10.
when indeed (as Ammianus Marcelinus shows) the Almanes had their King
Marcrianus of great puissance; the Burgundians theires; the Africans theires,
Nubel and then Firmus; the Franckes their King Melobaudes; and other Nations
likewise had theires; Valens the Emperor of the East was slain by the Goths,
who also had their Prince. Or perhaps not so soon, may some man say, because
after that Theodosius brought them again into some subjection to the Roman
Empire, which yet rather hindered then overthrew their growing, if not erected
Kingdoms; and indeed because he was an Emperor of great puissance, and both
greatly feared and loved: therefore it may perhaps be thought by some that
these Kingdoms were not yet erected till after the death of Theodosius in the
time of Pope Innocent, Spanish Hist. French Hist.
who governed in the days of the Emperor Honorius; In whose time at the
farthest, as all the best Historians show, Kingdoms were plainly erected in
Spain and Afrike by the Goths, Speed and How. Chron.
Vandales, Sueuians and Alanes; one in France under Pharamond; who yet is said
to succeed Marcomir, Sumo and Melobaudes. In whose time also the Picts, Scots
and others prevailed in Britain; so that after the Britains had elected
diverse other Governors, they were feign at last to choose Vortiger their
King; and to call in the Saxons, who chased the Picts and Scots, but succeeded
them in power and cruelty. Other Barbarous Nations of those times prevailed in
Thracia, Hungary, Austria, Sclauonia, Panonia, Dalmatia, and other countries.
Thus though the Beast might perhaps have some little power, to do a little,
before the rising of these Kings, yet they who had noe Kingdom before, while
the Empire floorished, do now receive power as King one hour with the Beast;
that is to say, whether he began to have that more Kingly power to do in the
time of Pope Damasus, or soon after in the time of Siricius or Innocent, which
truly is somewhat hard to determine: yet it seems to me to be in the time of
Damas.

And the Reader may also give a good guess thereat, when he shall see how
power was first given to these Popes, and more then to any other Patriarch, or
as a Kind of head over all. Which power yet was not given him by any plain
and lawful act of a council, as both the sixth council of Carthage about
the year 420. and the council of Chalcedon about the year 450. proved
against him: neither indeed did he get it of many years after, nor by
consequence justly; therefore the thing is not to find when he had it given
him lawfully, for that the Antichrist could not have; but when some things fell
out which gave it him, as it were accidentally; when first he took hold of
such occasion, and thenceforth openly used and maintained it. Which at the
soonest, for ought I can find, was not before the time of Damasus: but he
indeed strove to attain it; and to that end laid hold of every little
occasion, and made use of it. For haueing damned the heresy of Apollinaris, in
a Council held ad Rome, Theod. lib. 5. cap. 9.
about the year 379. he writes an Epistle to the Bishops of the East,
wherein he intimates unto them the condemnatory sentence pronounced against
Apollinaris, and his Disciple Timotheus: which Epistle is indicted with the
swelling pride of a loftic mind, breathing sovereignty and pre-eminence above
all other Churches, as if the Roman Church were that only Apostolic chair,
whereunto all other Churches ought homage and reverence. Basil. Epist. 20. ad
Eusebius. Samosat.
So that S. Basil Bishop of Cesarea complains of the pride of the West,
because they cared only for their own pre-eminence, but not for the state of
their persecuted Brethren in the East under the Arrian Emperor Valens. Yea he
says that he purposed often times to have written to the chief of them, that is
to Damasus, that he should not count the Splendour superbiae.
splendor of pride true dignity and honor. About the year 380. a general
Council was assembled at Constantinople. Whence the Fathers of the Council
wrote unto Damasus, as to a Brother, and rank him with other Bishops of the
West, then assembled in Rome, as their Letters show, Theod. lib. 5. c. 9.
which are recited by Theodoret; To our Brothers and Colleagues, Damasus,
Ambrose, Britto, Valerian, and other holy Bishops assembled in the great City
of Rome, etc. He then with other Bishops of the West in a Synod at Rome,
being desired as Brethren to approve the Council of Constantinople, did it:
and Baronius would persuade us, that he confirmed it as a Superior, and made
it of force. And indeed though Damasus durst not openly profess so much, yet
it seems he was willing to take their Letters in that sense, and that it
should after be thought so: for he resaluteth them as Sons, and says, that
indeed they had yielded all due reverence to the Sea Apostolic; as if he said
desiring to have your acts ordered, or confirmed and made good by it. Which
howsoever it was never so intented by the Council, yet it gave the Popes power
to do as they were disposed then, and ever after to take it, and make use of
it. For thereupon Innocent also used the same slight, when the Mileuitan
Council Anno 402. and another of Carthage Anno 413. had See Plesses Mist.
Iniqui. Progr. 9.
without consulting with him ordered matters, and then in like manner
acquainted him with their acts, and desired that he would add his authority;
he answers that they had had due regard of the Apostolic honor, I say of
him which had the care and charge of all other Churches. thus he assumed a
power over Councels, and so power to do as a head.

But some man will say, it seems that as yet he had not this power, because
the Popes of these times were opposed, and the power over Councels was not yet
conferred on him. I answer, Antichrist was to be opposed by some in all ages,
and so has the Pope been by particular men, and in many Councels, and even of
late in the Councels of Constance and Basil; which declared that a Council was
above the Pope: yet he took it before, and had it as the Beast was to have
it, by his own ambitious usurpation, and the flattery of his followers. But
as far as I can find not before the time of Damasus, about the year 380. And
then indeed he had also begun to take it upon him in the case of appeals,
espetially in that Epistle which he vvrote to Stephanus Archbishop of
Mauritania, Po^^. Council.
wherein he pretends that all the greater sort of causes ought to be
referred to his hearing, and that they could not be descided but by his
authority; as also that the provision of Bishops belonged to him; wherein also
he qualifieth the Church of Rome with the title of the Pirmament of all
Bishops, and top of all other Churches; emboldened noe doubt thereunto by
Letters sent before that time unto him from the said Stephanies, who
complained that certain Bishops had been deposed in in Afrike; adding that
this was done, though they all knew well enough, That Censures of Bishops and
all other causes of moment ought to be reserved to the audience of the Bishop
of Rome, whom he terms the Father of Fathers; and thereby gives him power to
do; himself being of that brood of Schismatiks of whom S. Cyprian
complained in his days, that being censured would presently cross the Seas
to Rome. And indeed it is the more likely that there had been such pride or
usurpation in Damasus, and flaterie in his followers: I. Because the Council
of Constantinople did not only limit every Patriarch, Theod. lib. 5. cap. 9.
and gave equal priuileidges to Constantinople, but even declared, that there
was an ancient law and decision of the Nicene Council, that the Bishops of
every Province, with those which dwelt near unto them, should ordain their
own Ministers: Council. Constable. Can. 5. and 7. Can. Graec. 3.
dividing the provinces for the auoidance of confusion: And ordaining that if
in any province a matter of difference hapened to arise, it should be decided
by the Synod of the same province.

II. Because Syricius about the year 386. emboldened as it seems by the
power which Damasus had taken, and the flateries of such as followed him,
feared not to say to Himerius B. of Aragon, Siricius Epi. 1. ad Himer.
That it is not lawful for any Priest of the Lord to be ignorant of the
decrees and statutes of the Sea Apostolic, and therefore requesteth him to
make known such ordinances and decrees as he should send unto him, not only to
those of his own Diocese, but also to those of Carthagena, Andalusia,
Portugal, Galeace and others, that is in effect to all the Provinces of
Spain; which could not (says he) but be glorious unto him, who was a Priest
of so long continuance. Purposing to use the ambitious humor of this Prelate
to extend his authority, law and traditions through Spain. And in his 4.
Epistle to the Bishops of Afrike, That without the priuitie of the Sea
Apostolic, that is to say of the Primate, none might presume to ordain a
Bishop. All which makes it most clear that he had the power to do, which the
Beast was to have in the beginning of his reign. His ambition was so apparent,
and men in those times so prone to flatter him with titles, that in remedy
thereof, the third Council of Carthage, anno 397. ( Siricius then sitting
Pope) decreed, That the Bishop of the first See should not be called the Prince
or Chief of Priests, or high Priest, or by any other such name, but only the
Bishop of the first See. As for the name of universal Bishop, that the Bishop
of Rome it self should not be called by that name. Which shows that these
titles had been given him by some flatterers in those days, or why else
should the Council make this Canon? this Siricius, to show the Beast was risen
and had power to do, stablished the forbiddance of Priests marriages, though
by general consent it had been rejected in the Council of Nice, and was not
received in the West of 600. years after, do his Successors what they could.

After him came Innocent, Innocent. Epist. 2. ad Victric.
anno 401. He, in his 2. Epistle to Victricius B. of Roan^, published this
general decree, That the greater causes after that they had been censured by
the Bishop should be referred to the Sea of Rome, as the Synod (says he) has
ordained, and the laudable use and custom of the Church requires. He and his
Successors Zozimus, Boniface, and Celestine would have men think that the
council of Nice had so ordained: which that council did not, as the 6.
council of Carthago proved against them about the year 420. and so did the
general councels of Constantinople and Chacedon. It was indeed the council
of Sardica, about the year 350. that gave this power to Julius; but that
canon never put in practice by him, was revoked in express terms in the
council of Constantinople, can. 3. which council had now been approved by
Damasus: therefore they would not name it to be a canon of Sardica, but pretend
it to be a canon of Nice. Which forgerie many perceived not, and therefore gave
him power to do. But if any man will yet object and say, It seems he had not
yet this power, because the councels of Constantinople, the 6. council of
Carthage, and the council of Chalcedon opposed it. I answer here as before,
Antechrist was to be opposed by some in all ages, and so has the Pope, and
even of late in the Councels of Constance and Basile, but yet he had power, as
the Beast was to have it, by his own arogant usurpation and the flaterie of
his followers, and that I think about the year 380. in the time of Damasus,
or soon after, and not before: and so as I said his time may expire about
the year 1640. or within few years after, that is if his term of doing
began not till the time of Siricius. Others perhaps will say he had it much
sooner. Here I must tell the Papists, that it is to noe purpose for them to
bring for a ground of appeals, or the antiq^^^^^ of them, the acts of any
particular Heretic, Schismatike or Superstitious Doter before the Nicene
Council: because the mystery did work in the Apost^es time, and if it were
granted that Mar^ian and Valentinia Heretics had recourse to the Bishop of
Rome, as Basi^des and (...) had, who were deposed for sacrificing to idols, and
likewise diverse Scismatiks of Afrike in the time of Cyprian: yet this proves
not that they might appeal, or he receive: for if the Pope had had any such
right, then would not Cyprian have complained of them for appealing, nor of him
for receiving; neither would the Council of Nice have limited his power, and
given as much to Alexandria. But howsoever, the question is here of power that
was given to the Beast after his rising; which could not be before the Nicene
Council, because he that hindered was not then taken out of the way, the
Emperor not fully departed to Constantin^ple.

Neither could the burning mountain (signified under the second trumpet, Reu.
8.8.) be cast into the sea before the Nicene Council; which will appear to be
the sea, as they abused it to rise out of it. But indeed this burning
mountain was either cast into the sea in the time of the Council, when the
Pope by his deputies might ambitiously crave of the Emperor, or of the
Council, that his might be the first see, and have some preeminence in power;
or else (as I rather think) son after before the fall of Constantius into
Arianisme (signified under the third trumpet, Reu. 8.10.) when the Pope
alleged the Nicene Council for his authority, as Julius did: and thenceforth
the beast might indeed begin to rise and do: yet I think he had not this
power to do before the time of Damasus, nor long before the year 380. or
perhaps not till the time of Syricius, about the year 386. or soon after.
For though we find in Socrates and Sosomene, that before that Julius took
upon him by absolute authority Socrat. lib. 2 c. 11. Edit. lat. Sozom. lib. 3.
c. 7.
to restore sundry Bishops of the Eastern Churches deposed for diverse causes
by their Synods, because says he the care of all Churches belonged to him by
reason of his see, therefore he wrote to the Bishops of the East telling them
that they had done verrie ill to determine and conclude any thing against
those Bishops without his priuitie; yet as Socrates and Sosom show, they took
his reproves in scorn, and calling a Synod at Antioch, by common advise and
consent return his imputations back upon himself with all bitterness,
telling him that he was no more to control the^, if they thought fit to
deprive any man in their Churches, than they intermedled at what time Nouatus
was cast out of the Church of Rome: Sosomene adds, That their answer was
full of scoffs and threats, etc. Thus as yet they gave him noe power to do.
And it seems that this answer wrought upon him: for in his next letter he
complained only that they called him not to their Synod; whereas before he
pretended, that they might not call a Council without his authority: he does
not allege for himself that either by virtue of his succession to S. Peter,
or of the Nicene Council, they ought to appeal to Rome; his words are only
these, The Fathers of Nice ordained, and that not without the counsel of God,
that the acts of one Council should be examined in another: whereby appears
noe greater power given to the B. of Rome over Alexandria, than to the B. of
Alexandria over Rome. As for the greiuance whereof he complains, it is only
this, that contrary to the custom, they had not written first of all unto him,
concerning the differences amongst the^, to have his advice for composing of
them, as being Bishop of the first see; as also that many Synods had been
held in the East, concerning points of faith and doctrine, without giueing him
notice thereof, contrary to the Rule and canon of the Church; wherein is
contained, that none might impose any law upon the Churches without the advice
of the Bishop of Rome. This canon gave him indeed that he should either be
called and have a voice in every Council that imposed laws, or at least that
his advise and consent should be asked if he should be far away, as fell out
at the general Council of Constantinople, where Damasus was neither in Person
nor by his deputies; and in noe other sense did Julius now allege it: he
complains not that they assembled without his leave, but that they neither
called him, nor used his advise; he does not say that this gives him that he
should be as a head or Sovereign, to confirm or abrogate at his pleasure;
much less that he should impose what law he list. He knew well enough that it
made him noe more then a Patriarch, that other Patriarchs and Archbishops were
his brethren, and that every Bishop had nevertheless a free voice as well as
he. Neither did he now expound it, that this canon gave him this priueleidge as
to a Superior, to whom such homage was due: therefore Julius bad not this
power to do.

Damasus as I showed seems to have been the first that took it in that
proud sense; and yet not verrie plainly, but somewhat tacitly in words of
doubtful signification, as ye saw. After him Siricius and Innocent were more
plain, as I showed. And so indeed he rose out of that Sea of Nice, by
forging one canon, and wresting another: a weak foundation for so mighty a
building; yet such and noe other was the foundation of this Kingdom. And thus
indeed one Canon of Nice gave him power to do: yet not as the Council meant
it, but as he in time took it. And so he had it, but not before the time of
Damasus, or Syricius. For Julius as ye see had not so much power given him: and
Liberius his next Successor, must needs have less, Baron. Vol. 4. Anno 365.
art. 1.2.3.4.5. etc.
seeing he was convicted of Arianisme, as after all excuses Baronius is forced
to confess, beholding many proofs thereof. And if (says he) there were noe
other proof, his own Letters are sufficient to put it out of question. And
indeed he wrote to the Bishops of the East on this manner, Epist. Liberij ad
Oriental, apud Hilar. in Fragment.
I cast of Athanasius from our communion, not daining so much as to receive his
Letters: I maintain peace with you, embracing the confession of the Sirmian
Council. Which was all one as if he had in express words renounced the
Council of Nice: and therefore, He could have noe power by it; nor indeed by
that of Sardica, which had given more to Julius, because that had confirmed the
Nicene faith, to which this of Sirmium was opposite. Yet here by the way we
may see what great inconvenience would follow, if either of those Councels of
Nice or Sardica must needs be in that point of force unto all ages: for while
Liberius ratifieth the sentence against Athanasius, and confirms the Council
of Sirmium, if the Councels of Nice and Sardica give the Pope this absolute
power of confirming or abrogating Councels, then they make this act of Liberius
lawful, and thereby utterly overthrow themselves, and their own faith and
confession, which was contrary: but the Papists will confess that the
Councels of Nice and Sardica do not make this act of Liberius lawful; which
to confess is as much as if they acknowledged that those Councels did not give
absolute power to the Pope, to confirm or abrogate the Decrees of Councels.

Howsoever ye see Liberius could not well have this power to do. But then
after him came Damasus, and he indeed was a man of more respect, learned, and
of such good parts, as covered his ambition, so that some could not see it, and
others were perhaps content to wink at it; he therefore after a while might
the better challenge some Priueleidge from that Canon of Nice. And noe doubt but
that the words of Hosius uttered not long before his time in the Council of
Sardica, whereof they so much boast, did now further him in his desired power.
The words of the Canon are these: Hosius the Bishop said, if any Bishop be
condemned in any cause, if the party condemned think he have just cause not
to stand to the sentence, if it please you, let us yield this honor to S.
Peter: Let the matter be signified by Letter to Julius Bishop of Rome, to the
end that he, with other Bishops of the Dioces, may enter again into the
knowledge of the cause. Now observe here: 1. That it was Hosius that proposed
it; and he proposed it as a new antidote against a poysen, considering that the
Bishops of the East were for the greater part at that time infected with
Arianisme, restraining it to the person of Julius, and would noe doubt have
done otherwise in the person of Liberius, Successor unto Julius, and a
professed Arrian, notvvithstanding the pretended Chair of Saint Peter. 2. Note
these words, If it please you, let us honor the memory of S. Peter: for had
this been an ancient right, should he not rather have said, Let us observe
the commandment of the Lord, or the ancient order of the Church, or the Canon
of Nice, whereby it is ordained that men might appeal to Rome. 3. Is it
reason that a Canon of a National Council should conclude and bind the
Church in general? 4. This Canon so made, and never practiced was in express
terms revoked in the general Council of Constantinople Can. 3. and in that
of Chalcedon Can. 8. This was the first that seemed to give him any great
power; but this as ye see was not absolute, yet hence he took such occasion
of rising, that some have thought that he did rise out of it. But that we may
find the truth hereof, observe: Doctrines are in holy Scriptures called
waters: whereof some waters are clean Ezech. 47.1. Joel 3.18. Zach. 14.8.
Reu. 15.2. some corrupted Reu. 8.10.11. chap. 16.3.4. some not corrupt of
themselves, but partly made so by reason of somewhat cast into them: so was it
with that Sea into which the burning mountain was cast, Revel. 8.8. and the
third part of the Sea became blood, and out of that Sea the Beast arose. Revel.
13. Now that vvce may know what that Sea is, observe: The Sea is the place
where waters are gathered and meet together. Rivers and Fountains run into
the Sea, and empty themselves there. Now Rivers and Fountains do signify
the Doctors and Teachers, from whom the doctrines, that is the waters, flow.
Reu. 8.10.
So when the third Angel sounded, a great star fell from Heaven, and it
fell upon the third part of the Rivers and Fountains of waters: this great
Star was Constantius the Emperor, who fell into the Arrian Heresy; and he
fell upon part of the Rivers and Fountains, viz. Bishops and Teachers, who
were corrupted by him, some by persvvasion and smoth devices, but most by
force and persecution. By which means many were corrupted, and among others
Pope Liberius himself.

The third vial is povvred on such corrupt rivers and Fountains as are
defiled with the filth of Babylon, Reu. 16.4.
and come from the mouth of the Beast and false Prophet. Now the place where
such rivers and Fountains mere, and empty themselves must needs be a Sea:
this is in Councels, whose doctrines and canons are therefore called the Sea.
Verse. 3.
Therefore when the second Angel poured out his vial on the Sea: this was on
an assembly or Council of Antichristian doctors, and on their waters or
doctrines, which he manifests to be corrupt and perintious; this was on the
Council of Trent; which was performed by Chemnitius. Examen. Council. Tride^.
Or at least by him and others, that also writ against that Council. But the
Sea out of which the Beast arose was not so corrupt in it self, but only
became so in some part thereof, into which the burning mountain was cast,
which corrupted it. Now if one should ask me whether the Sea out of which the
Beast arose were the Council of Nice, or that of Sardica? I think that if not
out of both confounded and put together by the^, then rather out of that of
Nice. I. Because that was a general Council, and therefore more apt for his
purpose and authority, as the other was not, which only restrained to the
person of Julius a priueleidge soon after revoked. 2. Because that of Nice
gave him prioritie of place, and this priueleidge that a law should not be
imposed on the Church without his advise: out of which, as he took it, he (as
ye saw) made great advantage, and indeed rose out of it, this being the
original and ground of all the power he after got. 3. Because he always
alleged it for his authority; which it seems he the rather did, because it
was general, and the more ancient and more reverenced; and indeed because
that Canon of Sardica was soon revoked: yea he so much desired to rise out of
the Nicene Council, that in alleging as he pretended a Canon of Nice, he
uses the very words of this Canon of Sardica, See Mystery of Iniquity,
written by M. du Plesses.
only leaueing out the name Julius, and was therefore convicted of forgerie by
the sixth Council of Carthage. 4. Because the burning mountain signified under
the second trumpet, must needs be cast into the Sea before the fall of
Constantius upon the rivers, signified under the third, and therefore in all
likelihood before the Council of Sardica; which yet gave him power, or
increased it, as he took it. But by reason that Liberius, who presently
succeeded, was an Arrian, and therefore could neither challenge power by it, nor
by the Nicene Council, this power, as I showed, was not excercised till the
time of Damasus. But indeed ye have seen that from the time of Damasus or
Siricius, the Pope (as he used the matter) had power to do in things that
belonged to other men's iurisdictio^s, yea as an ouerseer and confirmer of
Counsels, as he took the matter; and what more as a kind of head and
lawgiuer, as ye saw in the Epistle of Siricius to Himerius Bishop of Aragon:
and the Beast must needs be then risen, and in action, because soon after he
began to receive wounds, and at last his deadly wound, by the incursions of the
Goths and Vandals.

Thus power was given him to do, and thus he had it, but not so soon as some
have thought. So that they who reckon his time of doing from the time that
Constantine came to the Empire, or when the heathen Emperor was cast out, or
from the time of the Nicene Council, or from the time that Constantine left
Rome, or from the time of Pope Julius may begin to soon. And if not, then it
must needs be understood as others have observed, power was given him to do
forty and two months; but in the time of the wound by the Goths and
Vandals, or at least while it was sore and deadly, he had noe power to do;
therefore those years of the vvound, wherein he could do nothing, must not
be reckoned, unless you allow others for them: Which yet may be fewer by
many than some have thought; because the Goths and Vandals did not reign so
long in Rome, as they say; and so the time of the vvound being less then
they give, will bring it to the same reckoning we make, or very near it.
But indeed there is noe cause to expound it so, because it is clear enough
that the Beast was not risen, or at least had not power to do so soon as
they think; and withal that from the time that the Goths first took Rome to
their expulsion the Pope, had for the most part, power enough to do, which is
verrie behoofull to manifest; because men may thereby see that there is noe
allowance to be given him for the time of the wound, or if any, yet but little.
For Rome was more than once saved and rescued; and though it were taken again,
yet the Popes of those times had as much power to do, as ever their
predecessors had, if not more. Besides the Goths became Christians; many of
them were indeed but Arrians; yet Baronius shows that they gave the Pope
much power to do: and questionles their Kingdom did rather further the
mystery of iniquity then hinder it, as we shall see by and by. Therefore out
of doubt they are much mistaken, who give 140. years for the time of the
Goths Kingdom, beginning is when Alaricus first took Rome, which they say was
about the year 415. and ending it when Narses vanquished Totilas. Whereas
others better skilled in history show that their Kingdom lasted but 72.
years: beginning the time after the first coming of Theodoricus into Italy,
and ending it as the former, when Totilas was vanquished. And yet before that,
extirpation of Totilas, Belisares the Emperors Leiftenant had entered Rome,
taken Vitiges King of the Goths, and carried him captive to Constantinople;
and after that when the Goths, haueing chosen Totilas for their King, took
Rome again, Belisares recovered it the second time: But in his absence they
got strength, won it again, and then Narses wholly expelled them out of
Italy.

Now see their error who begin their Kingdom so soon, and reckon the time
of the wound to be 140. years. Beginning them in that time of Honorius wherein
Rome was first taken. For themselves confess that during the reign of
Honorius, Rome was twice taken, Alaricus and Ataulphus being the captains,
and yet the Beast had not the deadly wound in the head, seeing it was rather a
shameful then a harmefull overthrow (as Pomponius Laetus shows in the life
of Honorius;) that when Honorius began to rouse up himself, Sabell. En. 8.
lib. 1.
the Goths were expelled out of Italy, and Attalus their King led in
triumph to Rome, and after his right hand was cut off, he was carried captive
to Lipara; that so long as Honorius and Valentinian lived, the Majesty of the
Empire was defended by their Leiftenants Constantius and Aetius, though their
Masters were slack and lasie. Yet Valentinian reigned many years after
Honorius.

The truth is, that before that Alaricus had taken Rome; but he gave life to
such as fled to Christian Churches; and then led his army from Rome with
purpose to sail into Afrike, and setle his abode there: but ear long he
died. After his desease Ataulphus his Kinsman returned to Rome with the Goths,
resolving to overthrow all there, to build another city, to change the name of
it, and call it Gothia: but his wife Placidia the sister of Honorius with
persuasions diuerted him: and the Goths then departed and addressed themselves
toward France and Spain. So that it seems the deadly wound was not yet
given, nor the Popes power of doing taken short by them. For indeed Zozimus,
Boniface and Celestine took much on them in this time. And the Emperor
Valentinian, who reigned long after that in the west, couenanted with the
Vandals and assigned them bounds in Afrike to dwell in. And so in his time
Sixtus succeeded Celestine in the papacy, and ruled 8. years, free enough
from this wound; and after him Leo was in quiet enough for a long time; but in
his days indeed Attilas King of the Hunnes invaded Rome; and so did
Gensericus King of the Vandals shortly after: but Leo by his eloquence
redeemed Rome from fire, when both Attilas and Gensericus would have burned it.
The later was near about the year 450: and it has been thought a terrible
blow: but it seemed, the deadly wound was not yet given till the time of
Odoacer and Theodoricus. For Gensericus departed into Afrike, and the Popes
after this had but too much power, as we shall see by and by. Odoacer indeed
invaded it, took it, and besides the greatest part of Italy, slew Orestes,
Anno 472.
and compelled his Son Augustulus to denude himself of Imperial honors;
whereby the western Empire of Rome was for a time extinct, Baron. Vol. 6. an.
476. art. 1.2.3.
while that Odoacer now reigned there. Yet as Baronius and others show, he did
not molest the Pope and Clergy. Theodoricus killed him and reigned alone in
Italy for many years. But ear long after his death the Goths were beaten
out of Rome by Belisares and Narses.

Some perhaps will think that the deadly blow was not given till the time of
Totilas, after Belisares had recovered Rome; because Totilas took it again
about the year 547. And this was indeed the most fearful desolation that
ever it had; in so much that this King was called Flagellum Dei, that is the
scourge of God. He cast down part of the vvalls, burned the houses, killed
the Citizens, so that neither man nor woman remained therein for 40. days. I
answer if this were the vvound, it lasted not: for he was soon vanquished
by Narses. And if the vvound were before in the time of Odoacer, or
Theodoricus, or sooner; yet the matter is not to see how long the vvound
lasted unhealed; but whether it hindered the Popes power of doing for all
that time. We have seen already to Leo; who ruled 21. years, and indeed
took much on him, as appeared to the Council of Chalcedon: but the Papists
are ready enough to boast and show you what great power he had to do.
After him Hilarious continued 7. years. Simplicius succeeded and continued 15.
years. What power these had, may appear by their Successor, who lived in
a more dangerous time. This was Foelix the III. who continued near 9.
years. He governed the Church of Rome in the time of the Emperor Zeno, when
Odoacer and Theodoricus contended for the Superiority of Italy. He was
nothing inferior to his Antecessors in zeal to advance the Supremacy of the
Roman Chair. For he was so bold as to excomunicate Acatius Patriarch of
Constantinople, because when Petrus Moggus gave testimony of his repentance,
and the recantation of his error, Acatius absolved him, and did not crave the advice of Foelix, when he received him, like as he craved his advise before,
when he excomunicated him, though now, there was less need, while Moggus
testified his repentance and recantation. And hereupon Gelasius, Gelas. in
Epis. ad Dardanos.
who succeeded Foelix, grew so insolent as to deprive Constantinople of the
right of Patriarchship, and to pronounce that the Sea of Rome might without a
Synod of himself either absolve those whom a Synod had wrongfully condemned,
or condemn such as had deserved it; and so sets up his See above all
Counsels. And again, The Canon, Ibid.
says he, has ordained that all Churches ought to appeal to this See, and
from this See to none; because this See judges of all Churches, and noe Church
of it, as being without spot or wrinkle. Yet (as God justly permitted) after
this vain boasting, his next Successor Anastatius had secret communion with
the Accatian Heretics, Liber pontif.
as the Pontifical book shows, adding, That therefore many Priests, and
others of the Clergy withdrew themselves from his communion, etc. Symachus
succeeded, though not by full or plain election; for many held for Laurence,
and each Faction kept quarter apart, till some being wiser the^ some, the
matter was referred to Theodorik the King; who preferred Symachus: and yet 4.
years after Laurence was called home again, and the Factio^s fell fairly to
blows, wherein were infinite spoils and murders committed, Paulus Diaco^.
lib. 15. Nicephor. lib. 16. c. 35.
as Paulus Diaconus and Nicephorus show. After Symachus succeeded Hormisda, who
would loose noe time. If we may believe his Epistles, he made diverse Bishops
his Vicars in sundry Provinces of the West: as Auitus Bishop of Vienna in the
Province of Narbona, John of Arragon in Spanie on this side the river Betis;
and on the otherside Salust Bishop of Seuill. These Bishops desiring
precedencie and superiority accepted of this title, and so gave the Pope much
power to do in those times, at least by his Substitutes.

And indeed howsoever some think that the Goths Kingdom took away, or
hindered the Popes power of doing, as it might seem at some times, for a little
while: Yet to say truth for the most part it furthered and increased it. For
the Emperors power was now bounded in the East; and yet to recover authority
in the West, they thought fit to hold intelligence with the Popes of Rome, and
to make fair wether with them, by their means to find a door open into
Italy. And therefore whereas diverse Emperors had favored some herecies which
the Popes had opposed, Iustine the Emperor, to be more pleasing to the Pope,
was contented to send to consult with him upon certain points of faith: which
though it were no verrie great matter, seeing diverse Emperors have done as
much with some Priests, and Monks, that have been famous for learning,
judgment and integrity; as Charles the great with Bertram a Priest about
transubstantiation: Yet the Popes ye may be sure would in time make great
matters of these presidents. Wherefore Baronius makes much of a certain
sentence taken out of a letter which Iustine wrote to Hormisda: Baron. vol. 7
an. 519. art. 98.
which sentence he causes to be printed in great letters: We believe and
hold for Catholic, that which was intimated to us by your religious answer.
So dangerous it is to deal fairly with these men. For Baronius thinks he
has gotten a great ground of Supremacy in that the Emperor Iustine, and
after him Justinian sent unto the Popes a confession of their faith; which
though they often did as much to other Bishops, and might have done it to
Priests also, without any giueing of supremacy* yet as the Popes were pleased
to take the matter, it gave them power to do. After Hormisda came John. 1.
Theodoric the King sent him Ambassodor to Iustine, to crave that the Arria^
Bishops whom he had bainshed might be restored to their places again: else
the Catholic Bishops in Italy should expect the like at his hands: Liber
Fontif. in Johan. 1.
which made Pope John with tears to persuade the Emperor to condescend. Here
the Emperor, still willing for a further end, to please the Pope did him some
honor: which yet as they take the matter gave him power. But it so displeased
Theodoric, that at his return he clapped him in prison, where he ended his
life. Platina.
Foelix the 4. succeeded and ruled 4. years. He excomunicated Athanasius
Patriarch of Constantinople for heresy; he ordained that Christians before
their departure out of this life should be anointed with oil: This is their
Sacrament of extreme unction, instituted as ye see by him. Whom Boniface the
second succeeded, though not without schism: for Dioscorus was competitor
while he lived. In his time Eulalius Bishop of Carthage submitted himself unto
the chair of Rome: whereupon Boniface took occasion of insolent insulting,
and that so far, that he is not ashamed to write of Aurelius Bishop of
Carthage, Saint Augustine Bishop of Hippo, and of the rest of the Fathers which
were present at the sixth Council of Carthage, that they through the
instigation of the devil in the time of our Predecessors Boniface and
Celestine began to exalt themselves against the Church of Rome: But Eulalius
says he now Bishop of Carthage, seeing himself through the sin of Aurelius
to stand separated from the communion of the Roman Church, has repented him
thereof, entreating to be received etc. This indeed gave them great power to
do, as they insolently took it.

John the second succeeded, whenas the Emperor Justinian being newly come to
the crown, that he might please the Pope, and get friends in Italy, sent to
him, to assure him of his true faith. Baronius here observes that, in his
Epistle, he says in this manner; We are all careful to advertise your
holiness of all such things as concern the estate of the Church; we
endeavor to submit and to unite unto your holiness all the Bishops of the
East. Which words Pope John laid hold on with both his hands in his answer to
this letter; where he tells him, that among other his virtues, this was most
eminent, that he subjected all things to the Sea of Rome: whereas the Emperor
meant only to endeavor that the Heretics of the East should submit to the
faith, and so be vinted to John and other Bishops that professed it. Besides
he, and other Emperors had said as much to the Patriarch of Constantinople
and other Bishops, Plesses mist. Iniquit. prog. 17.
as Mounseire du Plesses has proved. Yet thus the Goths Kingdom rather
furthered the Popes power then hindered it, while in those times the Emperor,
to regaine Italy, gave him fairer words then otherwise he would have done.
Agapetus succeeded John, and was presently sent, by Theodatus the King, to
Justinian to pacify him for the slaughter of Amalasuntha his wife; a fit
commission for a Pope. When he came a Council was called at Constantinople,
wherein Anthimius the Patriarch thereof, being an Eutichean Heretic, was
deposed. And the truth is that Agapete being then at Constantinople presided
in the Council wherein Anthimius was deposed, and Menas placed in his room;
which as Popes would take it, gave them much power: he died there. And then
Siluerius the Son of Hormisda, sometime Bishop of Rome, succeeded. He governed
when Justinian sent Belisares to fight against Vitiges. Theodora the Empress
sent to Siluerius desiring him to yield to the restoring of Anthimius, and
deposing of Menas: Siluerius refused: wherefore Theodora sent to Belisares to
Banish Siluerius, Baron. vol. 7. an. 538. art. 20.
and to appoint Vigilius Bishop of Rome, who had promised to fulfill her
desires: which was done accordingly. Wherefore Baronius speaking of the entry
of Vigilius, calls him a theife, a wolf, a false Bishop, an Antichrist: Yet
soon after he calls him the Vicar of Christ, because he did not keep
promise in restoring Anthimius the Heretic. But therefore, as also for diverse
great crimes laid to his charge by the Romans, Anastas. in Vigilio.
he was apprehended, led violently away, the people persuing him with cursings
and Stones. He wast cast into prison at Constantinople, and then delivered
again. While he was in the City, the fifth general Council was held there:
but he would not be present at it, lest the dignity of the Roman chair should
be impaired, if he sat there: For first Menas Patriarch of Constantinople,
Bellar. lib. de council. c. 19.
and after him Euticheus Bishop of the same See, presided there. Neither does
Bellarmine deem it. So Nicephorus says when Eutichius was by the Emperor put
in the room of Menas lately deceased, Vigilius, though agreeing with him in
points of doctrine, yet refused to sit by him. Baron. an. 553.
But yet Baronius observes that this Eutichius when he was chosen in the room
of Menas tendered the profession of his faith unto Vigilius: which though it
were a thing usually practiced among Bishops, and Pelagius the next Pope did
as much to the Bishops of Italy, yet, as Popes and Papists take the matter, it
gave him power.

Thus we see that in almost all the years of the Goths Kingdom, the Pope had
power to do, and was seldom hindered, but often times furthered by it. Pelagius
the first, who succeeded Vigilius, had the worst time of it for a while;
because the Tirant Totilas then raged and triumphed in Rome, which he unpeopled
for 40. days: but he was soon vanquished: and therefore the time of the
Beasts doing was little hindered by them: and consequently he must needs be
verrie near his end, and may expire within 10. or 12. years; at least within
less then 16. or 20. years from this present, or soon after; yea though his
time of doing began not till the days of Syricius or Innocent, because the
years may be Egyptian years, as some have thought probable. Howsoever though
he may endure to do a little longer, as some think, yet it does not follow
that Rome shall stand so long; seeing it is in a manner clear by the holy
Scriptures, that he shall survive her destruction. Reu. 16.
For after the fifth Angel hah powered his vial on the throne or seat of the
Beast, and thereupon his Kingdom waxes dark: by which deed (as some think)
may be meant the destruction of Rome, seeing that is the throne or seat, and
by her ruin his Kingdom must of necessity wax dark: because it does most of
all consist off, and rest on the supposed chair of Peter to remain therefore
ever; and a fond presumption that the gates of hell shall never prevail
against that Church or City to root it out; after these things we see the
Beast suruiuing, and after the pouring out of the sixth vial, the Beast
sends to gather the Kings, Reu. 18.9.
and they are gathered; but when the City should be burned, they stand afar
off for fear of her torment, lamenting her ruin: therefore they are not then
gathered when the City is beseiged, but afterward, Chap. 19.
when they are gathered together with the Beast, to make war with him that
sat on the horse, and against his army. Then they do not stand afar off,
but are gathered together and slain; and the fowls are filled with their
flesh. This battle therefore it seems is after the racing of Babylon: and
therefore I think that no man can give any probable reason why Rome should not
expire within less then 10. years from this present year 1629. save this
only, that as yet he sees not those Kings in arms, and sincerely endeavoring
to do it, that should burn her.

Here also has been some mistaking about the horns that shall destroy her:
which some think to be ten succeeding Emperors: and they take Charles the
5. to be the first of these. But besides other good reasons that might be
alleged to the contrary, the present Emperors zeal to maintain the Popish
cause shows this to be absurd. Much better therefore do they expound, who
take these horns to be all Christians Kings, free Princes and States, and
that a certain number is put for an uncertain. For indeed this Beast has
upon his ten horns, ten feuerall Crowns; not one Crown, but ten; to
show that they are so many, or at least a number of heads of several Kingdoms
and States: whereas the other Beast Reu. 12. which is the Ethnic Roman
Empire, though it has seven Crowns on the seven heads, to show that those
were seven several succeeding forms of government, of which the Emperors
were one; yet that beast has not ten crowns one his horns, because those
ten horns were the ten persecutors, all Emperors or Kings of one Kingdom,
haueing but one Crown; as the horns of the Beast in Daniel also were; Dan.
7.22.
of which Antiochus Epiphanes was the little horn. Which things, if they be
well marked, prove that the horns of the Popish beast were not at first 10.
succeeding Emperors, who raised Romes Pope to his glory; and that the horns
that shall hate and burn her, are not 10. succeeding Emperors; but diverse
Kings, free Princes and States, that shall at one and the same time do it.
Neither let any man think that Rome can not be shortly destroyed, because many
Kings, free Princes and States are yet obedient to the Pope and Church of Rome.
For noe man can prove that all the horns of the Beast shall hate the whore; or
that all Christian Kings shall fight against her: yea it is in a manner
certain that some of them shall continue with the Beast and whore till the
end of the war. For when she should be burned we see some Kings standing
afar off, and weeping over her, although they do not help her for sear of
her torment; as also that after this, the Beast gathers, and has diverse
Kings on his side, when he is taken and destroyed: these without doubt are his
friends and helpers, and by consequence may be some of the horns: therefore
though noe other King or Kingdom should be converted, yet Rome may be destroyed
by those who already hate her. Neither should the Saints fear the rest,
seeing the Scriptures show that they shall stand afar of for fear, and not
help her. Which do not think to be written, as if I said that no other
King, State or Kingdom shall be converted, and so brought to fight against
her, but only those who are already Protestants. For though God do commonly,
for his greater glory, perform great works by small means, and overthrow
the greatest enemies by a smaller power then they themselves are; and that to
some such end, he has seemed to take away from the Protestant power, as he
did from Gedeons army, to show what he ca^ do by a few, and when our strength
seems to be brought to a low ebb; and that it is therefore likely that he
will also do so in this destruction of Rome and Antichrist; yea though now for
these many years noe King, State, or whole Nation have yealded to be
converted by the Word, and that therefore there is small hope of any (unless
peradventure of Venice) seeing they have so long withstood the Word; yet it
may please God to make any; yea that one of the Kings that shall do this may
be the Emperor then liueing, and that one of them may be the Angel of the
throne; yet to say for certain that he, or other Kings and States shall be
converted, and shall join therein, or that this or that Prince shall do this
thing, savors to much of presumption; seeing the Scriptures do not name the
particular Kingdoms, nor any particular man, as of old Josias in a like case 1.
King. 13. therefore till their own inclination, or the event show this thing,
noe man can say this Prince is that fifth Angel; that other he that stands in
the Sun, viz. in the light and confidence of the Truth.

There have been some other mistakings, which some have caused by applying
those things of Daniel chap. 2.43.44. chap. 7.8.9. etc. and espetially chap.
11.36. to the end: and chap. 12. to the times of Antichrist or of the Turkish
Empire, and those that should suffer under them; which indeed as M. Broughton,
and Doc. Willet on Daniel.
others prove do note out the times of Antiochus Epiphanes, and those that
followed soon after him: whose acts and times, as in a manner all confess,
are described chap. 11. ver. 21. to 36. and indeed the Prophecy of the things
that he should do is certainly continued there, as may thus be proved. I. The
Angel had there told Daniel of the miseries which the Jews should suffer
under Antiochus Epiphanes, Dan. 10.14. and chap. 11.31. chap. 12.6.
who should take away the daily Sacrifice, and set up the abomination, etc.
And question is made, saying, How long shall it be to the end of these
wonders? the^ the time when all these things should be fulfilled is expressed
chap. 12.11. ver. 11.
From the time that the daily sacrifice shall be taken away and the
abomination set up, etc; the days are summed to 1290. that is three years 7.
months and about 13. days: therefore these things could belong to noe
other time, much less to a time so far off, as that of the Pope or Turk.

II. The word Hamelech, chap. 11.36.
this King has reference to the former History: and the article ha is a note
of demonstration pointing out the King before spoken of. Neither is there any
likelihood that the Angel, chap. 10.14.
who came now to make him understand what should befall the Jews, chap. 11.2.
and to tell him the truth of the visions, would so suddenly and at once, make
such a large step, as is from the time of Antiochus Epiphanes to Antichrist, or
the Turk, and that without telling Daniel, that now he would show him another
King and Kingdom; which seeing he did not here, as he had done concerning all
the former See verse. 2.3.4.5.6.7.10.
Kings and Kingdoms, both here and also chap. 8.20. it is plain that he
speaks of the same King and Kingdom: and so indeed whereas he had spoken
before of the Kings of the North and South, verse. 6.7. etc.
viz. Syria and Egypt in their several successions; and came at last to
Antiochus Epiphanes King of the North, and his acts, both against the King of
the South, and also against the Jews; he there without intermission, or
variation, continues speaking of them under the same titles verse. 40. which is
an infallible argument, that he continues speaking of the same King, Kingdoms
and times.

III. The sequel of the Story answers to the Prophecy: for Antiochus did
all this, as See D. Willet on Daniel.
many have proved out of the Maccabes, and other Histories.

Neither let any man think that Antichrist can not be destroyed till Christ
come to judgment; and that therefore it will be in vain to bear arms
against him, and his Supporters in these times. For if it could be so that he
should stand till then; yet noe man can be sure that the day is far off or at
hand. But it is manifest by the Scriptures, that those words of Saint Paul, 2.
These. 2.
Whom the Lord shall consume with the Spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy
with the brightness of his coming, Reu. 19.14.15.17. etc. verse. 20.21. chap.
2.16.
must needs be meant of that coming, when the armies follow him. Revel. 19.
For then Antichrist is destroyed, and then also Christ fights with the
Spirit, or sword of his mouth. So he said of Pergamos, and the false Teachers
in her, Repent, or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will fight against
them with the sword of my mouth. Isa. 59.19.20. and Romans 11.26.
And so the deliverer shall come to Sion, as Isaiah shows. It is most
manifest, therefore I say that Saint Paul means such a bright coming against
Antichrist, both with the Word, and with the swords of Princes; and that he
shall be wholly destroyed; as also that after his destruction the Nations Gog
and Magog shall fight with the Saints, Reu. 20.9.
and that before the day of judgment. For the day of judgment shall come as a
theife in the night, and noe man can know before when it shall be: Reu. 19.17.
but when the Angel standing in the Sun has called many to the certain
destruction of Antichrist, and his Supporters, even to eat the flesh of Kings,
and the flesh of Captains etc. and at the same time Antichrist has also
called many to fight in his defense; Antichrist is taken and destroyed: but if
the World should then have an end, then all who are called to this Battle,
at least all that come against him, might know the day of judgment: for they
are called to the certain destruction of him and his, to cate the flesh of
Kings etc. but the whole World can not have so sure and vissible a sign, of
the ending of the World, seeing the Scriptures are contrary hereunto, and show
that after this another battle is fought with Gog and Magog: and therefore
the World can not then end. The like might also be said, when afterward the
Nations Gog and Magog are gathered together in battle against the Saints Reu.
20.7. if the world were to end with that battle the Saints that meet there,
might know it before. But this they do not know, therefore the world is not to
end at that time. Yet how soon after that it shall end God only knows. It
seems that as the, Isralites soon forgate his wonders in Egypt, so will those
that survive these two battles; and then, they being in security, the day
will take them or their posterity as a theife in the night. So that these
objections do not hinder but that all these things may shortly be fulfilled;
espetially Romes Ruin. Genesis 6.3.
We must not think that Gods Spirit will always strive with that Church, noe
more then he did with the old world; to whom he gave 120. years time of
repentance, when once the long suffering of God waited, while the Arc was
preparing, in the days of Noah; 1. Pet. 3.
a preacher of righteousness; and so indeed God has now given Rome well near
the like time since the preaching of Luther: an. 1517.
wherein God by him and others would have cured Babel, but she would not.
Therefore when his long suffering has a like time waited, and they repent not
to give him glory, her Ruin must needs approach and follow.

And indeed the wars and other troubles that are already begun among many
nations, show that these things are at hand, and namely that ere long Rome
the greatest cause of them shall be destroyed. The blood of the Saints shed in
these wars cries to heaven for speedy vengeance on Pope and Turk, but
espetially and first of all on Rome, as the cause of all. For she divided the
Empire into East and west, and so made way for the Turk to enter by that
division, and was therein the cause of all the slaughters which since have
been made by Turks upon Christians. It would ask to much time to recko^ up
all the wars that she has caused, and the blood that she has otherwise shed
in former times. To say nothing of the execrable practices of the bloody
inquisition, if we only look on the wars of Christendom in these times,
we may find that she has been the increaser if not the prouoker, and so
beginner of them all. Call to mind what her instruments the Jesuits and
Priests made the Emperor do against the Bohemians, to make them revolt, and
so to breed all those vvarres there and in the Palatinate, to the cruel
martyrdom of many thousands of Protestants, and all still by the animation and
encourageme^t of the Pope and Romish Clergy. See what troubles and slaughters
they have raised in Garmanie, France and the Low countries; and how easy will
it be to find her guilty of all the blood, that has of late been shed in
all these places? and that therefore she is like to be as dangerous to all
that survive, if to prevent it, she be not the sooner destroyed? as it is
written, Reu. 17.6.
The Woman was drunken with the blood of the Saints and of the Martyrs of
Jesus. chap. 18.24.
In her was found the blood of the Saints, and of all that were slain upon
earth. And indeed they are still so fierce in persuite of blood, and have so
great hope of bringing all Nations to the obedience of their Pope and Church,
that there is noe probability, that they will ever give over, till she be
destroyed.

And he that will may see, that God has therefore permitted her to go on in
this wickenes, to the end that all true Protestants, all true Christians,
might be thereby moved in Christian pity, and for the saueing of Christian
blood (which otherwise she will not cease to shed) to combine their forces to
remove her props, to weaken her greatest Supporters, the house of Austria, the
French and the Polonian; and then to pull her down: for her sins have
reached up to Heaven, and God has remembered her wickedness. Christ against
whom they fight, as he also against them, has as it were by all these things
said to them that seek peace with or for Papists, as Iehu to each messenger,
2. King. 9.18.
What have thou to do with peace, turn thee behind me; and concerning Rome,
as he concerning Iezabel; Who is on my side, who? Yea God has as it were by
all these things proclaimed wars, and showed that he will have wars till
she be destroyed; and who then is able so to resist his will, as without her
Ruin to work peace? For the Kings must destroy her, and the wars mentioned
Reu. 17.16. and chap. 19. can not be prevented. And therefore though the
Protestants in all countries do now seem to be in more danger then Rome and
Antichrist; yet it is marvelous to see how God has begun to prepare, and
fit all things to this work. First by suffering the Papists to provoke
Protestant Princes and States to it by their wars, victories and practices.
Secondly by taking away, or at least binding and weakening the greatest
impedinent and danger; and indeed by weakening, or half pulling away her
props. The greatest impediment and danger that has ever been suspected is,
that if Protestants and Papists should fight one against another, the Turk
would take that for an opportunity to break in upon them and endanger all
Christendom. But by the ill success, which was lately given him in Poland, his
wars with the Persians, and others, the lazines and indisposition of his
Ianizaries, the sinews of his war, their insolency and stubbornes, who
will now do but what they list, the murder of Osmond by them, the unapt or
rather foolish humors of Mustepha that has been twice deposed, and the
childishnes of him that now reigns, God has as it were taken all the cause
of that fear away: and while of late he has suffered them to do nothing
against Christendo^ worth the mentioning, he has convinced those preachers and
others in England and elsewhere of notorious flaterie and treachery who while
the Palatinate and other protestant bulwarks were in danger, to get preferment
by pleasing the late Duke, his Mother and some others, hindered supplies and
timely aid, by crying out against these wars of Protestant against Papist,
and saying it would bring in the Turk to get all. Which has been the cause
of great losses to Protestants: for in the mean while the house of Austria
and the French King prevailed. Besides if the worst should come, viz. that the
Turk should attempt it, he can only endanger the Popish Princes that lie next
him, and so keep them buisied that they should not be able to rescue Rome:
neither is it likely that he could easily overcome them. For Poland alone has
of late been hard enough for him; and the Turk indeed is not so dangerous to
our Religion as the Papist, who does daily strive more by eagre wars and
practices to subdue us, then the Turk does. Besides the Turk suffers
Christians to enjoy their religion in his dominions with less persecution:
the Papists in their dominions put all Protestants to death or great damages.

God has also in some respects pulled aside and weakened the mightiest props
of Rome and Antichrist: as first the Emperor, who notwithstanding all his
Victories and strength, is, in that respect, of supporting Rome, much weakened,
because he is in so much danger of the Turks, and of his own discontented
Subjects, Nobels, Husbandmen and others, that he can not come to help her, for
fear they should in the mean while join against him with the much injured
Princes of Germany; he being also far off from Rome. The like may be said
of Poland; and in some sort of France also. Italy is divided among many
Princes, most of them of small force, and ever at discord. Venice the strongest
of them has long been at variance with the Pope. The great whore then has
but one great prop, one great supporter, namely the King of Spain, whose
state (as many have Sr. Fran. Bacon lo. Verulam, his considerations touching a
mar with Spanie.
proved) is nothing secure, but stands on sliperie and disunited grounds:
against whom all Protestant Princes have cause to fight as against one that
seeks a Monarchy, to be universal King, yea to support the papacy, and to
bring all to his and the Popish subjection: Isa. 30.3.4
But he that helps and he that is helped shall both fall when God shall come
down to fight for Sion: And therefore when he shall please to weaken or remove
this Prop from supporting that See, the way lies open to Rome, and her final
overthrow. The united States have do^ne nobly against him, espetially of late
in the Indies; and if others would as sincerely strive and indeanour to do as
much, it might soon be effected; at least if the Iesuited friends of Rome and
Spanie, that lurk in protestant States, were once discovered and expelled.

All which things considered, I can not enough vvonder at the coldness of this
age, wherein there are many, some also of great auctority and strength, who
know the Beast, and see his Ministers vvorking together and tiranizing, and
yet are not moved to further this work by the best means with Constancy,
courage and perseverance. Are not those things fulfilled? Mat. 24.12. Phil.
2.21.
Because iniquity shall abound the love of many shall wax cold. All seek
their own, and no man that which is Christ's; that so he alone might reign in
spiritual matters: seeing nothing indeed but the destruction of Rome can
work this, or give peace and felicity to the Church, as all me^ may see,
who either look diligently into the Scriptures or into the practices of the
enemies; and how Princes are animated by Romish Spirits: yet I confess that
this can not easily be done till the Kings of Spanie and France, her chiefest
props and champions, be first weakened, and put in fear of her torment;
which (indeed will make them stand a far off, and so) is a part of the
work. But when she is destroyed, a great multitude cry, Reu. 19.6.
Alleluia: For the Lord God omnipotent reigns.

And will they then be slack in giueing their moneys, weapons, labors,
counsels or consents to this work? The Papists are not so in their war
against us. The Pope bestows his false blessings on them, and they show
their great thankfulness for these false benefits, in fighting manfully to
advance his Kingdom, and giueing moneys and other helps to further the same.
Christ has bestowed more, yea greater and truer benefits on us, even all we
have in heaven and earth, by them to bind us to be as true unto him: and who
then can escape his wrath, that is not faithful and thankful? 2 King. 19.
chap. 20.1.
Hezekia was in danger of enemies, and after sick unto the death: And the Lord
saved Hezekia: 2. Chro. 32.25.
But Hezekia rendered not again according to the benefit done unto him: for
his heart was lifted up, therefore there was wrath upon him, and upon Judah and
Jerusalem. He hearkened to the flatteries of the Assirians the enemies of God,
was to conversant with them, and did not refuse them, and trust in God who
saved him; which was unthankfulness. chap. 16.7. etc.
A fault that was also in Asa, who at first relied on the Lord, and was
mightily delivered: afterward he relied on the King of Syria, and not on the
Lord, and was therefore punished with wars. Who then would not be more
thankful, and cleave more fast unto Christ, then Papists do to the Pope? and
that because they that follow Christ shall assuredly be Victors. Reu. 17.14.
chap. 19.18.20. verse. 9.
For the eyes of the Lord run to and fro throughout the whole earth to show
himself strong in the behalf of them, Tortus. page 51.
whose heart is perfect toward him. Tortus says, In our supernatural birth in
baptism we are to conceive of a secret and implied oath, which we take at
our new birth to yield obedience to the spiritual Prince, which is Christ's
Vicar. As if he said that in their Baptism they received the mark of the
Beast: for See the Character of a Christian. page 282. and 296.
that is to receive and obey his law, as on the contrary to receive, obey and
profess Gods Word is to have Gods mark: but we are baptized in the name of
the Trinity, not of the Pope: And if they think that they owe so much to the
Pope, what owe we to God and his Christ? What owe we to our Savior, and our
Brethren which are members of his mystical body? When we were baptized we
received the promise, and consequently the mark of God, promising to fight
manfully under his Banner against all his enemies, and to be Christ's faithful
Servants and Soldiers unto our lives end, such as trust in him that he shall
overcome all enemies. Psalm. 2.


Let not Princes therefore be like them that go down to Egypt for help, and
stay on horses, and trust in Charets: Isa. 31.1.2.3.4.
but look not to the holy one of Israel, neither seek the Lord: yet he is
also wise, and will bring evil, and not call back his words. Let therefore
noe Protestant Prince seek leauge with Papists, as Asa did with Syrians, who
thereby displeased the Lord, as also by relying on them. For the Papists as the
Egyptians are men and not God, and their horses flesh and not spirit: When the
Lord shall stretch out his hand, both he that helps shall fall, and he that
is helped: for the Lord of hosts shall come down to fight for Mount Sion, Let
us therefore look into the Word of God, and see what God would have to be
done against them; not to join first (against the Turk) with them, who have
the mark of the Beast. Does Christ seek the help of his enemies? that is,
the help of Antichrist, or of them who have the mark of the Beast? there can
be noe more safety, nor good in mingling and joining with them, then was unto
the Israelites in mingling with the heathen, Psalm. 106.28.85.
and in joining unto Baal Peor, or with the Egyptians: Isa. 30.2. And if
Papists join with Protestants, they will work, and have hope to bring them
to their religion: they are verrie subtle in persuading, working a thousand
ways, and will not stick to compel, if it lie in their power. They would
cast to have the General of their religion: and if they could be persuaded
to fight under a Protestant General, yet the Scriptures show that in Christ's
army, there shall be none that have the mark of the Beast: Reu. 17.14. chap.
19.14. chap. 14.1.
for they that are with him are called, and chosen and faithful. They follow
him clothed in fine linen, white and clean: and have his Fathers name written
in their forheads; and consequently are not Papists, defiled with the mark
and name of the Beast. Neither shall there be any Papists in Christ's war
against the Turk, when he is overthrown. For as I showed the Saints do first
fight against the Beast, and the Kings with him: the Beast, and the Kings and
people that are with him are overthrown; some of them are slain in battle,
chap. 19.23.
the Beast and false Prophet are taken: but the remnant were slain with the
sword of him that sat upon the horse: which sword proceeds out of his mouth:
that is converted to Christ by his Word.

And then and not before they come to be of Christ's army against the Turk
chap. 20. therefore Christ will not have Protestants to join with Papists
against the Turk, but rather to join themselves first against Antichrist and
his, afterward against the Turk, neither can mortal man be vviser then God,
that they should find a better way then God has determined and revealed;
who out of doubt will never prosper any other contrary design, how
religiously soever it may seem to be undertaken.

We see they endeavor wholly to root out all Protestants, to come into
Christ's inheritance, where he reigns, and that where the Lord was lately
served, there the Pope is now worshipped, idollatrie erected, and our Brethren
afflicted with misery and death; neither are they moved to help rightly and
speedily, whose duty it is: which pleases the Papists, that so when such have
suffered their Brethren to perish, they may also root out them. Which I write
not to stir up any private man to lift up his hand against any particular
Papist whatsoever; nor yet to animate the Subjects of these Popish Tirants to
rise, and fight for their religion after the exemple of the Jews under
Antiochus Epiphanes: of whom it is said, Dan. 11.32
the people that do know their God shall be strong and do exploits. I
rather wish them to suffer, and wait his leisure, who says, Romans 12.19.
Vengeance is mine, and I will repay: as he has denounced against these
Tirants, the Champions of Antichrist, saying, Reu. 13.10.
He that leads into captivity shall go into captivity: he that kills
with the sword must be killed with the sword. Here is the patience and the
faith of the Saints. Patience in waiting for this, and faith in believing it;
rather yelding to suffer, then to receive the mark of the Beast, as chap. 14.
chap. 14.12
Here is the patience of the Saints; here are they that keep the commandments
of God, and the faith of Jesus. But if ye, o Princes and States, in whose power
it is to help these afflicted ones, be true Protestants and Servants of
Christ, think the Lord does as it were ask you, whether they that thus
afflict Gods Servants be of Christ's army or not? ye will answer, they are not;
but rather of Antichrists army, haueing the mark of the Beast in their right
hand, and bearing arms against Christ; then by consequence, they who sincerly
resist, if they be not subjects to the Tirants, but free, are of Christ's army,
and Christ is with them: and without doubt, all men of ripe years, if it be in
their power to be of either, are of one of these armies; there is no mean
between; for Christ says, He that is not with me is against me. And that will
such find in the day of the Lord, when he Reu. 22.
shall come to give every man as his work shall be.

In the mean while, whether or no, ca^ we say that we love our Christian
Brethren, yea or God himself? yet we say, 1. Ioh. 4.19.
we love him, because he first loved us. But S. John says, chap. 3.16.
Hereby perceive we the love of God, because he laid down his life for us,
and we ought to lay down our lives for the brethren. See what Abraham did,
Genesis 14.14
when he heard that his brother was taken captive, he armed his trained
Servants, brought again his brother Lot, and his goods, the women also and the
people. Gal. 3.29.
And if ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed. Ioh. 8.38.
If ye were Abraham's children, ye would do the works of Abraham. Iehoshaphat
likewise 2. King. 3.7.
helped Israel against the Moabits. Religion and the professors thereof were
in danger; wherefore he said unto Iehoram, 2. Chro. 16.9.
I will go up; I am as thou art, my people as thy people, my horses as thy
horses. He trusted in God, and he prospered therein. For the eyes of the Lord
run to and fro throughout the whole earth, to show himself strong in the
behalf of them whose heart is perfect toward him. They that cease to trust in
him, and rather rely on the help and alliance of his enemies, them he
forsakes, as we see in Asa, who relied on the King of Syria. But Iehoshaphat
helped his brethren, as Abraham did. He thought it not enough to say, I am a
Prince of peace, if I may have peace with the enemies, why should I hazard my
own to help others? it stands not with pollecie. For if such excuses would
have served; Judge. 5.23.
the inhabitants of Meroz could have said much for themselves, as that they
loved peace, and abhorred the sheeding of blood, and sought their own safety.
But if the enemy knowing they will not fight be therefore the more emboldened
to destroy their brethren first, that they may afterward destroy them, then
this wilful peace is rather merciles cruelty to their brethren and to
themselves, then true charity to any. For enemies have most desire to fight
with them whom they perceive to be faint hearted, as assured that they shall
thereby prevail. Therefore such polecie is rather extreme folly than true
wisdom: because God loves not, but forsakes them who forsake him or their
brethren. verse. 9.
My heart is toward the Governors of Israel that offered themselves willingly
among the people. verse. 18.
Zebulun and Nephtali were a people that ieoparded their lives unto the death
in the high places of the field, viz. to help the Lord and their brethren,
and were therefore blessed: Meroz did not so, and was therefore verse. 23.
Cursed, as guilty of blood that might have been spilt, and as one not
regarding the cry of the afflicted. But God psa. 9.12.
when he makes inquisition for blood he remembers them: he forgets not the
cry of the afflicted. Will not he then find such as neglect them guilty? for
as a famous Divine says, B. Hall. Contemp. the Rescue of Gibeon.
Even permission in those things we may remedy, makes us no less actors then
consent; some men kill as much by looking on, as others by smiting: we are
guilty of all the evil we might have hindered. And indeed the holy Ghost
says; pro. 24.10.11.12.
If thou faint in the day of adversity, thy strength is small. If thou forbear
to deliver them that are drawn unto death, and those that are ready to be
slain: If thou say, behold we knew it not: does not he that pondereth in
the heart consider it? and he that keeps thy soul does he not know it? and
shall not he render unto every man according to his work.

It therefore behooves him to stir who either regards his own salvation,
or Gods protection. Let them therefore, who may give help, take heed while
there is time; espetially seeing the cause is common to all, and not God and
civil pollecie only, but even common sense teaches this with the Poet, Ecquid
Ad te post paulo ventura pericula sentis?
Nam tua res agitur paries cum proximus ardet.


Which saying is the more to be regarded, because he that will may know, that
the Spanish King who is called Catholic, aims at the Catholic government.
Howsoever what will he and they not do for the Catholic cause, as they call
it, who are governed by the Pope, Rome, and the Jesuits and Priests? or who
have the mark of the Beast, and consequently are led by the devil and his
Agents? Reu. 16.
these frogs and locusts are Spirits of devils. Are they not then, as much to
be trusted in any thing they pretend, as of old Antiochus Epiphanes the Syrian
King, who came in peaceably to the Subjects of another Kingdom, and with
gifts and flatteries wrought them Dan. 11.26
to betray it, namely Egypt? of whom therefore it was said, chap. 8.25.
By peace he shall destroy many. chap. 11.23.24.
After the leauge made with him, he shall work deceitefully, for he shall come
up, and shall become strong with a small people: He shall enter peaceably:
and scatter among the^ the pray and riches: and he shall forecast his devises
against the strong holds for a time; viz. till he had corrupted the Egyptians,
raised factions among them, and so prepared them to betray the Kingdom to the
great army he intended to bring, and which he after verse. 25.
brought: also touching his craft to obtain Judea, and overthrow religion
there; ver. 30.^^
He shall have intelligence with them that forsake the holy covenant. And such
as do wickedly against the covenant shall he corrupt by flatteries. Wherein he
and they were lively types of Antichrist and his instruments, and of his secret
friends that are false brethren in other Churches and States.

Now therefore if any man think that Papists are more sincere in their
pretenses to Protestants; let him remember what doctrine the Council of
Constance left them, fidem Haereticis non seruandam: yea let him read Nauar.
in Manual. cap. 12. number. 18. cap. 21. and Sam. Aphor. tit. de testibus; and
then tell me, whether they think it lawful to equivocate, and delude
Heretics with subtelties? at least for the Catholic cause? and how long they
are to be trusted, I would he would judge whom it most concerns: and
espetially seeing God has seemed to have lately warned us of such dangers: I
do not mean so much by signs and prodegies, as by that which they have done
to our brethren in other Kingdoms and provinces. Howsoever we know that the
Pope, and his think and affirm Symancha. instit. cathol. cap. 45. number. 13.
and Allan against the execution of Justice, c. 5.
that war undertaken for the cause of religion is without controversy
lawdable and good; Thuan. hist. lib. 42. ad ann. 1585. lib. 62. and lib. 63. ad
ann. 1577. and Symanch. instit. Cathol. cap. 45. number. 15. Platin* in vita Greg,
7.
that peace is not te be made, nor kept with Heretics: yea they say that the
Pope has right Imperia, regna, principatus, and quicquid habere mortales
possunt auferre and dare; and that to whom he will as he says; and
blasphemously he for this thing abuses that place Ier. 5.10. as Hadrian in an
Epistle to the Archbishops of Treueire, Mentz, and Colen, whence had the
Emperor the Empire but from us? Behold the Empire is in our power to give is
to whom we will. For therefore are we of God set over nations, and Kingdoms
to destroy, to pluck up, to build and to plant. What he, and his being of
the same body and opinion have done in these times, and daily go about,
there is no need to tell; the matter it self declares, and that in many
countries. Such is their industry; who (as we may well think) will by
their tounges, subtelties, gifts, hands and feet do all things that they can
for their religion and brethren; whom also we know without commandment from
God to endeavor with all possible labor night and day, and to venture their
verrie lives to proffit the Pope and Church of Rome, and to root out the
Protestants; although in all these things, they to their everlasting
damnation profoundly take the mark of the Beast in their forheads, and in
their hands. And shall not we then be content to go forth for Christ, and
under Christ to do as much as they, while we may both benefit the Church of
Christ, and secure our selves? the voice says of the whore sitting on many
waters; Reu. 18.
reward her as she has rewarded you. Behold then what they do, and endeavor,
and then if thou be a sincere Christian thou will say, shall they do these
things unpunished? these things are all done and undertaken not only out of
coueteousnes, or in a desire of rule, but also for the Pope and Church of Romes
sake, yea for the Clergies sake; and indeed by their incessant instigations:
but when the cause why they do these things shall be taken away, these will
cease, peace will ensue, and Christ shall reign alone in spiritual matters.

We know also that all things which the Pope and his do against us for
religion sake, are verrie much against Christ, as the Scriptures declare. We
may know also, if we will how great authority Christ has given unto his,
espetiallie unto Kings and States to take from Rome, and the Beast their
wealth, and not only to eat her flesh, but also the flesh of her friends
Revel* 19.17. and that verrie justly; because many of our Brethren have been
by them led captive and slain: for as the Lord would have the deeds of
Ameleck remembered, and recompensed Exodus 17.14. and 1. Sam. 15. so he says
concerning these men, Reu. 13.9.10.
If any man have an ear let him hear. He that leads into captivity, shall
go into captivity: He that kills with the sword, must be killed with the
sword. And therefore though they have no authority to take from the followers
of Christ; yet they which are Christ's, ought to do his commandments against
those his enemies; and whether these things can be done without loss to
any save Rome only, as also whether they that have power should fear to do
his commandments, and what it is to have communion with so great enemies,
the props of the Whore and Antichrist, as 2. Corinthians. 6.14. Deuter. 7. what it
is to stand afar off, and not to fight under Christ's Standart, let any true
Christian judge, seeing as a great Prelate said in a like case, Epise.
Winton. Tortura Tort. in Epis. Dedica.
This cause is of that kind wherein when a man gathers not with Christ, he
scatereth with Christ's adversary, where unless one deliver the faith, neither
shall he deliver his Soul. Also, Now when the common cause is brought into
danger, let noe man be a spectatour, but every one an actour: and where the
cause of all men is handled, there with all power and labor, with all studdie
and endeavor to skirmish stoutly for it. And herein in what low state soever a
man be, yet let him be a Christian. The cause of religion is in danger; and if
they that profess the same religion help not, what religion the while is
there in them? The name Religion comes of a word that signifies to bind,
and it is a spiritual bond, whereby the men of each profession are bound one
unto another, and knit fast together in faith and love, as one body. In the
true religion they are knit together under Christ, and are both bound unto him
their head, and also unto one another, as true members of the same body. Is
any member then of Christ's body in danger, and will not all the rest help? He
that will not help is he a member? does he not cut himself off from the body,
if he stand like a newter? when Iabesh Gilead was in danger, and the enemy
sought 1. Sam. 11.2.7.
to lay it for a reproach upon all Israel; the fear of the Lord fell on the
people, and they came out as one man: as one body; every man showed himself a
true member: there was true Religion. As therefore Christ counted himself
touched when his members were touched Act. 9.4. so ought it to be among the
members of his body, who when one is in danger should all make it their
own case, and help what they can. Iam. 1.27.
Pure religion and undefiled before God is this, to help the distressed in
their affliction. True Protestants are now the Is^aell of God; the diverse
Nations, are but as the several tribes; they should be all knit together under
one head, viz. under Christ, and that to fight against Antichrist, who now
reigns. Is any member then in danger, and will not all the rest help? he
that can help and will not, is he a member? Joshua does greatly praise the
Reubenites, and the Gadites, and the half tribe of Manasseh, when he says to
them, Josh. 22.1.3.
Ye have not left your Brethren these many days unto this day, but have kept
the charge of the commandment of the Lord your God. There are many who call
themselves Protestants; and yet how few that truly desire this praise by
protesting sincerely against the Beast, and his members, who bear his mark,
and fight stoutely for him, and for one another? Psalm. 2.
The Kings of the earth band themselves, and the rulers take counsel together
against the Lord and against his Anointed. Do those who profess themselves
Servants of Christ, do as much for Christ, and for one another? as yet they
have not. Christ says, luke 16.8.
The children of this world are in their generation wiser then the children of
light. I would to God they were not also more zealous and bold for their
Master. Do we not see what mischeife the friends of Antichrist daily put in
practice against the Servants of Christ, and how the Pope approues of these
deeds? And how long they who have the mark of the Beast, are governed by the
Pope, and led by the Jesuits are to be trusted in any thing that they pretend,
I heartily wish that they would judge whom it most of all concerns. In the
mean time we must pray as Psalm. 74. Have respect unto the covenant: Psalm.
74.20.
for the dark places of the earth are full of the habitations of cruelty. And
as Isa. 63. and 15. to chap. 65.

Our adversary the Devil, who always goes about like a roaring Lion,
seeking whom he may devour, without all doubt labors so much the more when
he knows that he has but a little time for the Beast, and Whore and Dragon. He
will labor to have his Agents in all Courts and Kingdoms, that they may by all
the pretexts, proiects and devises that may be invented make some fight openly,
and others work secretly for the Beast and Whore; but espetially that they may
under color of wisdom, keep such as are best able from aiding their
brethren, or fighting against the Whore and her props; that so noe man of power
may seek to fulfill Gods will in aiding the Church, or ruinating the Kingdom
of the Beast, but rather forsake the Spouse of Christ, and leave her members in
danger of the adversaries; that so Papists may by degrees recover or destroy
all. To this end, he will labor what he can to get advantage out of all
dispositions and affections; as of old out of the disposition and affection of
Ahasuerus, a King benign, munificent, credulous, void of suspicion, greatly
loueing and trusting his Servants. The devil therefore labors that Haman
might be in grace: because he knew that no man would contradict him that should
be most in favor with the King, but rather that every one would be ready to
flatter him in all things whatsoever he goes about; and that therefore he
might make the King believe that his best subjects the Jews, were the Kings
greatest enemies; and that to this end, that whereas at that time God was
about to do some good for his people the Jews then in captivity, he might by
this Haman wholly destroy the Jews, and so not only frustrate Gods benignity,
and the restoration of true religion; but also by this means wholly destroy
the King, by causeing that for his injustice and cruelty God might be his
enemy. Nevertheless Haman used a pretext, saying, Esther. 8.3.
It is not for the Kings proffit, or honor, to suffer them: as if he should
say, they are against the Kings prerogative; for he says, their laws are
diverse from all people, neither keep they the Kings laws; (so others pretend
Ezra. 4.12. Dan. 3. chap. 6.13.) yea Haman pretends that the slaughter would be
verrie proffitable to the King; whereas on the contrary, chap. 7.4.
if they had been sold for bondme^ and bondwomen, the enemy could not
counteruaile the Kings damage; so good Subjects were they, and proffitable to
the King; nevertheless by this means he had prevailed with the King, if God
had not turned it: so powerful was the man whom the King did to much love;
and that the Devil knew well enough, and that therefore he was an instrument
the fitter for such a work; although indeed his life was most dangerous, and
his death most proffitable to the King, according to that; Pro. 25.5.
Take away the wicked from before the King, and his throne shall be
established: as if he should say, otherwise it stands in danger. As Rehoboam
found, 1. King. ^^.
who was led by the counsel of the wicked young men to speak roughly to
the people. The Devil knew well enough that the strength of the King, did
under God, most of all consist in the love of the people, who when they love,
and are loved will give their substance and lives for him: the Devil
therefore sought to alienate the heart of the King from the people, and
thereby the heart of the people from the King; that so the Kingdom divided in
it self might not stand, but might lie open to division, and thereby to the
Gentiles, and so that by that means the true Religion might also be quite put
out. And we may be sure that he has now so labored and still will to do the
like against religion in Protestant Kingdoms and States.

So also when God was about to reedifie the City and Temple, Ezra. 4. Nehem.
2. chap. 4. and chap. 6.
the Devil raised up scorners and slanderers against the builders, that they
might hinder the work. And when Joshua was about a good work, Zach. 3.1.
Satan stood at his right hand to hinder him. So when God was Iud. 13.5.
about to deliver Israel by Sampson; the Devil and the Philistines raised up a
Delilah to hinder him. And his industry is indeed always so great, that
who can look for better from him in these times? Howsoever we see what
Antichrist does daily practice against Christ, and the^ that are his; how also
he keeps the people in blindness, and hinders the true preaching and
obedience of Gods Word, and therein Christ's reign; yea how the cause of the
Gospel does every where seem to go backwards, and the cause of Rome to wax
lusty: yet few are moved to seek a right remedy. They who are outwardly
Protestants, inwardly Papists, they desire to rectify all things, and under
pretext of great zeal and wisdom, they still seek such an excelent remedy as
shall in show promise great redress, yet shall indeed come to no end, but
spend in vain time, treasure and labor, give the Papists opportuintie of
enlarging their bounds, make protestants be glad of peace on hard conditions,
and bring the protestant cause into a much worse state; this being brought
about, the^ appears what was indeed the drift of their designs. They that
are lukewarm, and seek their own, not that which is Christ's, these are
willing to conniue; they will not contradict the former, but serve the times
what ever they be; others have a desire to speak, but there is no place for
them among Princes; others have both place and will, but they are affraide; to
such a one the holy Ghost says; Hest. 4.14.
If thou altogether hold thy peace at this time, then shall there
enlargement and deliverance arise to the people of God from another place, but
thou and they Fathers house shall be destroyed. How great is the coldness? but
why do we wonder? when as it seems in the time of greatest danger, the
coldness should be so great, that the Angel standing in the Sun, should
have need to cry with a loud voice: as if men feared whether they might for
Christ's cause hurt his enemies; peradventure not allowing the cause of Religion
to be a sufficient cause of war, although the adversaries neither have been,
nor are so scrupulous; and God has said of the Whore, serve her, as she has
served you; peradventure pretending also that if this were granted, the
adversaries would also openly say the same things for themselves; (the Devil,
the Pope and Papists will desire and endeavor that we may alvvayes be of
that mind, that in the mean time, they who are otherwise affected may
prevail over us all:) but in the mean while these men, who profess
themselves Protestants are unwilling to see that war undertaken as matters
stand at this day both with our brethren, with the faith it self, yea and with
our selves also, might rather be called defensive S. Francis Bacon Lo. Verulam
his Consideratio^s Touching a war with Spain.
and preuentiue then offensive; the zeal and Iesuited Spirits of the
adversaries giueing all protestant Princes and States, so just cause of fear
and preventing care. Nevertheless when our seeming protestants, to mask and
palliate their own treachery in religion, or at least to cover their own
lukewarmenes and cowardice, call this war ignominious and the persuasion
thereunto a Jesuitical doctrine, they do not, or will not see, that this is
to condemn those noble Kings and their acts, who shall make the whore
desolate and naked, and burn her with fire; Is not that a war undertaken for
religion sake, and for Christ's cause?

Let them therefore remember that there is great difference, between those
who are of the true religion, and those who only affirm, or think themselves
to be such, between those who know that they shall fight against the enemies
of Christ, and those who only pretend, or imagine this thing; between those
who are moved to war for the Popes, and Church of Romes sake, and those
who are moved thereto, for Christ's and their own safeties sake; between
those who receive the mark of the Beast, have his name: for it seems in
their meaning their Armies are called Catholic Armies, and themselves
Catholics, that is universals of their ruler the Pope, who is called the
Catholic or Universal Bishop; Isa. 63.19.
in many things Christ bears no rule over them, therefore they are not called
by his name, at least not rightly: yea between them that murder the Servants
of Christ, and those who bear the mark of the liueing God, follow and obey
him by rooting out his enemies to the glory of God, and the liberty of the
Church; lastly between them who are hereto allured by the Beast and false
Prophet, and gathered together by the spirits of Devils, working miracles; and
those who are commanded of God concerning the whore sitting on many waters;
Reward her, as she has rewarded you, double unto her double, etc. And if this
be as Deuteronomy. 7. yet Christ who is their leader does Reu. 19.11.14.
in righteousness judge and make war; they are no better to him then
cananites: and his Servants follow him upon white horses, clothed in fine
linen white, and clean. The blood therefore of these his enemies does not
defile them. Neither can any overcome him who overcomes the Kings, because he
is chap. 17.
the Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, and they that are with him are called
and chosen, and faithful. There is therefore no danger or cause why these
Servants of Christ should fear to fight, least they should be vanquished in
war, seeing unto them the Lord has Reu. 16.10 chap. 17.14. chap. 18.10.
chap. 19.18.
assured victory, and to their adversaries destruction. He that has promised
this thing is their Leader, and verse. 11.
he is called Faithful and true. He will surely do it. We have his word for
this thing. And 2. Tim. 2.13.
if we believe not, yet he abides faithful, he can not deny himself.

Those great Searchers therefore that weigh the power of the adversaries by
the strength of their humane forces and polecies, (wherein indeed they seem
to exceed us) are like the ten that searched Canaan, who dishartened the
people with a relation of the enemies strength; so far are they from Calebs
faith and courage, who saw as much, and yet said, Number. 13.28.
let us go up at once and posesse it. For though as Moses often said, they
were seven nations greater and mightier then Israel, yet he knew that God had
assured destruction to them, and victory to his people. Such men therefore may
do well to remember what Christ says, w Reu. 21.8.
the fearful and unbelieving shall have their part in the lake. They
consider not that God does commonly for his greater glory overcome the
greatest enemies by a power weaker in all humane reason then themselves. Joel
3.10.
Beat therefore your plow shares into swords, and your pruning hooks into
spears, let the weak say I am strong, as the Prophet wills; and let no man
withhold them from this war, fearing lest they should be defiled with blood,
or thinking the issue will be doubtful, and that therefore it would be better
to persuade to peace; which yet when he most would, he shall hardly long
obtain from them that are governed by the Pope. Howsoever (as Polibius says)
Polib. Hist. lib. 4. p. 300
If peace be just and honest, it is a worthy possession and most proffitable;
but if it be dishonorable and base, it is of all things most shameful and
pernicious. Now if we consider how the case has stood, and yet does with our
brethren the followers of Truth, yea and with the Truth it self, we will then
grant what one proves: B. Hall. Contemp. on David and Achish.
viz. that the true Servants of God are in their places, when they are in
opposition to his enemies. Profession of hostility becomes them better then
leauges of amity. And indeed while Protestants seek, or take peace of the
Soldiers of Antichrist, they both make them think it is fear of their
strength, and also so puff them up with conceit thereof, that as time serves
they will be the more desirous of war, and all occasions thereof. Yea, it
causes that while such a peace lasts, they will not cease to encroach,
demand, and obtain either by flatteries or threats, till they may by peace
get more to themselves and their religion, then they could have done by
war. Nor is it likely, that such will longer hold it, then their advantage
increases therein.

Neither is it always sufficient before God to say we desire peace;
espetiallie where it is quarrel enough against the^ that they have the mark
of the Beast, are the Soldiers of Antichrist, and members of the great whore,
whose destruction is commanded. For as a famous Divine says, B. Hall. Contemp.
on the Gibeonites.
He that calls himself the God of peace proclaims himself the God of hosts:
and not to fight where he has commanded is to break the peace with God,
whiles we nourish it with men. And who ever got by angring him to please
others? or by loosing his favor to get the momentarie, and uncertain
freindship of others? uncertain I call it, because God that has injury
thereby may therefore suffer it to be turned into deceit, hatred, and greater
damage. That which men do unjustly to prevent an evil, though it seem great
polecie, is by Gods just judgment often turned into a cause that bringes the
same evil upon them, as appears Genesis 11.4. Isa. 30.1.2.3. Ioh. 11.48. I know
that in many places, causes and times that place may verrie well be alleged;
If it be possible as much as in you lies, Romans 12.8.
live peaceably with all men. But when God would that the whore should be
burned, and that the seven Angels have begun to power out their vials full
of the wrath of God; yea when these things are already in their progress,
who is there, who if he be a true Protestant, and Servant of Christ will say
that this, or the like place is congruently alleged, between free Princes of
so contrary Religions? to hearken is at that time better then sacrifice, and
Christ to be heard, Mat. 16.24.25.26. Ioh. 12. If any man serve me, Ioh.
12.25.26.
let him follow me, and where I am there shall also my Servant be. If in war,
then with him, if in peace, then with him. When diverse Kingdoms forsook the
Beast and whore, to follow the Word, it was said, The Kingdoms of this world
are become the Kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ. Reu. 11.
Since that time Christ, and they that follow him have continually skirmished
against Antichrist and his followers, and should continue so doing, till Rome
and Antichrist should be destroyed, as is showed Revel. 14. chap. 15. chap. 16.
etc. And will Princes and States then that are his Leiftenants suffer the Beast
and his to recover or spoil any of these Kingdoms, either by force or fraud?
surely if they do, those Princes will condemn them, who with all their might
defend and extend the dominion of Antichrist: and so will they also who at the
Popes beck led great Armies to recover Palestina: and that though God in
Scripture require no such thing, but rather shows that it shall lie under the
curse till the restoration of the Jews: Reu. 11.15.
whereas he says the contrary of these Kingdoms.

And yet the Jesuits, Priests and other Papists go about with the firebrands
of error and sedition, that like Sampsons foxes they may at least spoil
these vines and garnaries which are Gods, and not, as his foxes did, the
enemies. Now they that are in authority may know if they will that Christ our
Can. 8.11.
Solomon had a vineard, he let it out unto keepers; and that therefore they
should think of that, chap. 2.15.
Take us the foxes, the little foxes that spoil the vines. Espetially seeing
their cunning Priests are such as the wonderworking dreamer, and false
Prophet, of whom God says, Deuteronomy. 13.8.9. and chap. 17.7.
Thou shall not consent unto him, nor hearken unto him, neither shall thine eye
pity him, neither shall thou conceal him. But thou shall surely kill him.
Number. 25.16.
Vex the Madianites, and smite them for they trouble you with their wiles:
Gal. 5.12.
I would they were cut off that trouble you. For these indeed are the rivers
and fountains, through which the waters of error, which come from the Romish
Sea, are conveyed into every corner of the Land to the destruction of Souls.
These fountains and rivers are also, as it were the dougs, by which that Sea
is nourished, as they by it. And indeed these are they that venture to convey
floods of those waters of error and treason into those Lands where Popery is
thrust out, hopeing thereby to bring people back from the obedience of their
Princes, and indeed of Christ himself unto the obedience of the Pope their
Master. For which they have been justly punished with death, as is signified
Reu. 16. The third Angel powered out his vial upon the rivers and fountains of
waters, and they became blood. Which vial was indeed powered out about the
year 1581. when in England, it was ordained by public authority, that all
they that should endeavor by any means to draw the minds of the subjects
from their obedience toward their lawful and natural Prince to the Pope, or
for that purpose should draw them to their religion, should be put to death as
traitors: the good example of which Edict was in some measure followed against
the Jesuits in other Kingdoms. And questionless this is that which is
signified by that vial. For indeed herein the Lord gave them blood to drink;
because they that brought these waters of Rome, brought them with the danger
of their lives; and therefore they were not only turned to blood to those that
sent them, nor only to blood in themselves being apprehended; but also if they
escaped a while to convey them, they were also turned into blood to those that
received them, as David said, of the water of Bethlehem, which the three
mighty men fetched him through the host of the Philistines; 2. Sam. 23.17.
is not this the blood of the men that went in Ieopardie of their lives? Thus
the righteous God gave the Priests, and Jesuits blood to drink, who as we
know have caused many good Christians to be killed by the Inquisition, and by
animating Popish Princes to make war against Protestants. This is that
therefore which the Angel of the waters says there, Thou art righteous, o
LORD, which art, and wast and shall be, because thou have judged thus: for they
have shed the blood of Saints and Prophets, and thou have given them blood to
drink, for they are worthy. If Gods Word say they be worthy, what Christian
will plead for them that such laws should not be executed on them? Will
they do the like by us?

And therefore they who profess themselves Protestants, should methinkes take
heed, that they do not so much as think that kind of justice to have been
to severe, and espetiallie that they dissuade not from the execution of such
laws, nor give reasons against them, least they be thereby found to help the
Beast, yea to charge God of injustice, and even to dispute against the holy
Ghost, who by the Angel says, they are worthy. Which that no man might once
doubt S. John says there, I heard another out of the Altar say, Even so Lord
God Almighty, true and righteous are thy judgments. Thus then at least the
Romish Clergy are worthy. And the rest have the name and mark of the Beast.
Many of them fight his battles, and have sought our destruction; yea have
slain many of our Brethren, and led many into captivity, as was foreshewed
Revel. 13.10. therefore that should be heard, and remembered which God there
says concerning every one of them, He that leads into captivity shall go
into captivity: Reu. 13.10.
he that kills with the sword must be killed with the sword. And indeed the
greater part of them have wished our destruction, or subjection by the sword,
if not contributed to the effecting thereof; and thereby have both made
themselves guilty, and also given us assured testimony that this Scripture
must shortly be fulfilled in requital of those slaughters, and other
disasters wrought by them. And all of them are members of that great Whore,
which sits on many waters, and therefore are such as those of whom it is
said, Thou shall not seek their peace, Deuteronomy. 23.6.
nor their good all thy days for ever. God has said of the Whore sitting on
many wate s, Reward her as she has rewarded you, Reu. 18.6.
and double unto her double according to her works: in the cup which she has
filled, fill to her double, etc. and though he has hereby principally designed
the City of Rome; yet the City, or Woman is also to be considered as she
sits on many waters, which are peoples, and multitudes and Nations. For
whereas it is said, The tenth part of the City fell; he does not mean of
Rome, as she sits on seven mountains, but on many waters. From those
days, or rather from the time when the Kingdoms of this World are become the
Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ; the Whore and Antichrist with her have
been as a rotten, or ruinous house ready to fall.

But the Jesuits and Priests have obtained great props to uphold her; which
indeed are great Kings, and Princes espetially the King of Spain; and house
of Austria: Now that Protestant Prince which seeks to weaken these props,
and pillars by an honorable war, (as of late that noble Queen Elizabeth
did) he without doubt does a work verrie acceptable to God, as tending to the
Ruin of Rome and of Antichrist, who otherwise can not be overthrown: but if he
spare the props, or strengthen them, although he vainly hope thereby to
strengthen himself (as they did Isai. 30.2.) among whom will Christ our
Captain, and Judge find him? seeing he says, Mat. 12.30.
He that is not with me is against me, and he that gathers not with me
scatters; August. de peccator. meritis 18.
and as Augustine says, Nec est vlli vllus medius locus, vt posset esse nisi
cum Diabolo, qui non est cum Christo. Neither is there any middle place for any
man, that he can be with any other then the Devil, who is not with Christ. We
must not therefore do such a thing under the wilful hope of doing God the
better service, as to his exceeding loss Saul did 1. Sam. 15. and likewise
Ahab 1. King. 20.28.42. so dangerous a thing it is for a man to make himself
wiser then God. It is not therefore so small a matter to neglect the
commandment of God, and all the good that may come of this obedience, under
every pretense.

But peradventure they who are otherwise affected will say, if to neglect this
cause may be imputed to some for a fault; nevertheless there is no such danger
in it, if we remember that Christ died for Sinners. Saint Paul will answer
them, That he died for all, 2. Cor. 5.15.
that they which live, should not hence forth live unto themselves, but unto
him which died for them, and rose again; and that must needs be, that as they
should therefore live unto him in other things, so in this also; especially in
such times as these, when the injuries done unto the Church, and even to the
Truth himself, seem to require it of all that any way can give help. We
must not think that the members of Christ, who profess and follow the Truth
must always suffer under Antichrist, and his adherents; much less Christ
himself, who is the Truth. For as we may see Christ did many years ago
begin to conquer, chap. 11.13.
when the tenth part of the city fell, and the everlasting Gospel was
already begun to be preached. For of those times it is said, fear God, and
give glory to him, for the hour of his judgment is come; Reu. 14.6.
If it were come then in the time of Luther and Calvin, how much more in these
our days who live so many years after them? Let noe man now put off the time
of judgment, seeing also of those times it is said for Gods honor, our
comfort and their terror, Thou have taken unto thee thy great power, chap.
11.17.18.
and have reigned. And the nations were angry, and thy wrath is come, and the
time of the dead that they should be judged, (or revenged) and that thou
should give reward unto thy Servants the Prophets, and to the Saints, and to
them that fear thy name, small, and great, and should destroy them which
destroy (or corrupt) the earth. verse. 19.
Then the Temple of God was opened; and the seven Angels come out with their
vials full of the wrath of God, as is showed chap. 15. where see chap. 15.5.6.
you may see that he comes again to this verrie time of the Temples opening,
(mentioned chap. 11.) to show what should presently follow; and that the
judging and destroying mentioned chap. 11.18. is meant of these seven vials
full of the wrath of God, and which are the last plauges inflicted on
Antichrist and his followers, and other wicked men: and consequently that from
that time forward, Christ does maintain war against the whore, and
Antichrist; and that not spiritually only, by the word, but even with the
verrie svvords of Princes, as may appear from chap. 16. in diverse of those
seven plauges, also chap. 17. verse. 16. where the Kings destroy Rome, which
must needs be one of the 7 plauges, because these seven are the last
plauges: it has therefore seems to many to be the sift, because that is
poured on the throne or seat of the Beast, which is Rome; and yet the war
is still continued, chap. 19. where we see that the armies called against
Antichrist are said to follow Christ, chap. 19.
who is their Leader, or General.

Is he then in the field, and are we affraide to follovv him? or do we
think that all the war is for a Kingdom not vvorth the labor? or where
the General being victour does divide no spoil among his followers? If it
were so; yet methinkes when Christ Jesus is the General, there should want
no followers. The Popes Kingdom is of this world, and therefore his
followers fight for him, because he gives them temporal rewards, and
promises spiritual, though indeed he can not perform promise. Christ's
Kingdom is not of this world, therefore men fight not for him; Ioh. 18.36.
as he says, My Kingdom is not of this world: if my Kingdom were of this
world, then would my Servants fight. This he spoke when he was to suffer, and
did not desire that any should fight to rescue him. But now (as you have
seen) he is to subdue enemies by the sword, and therefore looks for followers
to fight, though his Kingdom be not of this World. Yet besides spiritual
honors and blessings, our Savior and General offers great temporalites to
his followers, when he says, Reu. 17.16.
they shall eat her flesh; that is indeed her riches and revenues: and
again, Come and gather your selves together unto the supper of the great God
(viz. unto a feast, that he should make them, as Isa. 25.9.) Chap. 19.17 18.
That ye may eat the flesh of Kings, and the flesh of Captains, and the flesh
of mighty men; etc. that is indeed to take their riches, pofessions and
revenues. Howsoever; the time being come, it will not suffice to say, we are
like to have no pay; Reu. 18.1.
or we have not yet had any such special commandment to go forth. For
without doubt those places of an Verse. 4.
Angel descending from heaven, of a Chap. 19.
voice from heaven; of an Chap. 14.
Angel standing in the Sun, are not to be taken literallie: but in those
places is signified the voice of God in some Princes, Ministers, or others
standing in the light and confidence of the truth: to these other Servants of
Christ hearken, and are hereby said, Chap. 17.14.
to follow the Lamb withersoeuer he goes; and to be truly Ioh. de Rada. par.
2. Theol. controu. inter Scotum, and Tho. cont. 20 act. 2. conclus. 6. Parcl.
de potest. Pap. cap. 41. p. 341.
called, and chosen and faithful. The Papists boldly teach that,f Lice:
praeceptum Praelati sit irrationale, and pro tale merito quand^que haberi
potest, tenetur tamen subditus illud obseruare: though the commandment of the
superior be unreasonable, and may well enough be thought to be so, yet the
inferior is bound to obey it: that men are bound, Papae sententiam exequi, to
put the Popes sentence in execution. And so we perceive the Jesuits and
Pre^sts to go forth, persuading Princes and people by diverse means to root
out the Protestants; and we see them laboring what they can to do so; so
truly do they worship the beast, and his Image: and shall they then that are
Christ's, and pretend to love him, be more afraid to do the commandments of
God in rooting out them? espetially seeing that harlot is the common
destruction of souls. There is no fear in love, 1. Ioh. 4.18.
but perfect love casts out fear: he that fears is not made perfect in
love. Why then should they fear? Do they think that Christ will without
their labor revenge them? he can indeed, but his purpose is not so to do,
seeing he says to them of the whore, which sits on many waters, Reward her,
as she has rewarded you, fill her double, etc. Reu. 18. Number. 25.17
As of old he said, Vex the Midianites, and smite them: for they vex you
with their wiles. Ioh. 13.17.
And as he says, If ye know these things, happy are ye, if ye do them. O
daughter of Babylon who art to be destroyed: happy shall he be that rewards
thee as thou have served us. Psa. 137. Ioh. 14.24.
But as he says, He that loves me not keeps not my sayings. If therefore
these things be not done, let us not lay the fault on God; but rather say
unto him, Psalm. 60.4.5
as psa. 60. Thou have given a banner to them that fear thee, that it may be
displaied because of the truth. That thy beloved may be delivered. psa. 68.1.
Let God arise, let his enemies be scattered. The comfort is here, as Psa. 110.
The people shall be willing in the day of thy power. Psa. 110.3.
Faithful is he that has promised, who will also do it. And though we have
not believed, 2. Tsm. 2.13
yet he abides faithful, he can not deny himself. These things are indeed
to be more espetiallie considered in these last times of Antichrist, wherein
we see or hear that our brethren have been in many places led captive and
slain, Reu. 13.10.
as was prophesied Reu. 13.10. and that therefore we are to expect with
confidence that recompense which for our comfort is there assured to the
adversaries. Here is the patience, and the faith of the Saints.

FINIS.

