A REPLY TO A notorious Libell Jntituled A BRIEF APOLOGY or defense of the
Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, etc. Wherein sufficient matter is discovered to give
all men satisfaction, who lend both their ears to the question in controversy
between the Jesuits and their adherents on the one part, and the Saecular
Priests defamed by them on the other part.

Whereunto is also adjoined an answer to the Appendix.

PSALM. 26. Mentita est iniquitas sibi.

Imprinted Anno 1603.

THE PREFACE to the Reader.
VBi non est sepes (says Ecclesiasticus) Cap. 36.
diripietur possessio. In such times we do live (courteous Reader) as no care
can be too much, no diligence too great, to preserve that little, which we have,
or are, from ruin, and rapine of the evil disposed mighty. How intolerable
the injuries were, which some Priests once sustained, and afterward freely
forgave, the whole world is now a witness, and cannot but see, how untimely
these stirs were revived by the Jesuits, and the Archpr. after that peace was
concluded between them. Other judges, then the whole world, the Priests would
have had, as appears by a letter of theirs to the Archpr. in their book
dedicated to the Inquisition pa. 61. but their humble petition was said to be a
tumultuous presumption, and would not be heard. They foreshewed what danger
would grow by his denial of a home-conference, but that did nothing move him.
They declared that they stood in such terms for their good name, and fame, as
they must either live in perpetual infamy, or use their pens in their own
defense: the first no way fitting their calling, and present state: the second
very dangerous to both parts: it being very probable, that an Apology would
draw on an Answer: the Answer, a Reply: and that Reply not likely to be the
last, howsoever lost labor. But neither could this persuasion purchase any
peace, or procure, that the Controversy might be determined at home among
themselves. One way more did the Priests assay to stay the outrage of the
Jesuits and Archpr. and that was to send to the University of Paris, for their
opinion in the matters in question, which was no sooner seen by the Archpr.
and Jesuits, but an Edict made, ^9 Maij 1600.
and diuulged in condemnation of their censure and great penalties threatened
against those, who should either directly or indirectly maintain, or defend it
in word, or in writing, whether it were truly given, or forged (mark I pray
you this spirit) whether upon true information, or otherwise, as being
prejudicial to the Sea Apostolic, etc.

This headdie proceeding, and disclaiming, or rather condemning all trial (but
a self will, and a dangerous obstinacy in the Archpr. and Jesuits) compelled
the Priests to advise upon some other course: in which consult, they resolved
to appeal to the Sea Apostolic: and the better to prevent such blocks, as
were before laid in their way upon the like attempt, they published certain
books: some in English to satisfy such of our own Country, as were
misinformed by the one part, and were not suffered to have any speech with the
other: some in Latin, that the cause coming to trial, might not be heard
with that prejudice, which false informations had before wrought, and would not
now be wanting.

Against two of these books there is an Apology lately come forth, to wit,
against the Latin book which is dedicated to his Holiness, and entitled:
Declaratio motuum etc. and again an English book entitled, The Copies of
certain discourses. And at the end of this Apology there is an Appendix,
wherein two other books are shrewdly threatened: the one in English, which was
written in reply to a letter of the Archpriest, to his assistants, concerning
the other books, and is entitled, The hope of peace: the other in Latin,
which was dedicated to the Inquisition: and has this title, Relatio
compendiosa, etc. It is a world to see what shifting there is in this Apology,
when a difficulty occurreth to be answered: what iugling, to have the matter
on the Priests side seem odious: what haste a second untruth makes to
overtake a former, which through the Authors fault only had gotten the start:
how many rotten points there are, by which one story is made to hang under
another: what singular devotion, and extraordinary charity is expressed in the
most vile, and bitter terms, that either malice, or madness could devise: as,
The Epist. to his Hol.
Children of iniquity, Apol. cap. 1. fol. 5.
Libertines, etc. and how true that sentence is in this Author: In oculis suis
lachrymatur inimicus, and si inuenerit tempus non satiabitur sanguine: Ecclus
cap. 12.
The enemy has water in his eyes: but if the time serve him, it is not blood
will satiate him. And this other also: Caput suu^ mouebit, and plaudet manu,
etc. He will shake his head, and clap his hands: He will seem to lament the
course which is taken, and in the midst of his sorrow he shows by one, or
other impertinent ridiculous matter, how glad he is of any little occasion to
sport himself at the griefs of other men. Yet notwithstanding this so gross
kind of dealing, as any man, who is not ouer-partiall, might enter into it, the
applause of the ignorant (who will not either read the books which the
Priests set out, or examine what is boldly, although most untruly, aduouched
in this Apology) demands an answer, which although M. Doctor Ely, and M.
John Collington have largely and learnedly given to the most principal points
therein handled, yet upon the earnest desire of some, who have seen this reply
in my hands, I emboldened my self without the Authors priuitie to publish it,
referring the Reader, for more satisfaction in this present controversy, unto
their labors.

The last years BREVE of the 17. of August would have cast some doubt into me,
whether I might have attempted thus much, had not the Archpr. after a quarters
meditation, or more thereon, published the Apology, and immediately after an
Appendix unto it. And if an uncontrolled custom may have the credit to be the
best interpreter of a Law, my fear is much lessened by the breaking out of
another pair of books from the same Authors since that time: In which while
they endeavor to manifest the bad spirits of other men, they discover their
own, by such terms, as ill beseem their profession, and pay doubly some one
man's debt, to which they would falsely, and against their own knowledge
persuade the Reader, that all the other Priests were liable: and if no
benefit rise by this present discourse to the Reader, yet will it be another
(although a needless) witness against the wilful blind, whom the holy
Ghost rebukes by the Psalmist in these words: Noluit intelligere vt been
ageret: He would not understand that thereby he might do as he ought to do.

Yours all that he is, A. P.

A Reply to a certain Libell, lately published in Print in the name of the
united Priests, called A brief Apology, supposed to be made by F. Parsons.
CHAP. 1. How the Author of the Apology plays at All hid, with the Reader,
and while he is covered under the name of united Priests, he discovers
himself to be a Jesuit.
IT might seem a very frivolous labor, to examine the title of this Apology,
if the Author thereof had not been more curious in the like, then there was
just cause, and over careless also what entrance he made to this present
work of his untruths, and poor shifts, when impertinent discourses do
suffer him to fall into the matter in question, which as at other times, so
here in the very title he peruerteth, and possesses his Reader, that an
Ecclesiastical Hierarchy erected by his Holiness, was impugned by the books
against which he writes, and for his pleasure terms (although most
ignorantly) Libels: their Authors being always ready to justify them both
before God and the world. And if his Reader might be so much favored by him,
as that he might have his leave to peruse those books, he would soon
perceive, how falsely this title is set to this Apology: the books entreating
only of the abuses of the authority, and of the just causes of the Priests
their forbearance, to subject themselves to a superior of the Card. Caietans
appointing, before any letters came from the Sea Apostolic, either in
confirmation thereof: or to show that the Cardinal had any such authority, or
commandment from his Holiness, to erect any such Hierarchy. This Apology is
said to be written, and set forth for the true information and stay of all
good Catholics, by Priests united in due subordination to the right reverend
Archpriest, and other their superiors. As though those, who had appealed from
the Archpriest upon just cause, did not remain in due subordination to him,
and other their superiors to whom they had appealed. But to let this calumny
pass: there has been inquity made of many, who are the men here meant by
these words: Priests united, etc. and as yet we cannot hear of any, who were
privy to the writing of it, or setting it forth. Some there are, who confess,
that their consents were asked to the setting forth of some book in their
names, the contents whereof they were not to know at that time: and of most
likelihood it was to the setting out of this book: but they denied to give
their consents thereunto. Many suspect that this Apology was not written by
those Priests, which are here made to father it: but rather by those, who have
always made their commodity by the disunion of the Priests. And although it
go forth in the name of many: it is very probable, that it was made by some one
man. For whereas one man setting out a book may use his phrase in the plural
number, when he speaks of himself: we suppose: or, we say: it is seldom in
use, that many joined together, do use in the like the singular number: as I
pray you: I suppose, which here we read in the Preface I shall, in the first
chapter: I think, I say, in the third Chapter: and in the sixth chapter I omit.
(...)
But to let this also pass: there are no weak conjectures, that this Apology
was made by some Jesuit, who bewrayed himself, before he was aware, as may be
seen in the 8. chapter of the Apology Fol. 180. where the author has these
words: Where about they ask this question concerning us, why should they be
unwilling to procure, etc. Copy (...).
And if any man will take the pains to turn to that place cited by these
Authors, he shall find, that the question was asked concerning no other then
Jesuits, and consequently, that out of this place of the Apology, there is
just cause to take them for the Authors. (...)
An other conjecture there is, that Fa Parsons in particular is the author of
this Apology: because in the common opinion of many, who have read his style,
this is so like unto it, as it would be hard for any man to imitate it so
nearly, without the very same gift which he has. And the number of letters,
and such as they are, do almost convince, that it is his doing For what
occasion had any Priests here in England to enter into so many impertinent
matters to their state and profession, as are here by manuscripts testified,
which probably were not to be gotten, by the first of July after the
publication of the books, he undertakes to answer. And F. Garnet the head of
the Jesuits did almost discover as much in a letter of his of the last of July
Anno 1601. to a Saecular Priest: M. F. B.
wherein he told him, that the two printed books (against which this Apology is
written) should be (God willing) answered from Rome. Such as had read: Prou. 27.
Laudet te alienus, and non os tuum, Let an other man and not thine own mouth
praise thee, might doubt whether F Parsons would so grossly commend himself,
as here he is commended, were he not known to be one, who would not
willingly, that any mouth or pen, of which he has the government, should not
show forth his praises. Some other might doubt whether it were his doing,
because of the diverse Englishing of this sentence: Hebr. 13.
Obedite praepositis vestris, and subiaccte eis: which here is thus Englished:
Obey your Superiors and submit your selves unto them. And in his selfe-clawing
Wardword (wherein he discovers a piece of his disposition against some
Catholics) he translateth it thus: obey your Prelates and lie under them.
Perchance those who had the printing of this Apology, prefixed this sentence:
and we will imagine, that they, in recompense of his extraordinary
commendations of them, requited him in that, which he might blush to say of
himself: if at any time his undeserved praises may make him blush. There is an
other place of scripture taken out of the first to the These. cap. 5. Rogamus
vos fratres, corripite inquietos. We beseech you brethren, repress those that
are unquiet amongst you, which is apparently abused in this place, both by
false translation, and by being applied against Cathol. Priests: because when
they saw a thief, they did not run with him, but stood, and stand still, as
they are bound in conscience in the defense of their fame against those, who
most injuriously had taken it away in some places, and endeavored to do the
like service elsewhere if they could. It is set out permissu Superiorum: that
is, by permission of the Superiors: but as yet we cannot learn, what superiors
these are, having most humbly requested the Archpriest to give us satisfaction
herein, as may appear by a letter to him from M. Collington, not long after we
had a sight thereof.

It is very probable, that no superiors dare avouch it: for it contains the
most gross untruths, and idlest shifts, and those so hudling one upon another
(especially where the controversy in question is handled) that it is a very
hard matter to find a truth in it. And doubtless this permissu superiorum was
not set here to any other end, then that the Reader might see, how the Author
could lie by authority: which that it may appear more evident, I have drawn
out of the Apology some of such falsehoods as are convinced to be such in the
Apology it self, or otherwise publicly known to be such: without meddling
with those, which otherwise are to be proved as occasion shall serve. I have
also noted a few so apparent shifts, as no man of any judgment can choose but
find them, and be thoroughly satisfied how this game does go.

CHAP. 2. A note of some notorious falsehoods and shifts which are contained in
the Apology.
IN the title of this Apology, it is said to be written and set forth by the
Priests united in due subordination to the R R. Archpriest: which is proved to
be false, Cap. 8. Apol. fol. 108. where it is confessed, that these Authors
are those, concerning whom this question was asked in the English book
entitled, The Copies of discourses, page 5. why should they be so unwilling to
procure or suffer to be procured, etc. which question every man, who can
understand English, may see, that it was asked concerning not the secular
Priests, but the Jesuits: and consequently the Jesuits are to be taken for the
authors of this Apology, and not the united Priests, as here is said.

2 In the title of the Table of certain principal deceits, etc. he tells
his Reader, that it is a Table of principal deceits, etc. contained in two
Libels: which is proved to be false both by the eye, and by this which he
says himself in the latter end of the Table. As for the second book set out
and entitled, The copies of discourses, etc. we mean not to cite any thing
thereof in this place, etc.

3 In the Table number 5. he affirms, That the Priests did exercise Card.
Allen when he lived, as now they do other good men, he being opposite unto
them and their factious proceeding, especially against the fathers of the
society. And this also is a notorious falsehood: the Cardinal being never
opposite against the Priests or any their proceedings, how opposite soever he
might be against some other kind of proceedings of some beyond the seas:
neither was there any faction in England, against which he might oppose
himself, The Apology contradicted by M. Blackwels letter.
as may appear by the testimony of M. George Blackewell in his letters to
Card. Caietane in the year 1596. which was long after Card. Allen his death.
And the letter which is here cited in confirmation of Card. Allen his being
opposite to the Priests, does show no more opposition against the Priests then
against the Jesuits, as may be seen where it is Cap. 2. Apol. fol. 11.

4 Ibid. number. 6. it is said, that when the Jesuits were first sent into England
(which was in the year 1580. as appears Apol. fol. 181.) the Priests had but
one only Seminary, which is proved false Cap. 1. Apol. fol. 3. where it is
said that the latter began in the year 1578.

5 Ibid. number. 13. A very malicious imposture.
It is said that the good and quiet Cath. prisoners in Wisbich, are compared by
the Priests to Donatists, for that they retired themselves from the tumultuous
and scandalous life of the other, and put themselves under rule: which is
apparently false, as may be seen in the place quoted, where the Priests do
not only not accuse any of Donatisme, but show how F. Weston (of whom the
speech is principally in that place) by yielding to stand to arbitrament,
declared himself not to be Tyronius that Donatist.

6 Ibid. numb. 14. It is fathered upon the Priests, that they should say that
one in Wisbitch Castle fell out of his wits, by reason of opprobrious letters
written unto him: which is very false, as may be seen in the place quoted by
this Author. The Priests there do affirm, that one in Wisbich fell out of his
wits upon grief (which these Authors leave out) taken of certain letters
written, which were written by himself, and as he confessed sometime, that his
writing of them was such a corrosiue unto him, as he should never recover it:
and these words unto him are added by these fellows for their purpose, and for
a brave flourish, that they might the boldlier charge the Priests with a
falsehood.

7 Ibid. number. 16. He shifteth off the assertion of the Priests, that M.
Standish had given his name to be a Jesuit (which was a thing to be considered
of) he being the man, who was said to have solicited this subordination in the
name of the Secular Priests: and it is so also confessed in this Apol. Cap. 8.
fol. 98. A palpable shift.
The shifting of it is in this manner: All are Jesuits with these men, who are
not of their faction, the Archpriest and all. And thus he runs away with
the matter: which as is said, ought to be thought upon as much, as any thing
here handled, for the discovery how, and by whom this subordination was
wrought.

8 Ibid. number. 23. The Priests are charged to call the authority of their
superior instituted by Christ's vicar, a masking vizard, which is proved false
in the same place, where the Priests words are cited. For there (as any man
may see) they do only affirm, that the Jesuits thought to procure dominion to
them selves under the mask of another man's person, which is no impeachment to
authority, or immodestie against it: every man knowing, that such authority
as they do acknowledge most just, may be abused, and the man who has it, and
made no better then a masking vizard under which men go, and do many things
unseen and unknown.

9 In the list of principal persons that are iniuried, number. 11. it is said,
that the most Reverend Father in God the Bishop of Tricarica Nuntius to his
Holiness in Flaunders appointed viceprotector, and judge of English
Ecclesiastical affairs, is refused by the Priests: which is most false, as
their going unto him (long before this book was set out) will make evident, Ad
Clerum Anglicanum 8. de^mb. 1601.
and his letters do testify as much: and of their acknowledging of him in all
dutiful sort.

10 In the Epistle to his Holiness, number. 14. it is said, that the Priests had
obtained liberty for four under the Queens letters patents to ride up and
down, etc. which will appear evidently to be an egregious falsehood, if the
records be sought, upon which all such letters are to be kept at the L. Keepers
peril.

11 A whetstone.
In this place also is another notable falsehood, that few Catholics dared to
deny them money, lest they should detect them to the Counsel.

12 The Jesuits play at in and out as they list.
In the first Chapter of the Apol. fol. 2. this author affirms, that the
principal or only ground of this our present contention and scandalous
controversy, is an emulation partly of lay men against Priests, and partly of
Priests against religious men, especially the Fathers of the society. And in
the 11. Chap. fol. 161. he says, that the whole world knows that this
controversy is of Priests with the Archpriest: and that the stomach against
the Jesuits is for standing with the Archpriest. By which, besides the
contradiction, it appears how this poor man's memory does fail him, even in
the deciding between whom the controversy is, which he undertakes to
handle and determine.

13 In the same Chapter, fol. 6. and 7. the beginning of the association of
secular Priests is attributed to the Priests upon their coming into England, A
malicious devise for to discredit the association intended by the priests.
after they were frustrated of their designments by F. Parsons dealing at Rome:
whereas his coming to Rome was in the year 1597. and not before, as appears
in this place: and the association began in the year 1595. and F. Parsons was
told thereof before he came out of Spain for Rome.

14 Cap 3. fol. 20. The Jesuits care for pure stuff to make priests of.
The books which are set out by the Priests are said to be done by such, as
went over Seruingmen, Soldiers and wanderers: which is most apparently false,
if those were the authors which in the beginning of this Apology are held to
be.

15 Fol. 21. It is said, That the whole body, and name of Jesuits is
impugned: which is most false, as may appear in the book to the Inquisition,
page 5.

16 Cap. 6. fol. 27. D. Norden is said to have been stricken by God with a
strange accident of repressing his tongue by dumbness, until he died: which
is most false, he dying no more strangely then all persons use to die,
according to the manner as the sickness does take them. It is well known,
that he died of a Lethargy, and that he spoke many times after he was first
taken therewith, and died in all points as became a Catholic priest, as there
are many to witness, who were present.

17 Cap. 8. fol. 98. His Holiness is said to have resolved to yield to the
erecting of a government in England, upon a mature deliberation taken of
certain letters, which by the date there set down were written in England,
after that this government was erected. Confer them with the date of the
Card: Caietanes letters of the institution of the Archpriest, Martij 7. 1598.
and the first of these here cited, will be seen to have been written in England
about a month before.

18 Fol. 109. The falsehood which is laid to M. Blackewel in his proposing
false instructions, and affirming them to have been annexed to his Commission,
is shuffled over with an assertion, that his instructions came with his
letters, which no man ever doubted of: The exception was against those, which
were proposed for such, and were not such.

19 In the same leaf M. Blackewell his persisting in this error, that we could
not appeal from him to his Holiness, is shifted: first in this manner: We are
sure he did not say it, in the sense they take it. Secondly thus: Many men in
the world might say this in diverse cases, wherein Appeal is cut off by his
Holiness consent and order. A couple of good ieasts. The first is common to
that sort of people, to fly to secret senses, to justify any thing,
whatsoever passes them. And it were not altogether so intolerable, if they
would (under the pretense, that sometime men may aequiuocate, by the example of
our Savior, and other his saints) only use it to save themselves from being
taken, for such, as they are: but they will pleasure their friends with the
like, and be as ready to give a sense of other men's words, as their own: but
with this difference, that if they can possibly devise, how to draw other men's
words to an evil sense, they will peremptorily affirm, that those men spoke
their words in that sense. And this their frowardnes toward others is
sufficiently discovered, cap 2. Apol fol. 16. where the priests assertions,
that authority is not an infallible rule of truth: and that but one upon earth
is warranted from error, and not he in all things, are called in question by
this author upon some his imaginary senses. But in the late spritish
manifestation of spirits, cap. 1. he discovers himself egregiously in this
kind: where confessing that Statutes have been made, both by our ancient kings
of England, and by our protestant princes, by which they have forbidden
provisions from Rome of dignities, and Benefices, he tells his Reader very
peremptorily, that they (priests) do conspire and iumpe with the protestant:
and in a false, and heretical sense, object the statute of Praemunire. Which
also he would seem to prove, by giving a reason, why the old statutes were
made: as though neither the statute were to be interpreted, according to the
contents thereof (whatsoever was the cause of the making thereof) nor the
absolute provision of dignities from Rome forbidden: because the motive of that
statute was, to keep the treasure of England within the land; which was raised
by the benefices, at that time annexed to the dignities. But to make this his
cavil more plain: the dignity of a legate had no spiritual living annexed
unto it: and yet did those Catholic princes hold him, to have incurred the
penalty of the Statute of Praemunire, who would exercise a power Legantine in
England without the Sovereigns consent: as may appear by the answer of Card.
Wolsey, when they endighted him in a Praemunire upon those statutes,
constrained thereunto (says the history) to entitle the King to his goods and
possessions. John Stow, 21. Hen. 8.
My Lords judges, the Kings highness knows, whether I have offended his
Majesty or no, in using of my prerogative Legantine, for the which I am
indicted. I have the Kings license in my coffers under his hand and broad Scale,
for the exercising and using thereof in the most largest wise: the which are
now in the hands of my enemies. Therefore because I will not stand in question
with the King in his own cause, I will here presently confess before you the
indictment, and put me wholly to the mercy and grace of the King, trusting that
he has a conscience, and a discretion to consider the truth, and my humble
submission and obedience, wherein I might right well stand to the trial
thereof by justice, etc. By which it appears, that although his Majesty, who
then was, were moved by some of his counsel, infected with Luthers doctrine,
to condemn the Cardinal, for using his power Legantine: yet it is evident by
this, that when the King was most Catholic, and the Cardinal also, the
Cardinal would not exercise his authority Legantine, without the Kings
license, and the King gave it to him under his hand and broad Seal: which
conuinceth, that whatsoever was the motive of making those statutes, all
provisions of dignities from Rome were forbidden, and not those only which had
temporal livings annexed unto them. And hereby also may it be seen, how ready
these fellows are to interpret other men's words in the worst sense, which
they may, and affirm most peremptorily, that the speakers or writers had those
senses, which it most pleased their adversaries to give them. And thus much for
this point. Only this is to be added, that although this new manifester of
spirits has in this place recanted somewhat of his rashness, uttered in the
Apol. cap. 2. fol. 15. concerning the chief purpose of those statutes of
Praemunire, yet he has left somewhat in this manifestation of spirits, which
he must in some other place recant, or show himself a very obstinate impostor:
that is, concerning the time of the enacting those Statutes, which were long
before the time, in which he here says they were made, as may appear by the
book of Statutes.

The second shift is as apparent, as this. For although many men in the world
may say as much as the Archpriest said in diverse cases, wherein Appeal is cut
off by his Holiness consent and order: yet no man in the world, who professes
to be a Catholic, will say it, and stand peremptorily in it, without some
warrant by this clause in their Commission, appellatione remota, or to that
effect: which is not to be found in the Commission which M. Blackwell had, as
may appear to those, who will read over the Cardinal Caietane his letters:
by which he made him an Archpr and Superior over the Seminary priests residing
in England and Scotland.

20 Cap. 9. fol. 123. There are letters of the 18. of March 1598. from
Flanders, brought out against the two Priests, that went from England to Rome,
about an authority not then known in England: as by the date of the letters
of institution, it may be evidently gathered, which was at Rome 7. Martij 1598.

21 Fol. 125. 126. 127. There are letters brought out to prove, that his
Holiness was provoked by them to imprison the two priests: whereas the date of
the first of them is, after the date of F. Bellarmine (now Cardinal) his
letter to F. Parsons, wherein he signified, that his Holiness had that
resolution, if they came to Ferrara; for his letter bears date the 17. of
October 1598. as appears fol. 120. Apol. and the first of the other letters
are from Doway 25. Octobr. 1598. as appears fol. 125.

22 Fol. 132. A most audacious imposture.
It is said that M. Charnocke said, and swore before, that their only coming
was to supplicate, etc. whereas there is no such matter said, or sworn by M.
Charnocke, as may appear fol. 129. where his oath is put down without this
word only, which is here thrust in by the author for his purpose.

23 Fol. 128. F. Parsons exhortations were the students only informations.
The whole English College is said to have known, what passed at Rome in this
matter, when the two priests were there deteyned prisoners, which (no one being
present at any thing, which passed) is a most gross and impudent imposture.

24 Cap. 10. fol. 141. It is affirmed, That the two Priests who were deteyned
as prisoners at Rome, were presently set at liberty upon the sight of the
Breue, and assurance, that neither they nor any of their side in England would
ever stir more in these affairs. Which may evidently appear to be most
false: for the Breue was brought unto them within two or three days after the
date thereof, which is 6. Aprilis: and the whole College will witness, that
one of them was not set at liberty, until the 6. of May following: although
the other had this liberty upon the 22. of April.

25 Fol. 143. A marucilous presumption of the blind reader his dullness.
There is very good use made of the false dating of the Breue, which is known
to have been upon the sixth of April 1599. and not long before, that is fol.
140. it is twice so cited. Yet here, for the credit of F. Parsons, the Reader
must take the Breue to bear date the 21. of the said month.

26 Fol. 154. This Author should have showed what means M. Char. had to live
in Lorraine.
It is said, that M. Charnock being at Paris, it was there resolved that he
should go into England under pretense of lack of means to live abroad: and
that only for fashions sake he should advise Card. Burghesius: which is very
false, as the principal of our Nation then living in Lorayne can testify: M.
Charnock having been there almost a year, and never received any thing from
them, who confined him there, nor from England, notwithstanding he had written
diverse times, both to Rome, and into England for some maintenance as some of
them have testified in their letters to the Archpr. dated the 11. of April
1600. from Liuerdune.

27 Fol. 168. A shameless disse^ling of the cause of these present controversies.
This Author inueigheth bitterly against the priests: and would have his Reader
most ridiculously to think that the priests had no just cause to stir, as
now they do, but that they took occasion (as he says) upon an angry
Epistle of the Archpriests unto them, and most impudently quoteth a place in
the priests book to his Holilines, page 62. where his Reader may see, that the
contents of that Epistle was a publication that they were schismatiks, and that
he had received such a resolution from Rome, which we leave to any indifferent
man to judge, whether it was a just cause for the priests to stir for the
purging themselves of this wicked slander.

28 Fol. 177. This Author boldly demands touching the two priests who were
imprisoned at Rome, among other questions (all which will be answered in their
places) had they not license after all examinations made to go and speak with
his Holiness if they would? Whereas all the English Nation then in Rome will
testify, that they were kept close prisoners long after their examinations
were made, and the one not dismissed out of prison, until two days after that
the other was departed from Rome: by which it appears, that they were not
together at liberty after their first imprisonment, nor licensed to go to
speak with his Hol.

29 Cap. 13. fol. 201. It is affirmed that M. Bensted was pursued so narrowly
up and down London, soon after conference with D. Bagshaw, as he was taken
near the Tower, and soon after made away, in recompense of this his
contradiction to the D. A most malicious suggestion.
For so good friends (says this fellow in this place) are the persecutors unto
them, as none that dissent, or disagree from them shall find any favor. And
to make this Narration seem the more probable, the priest himself is brought
in, as a witness hereof by a latter letter. But this falsehood is so notorious,
and known to be so great, and so wicked, as the spreaders of this libell
blotted it out in some books themselves, and pasted thereon a piece of paper,
as if they had been ashamed thereof. Yet did they let many books pass
uncorrected perchance to such, as they presumed would believe any thing they
said, without further examination. And to make some kind of recompense for
this their wickedness, they have set a few lines at the end of their Appendix
to the Apology: but indeed they have committed a greater wickedness by
iterating the accusation in this manner. A new found means to defame men.
Moreover in the Apology pa. 201. the Reader is to omit the 9. lines
immediately following these words, Thus far wrote that good priest, etc. for
that something is therein mistaken through the mistaken date of one of M.
Bensteds letters, whereby a former letter of his was taken for a later. His
first apprehension was verily thought to proceed of treachery, upon some free
speeches of his with some malcontents: but his second taking which hapened at
Lincoln, seems to have been by a mere chance after his breach from Wisbich,
and soon after he was put to death. What man of judgment will not discover a
notorious malice in this author: who would so peremptorily affirm, that M.
Bensted did testify by a later letter, that he was taken, and soon after made
away in recompense of this his contradiction: and afterward seem to salve it
with a mistaken date of a letter: as though the letter bearing this or that
date could deceive the Reader in a matter of so great weight.

30 A most gross slip.
Cap. 13 fol. 207. It is said, how that as soon as ever the priests
understood, that their two messengers were restrained in Rome, and not like to
prevail: then D. Bagshaw was sent for from Wisbich to London to treat with
the Council, etc. which cannot but be a very shameless untruth, all England
knowing that he was sent for up not long after Michaelmas about Squires Spanish
treasons: and it is well known that the priests were not restrained in Rome
until the 11. of December, as is confessed in the Apology, cap. 9 fol. 121.

By these few his Reader may see, how bold a face he has to prefixe in the
beginning of his Apology this saying of S. Augustine: Do you know to
distingui^ between true, and false; between solid, and puffed up; between
turbulent, and quiet; between swelling, and sound; between probations, and
criminations; between instructions, and fictions; between handling the cause,
and running from the cause? If you know this: well, and good: if you know it
not, we are not sorry that we have had this care to instruct you. For albeit
your heart be not turned to peace, yet our peace returns to us. Yet to make
some flourish in this kind, and that his Reader should be possessed with a
conceit of an infinite heap of slanders, calumniations, and contumelious
speeches pretended to be used in the books against which he writes, he gives
him a taste (as he says) in some few places taken out of the books, as they
do lie, by way of a Table: which he intituleth in this manner.

CHAP. 3. An answer to those calumniations which the Apologie-maker sets
out in a Table entitled, Of certain principal deceites, falsehoods and
slanders.
PArturiunt Montes: who does not expect some very great wonder? Who having but
one ear, or a credulous head, would not at this first encounter take the
Priests for no other, then strange monsters? But alas how will this good man
blush (if he be not past shame) when it shall be discovered, how little worth the
noting, he brings forth any thing, but the fruit of an idle and distempered
brain? of which in these few words he has given a sufficient argument,
knowing that this Table is not of deceites contained in the two books (as he
promises) but only in one, and so tells his Reader at the end of the
Table: That he means not to cite any thing of the other, for breuities sake.
But mark I pray you, what deceites, falsehoods, and slanders are here set down
for principal: and by those you may guess what he would say, if he might.

Out of the latin book dedicated to his Holiness, page 1. he has found no
less, then five or six deceites, shifts, and falshoodes. But if you will
know what they are, you must go look in the xj. Chap. of the Apology, where
we have also discovered his exceptions to be no other, then five or six fond
calumniations. He would not tell you here, what they were, either because he
would not so soon discredit himself: or else because (imitating Painters
throughout all this work, as well as Poets) the top of his Table shall present
nothing to his Reader.

In the second page, as he says, where the priests complain of the
persecution of the one side, and their oppression on the other side, he finds
great fault, or promises to prove, that few of them have been wounded or put
to death, but rather cherished, to make an opposition against the whole body.
He cites cap. 10, 11, 12, and 13. But if there should be a recital made of
such, as have been put to death, and the priests named, there would very few be
found, that have favored the proceedings of the Jesuits. And if any priests
have lately found more favor, then either themselves, or other heretofore have
had, it has been (as I suppose) in regard that the Council has lately
perceived a difference of priests from Statists: and what indignities the
priests have, and do daily suffer, because they will not run the lesuits
courses, but oppose themselves rather against their falsehood, with all due
respect to the whole body of which they are members: and the contrary is not
showed in this Apology, either in the 10, 11, 12, or 13. Chapter. For in the
tenth there are only a few foolish conjectures, that M. Doct. Bagshaw wrought
some matters with the Council (when he was sent for up to London to his
answer about the treason wrought by Squier, being by him charged therewith at
Fa. Walpole the Jesuits direction in Spain.) In the 11. Chapter there is
scarce one word to this purpose. In the 12. there is a bare assertion, as there
is here in some four or five lines. In the 13. chapter this author indeed
inlargeth himself upon this matter, and is emboldened upon a letter of M. Th.
Bluet, which by the contents seems not to be his: Bluet being therein named
among others, and altogether spoken of in the third person, not in the first,
as Englishmen use to speak, when they mention any thing concerning themselves
and others jointly. As for example our phrase is, we shall be, not, they shall
be, if the writer be one himself. And to say that he used such a phrase, to
cover himself, is too gross: for if he would have covered himself, he would
not have set his name down at the end of the letter, Yours Thomas Bluet. But
of this we will say no more until we come to answer the 13. Chapter of the
Apology, when it shall be further examined. The second demonstration which
this Apology makes of deceit, falsehood and slander, is out of this same place
cited. And as for their oppression (says he) it is none, but such as they list
to imagine, when they cannot have their own licentious will in all things.
What the oppression is, I leave it to any indifferent man to judge, when
Catholic priests, leaving all other liuelihoods, which either in England they
might have had, before they took upon them this state of life, or otherwise
out of England, as many have at this day, in requital of many years hazard of
their lives to save men's souls, without any Ecclesiastical living, or other
means for their maintenance, then the charity of such, to whom they minister
the Sacraments, are turned out to go pick sallets: and all Catholics, who
will be accounted pious and zealous, are forbidden their company, unless the
priests will yield to their own most unjust diffamations, and damn their own
souls in following the licentious will of the Jesuits, and Archpr. who would
have them to accuse themselves, that they have lived, and ministered the
Sacraments in schism. And if any thing be brought in the 1.5.6. or 7. chapter
as here is promised contrary to this, it shall be convinced of deceit, falsehood
or slander.

Out of the fourth page in the Latin book, there is deceit, falsehood, or
slander, proved in these words: Cogimur, etc. We are forced to fly to the feet
of his Holiness, etc. But this matter is sufficiently answered by the Priests
presence in Rome: which was with as much speed as conveniently they could make.
And if they had never gone, their sending of this book to his Holiness would
justify as much, as is here set down, by them: and if (notwithstanding those
means which the priests did use) their appellation, and consequently this
book, wherein the appellation is, never came to his Holiness, it is made more
evident, how necessary the printing of these books was, that some one by one
means or other, might by good chance light into his Holiness hands. And by this
is answer made to the next place, taken out of the 5. page, where this deceit,
falsehood, and slander is found. Haecautem, etc. We are forced to diuulge these
things in print, where diverse other causes are also given of the printing. And
to this purpose there was the last year a little book printed at Paris, and
dedicated to the Nuntius there residing, entitled, Rations redditae
proimpressione, etc.

Out of the 6. page, where there is no one word spoken of Card. Allen, but how
he was a common father to all the Priests, and how by his wisdom he kept all
things in quiet, there is gathered by this Author a certain principal deceit,
falsehood, or slander, which is proved because he was opposite unto the Priests
and their factious proceeding, especially against the Fathers of the society,
as by his own letters appears a little before his death, etc. See Apol. cap.
4. and 7. See the finenesse of this fellows wit, how he can discover a
deceit, falsehood, or slander. The priests do not say in that place, that he
was either with them or against them, or with the Fathers or against them: but
only make a plain narration of his wisdom, and the reverence which all did
bear unto him. And as for the 4. Chap. (to which we are here referred) there
is nothing of Card. Allen his writing concerning our matters, neither could
there well be, he being dead before these begun. In the 7. Chap. there is a
certain remembrance of a letter of his to M. Mush, which for so much of it, as
is set down in the second Chapter, it condemns the priests no more, then the
Jesuits: between whom belike he had heard there was some private questions:
of which, what his judgment was, it is very well known to some, and has
been confessed by other: namely Doct. Haddocke, that the Card. before his
death had such disgust of the Jesuits their actions, as this good Doctor being
told by M. Charnocke what was reported in England to have proceeded from a
Jesuit, took upon him perchance to save then the Jesuits credit (for now
they say he denies it again) that it was he himself who had used these
words after the Cardinals death. He is well dead, for if he had lived, he had
greatly dishonored himself and his country.

In the 7. page, there is a principal deceit, falsehood, or slander, noted in
these words: Desudantibus, etc. While Seminary Priests did sweat in the harvest
of England, which harvest was then well manured, and almost ripe, some Jesuits
were called in by Doct. Allen to help them, etc. But what are these falsehoods?
and how are they proved? Forsooth, for first (says this good fellow) how well
manured and ripe the English Cath. harvest was 22. years ago, when the
Jesuits were first sent, there being then but few Priests in England, as having
had but one only Seminary until that time, and few known Catholics, also
in respect of the number, that after had ensued, this we say, is known to all
men that understood our case.

We are not here to stand upon the increase of Catholics, which has been
within these 22. years: for no doubt there have been more known, then were
before. And if the Jesuits will take it upon them, that they have been greater
encreasers of Catholics then the Secular priests, they will discover in
themselves too much both falsehood and vanity. And as for the exception which
is taken against that which is said of the good manuring of the harvest in
England, and that it was almost ripe before the Jesuits came in, he might as
well have taken exception, and proved falsehood and vanity in our Savior his
words, when he said, Io^ 4.
Leuate oculos vestros, and videte regiones, quia albae suntiam ad messem, etc.
Lift up your eyes, and behold the country, how ready it is now for harvest.
And this was spoken by Christ only upon the disposition which he saw in the
Samaritanes to receive his doctrine. And as the number of Priests was not so
great as now it is, so was it not so small as this fellow would it should be
thought, and both the Priests and laity had suffered long before the Jesuits
set foot into England: and there was perchance more true and sincere religion
in the least household, then now is in a wider compass, what fair shows
soever are outwardly made to delude the world. And whereas it is here said,
that when the Jesuits came into England, there was but one only Seminary, it
is as false as the other was foolish: For as it is set down in the first
Chapter of the Apol. fol. 2. the first English Seminary began at Doway in the
year 1568. and never as yet failed, although upon occasion it has been
translated from thence into France, and back again now to Doway: so there is
also mention in the same Chapter fol 3. of the beginning of the English
College at Rome in the year 1578. which was before the Jesuits entrance into
England, as may be proved out of the 12. Chapter of the same Apology, fol.
181. where F. Parsons is said to have come into England betwixt Easter and
Whitsontide in the year 1580. where he must needs hear of some priests, who
had been sent from that Seminary before him. T.W. in his disgression from 16.
Martyrs in one year, page 52. says, that the College of Rome was founded in
the year 1575. which was five years before F. Parsons entrance into England.
And as I think no man doubts, but that Fa. Parsons, and Fa Campion were the
first Jesuits, which were sent into England to labor in that harvest. As for
those general letters, which follow in reproof of these supposed falsehoods,
they shall be answered, where this Author sets them down in particular.

In the 8. page F. Heywood the Jesuit is said to be falsely, and maliciously
belied in these words: Ostentansse, etc. A certain Jesuit vaunting himself
among our people, as though he had been Legate to the Sea Apostolic, etc. But
you must go for proof hereof to the 3. chap. (where there is nothing to this
purpose) and to the 11. chap. where fol. 164, F. Heywood is thus cleared from
this pretended false, and malicious lie. Only it is true, that some 16. or 17.
Priests (whereof one chief man is said to be of their faction at this day) met
together with him, (that is F. Heywood) and would have had all the National
customs of England about fasting (for some little diversity, and
difficulties, which they found in them) to be reduced to the common order of
the Roman Church, which D. Allen, F. Parsons, M. Blackwell, and others did not
allow: and F. Heywood yielded unto these men's opinions. And thus much perchance
should not have been said here, had Fa. Parsons, and Fa. Heywood been friends:
but they being otherwise, and the good Fa. Heywood reclayming himself, and
seeking reformation of manythings in men of his order (for which cause,
notwithstanding his learning and other gifts, he was made to live, and die very
obscurely) the Author of this Apology is content to say somewhat of him in
this case in question: although so far as it might touch the credit of the
society, the blame is laid upon the Secular priests. And because perchance
it is too well known, that some of those priests (otherwise zealous men, as by
their death they made evident remonstrance) did long after break those fasts
upon the warrant of this Provincial Council, it is said that F. Heywood
yielded unto the contrary opinion, lest the society should bear the discredit
of so rash an attempt. And thus is the calumniation answered, which was made
against F. Heyw. and no otherwise, as the reader may see, if he will turn to
the places whither this Author sends him. And it cannot but argue great want
of shame in this Author, to run with such foul terms upon men for saying
that, which when he comes to salve, he knows not almost, how to deliver
otherwise with any likelihood of truth.

In the 9 page the principal deceit, falsehood, or slander, is noted in these
words: Parietiam modo, etc. In like manner the Rectors of our English Roman
College did go about many things, that were grievous, and asperous to our
youths. But for this point you must see it handled at large cap. 5. Apol.
where also it is to be answered, or the Reader referred to some particular
treatise of this matter. But in the same page, there is an other slander, that
is: Conspectis, etc. Card Allen, after he had considered, and discovered the
endeavors of the Jesuits, was wont to say, that they sought more their own
good then either that of our Country, or College. The proof here of must now
stand upon the honesty of the Relators: but how justly he, or any other might
speak it, I refer me to any indifferent man's judgment, when the Jesuits would
never suffer any to be in rest in the College, who would not suffer themselves
to be drawn to the society either by them, or their Agents, who living in the
College, as the other students did, had secret vows to be Jesuits, and
persuaded, as many as they could, to take the same course. And England having
more need to be furnished with such, as were most fit to take upon them the
care of souls, who can doubt whether the Jesuits in seeking the most towardly
youths to leave their vocation, and become of their order, sought more their
own good, then either that of our Country, or College? And to the question
here foolishly proposed, what private good can the Jesuits pretend for
themselves worth their labors, and perils in England, more then in the Indies,
except the good of souls, and service of God? As though they sought somewhat
else in the Indies, then the good of souls, and service of God, or at the least
not so much, as in England; We answer both according to their proceedings, and
F. Parsons platform of Reformation, that whatsoever they pretend, they seek
to keep not only the Secular priests in a servile subjection unto them, but
the Bishops also, and all the whole State of England: having already in their
platform or Council of Reformation set down all Ecclesiastical men, as
pensioners, at the discretion of some Jesuits, and some Secular priests, no
doubt of their choosing, for avoiding of contention, and division. And whereas
(good man) he talks of the Jesuits labors, and perils in England, who
knows not, how deliciously they fare, how gorgeously they are attired, how
quietly they sleep in the best, and safest houses in England? insomuch as it
is a marvelous wonder, when any Jesuit is in peril. And there has not wanted
among the Lay gentlemen, that for these respects have wished themselves
Jesuits, notwithstanding they have lived with wife, children, great friends,
and as great contentment, as this world can yield to wealthy protected
Catholics.

In the 11. page is this falsehood noted or slander against Card. Tolet, in that
he is said to have been a favorer of the Troublesome against their superiors:
the words are these: I am tum, etc. At that time both the College, and all the
scholars had been undone, if Car. Toledo had not opposed himself, as a wall
for the said scholars. This is justified by many: and in the particular
discourse of the troubles in Rome, it will be showed, notwithstanding this vant
here of all Rome, and his Holiness, as though they would witness the contrary.

In the 12. page this Author has noted great falsehood in the narration of the
stirs of Wisbich, and tells his Reader in his religious terms, how the
priests do calumniate Weston, and the bigger and better part, because they
lived in order, and retired themselves from these men's licentiousnes, and for
more proof hereof his reader must go look in the 6. chapter of the Apology,
where he is like to find many untruths uttered by his Author, which are
already discovered in a relation set out of those matters.

In the 15. page (which he calls the 13.) he notes this falsehood, that the
priests called themselves united: Laicoru^, etc. The Jesuits did alienate Lay
men's minds ab vnitis sacerdotibus, from the united priests: note (says he)
the phrase of united, they being far the less number, and divided both from
their head, and the rest of their body the English Clergy. It is as the
Hollanders do call their rebelled states against the King, The united
Provinces, etc. Note, say I, how this fellow abuses his reader, by tellinghim
of a division against a head, where there was none, but voto only, that is to
say, by a religious desire, which was in Fa. Weston the Jesuit, who would be
directer of all the priests in Wisbich, to which because some would not
consent, he and his company divided themselves from them, which being an
unjust, and a scandalous separation, the other priests, who remained in their
former course of life, might justly call themselves united, as men, who
properly kept the union, when the other made such a division as they would not
have any commerce with them, upon their idle toy of Reformation, under pretense
whereof the Jesuits having gotten the superiority, the priests must yield to
what conditions they would offer, or the whole country must be in an uproar:
yet will these men challenge the name of united. But let every indifferent man
judge, which part did most lively represent a rebellious state. And for the
further proof of this fellow his malicious impostures (for it is not possible
that he should have hereof any ignorance) let any indifferent reader look
upon that discourse cited here by him out of the Latin book, and it will be
as clear as noone day, that there is no mention of any other matter, then of
the division wrought at Wisbich by the Jesuits and their faction, some years
before the Archpriest was instituted, and consequently before there was any
other head or whole body of the English Clergy, then that, from which the
Jesuits and their factious adherents divided themselves.

In the 16. page this Author discovers another principal deceit, falsehood,
or slander, in these words: Ticonius ille Donatista, etc. That Ticonius the
Donatist, etc. Note (says he) the spirit of these men, they compare all the
good, and quiet prisoners in Wisbich Donatists, for that they retired
themselves from these men's tumultuous, and scandalous life, and put themselves
under rule. See cap 6. Apolog. Are not these words, Ticonius ille Donatista,
shrewd words, that do infer such large consequences? are not rather these
tumultuous, and scandalous terms, and irreligious exceptions against the life
of Catholic priests, and some of them long prisoners for the Catholic faith,
an evident proof of most loose and large consciences? But to make this matter
more plain against this impostor, what if there were no speech of any of the
Priests? What a malicious Comment is this upon those three words, Ticonius ille
Donatista, That Ticonius the Donatist. Is it not most evident that the speech
there used, concerned no one, or other more then Fa. Weston the Jesuit? But yet
this was too much to compare him to a Donatist. Well, but then what if neither
he were compared to a Donatist, nay further yet, what if in that very place F.
Weston is showed not to be Ticonius the Donatist, or a follower of him? how
then can the indifferent Reader, but judge the Author of this Apology past
shame, who will lay it to the Priests charge, that in this place cited, they
compare all the good, and quiet prisoners in Wisbich to Donatists? And for what
cause? Forsooth, for that they retired themselves from these men's tumultuous,
and scandalous life, and put themselves under rule. Let us therefore now see
what there is in that 16. page concerning Ticonius ille Donatista: That
Ticonius the Donatist, etc. Thus we read in that 16. page. Tandem vero
aliquando, vt inuidiam leniret, quam sibi, suisque non mediocrem conflauerat,
ne reuixisse videretur Ticonius ille Donatista (cuius illud erat, Quod nobis
placet, sanctum est) promisit, se boni viri arbitrio rectene an illicite
separationem feeisset staturum: That is to say, In the end to mollify
somewhat that great envy which he (Fa. Weston) had gotten to himself and his
followers, he promised to stand to the judgment of any honest man, whether he
had lawfully, or unlawfully made the separation, least that Ticonius the
Donatist should seem to have been revived, whose saying this was, That is holy
which pleases us. So that by this it is evident, that not only the priests
are not compared to Donatists, but F. Weston the Jesuit is showed not to be,
as that Donatist, because he promised to stand to the judgment of another:
which as here is avouched Ticonius the Donatist would not do: but would have,
that which pleased him, stand for good.

In the same page, there is another principal deceit, falsehood, or slander,
noted in these words, Quorum vnus, etc. which this Author translateth thus. One
in Wisbich Castle fell out of his wit, by reason of opprobrious letters written
unto him, etc. Now he has made his tale, as he list: see what he adioyneth.
How egregious an untruth this is, the whole company will testify. And if
their words will not satisfy a reasonable man, he shall have more witness.
For it is most untrue, that he fell out of his wit by reason of opprobrious
letters written unto him: but by reason of opprobrious letters which himself
had written by persuasion of Fa. Weston the Jesuit, and other of his faction
against the other Priests, as himself in lucidis intervallis confessed: and
asked pardon of some of them, whom he had so injured, as they are ready to
testify: and these two words unto him are added to the text in this place by
the Author of the Apology, as every Grammar boy may see, who will turn unto
it.

In the 17. page, a malicious devise is noted in these words, Hanc vero, etc.
This sodality of them that lived under Rules in Wisbich, (besides many
stumbling blocks, which it brought into our Church) was vehemently also
suspected by the Queen and Council. But if those words of them that lived
under Rules in Wisbich, be fraudulently thrust into the text by this Author,
in whom is the malicious devise, (for so it is put in the margent) deceit,
falsehood, or slander? The words are no other then these. Hanc vero sodalitate^,
praeterquam quod offendicula multa inueheret in Ecclesiam nostrem, pacique
funesta esset, and vehementer principi, magistratibusque suspecta, quod
patribus Iesuitis alias, atque alias inuasiones hostiles continuo machinantibus
in regnum plus aequo tribueret, and quasi totum Clerum ijsdem subderet, videbat
ille arbiter nullam habere been institutae Communitatis formam, monstrique
simile esse, vt vnus pater Iesuita, membrum vnius corporis, caput fieret
alterius, etc. That is to say, This sodalitie, besides the many impediments it
brought into our Church, and was incompatible with peace, and vehemently
suspected by the Prince, and Magistrates, in that it gave more, then was fit to
the Fa. Jesuits, who sundry ways busied themselves in hostile invasions of
our Country, and as it were made all the Clergy subject unto them, the
arbiter saw, that it had no form of any well framed Community, and that it
was like unto a monster, that one Fa. Jesuit, being a member of one body,
should be made the head of another body, in which some were, who in regard of
their more ancient order of Religion, some in regard of their degree of
Doctorshippe, some for their venerable age, many for their wisdom, learning
and virtue, far his betters, etc. By which it may appear to the indifferent
Reader, how careless this Author is, what he says, so he may make somewhat
sound for his purpose. And to the end he might bring the Priests into
obloquie, he will for a color bring some two or three of their own words,
and join somewhat thereunto of his own, and then run a while upon that: as
in this place, having thrust in those words, Of them that lived under Rules in
Wisbitch, he makes this Comment; Great stumbling blocks, that a few pious
Rules of modest life in a few prisoners could bring into our whole Church.
Whereas the place here cited by this Author, gives him no occasion to frame
such a conceit, but pleads the judgment given against that sodalitie by
him, who was chosen arbiter in the cause.

And whereas he also affirms, That if this sodalitie were suspected by the
Prince, it must needs be that the Priests had maliciously persuaded, that it
(as also the institution of the Archpriest) was not for Religion, but for
matter of state, The Jesuits known practices against the State, mentioned in
the place, which is cited by this Author, convince, that there was no such
need, that the Priests should use any persuasions to the Prince, or
Magistrates: and that no plot in gathering a head under a Jesuits direction,
could be free from suspicion, as shall be showed more at large, where the
Author shall find his place in the Apology to give other color to the
Jesuits actions.

In the 19. page upon those words: Dom. Standisium, etc. M. Standish, who had
given his name to be a Jesuit, This Author infers a pretty conclusion. All
are Jesuits with these men, who are not of their faction, the Archpriest and
all: in which (to omit his folly) how does he show in that place any principal
deceit, falsehood or slander? or not being able to gainsay that, which the
priests said: how shamelesly, or rather childishly does he shift it?

In the 20 page there is exception taken against that which is mentioned of F.
Weston his being taken dumb, and falling down: and it is called an impudent
fiction, refuted by authentical testimonies of all the quiet prisoners in
Wisbich: and you must go look for this in the 6. Chapter of the Apol. where
you may find it contrary if you can. For answer to this, we are to refer the
Reader to the particular narration of the stirs in Wisbich.

In the 21. page the principal dece it, falsehood, or slander, is showed in
these wores, Consilium iniuimus, etc. We took a counsel together for
appointing prouosts and superiors over us in opportune places of the kingdom
etc. It was death for this good fellow to go any further in the narration,
which here he does calumniate: for if he had added these words (which are part
of the sentence cited by him with an etc. all which Prouosts and superiors
should have been chosen by the free suffrages of the Priests, his falsehood
would have been discovered, which he shows here in these words. This was the
work of their (the priests) association, whereby a few busy and ambitious men
took upon them to be Counselors of State without Commission, or consent of
the rest of the Clergy, or license of their superiors, to appoint dignities
to themselves, and others at their pleasures, and to make a new sedition. And
if the reader will vouchsafe to turn to that 21. page, he shall see that this
author is little to be credited in his relations, and may wonder, that he will
so shamelesly behave himself, as every indifferent man must condemn him of
exceeding great falsehood, and direct intention to deceive his reader. And
because he refers his reader to the letters of the assistants, and other
proofs, cap. 8. and 9. there we will make our answer unto them for so much as
is there touched in this matter.

In the 23. page these words are cited, Quid interea P. Parsonius, etc. What
did F. Parsons in this mean space, the Author, incensor and actor of allour
perturbations, etc. But nothing being in this place answered to that which in
the 23. page is said against him, we are not to stand upon those other matters
which are here mentioned. It suffices that there is nothing convinced of
deceit, falsehood, or slander: to which end the table maker brought this place
out of the latin book.

In the 26. page M. Blackwell is said to be slandered, and that these were
spiteful speeches against him: Videns autem D. Blackwell, etc. M. Blackwell
seeing this, etc. where in the Latin book mention is made of a letter he writ
to the Card Caietane: the letter is out in print, and whosoever will take the
pains to read it shall see, that there is nothing but the truth set down in
the place here cited by this author. And whereas here it is urged, that he is
named every where without any reverence at al, they will hardly since him
named, but Master Blackwell, which is as much reverence as is due unto him for
any thing the Priests know. And if he be sometime called the Archpriest, it is
as much as this Author gives him, as may be seen in many places. Moreover,
if there be any thing to the contrary in the 4, 10, or 11. chap. of the
Apology, it shall be there answered.

In the 27. page, a principal deceit, falsehood, or slander is noted, where it
is said: Cum omnes, etc. Whereas all Jesuits almost in England be children of
poor parents, etc. And to this, what answer is here made? Forsooth how
manifestly false and shameless this is, there needs no other proof but to
know the parties: and to consider also, what manner of children, and of what
parents they be that do object this, etc. But alas (good man) were they much
worse then they are, who are said to object this, they are by many degrees his
betters, who is taken to be the Author of this Apology. And if the priests had
as impertinently spoken so of the Jesuits, as this good fellow speaks of the
priests, his folly might have been in some sort excused: but it being evident,
that this fellow his speech proceeds of spleen, and without either any
necessity to enlarge himself so far, or any furtherance to his cause, (for
what does the quality of this or that man, make better or worse the quality of
another?) the place noted in this 27. page does show a just cause, why the
priests did say the truth in that cause. For whereas M. Blackwell (to the
ignominy of the Catholic gentlemen) did most ungratefully suggest, and most
untruly to the Card. Caietane, that the Jesuits did marueils in England in the
releeuing of all sorts of people distressed, and that they did it out of their
own patrimonies, because they were minima, not worth the speaking of, which
they received of alms from the Catholics: the priests, to show how palpable
this flattery was, affirmed (as they might justly) that all the Jesuits almost
in England were children of poor parents: and consequently not like to do so
much, and in that sort, as M. Blackwell did most grossly suggest. And let this
be sufficient for this time upon this occasion, to prove that it is no
calumniation, as the margent would have the reader to think it, nor deceit,
falsehood, or slander, as this table is entitled.

In the 29. page are diverse things noted, as that Pope Xistus was termed a
Wolf by the Jesuits, and defamed as a most wicked man, and certain
propositions maintained about the Stews, which will be justified to have been
uttered by F. Weston the Jesuit in defense of M. Archer one of his principal
confederates in his faction at Wisbich, and generally taken for a Jesuit, and
cannot therefore but appertain to the Jesuits, between whomesoeuer the
controversy first began.

In the 30. page the priests are said to call the authority of their
superior, instituted by Christ's vicar, Laruam: that is, a masking vizard: which
is very false; and no modest man would have auowched it out of that place, it
sounding no otherwise, then thus: ad dominium comporandum alienae personae
larua vtendum putabant: that is, they (the Jesuits) to get dominion, thought
they must use a mask of an other person; which can bear no other sense then
this: that they would rule, and an other should bear the name: and if ought
were done amiss, it should never be known who were the actors. But this man
must be seen in it: and they must be covered by him: which every man knows
to be a very ordinary course in the world, and cry out shame upon it, without
any touch to authority, but to the abuse thereof. And whereas Fa. Parsons
memorials are here said to be yet extant, intrearing for obteyning of Bishops,
it is no disproofe to that, which is auowched by the priests: it being so
possible for the same man to urge mightily the very same matter, which he will,
by some means, or other, cross. And there is sufficient proof of this kind
of dealing in F. Parsons: as for example. At the parting of some students from
Rome, he writ a letter of commendations in the behalf of one of them, and at
the very same time he writ as much to the contrary to the very same place:
insomuch as they to whom those letters came, conferring them together, could
not but marvel much at this falsehood in him. Likewise when M.D. Bishop was
to depart from Rome to Paris, in the way of great friendship and confidence, F.
Parsons requesteth him, that there might be intercourse of letters between
them: Mary one thing above the rest he earnestly commended unto him: and that
was, to certify him from time to time of M.D. Cecill his carriage, and at the
same time he writ to M. D. Cecill to do him the like favor for M.D Bishop.
And not long after he solicited M. Shelborne (a reverend priest then abiding
in Paris) to certify him against them both: and very likely it was, there was
some other appointed to pay his debts. But imagine what sport there was when
these letters came forth: and how peevish they are, who will not believe that
F. Parsons can play all manner of plays for his purpose.

In the 33. page the principal deceit, falsehood, or slander is gathered out of
those words, Nullo etc. no respest being had to the most Catholic Archb. of
Glasco. I would ask this good fellow what respect was had unto this Bishop,
when the Archpriest was made superior without his priuitie or consent over all
the English priests which then were, or after should be resident in his
diocese? And if there were no respect had unto him, what deceit, falsehood or
slander was there in saying so? But listen I pray you to the conceit which is
made hereupon. See (says he) the strange desire of these men to set strife
every where. They would stir up the Archb. of Glasco residing in Paris for
above 30. years against the Protector: for that he gives jurisdiction to the
Archpriest upon English Priests in England, Scotland and Ireland, and yet these
men do ask faculties for these three countries, but would be under no
authority in any. Now alas (good man) where has he his ground concerning this
last point, that the priests would not be under authority? so often as he
does urge the association intended in England by the Priests, he conuinceth
himself of this falsehood: And if he were set to find, where the Priests
asked faculties for those three countries as superiors there, he would be
sorely troubled. But the Reader must take all this upon his word: as also that
the Priests minded to set the Protector, and the Bishop of Glasco together by
the ears, when they said that in the institution of this authority over all
the English priests in Scotland, there was no respect had to the Catholic
Bishop of Glasco. How much better might it be said that F. Parsons and his
confederats meant to set strife between them, when so unadvisedly they procured
the Protector to give such jurisdiction to a strange Archpriest within the
dioces of a Bishop in another Nation, and no way subject to any prelate of
England? In this foolish fury also, how forgets he that he often says that
the Cardin all did but witness the authority by his letters, and sets it
down in plain terms, that the Priest would stir up the Bishop against the
Protector, for that he gives jurisdiction to the Archpriest? In the Apology
almost in every place, it is said that there was in the Priests at the first
coming of the Cardinals letters no less, then a resistance against the Popes
order; and how then was not the danger of stirring up the Bishop against his
Holiness, but against the Protector?

In the 35. page and so forward to the 59. many things are noted, for which the
Reader must go look in the Apology.

In the 61. page a principal deceit, falsehood, or slander is noted in these
words. His visis, etc. As soon as we saw the Apostolical letters of the new
Breue for confirmation of the Archpriest; we all presently submitted our selves
etc. This is so manifest and so often acknowledged by all from the highest to
the lowest, as there shall need no further justifying thereof: But this author
would have his reader conceive that this submission was fained and forced, and
that the event showed so much: and that it could not be otherwise, the Priests
having entered with the Counsel so far, as they had done, as is showed Cap.
10. and 13. where (says this fellow) we show, by their own letters, their
conspiracy with the persecutor. But in conclusion if you do not trust him
upon his words more, then upon his proofs which he brings either in the 10
or 13 Chap. you must hold him still for such as he is. We have already said
enough hereof in the defense of that, which he commenteth upon those words,
Hinc a communi etc. p. 2. as he has cited it in the beginning of this his
table of deceits, to which we remit you for this time; and omitting that which
here he says, that the submission of the priests was forced: which implies a
true submission (nothing being enforced, but their will to accept of him against
whom they had many just exceptions) I will only note how falsely, and
deceitfully this good fellow uses this place, which thus he has cited, out of
the 61. page. His visis etc. As soon as we saw the Apostolical letters of the
new Breue, etc. what can his reader think of these words, the new Breue; but
that there was some former Breue, which was not obeyed by the priests? And to
this purpose, as in other places, so in his first Chap. of his Apol. fol. 8. he
uses the same deceit, He (the Pope) confirmed all that was done already by the
Card. with a new Breue: where also in the margent this note is made, A new
Breue 1599. lest any man should think it a word spoken by chance, and not of
purpose, and it is the more apparent in this place, which now we handle,
because he has falsely translated the priests words, and made them to talk of
a new Breue. For thus he alleges them. His visis etc. As soon as we saw the
Apostolical letters of the new Breue for confirmation of the Archpriest, we
all presently submitted our selves to him: where His visis, that is, these
being seen, is only referred to these words, Sanctitatis tuae literae: that
is, the letters of your Holiness: And there is no other mention, of any other
Apostolical letters, or any other Breue, much less any Apostolical letters
of a new Breue, as it may be seen by them, who will turn to the place.

In the 69. page a principal deceit, falsehood, or slander, is gathered out of
those words, Archipresbyter, etc. The Archpriest denies access unto him, he
will not be seen, he does disdain to talk with his brethren, etc. But how is
this proved deceit, falsehood, or slander? Forsooth thus. All things are
rhethorically exaggerated, yet it is no marvel though the Archpriest do use
some moderation, and circumspection in admitting those men to speech, whom he
knows to have an evil mind toward him, and to deal with the Council, and
Bishop of London, and to seek his speech only to braule, and to take some
advantage at his words: as two of them did, who accused him of an heretical
proposition in talking with him presently upon the arrival of his first
commission. Had this fellow only given a cause, why the Archpriest would not
talk with the priests, without any more ado, it had been a little sign of
some small grace in him: but to bring that in for a deceit, falsehood, or
slander, which he cannot deny, but must confess to be true, and straineth
himself to give a cause thereof, it is too shameful. It being then evident,
that the Archpriest will not speak with the priests, let us see how good these
causes are, and how true, which are here alleged. The first is, because he
knows that the Priests have an evil mind toward him: but this sauoureth
too much of malice. The second is, he knows that they deal with the Council
and Bishop of London: but alas this cause comes too late, as may appear by
comparing the times together in which the Archp. has denied to speak with
the^, with the times in which it has pleased the Counsel as he supposes to
show them some favor by means of the Bishop of London, having conceived some
hope of their loyalty toward their prince and country.

The third cause here alleged is, for that the Archpriest knows, they seek
his speech, only to brawle and to take some advantage at his words, as two of
them did, etc. and in the margent M. Collington and M. Charnock are named. It
is very likely, if the Archpriest would be so resolute, as he would agree to no
reason, but run on the course he has begun, the priests might have parted from
him, as little edified as M. Collington and M. Charnock did, when he sent for
them and M Heburne to speak with them, presently upon the arriual of his first
commission, that is, the Cardinals letters unto him, or conuented them, as M.
Standish gave it out in the Clinke not long after, whereupon M. H Henslow, who
before was taken for the Archpr. messenger, was called his Sumner, and was very
angry at it. And this particular is brought that it may appear, what a bold
face that fellow has, who in the Appendix fol. 7. affirms, that it seems
they (M. Collington, and M. Charnocke) were sent to him of purpose to catch him
in his words. And if where difference is, there must of necessity be brawling,
I think no man doubts, but he is the brawler who offers the injury, not he
who uses necessary defense. And if moreover M. Collington and M. Charnocke
have accused the Archp. of an heretical proposition (as this Author in this
place insinuates) I do verily persuade my self, that they will prove it so
far forth as two men of their quality may prove it, which would be little
for M. Blackwels credit, notwithstanding the slight reckoning which is made of
their two relations only, Cap 8 fol. 109.

In the 83. page a principal deceit, falsehood, or slander, is noted in these
words, Plura, etc. The Jesuits do brag, that many more Seminaries have been
erected by them, etc. The Priests words are these: Plura numero, more in
number. This is very calumnious (says this good fellow) but if they should
speak of any such matter compelled by your slanders, should they not say
truth, seeing five or fix partly Seminaries, partly residences, have been
erected by them? etc. Well good sir, not to divine here what slanders they
were, which so happily compelled the Jesuits to speak of their so great
benefits unto the priests, I will keep mine eyesight for the 3, 5, 10, and
12. chap. where I am told, I shall see more of this most insolent ingratitude:
And in the mean while I will hope that the Jesuits of their charity, will
forgive them all, who compelled them to speak so much of their own great good
deeds, which, were they a thousand times more then they are, the Jesuits ought
not to embolden themselves, or challenge thereby a greater liberty to abuse
men at their pleasure: and it is a silly proof, that they have not abused men
in one kind, because that they have done them a good turn in another. And with
this the table was taken up: for the author had no other meaning when he set
you to this table of principal deceits, falsehoods, and slanders, then to let
you have a taste of those two libels, which the discontented priests did set
forth, to wit, the book dedicated to his Holiness, entitled, Declaratio
motuum, A declaration of stirs, etc. and the English book entitled, The
Copies of certain discourses.

But alas (poor man) either his wits appear hereby to be very shallow, who
out of an infinite heap of slanders, calumniations, and contumelious speeches,
which he says are contained in the priests books, could no better furnish
his table with deceits, falsehoods, and slanders, which here he undertook: or
his malice extreme great, to make such a vaineglorious show, where the
principal stuff was of no more moment, then is already showed in these 28.
picked points, to discredit the Latin book and the authors thereof, who
always have, and will show, that they mean better then he does, and tend to
that place to which honest priests should tend, and hope to arrive in the end:
whence it is to be feared, they shall behold the Author of this Apology lying,
and too late repenting this, and other his misdeeds.

The rest that follows in this Latin book about the Appellation (says this
Author) as also about a fond and seditious Latin letter of M. John Mush
thereon ensuing, are sufficiently examined, Cap. 10, and 11. Apol. But unless
the 10, and 11. Chap. be too too much ouerseene, there is no one point of the
Appellation examined. There is somewhat said to M. Mush his letter in the 11.
Chapter, which is little to the purpose. The examination of the English book,
entitled, The Copies of discourses, is for brevity sake put off to the 1, 2,
7, and 11. Apol. where it is to be defended, not to have any thing in it worthy
the name of a scandal, but to a Pharisie: and thereby it will be showed to be
a work, fit for Catholic priests to write, and publish to the world, their
case standing as then it did. And their fact will appear the more justifiable,
by how much it will appear by the answer to this Apology, that they cannot be
disprooued, but by manifest falsehoods, deceits, and slanders. After these
notes, or exceptions against the Latin book, which was dedicated to his
Holiness under this title, Declaratio motuum, etc. march certain principal
persons, which the Reader must believe, are iniuried by the priests, and are
defended by the Apology: amongst which there are such placed, as the Authors
might with more honesty have made two lists: one, of those most honorable
personages; the other, of the rest: but since that they have put them all in
one company, one answer shall serve to the whole list: that howsoever his
Holiness is here abused in the Epistle, and the honor of the honorable is
touched in this Apology, the priests at no time have iniuried either them, or
any the other by-hangers: neither can the contrary be showed, as any man (who
knows what use this author will make of a little) may justly imagine, in that
there is no one place cited out of the book written by the priests, or in this
Apology, where any abuse is convinced. And although sometimes in this Apology
the author puts his reader in mind of such matters, he does discover
nothing, but his own desires in some, and folly in other his exceptions, as
shall be showed when occasion is offered. And in the mean while, the discreet
reader may judge, whether this author or publisher were not past shame, who
could not but know, that the priests had been with the Nuntio in Flanders, and
acknowledged his authority. And to that end, that no principal thing be
hidden from his reader, he has after principal deceits, and principal
persons, set down the principal authors and spreaders of the books, wherein
these principal deceits are contained, and the principal persons iniuried.
And in naming those which he does name for the principal authors, he has
committed a very gross error in his Preface, where he seems to doubt who
were the authors. And in the end he concludes thus, So as these books must
needs be presumed, to have been published either by some one, or few
discomposed passionate people, or by some heretic or other enemy, to
dishonor them all; and discredit our cause, and nation: and so as to such we
shall answer, etc. what man of judgment will not say, that either the memory
of this fellow is very short, or his honesty very small, who having named,
whom he thinks to be the authors, makes his answer, as to heretics? And if
to these be added those disgraceful speeches, which are used in the beginning
of the 3. Chap. fol. 20. against the Authors of the books, impugned by the
Apology, his most audacious friends will blush at his folly, for there very
contemptuously he affirms, that some of them went over poor serving men,
other soldiers, (what an ingratitude, and dishonor is this to Fa. Ignatius
Laiola, the soldier, and Jesuits founder?) other wanderers in the world, etc.
Possibly this good man's wits are not always at home, and they should do him
great injury, who should look for one wise word from him, which is not put
into him by some other. If he had not named those six for the principal
authors of the books, he might with less shame have uttered his foul
conceit: but having named them, he cannot avoid the note of a most malicious
false companion, what godly pretenses and promises soever he makes of modesty
in this Apology.

CHAP. 4. How the author of this Apology follows that counsel which
Achitophel gave to Absalon, 2. Reg. 16. that other seeing how he abused his
Holiness, might the more desperately adhere unto him.
THe Epistle which follows to his Holiness, and is said to be translated
out of Latin into English, after some time of probation expired, was admitted,
and annexed to the Apology. It had been very great pity to have left out so
memorable an abridgement of so many impertinent, and false matters, and so well
suting with the Apology. I call all that impertinent, which concerns any
division, either of Jesuits, and other Catholics of the Clergy, or of the
Laity, before the coming of the Cardinal Caietans letters, for the
institution of the Archpriest in the year 1598. or the ambitious attempt of
the known, and covert Jesuits in the scandalous division in Wisbich. For upon
the not yielding of some secular Priests, to subject themselves, first to the
Jesuits in direct terms, and the not admitting of an authority procured by
them afterward, for their indirect soueraintie, this present controversy
began, and being once ended, at the sight of a Breue, it was renewed again by
the rashness of the Jesuits, and the indiscretion of the Archpriest, as it is
proved at large in the books set out by the Secular priests, and promulgated
in the latter Breue, dated the 17. of August. 1601. as shall hereafter be
showed. I affirm the rest to be false, because so it shall be proved, for so
much as is touched thereof, either in the Apology, or in this Epistle.
Omitting therefore, what is here propounded to his Holiness, concerning the
Catholics their going to the Protestants Churches, at the beginning of her
Majesty's reign, who now is: (a thing which would not have been published to
the world by any, who tendered their honor, unless there had been some
greater cause for it) the subornation of some by the Counsel to poison D.
Allen (afterward Cardinal) and the Students, and raising of sedition among
the Catholics beyond the Sea, the evil success, which some had about the
Queen of Scots, and diverse Gentlemen (which is here attributed to their secret
keeping of their practices from Fa. Parsons, and other) the inducing of two
Priests, to write two books in favor of heretics, as it were by reason of
State, and to become spies, the one in France, the other in Spain.

Lastly to let pass, that which is here said, that Car. Allen perceived, that
there was a faction begun in England by the same act (of the Counsel) against
the Fathers of the Society, and writ most earnestly against it, and that Card.
Sega had found out, that a few unquiet spirits were set on craftily, by the
subtle instruments of the Counsel, and were the cause of many troubles in that
College at Rome, we will here only touch such points, as do concern our
selves, and the matter now in controversy. Your Holiness therefore (says this
Author) seeing prudently these causes and effects, and having put a final end
to the long, and fastidicus troubles of the English Roman College, and given
your straight commandment by words of mouth, to such persons of the
tumultuous, as departed into England in that year 1597, to be quiet for the
time to come, and to have peace with all, but namely with the Fathers of the
Society, and hearing notwithstanding the next year after, by diverse letters
out of England, that this was not observed, but new means rather devised of
further division, and sedition; your Holiness did upon these considerations, and
upon the letters, and requests of diverse of the grauest Priests of our nation,
which after we shall cite, ordain by the Card. Protector his letters an easy,
and sweet subordination, etc. If we had no other proof of this fellows
falsehood, then might be made apparent in this second point of the Epistle, it
would give every honest man sufficient satisfaction. His Holiness is here put in
mind of such strange matters, and his wisdom very highly commended upon so
false grounds, as if this Epistle had been ever delivered unto him, he would
speedily have discovered a notable sycophancy. He is here told of two
principal motives, for his ordaining our easy, and sweet subordination. The
one were certain letters, which signified, that between the tumultuous who
departed into England in the year 1597, and the Fathers of the Society, there
was not that peace, which he had commanded, but new means rather devised of
further division, and sedition. The other were other letters and requests of
diverse of the grauest priests of our nation, which after (says he) we shall
cite. Concerning the first, least there should be any error in Judgment, what
those new means of further division should be, there is this note in the
margent, The new association; which conceit is delivered in plainer terms,
and more at large in the first Chapter of the Apol. fol. 6. in this manner, But
the relics of those, that had been troublesome, and unquiet before their
coming into England, and conferring again with their consorts of their former
actions, and designments, frustrated (as they thought) by F. Parsons dealing at
Rome, resolved to begin again, but after another fashion, To wit, by devising
a certain new Association among themselves, etc. And in the 2. Chapter fol. 13
his Holiness hearing of certain new Associations begun in England soon after
the tumults ended in Rome, etc. These (to omit other places in the Apology)
are sufficient to show, that his intention is, to make the Pope believe, that
the Association which was begun in England by the Secular priests, was a new
devise of those, who were sent from Rome in the year 1597, as tumultuous, and
unquiet persons. That this is a mere deluding of his Holiness, all who were
then in England can very well testify: yea F. Parsons himself will do us the
favor (I am sure) to say this is a very false tale, who understood at his
first coming to Rome by M. James Standish, that such an Association had been
long before intended, and consequently could not be a device of such, as
thought themselves frustrated of their designments, by his dealing in Rome.

The 6. assistants in their letters of the 2. of May 1601. do testify, that
this association began four or five years since, Cap. 7. Apol. fol. 90. and
that must needs be before those priests came into England, on whom it is
fathered, if it be true, which is said Cap. 2. Apol. fol. 12, that they were
not gone from Rome at the beginning of September 1597. It may also be gathered
out of the same Chapter fol. 89. that this association very probably was begun
long before by others: for there we find this story. But ( M. Mush) returning
into England, as he went forth, and the Cardinal soon after dying (in the
year 1594. as appears Cap. 1. Apol fol 6.) he joined with another of his
own humor etc. And they two, with some few other, determined to make a
certain new Hierarchy of their own, calling it an association of Clergy men
etc. The truth is, that M. Mush, and M. Dudley having made the peace at Wisbich
in the year 1595. (as appears Ca. 6. Apol fol. 79.) returned to London, and
there dealt with M. James Standish, a man growing in deed into that humor (to
wit of being a Jesuit, which M. Mush was then leaving) and not with M.
Colington (as is here falsely noted in the margent, for about that time M.
Collington lay very little at, or near London) and they, and some others
thought it very fit, that there should be an association of such priests as
would live under rule, to take away that slander, which the Jesuits, and their
favorites (to further their ambitious attempts) had generally spread abroad
against the priests, to wit, that they lived not under rule. And thus much
concerning this first falsehood, and the deluding his Holiness with this tale,
that the association was a new devise of such as were in those broiles at Rome,
and would not remain in that peace which was commended unto them, and
commanded by his Holiness in the year 1597.

The second falsehood is more deceitfully (although as grossly) conveyed, in
putting his Holiness in mind, what was his second motive, in the ordaining our
easy and sweet Subordination: forsooth, the letters and requests of diverse of
the grauest priests of our nation, which after we shall cite. And because he will
seem to deal faithfully in this cause, he puts this note in the margent,
Ca. 9 10. Apol. by which his Hol. is given to understand, that those letters
and requests of the grauest priests, by which he was induced to make this
subordination, are to be found in the ninth and tenth Chapt. of the Apol. But
now what if there be not any letters, or requests in the ninth or tenth Chapt.
concerning any such matter, what a shameless fellow is this informer? In the
ninth chapter fol. 125. begin certain letters of some priests, and others
follow: but these are not, neither can be the motives of his Holiness to make
this Subordination: they are written particularly against M. D. Bishop, and M.
Charnock: because they presumed to go to his Holiness about this Subordination,
already made as it was: And this is evident to those, who will vouchsafe to
turn unto the chapters. In the tenth chapter there is less matter, if less
may be, for this purpose; that I cannot but marvel how this fellow durst tell
his Holiness such a lewd tale: But perchance this good fellow had this policy:
he set in the margent the 9 and 10. chapters, hoping that his Holiness, if he
should chance to cause them to be turned into Latin, would be so tired with
seeking in the ninth, as he would rather believe, they were in the 10. chapt.
then be so troubled again: perchance this marginall note was set but in the
English Copy, where it would serve well enough for those, which have such a
facility in believing such like fellows as this is, as they will run riot
with them, howsoever their conscience disclaimeth it. Perchance it was
mistaken, and this 9. and 10. chapters were put in the margent in stead of the
eighth. And this we are induced to believe the rather, because at the beginning
of the eighth chap. this very matter is handled, and some letters cited: and
for the better satisfaction of the reader, I will here set down the place at
large, to which (as I suppose) this fellow alludeth, and had rather his Reader
should miss the place then hit it, because retaining a confused remembrance of
such matters he should run away with it, without further examination of the
truth, or the likelihood thereof. These are the words in the Apology, cap. 8.
fol. 98. When his Holiness heard the former state of the matters in England,
Flanders, and other places, and of the murmurations of some against the Fathers
of the society, set down as well in the foresaid contumelious Memorial, as by
diverse other letters and relations which came to the Protectors sight, and by
him was related to his Holiness, and namely when he received great store of
private and public letters out of England against the said Memorial of
Fisher, and some one with above an 100. hands at it, other with 40, and 50, all
in favor and commendation of the Fathers their labors, and behavior in
England, against the said slanderous Memorial, and many other in several
letters of principal men, which are yet extant: when also diverse of these did
expressly demand some Subordination and government of Secular priests, to take
away this emulation of some few against the Fathers, and that two lately came
out of England at that very time: one a Jesuit, the other a secular priest,
each of them urging the same in the behalf both of the one, and the other
order; his Holiness after mature deliberation resolved to yield thereunto,
hoping thereby to quiet all, etc. And so he goes forward, and shows how it
was consulted upon, and of whom opinions were asked, to wit, of F. Parsons, F.
Baldwin, who was one of the two, which lately came out of England, as appears
by the marginall note in that place, M. Doctor Haddock, M. Martin Array, M.
James Standish, who was the other which came out of England, as appears by
the same marginall note, although falsely said to be a secular priest, having
given his name long before to become a Jesuit, and gave it out here in
England, that his going over was to enter into their order, and others that had
labored in the English vineyard, perchance Fa. Warford, another Jesuit, and
such like: but those matters we shall handle there in that place. Here only we
have noted this relation out of the 8. chap. to help the favorers of this
Apology, that they wander not through the woods to no purpose, if they follow
not the path which their author shows the^, and so bring them where they may
find somewhat, (although not that which they look for) after a long seeking,
where there is nothing at all of this matter. And if this be not the place,
which is meant in this Epistle, there is none in all the Apology. For this
quotation in the margent fol. 101. in the same chapt. See the letter of 6.
ancient priests, the 13. of September 1597. is a poor proof, and to say the
truth it would be more for the others credit, if there were none at all cited
in the Apology. For if any man will be so indifferent in this case, as but to
look unto the dates of the letters here cited in the beginning of the eighth
chapter in the Apology, (which by the Contents seems to be the place, which
must justify as much, as is suggested in this Epistle) and confer them with
the date of Cardinal Caietane his letter, by which this Subordination was
appointed in England, he shall find that they were all written after the
Cardinals letters, some longer, some less while, and consequently after his
Holiness his determination, to make this Subordination, and therefore could not
be any motive thereof. The letter of the Card. Caietane by which the
Subordination was appointed in England, bears date the 7. of March 1598, as
appears in that 8 chapter, fol. 102. And the letters by which his Holiness is
said to have been moved to make this Subordination in England, and are cited
in this 8. chapter, fol. 98, bear date, some the 27 of March, some the 20 of
April, some the 18 of May, some the 30 of July, the soonest the four and
twentieth of March 1598: all which must needs argue not only an egregious
falsehood in this Epistle-maker, but a notorious impudency, in telling his
Holiness to his teeth, that he did make an easy and sweet Subordination
upon the letters, and requests, which he had never heard of, nor possibly
could, they not having been written or thought upon by the Inditors, long after
his Holiness is said to have thought upon the Subordination, and caused it to
be made by the Card Caietane. And as for the note in the margent, fol. 101. it
is not probable that a letter of that moment would not have been set in the
book much sooner then any other.

With the like liberty this Epistle is continued: His Holiness is told, that
all good and obedient Catholics were much contented and comforted with this
subordination: which is a most injurious insinuation against many, who (to make
no odious comparisons) have showed themselves in all points, as has become the
best, and most obedient Catholics. Neither are there any letters at all in the
9. Chap. of the Apol. of this thanksgiving, as the Pope is here told, and
those which are in the 8. cha. are not from any of the Laity, but from some
priests, all whose names are for some causes omitted in this Apol. except the
first subscriber, and the last, which perchance was therefore thought necessary
to be set down, to prove that at the least there were two to a letter: and
that the middle names might be as many in number, as are here supposed. But it
was a marvelous good chance, that the first subscriber, and the last were
such, as their names might be known. But perchance, under the name of all
good, and obedient Catholics, the English Clergy is also to be understood, of
which a few (says this Epistle-maker) not the twentieth part, and those for
the most part such, as had been troublesome before in Rome, presumed to impugn
the same subordination, calling first in question the said Cardinals letters,
etc. Fa. Parsons was told in Rome, that doublesse the greater part of the
priests was not contented with this subordination, and when for his purpose he
urged further, how many the messengers did certainly know, to approve their
mission (as appears Cap. 9. fol. 131.) they (not being willing to depose for
more in this kind, then they had either spoken withal, or received letters
from them to this effect) answered accordingly that they had certain knowledge
of some 14. or 15, which number is now deceitfully tossed up, and down, as
though they had no knowledge of any more, or did come in the name of so few
against all the rest; yet where there was just cause if they had been fewer,
yea if there had been no more but those two, who went to Rome, they had been
enough, because justice has always more with it, then against it. But to this
purpose, if those 14, or 15, which were named by M. Charnock in his
examination, were here set down, the falsehood of this fellow would be evident
to those who know the men, when he suggesteth to his Hol. that they were for
the most part such, as had been troublesome before in Rome. Concerning the
calling this subordination in question, how it was procured, how far forth it
did bind, before the Breue came, and other difficulties which the priests had,
they have not desired to have them muttered in corners, as may appear by their
books: to which their adversaries silence would have been somewhat more for
their credit, then their shuffling answer. And as for the evil success,
which their two messengers had, whom at the first they sent to Rome, all the
world knows, that not long after his Holiness coming thither, they were
infamously apprehended by Jesuits and Sbirri, all their writings were taken
from them, they were kept asunder in close prison, and were not suffered to
speak with any to ask counsel, nor to see the Copy of such accusations as
were put up against them, at such time as they did demand it, to make their
answer before the two Cardinals, Caietane and Burghesius 17. Feb. 1599. and
yet they were kept afterward close prisoners until the 8. of April, by which
time all matters were concluded as their adversaries would, as appears by the
date of the Breue which was the 6. of April 1599.

The notorious falsehood also which here is suggested to his Holiness in these
words, Who (that is the two Priests) finding not such success At Rome.
there, as they required, their fellows in England for remedy, began to deal
more closely with the Counsel, telling them (as has appeared since by the
event, and by their latter books) that this subordination was not for
Religion, but for State practices, as in this Apology is declared more
particularly: And in the margent is set this note, Apol. cap. 10.12.13. But
whosoever will examine the tenth Chapter, he shall find a few idle, and
doubtfully proposed assertions, or rather foolish conjectures, which are in as
great need to be proved, as this is here. In the twelfth Chapter there is not
one word, wise, or other to this purpose. In the thirteenth Chapter, there is
some proof brought for that, which is here proposed to his Holiness. But the
proof is such, as it would have made a man of little modesty to have blushed
with the very conceit thereof. Mark I pray you, what a narration there is,
fol. 209. For this is it, which is meant, as may appear by this marginall note,
D. Bagshaw. But above all other means the fowlest is, and ought most to move
a good conscience, their joining secretly for a time, but after, more openly:
and now, most evidently with the common enemy, and persecuter. First (as
before you have heard) as soon as ever they understood, that their two
messengers were restrained in Rome, and not like to prevail, then D. Bagshaw
was sent for from Wisbich to London, to treat with the Council, etc. The Pope
is told in this Epistle, that the Priests deal closely with the Council: but
in the Apology, the Catholics are told, that it has been secretly for a
time, but after, more openly, and now, most evidently. The Priests have always
been ready to give an account, in what, and how far, they have used that
favor, which her Majesty, and the honorable Council are said to have shown
unto them: and all men are to think, that they would not have gone to Rome, if
they had done any thing, which Catholic priests might not do. But mark, I
pray you, the substantial proof to which his Holiness is referred: and let
it be duly examined: As soon as ever they understood, that their two
messengers were restrained in Rome, and not like to prevail, then D. Bagshaw
was sent for from Wisbich to London, to treat with the Council, etc. If we
look into the Apology, we shall find, that the two messengers came to Rome
upon the xj. of December 1598. cap. 9. fol. 121. and they were imprisoned upon
the 29. of the same month. And M. D. Bagshaw his sending for was not so
secretly done, but that all England may quickly understand, that he was long
before this time at London, and that he was either returned again to Wisbich,
or upon his returning, before it was known in England, that the two Priests
were restrained in Rome. And yet his Holiness must needs be told, that upon
their restraint in December, and by reason thereof, D. Bagshaw was sent for
from Wisbich, to treat with the Council, in the month of October. Can any
thing make this fellow blush, who is so generally careless, what he
publishes to the world? or can the Cath. expect, that he should deal more
faithfully with them for their instruction, who will so boldly abuse his
Holiness?

All that also which follows in the 13. point, touched in this Epistle to his
Holiness, consists upon diverse untruths shuffled in one upon another: as
first, that the two Cardinals, Caietane and Burghesius, did duly examine all
matters. Secondly, that the Priests did but make a show to obey the Breue (as
having engaged themselves before with the Council to the contrary) and
thereupon sought occasions to break again. Thirdly, that they sent not any to
prosecute their appeal. Fourthly, that they did not expect his Holiness
sentence or definition, but proceeded by secret favor, and intelligence with
the Council, and Bish. of London, to print and set forth erroneous libels to
the detraction of diverse venerable men, and of a whole order of Religion, and
of their immediate superiors, and of the sea of Rome it self, of his
Holiness, and the Protectors proceeding in this matter. To the first it is
answered, that all matters were not duly examined, when the two Priests were
not suffered to deal, neither as plaintifes, nor as defendants, being clapped
up close prisoners, all their instructions taken away from them, not suffered
to speak one with another, or to confer with any man else about those
matters, for which they came: examined by F. Parsons, who made such
Interrogatories as were for his purpose, being the principal adversary on the
other part, and curtailed their answers when it pleased him, or blotted out
both Interrogatories and answers when they succeeded not to his mind: being
brought before the two Cardinals, Caietane and Burghesius, where after they had
heard severally some part of their examinations read, they were admitted to
come together to hear a libel read jointly against them both, but were not
suffered to have the copy thereof, to make their answer thereunto, as they
desired: and being friendly dismissed for that instant, were afterward kept
close prisoners seven weeks longer, and not suffered to come together, until
the Breue was out in confirmation of the authority. And thus much for the due
examination of all matters, which is here suggested to his Holiness. To the
second it is answered, That the Priests made an unfeigned peace for their parts,
and sought diverse ways to have all such questions ended, as might be cause of
contention between them, as may appear both by their offer of disputation,
and their sending to Paris for their further resolution, and satisfaction of
their ghostly children, after their offer of disputation was rejected by the
Archpriest. It is also well known, that the Counsel was not so informed at
that time of the difference between such men, as they took to be dangerous to
the State, and others, neither had any priests as then more favor then the
other had. And where it is said here, that the Priests sought occasions to
break again, it is most untrue: the contention was renewed by the Jesuits, who
after the peace was concluded, gave their censure, that those Priests were
schismatikes, who had deferred to subject themselves to the new authority
before they saw the Breue. And this contention was increased through the
default of the Archpr. who being certified of the Jesuits rashness in their
speeches concerning this point, did show himself to be of the same opinion:
and furthermore gave direction, that the priests should make account of their
being schismatikes, and satisfy, before they should receive the benefit of
absolution, as appears by the resolution diuulged by him from the mother
city. Of all which, the Breue dated the 17. August. 1601. takes notice. And
in the relation thereof, his Holiness uses these words: Quod dolentes
referimus, that is to say, which with grief we relate. And therefore it must
be great want of shame, to tell his Holiness in this Epistle, that the Priests
either made a show to obey, or sought occasions to break again. And this
testimony out of the Brief is of the more force, if it be true which is said
in the Preface to the Appendix, that his Holiness had not understood of any of
these scandalous books (for so it pleases this author to term the books
which the Priests set out) when he wrote the Breue, and therefore could not
receive any such information by them, as he does follow in the Breue.

The third matter is now answered by the Priests, there present in Rome.

To the fourth it is answered, that notwithstanding the Appeal, the Archpriest
proceeded against the Appellants, and principally because they had appealed; as
may appear by many acts which he did: and for this in particular, there is yet
his own hand to show, to a lay gentleman of the 16. of April 1601. This I
write unto you, to make you privy of the great spiritual danger, wherein you,
and all that receive any sacrament of M. Osw. Needam, may be, if it be so, that
he has subscribed to a seditious pamphlet colored with the name of an
Appeal. And in respect that the Archpriest did in this manner proceed against
the Appellants, without expecting his Hol. sentence and definition, which they
might have procured, notwithstanding his most irreuerent refutaries, the
Appellants proceeded to publish their cause in print without detraction, or
defamation, more then is requisite for the following of the cause in question.
And whereas it is here said, that a whole religion is defamed, it is most
untrue: as appears by the book to the Inquisition, page 5. the Sea of Rome
is no way dishonored, but rather maintained, and all lawful superiority:
neither were these books printed by secret favor and intelligence with the
Council and Bishop of London: For which this only argument might satisfy an
indifferent man, that they would have had a more skillful man to have printed
them, and not to have one to work, who (as the Latin book does very well
show) did not understand one word in Latin.

His exceptions against certain propositions, as scandalous, and temerarious,
leave some doubt in a man of judgment, whether this fellow be more ignorant or
more malicious. He refers his Holiness to the 2. and 11. Chap. of the Apol.
where he does too-much discredit himself, as shall be there showed. But lest
the Reader should conceive, according to the broadnesse of these terms, we
will here only note the propositions, which he terms scandalous, and
temerarious, and so leave them, until their place come to be defended.
Authority is not an infallible rule of truth in all, who have authority. No
man is bound in all things to believe or execute, what every man in authority
over him shall put upon him. Archpriests, and their superiors also the
Archdeacons, and other of higher degree have done amiss, and swarued from the
truth; and who upon earth is warranted from erring, but one, and not he in all
things. These propositions are put in the second Chapter of the Apol. fol. 16.
and in the margent, there is this note: Dangerous, and offensive doctrine. And
in the same Chap. fol. 19. there is exception taken at this proposition, The
sacrament of Confirmation is either most necessary in time of persecution, or
altogether vain, and as a superfluous ceremony in Gods Church. And in the
margent there is this note set, A very temerarious proposition: and he proves
it, because it is not absolutely necessary to salvation. If this fellow had
ever been a Soldier, he would have conceived the necessity perchance, of
Armor, and weapons in wars, although no man will say, that armor, or weapons
are absolutely necessary to the getting of a kingdom. In the 11. Chapter here
quoted, there is nothing but a certain remembrance of this point, with a
reference to the 2. Chapter, where what is said, shall be discussed, and answered
with less danger of the Inquisition, then this good fellow is in. And whereas
here also it is said, that by the Priests their own letters it may be proved,
that they have dealt expressly with the Queen and Counsel against the
Fathers of the Society, and such as stand with them: It is a false brag, and
will be taken for such, unless some other letter be forged, then that which is
cited in the 13. Chap. For this does not prove any such matter, as any man may
see. These are the words in that letter fol. 210, I have in some sort pacified
the wrath of our Prince, conceived against us, and of her Counsel, and have
laid the fault, where it ought to be, and proved that the Secular priests are
innocent for the most part. Which words cannot import, that he, who writ this
letter, had dealt against any, but only that he had dealt for some, who were
before thought to be as deep in matters displeasing to the State, as others:
the State being before out of doubt, that there were such plots, as were not
beseeming subjects, and much less beseeming men of our calling, and so much
the more odious, by how much the show of piety is dangerous, for the effecting
of any stratageme; And the Counsel thought, that all had been of one stamp:
wherein the Inditer of that letter affirms, he has otherwise informed them,
and freed the innocent. Now we will see, how this Author begins to close up
his Holiness mouth with as notorious a falsehood, as any of the rest.

They have obtained (says he) that four of their seditious company, that were
in prison before, have liberty under the Queens letters patents, to ride up
and down all England for a time, to gather money, and letters, which few Cath.
will dare to deny them, least they detect them to the Council, etc. This also
is a meditation upon the same letter, which is before cited, and is to be found
in the 13. Chap. of the Apol. fol. 210. wherein are these words: I have (by
opening the case unto their Honors and to Caesar) obtained that four
principal men shall be banished after a sort, to follow the appeal, D. Bagshaw,
Bluet, Champney, and Barneley, all prisoners: they shall be here with me on
Wednesday next. A month they shall have within the Realm, to ride abroad for
money amongst their friends, and then choose their port, etc. And from hence
perchance this fellow had some part of his intelligence: but how comes he to
enlarge himself so far, as to say, that these Priests had her Majesty's
letters Patents? upon what record has he found this? or does he mean thereby
to draw the Lord Keeper into question, as though he stood now in his light for
some what, which he has to effect, (all Letters patents being at his peril
upon record?) or does he know any Cath. who in such quandaries did give these
Priests any money? we know some, who, notwithstanding the great bond they had
to some of them, would not see them, neither would the priests press upon
them. Some again we know, who were requested to give somewhat to their journey
to Rome, if not for love of the men, yet for the love which they pretended to
peace, and to have a final end of the controversy, which could not be had but
at Rome: and nothing would be given. But this fellow cares not, what he says
to the Pope, presuming perchance, that by some way or other, all access should
be shut, and his falsehood should never be discovered. And thus forgetting that
which he says in the Apology cap. 11. fol. 162. that the intention of the
Priests seems not to be, to inform his Holiness, but to make a noise in
England, and to gain time of liberty, and to preoccupate some men's minds, by
making a show, that they appeal to the highest in this their controversy, but
yet indeed would be loath that he should know it, and much lother to answer it
before him, especially this Pope, etc, Here he tells the Pope in this
Epistle, that the Priests are to pass into France, and there, by the help of
the Queens Ambassadors, and other means, to procure (if they can) his most
Christian Majesty's letters to your Holiness in their favor, pretending that
they can get the Queen of England to give liberty of conscience, to some
Catholic, under certain conditions, whereof some must be, that the Jesuits
must go forth of England. All this is in handling (most holy Father) by the
children of iniquity, against Gods cause, and his servants, and will no doubt,
bring forth lamentable effects, if your Holiness do not speedily put your hand
thereunto. In this Apology we do lay down, by clear historical narration,
and authentical testimonies, the grounds of all. Christ our Savior inspire
your Holiness, etc. In the 10. Chap. of the Apol. fol. 147. there is a prayer
made to God, by the Archpr. to give him his grace, so to use Fa. Parsons
benefits, as that never he abuse them, and that never he fall into any
ungrateful behavior, etc. And in the margent there is this note, A prophecy
of the Archpriest to Fa. Parsons. How much more worthily does this place in
the Epistle deserve to be noted for a prophecy? but perchance he was loath,
that there should be any such prophecy, as that any good, or ease should come
to the Catholics, by the absence of the Jesuits in England. Wotteth he not,
that his Holiness knows, that no evil is to be done, although good should
ensue thereon? If it be a sinful act, to call the Jesuits out of England, what
fear is there, that his Holiness would do it? If it be no sinful act, to
call them out of England: and that thereupon may come ease, and quiet to the
Church, which has been a long time in the more grievous persecution, in regard
of the hard opinion, which our Prince, and Counsel have had of their
statizing, under a color of piety, and Religion: how far are these fellows
from that Spirit of Jonas, who willingly yielded himself rather to be thrown
out of the ship into the sea, then that through his default those, who were in
it, should perish? But of these matters we shall have cause elsewhere, to delate
more at large. And in the mean while we make humble request to the
indifferent Readers, to note well throughout the Apology how far this Author
is from all Authentical testimonies, in laying down the grounds of all such
matters, as are now in question: for we are not here to stand upon such
impertinent stuff, as he thrusts into his book, to the end, that by
shuffling in sometime some part of our matters, he might make them odious to
such, as will run over his packes without searching into them, what is
therein belonging to our controversy, and how little coherence it has with
that other, with which it is joined.

CHAP. 5. How the Apologie-maker by the same reason which he gives for the
publishing of his Apology, does give light to his reader to conceive the just
cause which the Priests had to print their books.
THe Preface of this Apology is to the Catholics of England to fore-arme, and
forewarne them, what is meant thereby, lest the matter being otherwise taken,
then it ought to be, should yield to scandal, and thereby overthrow (says he)
and work your ruin which is intended, and permitted by Almighty God, Father
of all mercies to your trial, and greater merit, etc. But this forearming of
the Catholics is such, as they ought all to be forewarned, what is meant by
this his fore-arming. For what Catholic, or worthy servant of God (as he
terms them) has ever before this time believed, that either scandal, or
their ruin has been intended, howsoever it has been permitted by Almighty
God upon some cause best known unto his divine Majesty? For how far off is
this fore-arming, or forewarning from his doctrine, who says, that the
betraying of Christ was Gods act in Judas, as well as repentance in S. Peter?
But I pray you see how he goes on, affirming that Christ sent adversaries to
afflict his Church: and which is most ridiculous, he avouches that he sent a
new kind of adversaries never heard of in the world before, named heretics,
that took unto themselves the name of the best sort of Christians etc. If
there were no heretics before, what were the Pharisees, and Sadduces? Of whom
Joseph lib. 18. Antiqui. Iud. cap. 2. affirms, that the Pharisees held opinion
that those souls, who after the separation from the body were found good, did
return again to some other bodies. And that the Sadduces did think that the
soul died with the body. And doubtless this was the cause, why it is so
precisely recorded in the second book of the Macchabees cap. 12. that Judas
did think piously, and religiously of the resurrection? For about this time
did these people rise, and fell very quickly into these heresies, perchance the
sooner for their very great pride, which they took of their over selfe-weening
religious course of life. Of the Saduces we have many testimonies in the new
Testament, and of their error, as Math. 22. Mar. 12. Luk 20. and Act 23. but
two notable places there are in the Acts of the Apostles, which show not only,
that these were errors, but heresies, and that they were Heretics, who are
related by the Evangelist, to have assaulted our Savior. We read in the 5.
chapter a company thus described: Quae est heresis Saducaeorum, which is the
heresy of the Saduces. And in the 24. chapter: Tertullus the orator accuses
S. Paul before Foelix the President in this manner, Inuenimus, etc. We found
this pestiferous fellow both raising contention against all the Jews in the
world, and broaching the sedition of the sect of those of Nazareth. And for
that word sect there is in the Greek copy (...), heresy. And in the same
chap. S. Paul answering for himself acknowledges, that he served God in that
way, which his accusers called heresy. Can there be any plainer Testimonies,
that there were heresies among the Jews, and so accounted by them, and the men
accused thereof, who held such opinions? But this good fellow writes to such,
as he thinks will not be evil conceited of him, howsoever he abuses them,
or himself, but will rather take his words for oracles, how contrary soever
they are to truth. Hereupon also he emboldeneth himself to cast many doubts,
and suspicions into his readers head, against the priests whom he calls
Libellers. First because (as he says) There is no certain author of their
books named. Secondly, because no license of superiors for printing is named.
Thirdly, because worthy men are defamed by name without intention, or
possibility to prove it by lawful means. To the first I answer, that the
authors names are as leageably set down in the books, which the priests set
out, as the authors names of this Apology. That book which is dedicated to
his Holiness is set out by the priests under their own names, as appears by
the title of the book, where it is said to be given to his Hol. by the priests
who were most unjustly defamed of schism and other crimes. And in the appeal
their names are particularly set down who they are, Page 119. and the other
are set out in the same manner. And this Apology is said to be written, and set
forth by priests united in due subordination to the Archpr. but the reader must
go look, who they are. This exception therefore against the priests books is
very absurd, and proves that the Apology comes nearer to the nature of a
Libel, then the Priests books. To the second I answer, that in case the
Superior be a party and labors what he may with all men, that the truth of
the question be not known, and to that end forbids, that any thing be
written, or read, which may give satisfaction to indifferent men, it is not
necessary to expect his license, neither is it a note of a Libel to print
without it.

To the third I answer, that there is no man touched in these books, but for
such matters, and upon such ground, as the authors of them are ready to
justify, and have already showed, that they have intention to prove them. In
which this Apology failing, as it must needs do, the author has already
given judgment against himself, that he is a notorious libeller, and that he
has brought all his followers, and furtherers herein, (whether consenters, or
spreaders of it abroad) into a heavy case, God amend them. But let us, I pray
you, examine the cause, why this Apology was written: (the author thereof
blaming so often the Priests for writing) Diverse points (says he) you know
already, and some more you are like to perceive by this our Apology (being
driven thereunto) but not all, for avoiding further scandal: which respect of
scandal should have withheld us wholly from putting pen to paper in this
cause, if the intemperance of some persons (given over as it seems to choler
and revenge, and forgetting both themselves and others, and the times wherein
they live) had not broken forth of late to such excess, as we are forced
against our wills, to put some stop, or bridle to so licentious and scandalous
proceedings, lest it infect even the good, and trouble the strongest, when they
see such enormous matters pass without controlement. In this justification of
his setting forth this Apology we gather, first that scandal is not always
to be avoided: For as he says: The respect of scandal should have withheld
him wholly from putting pen to paper in this case, if the intemperance, etc. so
that the intemperance belike of some persons may excuse a man doing that,
whereupon scandal may arise. Note I pray you, how this fellow can change his
hew, when it shall make for his purpose. When he will write himself, then the
intemperance of some persons is a sufficient excuse for him, although scandal
arise thereon. And when he would have others blamed, who were more grievously
injured, and provoked thereby to write then he is: he can preach unto them,
that S. Paul was of a spirit and judgment contrary to theirs, 1. Corinthians. 8.
who does so greatly exaggerate the danger of scandalizing any one of our
brethren for whom Christ died (as he said) that he would rather never eat
meat, then do it. Thus says this Apologie-maker in his Appendix, fol. 16.
And there he goes on also, and shows what Christ himself said: Matthew. 18.
That it were better suffer death in most hideous manner (to wit, with a
millstone at our necks to be cast into the sea) then to scandalize the least of
them, that believe in him, that be our Christian and Catholic brethren. And
then he concludes in this manner: So as this other divinity, that it may be
done for saving of our credites, mainteining our good names, and other
commodities, was not then known, and comes now down from a contrary spirit,
and Master, to Christ and S. Paul.

By this then it follows, that howsoever the Priests can avoid blame, this
Apologie-maker is in the lurch, who (having so great skill, not only in the
sayings of S. Paul, but of Christ also, and in divinity, and the true meaning
of it) notwithstanding he thought that some scandal would grow by this his
act, adventured contrary to true divinity to write this Apology. The
divinity which the priests do profess, teaches them that the scandal of
little ones is to be avoided: and the scandal of Pharisees is to be contemned.
And as they read in one place: Matthew. 16.
Qui scandalizauerit etc. Whosoever shall scandalize one of these little ones,
which believe in me, it were better for him that he had a millstone hung about
his neck, and he drowned in the bottom of the sea. So in another place they
find, that Christ (when his disciples told him that the Pharisees were
scandalized at that which he said) answered, Matthew. 15.
Sinite illos, etc. Let them alone, they are blind, and guiders of the blind.
There are diverse reasons set forth by the Priests, to justify their
publishing of their books: but to an indifferent Reader this place of the
Preface is warrant enough, since that in this authors opinion, there needs no
other caufe, then to put some stop or bridle to so licentious and scandalous
proceedings, least it infect, even the good, and trouble the strongest, when
they see such enormous matters pass, without controulment. Was there ever any
so licentious and scandalous proceedings, as have been against the Priests?
Can Fa. Listers, the Jesuits treatize of Schism be matched for excess, and
passion against Catholic priests? was there ever such an outrage committed in
Christendom by any Catholic to another, as this is, Harken, O ye factious, ye
are Rebels, ye are Schismatikes, and fallen out of the Church, and spouse of
Christ, ye have trodden under your feet the obedience which ye owe to the
highest Bishop: ye have sinned against all humane faith and authority, by
rejecting a moral certainty in a moral matter: ye have violently run into
excommunication, and irregularitie: ye have lost your faculties, by which you
should have gained souls to Christ: ye have so scandalized all the godly, as
now ye are generally become infamous? What shall I say more? ye have sinned
against Christ his chief Vicar, and Christ himself the Judge and Iusticer, by
your disobedience, that with Samuel the Prophet we may say: Quasi peccatum,
etc. as a thing of southsaying it is, to repugne; and as the offense of
Idolatry, not to be willing to be quiet. See I pray you, that ye are nothing
better then Southsayers and Idolaters. And because ye have not heard the
Church, while she spoke unto you by the chiefest Bishop, ye are as Ethnickes
and Publicans. And here I make an end, earnestly desiring the very mighty God,
that he will yet at the last give you his grace, lest that being thrust into
sempiternall destruction with Ethnicks and Idolaters you suffer immortal
pains for this your disobedience and scandal. Thus far F. Lister the
Jesuit. And was it not necessary, that there should be some stop put, or
bridle to this licentious and scandalous proceeding? was there not danger that
the good might hereby be infected? nay is it not evident, that many a good
soul has been infected, and many also of the strongest troubled hereby? and
had not then the Priests just cause to declare unto the world, how the case
stood with them in England: and to publish some reasons of their actions,
especially when after the peace made, and all injuries forgiven by them, the
Archpriest did not only not check these licentious and scandalous proceedings
of the Jesuits, broched afresh by them, but gave them his hand in this action,
and incontinently published this licentious and most scandalous libell, which
neither has the authors name, nor is likely ever to be justified. We have
received a resolution from our mother city, that the refusers of the appointed
authority were schismatikes. And surely I would not give absolution to any,
that should make no conscience thereof, etc. And therefore my direction is,
that they make account thereof, and do make satisfaction, before they receive
the benefit of absolution. Can this Apologie-maker find any such matter in any
of the books, which he does impugn, and term licentious and scandalous
proceedings? or can he show, how the good could be so dangerously infected, or
the strongest so greatly troubled by any thing which the priests have written,
as they may be with these treatises, resolutions, or libels of the Jesuits and
Archpriest? with what face does this author carpe at the priests books, and
say, that the style is most bitter and opprobrious, and nothing sauouring of
that spirit, that should be in the servants of one God? Could there be more
bitter speeches, then these before uttered against the priests? or is there any
one in those books which he impugneth, comparable to those which this fellow
himself uses against the priests in this Apology, calling them children of
iniquity, in the Epistle to his Holiness; sometimes Libertines, and other such
like, as the spirit moves him? But these his tricks, not being to be taken by
any man of judgment, but to proceed out of great excess and passion, and
himself thereby more likely then the priests to be condemned, he proposes
certain general considerations to trouble his discreet Reader: For example:
What manner of men these be, that have adventured to be the authors of so
intolerable a scandal in our English Church: what may be their motives: what
their ends: what their means, by secret combining themselves with the enemy,
for defaming such, as they most fear and hate: and finally, what may be
doubted in the sequel: and how disunited these men be from their lawful
superiors, and consequently from God also, as justly may be suspected: yet for
better enforming the Reader of diverse particularities falsely and unjustly set
down in their late books, or infamatorie libels, which I suppose the more
pious sort of men will have scruple to read or look upon, we are, etc. A
notable insinuation, that every man must listen to him and his partners, and
must not once look upon any thing which the priests allege for themselves.
And this caveat was very necessarily put in here, and conformable to that
policy, out of which the Edicts proceeded, that no man must see, what the
priests could say for themselves, lest that the iugling of their adversaries
should be seen by the Catholics, and they reduced to those, to whom in the
end they must adhere, when the true causes of all this division are to be
ripped up and judged.

But if the discreet reader would but enter into the first consideration, which
is here proposed unto him, that is, what manner of men these be, his discretion
will enforce him to hear them. For some of them are of the most ancient
Priests in England: some have suffered long imprisonment, and were never
touched with any thing blameworthy, before this controversy began. In the
time of greatest need these men have been of those, who have most employed
themselves in all parts of England, and what has been praiseworthy done in
any disputations at any time with the Protestants, it has been by some of
them. This therefore, and the like contemptible speeches, as Cap. 9. fol. 119.
such as they be, and such like, do argue nothing, but an intolerable pride in
this Author: who being inferior to many of them for many good parts in them,
uses a little liplabour (the best quality which he has) to disgrace them. In
which doubtless he will have bad success with a discreet Reader, and will
discover himself and his fellows, to have been the Authors of this
intolerable scandal in our English Church. The second consideration here
proposed to the discreet Reader is; what may be their motives. And for this the
discreet Reader, if he will (as discretion would lead him) look into their
books, he will find that their motives were, to show how badly the Jesuits,
and Archpriest have dealt with them; and how unjustly they have been defamed of
schism, and other enormous crimes, as before is showed: and that the end which
they desire is, peace, when the truth shall be known, which so long as it is
smothered up, can never breed peace. And thus is the next consideration at an
end, which was what their ends were. Now follows, what their means are, by
secret combining themselves with the enemy. But first he must have told the
discreet Reader, what enemy this was. The priests never took other for enemy,
then what they judged error, having always honored the personages of such, as
to whom they do owe honor. And if this have been now lately perceived by our
Prince, and the State, and thereupon they have showed such favor unto them, as
faithful and loyal subjects do, or may deserve (notwithstanding the
controversy in Religion) how does this fellow call it a combining with the
enemy? If the priests had at any time done any thing, which they are not ready
to justify at the feet of his Holiness, this good fellow might have cast some
odd surmise into his Readers head: but the contrary being so evident, as the
world is now a witness, the discreet Reader need not stand any longer upon this
consideration, nor upon the next: which is, what may be doubted in the sequel:
they having in this as well as in any other thing, behaved themselves no
otherwise, then has become Catholic priests. Lastly the discreet Reader must
consider how they are disunited from their lawful Superior, and consequently
from God also. A simple consequence: but well beseeming the charity with which
this Apology was written. What bad man in authority will not think himself
much bound to this Author for this his consequence? Must he consequently be
justly suspected to be disunited from God, who shall not run wholly with his
superior? Cannot a lawful superior do amiss? and in that misdoing may he not
be forsaken by those, whose superior he is, without incurring a just suspicion,
that they are dsunited from God? Have not the priests oftentimes offered to
have these matters scanned and determined (by which the disunion has grown)
with all submission? And has not the Archpriest refused this offer, and
written back again unto them, that their petition is a tumultuous complaint?
And how then can they be said, to be disunited from their superior, and not
rather the superior from them? and he in refusing to do that which is honest
and just, is more disunited perchance from God, then he takes himself to be,
or those who direct him in these his strange courses. After these
considerations follows a fair promise to bring forth authentical proofs of
such matters, as are, or should here be handled. But, they being not yet ready,
the Reader must content himself, with what this Author can at this time
afford him, and hope to see somewhat in a larger Apology. And he will
perform this in a far other style, then the priests used in their books, if
God assist us (says he) with his grace and holy Spirit. A very good condition,
and such as would gladly be seen in any of his actions, and his fellows: who
(both in their Libel, which was spread abroad under F. Lister the Jesuits name,
and in this Apology, yea almost immediately after this godly resolution) are so
far from Christian spirit, or ordinary modesty, as it could not but be an
exceeding joy to all their friends, to see any jot of Gods grace or assistance
of his holy Spirit in them. But as it seems by the latter end of this
preface, there is some kind of resistance made against this assistance of Gods
grace and holy Spirit. Where this author faigning unto himself, that these
books against which he writes, could not be published in the style they go
in, by any modest and Christian spirit, he concludes that they are published
by some one, or few discomposed passionate people, or by some heretic, etc.
and so as to such, we shall answer (says he) and not to our brethren: yet
does his answer throughout all the Apology light upon the Priests, although
indeed the terms which are used, would much better fit an heretic against an
heretic: so little do they savor either of modesty, or Christian spirit.

CHAP. 6. How this present controversy about the abuse of this new
subordination is deduced from John of Gaunt, and other matters most impertinent
thereunto. Apol. cap. 1.
Having showed through how foul, dark, uneven, and ill sauouring an entry
this author has lead his devoted to this Apology, the indifferent reader may
probably conjecture, that in the end there will be nothing to be seen, but a
boldness in auerring any untruth: a slight in casting mistes before his
eyes, to hold him still in ignorance of the truth: a defect of plain dealing,
when he is driven to say something: and a heap of slanders, with most odious
insinuations, to bring the Secular priests into contempt, and obloquy.

In the first chapter of the Apology, entitled, What great hurts have come to
England by emulation of the Laity against the Clergy, and of Secular priests
against religious, and of the state of the present controversy in question, he
makes an abridgement of the whole book following, and contriueth it in such
manner, as whereas he begins at John of Gaunt, he might as much to the
purpose have begun at the division, emulation, and contention, which the
enemy raised in Cain against his brother Abel. For although he entitle the
Chapter, of hurtes come to England by emulation, and therefore a story of
emulation in England may seem to come nearer to his purpose: yet his discourse
being of emulation, by which the reduction of England to the Catholic faith
has been hindered, he might as well have applied the story of Abel and Cain, as
that of John of Gaunt, and John Wickliffe, who were dead, and buried, I^. Stow.
in vita Ric. 2. An. 1384.
and this last also had his bones taken up, and burned above 40 years after,
to wit in the year 1425. by commandment of Pope Martine the 5. which was an
hundredth years before the discontinuance of the Catholic faith in England, or
the least declining thereof, as may appear by the most zealous disposition of
K. Henry 8. who in Anno 1521. deserved that most glorious title, Defender of
the faith. But let us see how handsomely he patcheth his geere together: thus
he begins the first chapter.

If ever the enemy of mankind did bestirre himself, and all his power to let
any public good of the English nation, it has been in this, of the reduction
of the Catholic faith. For hindering whereof, he has tried all his possible
means, as before we have noted: but especially that of division, emulation,
and contention has been his chiefest. For by emulation of the Nobility against
the Clergy, and of Secular priests against religious, he raised John Wickliffe
above 200. years past, whom John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, son to King
Edward the 3. together with the residue of his faction (upon emulation he had
with B. Arundel of London, B. Wickam of Winchester, and others) did set up, and
maintain against those and the rest of the Clergy: especially against
religious men, that had possessions: Wickliffe being a Secular priest himself.
Thus says this author: and then he goes forward, affirming how that certain
motions were made concerning the taking away of the Abbey lands, and giving
them to the Crown: which motions were made upon the same emulation under the
Kings, Richard 2, Henry 4, Henry 5, and others: and took effect in the time of
King Henry 8. And in the end concludes, that the want of restitution of Abbey
lands was the hindrance of reconciliation in Queen Mary's days. But this
doubtless argued rather an unwillingness in the Laity to part with the
Church livings, of which they were now in possession, then an emulation in them
against the Clergy, or religious. And therefore in this conclusion the Author
does seem much to forget himself, who undertook to show that emulation, and
not want of restitution of Church livings hindered the reduction of England to
the Catholic faith. It seems that he aimed only at this, that (the
controversy being now principally between some Secular priests, and some
religious) he might drive into his Readers head some sinister conceit of the
Secular priests: and to that end tells a tale of the enemy of mankind, and
how he raised a Secular Priest against religious: and how that malice took
effect in K. Henry the 8. days, and the Laity would not restore the Church
livings in Q. Mary's days.

And if the Reader can put all this together, and cry out against the Secular
Priests, habetur intentum, as truants use to say in the schools, when they
know not how to deduce the conclusion to their minds in form out of the
premises, without laughter in the hearers. We have before showed, how that
neither by Wickliffe nor by John of Gaunt, there could be any hinderance of the
reducing of England to the Catholic faith: and consequently how impertinent
this story is to that, for proof whereof it was brought. But for the better
discovering of this fellow his falsehood and sinister dealing, you shall
understand that this John Wickliffe was a Secular Priest. And although in
receiving that holy Order, he also received so indelible a character, as he
must be still a Priest, how wickedly soever he behaved himself: yet he did not
receive any confirmation in grace, but might fall into most great enormities,
as the most holy (not confirmed in grace) may do. And entering out of a
melancholy humor, which grew upon him, by being deprived of a benefice which he
had, into a good conceit of himself, that he was not sicut caeteri homines, as
other men were, he changed his life from the ordinary life of the Secular
Priests, into a streighter rule, and took another habit. Io. Stow in Ed. ^. An
1377.
He and all his followers went barefooted, and in course russet garments down
to the heels, and in contempt of temporal goods, his conversation was with
those Religious that had no possessions, and joined himself unto the begging
Friars, approouing their poverty, and extolling their perfection: Evident
tokens that he had left the state of a Secular Priest, and ascended to some
higher degree of perfection. But as it should seem, he was neither Monk nor
Friar, but talis qualis, such as he was, or as other perchance who came after
him, although they follow him not in all things: For as it appears in our
Chronicles, he preached against Monks and other religious men that had
possessions, and taught such doctrine, as he was condemned for it in the
Council of Constance as an heretic, and his bones were taken up and burned, as
is beforesaid. Whereby also this author is proved to forget himself very
much, to number him amongst the Clergy, which is generally taken for such, as
are not only in Orders, but live also in unity of the faith. Wherefore
purposing to tell a tale of emulation in the Clergy against the Religious, he
should have taken some other to have proved it, then Wickliffe, who also (by
his pretense no doubt of greater perfection) had forsaken the state of a
Secular Clergy man, as appeared by his habit, and conversation. To these
falsehoods, and covert calumnies against the Secular Priests, this deceit of
this author may be added, That whereas the Chronicles do mention, that not
only John Wickliffe, but four doctors of divinity also (one of every Order of
the begging Friars) joining with him, were employed by John of Gaunt in his
grudge against Bish. Wickham of Winchester, in whose defense the B. of London
(not Arundell, as this author affirms, but Courtney) speaking as became him
to do, John of Gaunt threatened him also, and swore, that he would pull down
both the pride of him, and of all the Bishops in England: this author
mentions only the Secular Priest (as he terms him) without any mention of
the orders of Religion, which were also employed. Moreover, it sounds very
foolishly, that John of Gaunt would set John Wickliffe against the Monks, upon
an emulation which he had against the Bishops, their estates depending so
little upon the estate of the Monks: as when all the Abbyes in England were
put down, the Bishops remained in as great honor as ever they did. And whereas
it is further said, that the Abbey lands were taken from the Monks, and given
to the maintenance of the crown by the same emulation of the Clergy against
the Religious in the time of K. Henry the eight, it is most false: the Abbyes
being then put down by a change of Religion, which had not the beginning upon
any such emulation as this author affirms, but upon the persuasion of
Longland B. of Lincoln, the Kings confessor, fortified by Card. Wolsey, viz.
that his Highness marriage with the Lady Katherine his brother Prince Arthurs
wife, was unlawful and against the word of God: whereby the King being induced
to seek a divorce, but crossed therein with the Pope by Charles the fifth,
nephew of the Lady Katherine, and some others, as well of the Laytie as the
Clergy, both Secular and Religious here in England, it wrought in the King
such a dislike of his Holiness, and others, as it procured not only the
overthrow of the Abbyes, but such a change in Religion, as since the world has
seen. Of this alteration therefore, if any emulation were the beginning, it
was an emulation in the Cardinal (who dealt with B. Longland, to persuade the
King, as is mentioned, and afterward did second him with all his might
himself) against the Emperor, for hindering him of the Popedom: and neither
the sister, nor the mother to ambition (as this author would have it) but her
daughter.

But the greatest folly committed by this author in this his exordium is not
yet touched: and that is, that among all other histories impertinent to the
controversy in question, he would make his choice of one wherein himself (if
we are not deceived) is notoriously disciphered. John Wickliffe was a Secular
priest: being a priest, and neither Monk nor Friar: and no Secular priest as
differing from them in habit, and conuersing with the religious Mendicants,
under pretense of greater perfection. His followers took no name of him, as
both Monks and Friars do of their founders, and Sectaries of their Masters:
but went under the name, which the common people gave them, to wit, Lollards.
He was used as an instrument by John of Gant, to bring that to pass which this
Duke had long conceived in his mind. For he saw (says the History) Ioh. Stow.
sup.
that it would be hard for him to obtain his purpose, the Church standing in
his full state, etc. Wherefore he labored first to overthrow as well the
liberties of the Church, etc. And to this end did John Wickliffe bestow his
talents: for he was not only eloquent (says the history) but also seemed to
contemn temporal goods for the love of eternal riches, etc. This author,
being in a state which once was of Secular priests, now no state of Secular
priests: not because he will be taken for either Monk or Friar, or go
barefoote as John Wickliffe did and his followers, or basely clothed (for these
are outward mortifications) which of what edification soever they are, yet are
not worthy of that honor, which is due to the inward mortifications, which lie
hid, and are not seen by the corporal eye. But because Pope Gregory the 13.
has so declared it: yet so as he being filius populi (as people say) has no
other name, but what the people give him, he is employed not by John of Gant
himself in his own person (for this great Duke died above 200 years since)
but by John of Gant in some of his posterity, who has somewhat to bring to
pass, which he has long conceived in his mind: for the effecting of which,
this godly Father is busied in the corrupting the Clergy of England, or the
utter ouerthowing it: which at this present, he and his do work by taking
from them their good name and fame, and making them odious without just cause,
to the people. And to the end that he would be known not to have spent his
time idly in Wickliffe his school, he has not only employed his tongue,
but his pen also: and in his first platform of Reformation has ordained, that
none of the Clergy shall possess any temporal livings, but shall live upon
such pensions, as shall to certain of his company and some secular Priests
(joined with them) in their wisdom seem necessary for their maintenance. But
let us now see whether this author can fit himself better in the next point.

In the beginning also (says he) of this Queens days, the little affection
which the Laity did bear unto the Clergy, procured by some unquiet spirits,
as also the small union of diverse Clergy men among themselves, some holding
with the heretics and politikes by beat of faction, was a great occasion of
the total overthrow of religion, whereupon also the same devil brought in the
division of opinions, about going to the heretical Churches and service, which
most part of Catholics did follow for many years: and when the better and
truer opinion was taught them by Priests and Religious men from beyond the
seas, as more perfect and necessary, there wanted not many that opposed
themselves, especially of the elder sort of Priests of Q. Mary's days. And
this division was not only favored by the Council, but nourished also for
many years, by diverse troublesome people of our own, both in teaching and
writing. See how shamefully he follows still this bug emulation. If the
little affection in the Laity toward the Clergy, and little union amongst the
Clergy themselves, were then culpable, what reward must they have, who now have
effected the same to the overthrow of religion, which by the great pains of
many religious Priests, has gotten root in many? But to our purpose. It is
evident that no emulation was cause of the change of the Catholic Roman
religion, professed in her sisters time, but her Majesty's conscience, I must
think: her Highness having been ever trained up, both in her fathers, and
brothers times, in the religion of the Protestants, and following to that
purpose the counsel of such as thought not so well of the Church of Rome, as
of the Religion that is now professed, Io. Stow. in Eliz. An. 1. 1559.
as may appear by such acts as are registered to have been done presently upon
her Majesty's coming to the Crown. But as for the Catholics their going to
the Church, it was somewhat more to be lamented perchance, then to be blamed,
before it came to be a sign distinctiue, by which a Catholic was known from
one, who was no Catholic. For this consideration only in the judgment of the
Jesuits in their Roman College, made the going to Church unlawful in
England, as we have heard M. James Younger (afterward Doctor of Divinity)
affirm, who presented unto them the discourse, which Bell made in defense of
going to the Church with a protestation.

It is also well known that Fa. Bosgraue the Jesuit, at his first coming
over into England, went to Church, until he understood, that now it was
become a sign distinctiue, and was excused for that fact by his ignorance of
the then present state of our Country: himself coming from such places,
where it was not taken for so heinous a matter to go to the Protestants Church.
F. Alexander and his fellow Jesuit may much more fitly be said in the spirit of
this author, to be the devils instruments in Scotland, by bringing in a
division of opinions about going to the puritanical assemblies, after that the
Catholics there had been instructed by the secular priests of the danger
thereof, and forbore those meetings: whereby it was become also there a sign
distinctiue. But whenever any troublesome of any sort has either in
teaching, or writing nourished this, or any other division, bending this way,
the Secular priests have showed themselves most vigilant and constant in the
defense of unity, and the safety of our English Church: as it very well
appeared by M. Io. Mush his labors against Bell in the North: his and M.
Watsons confirmation of the Catholics in Scotland against those Jesuits, Fa.
Alexander and his fellows: and the standing against Fa. Walley and Fa.
Southwel, (two Jesuits) in the South by M. Collington, and M. Charnock, when
these Jesuits did teach the Catholics (who were called to the bar openly at
Assizes or Sessions, in the year 1591) that they might lawfully (to keep
themselves out of prison, for not going to the Church) yield to go to this or
that learned Protestant to co^ferre with him in matters of their faith: which
could imply no other (at the least in the face of the world) then a doubt of
their faith, or a contentment to be instructed in their faith by such, as in
their conscience they took for heretics: and consequently it was a denial of
their faith before men, if this axiom keep his old authority: Dubious in fide
est infidelis: He that is doubtful in his faith is an infidel. But after all
this trouble was ended, Fa. Southwell (as we understand) employed M. Standish
to tell M Charnocke, that he was now of mind, that it was a thing unlawful.
And Fa. Walley told M. Collington that his meaning was only, that the
Catholics should go to the houses of the learned Protestants, not to confer
with them, but rather as a temporal punishment, to quit them from going to
prison: which how ridiculous a shift it is, any man of mean understanding may
easily perceive, and also what kind of people they were, whom it was likely
the Council did most favor, if they would debase themselves to deal in such
offices, as the Author of the Apology does here affirm. And thus much for his
second passage.

The third matter which here he affirms is, that certain Catholics liked
not, that the Catholic English Clergy should be restored at the least by way
of a Seminary, which was begun at Doway. which because it passes my
capacity, I will not enter into, further then this; that they were strange
Catholics, of what nation soever they were (that Seminary not having any rule,
by which the Students were bound to any thing more, then to study Divinity,
after which they might dispose of themselves as they would) but this Author
says, that those Catholics their letters are yet to be seen: and perchance
they will come forth with the larger Apology, and give credit to this so
strange an assertion. In the mean while this Author will go forward with the
narration of those hurts and difficulties, which upon emulation have fallen out
in this our English cause under the Queen that now is, especially concerning
the Seminaries, etc. But first as it should seem the Gentleman must have a
pipe of Tobacco, for that his stomach is marvelous full: and before he can
come to this narration, he must disgorge himself. Having therefore told his
Reader, how that some Catholics were against the restoring of the English
Clergy (as is before showed) thus he eases himself: And for so much as the
principal and only ground of this our present contention, and scandalous
controversy, is the very same disease of emulation, partly of Lay men against
Priests, and partly of Priests against religious men (especially the Fathers of
the Society, with whom at this present they have to do) and that this
emulation is accompanied with apparent wicked sisters and daughters, as
Ambition, envy, hatred, contention, malice, pride, malediction, and other
like: it is an easy thing for our brethren and others, to discern, from what
root these buds do spring: and consequently, either to avoid them in
themselves, or that other men be careful to take heed of them.

See I pray you, what loathsome stuff here is: and so peremptorily set down,
as it does most lively represent the known old medicine to kill fleas, by
putting dust in their mouths. If but half of these matters here alleged were
proved against the Priests, doubtless they were to be avoided by Catholics,
as such as wanting no faults in themselves, would hardly instruct others in
virtue. But this Author being not as yet settled to his Apology, without doubt
discovers that he is not free from all those vices, which he has reckoned
(if he want any of them) who upon so small, or rather no cause, or evidence,
would have his Reader to enter into so rash, and vile a judgment of the
Secular priests, as though his Apology were to no purpose, unless his Reader
would carry such an uncharitable conceit of them, as there should be no need of
any Apology, or defense of those who are their adversaries. But now to his
ground of this present contention.

The principal, or only ground (says he) of this our present contention and
scandalous controversy, is the very same disease of emulation, partly of Lay
men against Priests, and partly of Priests against religious men: especially
the Fathers of the Society, with whom at this time they have to do, etc. We
have before showed that the emulation of the Laity against the Clergy (of
which he speaks before) was, for that the Clergy were thought to be an
hinderance to some designments of the Laity: and thereupon some few devised
how to indomage the Clergy. The emulation also which was said to have been in
the Clergy against the religious, Io^. Stow in Edw. 3. Anno 13^7.
has been showed not to have been in the Clergy, but in Wickliffe and his
society, surnamed by the people Lollards. And if any of the Clergy may be
said to have joined with Wickliffe in that his insolent and heretical attempt,
they were of the Religious clergy, and not of the Secular. And this emulation
was against the religious who had possessions. Now then (good sir) if the
principal or only ground of this our present contention and scandalous
controversy is the very same disease of emulation: you must show what like
cause the Lay men have found in the Clergy, or the Priests in the Religious,
especially the Fathers of the Society, who by their rule have no properties,
nor can possess any thing, T.W. in his Di^res^on from the 16. Martyrs. page 63.
as M T.W. would have us to think. We have given a cause before of the
contrary part, why the Lay men (who follow the Jesuits) and the Jesuits also
may be thought to stir up themselves against some Secular Priests: to wit,
because that some of the Secular Priests cannot be brought to like of such
plots, as the Jesuits have laid for the invasion of our Country, in which they
have employed themselves oftentimes, and thrust also some Secular Priests into
the action (although most grievously against their wills) namely in the year
1596. And if this Author had not used this parenthesis speaking of Religious
men ( especially the Fathers of the Society, with whom at this present they
have to do) we should never have dreamed, that this digression from hurts done
in this Queens days, had been made against the Priests, who stand upon their
defense, against the impostures of the Jesuits, and their adherents, because so
small a number of the Laity, do stand with those priests, and the priests
themselves are so few, (by this good fellow his account) as he disdaineth much,
that they are called the priests. And in the 11. Chap. of the Apol. fol. 162.
he alleges it for the second abuse, slight or shift, which was used toward
his Holiness in the title of the book dedicated unto him: wherein it is said,
that the troubles were between the Jesuits on the one side with the Archpr.
etc, and the Seminary priests on the other side. But no doubt herein this fellow
his memory did fail him, as also in another matter there mentioned: For
whereas here he affirms, that the principal, and only ground of this our
present contention, and scandalous controversy, is the very same disease of
emulation, partly of Lay men against priests, and partly of Priests against
religious men, especially the Fathers of the Society: In the 11. Chap fol.
161. and 162. he affirms, that the Priests their controversy is with the
Archpr. etc. and that their stomach against the Jesuits is for standing with
him, and for him. So as by this reckoning the case is plainly altered: For if
the principal, and only ground of this our present contention, and scandalous
controversy, be the very same disease of emulation, partly of Laymen against
Priests, and partly of Priests against religious men, especially the Jesuits:
to which of these two members will this Author bring this controversy, which
in the 11. Chap. he says is between Priests, and their Archpriest? he cannot
bring it to the first, which is of Lay men against Priests, for then he must
account the Priests (between whom, and the Archpr. the controversy is) or the
Archpr. among Lay men, which I trust he will not. He cannot bring it to the
second, which is of Priests against Religious. For then the Archpr. (between
whom, and the priests is the controversy) must be confessed to be religious:
which also (as I ween) he will not say: especially, that he is a Jesuit, as
he expounds himself, or a Father of the Society, with whom at this present
(as he says here) they (the priests) have to do. For at this he laughed, Number.
16. in his table of falsehoods. But perchance his strayning to disgorge
himself, caused a lightness in his head, that he knew not well what he said.
The filth then before showed, being now out of his stomach, For better
declaration of this matter (says he) I shall go forward with the narration of
those hurts, and difficulties, which upon emulation have fallen out in this our
English cause, under the Queen that now is, especially concerning the
Seminaries, and the reduction of England by that way, and mean procured, for
these 20. years, and more: to wit, since the beginning of the Roman English
College, which was in the year 1578. at what time a contention began
between M. Doct. Lewis then Archdeacon of Cambray, but after B. of Cassana,
and the English scholars, about the manner of government, and governors of that
house, erected especially by his procurement, and industry.

He has showed you before, what hurt came to England by the emulation which
some Catholics had against the restoring of a new English Clergy at Doway,
which notwithstanding, the Seminary there flourished: and afterward also at
Rhemes in France in such sort, as England (thanks be to God) did not feel
that hurt, until new Lords came, who were of the Jesuits faction, and were
forced sometime to run with them, for some respects, how small soever their
inward devotion was unto them. Now he will give you to understand what great
hurt our English cause has had by emulation, which was at Rome. And because he
will take all before him, he says that Doctor Lewis (after B. of Cassana) and
the scholars fell out about the manner of government and governors of the
house, which doubtless if this fellow had any respect to the good reputation
of the Scholars, he would have concealed, the house being erected, especially
by that man his procurement and industry, as here it is confessed. For in
reason, who would not have expected, to have borne some sway in that of which
he might justly have been called in some sort a founder, being moreover a man
of great wisdom and integrity? But this Author thinks it good policy, to
conceal Fa Parsons presence at Rome at that time, lest that the riddle should
be read otherwise then he would have it, and the cause of dissension
disciphered. The truth is, that F. Parsons was there, and there needs no
more to be said. And he did deal with the scholars under hand, and as
secretly as he might, but failed of the Rectorship, if he sought it: although
T.W. in his digression from the 16 martyrs, page 53. amongst other his follies
does affirm, that the first Rector of this College was F. Robert Parsons,
etc. And to say that the Council did lay hands presently, hoping thereby to
keep a perpetual division in our nation, is to argue the Council of a great
oversight, and want of consideration, that a division in a nation proves
oftentimes a desolation or utter overthrow thereof. But let us see what
substantial proof there is of this assertion: For which cause (says this
Author) diverse spies were sent over to nourish the said division, as namely one
Vanne (if we remember well) who died in the Inquisition at Rome in the year
1581. and soon after they used another named Solomon Alread, a Tailor by his
trade, and married first at Lions in France: but after getting acquaintance at
Rome, and Millaine, he became a statesman, went in and out diverse times to the
Council of England, until at last being discovered, he remained for servant
with Sir Fran. Walsingham the Q Secretary: and lastly, professed heresy.
Vanne is said to be employed by the Counsel, to nourish this division in our
nation; but what he did, it is not said: this the reader himself must
imagine: neither is it said, with whom he joined, when he came to Rome, or
with whom he dealt: only it is said, that he dyed in the Inquisition; which
argues that he was some obstinate heretic. And this example is as foolishly
brought, to prove emulation in the Laytie against the Clergy, as that of
Wickliffe was to prove emulation of the Clergy against the religious, both
being heretics: and consequently neither of them of that body, of which we
are to understand this Author when he talks of the Laytie and Clergy,
unless he will also take that word Religious to extend it self to such
Apostata Jesuits, as are either at Geneua, or elsewhere. And then will he make
himself ridiculous in affirming, that emulation against such religious should
hinder the reduction of England to the Cath. faith. Solomon Alread was a
Catholic, and a great deuote of the Jesuits, both at Lions in France and
elsewhere. And if by his peuking, he did at any time discover what he received
of them, this author (who neglects the credit of all whatsoever, to save the
Jesuits credit) should have covered it, not having named any place of this man's
conversation, where he should become a Statesman, but such as where the
Jesuits were his directors, as Lions in France, Rome, and Millaine. And if
after the edification he had of the Jesuits, he returned into England, and
offered his service to Sir Francis Walsingham her Majesty's Secretary, Sir
Francis had little reason to refuse him, or not to employ him, although we
cannot learn that ever he did any harm in the English College at Rome. And
therefore this example of emulation in the Laytie against the Clergy, is as
small to the purpose as the former. His being a Tailor might perchance make to
the purpose in this authors conceit; but his being a married man, is doubtless
here mentioned, for no other end then to put us in mind, that married men can
play the merchants as well as others: as if we had forgotten, that as the
Council did second the Jesuits (who were not married) in the first division at
the College of Rome by sending Vanne thither, (as this author says) who was an
unmarried man, so did the Jesuits second the Councils imploiment of this
Solomon Alread, (who was married) in the furthering of their faction in the same
College at Rome, by entertaining Pierce amongst some other straglers, who was
also a married man, and his wife known to be living, to make up a small number
of 8. or 10. pious youths, (as the Jesuits did term them) to stand with them
against all the rest of the students in the College: yet in this one trick
the Jesuits went beyond our Council, in that they made their married man
Cornutus, by putting him in a square cappe, the better to effect that which
they did by his means. For this was he, who after many devises, prevailed at
the last with three of the Students, to go to a Tavern to drink, where they
were no sooner set, then apprehended by the Sbirri. And the matter was made so
odious, as hereby they lost the favor of his Hol. and were brought into a most
servile subjection to the Jesuits, not without the great grief of their
friends, who long after complained, that they had very evil handled a good
cause. And although these were the first stratagems, which were laid open to
the world: yet were diverse causes given of disquietnes, even from the first
foundation of that College: For the Jesuits having gotten the government
thereof into their hands, and in such sort, as they were most earnestly
requested thereunto by such, as (howsoever this Author does brag of them,
Chap. 5. fol. 28.
and their petitions to his Holiness) confessed not long after, that they knew
not what they had done; they began to strike (as we say) while the iron was
hot, and labored a couple of the Students to become Jesuits, to wit, Thomas
Wright, and John Barton, who were well esteemed of for their towardliness. And
although both of them did afterward leave the society of the Jesuits: yet
their present example, together with the Jesuits bad endeavors, was occasion of
much disunion of minds in the College: which when it was perceived, the
Jesuits the better to norish this division, and to cover their own dealings,
employed such of the Students in that office, as had already devoted themselves
unto their society: and did countenance them against those, who complained
thereof: insomuch as it was too apparent, that some were of purpose deferred,
or kept from going into the society of the Jesuits, to the end they might
persuade others to the same course, which was in deed the undoing of that
College. For now the Students did not know, how to discern one of their own
fellows from the Jesuits, which began to swarm amongst them; and grew in the
end to that malapartnesse, as they laughed, and iested at the Students to their
faces: yet must all be accounted the work of the spirit. And if this spirit
were at any time found, then to bleare the Students eyes, it was devised, that
no man did persuade any to leave the College, to become Jesuits: but did only
eleuate the minds of such good wits, as were capable thereof, to a desire of
some higher state of perfection: In which when they had once prevailed, and
that the student was now resolved thereupon, and consequently to leave that
course in which he was, by being a member of the College, they did the more
boldly ask this question, why the Student, minding to leave the College, and
betake himself to a state of greater perfection, or security, might not be
exhorted to be a Jesuit rather then of any other order of religion. By which
poor shifts the Jesuits were often discovered, that they sought their own
honor more, then the good, either of the College, or of our country: both
which, through these occasions, have come pretily forward to utter ruin. And
these were the troubles, which this Author mentions in this Apology, cap. 11
fol. 170. although he would seem to smother them under a much-making of M.
Mush, who was a principal instrument of the Jesuits in this disturbance of the
College, and he is not ashamed to object to the Fathers (says this author)
their partiality toward some, more then toward other, and all this to draw
young men to their society, whereas in the former we know by experience, and
can testify that no other thing ever wrought the Fathers more trouble in the
College, while this man was there, then their over much love and favor to him
above his merits, as other men thought, and yet was not this to draw him to
their society, seeing they would not admit him in so many years, as he
pretended to enter, foreseeing (as may be thought) his perilous nature, etc.
His service we may see how much it was worth unto him: he was kept out, as many
are, in all places where there are Jesuits; because being Jesuits, they cannot
but with too great a wrack of modesty, so inordinately commend them, as they
must be commended, nor, without demonstration of excessive desire of riches,
importunate others, to give them such lands, and goods, as are not to be lost
for want of asking, which while no Jesuits do hunt after, they are thrust upon
them (good men) and with all charity are embraced, with most godly intention,
to be bestowed in pios vsus. But it shall be always in the Jesuits choice, to
receive such a purueyor into their order: and he must during life be in a
servile estate, ready to attempt, what they shall command him (for their
entreaties are also commandments) or else he shall be turned going with his
livery. They would not admit him, foreseeing (as may be thought) his perilous
nature. But to leave such fools in their expectation of a like reward, after
so many years better service to them, then unto their Country (although we
make no doubt, but some think they do well, and that all is gold that
glistereth) we will return to examine that which follows concerning the
great harms, which this author has espied to have come to England, through
emulation (as he pretends) of others: but least these two, to wit, Vanne and
Alread, should not seem enough, to convince the great hurt, which has come to
England by emulation of the Laity against the Clergy, this author inculcateth
to his reader, that the Council still pursued this office of stirring division
between the followers of D. Allen, and D. Lewis, for both whom he does here
give his word, that it was much against their wills, although not long after
fol. 5. he calls the one an emulator of the other. But to let this pass, and
to bear with this poor man, whose memory seems to be very greatly
ouercharged with this Apology, we must also understand, that this plot of the
Council was much helped by a new accident: and that was, that certain
Gentlemen, having once joined (as it should seem with D. Allen, Fa Parsons,
and Sir Francis Inglefield, and the rest of the body of Catholics at home and
abroad, in certain affairs of our Country, parted sometime from them: and by
going another way, among other inconveniences thereupon ensuing, overthrew the
Queen of Scots. A proof to serve a poor turn, and very impertinent in this
place: yet such, as were it not a discredit for wise men to take advantage of a
mad man's words, it were sufficient to call all Cath. in question, and those
affairs, what they were, in which the whole body of them as well at home as
abroad, were united, especially it being here mentioned, that the going of some
another way was the Queen of Scots her overthrow. But rather then these
fellows will lack matter, they will tell a hundredth idle tales, with litttle
regard what danger may come to those who are upon ignorance wholly devoted unto
them.

About this time also, (says this author) and soon after, diverse
impugnations were attempted at Rome against the Seminaries and missions of
England by men of opposite spirit and emulation. But here is not showed, what
hurt came upon this emulation, but rather contrariwise it is showed, that there
came no hurt. And if there had come any, yet had this been far from his
purpose, unless he did show it to have been an emulation in the Laity against
the Clergy, or in the Clergy against the religious. And not only lay men,
but diverse Priests also, brought up in the Seminaries (says he) were drawn
by little and little to be of this faction against D. Allen, Fa. Parsons and
the Jesuits: and namely some in Rome, as appears by a visitation, yet extant
sent to the English College by Pope Sixtus in the year 1585, etc. At this
time, as we are informed, there was a visitation. And if those men should be
named, who were then noted for factious, the Jesuits would startle, and many
of their friends. But unless some cause be given of descending to more
particulars, we will say no more, then that the principal (then accounted) of
the faction, coming afterward into England, and not finding amongst the
secular priests any, who would consent with them in such their factious
humors, are become Jesuits: in which estate they may hope to keep themselves
at the least in ure for that humor. Other some although they do not profess
to be Jesuits, yet they stick so close unto them, as aio does to aiunt, nego
to negant. And for so much as we can learn, that emulation was not against D.
Allen: for as it appeared very well, he was so much honored by them all, as at
his word the principal of them, and who is now a Jesuit, made public
submission, and in express words acknowledged his error, in that he had not
so long a time observed that saying, Qui nescit dissimulare, nescit viuere: he
that knows not how to dissemble, knows not how to live. How far forth
M.D.B. (noted in the margent) was a cause of that visitation, I know not: but
if we do not mistake the man, he was sent into England long before this
visitation came to the College. And as for the other two Priests, whose names
are set in the margent in this sort, G G.E.G. who are said to have conspired
with the Council in England, and for more grace, and gratification, have writ
two mischievous books, the one (says this author) against D. Allen, the
other against F. Parsons and the Jesuits, giving them up to Walsingham the
Queens Secretary, affirming also among other points, to make the parties more
odious (as our men their successors do at this day) that these men depended
of Spaniards, and were enemies to their Country: We heartily wish that this
author may live in as good credit as the one of them lives, after all his
trouble in Italy, or elsewhere, and die as penitent as the other died, after
his troubles in France. He who writ against the Jesuits, was too privy to
their actions, as well in England, as elsewhere to be deceived in them. And if
the Appellants be the men, whom here this author means by these words, their
successors, they may purge themselves very well from any offense in having the
like thought. For it is well known, that Fa. Parsons in Spain caused many
as well others as Priests to subscribe, as priests, to the title of the
Infanta, now Duchess of Burgundy. Fa. Tancard also has made many to set their
hands to three blanks, although some refused to do it, as they have themselves
reported, at their return into England. We have moreover understood, that Fa.
Parsons was a chief dealer in the sending of those Armadoes which the
Spaniards have set out for the invasion of our Country: and there are in
England, with whom he dealt most earnestly, to go in the Navy which was set
out in the year 1596. who, refusing to be employed in any action against their
Country, were for that cause sent away from the College, and told, that it was
not convenient that they should stay in the College, where they had given
example of such repugnance. There is moreover sufficient proof, that after the
evil success of the Spanish attempts, Fa. Parsons carried a youth to the king
of Spain, who pronounced a certain speech for the purpose, which being ended,
Fa. Parsons began to urge the king to give one attempt more, affirming that he
(silly fellow) would write his letters into England, and nothing doubted to
effect, what should be to the great furtherance of such a journey. We have also
certain intelligence, that the Jesuits had devised a means, to have had the
tower of London seized into their hands, and how they would have it held until
the Spaniard came to rescue them. Diverse of their letters have bin showed to
diverse prisoners for proof against them, when they have answered in defense of
the Jesuits, that they thought them free from such stratagems. And amongst the
rest, there is one of the 10. of June 1596. wherein there are these words: It
may be, if the kings faintness and pusillanimitie hinder us not (as heretofore
it has) the Armado will be with you about August, or September. This is one
good help, Ireland will be only for us. The Earl of Tyrone and Odonell would
gladly have help from hence, and they are well contented to let the Spaniards
have certain holds and forts for their uses. This will greatly pleasure to
trouble and disquiet England, and in the mean time serve for harbor for the
ships, that shall pass that way, etc. It were necessary you should make it
known aforehand, that no Cath. man or woman shall take harm, either in body
or goods. Let every man be quiet till the Spaniards be landed, then shall there
presently proclamation be made of all security. There were 200. copies of
these proclamations printed in Spain.
Certain other letters also have been seen of Fa. Parsons to his fellow
Jesuits in England, wherein he has wished, that the Catho. would unite
themselves together, and set up a king of England. And in his letters of the
24. of Ianu. 1600. to the Earl of Anguise, he confesses that he dealt in such
matters for 8. or 10. years. But if all these, and many other, as infallible
proofs did fail us, F. Parsons book of Succession would so far convince
his dealing in State matters, in the behalf of Spain, as the Appellantes may
without scruple charge him with it, yet without any intention to make him more
odious, knowing it a thing very impossible, if they were so minded. And thus
much concerning this author his folly in indeuouring to gall the Appellantes
with the name of Successors to such as affirmed that the Jesuits depended of
the Spaniards, and were enemies to their Country.

The next fit of emulation here mentioned is against D. Allen, when he was to
be made a Cardinal, and it is set out with a very rich margent, and much to
our present matter in controversy I warrant you.

But not being able to prevail in this against the Card himself, (says this
author) they began to set more earnestly against the Jesuits his chiefest
friends and constant defenders, as well in stirring up the scholars in Rome
against the Fathers that governed them, as also to make a faction against them
by Secular Priests in England; as may appear by a letter of the Cardinals
own, written most earnestly not six months before his death to a priest
named Mush, etc. There is a special Treatise coming forth, of the troubles of
that Roman English College, to which I am to refer the Reader, and to note
no other thing in this place, then that the misdemeanors of the Jesuits was
the cause of all those troubles. But concerning this foolish assertion, that
there was a faction against the Jesuits by Secular priests in England, the
contrary is most clear as all England may witness: and there is a letter
extant of M. George Blackwell (the now Archpriest) wherein he inueigheth
mightily against those, who had made the report, that the priests and Jesuits
were at strife. January 1596. to the C. Caietane.
And this letter is kept in the English College at Rome, and registered as an
Oracle, although perchance not for this clause so much, as for the immoderate,
but false extolling of the Jesuits, in doing infinite deeds of charity out of
the profits of their patrimonies, nam minima sunt, etc. (says M. Black.) it is
not worth the speaking of, which they receive of alms, etc. And whereas the
Card. Allen his letter is here brought to testify a faction of either the
scholars at Rome, or the Secular priests in England against the Jesuits, it is
a mere mockery, as may appear by the letter it self, for so much as is set
down to this purpose in this Apology, cap. 2. fol. 11. where we find these
words: I have heard to my great grief, that there is not that good
correspondence between the Fathers and other priests. I cannot tell upon what
coffeehouse, etc. But whereof soever it comes, it is of the enemy, and
with all possible discretion and diligence by the wiser sort on both sides to
be rooted out, or else it will be the ruin of the whole cause, etc. And
therefore in this point (especially M. Mush) be earnest and peremptory with all
parties, and every one in particular, etc. By which we understand not, how it
may rather be gathered, that there was a faction by the Secular priests against
the Jesuits, then that there was a faction by the Jesuits against the Secular
priests: neither is here any relation to any former speech had with him, as
doubtless there would have been, had M. Mush given any such information to
him, but rather the contrary, as may be gathered by these words: I have heard
to my great grief, etc. which argues, that this was put into his head by some
other, that this being before laid for a ground, they might afterward build
thereon to their own best liking, nothing at any time being accounted so much
their honor and glory, as others falling out: which howsoever they do
underhand nourish it, while they would seem to remedy it, makes them wise and
charitable purueyours for the common cause, and what not (good men) being as
innocent of these broils and divisions, as Sinon was of the betraying of Troy.
Moreover, it may appear by this letter, that the Car. had a very great good
conceit of M. Mush, who would employ him in a matter in which lay the ruin of
the whole cause: and therefore willed him to be earnest, yea and peremptory
with all parties. His good affection was also showed, in that at his coming
into England, he persuaded the Pope, to give unto him very special faculties
and power to name, at his return into England, to a certain number, who hoc
ipso should have the like. And yet this author is not ashamed in this place, to
set down to his discredit these words: Having been with the Cardinal at Rome,
and having done some evil offices, as is presumed, etc. the Card. perceiving
his humor, wrote most effectually to him, and by him to others against this
division and faction, but little prevailed. And in the margent there is a note
of the above cited letters, which as they are set down in the Apology, are a
most absurd instance to prove thus much, as is here presumed of the Cardinals
sinister conceit of M. Mush, as that it was far from truth, which was
auowed, that the Cardinal was disunited from the Fathers before he died. For
thus this author makes his tale hang together: But it little prevailed, as now
appears: only it may serve to prove how false and far from truth it is,
which he (M. Mush) and others of his faction do auow in their books, that the
Cardinal was disunited from the Fathers before he died: for that he said, as
they relate, that when he should be dead, far greater troubles and
oppositions would fall out against the Jesuits: which may be true, for that he
saw so much emulation against them, by Libertines and factious people, already
begun in his time, which yet were retained somewhat from breaking forth by this
authority while he lived. But the Cardinal living yet six months longer,
what proof could this letter be, that he was not disunited from the Jesuits
before he died? Or what proof is it of any such union to the Jesuits, when he
writ it, as it could not be likely, that he was disunited, before he died he
wills Master Mush to be earnest and peremptory with all parties: in which
words the Jesuits are included, as well as the Secular priests, and
consequently the Cardinal was peremptorily conceited, that somewhat was amiss
in the Jesuits, or else he would not have been so bold with them, as he might
(upon any small occasion) with the Secular, of whom he had a particular charge.
To our remembrance also the words of the Cardinal related unto us, were not
those which are here cited, to wit, that when he was dead, far greater
troubles and oppositions would fall out against the Jesuits; but, that there
would be very great troubles by the Jesuits their ambitious courses and bad
carriages toward the Secular priests. And this gloze, that he foresaw so much
emulation against them by Libertines and factious people, is piously made by
this author, that the reader should be out of doubt what spirit it is which
does assist him in the making of this his necessary Apology.

But the good Cardinal being dead in the year 1594 all factions (says this
fellow) brake out together against the Jesuits, destitute now of the Cardinals
assistance, etc. This Author mistaketh the matter: For after the Cardinals
death, the Jesuits began their reign in every place, where any English were
resident, as at Rome, and in England, especially at Wisbich, where, through the
folly of the Lay Catholics, they had greatest hope to prevail first, and
afterward to have an easier conquest of the rest. The stirs and troubles of
Rome are particularly to be set down in a discourse thereof, whither we are
to refer the Reader. The stirs in England began at Wisbich by the
insolency of the Jesuits there in durance, F. Weston, F. Buckley, F. Bolton
and others, who had devoted themselves particularly to their order, or passed
their vows in secret. And to effect this the better, the Lay gentlemen, by
whose charity the Castle had been relieved, were dealt withal by the Jesuits,
or their factious adherents, to withdraw their charity from all those, who
would not subject themselves to F. Weston the Jesuit, by whose instructions it
is most falsely here auowed, that the company had lived a Collegiall and
religious manner of life: for before he came thither they lived indeed in such
sort, but after his coming, his ambitious humor disturbed the whole house, as
it is set down in a book already published of The stirs at Wisbich. And as
for the stirs, which were in the Low Countries, the cause is here in patt set
down by the Author of the Apology, to wit, that Fa. Holt, and M. Hugh Owen
were deemed partial against some, and did not further them for the getting of
their pensions. But as it should seem these two had some intent, in which
because those other would not join with them, they were accounted as factious,
and not worthy of the Spanish charity. F. Holt was sufficiently known to have
been a notorious actor in the year 1588. and was not without cause thought,
through his folly, to have been the cause of the death of the duke of Parma.
His treachery was afterward better discovered, in his employing of Hesket, who
was executed at S. Albones for his service done to the same F. Holt the Jesuit,
and other the plotters of the raising of the noble Ferdinand Earl of Darby to
the Crown of England, by the assistance of Sir William Stanley, and other such
like. After which the good Earl likewise enjoyed his life but a little while,
but died an untimely death in the prime of his age. How far forward this Owen
also, mentioned here, might be in these actions, we leave it to men of
understanding; he being pew-fellow with F Holt in the English affairs, as it
should seem by this Author. And certain letters of his of the 5. of April
1596, do show evidently, that he was a dealer with the Spanish faction against
England. And whereas this Author, among other his impertinent stuff, does
here gird at the dimission of M.D.B. out of the English College at Rome, to
quit perchance the story of that infamous expulsion of F. Parsons out of Baliol
College in Oxford: he has made his answer to this, and set it to M. D. Ely
his notes upon the Apology. But this is also here to be noted, that he was
sent into England very honorably, and was admitted into the sodalitie of our
Lady, which was at that time a favor so joined with those, who were esteemed
well of by the Jesuits, as if any of that sodalitie had been factious, or
behaved themselves contrary to their liking, they were expelled, or reduced to
a kind of Nouiceship, as some Jesuits in England can testify. This also is
certain, that the visitation, of which there is mention made in this Apology
to have been about that time, was long after his departure, upon an open
breach, and parts-taking in the College, between the Jesuits, and many of the
Students.

And thus much concerning John of Gaunt, John Wickliffe, the dissolution of
Abbeyes in the time of King Henry the 8: the Q. Mary Priests: the going to
Church: the emulation against the institution of the Seminaries: the dealings
of the Counsel by spies, to further the division begun in, and for the
Seminaries: the parting of some Gentlemen from D. Allen, F. Parsons, Sir
Frances Englefield, and the whole body of Catholics united in certain
affairs of our Country: more matters against the Seminaries: the writings of
G. G. and E. G. against D. Allen, F. Parsons and the Jesuits: the hinderance of
D. Allen, when he was to be made Cardinal, and the setting up of his emulator:
and the breaking forth of all factions against the Jesuits in Rome, Flanders,
and England. Now we shall come to more domestical affairs. And first of all
we must understand that Fa. Parsons coming to Rome in the year 1597, made an
end of those stirs, which were between the English students, and the
Jesuits: which we are not here to examine, but refer the Reader to the
particular discourse, which is made thereof. That which concerns us here, is
the bold and unshamefast assertion of this Author, who to make a lewd entrance
into a like relation, he tells his Reader that the association which was
begun in England by the Priests, was devised by the relics of the troublesome,
which F. Parsons had after his coming to Rome acquieted. These are his words,
But the relics of those that had been troublesome, and unquiet before coming
into England, and conferring again with their consorts of their former
actions, and designements frustrated as they thought by F. Parsons dealing at
Rome, resolved to begin again, but after another fashion, (to wit) by devising
a certain new Association among themselves, with offices, and prelacies of
their own institution, where unto meaning to be chosen by voices of such as
they would procure to favor them, his Holiness should be enforced afterward to
confirm them, etc. What is it upon which this audacious companion will not
adventure, who so shamelesly will report a matter controllable by all the
Catholics in England, who can witness, that this Association was begun long
before the year 1597, and consequently before Fa. Parsons came to Rome, as may
apparently be gathered out of this place of the Apology? Yea Fa. Parsons
himself (as good proof will be made) had understanding of this Association,
when he was in Spain, and M. James Standish, who was one of the first dealers
therein, was at Rome before Fa. Parsons came thither. And could this fellow
without a vizard publish, that it was devised by the relics of those
troublesome (as he terms them) whose designements were frustrated (as they
thought) by Fa. Parsons dealing at Rome? Is it not easily seen with what
spirits assistance this is written, when as this very same Author in the same
book Ca. 7. fol. 89. turns this matter to M. Mush, and an other upon his
return from Rome, and the death of the Card. which was in the year 1594 and
fol. 90. brings witness of his own, that it begun about 4. or 5. years before
a letter dated the 2. of May in the year of our Lord 1601? And fol. 96. the
examination of Fisher conuinceth most plainly, that it was begun before his
being returned back out of England in the year 1597 as appears fol. 93.
Moreover, that which here in general terms he calls offices and prelacies
of the Priests institution, in the 7. Chap. fol. 90, he calls a superiority,
as it were of Archbishops, the one for the South, the other for the North,
which if it had been so, was no prelacie of these Priests institution, as all
Christendom will witness. But there was no such matter, as M. Blackwell his pen
will witness, which was used to prove, how inconvenient it was for one to have
so great a charge: neither can this Author prove, that ever there was any thing
intended, but an order or rule, under which who would, might live, and those
who would not, might choose. And there is as much confessed in this Apology,
Cap. 7. fol. 90 where we find in the letters of the six Assistants to the
Nuntius in Flanders of the 2. of May 1601, that there were Chapters in the new
constitutions of the Association of those that are to be admitted, or
expelled; Which is a demonstration that this fellow enlarges himself too
far beyond the truth in this point, as also when he affirms that those
relics of the troublesome at Rome devised a new Association in England with
offices and prelacies of their own institution, as if they were Archbishops,
the one for the North, the other for the South, as Cap. 7. he explicateth
himself, and adds here in this place a stranger conceit, then was in all the
rest, that is, that his Holiness should be enforced afterward to confirm them.
For how this force should be offered to his Holiness, we do not understand:
especially if it were true (as it is as far from the truth, as that which we
have already showed) which fol. 90. is said, that this Association was to the
prejudice of others. And that the most part of our brethren reclaimed, and
misliked the same, as sauouring both of presumption, and ambition. But let us
suppose, as the truth was, that as many, as were moved in the matter (either
Jesuits, or Secular priests) liked so well of it, as some of them affirmed,
that the only fear they had was, that it was too good a motion to go forward
(having perchance had some experience of their own perverseness, or of
others, who now exclaim against it) some that it was the best plot that ever
was devised: yet could not this be any inforcement to his Holiness to confirm
it, unless this author will acknowledge such a right in the priests to choose
their superior, as the thrusting one upon them, without their priuitie, must
be taken for a wrong done unto them, which (we hope) he will not say. But we
will leave this fellow to explicate himself how his Holiness should have
been enforced to have confirmed such as the priests should have chosen to the
offices or prelacies, and as it were Archbishops, and we will examine that,
which follows, and is peremptorily affirmed, that the priests were working
against the Jesuits, whom (says this author) they had procured at the very
same time by a man sent over to this purpose into Flanders, to be accused to
his Holiness in a most odious, and infamous Memorial, as ambitious men, that
will govern them against their wills, etc. But this could never be proved as
yet against those, who were the beginners of the association, although
perchance some of those in Wisbich might send over such informations, as the
ambition of Fa. Weston the Jesuit, and others his parteners might give cause
in that insolent Agencie which was to be erected in Wisbich, whereunto many in
England cannot, without a desperate impudency deny, that both they were
solicited, and persuaded, that when they sent their alms to the relief of the
prisoners in Wisbich, all those priests who would not subject themselves to Fa.
Weston the Jesuit, should be excluded from having any part of their charity
(as they wrongfully termed it) And one of this godly Agencie at Wisbich
(breaking forth with the consent of the rest, to employ the utmost of his
talent in this their negotiation) being asked by a Gentleman, with whom he had
dealt to this purpose, what should become of those who would not subject
themselves to the Jesuits government, made this answer, Starve them. The
lamentable division which was made by the Jesuits, and their associates in that
action, to the public scandal of all our Country, does also convince, that
the Jesuits, as ambitious men, would govern the priests against their wills:
there being no other cause of that public separation both at board, and in
their other conversation, then the not yielding of some to become subjects to
Fa. Weston the Jesuit. By which it appears that the Memorial in this part
was neither slanderous, nor any way false, as here it is affirmed, but most
true and justifiable, and no priest who had any care of his credit, or
conscience, could write otherwise to his Holiness. True it is, that the
Jesuits labored mightily to have all the priests to set to their hands to
certain letters or propositions framed by them against a Memorial, which they
themselves spread abroad here in England, and translated it into English, that
all sorts of men, women and children might see their goodness. And they got
many priests to set their hands, some to a letter to this effect, that upon
their own knowledge all was false, which was contained in the Memorial: (a
testimony, which none but God himself could give, if it had been so, for it
required that such a witness was to be present at all times, in all places,
with not only one of those Jesuits, but with them all, in how several, or
distant places soever they were, and must be privy to all their actions)
others the Jesuits got to set to their hands to this point, that not knowing
any of these articles to be true, they did think that all were false: An act
both of exceeding pride, and rashness in prejudice of such as were said to have
been the authors of that Memorial, to wit, M. D. Gifford, and M. Charles
Paget, and such like, to whom these subscribers and the soliciters were much
inferior for their reputation, and place in the world, and could not without
great injury (being so informed) give such a testimony, especially upon so
weak a ground, as not knowing: being bound in modesty to know, that there
were many things, both true and justifiable, which they did not know, and how
easily all malefactors would be clearly purged from all heinous crimes
whatsoever, if the witness of all, who could not, or would not accuse them,
were to be regarded, or taken as current, against a far less number of
accusers. But neither were these subscriptions voluntarily made: for they were
exacted with grievous comminations and threatenings: yea, and some must
subscribe without reading that to which they were willed to subscribe, or their
subscriptions deferred until the time would better suffer the gatherer of the
hands, to let the subscriber see, whereunto he must set his hand: which what
could it argue other, then that there was somewhat to be testified, which they,
who demanded it, thought in their own consciences, the Priests would not
testify, if they might be suffered to read it? And in this sort was M. Johnson
solicited to subscribe, as himself did at that very time relate to some of
his brethren. And it is very probable, that Fa. Garnet the Jesuit intended some
such matter, when writing to M. Collington to request him to set his hand to a
letter, which M D. Bauand had written, and to procure likewise M. Charnockes
hand, and M. Heburnes to the same, he would not let them see what M.D. Bauand
had written: but being asked the letter, to which he would have had these set
their names, he returned answer, that it was already sent away: which could
argue no other then a fetch to get their consents to subscribe to such a
letter, by virtue of which consent, he would have set their names unto it, and
they should have testified, they knew not what. The good dealing also in
gathering names against this Memorial was presently after showed, by the
falsifying of the Archpriests instructions. For in this heat the authority
was procured and appointed, as may be proved by the date thereof, which is 7.
Mart. 1598. Apol. cap. 8 fol 102. And the first of these testimonials bears
date 24. Mart. 1598. fol. 98. Fa. Garnet failing of his purpose, of getting
these men's hands in that sort, as he wished (for although he gave them liberty
to pen a letter of their own, if they would, yet his request to have their
hands set to a letter already drawn, but not to be seen by them, as the event
proved when they sent for it, bewrays his good meaning what it was:) there
was (amongst other forged instructions, and falsely inserted among those which
were sent unto the Archp. from Rome) this instruction made, that every one
should set his hand against that Memorial. And this did the new Archpriest,
even when he was taken in the manner of falsifying his instructions, so urge
upon M. Collington and M. Charnocke when he sent for them, to make known his
authority, as he threatened them grievously, if they would not subscribe
against it, affirming that they should answer this their bearing off from that
action, in some public Court, where they should repent it. Afterward also it
was so followed, as M. Henry Henslow was employed to persuade them, where M.
Collington was then resident, to turn him out of their house. And he performed
his office with such immodest terms, and with such extreme fury, as he well
discovered, whereunto this new authority did tend. And thus much to show, that
it was far enough both from slander and falsehood, which was said of the
Jesuits their endeavors, to govern the secular Priests against their wills,
and how they did canuase for names against the Memorial, and pressed the
Priests so far, as they were constrained to use figures (as some of them have
since confessed) to satisfy the importunity of the Jesuits and their
factours. This also is here to be remembered, that the man named to have been
sent over by the Priests into Flanders to accuse the Jesuits, was not sent by
them, but returned thither, from whence he was sent into England, to understand
whether the Jesuits did use themselves no better in England among the Priests,
then they did at Rome among the English Students: for to this end he was
employed by the Card. Toledo (as he affirmed) and had letters to that effect of
the Cardinal, who was much auersed from the Jesuits their actions in the
College. And although he brought not these letters with him into England (which
was a cause that many give no credit unto him) yet he brought some testimony
thereof, and that he was employed into England by the Cardinal, and could not
return any other answer, then what was most apparent by the division at
Wisbich, that the Jesuits as ambitious men would govern the Priests against
their wills.

When his Holiness saw this manner of proceeding, says this author, (that is
to say, how he should be enforced to confirm these Prelates which the Secular
priests would have chosen, and how the Jesuits were slandered and purged by
the most of the Priests in England) he willed the Card Protector, to call unto
him F. Parsons, and other Englishmen in Rome, to see what remedy was best for
these disorders. They answered, that the only way which seemed good to them
was, to give them a Superior, or Prelate of their own Order, and to deliver
thereby the Jesuits from these calumniations, which his Holiness yielded
unto, after diverse months consultations, etc. Here then we are solicited to
conceive that the ground of this new authority, was his Holiness care to
remedy the disorders which he perceived to be in England, by such letters as
were written unto him: namely against this Memorial, and that after diverse
months consultation, it was appointed. But we have already showed sufficient
to prove this a notorious falsehood. For as we have proved out of this Apo.
fo. 98 the first letters which were written to this effect, were written the 24
of March. 1598. which was after the Cardinals letter of the institution of the
Archpriest, as appears by the date thereof, which was the seventh of March,
1598. as it is to be seen fol. 102. and consequently diverse months after that
his Hol. is said to have entered into this consultation, as appears in this
present place of the 1. chap. and in the 8. Chap. fol. 98. But perchance we
took this author at the worst, when we construed his words in this manner, as
though he had said, that his Hol. had upon these letters advised upon some
subordination, and after diverse months resolved upon this: whereas this
author, after mention of these letters, and other matters, says only in this
sort, When his Holiness saw this manner of proceeding, he willed the Cardinal,
etc. We are therefore to request the indifferent reader to turn to the 8. cha.
of the Apol. where no such shift ca^ be used to avoid this foul dealing. The
cha. begins in this manner. When his Hol. heard the former state of matters
in England Flanders, and other places, and of the murmurations of some against
the Fathers of the society, set down as well in the abouesaid co^tumelious
Memorial, as by diverse other letters and relations, which came to the
Protectors sight, and by him was related to his Holiness, and namely when he
received great store of private and public letters out of England against the
said Memorial of Fisher; and some one, with above 100. hands at it, other with
40. and 50. all in favor and commendation of the Fathers, etc. his Holiness
after mature deliberation resolved, etc. And because he will not come without
his proof, what cause his Holiness had to institute this subordination, or
rather to give order to the Cardinal for it, as he says, he has set down
in the margent a note of the letters, which caused this consultation. See
(says he, in the margent) the letters of the Northern Priests, 24. Mart.
1598. and others 20. Apr. and others after 30. Iul and others of the South in
great number 18. Maij, and of the quiet sort of Wisbich 27. March 1598. and who
without blushing can read this, and take it as a cause of a determination
upon the 7. of March 1598. for then was the authority instituted, as is
acknowledged, fol. 102. and much less of a consultation diverse months before,
as is here said, fol. 7. And thus he goes forward with a certain shameless
boldness, not caring what he says, knowing belike that his favorites will
swallow any thing easily, which he proposes unto them: yet does he too much
forget himself in this place, where he says, that it was not thought
expedient for his Holiness to write himself, for avoiding suspicions and
troubles of the state of England: for by this he will sufficiently purge those
priests of all disobedience to the Sea Apostolic, who did not subject
themselves to the new authority upon the coming of the Cardinals letters, by
which the authority was instituted. But this is elsewhere sufficiently
handled, and proved to be free not only from schism or disobedience, but
from all sin also, yea though it were true, that his Holiness gave full
commission (as here it is said) to the Card. Caietane the Protector, to
appoint the authority with convenient instructions. For his Holiness not
writing himself, as here it is confessed, how should the Priests take notice
thereof, that it was his act? which, together with the Archpriests
misdemeanour, in the promulgation of his new authority, and other matters
also, was the cause, why the Priests did at their great charges send to Rome
two of their brethren, to have dealt with his Holiness about it.

But their Ambassadors coming thither (says this author) and showing no
desire of peace or union at all, or to accept of any good condition to live in
obedience, etc. And thus he runs with a free pen to avouch any thing
which is for his purpose, how contrary soever it is to truth. But because this
matter is at large handled by this author in the 9. Chapter of the Apology,
where also we shall declare how these matters passed at Rome, we will only
note here, that the two Priests had little reason to determine their business
with F. Parsons, D. Haddocke, or M. Martin Array, who perchance are the others
which are here meant, and as it is here confessed fol. 99. were actors or
consultors in the constitution of this authority, and parties directly opposite
against the Priests in England. Besides that, the condition which was offered
by F. Parsons, was very ridiculous, to wit, that the two Priests, who with so
great danger and charge were arrived at Rome in the behalf of many other,
should return again into England with letters to the Archpriest and Jesuits,
to amend what should be yielded by them to have been done amiss: and to give
satisfaction unto all men, where it was due: which if the Archpriest and
Jesuits would not perform, the Priests might come again out of England to
Rome. And how subtle soever F. Parsons thought himself in this devise, the
two priests could not but think it would have been a great folly in them, to
have accepted this condition of peace, although perchance if they had
understood his Holiness mind, that he would have entertained them, as they were
entertained, with close imprisonment, and other such favors (as shall be showed
as occasion serves) possibly they might have returned again into their
country, and have contented themselves until it had pleased God, to have
taken some pity upon their miseries. But to prove how falsely this fellow
affirms, that the two Priests showed no desire of peace and union, their
going to the Cardinal Caietane (whom they took to be the ordeiner of the new
authority, as these words of his letters did import) Dum haec nostra ordinatio
durauerit: so long as this our ordinance shall endure: and there offer to bring
him in writing, what they had to say, will be a sufficient argument: which as
it should seem, the Jesuits, and their faction, fearing least by this means
their dealings might come to light, procured (contrary to the Cardinals honor,
who had entertained the Priests in this cause) that they should be committed
close prisoners, and not suffered ever after to come together to deal in any
thing, until some two or three days after, that there was a Breue given, in
confirmation of the Archpriests authority: which being obtained upon the 6. of
April, as the Breue bears date, the two Priests were suffered upon the 8. of
the same month to come together, and the Breue being presently brought unto
them, they yielded themselves, as well in the name of their brethren, as in
their own, promising to obey it, and doubtless were ready enough to have sworn
it, if his Holiness had exacted any such thing at their hands, after that he had
declared what his will was should be done, what reason soever the priests had to
the contrary. But the truth is, that there was no oath taken, nor any
demanded. This might therefore have been left out with more truth then inserted
in this Apology, to wit: this was promised at that time of all hands, and the
two messengers did swear it also by a corporal oath: as also that epitheton
to the Breue, to wit, new: for what does this import other, then another Breue,
as though some Breue had been before made, and refused by the priests? which is
a most untrue conceit, yet necessarily to be made upon these words of the
Apology, He (the Pope) confirmed all that was done already by the Cardinal with
a new Breue. This was promised at that time (says this author) of all hands,
and the two messengers did swear also by a corporal oath, and hope was, that
all would be quiet hereupon, to which effect Fa. Parsons also wrote very
courteous and pious letters unto M. Collington, and M. Mush, and they accepted
kindly of the same, as after we shall have occasion perhaps more particularly
to set down. But now Satan being loath to have sedition ended, began again to
set them out in England, and to put them in worse case then ever, by the
industry of certain seditious humors of the chiefest contenders, whereof some
devised new injuries offered them by the quiet, some required satisfaction for
the old etc. until in November last 1600. diverse of the discontented made a
general appeal etc.

Thus far does he imbolden himself, as who having no intention to be any
way accounted a changeling. We will here omit, that which he affirms of Fa.
Parsons pious letters to M. Collington, and M. Mush, which seem here to have
been written upon the promises and oath (as he says) of the messengers, to be
at peace, when they saw the Popes Breue, which letters Cap. 10 fol. 143. he
says were written even then (to use his own words) when yet the Popes Breue
was not come forth, as appears, for that this was written the ninth of
April, and the Breue bears date of the 21. of the same month. What need was
there of this so palpable a falsehood? Cannot Fa. Parsons praises even in
matters of smallest moment be sounded by lip, or registered by pen, but with
most gross falsehood, thus wrote F. P. (that is, a courteous and pious letter,
as here it is declared fol. 8. for it bears the same date, and is written to
the same men as may be seen) even then when yet the Popes Breue was not come
forth. And lest any man should doubt of this Fa. Parsons his courtesy or
piety, before that time of the coming forth of the Breue, he proves it by
the date of his letters which he says is the ninth of April, and the date of
the Breue which he says is the 21. of April. A manifest falsehood, as may be
seen both by the Breue it self, and by many places in this Apology: where it
is set down to bear date 6. April 1599, as in the same tenth chapter fol.
140: and immediately before in the end of the ninth chapter, and else where. So
that I cannot but marvel at the foolish greedines of this author, in taking
every occasion to commend Fa. Parsons, how untowardly so ever it fadgeth with
him. But Satan being loath to have sedition ended, began again to set them out
in England, and to put them in worse case, then ever, by the industry of
certain seditious humors of the chiefest contenders etc. These were the
Jesuits and the Archpriest: first the Jesuits, namely Fa. Jacob, who after the
peace made, gave out, that they, who should hold opinion dogmatizando, that the
priests were not schismatikes, should incur the censures of holy Church,
which the Archpriest did not only not control being told thereof, but bare
the Jesuit out in his wicked assertion. And furthermore published a resolution,
which he said he had received from the mother city, by which the priests were
condemned, as schismatikes. and it was high time for the priests not only to
complain of intolerable injuries, but to seek for satisfaction also in such
places, where they were by these means defamed, which when it would not be
granted, they made an offer to come to dispute the case, with promise most
humbly to ask pardon of the Archpriest, and the Jesuits, if it could be
proved, that they had been schismatikes, and desire to be restored to their
good name, if in case they could not be proved to have been such. But this
offer of dispute was also rejected, and they were threatened, who should go
about to defend their good names, thus most unjustly harmed. whereupon they
sent to the University of Paris, that by the resolution of learned men, such
as they imagined a company of punie fellows would have regarded, this question
might have been ended. But when these silly men saw this resolution for the
priests, they were worse then ever they were, and the Archpriest did forbid all
sorts upon grievous penalties to maintain that resolution by word, or writing,
directly, or indirectly, whether it were given upon true information, or
otherwise. as though those learned men having true information (as the
Archpriest here supposed) were so much to be contemned, as no man without
incurring grievous censures, might defend their opinion, in the question
proposed: for these are the words of the decree, made by the Archpriest 29.
Maij 1600 whether it be truly given, or forged, whether upon true information,
or otherwise. And these proceedings of the Archpriest compelled the priests to
make their Appeal to his Holiness, which bears date the 17 of November 1600.
And it was made not only for them who set their names unto it, but for others
also, who seeing the affliction which hung over the secular priests, and
fearing (not without just cause) that their turn would come afterward, were
desirous of redress, but dared not to show themselves in the action, in
respect of the hard measure which they saw offered to their brethren, who were
in actual persecution by the Jesuits, and Archpriest. And when this Apology
was published in England, it was known, that long before the publishing
thereof, the priests were gone over to prosecute their Appeal; and had
presented themselves before the Nuntius in Flanders, who was in commission, as
they understood, to determine this matter.

And whereas it may be said, that the book was printed, before thus much was
known, this answer also may be made, that in the like case, where an untruth
was printed in the 12. Chapter fol. 201. they did find a means to clap on a
piece of paper, that it should not be read, being a relation no more false,
then this was. But if they should have taken this course throughout the book,
to have pasted paper, where there were untruths uttered, there would have been
very little to have read in the Apology. And therefore perchance they resolved
rather to adventure all their credit at once, by letting the book go
uncorrected of those falsehoods, which are contained in it, then not to do the
harm which they intended. The like folly and falsehood also is that, which is
here inserted of M. Charnocks Appeal: for as we had sufficient testimony from
beyond the seas, his Appeal was prosecuted in due time: and moreover, that he
was long since freed from the sentence of the two Cardinals.

And whereas it is furthermore said, that M. Charnocke appealed from the
sentence of two Cardinals, after that he had accepted it, and sworn to the
observation thereof, it is most untrue; for no oath was ever demanded of him,
concerning that sentence. It was only showed by Fa. Parsons first to him, and
afterward to M. Bishop, who had his liberty four or five days before this
sentence was seen. And all the oaths, which were taken, were taken by
Acarisius the Fiscall, when M. Bishop was delivered out of prison: which act
of the Fiscals was of none effect, as not having Commission to do any thing in
that cause, as Fa. Parsons affirmed, when he showed this sentence of the
Cardinals, alleging for proof, out of the same letters, that the declaration
of the Cardinals mind was committed to the Rector, or Vicerector of the English
College. But of these matters, and the falsehood used therein, we shall have
occasion to write more at large in answer to the ninth chapt. And while these
Appeals did and do hang, all obedience is showed, which may be showed
without prejudice of the Appeal, or which is to be used to notorious
detractors, and unconscionable defamers of Catholic priests. Neither is there
any other liberty, or freedom sought for by any, then such liberty as
belongs to Christians, and of the which Catholic priests are most
unchristianly deprived, and they only seek to live in reputation due unto
their estates, and to maintain the same by all lawful means. How falsely also
this is inserted by this author, that liberty is sought, and not trial of the
cause, I commit to the judgment of all men of any sense, who understand how
that the priests are gone to Rome to his Holiness, to have the case decided. But
nor resting here, nor contented with this freedom during the dependence of the
said Appeals, they have proceeded (says this author) to greater disorders,
which is, to publish in print most injurious contumelious, and infamatory
books, and libels, (as before has been said) without particular name of
author, without license of Superior, and other circumstances of modesty,
right, and conscience required in such attempts, etc.

This good fellow presumes much of his readers ignorance, favor or patience.
For, as it appears by the Archpr. his letters to M. Collinton, he rejected
the appeal, and by other his acts he has declared, that those, who had put
their names unto it, had incurred the penalties of his decrees. He also
hereupon solicited some not to receive the Sacraments at the appellants hands,
as may appear by his letter of the 16. of April 1601. to a gentleman, where
thus he writes, This I write to make you privy of the great spiritual
danger, wherein you and all that receive any Sacraments of M. Oswald Needam may
be, if it be so, that he has subscribed unto a seditious pamphlet, colored
with the name of an appeal. With what face then does this fellow, in the
Archpriests behalf, urge the dependence of the appeal? or what freedom is
that, with which he would that the appellants should have been contented? if
there was just cause to appeal, in what a poor case would the Archpriest be,
if that there were put in execution against him, which is due unto the refusers
of just appeals, and contemners of the sea Apostolic, whither the appeal was
made? And if the appeal were not a just appeal, how foolishly is it here
urged, that the Priests not resting here, nor contented with this freedom,
during the dependence of the same appeals, they have proceeded to greater
disorders? which is to publish in print most injurious, contumelious, and
infamatory books, and libels, without particular name of Author, without
license of superior, etc. The causes of this publishing have been diversely
touched by many, who have proved, that it was most necessary, for the procuring
of an unfeigned peace, lest matters being shuffled up, as once before they were,
the Jesuits should break out at their pleasure (as they did once before, not
long after the peace was concluded) And being backed with the authority of the
Archpriest, bring new quarrels every day worse, and more grievous, then the
former. And whereas here it is particularly urged, that during the dependence
of the appeals these books were published, it is easily answered, because the
archpriest showed no reverence to his Holiness, and to the sea Apostolic, but
denied the dimissory letters, which were demanded of him, rejected the appeal,
as a seditious pamphlet, and proceeded against the appellants, as if the
appeal were no otherwise to be esteemed: as we have immediately before proved,
and all Catholics can testify as much, who have been warned not only from
receiving Sacraments of the appellants, but also from being present at their
sacrifice, because they set their hands to that appeal. And therefore it was
judged necessary, that all Catholics should be informed of the truth, and how
the case stood in this present controversy, which, without printing, could not
conveniently have been declared, especially where the matter is so hardly
followed, that no one of the Priests may be suffered to speak for themselves.
And to this effect also were the Latin books printed, that the Priests making
their cause generally known in Christendom, they might (maugre their
adversaries) come to have audience, where they desired, and had once before
failed: when, for avoiding of too much speech of strangers, they went in a more
private sort for a remedy of home miseries. Neither ought any man to wonder at
this good fellow, when he calls these books Libels: for the spirit moved him
in hope at that time, that the Priests should be sufficiently debarred from
coming to the place, where now they are, and being there ready to prove such
things, as are here to be objected, they do convince the understanding of him,
who has any, and knows what belongs to a libel, that these books are no
Libels, against which this author inueyeth in these hot terms, injurious,
contumelious, and infamatory books or libels. But by that which follows, he
does more discover his folly. He says, that the books were published in
print, without particular name of Author, without license of superior, and
other circumstances of modesty, right, and conscience required in such
attempts. Alas good sir, to omit in this place, what want there is of other
circumstances of modesty, throughout all the Apology, if it be a necessary
circumstance of modesty, right, and conscience, to put to a book some
particular name of Author, where was your modesty, right, and conscience, when
you published this Apology? what particular name of Author has your book?
Have you not set it out in these general terms written and set forth by
Priests united in due subordination to the right reverend Archpriest, and other
their superiors? And I pray you (sir) what particular name is here, and of what
author? Good sir turn once again the books against which this Apology is
written: and find this circumstance of modesty, right, or conscience more
wanting in their books, then in the Apology, and then with less shame
vpbraid the priests that they published in print without particular name of
Author, and other circumstances of modesty, right, and conscience.

But to give a fuller satisfaction to our Reader, We affirm that the books
which were published by the Priests, were published with more particular name
of author, then this Apology was, if the particular name be that which
brings the author to be known who he was. For first the Latin book, which
was published in print, and dedicated to his Holiness, is said to be exhibited
by those Priests who were accused of Schism, and other crimes. The English
book also which is entitled, The copies of certain discourses, carries as
particular a name of author, in these words, which were extorted from diverse,
as their friends desired them, or their adversaries drive them to purge
themselves of the most grievous crimes of schism, sedition, rebellion, faction
and such like. Now good sir, I do appeal to the indifferent Reader, whether
the authors of these two books (for this Apology means none other, as
appears by the whole discourse thereof, and particularly fol. 8.) were more
known by this description accused of schism (they showing themselves
publicly in their own defense) then the authors of the Apology by this
description, Priests united in due subordination to the Archpriest, all the
rest keeping their consciences to themselves, that no man almost is sure, who
can be meant by this name. And some of them, who were so firmly reputed for
such, as the Archpriest and Jesuits adventured to ask their hands or
consents to somewhat, which some do think should have been used, for the
authorizing or giving their consents to the setting out of this book, they
took this priestlike courage unto them, as to deny to set their hands to that,
to which they were not to be made privy. And many more there are (as many do
know) who go for such as are here set down for authors of this Apology,
who perchance have their hands as deep in the answer, as any of the other.
But we will let this slip go, hoping that this good fellow will be better
advised in his next book, how he taxes men for that, in which he does offend
himself, if the fault which he finds may be called an offense. But now
concerning the other circumstance, that the books were printed without license
of Superior. If this author will tell us, whither we should have gone near
hand to have found an indifferent Superior, we will acknowledge that there was
some error. The Archpriest was not an indifferent Superior in this case,
because he was a party, against whom the books were to be published so far
forth as they concerned the controversy between himself and the Priests,
and therefore he was not likely to give them license to print An other Superior
they know not where to seek in any reasonable distance, to dema^d their
license. Besides that, to their remembrance, they do not find any authority
in his Commission, to license books to the print being no Ordinary, but a
Subdelegate, and for certain purposes, among which this is not reckoned for
any. And perchance this was the cause, why being solicited by M. Collington
upon the coming forth of the Apology, to certify him what Supertours did
license the printing thereof, he knew not what to answer. And if these words,
permissu superiorum, be proved a necessary circumstance of modesty, they
shall be used hereafter in our books also: Much idle stuff follows to make
an end of this chapter, as that the Priests do go about to disguise matters
by laying the fault upon M. Archpriest and Fa. Parsons, as though they did not
descend to such particulars, as cannot be applied unto any other, but unto
them. They labor to purge themselves from schism, in their forbearing to obey
the authority appointed by his Holiness, before they did see some instrument
from his Holiness, in testimony that he had instituted, or given authority to
another, for the institution thereof. They complain of hard dealing used
toward the students, and particularly against the two Priests, who were not
suffered to come to his Holiness, being sent unto him to deal concerning this
new authority. And whereas the Priests are here charged to contemn the
Cardinal Farnesius his doing, or writing, or procuring for the Archpriest a
Protonotariship: This fellow seems to take it for a disgrace, not to make
some sport among all his big words. For how would a man think, that he
proves this negligence or contempe; as he terms it? Forsooth the Cardinal
procured the Archpriest to be protonotarius apostolicus. And what then? does
it follow, that the priests do neglect and contemn, whatsoever the present
Protector, Cardinal Farnesius has done or written, or deferred to the
Archpriest, because the Cardinal procured him to be a Notarie? But perchance
the book is falsely printed, and that which follows, as another contempt, is
to be understood to be the only proof of the contempt, of which here is
mention. These are the words, Neither do they give him the title of
Reuerendissimus due to that degree, and used toward him by the Cardinal
himself in his letters. We will leave it to this author to explacate himself,
whether this word neither implies a second or one only contempt. We will
only excuse the Priests for not giving him the title of Reuerendissimus,
until they did know some cause why. For as it is to be supposed, the priests
did not see, what Cardinal Farnesius writ unto M. Blackwell. Neither yet have
they seen any thing, why he may not challenge to be called Illustrissimus. And
yet, I think, it were a wonderful folly, if they should give him that title,
and he could not but take it as a flout, or a mock to be so called. The reason
then being all one, the Priests knowing no more of the one, then of the other,
it is an argument, that this author wanted both matter, and wit to devise
matter. For who would have used so great terms against priests, for not giving
a title to one, to whom a Cardinal gave it in a private letter? In what fear
may we be stricken, least that some Cardinal had also written to this author,
and given him some title, which we know not? Or if any Cardinal would bestow
any honest title upon him, yet this kind of Reuerendissimiship, being a matter
of twenty or forty crowns, he might easily procure it: and we might be
condemned for neglecting or contemning somewhat, which is not in use, where as
skillful Protonotaries, as any are in England do keep open shops in every good
town, and are known amongst their honest neighbors for such. But we will let
this idle exception go, among the other, as idle and railing speeches, with
which this author ends the first chapter, and closes up his readers
stomach with them, who cannot but see what spirit, and in what sort it moves
him.

CHAP. 7. How this Author of the Apology while he would inueigh against
dangerous and temerarious propositions, engages himself further then
becomes a Catholic. Apol. c. 2.
IN the second Chapter of the Apology, this Author purposes to treat of
three things: first, of disobedience: secondly, of undutiful behavior to
superiors namely his Holiness: thirdly, of scandalous and temerarious
propositions.

Concerning the first, he brings some Scriptures, with if, and ands: as if
his reader should provide himself to hear of a great plumpe: If all this be
so as it is (says he) alas in what case, etc. And so proceeds to a
lamentation over his brethren, supposing that the scriptures he brought were as
truly applied, as they were true in themselves. And to prove the stubbornness
in the Priests, which the good man seems to lament, he brings a clause (as
he terms it) of a letter of Card. Allen to M. Mush, dated the 16. of March
1594. whereby he would have his reader conceive very strange matters, and
wrongfully informed himself of any evil affection or hard opinion of the
Cardinal toward the Secular priests. And lest we should be thought to blame
this authors folly without cause, we will set down his own words as they lie
after his exordium, together with the Cardinals letter. These are his words.

For first of all to begin with Cardinal Allen, of whom these men would seem
to make most account now he is dead and gone, as though he had favored them
when he was alive, which yet (as we shall show) is quite contrary: for he in
his foresaid letter of the 16 of March to M. Mush, does most earnestly give in
charge to him and to all other Priests, to live in great union with the Fathers
of the Society, yielding for his reason the singular obligation they had to
their manifold benefits. His words are these: I have heard (says he) to my
great grief, that there is not that good correspondence between the Fathers
and other priests. I cannot tell upon what coffeehouse, etc. But whereof
soever it comes, it is of the enemy, and with all possible discretion and
diligence by the wiser sort on both sides to be rooted out, or else it will be
the ruin of the whole cause, etc. Therefore in this point especially ( M.
Mush) be earnest and peremptory with all parties, and every one in particular.
And tell them, that I charge and advise them by the blessed blood and bowels of
Gods mercy, that they honor, love, and esteem one another according to every
man's age, order, and profession: and that those of the Secular order,
especially those that have been brought up under the Fathers, and have found
so great love, charity, and help in all places at their hands, that they be
correspondent in all gratitude and thankfulness, reuerencing them in word and
deed, as is requisite to their merits and calling, etc. Thus wrote the good
Cardinal not above half a year before his death. And by this we see, both
what his love and opinion was toward the Fathers, and what his commandment
and order was to all those priests, he being superior to them all, appointed
by his Holiness, that now are so contentious against the Jesuits. What would
the good man have said, if he had lived till this day, to see his request and
commandment so contemned by them? And how can M. Mush and others name so often
the Cardinal without blushing, when they break so earnest an exhortation, and
order of his in so great a matter?

The contents in this letter are so plain, as I cannot but marvel at this
fellow his boldness, and how without blushing he can make that descant which
here he does.

The letter (as all men may see) was written upon a suggestion made unto the
Cardinal, that the Priests and Jesuits were dangerously fallen out, as may
appear by those words, I cannot tell upon what coffeehouse. And afterward,
Therefore in this point especially (M. Mush) be earnest and peremptory with all
parties, and every one in particular. Thirdly the charge and advise which was
given, was as deeply given to the Jesuits as to the Priests, as may appear by
the words immediately following those which we last cited: And tell them that I
charge and advise them, by the blessed blood and bowels of Gods mercy, that
they honor, love, and esteem one another, according to every man's age, order,
and profession. Fourthly, the particular exhortation to the Secular priests to
be correspondent in all gratitude and thankfulness to the Jesuits love,
charity, and help, with reverence in word and deed, not only as was
requisite, but as was above their merits and calling, was long since prevented,
as appears by a letter of F. Campion to F. Euerard the general of the
society (with whom there was no cause why he should dissemble) as may be
seen in the Epistle of pious grief, fol. 6. and 7. These are his words there
cited: Tanta est aestimatio, quam de nobis concitarunt Presbyteri, ipsietiam
piissimi, and doctissimi, vt nisi timide commemorandum sentiam: The Priests
here, who are most learned and holy, have raised such an opinion of us, as I
cannot speak it without fear: which saying of F. Campion proouing nothing but
a correspondence in all gratitude on the behalf of the priests for the love,
charity, and help, which they had or might have of the Fathers, I cannot but
wonder at the Epistle maker, who brings it to prove a correspondence in the
behalf of the Jesuits, unless perchance he mean, that no other gratitude is
to be expected of a Jesuit, then that he will tell his general, what benefits
he receives. This correspondence of the Priests was so followed still by them,
until the Jesuits grew so insolent, as those, who brought them into credit,
were forced to stand at their reuersion, and without respect either to age,
order, or profession, they went about tyrannically to have the government over
the Priests, as may be proved as well by their attempt at Wisbich, as by the
beginnings abroad, where Catholics had no entertainment for Priests of what
age, order, or profession soever, unless they did come by order of a Jesuit,
and so would the Cardinal have said, if he might have lived till this day:
notwithstanding his request and commandment given as well unto the Secular
Priests as Jesuits, in these words: Tell them, that I charge and advise them by
the blessed blood and bowels of Gods mercy, that they honor, love, and esteem
one another according to every man's age, order, and profession: yet this
fellow, without blushing, cites this letter to prove the Cardinals more
special affection before his death to the Jesuits, then unto the Priests,
wherein he gives a like round charge to them both: and in that he gave this
commission to a Secular priest, to be peremptory with all parties, this letter
does rather prove, that he favored the Secular priests then the Jesuits.
And thus much concerning those fond collections which are made out of this
letter by the author of this Apology.

Our author having showed (as he supposes) that the priests have disobeyed
this the Cardinal Allen his commandment, (whereas indeed the Jesuits did
break it, and drove the priests to stand upon their own necessary defense)
he pretends to show the priests their progress from worse to worse: but in
very deed discovers his own in the same kind. And first he outrunneth his
reader, by briefly touching (but untruly, as will be showed in the particular
treatise of the Roman stirs) the breaking forth of the students in Rome with
the Jesuits: and as if his words were Oracles, he applies some places of
Scripture (as he knows who did to our Savior in the desert) then he
pursues his former confuted falsehood, of the beginning of new associations in
England, after the aforesaid tumults ended in Rome, and tells his reader that
his Holiness perceiving the same to tend to a new division and contention, as
well by the laws and rules thereof, as by a certain new, contumelious, and
most enormous Memorial, sent over against the Jesuits, he appointed them (the
priests) a superior of their own order, as you have heard, and such an one,
as their own two ambassadors sent to Rome, confessed under their own hands
and oaths (as appears in their examinations) that he had been the likeliest
man of al others to be chosen by voices, if the election had been permitted
unto them. And so he goes on without any new matter, or any thing that
needs new answer: only this we are to note (for so much as we can learn)
that neither of those two Priests (whom here he calls the two ambassadors)
did ever say or swear so much, as here they are charged: neither can it be
proved out of their examinations, unless the Jesuits have showed their skill
in corrupting, or falsifying those examinations, as they have done in other
writings. The challenge also which follows, that the Priests did not obey the
Archpriest at the sight of the Cardinal Caietans letters, is often, but now
lately by M. Collington sufficiently answered. And if the Cardinal had upon
his own proper motion, expected an absolute blind obedience unto him, it had
argued too great a want of consideration in him.

There is also a full satisfaction given, that what the priests did, might
very well stand with obedience, and with humility, and was not against any oath
which any took, when they were scholars of the Seminaries: that oath being no
other, then to take orders, when the superior would have them, and to return
into England, when they should be sent, ad lucrandas animas: to gain souls to
God: which they did perform until this new authority, pretending power to
take away their faculties (by which they labored in their vocation) solo nutu
(to use M. Blackwells words to M Charnock, in his letters 17. Iunij 1600.) at
his beck did make them cease (for scandal sake) to do that, to which by oath
they were bound. By which it may appear how foolishly this oath of the
Seminaries is urged, against those, who did not become blind obedient at the
sight of the Cardinals letter to M Blackwell. And if any have since promised
obedience to the Archpriest, when they received their faculties, they are ready
to give a reasonable cause, why in such and such particulars they did not obey
him. For as I take it, this fellow will not stand obstinately in this heresy,
that a superior cannot do any thing, or command any thing amiss, wherein a
subject may refuse to obey him, although he were sworn to obey him, as now
many are. For such oaths are always to be understood, to be observed in just
and lawful matters, or at the most in such, as are not to be proved most
unjust, and unlawful, as these are, which the Archpriest does command, to wit:
that they shall not defend themselves, nor be defended of other from the infamy
of schism, sedition, faction, rebellion and such like, whereof they know
themselves to be most clear, and that the suffering of such slanders to go
uncontrolled, would be most injurious to themselves, prejudicial to Gods
Church, in which they live as pastors, and dishonorable to God himself, to
whose service they have, with their uttermost peril, devoted themselves. But to
make all apparent in one word: the priests obeyed so soon as they knew it to
be his Holiness will, that it should be so, as appears by the second Breue,
dated 17 August 1601 if there were no other proof for it. These are the words
of the Breue: Quae nostrae literae, simulatque promulgatae advestram (filij
presbyteri) notitiam deuenerunt, omnem illico sedatam fuisse discordiam, and
summam pacem (reconciliata inter vos gratia, depositisque odijs, and
simultatibus) initam fuisse, magno nostro cum gaudio cognoutmus: Which letters
of ours (the Breue) so soon as they were promulged, and came to your
knowledge, we perceive to our great toy, that all discord was presently
appeased, and that a full peace was made by a mutual atonement, and a laying
apart all hatred, and private grudge. So that we do not a little marvel at
this fellow his boldness, who without any regard of so many testimonies, as
would be brought against him, or of this Breue, would set forth to the view of
the world this untruth, concerning the priests obedience at the sight of the
Breue, to induce his Reader to a contrary conceit of the priests actions. For
thus he tells his tale: But at length his Holiness to resolve all doubts
declared by his Breue, that all, and every point of the former institution by
the Cardinal was by his order, consent, knowledge and commandment, and should
not this have brought some remorse to good and tender consciences, of all the
broils, and turmoiles raised up before about this unnecessary doubt? Or at
least wise should not this have so appeased men for the time to come, as that
whatsoever the superior had been for his person, yet should his authority
never more have been called in question? But what insued? Truly we are afraid
to recount it, remembering that dreadful saying of the Apostle, Mali autem
homines proficiunt in peius. Evil men shall go from worse to worse. And it
seems to have come to pass, for that diverse of these chief heads of this
sedition, seeming to have lost much of Gods grace, in not obeying promptly that
Apostolical declaration, and determination, have run since to far greater
contempt, and perturbation of mind etc. Could this fellow have used himself
more malapertly against the Popes Breue, then after his wonted and graceles
conceits and insinuations, to tell his reader that the Priests did not promptly
obey that apostolical declaration, whereas the words of the Breue are most
plain to the contrary, Quae nostrae literae simulatque promulgatae ad vestram
(filij presbyteri) noticiam deuenerunt, omnem ilico sedatam fuisse discordiam,
etc. So soon as our Breue came to your view, presently all discord was a
appeased, and peace was made etc. which peace is in diverse discourses showed to
have been broken by the Archpriest, when complaint being made unto him by the
priests, of that audaciousnesse of Fa. Jones the Jesuit, in renewing his
fellow Fa. Listers absurd, and seditious assertion of schism against the
priests, he did not only anouch as much now a fresh, but published a
resolution, which he said he had received from Rome, to the same effect: and
with such appurtenances as might well declare how deep a root the infection
had taken.

The other two points, to wit, of undutifulness and of scandalous and
temerarious propositions, are handled somewhat confusedly: But for the fuller
satisfaction of the Reader, they shall be answered as they lie. And whereas this
author does first begin to except against some speeches, uttered by letters,
contained in the English book, as co^temptuously spoken of the dignity, and
office of the Archpriest, and also of the manner of the institution thereof by
his Hol. the reader is to understand, that in this there is very evil dealing,
considering that those speeches, which were used, were used before it was
known, that his Holiness had his finger in it. And they were the more boldly
used, because it was presumed, that the authority was not instituted by his
Holiness, but by the Cardinal Caietane, who in his letter constitutiue
affirms, that this was his own ordinance: although he says in one place in
general terms, that he was commanded to make a peace in England upon the
false suggestion, that the priests and Catholics were at wars. And in another
place that he followed the Popes will, who thought it meet that there should
be a subordination in England, being induced thereunto by reason given him by
priests: whereas to this day neither were the reasons ever heard, nor what
priests they were who gave them, except perchance a few Jesuits, who are
exempted from the authority. Nothing then being known to the contrary, but
that it was a devise of the Jesuits, and an institution of the Card. Caietane
by their means, without any letters to one effect, or other from his Holiness,
as is here confessed in this Apol. Cap. 1 fol. 7. the priests might the more
justly term the authority by such names, as to them it seemed then to deserve,
to wit a new, and extraordinary authority unpleasing, obtruded, disorderly
procured government, exorbitant and altogether dissonant from reason, and the
accustomed practice of Gods Church, and that it was already thought by the
Council, to be of purpose erected, not for Religion, but for the better
effecting of plots and designments of State. For although neither the title of
an Archpriest be new, nor the authority of an Archpt extraordinary, yet may
this authority be termed both new and extraordinary being such as was never
heard of, to have been before given to so mean a Prelate. It was called an
unpleasing authority, for that it was merely affectiue, as may appear by the
constitutiue letters: and if it have now any power to do any good to any, the
Prelate is to give thanks for such thanks for such his authority to those
priests, who found the fault. It was said to be obtruded, for that neither the
priests knew, that it came by any lawful authority, nor it self brought any
grateful thing with it, but rather did grace and strengthen the faction of the
Jesuits against them, the Archpr. being commanded in his instructions to do
nothing of moment, without the advice of the Jesuits, who had already begun a
most scandalous sedition in England. It was said to be disorderly procured etc.
both in respect of the false suggestion, which was the mother thereof, (as may
appear by the constitutiue letter) and also in respect that the principal
actors in the procuring thereof were men of an other order, who were not only
free from being subject unto it, but must be directors also in it, especially
in matters of moment, as appears by the Archpr. his 6 instruction. All which
manner of proceeding being right well known, and that these principal
procurers, and counselors were such, as were also known to the Counsel to be
more meddling in matters of State, then became them, they could not shoot very
wide, who affirmed that this authority was already thought by her Majesty's
Council to be of purpose erected, for the better effecting of such
designments. Neither was this to bring the archpr. or any good Cath that should
obey him, within the compass of treason, for matter of State: but a reason
which al good Catholics might take, why the priests were not ever forward, to
run after the novelty, having no other warrant for it, then a letter of a
Cardinal, who under color of piety might easily be carried by the Jesuits
known Statesmen) to do any thing, which might further their designments. And
the Counsel being known to be thus possessed, the priests had no reason to
run further into displeasure of her Majesty, and her Hon. Council: but
rather seek to be well assured, that the ground thereof was no State plot, but
Religion, for which they have been, and are most ready to shed their blood,
when it shall please God to suffer it. But where does this good fellow show,
that the priests would bring all good Catholics, that should obey the
ordination, and the Archpriest, within the compass of treason for matter of
State? See I pray you how he choppeth Logike: which point these men, to work
more mischief, do teach the persecutors in plain words: again a little after
in the same page in these words. Besides all this by the opinions of diverse men
in the Laws of our Country this our cause may, and will be drawn within the
compass of an old Law enacted as well by our Catholic Bishops and Prelates,
as by the Prince above 300. years ago, viz. the Law of Praemunire, because it
is an external jurisdiction brought into this Realm, against the will, and
notice of the prince and country: which made the late reverend Bishop of
Lincoln, D. Watson, to refuse all external jurisdiction offered him over his
fellow prisoners, although once he had lawful Episcopal Jurisdiction within
the Realm, and was unlawfully deprived thereof. Thus much does this author
cite out of the English book, to prove that the priests, to work mischief
do teach the persecutors in plain words, that all who obey the archpriest,
are within compass of treason. Is this fellow in his right wits trow ye? or
must not his Reader be very credulous, or at the least very forgetful, who
being told, that he shall see how the Priests to work mischief teach the
persecutours a lesson to bring the obedient within compass of treason, must be
served with an example of a Praemunire? But neither do the Priests affirm in
this place, that the Archpriest, or those who obey him, incur the Statute of
Praemunire, but say only, that by the opinions of diverse men in the Laws of
our Country, this our cause may, and will be drawn within the compass of an
old Law, etc. And in that they say of diverse men, they leave a scope for
others to be of the contrary opinion. And if the matter were so clear, as all
men were of that opinion, there being as expert Lawyers of the Privy Council,
as any other are, how can they be thought to be taught by the Priests, that
there is here in our case any danger of a Praemunire? Who can judge whether the
folly of this author or his malice were greater, when he alleged this
sentence out of the Priests their book, to prove that they to work more
mischief, did hereby teach the persecutours in plain words to bring all good
Catholics that obey this ordination and the Archpriest appointed by his
Holiness, within the compass of treason for matter of State?

Let us put the case that there were no danger of a Praemunire in this our case:
yet if by the opinions of diverse men in the laws of our Country, it might, or
would be drawn within the compass of such a law, it had been wisdom to have
paused upon the matter, and not to have run over headlong into so great a
danger upon a letter of a Cardinal: which added affliction unto affliction,
without any good, or ease to men otherwise afflicted, and might very well have
been omitted, and God much better served, except only in the trial of his
priests, who have ever since the institution of this authority, lived under a
grievous yoke, and most extreme persecution, under the Archpriest, Jesuits,
and other their over forward, and busy adherents.

And whereas this author notes, that the Priests would have consent of the
prince (though different from them in religion) to be needful for legitimation
of this authority, he does but show how his pen can play the Gentleman usher
to his wit. The less the likelihood is, that the Prince would legitimate this
authority, the greater was the reason, which the Priests did use for their
forbearance to yield unto it. It is very well known, that when the prince did
not differ in religion, the statutes against the provision of dignities from
Rome was sued. And can any man of reason hope for more favor at the hands of a
prince, who does differ in religion? If this Archipresbyterie could be proved
so necessary, as without it the Catholic religion could not stand in England,
this glanse were to some purpose, and the Priests no doubt, would have been as
resolute in the behalf of the Catholic faith, as they are not sparing their
lives in the defense thereof, which they daily give for it, although through
the business of a few untimely Statesmen, they are all generally taken for
such, and are put to death as traitors. But the Archipresbyterie being no way
so necessary, but that it might with much more profit to Gods Church have been
wanting, the Priests most resolute to die in defense of the Catholic faith,
might advise themselves whether it were wisdom, to run needelesly into an
other danger, and of such quality, as if the magistrate had no way differed in
Religion, he would have put the law in execution against them.

An other note, which this author makes, is, that by the Country, the
Priests must needs mean themselves only: that is to say, some five or six
that opposed themselves at the beginning, for that his Holiness had not asked
their consents. See I pray you, how this fellow still thrusts in his Holiness
in this action, who was not known in 12. months after, to have dealt therein,
except what might be gathered by the imprisonment of the two Priests, who went
out of England to Rome, to have showed what they, and others thought meet he
should understand; although this their imprisonment being such, and in such
manner, before they had audience, was an argument to some, that it was not his
action, and that as well his Holiness in particular, as that Sea, and those who
did fly thither for succor, were too too much abused: and this imprisonment of
the two priests was about ten months after the institution of the
Archipresbyterie. How handsomely would this fellows music sound, were this
string in tune, upon which he harpeth so often? But it being so generally
known, that his Holiness was not seen in the action until his Breue came,
which was above a year after the institution of the authority, no man but he,
who is past shame, would so often urge his Holiness, or disobedience to his
Holiness. And in this place he gives this cause in mockage, why five or six
opposed themselves at the beginning, for that his Holiness had not asked their
consents. Alas poor man, how feign he is of any foolish conceit, to bring the
priests into a contempt with the Catholics? Whose consent did his Holiness
ask, when he confirmed the authority by his Breue? I am well assured that he
asked not the consent of any of them: and yet if the Pope be of any credit, or
his Breue of the 17. of August 1601. they did all presently without delay yield
themselves. So that this absurd fiction of this fellow is too too apparent. I
would also demand whether his Holiness had the consent of any of the Secular
priests in England, when this authority was first instituted, and of how many?
If he had not the consent of them, as doubtless he had not, more then what M.
Standish a Jesuit by promise (abusing the priests) gave for them, and in their
names, who sent him not: why is this urged against five or six, as though all
the rest had given their consents to the institution thereof? If he had the
consent of the priests, why was there such canuasing for voices, or hands to
be set to a letter which began thus: Olim dicebamur? Why were so many
threatened? Why were others (who were not to be threatened) solicited, with, Now
it is Fa. Parsons devise, you must not deny your hand? Again to an other: you
shall not deny me, to set your hand unto it: And afterward his hand was set to
it, and he knew not thereof, nor gave any consent thereto. And in this kind did
the Jesuits labor, and posted from one to another, to get consents, after that
they saw some to forbear to yield themselves unto it. What devises were used
to others for their liking hereof, may also be gathered by M. Blackwels
behavior in this point: who sending for M. Collington, and M. Charnocke, urged
them to like thereof, and threatened them, that unless they would positiuely
affirm, that they did like thereof, he was to send information to Rome, that
they did dislike thereof: notwithstanding they would give no other answer,
then this unto him: that they did neither like, nor would dislike, but would
bear themselves as became Catholic priests to do. And this was all the
opposition which was made at the beginning, and it was by fewer then 6. or 5.
for it was by these two only, which were enough, and are as many, and perchance
one more then at the beginning use to oppose themselves against springing
heresies, errors, falsehoods, or the misdemeanors of such, as adventure to show
themselves in private, before they appear more openly to the world. The causes
of this opposition (as this fellow terms it) are discoursed upon at large by
M. John Collington, in his book lately set forth of this argument. And thus
much in answer of that which this author notes upon the priests words, which
he cites in this place.

After these notes taken upon the priests words, he declares his opinion of
the statute of Praemunire, in this manner. And as for the Statute of Praemunire by
them mentioned, it is not so ancient as they make it, but was begun to be
treated, about the time that Wickliffe rose up, when emulation was in heat
against the Clergy: and the chief purpose thereof was, at the beginning to
prohibit appellation to Rome in the first instance, under the pains
aforesaid: and the worst kings of England ever since have most urged it, and it
was not made (as these men say) by our Catholic Bishops, and Prelates, nor
could in conscience, but sorely rather against their wills was it passed in
Parliament by the stream of Temporal power, and emulation against them, etc.
If the priests did speak of a Statute of Praemunire, according to the opinions
of men well seen in the laws of our Realm, how impertinent is this to tell
us, what the chief purpose thereof was at the beginning? and this being so,
that the chief purpose thereof was to prohibit appellation to Rome in the
first instance, and therefore no Catholic Bishop, or Prelate could in
conscience agree to the making thereof: does not this fellow show himself to
be past shame, in bringing in this conceit, to the infinite discredit of the
Archpriest and his tutors? We will here omit, how the Archpriest (who according
to his sixth instruction, is to do nothing of moment without the advice of the
Jesuits) when he sent first to speak with M. Collington and M. Charnocke,
stood very stiffely unto it, In his letters to M. Collington.
that we might not appeal from him to Rome, until it was often inculcated
unto him, how dangerous that proposition was. We will also here omit his
commandments unto us, not to go to Rome, first to plead our cause in hand:
for to this perchance answer may be made, that he had procured, that it should
be first heard in Flanders, before his Holiness his Nuncio: to whom when our
brethren presented themselves, and showed themselves ready to have their cause
heard, no one appeared for the Archpriest, although he had before given out by
his letters, what potent adversaries the priests should there find in this
behalf: The Nuntio his letter to M. Blackwell.
and the Nuntio himself had written unto him, to come or send some instructed
in his cause. We do here ask, with what conscience have his godly tutors
advised him, and he attempted to punish such as have appealed to Rome, because
they have appealed to Rome, as his own hand will justify it against him:
namely in his letter to a lay gentleman dated the 16. of April 1601. where he
affirms, that he writes unto him, to make him privy of the great spiritual
danger, wherein he, and all that received any sacrament of M. Oswald Needam
might be, if it were so, that the said M. Needam had subscribed unto a
seditious pamphlet (these are his words) colored with the name of an Appeal?
And having denounced M. Robert Drewrie to have incurred the penalties of his
Decrees, for subscribing to the same Appeal, he sent unto him a form of
submission, which he was to make, or not be restored. And this was the form of
that submission. Ego N. confiteor, etc. I do confess and acknowledge, that
without any just cause I have complained of grieuances, and many injuries
offered me by the most Reverend archpriest, and have cast upon him the blame
of these dissentions, tumuls, and deadly wars, and that I have transgressed
his wholesome Decrees, of all which I humbly crave pardon, restitution of my
faculties, and the remoouing of Censures, if I have incurred them. And I recall
all these aforesaid, and do greatly wish, that I had never spoken, written, or
approved them. Moreover, I do swear that I will hereafter behave my self
peaceably, and obediently toward this my Superior, and will procure according
to my bounden duty what lies in me, that others do the same. At London.
March. an. 1600 according to our English account.

The decree which the archpriest made, and by the subscribing to the appeal
was, and is judged by him to be broken, and these grievous penalties thereby
incurred by those, who subscribed, bears date 18. October. 1600. The words of
the decree are these Prohibemus autem sub poena suspensionis a diuinis, and
amissionis omnium facultatum, ne quis sacerdos vllo modo suffragia vel scripto,
vel verbo danda ambiat, vel det, ad quamcumque causam, qua^ antea nobiscum, vel
cum duobus ex Assistentibus nostris non constet fuisse communicatam. We forbid
under pain of suspension from divine offices, and of loss of all faculties,
every Priest to go about, to take any suffrage, or voice, any manner of way,
either by writing, or by word of mouth, or to give any such suffrage, or voice
to any matter whatsoever, which is not known to have been before communicated
to us, or unto two of our Assistants. This is the decree, and by virtue hereof
the Appellants so setting their hands, or giving consent, that their hands
should be set to the Appeal, are said to have lost their faculties, and
incurred the consures, which, were the Law a just Law, is not true, the
penalty not being inflicted therein, but only threatened. And whereas the
Archpriest, and his adherents, to faue him from those penalties, which are due,
and are ipso facto incurred by those who forbid Appeals to Rome, affirm, that
there was a Libel and an Appeal, and that his decree was broken, and the
penalties therein contained, were incurred by subscribing to the Libel, and not
to the Appeal; it is a poor shift, and to be used but in a few corners: for
in his letter before cyted, he makes no difference, but in the name only: For
these are his words, concerning M Needam, If it be so that he has subscribed
unto a seditious pamphlet, colored with the name of an Appeal. So that now it
is too late, to make two things of that, to which the priests did subscribe.
Secondly it is a very gross ignorance, to make two matters of that Appeal,
all writers affirming that Appeals made a grauaminibus, from grieuances, must
expressly contain them. For brevity sake Lancelot L. 3. Instit. Iuris Can.
tit. de Apella. writes thus, Multum autem interest, ab interlocutoria, vel
alio grauamine, an a definitiua: nam primo casu, and causam etc. There is a
great difference between appealing from an interlocutory sentence, or other
grieuance, and a definitive sentence. For in the first case the cause of the
Appeal must be put down in writing, etc. Yea it is so essential a point to
such an Appeal, as no case can be pleaded, which is not expressed in the
Appeal, as is showed in that Clementine, Appellanti de Appellationibus. Thus
says the Pope, Appellanti ab interlocutoria, vel a grauamine iudicis, non
licet alias causas prosequi, quam in Appellatione sua nominatim duntaxat
expressas etc. It is not lawful for the Appellant from an interlocutory
sentence, or from a grieuance of a Judge, to prosecute any causes, but such
only, as are by name expressed in his Appeal etc. If then there be nothing in
that, which he calls a seditious pamphlet, or a Libel, but an Appeal,
containing (as it ought) the causes thereof, what a poor shift is this, to say
that the Archpriest punishes, or denounces none to have incurred his
penalties contained in his Edicts for subscribing to the Appeal, but only for
their subscribing to a seditious pamphlet, or a libell, colored with the name
of an Appeal, or prefixed to an Appeal? The whole Appeal is now set forth in
English by M Colington in his late book, that every man may see, whether there
is any other thing, then we have said: that is, an Appeal, with the causes
thereof expressed, as it ought to be, and as we have sufficiently proved, it
being so evident a truth, as no man may without blushing deny it. And to
conclude this point; if we should attribute so much ignorance to the
Archpriest, and his busy adherents, as that they would separate the Appeal
from the causes thereof, being an Appeal a grauaminibus, from grieuances (as
it lies open to all men's view to be such) then there is a much greater
deformity in his actions, who proclaims, that the Priests have subscribed to
a seditious pamphlet, or a Libel annexed or prefixed to an Appeal: and that
they have thereby incurred the censures, and other penalties contained in his
Edict of the 18. of October. 1600. because there is not one name subscribed to
any thing, but to that, which he must confess is really the Appeal, if he
make such a distinction between the Appeal, and that, which he says is
prefixed unto it. And consequently, he must confess that he has incurred the
censures of holy Church, and the judgment given against the Bishops in this
place of the Apology. Those Kings of England, who had the will to prohibit by
Statute Appeals to Rome, doubtless had never the grace to go to Goose fair,
where not only they, but their Nobles also, as well the Spiritual, as the
Temporal might have learned, how they might with conscience have enacted, or
consented to the making of such a Statute. But this one thing was wanting to
make perfect their felicity in this world: they never eat a goose at that
fair, where the courtesy is to minister geese to all comers gratis, and the
Host will not receive any money for them: only they must pay for the sauce,
which (according to the custom of the fair) they must have, or else they must
have no goose. O happy day, wherein that fair was first instituted, and a
secret discovered; which no Catholic Kings or Prelates could ever attain unto.
And thrice happy are they, who by the light (as it should see me) of that day
did see to make that Statute in the third year of the Archipres byterie of M.
George Blackwell, vidi preuaricantes, etc. 18. October. 1600, wherein, al right
to appeal to Rome being most Catholikely conserved, the penalties therein
contained do only light upon such as have set their hands to that, which is
prefixed to the Appeal, which is nothing else, but the causes thereof: without
which (according to the custom, and Canons of holy Church) the appeal is of
no force, and are therefore by name to be expressed, as we have before showed
out of the Clementine: Appellantide Appellationibus. Now it remains, that we
show when, and upon what occasions the Statutes were made, by which the
provisions from Rome, and some Appeals to Rome were forbidden.

First concerning these provisions, there was a statute made, either in the 30.
or 35. or as some other affirm 25. Edward 1. which was above 300. years
since, wherein it is agreed, and established, that they should not be suffered.
There was also the like statute made in the 25. year of Edw. 3 to the like
effect, by which it was forbidden, that any should be placed in any dignity,
without the assent of the King. The same is also forbidden in the Parliament
holden in the 38. of the same King. The occasions of enacting these statutes
are set down, as well in that of the 25. of Edw. 1. as elsewhere: and the
justice of those, which were made in the time of Edw. 3. is the more apparent
by a letter, which he and his nobles sent in the 17. year of his reign, to
his Hol. to have redress for such defaults, as were in that kind committed.
The Letter was to this effect.

King Edward and his Nobles perceiving the derogation that was done to the
Realm, by such reseruations, provisions, and collations of benefices, as the
Pope practiced here in England, wrote to him, requiring him, that since the
Churches of England had been founded and endowed by noble and worthy men, to
the end the people might be instructed by people of their own language: and
that he, being so far off, could not understand the defaults: yet his
predecessors, and he more then had been used, by diverse reseruations,
provisions, and collations made to diverse persons, some strangers, yea and some
enemies to the Realm, whereby the money and profits were carried forth, their
Cures not provided for according to the founders minds: they therefore upon due
considerations thereof, signified unto him, that they could not suffer such
enormities any longer: and therefore besought him, to revoke such reseruations,
provisions, and collations, wholly to avoid such slanders, mischiefs, and
harms as might ensue; and that the Cures might be committed to persons meet
for the exercises of the same, beseeching him further without delay, to
signify his intention, since they meant to bestow their diligence to remedy
the matter, and see that redress might be had. Given in full Parliament at
Westminster 18. of May Anno Dom. 1343. Thus far out of John Stow 17. Edw. 3.
where he also cites Auesburie and Honingford.

Secondly, concerning the forbidding of the appeals to Rome, we find a Statute
made in the 27. of Edw. 3. against those who shall draw any person in plea
(out of the Realm) of a thing whereof the knowledge appertained to the Kings
Court, or of such things whereof judgment was given in the Kings courts, or
should sue in any other courts to defeat or let the judgments given in the
Kings Court.

To these, and other Statutes to the like effect, the author of the Apology
affirms, that the Catholic Bishops neither did nor could assent. But
whatsoever may be said for or against this position, concerning the appeals,
no man can in reason think, but that they both might very well, and did assent
to those statutes, which were made against the provisions, or bestowing of
dignities in England, without the kings consent, the causes are so apparently
laid down by the King and the Nobles, for that abridging of his Holiness his
promoting whom he would, and to what dignities he would in England. And thus
much may be alleged in the behalf of the consent of the spiritual Lords to
the statute against those appeals, That in the new great abridgement printed
Anno 1551. there is this clause set to the end of some statutes, But the
spiritual Lords assented not to this statute. And there is no such note set to
any of these Statutes which we have here cited.

It is also evident, that these statutes were not made upon any heat of
emulation against the Clergy: for as we find that in the 38. year of King
Edw. 3. the statutes against those provisions made in the 25. and 27. of the
same King, are confirmed, although there be some favor given to the Lords and
Prelates offenders: so in the 39 year of the same King (which was the next
year after) we find that the Clergy in England was in as great honor, as any
Clergy in the world, as may be showed by the offices which the Bishops and
Priests had then in England. For the Bishop of Canterbury was Lord Chancellor
of England: the Bishop of Bath was L. Treasurer: the Archdeacon of Lincoln was
Lord privy Seal: the Parson of Somersam was master of the Rolls: ten
beneficed Priests were masters of the Chancerie: the Deane of S. Martins le
grand was chief Chancellor of the Exchequer, Receiver, and Keeper of the
Kings Treasure and Jewels: the Archd. of Northampton was Chancellor of the
Exchequer: a Prebendarie of S. Martins was Clerk of the privy Seal: a
Prebendarie of S. Steuens was Treasurer of the Kings house: the Parson of Auon
or Oundell was master of the Wardrobe: the Parson of Fenny Stanton was one of
the Chamberlaines of the Excheq. and Keeper of the Kings Treasury and Jewels.
Other of the Clergy are noted to have been in office also in France, and in
Ireland, as well as in England.

John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, the fourth son of King Edward 3. having the
government of England committed unto him in the time of his fathers last
sickness (which was in the 50. and 51. of his reign) disposed so far of
matters and offices, as he conceived some possibility to attain to the Crown,
and to deprive his nephew, Richard of Bordeaux, who was son to the Black
prince Edward, the eldest son of King Edward the third. But perceiving that
it would be hard for him, to obtain his purpose, so long as the Church stood
in that estate it did, and the citizeens of London enjoyed their liberties, he
labored to overthrow them both. For the ruin of the City liberties, he
devised that it should no more be governed by the Mayor, and Aldermen, but by
some Captain, appointed for the purpose: And that the Marshall of England (who
then was a trusty friend of his, and placed in that office by him) should use
his authority, as well in London, and the liberties thereof, as else where:
which the Commons taking in evil part, rose together in great multitudes, and
in heat of emulation (to use this authors words) sought the Duke, and the
Marshall with such fury, as if the Bishop of London had not happened to appease
them, the Duke and the Marshall had not escaped them. But when all was quiet,
and the best of the City (for the common sort would not obey it) had given
such satisfaction, as the king commanded, the Duke took exceptions thereat,
affirming that they knew his mind, and were not ignorant, how to make
satisfaction: with which words (says the history) the citizens were much
troubled: for, quoth they among themselves, he would have us to proclaim him
King, but this shall never be done.

The way, which he took to overthrow the estare of the Church, was by
countenancing John Wickliffe, who, by reason of an hypocritical demeanor
among the Common people, had gotten an opinion of holiness. He had lived as a
secular priest; but afterward he changed his habit, and conuersed with the
Friars mendicants. He and his company went bare footed, and in course russet
garments down to the heels. They preached especially against Monks, and other
religious men that had possessions: and for this cause got in some favor with
the Religious, who had no possessions, and were assisted by them in that cause.
This Wickliffe being called before his Ordinary, to answer for certain words
spoken by him, was brought in by the Duke, and the Marshal into S. Paul's Church
in London, and was bidden by them to sit down, as having much to answer:
which when the Bishop Courtney of London understood, he countermanded it.
Whereupon the Duke and the Marshall took occasion of anger against the Bishop:
and the Duke threatened to pull down both the pride of him and of all the
Bishops of England. He had before caused all the goods of the Bishop Wickham of
Winchester to be seized on, and would not suffer him to make his answer, and
had persecuted others, who had been most used by his father in the government
of the Realm. But shortly this Bishop had his temporalties restored unto him
by king Edward against the Dukes will: and presently after, the Duke and he
were made friends at the very beginning of the reign of King Richard the
second, who succeeded King Edward the third. And this accord was not only made
between them, but also between the Duke, and the city. And thus ceased that
heat of emulation, so soon, as it was begun, and yet it began not, until the
50 or 51 year of K. Ed. the 3: in whose 17, 25, 27, and 38 years of his
reign, the statutes before cited were begun to be treated of, and made,
concerning the abridging of provisions for dignities from Rome, and the
forbidding of Appeals in some cases to Rome: besides what we brought,
concerning the first of these two points out of a statute made above 300 years
since: to wit in the 25 of Ed. the first. By which it may appear that it was
treated, concerning these points, before Wickliffe rose: and how deceitfully
these matters are laid upon a heat of emulation against the Clergy.

And although in the 9 year of the reign of K. Rich. the 2, there was a Bil put
up in the Parliament, against the Clergy for their temporalties: the King
hearing (says the story) the inordinate cryings out of the Laity, and the just
answers of the Clergy, commanded that the bil should be cancelled, and such
inordinate petitions to cease: and affirmed, that he would preserve the church,
during his time, in as good state, as he found it, or in better. And the king,
being then not past 20 years of age, no doubt but his nobles counseled him in
this his answer: which is an argument, that at that time the adversaries of
the Clergy did bear no great sway in England. In the 18. year also of his
reign, the Clergy and religious men being oppugned by certain favorers of
those hypocritical Lollards, the King being in Ireland, and certified thereof,
hastened home, and threatened those fellows, that if they did from thencefoorth
favor the Lollards, or in any wise comfort them, he would extremely punish
them. By which it is evident, that what was enacted; or confirmed by him in the
16 year of his reign, which was two years before this, or at other times
concerning those points, cannot be construed to have been done by heat of
emulation against the Clergy.

King Henry also the fourth, who was son of John of Gaunt, and succeeded King
Richard the second, was so great an enemy to these Lollards, as in the
beginning of his reign at a Parliament held in London, he made a statute
against them: wherein it was enacted, that they should be apprehended, and
delivered to the Bishop of the Diocese: and if they were found obstinate, they
should be degraded, and committed to the secular jurisdiction, to be executed.
And in the fifth year of his reign, when some to relieve his want, made a
motion in the Parliament, to have the Clergy deprived of their temporalties,
and Thomas Arundel Archbishop of Canterbury had given his reasons to the
contrary, the king and his Nobles stood for the Bishops, and those knights of
the parliament, who were actors against the Clergy, were brought to confess
their offense, and to ask forgiveness thereof.

To conclude, no one of these statutes were ever repealed by any of our princes
Catholic, or other, which concerned those prohibitions of provisions from
Rome, or pleading of matters out of this Realm, the knowledge whereof did
appertain unto the kings Court, although some particular clause concerning the
punishment of the offenders has been repealed. As for example: where it was
lawful for any man, or at the least not punishable by our laws, to kill such,
as were out of the kings protection, or to be taken as the Kings enemies, by
offending against these statutes. And in the first year of Queen Mary, whom
the Author of the Apology will be ashamed to number amongst the worst kings,
(for according to the statutes of our Realm, what prerogatives soever any
kings have had, they are to be understood to be fully, and wholly in the
Queens, who come by succession to the Crown) when no doubt these statutes
were in mind, it was enacted, that all offenses made felony, or limited, or
appointed to be within the case of Praemunire, by any act, or acts of
Parliament, statute, or statutes made sithence the first day of the first year
of the reign of the late king of famous memory King Henry the eighth, not
being felony before, nor within the case of Praemunire: and also all, and every
branch, article, and clause mentioned, or in any wise declared in any of the
same statutes, concerning the making of any offense, or offenses to be felony,
or within the case of Praemunire not being felony, nor within the case of
Praemunire before; and all pains and forfeitures concerning the same or any of
them should from thenceforth be repealed, and utterly void, and of none effect.
King Henry the eighth also when he was so devoted to the Catholic faith, and
particularly to the Sea of Rome, as he gave monthly 60000 angels, toward the
pay of an Army under Mounsieur de Foy for the delivery of Pope Clement the 7,
when he was holden prisoner in the Castle Angel in Rome, by the Duke of Bourbon
his Army, and the prince of Oringe: Yea, when Pope Leo the the tenth esteemed
of him, as of the best prince in Christendom, and either to his deserts, or
under them, gave him this glorious title Defender of the faith: he did so far
forth execute the law of Praemunire against all foreign provisions of
dignities, and authority, to be practiced within his Realm, without his
assent, as the Cardinal Wolsey, notwithstanding an extraordinary affection in
the king toward him, dared not to exercise his power Legantine, until he was
licenced thereunto by the king, under his hand, and broad seal: Io Stow. 21.
Hen 8.
which he pleaded, that he had when he was indicted afterward in a Praemunire,
for his exercise thereof. And yet was the king himself a suitor to the Pope, to
give that authority to the Cardinal, as may be seen in the tenth year of his
reign: which was about three years before he was entitled, Defender of the
faith. But all as well princes, as other must stand to this good fellow his
check: and if they displease him, it is enough to have them accounted in the
highest degree of badnesse, how pious, and godly soever he esteemed them
before with the same breath.

But now concerning that which is said by the Priests, of Bishop Watson, that
he refused, upon these statutes, all external jurisdiction offered him over
his fellow prisoners, this good fellow says, that it is most contumelious and
false. Whom shall we believe in this case? those who were Priests, and fellow
prisoners with him, and were present at the offer, and his refusal, and are
ear witnesses thereof; or this peremptory fellow, who cares not what passes
him? But perchance his reason may ouerpeaze the relation of these witnesses,
although for many respects most reverend. For (says he) that had been to deny
his Holiness Ecclesiastical jurisdiction in England. Mark (I pray you) this
reason, and weigh it with that which is before said and showed concerning this
point. Card. Wolsey would not exercise his power Legantine in England, until
he had license of his Majesty, as appears by his plea before cited: and yet
neither the king nor he denied his Holiness Ecclesiastical jurisdiction in
England; as appears by that the king of England made request to Pope Leo, to
constitute Card. Wolsey his Legate in England, and behaved himself so
Catholikely, as he was called Defendor of the faith. Also the most Catholic
Bishops, who lived in the times of many, and those most Catholic Princes
without al doubt observed the law, yet no way were to be touched, as this
peremptory companion would have them, with a denial of his Holiness
jurisdiction in England. And in the Parliament holden 16. Rich 2. the Bishops
do make a difference between authority in the Pope to excommunicate, and the
execution thereof in England. Moreover, this Doctor Watson when he was made a
Bishop, he had license of her Majesty, who then was, before he would take
upon him to use his Episcopal jurisdiction in England; as he related himself
to some yet living, and of credit. And no doubt this was done upon the same
ground (that law of Praemunire standing in full force in her time, as being
never repealed, but rather suffered voluntarily to stand in full force) as may
be gathered by an act primo Mariae: yet no Catholic doubts, but that her
Majesty did acknowledge the Popes authority in England, as appears by her
repealing diverse statutes made by her father, to take away the Popes authority
in England; Anno 1. and 2. Philip. and Mariae. So that the folly of this fellow
is exceeding great in giving this reason, why the Bishop could not refuse all
external jurisdiction offered him from his Holiness.

Again, although Doctor Watson were Bishop of Lincoln, and had used his
jurisdiction in that Diocese by the license or permission of Queen Mary: yet
he was never Bish. of Ely, in which Dioces these prisoners lived, who offered
him that external jurisdiction: so that his refusing all external
jurisdiction over his fellow prisoners, is no way to be brought within the
compass of denying his Holiness Ecclesiastical jurisdiction in England. And if
his Episcopal jurisdiction were so enlarged by his Holiness, that he might have
used it over all England, yet might he most justly have refrained from the
present exercise thereof in that ample manner, having never had any such
license, or assent from his Sovereign, according to that Statute, which was
made 25. Edw. 3. wherein it is enacted, that first the Kings license, to choose,
was to be demanded, and after election, his royal assent was to be had. And as
he was not to expect, that a Prince of a contrary Religion should legitimate
any such authority in him, so he was to assure him self, that a Prince of a
contrary Religion would take hold of that Statute against him: seeing that
Princes, who were of the same Religion, did both enact it, and cause it to be
most strictly observed, and yet they never denied his Holiness Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction in England. And by this it is made most manifest, how Bishop
Watson might acknowledge his Episcopal jurisdiction from Rome, and yet refuse
to exercise the same, without denial of the Popes Ecclesiastical jurisdiction
in England any more, then for 200. years together all the Catholic Bishops in
England did before him.

But I cannot a little marvel, that this author would compare the
association (intended in England) with this Archipresbyterie, which is so
pontifical or maiesticall, as the Title (which by virtue thereof he uses) is
enough to make such mean men as his fellows are, not to know which way to
look. For thus he writes himself: George Blackwell by the grace of God, and
the ordinance of the Sea Apostolic, Archpriest of England. We will put the
case, that the association intended had gone forward: but then how (says he)
would that have stood without external turisdiction, seeing that one of these
two points they must confess, that either they would have asked confirmation
thereof from Rome, and consequently it would have been an external
jurisdiction as well as this of the Archpr. or else they would have governed
absolutely of themselves, without any dependence or approbation of his
Holiness? And this had been a far worse inconvenience, to exclude wholly the
Sea Apostolic, for avoiding the statute of Praemunire. Wherefore whither this
spirit tends, all men do see. But few men yet do see, whither this spirit
tends: neither must they so much as ask a question. which may imply a doubt
of any thing which this author affirms. If the Priests must confess, that
either they must have asked a confirmation of their association from Rome, or
else have excluded wholly the Sea Apostolic, what must the eighteen (so often
surnamed quiet Priests of Wisbich) confess, who sought no confirmation of
their enforcing and violent agencie or government under F. Weston the Jesuit?
Must they confess, that they did wholly exclude the Sea Apostolic? or had
they any privilege above other Priests, to confess that it was not of any
necessity for them either to seek a confirmation from the Sea Apostolic, or
to exclude it wholly? Had it not been a sufficient acknowledging of the
authority of the Sea Apostolic, if they had always been ready to have
dissolved their association, upon notice from his Holiness, that he would not
have any such association in England? Is every dutiful respect, which one man
or two will carry voluntarily to a third, to be confirmed by the Sea Apostolic,
or else that See to be thought wholly to be excluded? It is most certain, that
the association intended, was of no other, then such as would voluntarily
subject themselves to a course of life for their own both spiritual and
temporal good, and to do what good they could to all others, although they
would not be of that company, as their rules did show. Cannot this good fellow
make a difference between the sending in of an authority, which must imply
necessarily an external jurisdiction, and include the accepters thereof within
the Statute of Praemunire (unless the prince had accorded unto it) and the
sending out to have a liking of a confraternitie of priests, or association,
which might have been, whether the Pope had liked it or no, until he had
forbidden it, it having no such title of dignity, as required necessarily any
act of the Pope, or external jurisdiction to erect it, or her Majesty's
allowance, license, or assent, if she had been of the same religion? If there
were no other, this title of the Archpriest would make a great difference:
George Blackwell by the grace of God, and the ordinance of the Sea Apostolic,
Archpriest of England.

This author having pleased himself in proving a contempt (as he weeneth) in
the priests concerning this authority, he still inculcateth, that it was
instituted by his Holiness, and confirmed afterward by an express Breue, as
though it had been known before the coming of the Breue, that his Holiness
had any part in it, or that any of these forementioned matters had been first,
or formerly urged by the priests, after that they had full notice of the Popes
mind therein, and not rather been only published afterward, to the end that
all might see (who would) what reason the priests had to forbear, to subject
themselves unto the authority, at the sight of the Cardinal Caietans letters.
And whereas he would after show out of the priests their own words, how
dangerously they do teach disobedience to this authority, and to all other,
which they mislike: and in the margent puts this note: Dangerous and
offensive doctrine: he does infinitely discredit himself: the doctrine as he
has here delivered it, being so sound and Catholic, as whosoever shall
gainesay it, will prove himself an Ass or an heretic. Neither can his
malicious descant upon these words, which he cites, prevail in the judgment
of any, who has judgment. As for example, that by this doctrine men are
taught, to examine every thing, coming from their Superiors, by their own
judgments, and to admit, what they please, and leave the rest: For the
discourse, from whence these words are taken, which are here cited, does
plainly show, that the priests relied upon the judgment of many learned men
from beyond the Seas. And whereas the priests their words are these: that no
man is bound in all things to believe, or execute what every man in authority
over him shall put upon him: he peruerteth this sentence, and tells his
reader, that the priests do teach that every thing must be examined: which the
priests never affirmed: or that which pleased them should be admitted. And in
this matter of schism, which was not every thing, but one special thing, and
of great importance, they relied upon the censure of Paris as all men do know,
which cleared them from it, and also from sin: from which also his Holiness
has now declared that they were free, notwithstanding that M. Blackwell was an
Archpriest, and a Superior, and stood most peremptorily in that error: And by
his being in authority, countenanced such his forward adherents, as by their
audaciousnes in this present controversy have given earnest, that they will be
most ready, if occasion be offered, to raise a most dangerous faction against
the Clergy, without all respect of duty, or correspondence in good desert
toward them. And to the question moved here in the Apology, what other way
did heresy take at the beginning against Ecclesiastical governors, or what
other gate did some unquiet and disobedient Catholics in those days open to
heresy: who being offended with their superiors, taught, that their subjects
in conscience might dissent from them, and disobey them in diverse cases? I
answer that heresy never found her way into the world by truth, or Catholic
doctrine, (as that is which is cited here in the Apology, out of the priests
books, and most ignorantly (to censure it no worse) oppugned by this author)
but by falsehood, after that the people were carried away with an opinion, that
this or that man could not err, and that all must be true, which this or that
man said. And perchance the fowlest block, at which many heretics at this day
do stumble, is a supposed doctrine, which (until this Apology came forth)
was never favored by any Catholic, and that is: that there are some, who in
respect that they are in such place of authority, cannot err in any thing;
which being so apparently absurd, as all Catholic histories may convince the
contrary, some that hear it, do resolve themselves, that all the rest is
naught. Neither is the exception just, which is here taken against the priests:
to wit, that they did teach this doctrine in general without any particulars,
although they might have done it, without offense to any (but to such as hope
by their egregious flatterly and sycophancie to prevail in that, after which
they have long gaped) for the priests delivered this doctrine upon occasion of
the controversy of schism, and proved by this doctrine, that the credit of
the Archpriest, as Archpr. was not sufficient to convince, that it was schism:
and added in most plain and particular terms, as much as was needful for
this place, for the credit of the chief pastor in these words: And who upon
earth is warranted from erring, but one? To which, to take away the scandal,
which upon some speeches of such sycophants, as this author is, has grown in
Christendom among the simpler sort of people, these words are most Catholikely
and truly added, and not he in all things.

The exceptions which afterward are taken for unkindness toward the Cardinal
Caietane, are very foolish: and those that are for irreuerence are as false;
the priests having always showed as much reverence, as the Cardinal did
deserve, or they could do: saving their duty to the Cardinals superior and
theirs, and the liberty which the Clergy has in all places of Christend^e,
and yet deserve not the name of libertines, as this godly author out his great
charity, and assistance of the spirit, which guides him, terms them in this
place, upon occasion of some words which he says are under the hands of
six prisoners of Wisbich, and were to be showed to his Holiness, to wit:
cito indignabitur libertas, si prematur: that is to say, oppressed liberty
will not long bear it. For after that he has showed that the priests dealt
unkindly with the Cardinal Protector, who now he says is gone to God (and
perchance had left a greater hope of possibility, of some peace in our
afflicted Church, if he had taken some of these godly with him) he would
persuade his Reader, that the priests do not spare the Pope himself, and for
proof he cites one place, where they speak of their boldness, in repelling
injuries, as though this did any way concern the Pope, and that other place
before cited, which he says should have been showed unto him: and then he
falls from this to prove a haughtiness in the priests, in that they would
not suffer themselves to be accounted all the world over for schismatikes. Other
sentences also are cited out of their books, where they endeavor to prove,
how convenient it had been, that they had had the choice of their Superior,
according to the decrees not only of Popes, but also of the Emperors: at
which this Author glaunceth, and uses these words: as though this were more:
as though this were not more, although the one be of a higher order then the
other: as when we say, that such a thing is of force by law divine and humane,
when no man is so absurd, as not to think that the law divine does far
excel man's law. But for our purpose, and to prove, that it was always more
to have a liberty by the temporal Prince his law, over and above the
liberty which the Clergy had by the decrees of holy Church: see I pray you,
how this was thought on, when it was granted by a Parliament, 47 Edw. 3.
that the Cathedral Churches should enjoy their elections, and that from
thencefoorth the King should not write against the elected, but should by his
letters help toward their confirmation. But (says John Stowe) this statute
took small effect. By which it is evident, that the Clergy did find, that it
was more to have the decrees of the Pope and King, then the decrees of the Pope
alone. But if this fellow will say, that two are not more then one, his Reader
must take it for an Oracle, and by virtue of blind obedience believe it
undoubtedly.

In the next point, this author iuggleth up two matters together: the one that
the Priests do call into suspicion of forgery the Popes Breue it self: the
other is, that they draw his Hol. pious meaning into matter of State. For
proof of the first he cites these words out of the English book: that it was
procured God knows out of what office: which words cannot by any, but an
evil disposition be brought to an accusation of forgerie: The most that can be
made of it is, that Fa Parsons might be suspected to have procured it, where
he might have his will perchance more then was convenient; and yet the Breue
not forged. For as Rebuffus in praxi beneficiorum, de breui Apostolico numero
16. does note: an Apostolical Breue, solet concedi and a Papa, and a
Cancellaria, ac a summo paenitentiario, and horum quodlibes dicitur
Apostolicum, and sic Breuia dicuntur literae Apostolicae. It uses to be
granted by the Pope, and by the Chancery, and by the high penitentiary, and
every one is called Apostolical, and so the Breues are said to be Apostolical
letters.

Having then thus showed that Breues may come from diverse Courts, and yet be
true Breues, we have also showed, that the Priests are here falsely accused,
where they are said to bring the Breue in suspicio^ of forgery, by making a
doubt, out of what court it was procured. But to give further satisfaction to
the curious. The cause why a doubt was made of F. Parsons his carriage in this
matter, is (as we have set it down in the book dedicated to the holy Office
page 59) for that the Breue affirmed that M. George Blackwell was appointed by
the Cardinals letters of the 7. of March 1598 Archp. of the English Catholics,
for the better union of the Catholics of the kingdoms of England and
Scotland; whereas in these the Cardinals letters he is not made archpriest of
the English Catholics, but only of Priests, and not of all the priests, but
only of the Priests of the Seminaries. And we did more easily give consent to
think, that Fa. Parsons had busied himself more then became him, because his
Holiness, as no doubt he is careful, that no errors or show of errors should be
in the Breues, so he has no custom to look upon them, but only gives his
consent that they be made. Which consent although sometimes the chief of that
office does take in presence: yet sometime he gives credit to those, who say,
that they have his Holiness consent thereto. And although he, who is chief in
that office, must give also his consent or warrant for the making of the Breue:
yet he takes all his information of him who asks for it, and sees not the
Breue, but only a small abstract thereof, and leaves it to other inferior
officers to draw it as it must be, seal it, and deliver it to them, who are
the procurers thereof. All which is expressed by Zecchius in his book de
republica Ecclesiastica tract. de prelatis Cap. 9. Breuium vero officio
praepositus est vnus Cardinalis iurisperitus, qui habito viuae vocis oraculo
Papae perseipsum, vel alium facto, absque alia Papae signatura, omissa etiam
porrectione supplicatoris, sed sola Breuium minuta ab Abbreuiatore recepta,
videt formam Breuis, addit and minuit pro eius arbitrio, and reuisam, minutam,
and subscriptam ab ipso, solicitatoribus restituit, quae postea apud
expeditores fidem facit, and inde litterae in forma Breuis in tenuiori
pergamena scribuntur, and scriptae sub annulo Piscatoris dominico sub cera
expediuntur apud Secretarios domesticos, and little scriptores fere semper, and
expeditae, expectantibus, accepta earum taxa pro rei natura, and scripturae
mercede restituuntur. There is a Cardinal skillful in the Law (says
Zecchius) who is appointed over the office of the Breues, who having leave
immediately from the Popes own mouth, or by the relation of some other, without
any other warrant from him, and without the supplication, but only having a
small abbreuiation of the Breues, vieweth the form of the Breue, adds or
diminishes thereof, as it shall please him, and when he has viewed his small
abbreuiation of the Breue and set his hand unto it, be delivers it back to
those, who presented it unto him, and so it is carried as warranted, to those
to whom it belongs to make the Breues. Hereupon are letters framed in form
of a Breue, and written in thin parchment, and being written, they are sealed
with wax under the Popes scale called annulus Piscatoris, by the domestical
Secretaries, and their writers almost always; and being dispatched, they are
given back to those who wait for them, paying the duties according to the
nature of the matter, and the hire or reward for the writing.

Let us now lay these matters together: first how that Breues be made, and his
Hol. never reads them, nor yet the Cardinal who is president or chief in
the office, after that he has given his warrant for the drawing of the Breue,
according to that which was showed to him by the abbreuiator, nor knows ought
of the matter, but what the procurer thereof suggesteth. Secondly F. Parsons
industry to further the plots, which he has laid. Thirdly the credit which he
has in Rome, by reason of the Spanish faction, which he has many years
blinded in such sort, with putting so great an Island as England, or Ireland, or
both in their eyes, as they cannot see how vainly they wast themselves upon
the foolish promises of so mean a man. Fourthly the fault which seems to be
very great in the Breue, where it refers us for proof of a matter to a
letter, which does not contain that which the Breue says it does. Fifthly
that it may come from diverse offices, and no man can with reason blame the
priests if they have some doubt of the manner of procuring this Breue, and also
affirm thus much, God knows out of what office it was procured: Not accusing
it notwithstanding of forgerie, as this author most injuriously, and falsely
taxes them.

Concerning the other accusation, that the Priests do seek to draw his
Holiness pious meaning into matters of State: I answer, that his Holiness
pious meaning was not known, or that he had any part in the institution of
this authority, until his Breue came. And if since this time, by the Jesuits
means, or any others, his Holiness has by any act in Ireland or otherwise,
given the Council cause to think that he deals in State matters, the
priests in England are not to be charged with that which may thereupon fall
out. And it is said that it has been confessed by some, who are in hold now in
England, that such a conceit was current in Spain, that this Archipresbyterie
was made for the furtherance of some State plots against our Country, which at
that time perchance was concealed from his Holiness, and a fayrer tale told
him of piety, to win him to institute it at their instance: who hoping to
get thereby, what they desired, would in time bring the Church government into
a company of blind-deuout-obedient children under some elder, or some Agent,
which had been to take away all Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, and ancient
approved government in our Church. But as it has been often said, and is
confessed in this Apology, the Breue came not in a year after the institution
of this authority. And therefore these are very malicious accusations, and
constructions of the priests their words, which were written or spoken, when
they knew no other, then that all proceeded from the Cardinal Caietane at the
instance of the Jesuits, whose troublesome and seditious State-humors were too
well known in England, and gave too much cause to say more then ever the
priests as yet have said in this kind.

But now to make an end of this second chapter, this author cites an other
proposition out of the English book, that is: that confirmation is either most
necessary in time of persecution, or altogether vain, and as a superfluous
ceremony in Gods Church. Upon which assertion thus he runs: which is a very
temerarious and scandalous speech, not to censure it any further, but to leave
it to whom it belongs. But yet he will have a blow or two at the legs of it
at the least. Let us see his play, for that the words vain and superfluous
ceremony, are contemptuous phrases of the heretics. In good time good sir: and
you by this have given us some light, how it could be possible, that you should
go so far out of the way as you do, not only here, but every where in this
Apology. You have read, as we take it, that saying of Elias, Siautem Baal,
sequimini illum. If Baal be God, follow him. Those latter words do best serve
your turn, the whole proposition is too heavy for you. Can you find in any of
the priests books, where they say, that the sacrament of confirmation is a
vain and superfluous ceremony? If you can, then cite the place, and you shall
have humble thanks for your pains, and shall thereby also put the priests in
mind of such their temerarious, and scandalous propositions. If you cannot (as
we are most sure that you cannot) then must you not be offended, if we think
that you set up your rest upon Sequimini illum, the following of Baal, and that
your company will suite better with beasts, then with men, upon whose last
words, none but such senseless echoes do take advantage. His Reader being
preiudicially possessed by a comment upon the last words, he imboldneth
himself to say somewhat of the whole sentence, to wit: Neither does it follow,
that albeit his Holiness and predecessors hitherto, have not thought the use
of this Sacrament necessary in England, during the time of our persecution (as
indeed to no man in any time is it absolutely necessary to salvation)
therefore good Catholics should esteem it for a vain and superfluous
ceremony. Note I pray you, the pretty sleights which he uses. The priests did
say, that this Sacrament was either most necessary in time of persecution, or
else a vain ceremony. And he tells us, that albeit his Holiness has not
thought it necessary in England, during the time of our persecution, as though
his Holiness could not think, that this Sacrament of confirmation was most
necessary in the time of persecution, and yet not judge it necessary here, and
now in our persecution by reason of such misinformations, as might be given
him: as if for example, any should say unto the Pope, as Fa Parsons said to M.
Charnocke at Rome, Why can they not now do as well without it as heretofore? Or
some other perchance might put into the Popes head, that which some Jesuits
put into some of the Catholics heads in England: it cannot last long now, the
next year we shall have Mass openly in Paul's: or as a Jesuit having once
promised a gentleman, in recompense of an injury done unto him, to get him a
dispensation to marry his kinswoman: and being sued unto to remember his
promise, answered, that he understood that the Card. Allen was now upon his
coming into England, and would be here shortly, and dispatch by him self
this, and many other such cases. Upon how many motives may a thing, from one
small time to an other, be deferred, which notwithstanding might be thought
necessary? Can any Catholic think, that amongst all Countries christened,
only England must be deprived of the benefit of this Sacrament, and that the
Sacrament, which is as properly instituted to strengthen Christians in
persecution, as Baptism is to make Christians, must not be granted to the
English, as their case stands? For what else can these his words imply: albeit
his Holiness, and predecessors hitherto have not thought the use of this
Sacrament necessary in England, during the time of our persecution? Belike
then it is necessary in time of persecution: but we in England must not have
it. Has he not well helped the matter? and as for that foolish parenthesis (as
in deed to no man in any time it is absolutely necessary to salvation) to what
end is it here brought? who has ever said that it is at any time absolutely
necessary to salvation? Baptism by water is not absolutely necessary to
salvation, as some Martyrs have proved, and yet our Savior says, John. 3.
Unless a man be borne again by water, and the holy Ghost, he cannot enter
into the kingdom of God. The like phrase of speech, implying necessity, is
used by our Savior concerning the receiving of the Sacrament of his body: and
yet no man does say, John 6.
that it is absolutely necessary to salvation. This question was not, whether
the Sacrament of confirmation was absolutely necessary to salvation: for this
must have set a stint upon the power of God: but the question was, whether that
confirmation were necessary in time of persecution in Spain (if you will) when
God shall suffer it, or in Italy, if in England and in the English persecution
it be not thought necessary. And if it can be proved, that at the least
somewhere this Sacrament is necessary in the time of persecution, the
proposition, which the priests did make, is neither scandalous, nor
temerarious, nor false doctrine: it being evident to all men of sense, that the
one part of a disjunctive proposition being true, the whole proposition is
true. As for example, if a man say of a Swanne, this Swanne is either white or
black: His proposition is so true, as no man of any sense can deny it:
although it were a most ridiculous assertion to say, that the Swan were black.
If then we can prove, that confirmation is most necessary in time of
persecution, he would be proved to have been over hasty, who snatched so
greedily at this proposition: It is either most necessary in time of
persecution, or a vain and superfluous ceremony in Gods Church.

The necessity thereof in time of persecution is thus proved. That by which
only a special grace is given, to strengthen a Christian against the assaults
of the persecutor, is most necessary in time of persecution. The Sacrament of
Confirmation, is that, by which only a special grace is given, to strengthen
a Christian against the assaults of the persecutor.
Therefore, The Sacrament of Confirmation, is most necessary in time of
persecution.


The first proposition is evident by light of nature. The second proposition is
so generally received of all Catholic Divines, as they do anathematize
whosoever denies it, and it is made plain by induction: For in Baptism we
receive grace for remission of original sin, and all other, if we have any
at the receiving of that Sacrament: but we do not receive any special grace
to resist the persecutor: and so likewise do we receive grace to such, and
such particular end, by all the other Sacraments. But the grace by which we
are strengthened to combat with the persecutor, is only given, and under this
name, by the Sacrament of Confirmation. And for this cause does Pope Vrbane,
as he is cited de Consecra. did. 5. cap. 1. affirm, that all Christians must
be confirmed: and in the same place Melchiades the Pope is cited, who
affirms, that the helps, which we have by Confirmation, are necessary for
those who live: for in his time all Christians lived in persecution. Hosius
cites this Epistle of Melchiades more at large in his book entitled
Confessio Catholicae fidei Christianae, cap. 38. where the Pope compares the
Sacrament of Baptism, to the admission into a warrefare; and the Sacrament of
Confirmation, to the furniture for the battle. And to show further how
necessary this Sacrament is in time of persecution, he applies to it that
saying, Nisi Dominus custodierit ciuitatem etc. unless the Lord keep the
city, he watches in vain who keeps it. And afterward to this doubt, what
did the coming of the holy Ghost profit the Apostles, after the passion and
resurrection of Christ? He makes this answer, that thereby they were made able
to that, to which they were not before: for that before the coming of the holy
Ghost, the Apostles for very fear denied Christ: but after that the holy Ghost
was come unto them, they were armed to suffer martyrdom. And to conclude, this
Pope tells us, that by this sacrament we obtain, amongst other gifts, that
gift of understanding, of which it is said. Intellectum tibidabo, etc. I will
give thee understanding, and instruct thee in this way in which thou go. The
same Hosius in the same Chapter cites S. Clement, who succeeded S. Peter; and
Cornelius, who attributes the fall of Nouatus the heretic, to the want of
this Sacrament of Confirmation: for Nouatus falling dangerously sick, after
that he was dispossessed, was baptized, but not confirmed, as he ought to have
been, according to the rule of the Church. This Epistle is in the 6. book of
Eusebius his Ecclesiastical history. cap. 43. By these and other the like
does Hosius prove, that baptism is for those that come in; confirmation, for
those who fight. King Henry the 8. in his book against Martin Luther, having
discoursed upon this Sacrament, cites those words out of Hugo de S. Victore.
Illic gratia tribuitur adremissionem peccatorum, hic gratia datur ad
confirmationem: Quid autem prodest si a lapsu erigeris, nisi ad standum
confirmeris? That is, There (that is, by baptism) is grace given for the
remission of sins: here (that is, by confirmation) is grace given for
strengthening: For what profits it you to be raised after a fall, if you are
not confirmed or made strong to stand? And a little after says the King: Ad
hoc enim ordinatur: It is ordained to this end, that a man may boldly confess
his faith before the persecutor. And to make here an end of this discourse,
Pope Leo the 10 gave unto the King for this book, this Title, Defender of the
faith. And if there were no other proof of the necessity of this Sacrament in
time of persecution, that which is here cited out of Hugo, and so highly
commended by Pope Leo, were sufficient for a far better man then the
fault-finding Apologie-maker: and to convince him, that the proposition which
the priests used, was neither words of great excess, nor contained false
doctrine, nor was reproachful to his Holiness, or his predecessors: who could
not but know, that confirmation was most necessary in time of persecution,
howsoever they were persuaded by some our backe-friends, that it was not
necessary in England, during the time of our persecution. And thus much in
answer to the second Chapter of the Apology, wherein the author does
sufficiently discover by his proud and peremptory judgments, whither his
spirit tends: and that his hope to prevail with his reader, is founded more
upon contumelious words and false imaginations, then upon sound discourses.

CHAP. 8. How this Author lays his plot for the disgrace of Secular Priests,
and draws on his reader with diverse idle stays. Apol. cap. 3.
IN the third Chapter this Author intends, first, to show the great injuries
and ingratitude offered to the whole body of the society: secondly, how
pleasing and profitable this is to heretics: thirdly, how prejudicial and
dishonorable to all our Catholic nation and cause: three very material
points, were they performed. The priests do show all these things most
plainly against the Jesuits and their adherents in this action. For whereas
the Priests did raise a very reverend opinion of the Jesuits in the hearts of
the English (as Fa. Campion in his letters to his general, confesses) and
such, as without fear he could not recount it, the Jesuits being by these
means wrought into credit, wrought the priests out so far, as in many places
no priest was welcome, who came not by order of a Jesuit: and having gotten an
advantage (as they thought) of the Priests, followed it to the priests great
disquiet, although in the end it will turn to their own utter discredit, as
already it begins, and their best friends do see it, and wish too late,
that their treatise of Schism against the Priests had never been written. The
commending of which treatise by their fellow Jesuits, or the not punishing of
so famous a libeller, has justly drawn on a hard conceit of the whole body,
especially the superior of the society, who in conscience should have
corrected so foul a fault, and chief root, from whence does spring the
present disquietnesse in England among the Catholics, and a very profitable
pleasure to the Protestants, who cannot but laugh at this sinful folly of
the Jesuits, while by libels they would possess al Catholics, that the
priests, who reconciled them to the union of Gods Church, were now themselves
become Schismatikes, the most prejudicial and dishonorable calumniation, that
ever was raised against our Catholics, and the Catholic faith.

And for the further vexation of the priests, this author proceeds in this
third Chapter, to bring them into the highest degree of contempt and hatred: he
endeavors to bring them into contempt, by telling his reader, that they went
ouer-Sea some of them poor seruing-men, other soldiers, other wanderers in
the world; good stuff to make priests of, whom Catholics are to reverence, and
at whose feet Princes are to kneel. And although our Savior made his choice
of his Apostles out of the meaner sort of men, to give us to understand that it
was their function which was honorable in them, yet these words in this place
might for diverse respects have been spared. First, for that if any such be
among them, it is little for the Jesuits credit, who procure them to take
orders. Secondly, because these who are named to have been the authors of the
books, against which this Apology is written, and seem by this discourse to
be here girded at, have some of them left more, to betake themselves to that
calling, in which they are, then all our English Jesuits have done: others are
so abundantly provided for out of their own patrimonies, as they do maintain
diverse others of their friends: Others (if al their worshipful friends should
have failed them) were so well placed in the Universities of Enggland, as they
needed not to have come to any such bare estate as to become poor serving men,
soldiers, or wanderers: And he, who was worst of them all provided for, was a
scholar of good fame, and so might have lived in such sort, as he neither
needed to serve in this manner, or to wander in a strange country. Thirdly, the
author of this Apology (if he be not mistaken) had he not helped himself with
his pupils money, with which he was put in trust for his pupils use, might have
been a poor serving man in some strange country, or a soldier, or a
wanderer, not having any honest place of abode in England. For being expulsed
with infamy out of his College at Oxeford, and thereby made destitute where
to become in England, resolved to travail and to study Physic in Padua,
where in a short time his money failing him, which his pupils lent him against
their wills, want wrought such a devotion in him, as he was contented to be
beholding to the Jesuits in such sort, as here in general terms he affirms
of the priests. Fourthly, if the remembrance of sir William Stanley, and of
other good soldiers, and zealous men for the Jesuits, could not have obtained
of this author, not to have spoken so contemptuously of soldiers, and to
discredit some of his closest adherents; yet the remembrance of F. Ignatius
Loiola, the founder of the Jesuits, should have made him bear a greater
reverence to the name of a soldier. But perchance he means to keep himself
well enough out of his sight, and we fear it greatly, that F. Ignatius will
have little joy to look upon him, unless he fall to repentance of these his
bad dealings.

And whereas he affirms, that probably some of those which he calls heads
of the faction, had never been men of learning, or account, or able to write
books, if the Jesuits had not been: It is well known, that some of those whom
he by-nameth were never the better by the Jesuits: some so little, as little
might be: and al of them might have bin probably men of more learning, and
account, and better able to write books, if they had never known the Jesuits,
then now they are: having had more hinderance by them, then furtherance, while
under color of prudent and necessay mortification, those who would not listen
to the spirit which called them to be Jesuits, were enforced to spend their
time with less quietness, and consequently with less profit, then otherwise
they might. Neither is it here needful to stand upon the Catholics their
blushing, to ask help now of the Jesuits: for their helps are, as they have
been a long time (as we fear) upon such conditions, as all honest men must
blush, if they do ask them, and those, who are as ready to further the
Jesuits plots; as themselves (a notable abuse of the Catholic King his
charity to poor Catholics) are neither driven to ask help, nor to blush,
when they take it: although their help is so prudently offered, as few do
surfeit upon it.

Having thus laid his plot to bring the priests into contempt, now he
imploieth himself to bring them into hatred with the Catholics, by affirming,
that they conspire with the very enemy against their own. which is most false:
For if matters of Religion be in question, the priests are ready to join
rather with the lewdest Catholic in the world, then with the Protestant:
although when matters of treachery against their Prince and country be
handled, they are as ready to defy the plotters thereof, were they the most
zealous Catholics in the world. Sure we are, that this author cannot justly
challeng us, that we have swarued one jot from the Catholic faith: and his
accusation must needs sound evil in the ears of upright Judges, when he says
we conspire against our own. I wish also that it were not too sure, that the
Jesuits and their adherents have thrust themselves into conspiracies against
their own, if either their Prince and their country, or Catholic priests be
their own. For it is so palpable as every man may feel it, how they have
thrust in not only their advise, but their persons in actions against their
Prince and country, and against Catholic priests. What greater conspiracy
could have been made, then has been by their slanderous tongues, and
infamatory libels of schism, dispersed against them? whereby they have
declared, that they have given hands to all sorts of enemies, as well ghostly, as
visible, against their own, in which their union the priests have no reason to
join themselves.

Now do follow certain exceptions against some marginall notes made in the
book dedicated to his Holiness. For example in the 23 page, there is this note
in the margent, Iesuitae quaesua sunt quaerunt, which this author Englisheth
thus, Jesuits seek their own, and not those things which are of Jesus Christ,
which is more, then is in the Latin, or perchance more then was meant by that
Latin, or could be honestly gathered, the priests not citing the place of
Scripture to which this author alludeth. And upon his own addition he
discourses somewhat in the end of this Chapter, and concludes, that they
have sought those things which are of Jesus Christ. The error then was, that
the priests put this word sua, where they should have put Jesus Christi and have
made the note more true in this manner: the Jesuits seek those things, which
are of Jesus Christ: for belike the Jesuits have no list to busy themselves,
where nothing is to be had, which they must do if they seek sua, their own.
They do rather seek, where there are some great sums of money to be
bestowed upon the poor Catholics and priests, who are in want: which alms
are Jesus Christi, belonging to Jesus Christ; and the note had stood very well
to this sense, Iesuitae quae Jesus Christi sunt quaerunt. The Jesuits do seek
those things which are Jesus Christ's. The other notes this fellow calls them
trifles, and he might very well have left them, as many other: For he does but
stir up a desire in the Reader to look upon the book, whence these notes
were taken: where he shall find matter enough, to make more displeasing notes,
then these are which are here picked out. Yet that note, concerning the
Seminaries, must in no case be omitted, although it has been often answered,
that they are more to the benefit of the Jesuits, then to England; having
therein such, as they use, or abuse rather, for the furthering of their present
state-plots, and a good assurance, that the Colleges in Spain are to fall to
their share hereafter. The lamentable state, into which the college of Rome is
brought, will be declared at large in a treatise thereof: The college of Doway is
brought into these terms, under pretense of poverty, as no man is to be
admitted thereunto, of who^ there is not great hope, that he will become of the
Jesuits faction. The Cardinal Protector willed perchance, that there should be
a stint until the debts were paid: and this is used for a color, to admit, or
reject, whom the Jesuits list. If one be presented thither, whom the Jesuits
like not, then the college debts are to be paid: if it be one, who is likely
to be factious for them, the College has credit for his admittance. And if he
be one whose friends will maintein him, then he shall go to S. Omers after some
circumstances, where the Jesuits will have care for the pious distribution of
that which he has: and nothing is ought worth, which has not some great
providence, or piety at one end thereof.

To conclude, In this chapter the author does little other then weary his
reader, with those idle matters, which he has before brought, to prove
emulation and faction in all places, and actions, where Jesuits have had any
thing to do: and to the ostentation of the Jesuits actions, he adds some
little of the zeal of the priests, which would prove, that the good priests
dwelt far from good neighbors, if I think fol. 21, and such like slips, did
not discharge the united Priests from all the suspicion of writing this
Apology, as by the title he would that the Reader should believe,

CHAP. 9. How this Author pursues his impertinent discourses of troubles among
the English in Flaunders, France, Italy, and Spain. Apol. cap. 4.
IN the fourth Chapter of this Apology, the Author intends to show how
greatly the Card. Allen, and others of our nation are iniuried, by being said
to have been against the Jesuits, and what injury is also offered to the
Cardinals Borromaeo and Toledo, and his Holiness himself. And for his exordium,
he declares how all sorts do seek company, to approve and authorize their
actions. Belike it was not forgotten as yet, how the Jesuits have canuased, not
only in Flaunders amonst the soldiers, religious women, and artificers, for
voices in commendation of themselves, but also here in England: hoping that the
number of such as can be gotten by bribes, flattery, or threats, may in time
ouerpease the truth of the cause now in controversy. The first proof which
is here brought to declare the Card. Allen his love and affection to the
Jesuits, is out of his letter written to M. Mush: of which we have discoursed
before, and showed how little it can make for the Jesuits. All the other also
here cited make as little to the purpose, this present controversy being long
after the Cardinals death: to wit, whether the priests (who would not be blind
obedient upon the sight of Card. Caietane his letters for the institution of
the Archpriest) were schismatikes, factious, seditious, rebellious, fallen from
Christ and his spouse, excommunicated, irregular, witches and Idolaters, and as
Ethnicks, and Publicans? In which controversy, if any of those stand with us,
who showed themselves contrary to the Cardinals proceedings, while he was
seduced by the Jesuits, and brought into dishonorable actions against his
Prince, country, and friends, what reason have we to reject their help? And
if they had been as bad as heretics in those actions, why should we be charged
as partners in that action, more then any Catholic prince may be charged to be
a favorer of heretics or miscreants, who should have any such joined with him
in his army, either for love or money, when he fights against some other
Catholic prince, upon injuries offered by the one to the other. Those Noble
men, Gentlemen, and others whilst they lived, were ready to give account of
their actions in those times, and some will yet perchance upon this occasion,
say somewhat therein: and the Cardinal might show himself very contrary unto
them in those actions, and yet be very favorable to the students in Rome,
toward the latter end of his life, when time let him see those things in the
Jesuits proceedings, which either affection would not let him see before, or
little hope to amend them, made him dissemble, which perchance he did the
rather, because by the Jesuits means with the King of Spain, he came to that
preferrement which he held, and could not so suddenly go about to reform,
what he saw amiss in their government of the English College, and their
general carriage in English affairs.

The fears and doubts which F. Parsons showed in his letter to M. Tho.
Fitzherbert do discover, that D. Stapleton dissembled with them, as may be
gathered by the bold carriage of such, as stand with them and their impatient
violence, which leaves no doubt to any how they are carried: and this doctor
having been once of their society, and going out from them, might justly fear
that it would have been laid wholly in his dish, if he had declared his mind
in any public sort, as he did often privately to such, as he thought he might
complain unto, without harm to himself. He was also a man of that mark and
merit above all the rest of our nation, as it was expected he should have come
to some great preferrement, which he was sure that his manifesting himself
would have hindered. And this was also an occasion of Do. Barrets dissembling,
of whose mind there are many witnesses in England: and of his lamentations,
for his opposing himself against such, as he confessed were the only men with
whom he durst deal confidently. And although it pleases this devout spirit,
to tax such, as he says are of the faction, that they are a few of the
meaner sort of our nation, and that they carry their known notes of discredit
with them, if they be examined: he who shall examine it shall find the clean
contrary both in England and out of England: and that the Jesuits faction is
held up by such only, as seeing the liberty which the Jesuits and their
adherents do use against the priests, or hoping of some reward by them, do
fear to displease them. Which folly, were it once removed, the Jesuits and
their adherents would appear to be sicut caeteri homines: as other men are:
(notwithstanding this pharisaicall contempt of the priests) and perchance much
worse, even to the equalling of the author of this Apology, who carries his
openly known notes of discredit, for the which he was expulsed the University
of Oxford, and are not yet displayed as they may be hereafter, as occasion may
be given; but are as much laughed at in private by some, as his counterfeit
holiness is admired by other.

The injury which the priests are said to have done to the Card. Borromaeo,
Archb. of Millan, consists in their affirmation, that he took the
government of one of his Seminaries in Millan from the Fathers. This might be
an injury to the Fathers, if the Card. did it without just cause: but being
done, the case is to be discussed whether it were just or no. And the Cardinal
being known to be a most devout Bishop, and not likely to have been carried
away with any foolish passion in a matter of so great moment, the priests have
laid the blame upon the Jesuits their misgouernement. And further they say
wherein, to wit, because the Seminary instituted by that devout Bishop, for
the maintenance of able persons for the Church under his charge, the Jesuits
took their pleasure, and choice of such as they thought would be some credit
unto their own order, and thereby endeavored to furnish themselves rather then
the Church, for which the Seminary was instituted. And they who gave this
cause of the Jesuits their remove, were well acquainted therewith, and with
those Jesuits, which were thus allured from that state of life, for which they
had maintenance of the Cardinal. But let us see how this author shuffeth off
this matter. The Fathers of their own will, and upon their own earnest suite,
left the said government for the great labor and trouble thereof. Good
charitable people, who challenge unto them a particular vocation to bring up
youth, and labor it in all places where they come, as the best policy they
can devise to bind men unto them, without respecting how themselves are
maintained for that purpose in the Country, or the College, as many other
would, and do in Universities much better cheap, where any Lecture is founded
for all comers unto it. The second shift which is here used, is far worse,
although in an other kind: for thereby they draw the Cardinal or themselves
into discredit. Forsooth the matter was, the Cardinal would have had those his
scholars more bare in their diet and apparel, then the Fathers order in their
Seminaries did permit, seeing they were to be sent afterward abroad to poor
benefices among country people, where they must fare hardly. If the Cardinal
did allow sufficient for them, then had the Jesuits no cause to give it over,
unless perchance they could not content themselves with that which was
sufficient. If the Cardinal did not allow that which was sufficient, then was
he not of that wisdom, of which he was reputed to be, neither could any
benefice in all his Diocese be so beggarly, as that it would not maintain the
Pastor in such diet, as is ordinarily used in the Jesuits Seminaries: neither
could the Cardinal be so ignorant, but he knew he might, nor so careless of
the credit of a pastor, but that he would unite two benefices in one, where
one could not suffice to maintain the pastor, at the least after so mean a
rate, as we do conceive in is kept in diet and apparel in the Jesuits
Seminaries. And this dislike in the Cardinal, of the Jesuits government of
his Seminary, might stand with an opinion, that many of them were good men,
and to be used otherwise. As also the Cardinal Tollet might conceive of them
how evil soever some of them behaved themselves in the government of the
English College at Rome. Lastly, whereas the priests are here challenged to
have done injury to his Holiness, for that his exhortation to the Jesuits in
their general congregation is remembered by them, is a very foolish conceit of
this author, as also that he would have us to think, that his Holiness did
exhort the Capuchines to lay down their pomp, who are generally known to use
none. But as this author said at the beginning of this chapter, All sorts
seek company, and of all other, the Jesuits love the Capuchines, because
they desire nothing.

CHAP. 10. How the stirs in the English College at Rome began, the cause
whereof this Apologie-maker does seek to color, and to lay it where it should
seem it was not. Apo. cap. 5.
IN the fifth chapter this Author treats of the great troubles which were
raised in the English College at Rome, after the Card. Allen his death, and
challenges the priests of imprudencie, for bringing them in now again, and
defending them in their books. And for so much as this chapter does wholly
consist of this point, here is little to be said thereof, the story being
particularly set down by such, as to whom these things do principally
appertain: only these few matters are to be noted, that whereas this Author
would make show, that the Jesuits were drawn into the government of that
College; there are priests yet living, who will justify, that they were
solicited by the Jesuits to take them for governors: which how willingly
soever, and sincerely the Students then performed, being carried away (as many
yet are, though not so faultily, as those who are now deluded therewith) with
the religious name of some, who little deserve it: M. Sherwine who is here
named in this chapter, said not long after in the presence of some, from whose
mouth we writ it, that they had done they know not what. What would he have
said if he had lived to see this love unto the Jesuits, used by the same
Jesuits to bring the Secular priests into hatred, even with such, as will they,
nill they, must take them for their pastors, as all the world does, and has
done, and have prospered in souls health for the space of 1500 years, and
more, before this society surnamed of Jesus was begun? And whereas there is a
touch here also, of some troubles raised in that College, not long after the
foundation thereof: it is well known, that they grew upon the Jesuits their
dealings with the students to become Jesuits: which how pious soever the desire
was in the one to dispose, or in the other to attain to a higher perfection,
was a trouble to the rest, who grew in contempt with the new inspired, and were
much less regarded of the Jesuits.

But these troubles were quietly ended within the College, after that the
Students perceived that the Jesuits notwithstanding their public protestations
to the contrary, did underhand practice themselves, and bare some others out,
which were their chief instruments in this action. And this is the true
solution of that riddle, which is in more general terms related in the
second chapter of the Apology, fol. 170 where (speaking of M. Mush) the author
affirms, that no other thing ever wrought the fathers more trouble in the
College, while this man was there, then their overmuch love and favor to him
above his merits, as other men thought: to wit, when the Rector was informed,
that (having at that time devoted himself to the Jesuits, as also there it is
sufficiently insinuated) he used to persuade the Students to become Jesuits,
and the profes were very evident, the Jesuits would never believe it: and their
trouble grew by devising sleights to save him from blame, having offended in
that, for which in public sermons, the Jesuits would often protest, whosoever
he were that should use it, he should be the same day turned out of the
College. These troubles being ended, and the scholars acquieted (as seeing no
remedy without further trouble) and contented to bear what was offered them by
this new spirit, which first began to be the overthrow of that College, and
now of England: Other began in the time of Pope Xistus of holy memory, and
then there was a visitation made in the College. But what the causes were
thereof, we do not understand. If this author could do any thing impudently,
doubtless he shows his weakness in bringing this matter. For as we are
informed, those who were reputed the chief in that faction, since they came
into England (not finding belike such among the Secular priests, as could sort
with that humor) have betaken themselves to the Jesuits order, and some of
them, who are now in England, are as factious in their Religious humor, as they
were busy before against the same religious order.

CHAP. 11. How this Author beslirreth himself to lay the fault of the
scandalous division in Wisbich upon those Priests who would not subject
themselves to that insolent Agencie of the Jesuits. Apol. cap. 6.
THe sixth chapter of the Apology is of the troubles, which were raised among
Catholic prisoners in Wisbich: the beginning whereof this author affirms,
that the priests do declare in the Latin book, page 11. to have been a
repining in themselves, that their fellows would have certain rules of orderly
living: which is most false. For they have always attributed the cause of
these stirs, to the separation, which the Jesuits, and their adherents made
from them, because they would not subject themselves to F. Weston the Jesuit,
as a new illuminate, under the name of an Agent, which I leave to those, to
whom it appertains to discover, if this Apology minister occasion, to say
more then has already been said of these matters. And whereas this author
promises, to put down authentical informations, and originals against the
narration which is already made of these stirs, he brings his proofs only
out of the letters of the Jesuits, and their faction, who are, and were parties
in the controversy. And although the testimony of Fisher may seem to some to
be of some weight against the Priests, as having been sometime an enemy to the
Jesuits: yet it ought not to move any man of discretion, what he said against
them. For if the author of this Apology be of any credit, Fisher mst be of no
credit. For in the seventh chapter fol. 93. Fisher is said to have been one of
the most exorbitant disorderly fellows in the Roman stirs: and professing
to have been now more, then half converted fol. 94. what is to be looked for
of him, but the like behavior against the other part upon this his conversion?
yea in the very point, for which Fisher is brought as an authentical witness
or informer, he is discredited by this Author. For fol. 95. speaking of
Fisher, thus he says. And albeit we will not affirm all to be true, which
he said: yet many things are such, as they could not be well fained (perchance
that they had a swanne to dinner at Wisbich, which was a most necessary
circumstance to be noted, and put in print) and are confirmed otherwise, and
the speaking voluntarily (see Fishers relation to D. Bagshaw at Paris, set out
by the same Doctor, with M.D. Ely his notes upon the Apology) upon his oath,
must be presumed to have had some care also of his conscience, etc. This etc.
were enough in this place, to make a man doubt what care he was thought to
have of his conscience. But such testimonies must be taken for authentical
against the priests. And if there be an original brought out against a priest,
it is enough: it is no matter, how many untruths be in it: for it is an
original.

The extraordinary commendations here brought of F. Weston we wish he might
deserve them: and if his life were so exemplarie in the Clinke, the man had an
evil chance to be removed to Wisbich, where his actions are blamed, and proved
blame worthy, at the least in this point very manifestly: that seeing what
stir was likely to grow upon his Agencie, he would not give it over, but
would prosecute it, it being a thing which if it had never been thought upon,
might very well have been missed in Gods Church, and no way necessary for the
reformation intended by him and his fellows (as F. Weston himself confessed
in his letter to his General 27. March 1598, and is here to be seen fol. 77.)
especially without their priuitie, whom he would should become his subjects,
or pupils, or how the good man would have had them called, who (setting passion
aside) were much fitter to govern him, then he them. The cause of the breach
when peace was once made amongst them, was in the lesuits; for that they would
not stand to such rules, as were made, but when they listed; which D. Norden
taking (as he had just cause) in evil part, got away the copy of the rules
which the Jesuits had, and their faction, and would not restore them again
unto them: And for this is he challenged to have broken the peace, which in
truth they did break: and if he tore the paper, or burned it, they tore the
rules, and cancelled them before, when they refused to stand to judgment,
according as the rules between them had ordered it. But of this there is not a
word spoken.

This authors meaning is, to prevail if he can by falsehood and cousening of
his Reader, and labors to make him merry with now and then some foolish
impertinent matter, as here fol. 82. he tells him how that there were six or
seven butterics for 13. persons, they not suffering the 20. to have any. And
further (says he) the party that directed him ( M. Mush) after he had showed
him all these, he brought him to a chimney where also there was good ale, and
said, here is another buttery: nay said M. Mush, there is the devil, whereof
that place was called afterward merrily by some, the devil in a corner. And
verily it was a matter worth the laughing at: whoreson devil, the chimney was
too good a place for him, under correction of that zealous company, the other
20. that would have all things in good order, and every one in their due place,
as seemed them. For these good and virtuous (as they say of themselves in this
chapter fol. 65. and therefore may be believed in this point, unless perchance
they will now disclaim the company of the united to the Archpriest, which are
said to be the authors of this Apology) brought their devil and placed him in
the chapel: where what worship they did unto him, either merrily, or more
seriously, we leave it to their own godliness to explicate. For we should be
loath to say any more, then what all the world talked: that is, that they made
a buttery of the chapel, which is in the castle of Wisbich. Other many things
there are here touched in this chapter, wherein folly and falsehood strive for
the mastery. As where this author tells his Reader, that the Jesuits and
their faction at Wisbich forced none, but such as would willingly put
themselves into their Academy, or congregation according to the fashion, and
example of those private congregations of our Lady, allowed by the Sea
Apostolic in diverse Countries. A strange liberty does this author take to
fitton, seeing that all men do know, that the cause of breach was, for that
some would not subject themselves unto that Academy, which was devised by the
Jesuits and their faction: and that this Academy would not eat and drink with
their brethren. Whereupon the breach was first made publicly known, an
unusual fashion, or example in any private congregations of our Lady, or any
honest company, and never perchance heard of before, but among the impurer sort
of heretics: to which separation, because the lesser part would not agree,
they are charged fol. 67. that they were so divided among themselves, as in the
year 1597. as one writes, that they did eat and take their diet in four
several places, having notwithstanding driven out of the common hall by help
of the Iaylour, the other part, though far the greater. But the manner of
driving them out was no other, then that least these (the lesser number) should
seem any way to accord to the separation, made by the greater number, they did
sit some of them at every table in the hall; and not upon any division, which
was amongst themselves, as it is here falsely suggested. For had the Jesuits
faction had but so much against the lesser number, that they had flocked
together at one table, the separation should have been fathered upon them,
although they never dreamed thereof: and this humor of the Jesuits being
known unto them, they used to sit at every table some, because it should be
manifest, that the other made the separation. Yet was not this altogether done
of purpose to this end: for they used before to sit at the same tables, at
which now they sat But if they had now left those places, and have sitten
together at any one table, this circumstance would have been evidence enough
for their adversaries against them. There is also a notorious falsehood in the
68. leaf, where these priests of Wisbich are said to have been the first that
appealed from his Holiness Breue, by which the Cardinal Caietanes letters were
confirmed: whereas they never appealed from the Breue, but from such grieuances
as they have set down in their Appeal, among which the Breue is none, as
there may be seen. And fol. 76. there is a scornful speech of the degree of
Doctor in Divinity: where speaking of Master Doctor Bagshaw, thus he says:
and all this stir to make room to his Doctourship: (a degree wont to be
honored among honest Catholic priests) which God knows in what corner of
the world he got it, and how worthily: but certain it is, as far as we are
informed, by ordinary commendation of his Superiors he had it not. God and the
world knows, that he had his Doctorship, at which this silly fellow gybeth,
in no corner of the world, unless one of the most famous Universities in
Italy, be to be termed a corner of the world. For it is well known, that he
took his Doctourship in Padua, and he took it so woorthily, as this poor
fellow might come learn divinity of him these many years: although his
gravity perchance would think much thereof. And it is certain also,
howsoever this fellow is informed, that he had it by the ordinary commendation
of his Superior, who at that time was no other, then his Holiness, who in his
predecessors time, admitted all into the degree of Doctourship, who should be
judged worthy thereof, by such as were in office for that purpose in that
University, as well as in all others: and the most injurious Breue, which
afterward the Jesuits procured against all Englishmen, as well Divines, as
Lawyers, was not as yet procured by them. But this fellow his grief is, that
he, or any other should take degrees, unless they would become of their
faction, which makes them to have so many venerable Doctors for them, and so
forward, as some of them have not blushed to take upon them to hear and
determine the matters of such learned men, as were judged most worthy of that
degree, and had it, and other honorable places in Gods Church, when these were
blockheaded boys: and cannot but move wonder and also laughter to those who
knew them, to think in what corner, or how they came to be made Doctors. But
they were the fittest subjects for Jesuits to work upon, and stood most in
need of extraordinary commendations from such Superiors, as here this
Author would that M. D. Bagshaw should have had for the taking of his degree.

As for the other points touched in this sixth chapter concerning the stirs in
Wisbich, I am to refer the Reader to a relation set out thereof, before this
Apology appeared, and to that which M.D. Bagshaw has set forth already at
the end of M. D. Ely his notes: and what others, now touched here, shall
hereafter say of these matters.

CHAP. 12. How this present controversy is dissembled and fetched from a head
in Flanders by the Apologie-maker. Apol. ca. 7.
IN the seventh Chapter of the Apology, the Author intends to show the
general troubles and disquietnesse, which were raised among the English
Catholics in Flaunders and England, during the former stirs in Rome and
Wisbich, and how the one gave hand unto the other, and that all proceeded from
different members of the self same faction. And this his narration of the
Flemish troubles, he begins at the year of our Lord 1588. and continues it
with many idle discourses, and altogether impertinent to the present
controversy. But when he has told his tale of those matters, then he patcheth
thereunto the stirs in England, with an As in the controversy against F.
Holt, and others in Flanders, these few had against them all the body of our
Cath. nation, etc. So fares it now in England, where a very few at the
beginning, partly upon stomach and auersion, or rather coffeehouse, partly
of ambition, unquietness of spirit, and desire of contention (as by their doings
may appear) they began to oppose themselves against the whole stream of other
Catholics, devising particular ways for their own preferment. The admirable
mildness of this Apologie-maker, and his true religious piety! But it is
great pity to interrupt him, for he means to show his reader the true state
of the question; and thus he proceeds, And since that time have drawn in
diverse other, one upon one motive, another upon another, some for preferrement,
some for coffeehouse, some for other occasions, to take their parts: and
being once engaged, to leap with them from an inch to an ell, and from a
little slide to a headlong precipitation. A godly procession, but where is the
true state of the question? Forsooth, and this is the true state of the
question. Happy is he who can understand it: A few discontented, upon such
causes as this author affirms, began to oppose themselves against the whole
stream of other Catholics, but you must go look wherein: and those few
made some other to leap from an inch to an ell: and this is the true state of
the question. How have we hitherto been deceived, in taking the true state of
the question, to be in matters principally between the Secular Priests, and the
Jesuits, as sometime we are told in this Apology, namely in the first Chapter
fol. 2. or between the Secular Priests, and their Archpriest principally: as
other sometime we are told in the same Apology, cap. 11. fol. 161? Now we
must believe, that the true state of the question, is between some few, and
the whole stream of other Catholics: But what skilleth it, since that every
thing is used in his place to some good purpose, for the bringing about that,
which is principally intended by the authors of the Apology? The opposition
then against the whole stream of Catholics, and particular devises for
preferment, with the making diverse other to leap or slide, must here be
suggested to be the true state of the question, which how deeply it may touch
the Jesuits and their factious adherents, is, or will be declared elsewhere; to
wit, with what ambition they sought their own preferment in the castle of
Wisbich, and with what scandal they wrought it, by a most wicked separation or
schism, at what time the true state of the question was: whether the Jesuits
and their fellow-factious committed any sin, or did like Christians, in
making that division in Wisbich from their fellow prisoners, and priests as
they were, suffering all under that name of Catholics, and Catholic priests.
Secondly, with what ambition, unquietness of spirit, and desire of contention,
the Jesuits began to oppose themselves against other Catholic priests, when
they writ that wicked and senseless libell of schism, omitting no name of
disgrace which a Jesuits malice could devise, at what time the true state of
the question was: whether the priests were bound to subject themselves to an
authority procured by falsehood (as the letters of institution showed) proposed
with falsehood, as then the Archpriest, being taken in the manner, could not
deny, put in execution contrary to the tenor thereof, having no letters from
his Holiness; besides whom, the Priests had no known Superior, either for
the erection of that authority, nor any testimony, that any other had power
given unto them by him to make that subordination. Thirdly, with what stomach,
and auersion from all Christian peace the Jesuits proclaimed (after that the
peace was made) that they all incurred the censures of holy Church, who should
dogmatizando, maintain, that those Priests were not schismatics, who forbore
to subject themselves unto the authority, before they saw his Holiness letters
in confirmation thereof, and the Archpriest published, that he had received a
resolution from the mother City: which afterward he explicated himself to
some, that it was from a pair of young Jesuits: to wit, F. Warford and F.
Tichborne, or from one of them. The contents whereof were, that these priests
were schsmaticks, which is now the true state of the question, (as none but
most impudent companions can deny) and the original of these present stirs.
And this the Archpriest his fact, the author of this Apology in the 11. chap
fol. 168. calls an angry Epistle, and challenges the priests in terms best
fitting his Religious humor, that for an angry Epistle they would break out
into such scandalous tumults, and so leaves the matter without telling, what
this angry Epistle was, and that it was a proclamation, that the Priests had
lived a long time inschisme: and what other matters must thereupon necessarily
ensue, not only to the discredit of those priests, but also to the disturbance
of many devout Catholics, whose ghostly fathers they had been, during that
time. But since that this author has proposed the true state of the question,
as he says, to be an opposition of a few against the whole stream of other
Catholics, devising particular ways for their preferring, and there causing
some to leap, and slide: Let us do him the favor to hear how he proceeds
with this his imagination. And this (says he) is the true state of the
question: let us declare briefly the way, and path how they came into this pit.
Thus he begins this declaration.

We have understood by Card. Allens letters before mentioned, written to M.
Mush the year that he died, how he had understood of a certain emulation, and
division begun in England by some priests against the Fa. of the Society, and
perhaps he perceived the same by no means more, then by himself, his speech
and behavior, while he was at Rome with him the very same year. I do
nothing marvel that this good fellow, would feign have his Reader conceive,
that the Priests began a division against the Jesuits. For if he could persuade
this, he would not doubt, but to deal well enough with such fools, as cannot
think, that the Jesuits can give any just cause, why the Priests should break
with them. I marvel much, that he is not ashamed so often to inculcate this
letter of the Cardinal; which if it make any thing in this matter, it makes
against the Jesuits, as we have often showed. For first concerning the
division, the Fathers want of good correspondence is first placed, the cause of
coffeehouse not known, and M. Mush a Secular Priest put in commission to be
peremptory, as well with the Jesuits as the Secular Priests, with who^ the
Cardinal knew he might be bold, especially in so good an action, as was the
furthering of a peace, where he was informed there was want. And for the better
satisfaction of such as will be satisfied, we will once again repeat the
Card. letter, as it is set down in the second Chap. of Apology fol 11. I have
heard (says he) to my great grief, that there is not that good correspondence
between the Fathers, and other Priests. I cannot tell upon what
coffeehouse, etc. But whereof soever it comes, it is of the enemy, and
with all possible discretion, and diligence, by the wiser sort on both sides to
be rooted out, or else it will be the ruin of the whole cause, etc. And
therefore in this point especially (M. Mush) be earnest, and peremptory with
all parties, and every one in particular, and tell them that I charge, and
advise them by the blessed Blood, and bowels of Gods mercy, that they honor,
love, and esteem one another, according to every man's age, order, and
profession. And then he exhorts those of the Secular order, which is an
argument, that what went before did principally concern the Jesuits. The manner
also of the Cardinal his writing does show, that what he conceived of the
division here supposed, was by other means then by M. Mush: For had he
understood it (as this Author says) perhaps by no means more, then by
himself, his speech, and behavior, while he was in Rome, without perhaps the
Cardinal would not have written unto him, after his departure in this manner: I
have heard to my great grief, that there is not that good correspondence
between the Fathers and other Priests, I cannot tell upon what coffeehouse:
but rather have put him in mind, what he had told him, and would not have
been left ignorant of the true cause, or some color of cause, if M. Mush had
discovered any such matter unto him: And whereas here is mention of M. Mush his
behavior while he was in Rome with the Cardinal, we may verily believe, that
it was such, as became an honest priest, and that he gave very great
satisfaction, not only to the Cardinal Allen, but also to many other, having
those graces, and favors at his return, which no man ever had before him: to
wit, authority, not only for himself in diverse reserved cases, but to give
to a certain number of other priests, whom he would name at his return into
England. But mark, I pray you, what moves this author to say; that the
Cardinal writ his letter upon M. Mush his behavior, when he was with him at
Rome the very same year. For albeit (says he) this man gave out every where,
that he went to Rome, to enter into that order, which many years before he had
pretended: yet others that knew him better, did soon discover his alienation
from them, and that he pretended perhaps by his journey to Rome, to get some
other dignity. Here there is another Perhaps to help the former. For first it
was perhaps that the Cardinal perceived a certain division, by no means more
then by M. Mush his behavior and speech at Rome: and now it is perhaps that he
went to Rome, for to get some other dignity. Good meditations for such
spiritual guides, and very charitable. We will not here cite M. Blackwell his
letter, which was written in the year of our Lord 1596, which was two years
after the Cardinals death: wherein he takes on marueilously against all
those, who did affirm at Rome, that there had been strife, or any falling out
here in England, which was worth the talking of: although neither he, nor any
man else can deny, but that the scandalous separation in Wisbich was begun by
the Jesuits and their faction, long before, and is not to this day ended. We
will only request the religious spirit of the author of this Apology, to let
us understand what reason he had in this place, to make this note in the
margent, How this last sedition in England began, showing nothing in the text,
but his general conceit of an emulation and division begun in England, by some
Priests against the Fathers of the Society: and brings no other proof
thereof, then the Card Allen his letter above mentioned, wherein there is no
more mention of any division by Secular priests against the Jesuits, then by
the Jesuits against Secular priests, as has been showed. And if by this note
we are given to understand, How that this last sedition in England began before
this letter of the Car. Allen was written: then at the latest this last
sedition must have his beginning in the year of our Lord 1594 or before For in
that year the Cardinal died, as it is here confessed in the Apol. fol. 6. Now
then if this last sedition in England did begin in the year of our Lord 1594,
or before, what was the secret intention which this Religious spirit had, when
in the 9. Chap. of this Apology fol. 131. it made this marginal note, The
first beginners of the sedition M. Collington, and M. Charnocke by his own
confession; how could these men be the beginners of this sedition by an act
done in the year of our Lord 1598 at the soonest (for so the letter
constitutiue bears date, about which this confession is said to have been
made) when this author affirms that this last sedition was begun in the time
of Card. Allen, who died in the year of our Lord 1594. But as the good-wife of
an Ordinary says, A joint is a joint, so with this good fellow, A book is a
book And it is no great matter how one piece is patched to another: the fools
who are devoted unto him will take al with blind obedience: and for the rest
there will be some other devise: as to stand stoutly to the auerring of any
thing, which may further his cause, or the denying whatsoever may hinder it.

Having thus far presumed upon the simplicity of his Reader, he proceeds in
his declaration of the way or path, or the supposed true state of the question,
and continues his tale of M. Mush his negotiation. But returning (says he)
into England, as he went forth, and the Cardinal soon after dying, he joined
with an other of his own humor, that had left another religion, namely the
Carthusians (and in the margent he sets M John Collington) and they two with
some few other, determined to make a certain new Hierarchy of their own,
calling it an association of Clergy men with two Superiors, as it were
Archbishops, the one for the South, and the other for the North, with certain
Rules and devises impossible to be observed in England, while times and matters
do remain as they do, etc. It is very well known that M. Mush returning
into England, employed himself in more offices of charity, then all the
Jesuits in England. And all the North parts of England will affirm it:
especially those who were in durance for their conscience. And when the spirit
of the Jesuits moved them, under pretense of reformation in Wisbich to make
their scandalous separation and schism, he went thither accompanied with M.
Dudlie, where after that they had spent some days, and perceived that there
was no hope of any accord, but by the commandment of him, who was Superior to
F. Weston, who canuased in Wisbich for a superiority under the title of an
Agent, he came to London, where he found this Superior, and after long
conference with him about it, as one, who was loath the matter began should
go backward, he promised at the length to send such letters unto Wisbich by
them, that at the sight thereof his subject Fa. Weston should surcease from
that intended Agencie, and all should be well. But M. Mush and M. Dudlie were
compelled to send for these letters, and if they had not urged the matter in
such sort as this Superior could not any longer halt with them, they had
departed with such letters, as had been to no purpose, and the time was
differred until it was so late, as he hoped they would not have stayed for any
other.

The peace being in the end made, such as it was, and not without this
underhand condition, that the Jesuits and their faction might afterward break
off, when they would, M. Mush, and M. Dudley at their next return to London,
if not before, dealt with M. James Standish for the erecting of an Association
of such priests, as would voluntarily subject themselves to live under such a
superior, and such rules as they should among themselves agree upon. M.
Standish communicated this matter to other priests, who liked well thereof, and
as yet M. Colington (not being near London) knew nothing of this intent: and
howsoever it has pleased this author now to except against it, there will be
good proof made, that the Superior of the Jesuits was so far from speaking
against it, as he did seem to take great joy in it, until he perceived, that
he was not likely to have the government thereof, as his fellow had in Wisbich
of the greater part of the Catholic prisoners: And if the united priests were
the authors of this Apology, how ridiculously are six of them brought in here
to credit it, as though there were more honesty in these 6. alone, taken
singly from the rest, then 16. in the whole company of those united brethren,
when those six also are among them, but it shall be well seen in a particular
answer to their letter, here cited, that whosoever were the authors thereof,
those six, who subscribed unto it, had small cause to do so, or to thank
them, who eased them of the labor to pen it.

But now remitting the reader for M. Collington his just causes of leaving the
order of the Carthusians (in which he never was, but only in probation, which
argued a most religious mind in him, and was crossed only by the disablements
of his body) to the last point handled by himself in his late book of Reasons
entitled A just defense etc. And for M. Mush his leaving the Jesuits, to the
eleventh Chapter of the Apology, fol. 170, where it is plainly said, that
they would not admit him, we will see how this Apology fitteth his Reader.

First, by this narration in the Apology, it is evident, that the association,
of which here is mention, was not devised by such as thought their designements
frustrated by Fa. Parsons dealing at Rome in the year 1597, as the author of
this same Apology affirms cap. 1 fol. 6. and 7. Secondly, it is untrue, that
these two determined upon any such matter. Thirdly, there was never any
determination to have two Superiors, much less, as it were Archbishops: For as
may appear by the rules made in the North, the very first rule, De rectoribus,
is this: There shall be chosen every year one Father, and two assistants, by
the consents and most voices of the brethren. And under another title afterward
there is this rule: When in any Country the multitude of the brethren are
increased to the number of eight, and cannot conveniently resort to the
consultation of this confraternitie in the Country where the Father and the
Assistants abide, they shall at their own discretions choose a father, etc. But
neither in the rules made in the South is mention of any more then one
Superior. And these diverse rules were made, not that one form should be of
force in the North, and another in the South, but that one form should be
drawn for all England out of such rules, as were thought fit by the priests,
which lived either in the South or North parts of England. And the form which
was drawn in the South, was accepted by those in the North with some few rules
added, or altered. And this was so well known abroad, and confirmed also by
that, the two priests carried no other form with them to Rome, as I cannot
marvel enough at the author of this Apology, that he will cite the rules
which were made in the North, yea and take his arguments (although foolish)
from them against the priests, as here he does fol 91. where first he argues
out of them negatiuely, that there was no mention made at all in their
constitutions, that the same should be confirmed by his Holiness: as though
the author of this Apology did not know that Fisher under his oath at Rome had
affirmed, that the priests determined to send some to his Holiness for this
purpose, and named the persons: and if this testimony were not, many are yet
living, who made their petitions to his Holiness under their own hands for
the confirmation thereof. And these petitions were taken from M Bishop and M.
Charnocke, among other their writings, when they were apprehended at Rome by
the Jesuits. The second advantage which this Author would scrape out of those
Rules of the North is: that they left no appeal to Rome, or other place: and
this he would prove out of their Chapter (as he says) of Appellations, and
then he sets down almost all the Chapter in this manner, That no appeal
shall be made from the sentence of one company to them of an other Country:
but all the brethren shall content themselves with the judgment of the
Fathers, and assistants, or more part of the company, where he shall be, etc.
Thus far in the Apology. Whereby he would prove that the priests would
debar appeal to Rome. Can any man think his wits were at home? is there any
mention of any, but of the several companies under diverse Fathers, or
Superiors here in England? and how does he draw it to a debarring appeal to
Rome? But mark I pray you this fellows falsehood: to help himself to make
this foolish calumniatio^, he has cited the rule or decree, as he calls it:
but he cited it with an etc. Whereby his Reader should understand, that
somewhat did follow, although he said not what. And in that he would have his
Reader know thus much; it is likely he knew it himself, and what it was: and
moreover that if he had set it down, he had discovered himself to have been a
notorious calumniator. And the indifferent cannot but note him, for a very
false fellow in his dealings. The rule begins in this manner: No appeal,
and so forth as he set it down unto these words: where he shall be, and then
it goes on thus: for the present, unless it seem otherwise more convenient,
by the most voices of the company. So that there is appeal left from those of
one company to them of an other country, if it be thought convenient by the
most of them. And whereas he would hereupon infer an absurdity against the
Priests, like to that, which the Archpriest committed, when he would not admit
appeal to Rome, he commits as great folly, as in any of the other. For the
Archpriest stood peremptorily in it in plain terms, that we could not appeal
from him to Rome, and this rule was only for such, as would in such manner
voluntarily subject themselves to their superiors. And as it appears by the
rule, there was no mention of Rome. But put the case that the priests had
debarred themselves of appealing to Rome, is it all one thing in this Authors
conceit, for a man to be content, to part willingly with that which he has,
and to have it unjustly taken away from him? If the priests had made such a
Rule, as that they would have debarred themselves thereof, was this any warrant
for the Archpriest to obtrude such a matter upon them against their wills,
having no such commission from any that could give it unto him, which is also
to be understood in frivolous matters? But the goodman must play at small game,
or else he must sit still.

That calumniation also is hereby answered, which is laid to D. Bagshaw, that
he thought it not fit for them, to be tied to Rules at Wisbich: For the
difference is manifest: for that the Association was free for all who would,
and who would not might continue, as they did, without any impeachment, either
of same, or what else soever: those Rules at Wisbich were to be accepted of all
so necessarily, as the not accepting thereof was deemed by the rest a
sufficient cause, to make that scandalous schism, which was there made, and
remains as yet, and to defame all those who would not subject themselves to
the Jesuits who were the deuisors, and must be superiors also, under the title
of Agents.

Touching the detestable Memorial here mentioned (says this author) drawn
out, and published, etc. Here is nothing to be said of this Memorial, more
then that the Jesuits were the first publishers thereof in England, (so far as
we can learn) and translated it into English, for women to see it, and
understand it. The contempt of University men, and graduats, of which the
Jesuits are said to be accused in the Memorial, is not obscurely signified in
this Apology, cap 6 fol. 76. where speaking of M. Doct. Bagsh. thus the author
says, And all this stir is to make room for his Doctorship: being a Doctor
of Divinity, and proceeding in Padua with the applause of the University. And
in this 7. Chap fol. 93. he puts this limitatio^ of the Jesuits their esteem
of Vniuersitte men and graduats; If their virtue answer to their degrees: that
is, to speak the true English, if they will be wrought to be Jesuits, or
factious for them. And whereas it is said, that Jesuits are more hurtful to
Catholics then heretics, let indifferent men give their verdit, after due
considerations of the divisions made by them. And as for this author his
certeintie, that these articles of the Memorial came from D. Bagshaw, (whom he
here insinuates to have been expelled the College at Rome for his troublesome
spirit, with a reference to Card. Sega his visitation, which is well known to
have been long after the Doctor his departure from Rome) his persuasion is upon
a very weak ground. For although such articles might be given or sent to M.
Charnocke under his hand, to carry to Rome: yet these articles might come from
some other, the Memorial being long before made, and at Rome, as appears in
this Apology, fol. 94. where also Do. Barret affirms, that he found a little
compendious note of all their articles against the Jesuits at Rome, which
(says he) he (Fisher) carried with him to dilate to the faction in England:
and for proof hereof he adds: as appears; for it is very old, and almost
worn out.

All the foolish story of Fisher, we here leave out, as not worth the noting,
he having been in the judgment of this author, fol. 93. one of the most
exorbitant disorderly fellows in the Roman stirs. And fol. 95. albeit (says
this author) we will not affirm all to be true which he said: yet many things
are such, as they could not be well feigned, and are confirmed otherwise: and
the speaking voluntarily upon his oath must be presumed, to have had some care
also of his conscience, etc. or of his sides, as himself confessed at Paris.
But I pray you let there be care of conscience at the lest with an etc. in such
matters as may make for the Jesuits. Some things here set down are not only
false, but so impertinent to the matter, as we cannot but judge, that there was
much good iugling between him, and his examiner: as that which is affirmed,
fol. 96. At London I lay commonly with M. Charnock, otherwise called Long, and
M. Medcalfe: whereas the poor man was never in any such credit with either of
them, as that he was acquainted where either of them lay: yet some things at
the least could not be well feigned: perchance that being bidden to a banquet
at Wisbich he had a swanne, which was the more to be noted, because it was a
very unusual dish at a banquet, unless we turn the banquet into a dinner, and
then the grace of this relation is marred. For the reader must conceive that
the priests in Wisbich did not dine, (that is, too gross) but they did
banquet: and he must understand, that the Priests had a Swan, at that banquet.
Certainly either Fisher did herein show himself to be too weak a man to be
brought here for an authentical witness, unless some such particular
question as this is, was demanded of him, What good cheer had you? or else the
examiner was exceeding foolish, who in a serious matter would fall into such
questions, and set down such stuff in an examination. But had not such folly
been to be uttered, we should have had no Apology. One thing more is here to
be noted, that fol. 96. this author relates out of Fishers examination, that
there passed eight or nine months in diversity of opinions: and that he went
seven or eight times from the North parts to Wisbich, Cambridge, and London,
about an affair which would not well stand with the association then begun.
Which being compared with that which is also affirmed fol. 97. where it is
said, that it was not known at his departure from England, that peace was made
at Rome, or that Fa. Parsons was come thither: albeit M. Bagshaw and his
friends seemed to fear it much: This author must wipe his mouth, for his false
tale told in the first Chapter, fol. 6. and 7. where he affirms, that the
relics of those that had been troublesome, and unquiet before, coming into
England, and conferring again with their consorts, of their former actions and
designments, frustrated (as they thought) by Fa. Parsons dealing at Rome,
resolved to begin again, but after another fashion: to wit, by devising a
certain new association, etc. Did these men (who were thus frustrated at Rome
by F. Parsons his dealing there) know that Fa. Parsons was come to Rome, trow
ye? If they did know thereof, and were in England before Fishers departure
from England, how was it unknown there at his departure thence, that F.
Parsons was come to Rome? If they knew thereof, but were not as yet come into
England, before Fishers departure from thence, how did Fisher go seven or
eight times from the North parts to Wisbich, Cambridge, and London, about the
affair he speaks of, in which the association had caused diversity of
opinions? For if this author be an honest man, those men, who were said in his
first Chapter fol. 6. and 7. to have been frustrated (as they thought) by F.
Parsons dealing in Rome, resolved to begin again by devising a certain new
association, etc. But perchance Fisher dreamed, that he was employed in such
business in England, and how that he had a swan at a banquet in Wisbich, and
lay at London with M. Charnocke and M. Heburne, and much other good news. And
this author puts down his dream, as an authentical testimony, for want
of other stuff. And if he had not dreamed himself, when he set it down,
doubtless he would have omitted so much at the least, as (if one dreamer may
convince another of falsehood) conuinceth him most manifestly of fault in his
relation of the beginning of the association, set down in his first chapter,
as we have noted. But by this (says the Apology) any indifferent man may see,
how matters stand, and where the ground of all troubles and dissensions lies.
All is but a conspiracy of evil humors, against them that do better then
themselves, and every man that loves his soul will soon descrie the same.
Religion is not sought by this faction, but revenge and satisfaction of bad
appetites. This wrote he, who knew well what he said, although his
ungraciousness would have his reader apply it to others, and not to him, who
deserved it, as has been showed: and will still appear in every chapter more
clearly then other. And in this vain he tells his reader, that his Holiness
clearly perceiving, took order first in the Roman college (which belongs
to another place) and then in England for remedy thereof, as hereafter you
shall hear. And so he sets himself to the eight chapter, where at the very
first he does notably abuse his reader, as shall be showed, and he convinced of
most manifest falsehood, and to be a chief man in the conspiracy of evil
humors, against such men as sought religion with the greatest hazard of their
lives, when he and his fellows were idle lookers on, and would be no actors,
until room was made for their fatherhoods.

CHAP. 13. How the Author of the Apology to cloak the Jesuits their dealings
concerning the institution of the new Subordination, persuades his Reader that
his Holiness was moved thereto by certain letters which were long after
written. Apol. cap. 8.
IN the 8. Chapter of the Apology the author proposes to handle how his
Holiness hearing of the former disorders, and contentions, did resolve to make a
Subordination in England, and how it was ordained, and intimated by the
Protector, and called in question by some disco^tented brethren, without
reason, or authority: and how great troubles have ensued thereof. And first he
begins to declare the motives, or causes of this Subordination in this manner.

When his Holiness heard the former state of matters in England, Flanders, and
other places, and of the murmurations of some against the Fathers of the
Society, set down as well in the aforesaid contumelious Memorial, as by
diverse other letters and relations, which came to the Protectors sight, and by
him was related to his Holiness, and namely when he received great store of
private, and public letters, out of England against the said Memorial of
Fisher, and some one with above 100. hands at it: other with 40. and 50. all in
favor, and commendation of the Fathers, their labors, and behavior in
England, against the said slanderous Memorial. And in the margent there is
this note: See the letters of the Northern Priests 24. Martij 1598. and others
20 of April, and others after 30. July. And others of the South in great number
18 of May, and of the quiet sort of Wisbich. 27. of March 1598. it follows in
the text, and many other in several letters of principal men, which are yet
extant, (but are not yet to be seen) when also diverse of these did expressly
demand some subordination, and government of Secular Priests to take away this
emulation of some few against the Fathers, (as though all but a few, would have
had them to have been their masters) and that two lately came out of England,
at this very time, one a Jesuit, the other a Secular Priest (bate me an ace,
quoth he, for M. Standish had given his name before, to become a Jesuit, and
therefore a vassaile of theirs, although he retained still the habit of a
Secular priest, that under that habit he might the more cunningly deceive his
Holiness) each of them urging the same in behalf of the one, and other order,
(a couple of fit Proctors for the purpose.) But when all this was done, What
then? Forsooth his Holiness, after mature deliberation resolved to yield
thereunto, hoping hereby to quiet all, as well for that the Secular priests
should by this means, have governors of their own, as also for that the
Fathers by all likelihood should remain free from all matter of calumniation
about governing Secular priests for the time to come. How current would this
tale be, if one of the most necessary matters there, were not, that the
Archpriest must advise still with the Jesuits in his greatest affairs? for so
he is commanded in his instructions; and consequently, the Fathers by all
likelihood, do not remain free from all manner of calumniation, as he terms
it, about governing Secular priests. And doubtless if it be a calumniation, to
say, the Fathers do govern the Secular priests, what is it when they are not
said to govern, but do really govern, by order as is said from his Holiness
in great matters, and of their own great devotion in all other by the
Archpriest his blind obedience unto them?

But now to the maine motive of this Subordination, and that which caused his
Holiness to consult for some months, and to seek for informations out of
England (of the quiet at the least) for the fittest men for government, (as
this author immediately suggesteth) we must conceive some such strange miracle;
as that there was some extraordinary day, week, or month, in which this
motive was made, consultation had, and information given. In this chapter fol.
102. it is confessed: and if it were not, it would be otherwise proved, that
the Cardinals letters, by which the authority was instituted, did bear date
the seventh of March, in the year 1598. This then being dispatched at that
time, what time would a reasonable man have allowed for the travailing of the
motives thereof out of England to Rome? How many will he guess those months to
be which are here said by this author, that his Hol. took to consult, and to
have intelligence from the quiet in England, of the fittest men for government,
and could hear but of seven in all England, whereof one was dead, to wit, M. D.
Henshaw? The sun, who kept his course in England, and saw how the Jesuits
were calumniated, as men, that would govern the Secular priests, stayed his
course at Rome, for the space of five, or six months.

And whereas the Romans had gotten the start of us in England for some ten
days in the course of the year, now the English had gotten the start of them,
and made their seventh day of March, come many months after ours. For as it is
said, this authority was made at Rome upon the seventh of March 1598: and it
was made upon certain informations (as appears here in the margent fol. 98.)
which were sent out of England, some the 24 of March, some the 27, some the 20
of April, some the 18 of May, some the 30 of July, in the same year 1598, to
which if we should allow a time for the motives to travail to Rome, and some
months for his Holiness to consult, and send back again into England for
informations of the fittest men for government, I trow the same would have
rested himself well at Rome, (howsoever he labored elsewhere) to have an
authority instituted upon these motives, consultations, and informations, upon
the seventh of March, at Rome in the same year 1598. And least that they should
be idle at Rome any time of this long day: In Rome also (says this Author)
the opinions were asked by the Protector of the principal English, that
resided there, and could best inform: as namely Father Parsons that had often
advice from thence, (from his fellow Jesuits, and therefore could the better
inform for his own purpose) Fa. Baldwin, lately come from England (a jolly
bold young fellow, but a Jesuit, and therefore a principal man) M. D. Haddocke,
M. Martin Array (whose fairest game was to please the Jesuits) M. James
Standish (who had given his name to the Jesuits to become one of their Order)
and others that had labored in the English vineyard, (perchance Fa. Warford,
who was become also a Jesuit, and helped to make up a very fit Jury to pass
upon the priests) as also M. Thomas Allen, nephew to the late Cardinal, and
diverse else (not worthy the naming, yet might very well be of the Council, the
plot was so wisely cast) who concurring with the opinion of letters coming out
of England (he has before told you what letters, and when they were written:
some of them in April, some in May, some in July) as also with diverse other
principal men that wrote thereof from Spain, Flanders, and other places (some
divine intelligencers) both of the necessity of some Subordination to be made
(they had belike understood of the Jesuits their ambitious humor wherewith they
had begun to trouble all England: namely about their insolent Agencie in
Wisbich, where who would not subject himself to a Jesuit, was to be defamed
as a loose companion, or libertine, and be flarued to death, and sufficiency
of M Blackwels person, with the help perchance of the Jesuits, for such is
his sixth Instruction. Et licet Superior ille ex co^sultoribus Archipresbyteri
non sit, quia tamen summopere expedit, sua Sanctitas id omnino cupit, atque
precipit, vt inter patres, and sacerdotes summa sit animorum vnio, ac
consensio: Et quia dictus Superior pro sua in rebus Angliae experientia, pro
eaque, quam apud Catholicos habet, authoritate, plurimum poterit ad omnes
Sacerdotum consultationes adiumenti afferre, curabit Archipresbyter in rebus
maioribus iudicium quoque eius, conciliumque exquirere, vt omnia euidentius, ac
maiore lucc ac pace ad diuinam glorinam dirigantur: That is, And although that
Superior (of the Jesuits) be none of the council of the Archpriest, that is,
of his twelve assistants, who were appointed to advise the Archpriest, but are
used only as informers, and are furthest off from him, yet because it is very
expedient, his Holiness also does altogether desire, yea, and command, that
there be the greatest union that may be, and agreement between the Fathers
(the Jesuits) and the Priests. And because this said Superior (of the Jesuits)
both by reason of his experience in the affairs of England, and of the
authority which he carries among the Catholics, can very much further all the
consultations of the priests, the Archpr. shall have care to seek for his
judgment, and counsel in matters of greatest weight, to the end that al things
may more ordinately, and with greater light, and peace be directed to the
glory of God (almost a threedbare worn cloak to cover any disorder) Now that
he has declared upon what motives his Holiness resolved to make a
Subordination, he descends to more particulars, and tells his Reader that
upon the advice of these iollie Counselors, (all Jesuits, so far as we
know, except M. Thomas Allen, whose name is here set, for the more credit of
this consistory, because he was nephew to the late Cardinal) his Holiness
resolved according to their opinions and informations in these two points,
(mark I pray you, what this author attributes to his Holiness in this
subordination) to wit, to appoint a government: and that this man should be the
governor: though for the third point (that is) about the kind or manner of
government, he judged not expedient for the present, to appoint any other but
an Archpriest, an ancient dignity in the Church of Christ. This then, by this
authors relation, was the utmost which his Holiness resolved, to wit, that the
kind or manner of government, should be no other, then what is under that
ancient dignity of the Church: namely of an Archpriest. Consequently his
Holiness appointed no other subjection or subordination, then such as is to an
Archpriest: we are therefore to see, what belongs to the office of an
Archpriest, and in that only (according to his Holiness appointment) we are
to obey M. Blackwels person, and in no other. For such are this authors words:
though for the third, about the kind and manner of government, he judged not
expedient for the present to appoint any other but an Archpriest: whose office
whosoever will seek in the Canons of the Church, he shall find to be in
another kind, then this of M. Blackwels is, as it is instituted by the
Cardinal in his Holiness name: for so also is it here confessed in the words
immediately following, Lest if he (the Pope) should have begun with Bishops,
he doubted very probably, that it would have caused some great motion in
England: for avoiding whereof, he resolved also for this first time, not to
write himself any Apostolical letters (note here the folly and malice of the
Jesuits and others, who writ or approved that scandalous Libell of Schism:
in which the Priests were condemned of schism, sedition, faction, and
denounced to be excommunicated, irregular, fallen from the Church, as
Southsayers and Idolaters, Ethnickes and Publicans: and for what? For resisting
Apostolical decrees, when there was none, but to commit rather the institution
of the matter by special order to the Protector, to be done in his (the Popes)
name. And how agrees this with the Cardinals letter, where we read these
words in the Cardinals own name: Dum haec nostra ordinatio durauerit; so long
as this our ordinance shall remain? And all that follows concerning the
Archpriest his subdelegation, and faculties, or form, which he was to keep in
the exercise of his subdelegation. But his Holiness says afterward in his
Breue of the sixth of April, that all was done by him. Be it so. What is this to
the purpose? the priests do not now call that in question, nor ever did since
the time, that they first saw that Breue. Where is then the difficulty?
Whether the priests were Schismatikes, seditious, factious, excommunicated,
fallen from the Church, as Ethnicks, Publicans, Sorcerers, and Idolaters, in
that they did not yield their obedience to a Superior, said to have been
instituted by his Holiness: but not proved otherwise then by the bare testimony
of a Cardinal in a letter to the same man, who was to become a Superior: which
letter bears date the seventh of March 1598: and it was more then a year
before the Popes letters were written, as appears by their date, which is the
sixth of April 1599. And the foolish blind obedient must believe you, and use
Catholic priests like schismatikes, who in the space between the seventh of
March in the year 1598, and the sixth of April 1599, did resist (as they are
told, and will not understand any other) the Popes order, and decrees.

Lo here then (says this author) the grounds of this his Holiness resolution,
so far as we are informed by them, that were privy thereunto. Lo then say I,
how sottishly the Jesuits urged a resisting of Apostolical decrees, before the
Pope resolved to write himself any Apostolical letters. And by this (says
he) are overthrown all these cauillations. And by this (say I) is overthrown
that malicious Libel which was fathered by Jesuits, and fostered by the
Archpriest, and all his seditious adherents, wherein the priests were concluded
to be Schismatics, excommunicated, fallen from Gods Church, etc. as resisters
of the Popes decrees, when there was none made, as here it is confessed in the
Apology: And suspicious conjectures (says he) which our discontented brethren
in their last books have set forth, about this meaning as well of his Holiness,
and the Protector, as of those also that gave informations for procuring of
this authority, sinisterly interpreting the one, and the other. There could be
no suspicious conjectures of his Holiness meaning. For as here it is confessed,
his Holiness declared nothing in a year after, that he had any meaning, or
knowledge of this Superiority, instituted by the Cardinal: the Protectors
meaning not being known otherwise, then by his proceedings in the institution
of this auctority, did minister cause of suspicion, that he knew not what he
did. The meaning of the informers, for procuring this authority (being not
known to be any other men, then Jesuits, and confessed to be those fol. 99. by
this author, to wit, Fa. Parsons, F. Baldwine, D. Haddocke, M. Martin Array, M.
James Standish) might without offense be subject to a suspicious conjecture;
considering the canuas, which the Jesuits had made for a Superiority over the
priests in Wisbich, under the name of an Agencie. And whereas here is mentioned
sometime, that Catholics desired some subordination, sometime that the
priests, there are no other particulers set down, then certain letters, which
were al written long after, that the Subordination was instituted: neither can
they bring any, as in reason may be judged, by their so long concealing them,
(the sight of them being more material, then all their Apology) unless they
will bring forth some of those letters, which were taken from M. Bishop, and
M. Charnocke at Rome, and abuse them: affirming, that they were sent before by
some others for such a purpose. For when the priests determined upon the
erecting of their Association, they had the petitions to his Holiness of many
as well of the ancientest priests, as other: some in general terms for some
Subordination, some to have his allowance for their joining particularly in
that manner, as they wished, under a head, and such Rules as were proposed: and
some of these were written before this Subordination was made, as is confessed
in the 5. article of the Libel, which was put up at Rome to the Cardinal
Caietan, and Burghesius upon the 17. of February 1599. in the English College,
which also demonstrateth, how false the imputation is fol 100, that without all
Superiors authority, they (the priests) would have set up their Association.

But mark, I pray you, how this fellow goes onwards in this narration, and you
shall quickly find where his shoe did wring him. For so long (says he) as our
Clergy proceeded in the Spirit of humility, obedience, peace, and unity,
there was no need of Superior* for that every one was a rule, and law to
himself. Where was this defect of humility, obedience, peace, and unity? or
in who^? If contention for superiority be an argument of pride, then was this
defect in the Jesuits and not in the priests. For as all the world knows, the
Jesuits sought a Superiority in Wisbich over the Secular priests. Or if they
will stoutly stand upon it, that it was thrust upon them: yet they must
confess, that it was most followed by such as were secretly Jesuits, as F.
Bickley, F. Bolton, F. Archer, and who else. And that when it grew to a
marvelous tempest, the Jesuits persisted still in their course, or canuas for
the superiority, under the title of an Agencie; neither was there any
disobedience ever noted in any of the priests, but to F. Weston the Jesuit, and
first usurper in Wisbich, which was not to be called a disobedience, but a
resisting rather of his ambitious humor, and his fellows: who labored,
notwithstanding the scandal which came thereof, to make him Superior over the
Secular priests living then in the Castle: by which, peace was broken, and a
most sinful division begun, so far forth, as those factious innouators
would not eat with those priests, who would not subject themselves unto the
Jesuit. But (says this author) crescente numero discipulorum, factum est
murmur Graecorum aduersus Hebraeos, etc. when the multitude of our priests
increased, and the former spirit in many of them decreased, then begun
presently murmuration, and emulation against the Fathers of the Society, as
though they only did hinder us, who indeed were, and are the men, that do
principally help us both in word, and life; so long as we were content to
learn. Hinc illae lacrymae, We would not be contented to learn any longer of
the Jesuits. If this fellow had meant honestly, he would have cited a little more
of the text of Scripture. But then perchance it would have made against him
more, then he would his simple Reader should understand. He takes as much as
he lists to apply, and leaves out the rest: yet does he falsely apply also
that which he brings. For in our case the Priests were the Hebrews, for they
came first into this harvest: and the Jesuits must be these murmuring
Graecians, who came in after us: and the Jesuits not being contented with their
fellowlike State with the priests, must become forsooth, M. Agents, and take
charge of the priests, whether they will or no; as in their vproare at Wisbich
was manifest to all the beholders. But now to that which this author concealed
under an etc. In the text it follows, eo quo despicerentur in ministerio
quotidiano viduae eorum: because their widows were despised, or contemned in
the daily service, which used to be performed by widows in those times. And
by this it would have been apparent, that the pride of the Jesuits had been the
cause of this murmuration, and our peace broken upon their foolish self
conceit, that they were not sicut caeteri homines, as other men. But note I
pray you, how the text is turned, from a despising or contemning, to a
conceit, that the priests were hindered by the Jesuits. It is also further to
be observed, that when the multitude of Priests were great, and the number of
the Jesuits very small, the Priests and the Jesuits conferred together, and
great peace was between them. But when the number of the Jesuits increased,
that they began to conceive a hope of Superiority, and to bring the Secular
priests into a slavish bondage under them, they began to take exceptions
against the priests, and the more wicked and sinful the slanderer was, the
more united he was to the Jesuits. And no other remedy must be used, but a
Subordination to a Jesuit, to keep the priests in order. And this was thought
fit, to be first attempted at Wisbich, where the priests living upon the alms,
which Catholics sent thither, might be enforced thereunto by the Catholics
there, withdrawing their charity from them: to which purpose the Jesuits
friends employed themselves abroad. But some coming out of the Seminaries
(says this Author) where they had lived under the Jesuits, with less, or
worse Spirit, then were to be wished, drew other to emulate them, whom before
they had obeyed. This emulation would be expressed: The Priests affirm, that
the Jesuits pride and ambition was the cause of all the stir in England, and
for proof they bring their attempt at Wisbich, before which time all was in
quiet. And as some priests did sometimes obey some Jesuits, as Rectors of
Colleges, where they were brought up: so are there many in England, who never
obeyed any Jesuit. Neither does this argument prove, that they should ever
after obey the same men, much less that they should obey all other, who are of
that order: yet must this be the argument, which is foolishly here insinuated
by this author, or else none. For of all the Jesuits in England there are none,
whom these priests obeyed at any time, in any place. Besides that they are al of
them inferior to many priests, both for age, learning, wisdom, government,
and what else belongs to men. But by this has this author showed, what his
meaning is: that forsooth, because some Priests have obeyed some Jesuits,
therefore all priests must be obedient to any of the Jesuits: yea although he
be one, who immediately before he became a Jesuit, had scant the wit to keep
himself clean. But for the avoiding of this emulation it seemed (says this
author) in all good men's opinions, and the Jesuits above the rest (or else all
is marred, when you talk of good men) that the only, or chief remedy would
be, to have this subordination of Secular priests among themselves: but so as
the Superior must be at the Jesuits direction, as both his instructions, and
his practice declare. And then follows a proof out of a letter of 6.
Assistants, to clear the Jesuits from the procuring of this subordination,
against or without the will of the Secular Clergy, which testimony, if the
united Priests were the authors of, the Apology is as clear, as that, of
which one requested to have, either his fellow asked, or himself, if he were a
thief. This testimony also harpeth upon the long day at Rome, of which we
spoke before, and of the wonders wrought thereupon the 7. of March, by certain
letters dated in England in April, May, and July following. Of this letter we
shall have occasion to say more in a particular answer thereunto. And here we
will leave the Reader to wonder only at this marginall note, fol. 101. See the
letter of six Ancient priests the 17. of September 1597. For he tells not,
where this letter is to be seen, but rather leaves a suspicion, that it is
yet to be devised, unless he thought it too worthy a thing to be inserted
among so many foolish and frivolous impertinencies, as with which this Apology
does swarm. The proof also which follows, that Fa Parsons labored to have
Bishops in England, is most absurd in their understanding, who know how he can
play on both sides, and impugn that in which he would seem to be most forward:
he can send notes of such things, as he would pretend a desire should be kept
secret, and send them round about the world with the same desire of secrecy.
He can write his letters in exceeding great commendations to one of some one
man, and at the same time write to another, in the dispraise of the same man.
And is it a sufficient disproofe of his backwardness of having Bishops, that
he labored with some to have them in England? Can Fa. Parsons so far
ouershoot himself, as to make his credit so small in the Court of Rome, as
that any thing can be denied him, being assisted by such as expect from him a
kingdom or two for their service?

Well (says the Apology) this then being resolved by his Holiness, that he
would have an Archpriest appointed in England, whom all the rest should obey,
he gave commission to the said Cardinal Protector to institute the same in his
name. How was this made known to the Priests? Forsooth the Cardinal showed,
that it was his Holiness especial order and commandment by these words,
Speciali mandato nobis iniunxit; his Holiness has ordained this unto us by a
special commandment. What silly boy would thus have Englished iniunxit in
this place? or what is that This, which his Holiness ordained by a special
commandment? the institution of this subordination with these faculties etc.
could this man imagine, that the Cardinals letters would never again be looked
on? or if he could fear that, could he be so impudent, as to cite this part
thereof, for to prove his Holiness special commandment for the erecting of
the Archpriest? And to prove, that his Holiness was moved by the aforesaid
reasons, alleged by him, to wit, emulation, and what else pleases him: he
cites these words out of the same letter of the Cardinal: Rations abipsis
sacerdotibus redditae, etc. the reasons alleged by priests for this matter,
were allowed by his Holiness: and afterward he cites a great part of the
letter, for so much as concerns the commendations of the Jesuits: and the
desire which the Pope has, that the Jesuits, and the Priests might live in
peace together. Which (says he) coming from so high a superior, and directly
from Christ's vicar himself, we do wonder, how it took no more effect within
the hearts of our brethren, that impugned the same. And our brethren wonder,
that any man can be so impudent, as to make such a wonder; confessing so often
as he does in this Apology, that Christ's vicar himself would not write at
all: whereby neither his letters appeared for the institution of this
Archpriest, nor any commission by which the Cardinal had power to do it. But
the Cardinal his word was sufficient (says he) and our brethren say no, and
prove it by the testimony of all men of knowledge in the Canon and Civil
laws: who say, that the sole testimony of a Cardinal, is not necessarily to
be credited in any matter prejudicial to a third person: yet must the blind
obedient believe, that the priests in not obeying the Cardinals letters, did
directly withstand Christ's vicar himself. But after he has cited a part of
the Cardinals letter, he affirms, that all was confirmed afterward by his
Holiness own Breue: and that all written by the Cardinal, and every parcel
there of, was by his order, consent, proper motion, and commandment, written,
ordained, and sent into England. And to this our brethren answer, that so
soon as they saw this, they did presently submit themselves unto the order.
And say moreover, that this is very foolishly brought in, to prove a
disobedience in them, before this Brcue was written. And by this is answer
made to the question following. But what? did this satisfy or quiet them, that
had resolved to be unquiet? For the priests perceiving such a devise of the
Jesuits, and foreseeing how hereby the Jesuits might under a mask play their
prises more boldly then before, sent to Rome, as became Catholic priests, to
know his Hol. pleasure, and in the mean while, these who were resolved to be
unquiet, spread Libels abroad against the priests, and condemned them of
schism, and much more such religious stuff. The causes which moved the
priests to demur upon the matters, until they saw his Hol Breue, are set down
at large by M. Io. Collington in his book entitled A just defense etc.
whither we are to refer our Reader: and as for the letter of the 6.
Assistants, it shall have his place elsewhere, to be answered, and for now, we
let it pass, as a base proof of any thing, which is therein affirmed, it being
(no doubt) penned by those, who are interessed in this Apology. Neither do
the letters of forty or fifty priests in England egged on, and in a manner
compelled thereunto by the Jesuits and Archpriest, to approve his authority, or
give thanks to his Holiness for it, prove any thing, but a lightness in them,
to give credit where it was not due, even in a most prejudicial matter against
themselves. The praises which are here attributed to M. Blackwels person, no
man wishes more he may deserve, then I do: but the testimony which is
brought of his false dealing, when he first manifested his authority, will go
hard against him: and the harder, for the poor shifts which are used in this
Apology, fol. 109. to salve them. This author having proved a resolution in
the Pope, and laid down the supposed reasons of the institution of this
subordination, and concluded, that the priests were disobedient to Christ's
Vicar himself, yet not having the wit to conceal, that his Holiness did not
write himself any thing, until a year after, and more: (at the sight of which
letters, the priests did instantly submit themselves) he goes about now to
salve the reasons which the priests have given in their books, of their
forbearance, until they saw his Holiness Breue: and tells his Reader, that
he has gathered them out of both the two late books, the one in English, the
other in Latin, though confusedly and tumultuously set down in both; and in
no one place distinctly and in order: whereby perchance he might have deserved
some commendation for his good will, had he not marred all himself in this
Apology, chap. 2. fol. 18. where he takes notice of one and twenty reasons,
which are distinctly and in order set down in the English book, and cites
the pages 84, 85, 86, and deinceps: and chap. 11. fol. 176. he acknowledges
the same 21. reasons to be laid together by distinct numbers.

The first reason which this author impugneth is, that it was gotten by wrong
and false information, by the instance of the adverse party only, against
their wills, and without their knowledge, contrary to all equity and justice:
And this he impugneth, by affirming, that he has already showed it to be
false, but you must go look where. The reason is defended by M. Doctor Ely in
his notes upon the eight chapter of this Apology, page 226. and other
following; and by M. John Collington in his first reason.

Secondly (says this author) they allege, that they doubted whether this
ordination came from the Pope himself or no, seeing there came no Breue, nor
Bull. Their reason is, for that the Pope uses to send his Breues or Bulls in
matters of less weight then this is, as appears by that extrauagant
Iniunctae nobis, de electione: where all men are forbidden to receive less
prelacies then this was: although this were the meanest title that any prelat
has, as is handled at large by M. Collington in his 4. Reason, pa. 138, 139,
and 140: and M. Do. Ely, page 141. to 149. whereabout they ask this question
concerning us: Why should they be so unwilling to procure, or suffer to be
procured, some Bull or Breue for the confirmation thereof, if it came from his
Holiness? Here were so many tales told of the united Priests, which labor
well and zealously also, chap. 3. fol. 28. and chap. 8. fol. 105. but what now,
the good and obedient: and such like arguments of the quiet, their dwelling
far from good neighbors, that the rope brake, and down fell the Jesuits.
Whereabout (says this author) they (the priests) ask this question concerning
us: we must go see concerning whom this question was asked, and assoile this
riddle, Who is the author of this Apology? and for the greater evidence, we
will set down the priests words, in the place cited by this author out of The
copies of discourses, page 4. and 5. And more to show their (the Jesuits)
intentions in this matter, what interest they seek and challenge in this
authority (though indeed nothing concerning them, because a distinct society
and body from us) one of them (and in the margent we read Fa. Garnet) in a
letter he wrote unto one that would not subscribe, confesses and
acknowledges, that whatsoever is opposite to the reverend Archpriest, must of
force be consequently opposite and against them; which thing must of necessity
import an extraordinary tie between the authority of the Archpriest and
them: either of the subordination of them to the Archpriest, which they
disclaim from and deny; or contrariwise of the Archp to them: Fls how must it
of necessity follow, that he which is opposite unto the Archp, authority, must
of force be opposite to them, as though a man might not resist their superior
of an order, but he must needs thereby oppose himself against the whole body
of another order? Furthermore if their interest were not great in this
authority, why should they be so unwilling to procure, or suffer to be
procured some Bull, or Breue for the confirmation thereof? Now tell me,
Concerning who^ is this question asked? If ye be Ies^ts (who are authors of
this Apology) why do ye mask your selves with the name of Priests united in
due Subordination to the Archpriest? If ye are secular priests, tell me, How
does this question concern you? The author of this Apology was not mindful
of the weakness of the Rope, by breaking whereof he catched so foul a fall.
The matter being laid down so plain before you assoile this hard riddle,
concerning whom is this question asked? Why should there not etc. Will you for
shame answer as the poor fellow did to this question, Who was Iaphets father?
being no plainer taught, that Noe had three sons, Shem, Cham, and Iaphet,
then you are taught in this place by you cited, that this question was asked
concerning the Jesuits? Well then, hereafter we must take either the Jesuits to
be meant by your words concerning us, and consequently one of them to have made
this Apology, or Troll, Tom Millers bitch. But what? does this authors folly
cease with this? no God wot, (to use his own phrase fol. 104.) but he gives a
like answer to the question which the priests did ask, and this is it: but
this question, and reason thereon depending is now answered: and how? for that
a Breue was procured: but when? above a year after, as appears by the date.
but when the priests did ask the question, how was it then to be answered?
they know now, that there is a Breue procured, and they all submitted
themselves readily unto it, as is witnessed in this Apology. And in the last
Breue of the seventeenth of August 1601, to the manifest reproving of this
authors falsehood, who in this place affirms, that it was not much more
esteemed by these men (the priests) then these the Cardinals letters. but mark
I pray you this proof, as appeared by the effect: what effect? forsooth, the
priests would not suffer themselves to be abused, and reported to have been
schismatickes as the Jesuits published, after the coming of the Breue, and the
peace made: and the Archpriest did not only not control this seditious
attempt of the Jesuits, but furthered it by promulgating a resolution which he
said he had received from the mother City, that the priests were schismatikes,
who refused to obey the authority before they saw the Breue. And what else?
And that they in this very book do call it in question also, how it came
forth, saying, that they do not know out of what office it was procured by Fa.
Parsons means. Is this to call the Breue in question, or rather the manner of
procuring it? He who used the words, out of which this clause is gathered,
declares in the Pamphlet, entitled, The hope of peace page 23 that a Breue
may come from diverse places, and be called an Apostolical Breue: and page 24. he
gives a cause why there might be some jealousy had of indirect dealing, in the
procuring of this: to wit, a manifest mistaking of the Cardinals letter, which
is also noted in the book to the Inquisition page 59: a thing not vnufuall in
his Holiness Breues.

Other reasons of theirs are (says the Apology) that the Cardinals letters
Patents are not sufficient to give the matter credit: and this is sufficiently
proved by M. Io B. in The hope of peace page 32 33. and since by M. John
Collington in his third reason, page 60.61. and other following. M. Doctor Ely
also, Doctor of both laws, and professor in Pont a musson in Lorraine, in his
notes upon the Apology from the 116 page to the 137. proves this point:
where also that foolish objection of the eighth privilege of a Card. here
cited in the Apology, is answered: as also by M. John Collington page 114. and
the author of the Apology justly reproved for his false dealing in citing
this impertinent gloss: for he leaves out a part of the sentence, which
marreth his market, and makes it evident, to what poor straits he is driven,
that must cite such a place for himself: which besides that it makes not for
his purpose, it makes altogether against him, in calling that in doubt, upon
which he would build his argument which he would frame in this manner: The
credit of a Card is so great, that if he should say, he is the Popes Legate, he
is to be believed, though he show no letters: ergo in this, as a matter of
less moment, he is to be believed. If a debtor tell his creditor he is a
Christian, his creditor will believe him: but if he tells him that he owes
him nothing, I doubt whether he will believe him, notwithstanding he believes
him in a far greater matter then forty shillings, to wit, that he is a
Christian. But to their argument. First it is to be seen, that it is not
infallibly true, nor so taken generally, that such credit is given to a
Cardinal: For the same gloss in the same place affirms, that some do doubt
thereof. And M.D. Ely affirms, that it may be better said, that all do doubt
thereof, and so he goes on page 125. upon this point, showing upon how weak a
proof this Apology stands. and M. John Collington proves page 118. that he
to whom a cause is delegated by special commandment, is greater in the same,
then is a Legate general, and by this is that supposition also maimed, that in
our case (where the Cardinal is said to have affirmed, that what he did, he did
by special commandment) he was inferior to a Legate, although in very
truth he says not so, but only that he had a special commandment of his
Holiness, to do what he could, for the making up the breach, which was
suggested to the Pope, to have been in England between the Seminary priests,
and Catholics, as may be seen in the letters constitutiue, prefixed to M.
Collingtons book. And yet to blind such as take pleasure therein, this author
speaking of the Cardinal, demands, who does not know what a Cardinals test
money in any Christian Catholic Court is worth: especially a Protector,
testifying, and professing in his letters patents, to do it exspeciall mandato
Sanctissimi, at this man does in his letters? As this man does not in his
letters, more then we now have said: which was no commission, to make his
Subordination. Let the letters be sought, and it will soon be seen, that
this fellow used these Latin words of his own, and not out of the Cardinals
letters: and that the like words are referred by the Cardinal to some other
point, then the making of this Subordination. But to omit the iugling which is
used between the Cardinals doing it sometime, as here fol. 108. and his
witnessing sometime, that his Holiness did it: as it was said in the Libel
which D. Haddocke, and M. Martin Array put up against M. Doctor Bishop, and M.
Charnocke at Rome the tenth of January 1599, and all with the same letters,
commonly called the Constitutiue letters. This circumstance of being Protector
does little help the matter: for that, as is said in The hope of peace page 33.
this act of the Card. was a subdelegation, as appears by those words of his
letters, Te deligimus etc. We make choice of you, whom for the time we
subdelegate in that charge which was committed to us, and not an act of
Protectorship. And page 34. it is showed that the office of a Protector
stretches it self no further then the Court of Rome. For so does Zecchius set
it down in his book De repub. Christiana: De statu Ill. Dom. Card. Nu. 9. In
hoc Consistorio quaeque prouinciae, and regularium congregatio, ac reges habent
suos patres tutelares, qui Protectores dicuntur: qui electiones, and alias
causas prouinciae sibicommissae, in Consistorio proponunt, and oppositoribus
respondent. In this Consistory every province, congregation of Regulars, and
kings have their Fathers, who have care of them: and these are called
Protectors: these do then propose elections, and other causes of the province,
committed unto them, and do make answer to such, as oppose against them. This
point is also handled by M. Collington pa. 6^. and by M D Ely pa 163. and 164.

But not to stand upon these matters (says this poor man who in truth can
find no footing in this his cause) it is a foul thing; what? for birds to
defile their own nests: as these united priests do often in this Apology, if
they are authors thereof? you mean some other matter; Let us hear it: when
for covering our own wills, of not obeying, we seek holes in the coats, and
authority of our Superiors. I will show you what is a foul thing; when for
covering the lewdness of others, who shot at nothing else, then to have you,
and all the Secular clergy of England under them as punies, and boys, you
will take upon you to patronize and make their actions to be yours: that if
through your folly, and their foul dealing they could prevail, in their most
unjust, and wicked attempt, you shall feel the smart of your blindness in
which now you glory. And if they do not prevail, you must bear the shame of
your wicked enterprise* But what holes are those, which these men are said to
seek in their superiors coats? and what superiors are they? Mark I pray, how
this author discharges himself of this matter: as these men do both against
the Cardinal Protector his authority, and person, as also the Archpriest; yea
and his Holiness also in covert words, and so far as they dare. What, man? so
far, is they dare? what is that, which they would dare against his Holiness?
Forsooth persuading the people, that he has believed false information: did
any man ever dare to say: what? and persuade the people also, that the Pope
could believe false information? marry sir, here was such a nole found in his
coat, as himself could never have seen. Here was Christ's vicar himself very
strangely abused: and thereby appointed a subordination most inconvenient. Were
all those Popes fools, whose letters are cited in the common Law, de
rescriptis, and the Bishops also, to who^ they did write in such form, as they
did acknowledge, they might be, and were often misinformed, and did many
things otherwise, then they would have done, if they had been truly informed?
Si quando (says Pope Alexander the third, to the Archbishop of Rauenna. cap.
si quando de Rescriptis) aliqua tuae fraternitati dirigimus, quae animum tuum
exasperare videntur, turbarinon debes. Et infra. Qualitatem negotij, pro quo
tibi scribitur, diligenter considerans, aut mandatum nostrum reuerenter
adimpleas, aut per literas tuas, quare adimplere non possis, rationabilem
causam pretendas, quia patienter sustinebimus, sinon feceris, quod praua nobis
fuerit insinuatione suggestum. That is, If at any time we direct any things
unto your brotherhood, which seem to exasperate your mind, you ought not to be
troubled thereat. And afterward, Having diligently considered of the quality of
that business, of which we write unto you, either fulfill our commandment
reverently, or pretend some reasonable cause, by your letters, why you cannot
fulfill it. For we will patiently bear, that you do not that, which was by bad
insinuation suggested unto us. Other Chapters there are there to be seen to
this effect, which in this place would be needlessly cited; Only this will
suffice, to show that it has been long since seen, that Popes could be falsely
informed, and thereby also appoint a matter most inconvenient. And yet this was
never taken for a hole in the Popes coat. But what more is there concerning
this hole, not heard of in the Church before? The day would blind Hugh feign
have seen, and those, that are deaf, would gladly hear, when it was ever
heard of in the Church before, that an Archpriest was made Superior over all
the Secular clergy of two whole kingdoms, as now M. Blackwell is of England
and Scotland. And that it is against all equity and justice, and that his
Holiness could not lawfully appoint it without their consents. The accepting of
the authority at the sight of his Holiness Breue does convince, that the
priests never stood upon his absolute authority, but upon the custom, which
by Law is also confirmed, that they should choose their superior, which M. D.
Bishop touched, and proved in his reply to F. Parsons pa. 151. and it is
handled since more at large by M. D. Ely page 190. to 196. And that the means
by which he had appointed, is insufficient, binding no man to obey it. If this
man do mean, that the priests did not take the Cardinals letter, as sufficient
to bind them to obey it, it is very true, that they thought those means
insufficient, and they have given diverse proofs of the insufficiency thereof.
If he mean any other matter, he must explicate himself. For other means the
priests did not know, until they saw the Breue: at which time they did all
submit themselves unto it: All which must argue great insufficiency, defect,
and lack of consideration in his Holiness proceeding. They should have had more
honesty, who gave the false information: and their fault was the greater,
because so great a trust was reposed in them by his Holiness. And to mend these
holes in the Popes coat I would gladly understand, why the two priests, who
were first sent to his Holiness, were clapped up close prisoners, before they
could have access unto him? If his Holiness could not believe wrong
information, then might the Jesuits, and the Sbirri with more credit have been
at their iayles, then seeking to imprison such as came to inform his Holiness.
If his Holiness could believe wrong informations, and that these good men
therefore joined together to apprehend, and imprison the two priests: then is
this hole in his Holiness coat patched up again: that the Priests dared to
persuade the people, that he has believed false informations: for this
implies that he could. And thus much for the holes in his Holiness coat: a
pretty slubbering kind of answer to the priests reasons. The Protectors turn
should be next, but this author will owe him the patching up of his holes, and
will go help the Archpriest. And as for the Archpriest their immediate
superior (says he) though in words they acknowledge his authority, etc. yet
do they seek by all means possible, to discredit both him, his authority,
and person. The first matters seem to concern him, and his person; as that he
is charged about his doubling in his instructions, and about an heretical
proposition. But how are these things answered? the first is thus awarded, We
cannot apprehend how it could be spoken: the second thus. If M. Blackwell
should say, as we are sure he did not in the sense they take it: two poor
shifts. But to the Apology as it lies. And here in this place they will needs
raise a certain cavil against him (the Archpriest, or his person) saying that
he doubled in his speech with M. Collingt. and M. Charnock: for of their two
relations only all these matters are raised against him (vt in ore duoru^, vel
trium testiu^ says our Savior Matt. 8.) stet omne verbum, that every thing be
tried by two or three witnesses) when at the first coming of the Cardinals
letters and instructions, he conferred them confidently with these two (but
this his confidence wrought in him a marvelous confusion, when he was taken
tardy upon too great a confidence of an uncleanly conueyance) who so dutifully
interpreted his speeches, as first they said he was contrary to himself, and
affirmed his instructions to have come from Rome together with his letters,
which is most true, and they are to be seen under the Cardinals hand and
seal, etc. Mark how this matter is shuffled up: He was never blamed for
saying his instructions came from Rome, which were under the Cardinals hand and
seal, but for saying that those instructions came from Rome which he showed,
and were never to be seen under the Cardinals hand and seal, but were of his
own making as he confessed, being enforced thereunto, when so much was
convinced by the contents, and that he had counterfeited them, which at that
time was no little confusion unto him. And thus may any reasonable man
apprehend, how it could be spoken, which (this author says here) we cannot
apprehend how it could be spoken. We do further apprehend how it could be
spoken, and to what end, that he had authority to excommunicate, and send
priests to their answer to the Court of Rome, and how a nod could be given
toward the next chamber, to insinuate that there was his commission for this
also: and yet never a word true of all this which he spoke. And the thing
being apprehended, how it could be, and two priests ready to depose, that it
was so, we do further apprehend, that the Archpriest or his person deserved a
greater punishment, then his factious adherents would should light upon him,
especially if his instructions, which he had so falsified, were sent by his
Holiness, and only testified by the Card. as sometimes for an advantage this
fellow will urge. But whither do we wander, that this fellow understood not,
how it could be spoken? For the Archpriest himself could not well tell what
he said, as it should seem by a letter of his of the second of March
following, being charged with these matters: Sir (says he) the Archpresbyter
has to do about excommunications, and the sending to the Court of Rome. But
what? can he excommunicate, or has he any power to send priests thither? no
such matter. What is it then, that he can do? Mark I pray you his own words,
and how he answers that which was laid to his charge: For by his commission
he is charged to specify all such rebellions and contumacies, as are too
familiar with you, if they cannot be suppressed, with his authority at home,
and to intimate the same to the Card. Protector his grace, and so by his means
to procure excommunication, or the sending for to Rome, for the redress of
such licentiousness. By this logic then, a power to excommunicate, is a
power to write to those who can procure it. And he that cannot write to any,
that can procure an excommunication, is not worthy to be said, to have the
power himself to excommunicate. But for the instructions, note I pray you how
he would shift the matter: And for the particular instructions, he never said
they were all made at Rome. Indeed there was no cause, why he should use those
particular words neither is the charge so to be understood. He is thus charged
by Master Collington and M. Charnocke, that after the Cardinals letter was
read, he put them in mind, that the letter did mention certain instructions,
which should be annexed thereunto: and therewithal drew a paper out of his
bosom, which he did not deliver unto them to read (as he had done the letter)
but kept it still in his own hands, affirming that those were the instructions
which were meant in the letter, and he read them as such: and being taken in
the manner, and convinced, that they could not be such, he confessed that some
of them were of his own making. And this will the two priests above named
justify before God and the world, where this poor shift will not serve: he
never said they were all made at Rome, nor this new devise: But that his
instructions made at Rome, gave him authority to set down Rules, about all
particular matters and cases of such quality.

Moreover (says he) they gave out amongst their friends, that he had spoken an
heretical proposition: whereupon M. Bishop told the same in Rome, as
appears in his examination, affirming to have heard it of his fellow M
Charnocke, who yet as far as we understand, did set down nothing thereabout
in his depositions. Perchance Fa. Parsons was loath to trouble M. Charnocke
with any such interrogation: for doubtless, if he had been asked this
question, his answer would have been here also inserted, especially if he had
denied it. The avoiding then of such a question to M Charnocke must needs be
suspicious, his examination both being begun before M. Bishops, as appears in
the 9. chapter of this Apology fol. 129. and ended some 9. or 10. days, after
M. Bishops examination, as appears in the same chapter fol. 134. And in this
latter English Libell, again diverse times mention is made thereof by a
certain censurer entitled, M. I. B. comenting upon a letter of Fa. Parsons,
but nothing affirming or denying, but only entertayning the speech, that an
heretical proposition had been objected, or spoken of at Rome against the
Archpriest, There was no place for to handle any proposition in that censure,
more then the letter of Fa Parsons gave cause, And he gave no other cause then
in these general terms: you took the way first to discredit so much as in
you lay, M. Blackwell, etc. yea in the very matter of his faith: for that an
heretical proposition was laid to his charge Copies of Discourses.
page 62. The censurer perchance did not know thus much but upon Fa. Parsons
word: to which he gave little credit, and therefore used those words, page 88.
if it should be true which Fa. Parsons says in the 17. paragraffe, that M
Blackwell was touched in the very matter of his faith, and offers to prove
it by certain depositions, yet extant at Rome, that an heretical proposition
was laid to his charge. I doubt their ground for going to Rome will hardly be
shaken. And this is the oftener inculcated, because Fa. Parsons in the same
letters where he mentions this deposition, does often affirm, that there was
nothing of substance brought against the Archpriest page 55. And a little after
that their enterprise of contradiction was without foundation at all. page 59.
And again, that his Holiness and the Cardinals were ashamed, to find them to
have come so long a journey with so little to say, page 58. And the censurer
thought, that he had discharged himself sufficiently in that action, when he
showed how unadvisedly F. Parsons still ran upon this point, that the two
priests had nothing to say worth the handling, and yet confesses that they had
to touch, yea and touched M. Blackwell in the very matter of his faith, page
62. But now this author will set it down more particularly, and answer for
Blackwell.

And the proposition forsooth was, that M. Blackwel should say unto them, that
they could not appeal from him to the Pope himself: well good sir, how do
you answer for M. Blackwell? which if M. Blackwell should say, as we are sure
he did not in the sense they take it. In what sense do they take it which the
plain words do not give? what a poor shift is this to say, if he should say
it, as we are sure he did not, in that sense they take it? Then you are not
sure, that he did not say it, but that he did not say it, in the sense they
take it. If you should complain that you were stricken, would you take it for an
argument, that you were not stricken, because the striker did not strike you, in
that sense that you take it? He spoke it, and stood peremptorily in it, after
that he was often admonished of the danger thereof, by M. Collington, and M.
Charnocke: and this flying to senses, which are so secret, as they may not be
known, nor can be imagined to be other, then the words do give, bewrays
too much guiltiness. But mark, I pray you another shift, at a dead lift. If
M. Blackwell should say it, etc. yet many men in the world may say this in
diverse causes, wherein appeal is cut off by his Holiness consent, and order.
Does the power which is in other men in the world, give M. Blackwell a warrant,
to say this or that, because they can say it? If many men in the world may say,
that appeal is not to be made from them to the Pope himself, many men in the
world may say more then becomes them, but in such cases, as wherein appeal
is cut off by his Holiness consent and order. Which consent and order they are
to show, or to be taken for such, as M. Blackwell was taken; that is, either
very ignorant, or a worse thing. Such Commissions are commonly granted with
this clause appellatione remota, or some other equivalent, which can not be
found in the Cardinals letters, or his instructions, which were all the
commission which he had, when he stood upon this point: nor to this day is
appellation from him to the sea of Rome cut off by any consent or order of his
Holiness, although the Breue of the 17. of August 1601. does not admit of the
Appeal, his Holiness being persuaded, that it could not be followed without
further trouble. And if he had this clause from his Holiness himself in any
commission Appellatione remota, yet would no man of understanding affirm, that
the Priests could not appeal from him to the Pope himself, according to that
chapter. Pastoralis de officio and potestate iudicis delegati. Si Papa scienter
commisit appellationem interpositam a suo delegato dato cum clausula
appellatione remota, iurisdictio primi delegati est interim suspensa, quoad
executionem, etc. If the Pope has wittingly committed an appellation, which
was made from his delegate, who was delegated with this clause appellatione
remota, (without admitting any appeal) the jurisdiction of that first delegate
is the mean while suspended from any execution: Donec (says Pope Innocent the
third, out of whose words the Rubricke is made) appellationis merita before
sint discussa: until the causes of the appellation be discussed. And Lancelot
lib. 3. tit. de Appell. Interdum non obstante prohibitione appellari poterit.
Sometime it is lawful to appeal notwithstanding the prohibition. And he
puts some cases for example. Licet causa (appellatione remota) commissa
fuerit: although the cause were committed with this clause, appellatione
remota, without admitting any appeal: so that whatsoever this author of the
Apology says, few men will say so much, as M. Blackwell said: Although
appellation from them be sometimes cut off with his Holiness consent, and
order: and much less where there was no such cutting off, as may be seen in
his letters by which he was instituted Archpriest. Besides that, these were not
his Holiness letters, but the Cardinal Caietans: and therefore as yet was
there less cause to stand so peremptorily upon this point, as M. Blackwell
did, after that he was told of his error. And if M. Charnocke in conscience
had thought this to have been heresy, or heretical, he was bound under pain
of exco^municatio^ (especially being in Rome) to have prosecuted the matter,
etc. M. Charnocke might have thought that it was heresy or heretical, and
might have had the purpose to prosecute it in Rome: who can say the contrary?
But then why did he not? perchance because it ran in his mind, as good never
a whit, as never the better. Perchance he might dream that M. Blackwell had
some secret sense, contrary to the purport of the words, and say, that he
meant all well. What if it were set down in writing among those notes, which
the Popes officer took from him, as Fa. Parsons insinuated in his letter to M
D. Bishop, which is in The copies of discourses, in these words, page 62.
Moreover it appears by your papers and depositions yet extant, that you took
the way first to discredit (so much as in you lay) M. Blackwell etc. yea in the
very matter of his faith. And if M. Bishop did depose, that he heard such a
matter of M. Charnocke, how far were the examiners bound, especially at Rome,
to prosecute this matter, it being there deposed in that manner? Or where
should M. Charnocke have prosecuted it, being close prisoner, and committed to
his adversaries to be kept, examined, and have all his words and actions
interpreted by them, and was debarred of conference with any but them; whereby
he might well perceive there was no fit place for him to deal in any matter,
but what the Jesuits would like of, and their adherents: in so much as if Fa.
Parsons have any truth in him, the Pope was hardly brought to think, that M.
Bishop and he were Catholic priests? And was this (trow you) a convenient
place, or time for him to enter into any course (had he been otherwise bound
thereto) against another, especially such a man, as whose discredit would be
so great a blow unto M. Charnockes Iaylor, as he could not have had the like
in the Court of Rome? But how hangs that together which follows; and not
having done so (that is, prosecuted this matter at Rome) and yet procuring in
these late libels to renew the speech thereof again. How is this proved? It is
easily seen, that their intention: now he is fallen from M. Charnockes
supposed act, to their intention: as though, if it had been true, that M
Charnocke had procured to renew those speeches, and that all those friends had
forgotten it, amongst whom in this place the Apology confesses it was given
out, the intention of the rest could be d scouered to be only to discredit
the person of their superior in what they may, which (says he) is a bad kind
of obedience. He may swear it, for it was never heard that the act of
discrediting of a man, was an act of obedience, unless the Superior would
give such a foolish commandment against himself, which M. Blackwell will
never do, as we hope. And although that these books were printed, as here it
is urged, after that M. Blackwell was made a lawful Superior, (to wit by his
Holiness Breue) yet these matters were touched (as long past before the Breue
came, and at such time, as he was deemed to be intruded, without his Holiness
knowledge) to show what just causes the Priests had, to be advised before they
should resolve, to subject themselves unto him.

After this long pain, to find holes in Superiors coats, the author is
fallen again into the priests reasons, among which he cites those, which we
have now once already answered, to wit, that his Holiness could not do it
lawfully without their consents, and that the election pertained unto them, and
the like. One new devise he has for some variety, as for that it is a
foreign authority and subject to danger of Praemunire, which is answered
before, that the priests did not plead this, or give it as a reason against the
authority, but alleged it as the opinion only of diverse men of judgment in
the laws of our country, as may be seen in the sixth page of the English
book, and proved thereby, that in wisdom they might pause upon their
submitting themselves unto the authority, seeing no other warrant for it, then
a Cardinals letter, to whom they knew no tie of obedience, much less in a
matter of so great moment. And that this was all which they did, it is evident
in that so soon, as they did see his Holiness letter (whom they knew to be
their Superior) they all yielded themselves. And as it is said before, if our
princes of the same religion, of which we were, did punish such as accepted of
any dignities by provision from Rome, without their co^sents, the priests might
assuredly expect some severity of a prince of a contrary religion. And as they
were not bound to accept thereof, before it was confirmed by his Holiness, so
did they think it great folly to exasperate the state any more against them,
by accepting of so strange and needles a novelty.

And these reasons (says the Apology) are set down and printed in two of the
first treatises of this English book entitled, Copies of discourses, which
were written before the Breue came forth for confirmation of the Archpriest:
and therefore they ought to have been answered according to that time, not with
this idle shift: His Holiness Institution. For as then it was not known, that
it was his Holiness Institution, as here is confessed in these words, Before
the Breue came forth. And consequently it seems strange to us, why they were
now permitted after the Breue is forth, and has not wrought that effect for
quieting them, which then they promised What then will this fellow say to all
the testimonies brought by himself, to prove the peace was made at the sight
of the Breue Cap. 10. Apol? what will he answer to his Holiness Breue of the
seventeenth of August 1601, where his Holiness avouches it that all was
presently ended upon the sight of his Breue of the sixth of April 1599. His
riddle then is thus read: that the Breue did work that effect in the priests,
which they promised, as we have now showed. But not long after the Jesuits
began to spread abroad, and that the priests, who obeyed not, before they saw
the Breue, were schismatics: and the Archpriest was so far from controlling
this revived faction of the Jesuits, as he published a resolution pretended to
come from Rome, that the refusers of his authority were schismatikes. And now
it will not seem strange to a reasonable man, that these discourses were now
printed, for that now there was need to persuade Catholics, that the priests
were not then schismatikes: which persuasion the priests thought it fit to
further, by declaring the true state of matters, how they then stood, and upon
what reasons. And these were best, and most sincerely to be showed by the
letters, which passed at that time to and fro, and by laying down the causes,
which then they had, and might have, to defer their obedience, until they
saw the Breue: and thereby give satisfaction to Catholics, that they had not
been schismatikes, as the Jesuits and Archpriest began now again after the
peace made, to publish against them.

But now after these treatises (says this author) ensues an Epistle of M.
Anthony Champneys, which we would hardly believe to be his, if he had not
suffered his name to be put down in print to the same. For we had greater
opinion both of his discretion, learning, and modesty, then that he would
utter such things as in this epistle are contained: especially matter of so
much gall against the Fathers of the society, under whom he has been brought
up, and of whose order for diverse years (as we are informed) he sought to
be, Note this author his opinion of M. Champneys discretion, learning and
modesty, and how that this opinion must no longer last, because he maintains
his good name against the slanderous tongues of the Jesuits, and their
associates, in their unjust accusation of Schism, and disobedience. And
whosoever shall read his Epistle, which is here mentioned, shall perceive
great cause, why that good and reverent opinion was rather to be still kept by
that Epistle, then the least jot diminished, as having showed very discreetely,
learnedly, and modestly, how wrongfully he, and other grave and reverend
Catholic priests were charged by the Jesuits and their adherents. But this
seems very strange to many, that there being so reverend an opinion of his
discretion, learning, and modesty, as this author affirms, they would not
admit him into their order, having sought it for diverse years, as here is
affirmed. Will he perchance have his reader to understand, that a man of
discretion, learning, and modesty, cannot well suite with that religious
order? or that such men are not thought fit for such purposes, as the master of
misrule would effect in our country, who now has the disposing of our English
Jesuits, and is of opinion perchance, that the further off a man is from
discretion, learning, and modesty, the fitter will he be to further his
designs, and has for the instruction of his nouices, or encouragement to
other, written this Apology, and showed that he himself has neither
discretion, learning, nor modesty, or else that his instruments must have
defect at the least in some one or two of these three virtues, as the author of
the Treatise of Schism, and his abettors therein, who were thought to have had
some learning, but they have given an earnest penny in that Treatise, that they
neither had discretion, modesty, nor learning? And M. Champney might be
thought to be highly favored of God, that he escaped so great a danger,
seeking it himself for diverse years (as here is said) although no doubt he
might have been of the society, and have taken such good and religious
courses, as we doubt not but that many of that order do. But those commonly
(says this author) are worse when they loose their spirit, seeking to pacify
the remorse of their own conscience, by devising defects against them whom
they left. See how this fellow doubleth in his tale. If M. Champney sought for
diverse years to be of the society, why was he not admitted, they having an
opinion of him to be of discretion, learning, and modesty? could he do any
more then to seek it, and to persevere in seeking it for diverse years, as
here is confessed? how is he charged to have left them? Is it not rather
evident that they would not admit him? Again, I would feign know what remorse
of conscience it is, which a man of discretion, learning, and modesty, can
have, for missing that, for the effecting of which he did the uttermost, which
he could morally do. He sought it, you say, for diverse years: and is he to
be charged with any thing, of which he should have remorse of conscience: he
should perchance have continued still that mind to be a Jesuit, but must have
deserved it by some emploiment under you; in which if he had not had that
plausible success which you desired, the Secular priests must have borne the
shame thereof, because whatsoever he was in desire, or in the adventure, yet in
his state he had been no other then a Secular priest. And so by this Epistle he
pays all his former obligations unto them, by as hateful speeches as
commonly any enemy could utter. This author has showed you the obligations
which M. Champney had unto them, which perchance were obligations in them
toward him, in that he perseuered diverse years, seeking to be of them, and was
likely to have been a greater credit unto them, then any of our nation, which
have been employed here in our English affairs, being accounted a man of
discretion, learning, and modesty. And can any man think, that if there were
any hateful speeches in his Epistle against the Society, that this author
would not mention them? But leaving this (says he) we come to the point it
self, wherein he shows as little sound judgment of learning, as any other
that had his hand in the book. Provided always, that it be remembered, how
that this author deals against a man, who otherwise has been esteemed
discreet, learned, and modest, which qualities were never known to have had
greater adversaries then indiscretion, ignorance, and immodestie. And here
these show themselves now against M. Champney his learning, discretion, and
modesty. For first (says this author) he will needs take upon him in this
Epistle to prove, that he and his fellows had great reason in doing as they
did, and that it neither was nor is any sin or disobedience at all: for
(says he) to disobey, is to resist, contemn, and impugn the known
commandment of a Superior. His reasons (good Sir) you are contented to let
them rest for this time: and you employ your talent against this definition of
disobedience, in which you have offended against modesty, as we take it, in
that you would so boldly relate his words with falsehood. Is it all one with
you, It is midday, or midnight; and, it is midday, and midnight? His words are,
resist, contemn, or impugn: and you cite them, resist, contemn, and impugn.
And in the margent you make this note, The large definition of disobedience,
devised for excuse of the troublesome. Know you what you say? If this be the
large definition of disobedience, how do you here exclude out of it the
disobedience of Adam, Saul, and Achan, whom you confess to have disobeyed,
and sinned by their disobedience? yea you deduce the matter in such sort, as
you prove this definition to be only of that disobedience, which is the sin
against the holy Ghost. For thus you argue speaking of Samuel: He did not say
to Saul, why did thou resist, contemn, or impugn, which is not only
disobedience, but rebellion and obstination, of which obstination S. Thomas in
the question by M. Champney cited, affirms to be the sin against the holy
Ghost? And yet in the margent, you will make a note, That this is a large
definition of disobedience, devised for the excuse of the troublesome. For
which he (M. Champney) cites S. Thomas (says this author) 2.2 quaest. 104.
art. 1. and quaest. 105 per totum. But here we would ask M. Champney, that
came so late from his study, whether to every sinful disobedience, yea
mortal sin, it be needful that the disobedient should resist, contemn, and
impugn, or whether S. Thomas in these places by him alleged, does define any
such thing, and not the plain contrary? In the absence of Master Champney, who
perchance at his return will give some larger satisfaction, it is for this
time answered: First, that here is a iugling of mortal sin, and
disobedience, as if M. Champney did undertake to define every mortal sin,
and not the sin of disobedience. Secondly, it is answered directly to the
question: first, concerning every mortal sin, that to every mortal sin it
is needful that the disobedient should resist, contemn, or impugn, according
to the doctrine of S. Thomas here cited, quaest. 104. art. 3. in corpore. These
are his words: Sicut peccatum consistit in hoc, quod homo, contempto Deo,
commutabilibus bonis inhaeret: As sin consists in this, that man (God being
contemned) does follow such a good as is subject to change. And now concerning
disobedience, it is also answered, that the disobedient, not as an adulterer or
a thief, but as disobedient does resist, contemn, or impugn, not only
virtually (as every sinner does, according to S. Thomas cited immediately
before, and which were enough to justify M. Champneys words in every mortal
disobedience) but actually. And in this sense does Nauar. in his Manuel. cap.
23. nu. 35. define disobedience. Inobedientia (says he) prout est speciale
vitium, est vitium inclinans ad non faciendum, quod iubetur, eo principaliter,
quod iubetur: Disobedience as it is a special vice, (that is, as disobedience)
is a vice inclining not to do that which is commanded, principally because it
is commanded. And for this he cites S. Thomas 2.2. quaest. 104. and then he
adds this: Ita quod ex duobus conficitur inobedientia specialis, scilicet ex
non faciendo iussum, and ex animo non faciendi illud, eo principaliter quod
iubetur: So that disobedience (as disobedience) consists of two things, to
wit, of not doing that which is commanded; and of a mind not to do it,
principally because it is commanded. S. Thomas quaest. 104. ar. 2. ad primum,
says directly of disobedience (as it is a special vice, that is, as
disobedience.) Ad inobedientiam requiritur, quod actualiter contemnat
praeceptum: In disobedience it is to be required, that the commandment be
actually contemned. And quaest. 105. ar. 1. ad primum: Nec etiam omne peccatum
mortale est, inobedientia proprie, and per se loquendo, sed solum tunc, quando
aliquis praeceptum contemnit, quia ex fine morales actus speciem habent: Cum
autem facit aliquid contra praeceptum, non propter praecepti contemptum, sed
propter aliquid aliud est inobedientia materialiter tantum sed pertinet
formaliter ad aliam speciem peccati. That is, Neither is every mortal sin a
disobedience, if we speak properly, but only then when the commandment is
contemned, because moral actions take their nature of their end: But when a
man does any thing against a commandment, not upon contempt of the
commandment, but upon some other motive, it is only materially a
disobedience, but formally it appertains to another kind of sin: and is
called for example, pride, covetousness, theft, or such like not disobedience.
By this it appears, that M. Champney is unjustly blamed: and that the author
of the Apology may as yet go to M. Champney his lecture: and in the mean
while if he would be silent, he might be taken for a jolly fellow. But who is
so bold as blind bayard? And thus he runs on. For if it be true that no
man does sin by disobedience, but he only who does resist, contemn, and
impugn, ( M. Champneys words are, or impugn) his superiors commandment, how
was Adams offense so greatly punished in him, and his posterity? wherein yet we
do not read, that he did resist, contemn, or impugn the Commandment of God
Almighty about the apple: but only did simply disobey by eating the same which
was forbidden. We might here make answer out of S. Thomas, that there was a
contempt: for so he says, Quest. 104. ar. 3. in corp. peccatum consistit in
hoc quod homo contempto Deo etc. Sin consists in this, that man (God
contemned) does follow such a good as is subject to change. And if reply be
made, that it is no actual contempt; I will ask where they read this word
actual in M. Champneys definition of disobedience? But to make this matter
more clear, I demand of this author whether that this sin of Adam were a
sin of disobedience formally; that is, the same which is called peccatum
inobedientiae or no? If he answer affirmatively, then he must confess,
according to the doctrine of S. Thomas quest. 104 ar. 2. ad. 1. that there was
an actual contempt. If he answer negatiuely, and that it was some other
sin, as S. Thomas affirms quest. 150. ar. 2. ad 3. that it was pride and
not disobedience, otherwise then every sin may in a general term be called
disobedience, then is not this example to the purpose. For M. Champney did not
define pride, but disobedience, and not disobedience in the largest manner as
here it is foolishly noted in the margent (which as S. Thomas says quest. 104.
ar. 2. ad. primum, is a general sin, as obedience may be a general virtue
if obedience be taken for an execution of any thing, which may be commanded,
and disobedience for an omitting to do the same, upon whatsoever intention) but
disobedience (as disobedience,) to which S. Thomas says in the same place is
necessarily required, that the commandment be actually contemned. The same
answer is to be made to the next instance, which this author gives against M.
Champney his definition of disobedience. Neither do we read (says he) that
Achan in the spoil of Jericho did resist, contemn, or impugn the
commandment of Joshua, that nothing should be touched, or saved of the goods
of that town, but being delighted with some part thereof, held it to himself.
See how this fellow minseth the matter, being delighted with some part thereof,
held it to himself. Whereas the words of Acan Ios. the 7. are these,
concupiscens abstuli, coveting them I took them away. By which it is evident,
that his sin was covetousness, and not disobedience, but in that large manner,
in which the pride of Adam, and every mortal sin according to S. Thomas might
be called disobedience. And if this author will avouch, that it was formal
disobedience, that is, the special vice of disobedience, then do we say
according to S. Thomas before cited, that there was an actual contempt. The
third instance is of King Saul for his sparing the Amalekites, and retaining
some part of their goods: for the which (says this author) Samuel said unto
him, Quare non audisti vocem Domini? why did thou not hear, or obey the
Commandment of God uttered to me? He did not say, Why did thou resist,
contemn, or impugn? which is not only disobedience, but rebellion, and
obstination; of which obstination S. Thomas ( in the question by M. Champney
cited) affirms to be sin against the holy Ghost: Non omnis, etc. I first
demand of this author, what he thinks of this sin of Saul, what kind of
sin, or what name it had in special? S. Thomas above cited says, that the
name of Adams sin was pride, and Acan confessed that his sin was
covetousness. Now are we to find out the name of Saul's sin. If credit may be
given to Lyra at the very beginning of his Comment upon the 15. Chap of the
first book of the Kings, whence this story is taken, the transgression of Saul
was, Ex cupiditate, and superbia, upon covetousness, and pride, so that then
this must be the name of his sin, and then is the same answer made to this
instance, which was made to the other. And if this author will contend, that
his sin was neither pride, nor covetousness, he must tell us, what he will
have it called. And if he will have it to have no other name, but disobedience,
and that it was that special sin, which is called disobedience: then do I
say according to S. Thomas, quest. 104. ar. 2. ad. primum, that there was an
actual contempt. But the Prophet did not say, Why did thou resist, contemn,
or impugn? How then good Sir, I perceive the spirit is not clean gone from
you as yet, in which you offered to take your oath, to a Gentleman in the
Temple a little before your going over, that you neither then were, nor ever
meant to be a Papist. You cannot be ignorant what sort of people do ground
their arguments against the Catholics, upon such negative propositions. The
Prophet (say you) did not say, why did thou resist, contemn, or impugn? But
if it also be found, that the Prophet did say thus much, where then will ye say
your spectacles were, if you did read out the Chapter? or if you did not read
it out, what blind bayard would have been so bold as to affirm peremptorily
that the Prophet did not say so? I read in the 23 verse, Pro eo quod abiecisti
sermonem Domini etc. Because thou have contemptuously cast away the
commandment of God: and verse 26. Etait Samuel ad Saul, non reuertar tecum:
And Samuel said unto Saul, I will not return with thee. Why so? Quia
proiccisti sermonem Domini: or Quia spreuistiverbum Domini, (as Lyra says
according to another editio^) because thou did despise the commandment of
God. You could content your self with those words, Quare non audisti? Why
did thou not hear? and dissemble those which followed in the same chapter,
which do imply a contempt. But yet make your answer, whether you will have
this act of Saul, a formal act of disobedience, and then you are told, that
according to the doctrine of S. Thomas, here must be an actual contempt, or
some other mortal sin. And then, although according to the doctrine also of
S Thomas, it includes at the least a vertual contempt: which if you confess,
you cannot impugn M. Champney his definition, yet is not your instance ought
worth against the definition of disobedience as it is a special sin, which and
no other sin was defined by M Champney. But mark I pray you another point of
this authors divinity: He (Samuel) did not say, why did thou resist,
contemn, or impugn, which is not only disobedience, but rebellion, and
obstination, of which obstination S. Thomas in the question by M. Champney
cited, affirms to be sin against the holy Ghost: Non omnis inobedientia
(says he) est peccatu^ in Spiritum sanctum, sed solum illa cui obstinatio
adhibetur: Not every disobedience is sin against the holy Ghost, but that
only whereto is adjoined obstination. Is every sin of disobedience, I say
not of theft, nor murder nor such like, but of disobedience formally taken, as
here M. Champney does define it) a sin against the holy Ghost? This is a very
strange doctrine, that a man that obeys not, because he will not obey, shall
be said to sin against the holy Ghost: yet does this follow of this doctrine
in the Apology: for (says he) to resist, or to contemn, or to impugn, is
rebellion and obstination, of which S Thomas says is a sin against the holy
Ghost: but as S Thomas affirms quest. 104. art. 2. ad primum. Ad
inobedientiam etc. It is required to disobedience, as disobedience, that there
be an actual contempt, therefore every disobedience, as disobedience, is a
sin against the holy Ghost. A very fair piece of divinity; yet well fitting
the divine author of this Apology, who, had he had the least honesty, although
he had no divinity, he would not have used S. Thomas in this sort: For in the
very place where he had his divinity, of the sin against the holy Ghost, S.
Thomas teaches him (if he had had the wit, or the grace to have learned) that
not the contempt of every hinderance of sin, does make a sin against the
holy Ghost (by which also he explicateth what he means by obstination) for
then the contempt of every thing that good is, should be a sin against the
holy Ghost, because by every good thing a man may be hindered from sin. Sed
bonorum illorum contemptus facit peccatum in Spiritum sanctum, quae direct
ducunt ad poenitentiam, and remissionem peccatorum: But the contempt of that
good does make a sin against the holy Ghost, which good does directly lead
to penance, or repentance, and remission of sins: So that the general
doctrine here set down in the Apology, that a contempt is a sin against the
holy Ghost, and fathered upon S. Thomas, is showed out of S. Thomas to be very
false doctrine, and only that contempt is to be accounted a sin against the
holy Ghost, which is a contempt of such goodness, or good things, as directly
do bring a man to penance, or repentance, and remission of his sins. These
good prefaces being made by the author of the Apology, he would seem to
draw to some point: in which if you mark him, you shall find his error:
Wherefore (says he) according to S. Thomas doctrine, declared also by other
schoolmen, and most briefly and clearly by Caietane in his Sum, a man may
commit damnable sin by disobedience two ways. First, formally and properly,
when he resolves not to obey, which includes contempt. And of this means
S. Thomas, when he says: Ad inobedientiam requiritur, quod actualiter
contemnat quis speciale preceptum. It is required to inobedience formally
taken; that a man do contemn actually the particular precept of his
Superior. quest. 105. ar. 2. ad prim. Now then there wants nothing but for
this Author to show, that when M. Champney did define disobedience, he did not
define disobedience, as disobedience, and as it is formally taken, but for
example theft, murder, or some such other sin. His plain words are of
disobedience precisely, and nothing else, and all his discourse is to prove that
there was no disobedience. And will any man doubt, but that he defined
disobedience as disobedience? Has not this author brought himself into a good
case, that after all this girding at M Champney for saying that disobedience
(he said not theft nor murder, but disobedience) did include a contempt, and
now this author confesses so much, and can bring S. Thomas to prove it,
(although he mistake the question; for it is in the 104. quest.) whom M.
Champney cited, and this author affirmed before very boldly, that S. Thomas did
not only not define any such thing, as M. Champney cited, but the plain
contrary?

But let us see how this author proceeds in his discourse against the
definition given of disobedience; wherefore (says he) according to S. Thomas
doctrine (but you must go look where) declared also by other Schoolmen; and
most briefly and clearly by Caietane in his Sum, (in the margent is this
note, Caietane in summa, verbo Obedientia,) A man may commit damnable sin by
disobedience two ways, First formally, and properly, etc. And so he goes
forward and proves no more then M. Champney affirmed, to wit, that there is an
actual contempt in disobedience, as disobedience is of it self a sin. But
when he comes to the other way of sinning by disobedience, (which is some two
leaves after) he changes his terms, and tells his tale of a material
disobedience, and flies off from the sinning by disobedience, which he should
have followed: for so are his words. A man may commit damnable sin by
disobedience two ways, First formally, and properly. This is one way: the
other then belike must be materially and improperly, which member is of his
own devise. And neither S. Thomas his doctrine, nor Caietans in the place
which he would cite, (for his note book, as it should seem deceived him, not
only in coating the question wrong, and the sentence also out of S. Thomas,
which here he cites, but Caietane also) who verb. Inobedientia, (and not
Obedientia, as he cites him) says, Inobedientia dupliciter incurritur,
velperse, hoc est, ex intention, i. Disobedience is two ways incurred. First,
as it is a disobedience: that is, when there is an intention not to obey, and
this he calls afterward, a formal disobedience. Incurritur autem
inobedientia materialiter, quandocumque non ex intention inobediendi, sed alia
intention, contra precepta Dei, vel Superiorum homo facit. A material
disobedience (or disobedience materially taken) is incurred, whenever a man
does against the Commandments of God, or his Superiors, not with intention of
disobeying, but upon some other intention: and tunc inobedientia non est
speciale peccatum, sed concurrit generaliter cum omni peccato, in quantum in eo
est inobedientia Dei etc. And then disobedience is not a special sin, but
concurreth generally with every sin, forasmuch as disobedience to God is in
that sin. So that according to Caietane, a man does not commit damnable sin
two ways by disobedience, but one way only, that is, when he does sin with
intention not to obey. And when he sins against some Commandment of God, he
sins by some other sin, and not by disobedience, although in the committing
of that sin, he is disobedient to God. As for example: A thief is
disobedient to God, but this sin is by stealing, and not by disobedience,
unless he make it a formal act of disobedience: for then he sins two
ways: one way by stealing, another way by disobedience. As if a thief steal,
because he will disobey this commandment, thou shall not steal, he sins
both by theft, and by disobedience, and more by disobedience, then by theft.
But if a thief steal, because he will steal, then although he commit a
disobedience, he sins by stealing, and not by disobedience, and his act is
not to be called an act of disobedience, but an act of theft, quia ex fine
morales actus spectem habent, says S. Tho. quest. 105. ar. 1. ad. 1. because
moral actions take their nature of their end, for which they are done. And M.
Champney did well define disobedience when he said, It was to resist, contemn,
or impugn the known commandment of a Superior, and he defined it according
to S. Thomas doctrine, who quest. 104. ar. 2. ad. 1. affirms that, ad
inobedientiam requiritur, quod actualiter contemnat preceptum: To disobedience
it is required, that a man do actually contemn the precept. But yet mark
(says the author of the Apology, after that he has cited a place out of S
Thomas, which as I think should be this, which I have cited, and he has
mistaken the question, and the sentence) how Caietane does explicate these
words, (and in the margent he refers his Reader to Caietanes Sum, as
before) Idem est, (says he) contemptus praecepti, and nolle ex intention
obedire praecepto: It is the self same thing to contemn the precept of our
Superior, as to have intention not to obey his commandment. First it is
evident that Caietane does not take any sentence out of S. Tho. to explicate,
but explicateth himself according to the opinion which S. Tho. held of
disobedience. Secondly there is very deceitful dealing in the translation of
Caietans words, where nolle ex intention obedire, are construed to have
intention not to obey, whereas the words imply a formal resistance, or
repugnance to obey. And thus by degrees he would conclude somewhat against that
which is said of disobedience, as disobedience. For in this manner he
proceeds. By which we see, that neither in this proper, and formal kind of
disobedience, is it needeful, that a man do openly resist, contemn, or
impugn. But it is sufficient that by one way or other, he has an intention
not to do that which is commanded; So that M. Champney teaches us very
absurdly, that no man disobeyeth sinfully, except he resist, contemn, and
impugn. See to what he has brought this matter. Disobedience, which has
hitherto according to S. Thom. been taken for a sin, which does contain an
actual contempt of precept, now requires no such matter. But it is sufficient
for disobedience properly and formally taken, that by one way or other, the
offender have an intention, not to do that which is commanded; and
consequently according to this doctrine of the Apology, every mortal sin
almost which a man commits, must be two double sins, one in the kind, in
which it is, as theft in stealing, murder in killing, and so forth: and it
must be disobedience also formally taken: that is, as it is a special vice, in
that by one way or other, he must needs have an intention, not to do that
which is commanded, to wit, to refrain from stealing and killing For this,
says the author of the Apology, is sufficient to make a proper and formal
disobedience, whether it be done in secret, or openly, which word I know not
how he has thrust it in, or to what purpose, the doing a thing openly or not
openly, being nothing to the nature of the sin, but to the scandal which may
grow upon an openly committed sin. So that not M. Champney (as he
concludes) but himself teaches thus very absurdly, and M. Champney does
according to S. Tho. teach us, that to disobey (not to steal or kill) is to
resist, contemn, or impugn the known commandment of a Superior.

The author of the Apology proceeds to the other part of the definition
which M. Champney gave of disobedience, and approves it, to wit, That it must
be a known precept, and thereupon concludes, that it does go hard with the
fact of priests, but does not show how they did disobey any known precept of
any Superior. He commends also the preventing of an express commandment,
by obeying, which no doubt is commendable: but if he infer, that they do
sin who do not obey, until they are commanded, he will teach an absurd
doctrine. And this is (says he) S. Tho. doctrine of this first kind of formal
disobedience, whereby let any man consider the different spirit of S. Tho.
about ready, willing, and simple obedience, from these our brethren, who in
their first preface to the Reader, do make a long speech, that authority of
Superiors, is not a sure rule of truth to be followed without examination
etc. What do we here with any etc? go on I pray you, and let us hear out the
sentence if there be any such sentence there: but the etc. came to stop this
fellow from further falsifying the words cited out of the preface to the
Reader. Can any man but this Apologie-maker, find this sentence there, that
authority of Superiors is not a sure rule of truth to be followed without
examination, etc. as here it is set down in a different letter to deceive the
Reader? and in the margent there is this note to help it, A perilous and
scandalous doctrine of our brethren about obedience. But because this fellow
tells his Reader, that he has treated hereof before, in his second chapter,
I refer the Reader to the answer there made unto it, here only repeating
that which is there affirmed, and will be justified; that whosoever he is, that
shall go about to disprove that doctrine which is there given of obedienee (as
he calls it) or of the fail which may be of truth in a Superior, will
prove himself an ass or an heretic. And the foundation at the which he
immediately after throws his cap, to wit, that it is neither piety, nor true
obedience, at the first sight to admit any authority, but such as is orderly
procured, and lawfully promulgated, is no whit weakened with this idle
question, Who shall be judge of this? For it is easily answered, that men of
understanding and learning may judge, whether a thing be orderly procured, and
lawfully promulged: and the judgment was given for the priests, who not
trusting to their own learning, sent to Paris, where their judgment was
confirmed, and has since also been determined by his Holiness, that
howsoever it was procured, it was not promulged so as it bound the priests to
obey it. Neither does it therefore follow, that every subject is to examine his
Superiors ordinances, nor is it absurd, that men seeing cause why they should
doubt, should seek to help themselves by dealing with their Superior as the
priests did, who presently upon the first knowledge of this authority,
perceiving what they did, sent to Rome to his Holiness from whom it was said
to come: when contrary to the custom and laws of holy Church, it came without
any his Holiness letters, as it is after confessed in this Apology.

Here he might allege (he says) the whole course of ancient holy fathers
sayings, about prompt, ready and simple obedience, most opposite and
contradictory to this vain doctrine of these our brethren. But if he mean the
vain of doctrine which he says is in the Preface to the reader, and is
impugned by him as perilous and scandalous doctrine, then doubtless he cannot
bring the saying of any ancient holy Father against it, nor of any Catholic
new father. If he mean that the priests do argue against prompt and ready
obedience, as a matter not worthy commendacions, he does but mock his reader:
for the priests do highly commend it, as a most rare virtue. If he mean that
the ancient holy fathers did so highly commend prompt obedience, as they did
condemn all delays to obey the commandment of a Superior, upon what cause
soever, as sinful; he is in a very gross error. For as we have before cited
out of the chapter, Si quando de Rescriptis, Pope Alexander the third, writes
this to the Arbishop of Rauenna. Qualitatem negotij, pro quo tibi scribitur,
diligenter considerans, aut mandatum nostrum reuerenter adimpleas, aut per
literas tuas, quare adimplere non possis, rationabilem causam pretendas, quia
patienter sustinebimus, si non feceris, quod praua nobis fuerit insinuatione
suggestum. Having considered upon that for which we write unto you, either
with reverence fulfill our commandment, or pretend some reasonable cause, by
your letters, why you cannot fulfill it. For we will bear it patiently if you
shall not do that, which was suggested unto us with evil information or
insinuation. By which and other such authe^tical warra^ts would all the
corrollaries of Gregory of Vale^cia be answered, if we should agree, that the
priests were commanded any thing by a Superior, which they did not obey. But
this can never be proved: for so soon as they did see his Hol letters, they
did obey, as it is said in the Popes own letters, or Breue of the 17. of
August 1601. And other Superior they know not, that could make an Archpriest
among them, with these appertenances. Whether then it be said, that the
Cardinal did it himself, or that he said the Pope did it, it is not greatly
material. For if it be said, that the Cardinal did it of himself, we ask by
what authority? if you say by his own: we say that he had none, or if he had,
and had showed it, he had been obeyed. If it be said that the Pope did it; we
ask how this appears? If you say, by the Cardinals testimony, we say it was
not sufficient to bind under sin to obey it. And this is proved by M. I.B. in
The hope of peace page 32. and 33 and by M. John Collington at large in his
first reason: and by M.D. Ely in his notes upon the Apology, who handles this
question from the 117. page to 233.

It follows in the Apology. And all this now is about the first kind of
formal disobedience wherein there must be some actual contempt with
reflection: which is, as out of Caietane you have heard, an intention not to
obey: and would to God this also were not too openly seen in this fact of our
brethren, and their perseverance therein. From this kind then of disobedience
it was for the priests to purge themselves, and from the imputation thereof.
How unjustly then is M. Champney blamed, who to purge himself of this kind of
disobedience did first show what this disobedience is? Why is his doctrine
carped at, when his adversaries are forced to say no less then he said? That
disobedience, as disobedience, or disobedience, wherewith he was charged, did
imply contempt, resistance or impugnation etc. And to what end have we now a
tale of a material disobedience, which is only committed by stealing, or
coveting, or by such like? Listen I pray you to another strange Lecture, which
this Apologie-maker will give you. But now besides this (formal kind of
disobedience) there is another kind of material disobedience, when a man
leaves to do that which is commanded, not with intention, or reflection, he
will not obey, or does contemn his Superior, but only that he does either
omit that which was commanded, or do some other thing contrary thereunto. And
in this kind is it to be presumed, that the disobedience of Adam, Achan, Saul,
and others were. We do commonly understand sins of omission, to be against
affirmative precepts. It would therefore be explicated, what affirmative
precepts were given to Adam, Achan, and Saul: or else this first kind of
material disobedience might have been spared, it being no more proper to
material disobedience then to formal. And so does Gregory of Valencia
affirm of formal disobedience. Disp. 7. quaest. 3 puncto. 3. Frequenter autem
eiusmodi in obedientia formalis per omissionem accidere potest etc. altera
inobedientia formalis est per commissionem: Formal disobedience may often be
committed by omission etc. And the other formal disobedience is by commission.
But to return no more to this, It is evident that the commandment which God
gave to Adam concerning the apple, which commandment this author says Adam
did simply disobey, was a negative precept in this manner: De ligno autem
scientiae boni and maline comedas. Eat not of the tree of knowledge of good
and evil. Likewise the commandment given to Achan was a negative precept. Vos
autem cauete ne de hijs, quae precepta sunt (vobis) quicquam contingatis. Take
heed you touch not any of those things which you are forbidden.

The precept likewise which Samuel gave to Saul, was a negative precept: Non
parcas ei, and non concupiscas ex rebus ipsius aliquid: Spare them not (the
Amalekites) neither covet any thing which is theirs. And consequently these
sins were sins of commission, and not of omission, unless we take omission
so generally, as it may include all the sins in the world, for that by
sinning, a man omitteth to fulfill that which he is commanded. In which sense,
there is no sin, but there is an omission, as a condition included in it: as
Gregory of Valentia speaks of material disobedience in the place cited,
Quae-materialis inobedientia nihil aliudest, quam transgressio cuiuscunque
praecepti, in materia cuiusuis virtutis, atque ita non distinguitur ab alijs
peccatis, sed est conditio quaedam generalis, inclusa in omnibus peccatis, hoc
ipso, quod peccatum omne est contra praeceptu^. Material disobedience is
naught else, but a transgression of every precept, in the subject or matter of
every virtue, insomuch as it is not distinguished from the other sins, but is a
certain general condition, included in all sins, in that every sin is
against the commandment. Therefore although there be an omission included in
every sin, and the sinner may justly be said to have omitted, as there is a
disobedience in every sin, and the sinner may be said to have disobeyed, yet
is he no more to be said, to have sinned by omission, then by disobedience, but
by doing this or that, for example, by theft, or murder, and such like. This
part then of material disobedience, as our author calls it, or as Gregory of
Valentia says of formal disobedience, is showed, not to have place in the
sin of Adam, Achan, and Saul: let us see how handsomely their sins will be
deduced to the other branches of material disobedience, which here this author
spreads: or do (says he) some other thing contrary thereunto, that is,
contrary to that which is commanded. Now we are to ask how, or in what sort a
man is said to do some other thing contrary to that which he is commanded. If
a man be bidden to go upon the right hand, he is properly said to do some
other thing contrary to that he is commanded, if he go upon the left hand;
for it is another thing, and it is contrary to the commandment. Likewise if a
man be bidden to stand still, and not move, if he do run, he does some
other thing contrary to the commandment: or if any other man can better
explicate what it is, to do some other thing contrary to a commandment, I
will willingly learn of him. This author then, when he would reduce the sin
of Adam to this kind of material disobedience, who is to do some other thing
contrary to that which was commanded, in my understanding he knows not what
he says. Adam was commanded, that he should not eat the apple: now I would
know, what was Adams disobedience. This author, fol. 111. affirms, that Adam
did simply disobey by eating the apple which was forbidden. But now what will
he say? for he has brought Adams offense in the roll of doing some other
thing contrary to the commandment. And if Adams sin were nothing, but a
simple disobedience by eating the apple, as he says fol. 111. then was not
Adams sin a material disobedience in that kind which here he puts,
because he did no other thing contrary to that which was commanded, but did
the very same thing which he was commanded he should not do. Such likewise was
the sin of Achan, who being commanded not to touch any thing which belonged
to the Amalekites, he did the very same thing which he was commanded he should
not do: and so did Saul likewise the very same thing, which he was forbidden
to do. So that the sins of Adam, Achan, or Saul, were not material
disobedience, unless this author can find better means to prove it, or to
reduce them to some other branch thereof, then here is specified, to wit, that
he commits a material disobedience, who only does either omit that which
was commanded, or does some other thing contrary thereunto. And thus does he
leave the sins of Adam, Achan, and Saul, and neither will have them to be
sins of formal disobedience, nor is able to show, how they were sins of
material disobedience. And yet he goes on, and talks, what divines do
hold. Mary if you will have this fellows favor, you must always remember
with S. Thomas before cited, that it is sufficient the superiors will do
appear quocunque modo, by what means soever: that is, (according to this
authors conceit) if you be told it, although it be in such sort, as you are not
bound to give any credit unto it: which has been proved very often to have
been in our case, and also that by an insufficient testimony the will of a
Superior cannot by any means appear. And thus much in defense of M.
Champneys definition of disobedience, with which he and his fellows were
charged.

The author of the Apology, being (as it should seem) driven to a desperate
point, begins to advise the priests in this manner: Well then, all this being
presupposed, (a hot piece of service) and all heat of partiality and passion
laid aside, we would ask our brethren in their consciences before God, and as
at the day of judgment they will and must answer truly and sincerely, when
they had seen and read over Car. Caietans letters patent, wherein under his
hand and seal, he testified to them and the whole world, that in respect of
the division and dissension raised in England between priests and Jesuits (I
pray you bid the Jesuits welcome into the listes, although they seem to have
stolen in here at the latter ending of the fray) or priests and priests, upon
that or other causes, and for continuation of discipline, union, and concord,
his Hol. had resolved to make a subordination, and had by a special
commandment enjoined the same to him to be performed by his letters. And
knowing further, that his Hol. not many months before (which the Card.
repeated in his letters) had told the very same tale unto diverse of them, at
their departure from Rome, about these divisions, exhorting and charging them
most straightly, to have union and peace with all, and namely with the Fathers
of the Society, making the very like exhortation to them, which now the
Cardinal did. All these things we say concurring, and many others, as well
letters from Rome, as men that came from thence, testifying this act, and
meaning of the Pope: and the very probability and moral evidence it self,
being so clear, that no Card would ever dare presume to do, or attempt so
public an act under letters Patents, and that expressly in the Popes name,
without sure commission: Here we say, let our brethren tell us sincerely, and
without passion, was this moral certainty of the Popes will or not, or was
this sufficient knowledge to bind, under sin to obedience, or no? Was a
Card. Protectors letters Patents, testifying his Hol. commandment therein
enough to the condition required by S. Tho. vt superioru^ voluntas quocunque
modo innotescat, That our Superiors will do any ways appear? But we will not
urge this any further here, especially seeing Fa. Valent. his doctrine set
down before out of S. Thomas, does most clearly convince them. And therefore
we leave that to God, and their consciences, to answer one day before the high
Judge, where shifts will have no place. A condition, which I doubt not, but the
author of this Apology would gladly for this time should be agreed upon,
howsoever when that day shall be present, he would be willing to have the hearing
of the matter further deferred. For if we do but reflect what means have been
made, to have it heard in this world, and have been crossed by him, and his
faction, we shall easily conceive how unwilling he will be to come to the
trial in the next, where he must come to the naked proof of right, or wrong
without his cloak, which now covers all his falsehood.

To this adiuration the priests will answer in their consciences before God,
and at the day of Judgment, where shifts will have no place, that when they had
seen and read over the Card. Caietanes letter, which he testified not to the
whole world (as here it is most falsely suggested) but only to M. Blackwell,
being a letter written particulerly to him, and to no other (as appears by
the letter extant both in the books dedicated by the priests to the
Inquisition, and at the beginning of M. Colingtons book lately set forth) and
written by one, who was not known to have any authority in England, neither
did he make it known, that he had any authority delegated unto him for that
which he had attempted but only by his own bare words, which no man in this
case was to believe under any sin; Notwithstanding they had heard that his Hol.
had given a charge to some in particular, to have peace with the Jesuits (a
very impertinent matter, and as foolishly here urged, for the band to accept
the Subordination at the first coming) or had seen other letters testifying
the same, as a hearsay (as M Colington does particulerly prove, from the
68. page to the 80. or that he was a Cardinal who writ his letters (it being
evident, in the opinion of the chiefest Cannonists, that a Card. may do more
sometime then needs, or else they would never accord, that credit is not to be
given to him unless he show his commission,) whereupon your brethren do
answer sincerely and without passion, that it was no moral certainty of the
Popes will, and that they had not sufficient knowledge to bind under sin to
obedience, and that no Superiors will did by any means appear unto them, but
rather a very bad part of their adversaries to cross them for a time, until
they could work the Pope to confirm the plot which they had laid, to bring
the priests into a slavish bondage under them: neither can they once be
convinced of the contrary, as may in part appear by that their reasons of
their refusal before the Breue came, do stand firm as yet unanswered. And
thus omitting to conjure the Jesuits, and Archpriest for their false dealings
in this action, for which assuredly they must come to an unpleasing reckoning,
I will briefly touch what is here said of the censure of Paris, and make an end
of this Chapter, referring the Reader for a larger satisfaction to M.D Elie his
notes upon the 8. Chapter of the Apology page 245. and to M. John Colington in
his 4. reason page 153.

The decree of the doctors of Sorbon in Paris consisted of two parts; the one
was that the priests who deferred to admit of the authority upon the causes
alleged, were not schismatics, the other was that the priests, (the fact of
it self considered) did not any way offend, or commit sin. By this
definition of Paris (says this author fol. 118.) comes very little relief
unto the priests, and it was printed only to make a vain flourish with the
ostentation of an Academicall sentence. Th^s very word Academi^ sticks
marueilously in this authors stomach, and his fellows. But let us see how he
will show that this decree of these doctors did very little relieve the
priests. To the first point that it was no schism, what says he? mark I pray
you his words fol. 115. for of the other point of schism we will not talk at
all, and am sorry that ever it was mentioned, or brought in question. But will
you see this good soap of milk turned down with a foul pair of heels? Note
that which is behind. Unquiet people having taken occasion hereby to continue
contention, and to make more brables, then were needful. They were much to
blame belike who would speak being publicly defamed for schismatics, and
what else a quintessence of malice could devise, as may be seen in the treatise
of Schism written by the Jesuits, and approved by the Archp. and yet to this
day maintained in corners, where any of that seditious crew can have any hope
to increase the schism (or division, or what else it may be hereafter called)
in Gods Church by persuading now some, now othersome, not to communicate in
Prayer, and Sacraments with those who are the true members of Gods Church, and
for a cause in which these members do in here, and plead the commandment of
the head of the Church, against a private letter, from a private Cardinal to a
private man, as may appear by the letter it self. Were shame of that most
wicked and senseless slander, the cause of sorrow or silence in this author,
concerning this point of schism, what hope might there be that he had some
grace? but his sorrow and silence grow both out of a spleen, that his, and his
fellows slanderous tongues had not that success, which he and his froward
malicious adherents hoped for.

The submission which the priests did make at the sight of his Holiness first
Breue of the 6. of April 1599. (acknowledged in his later Breue of the 17. of
August 1601.) conuinceth all but contentious, and brablers, that the priests
were further off by much from any touch, or any suspicion of schism, then
their adversaries here, ever since their first dividing themselves from them in
prayer, and communion of Sacraments. But seeing he will say no more of schism,
we will omit it, and come to the question, which this author means to handle.
Our question (says he) is then only, whether any sin were committed,
whereof also we will not presume to determine any degree of sin, but leave
that to God, and to the offenders consciences. Now that the priests here be
published for rebels, seditious, factious, excommunicate, irregular, fallen
from the Church, to have lost their faculties, scandalous, infamous persons, no
better then soothsayers, and Idolaters, disobedient to the Church, and
therefore as Ethnickes and Publicanes, the author of this Apology will not
presume to determine any degree of sin.

Our question (says he) is, whether any sin were committed: but he gives no
answer to this question, but wrangleth a little about the censure of Paris in
this manner. First, there was no man to inform the Doctors for the Archpriest:
As though the Doctors censure had not passed upon those informatio^s, although
no one of any side had been present. The case was propounded, and they gave
their judgment upon the case, and not upon any particular person. If any, that
might have been then present for the Archpriest, could have proved the case, to
have been wrong put, let it now be done, and it shall be all one: For as it is
said, it was the case, which was censured, which might have come out of
Moscouia, for any thing that was set down to the contrary, in the information.
And the decree being given, according to the information, will be justified,
notwithstanding this senseless and shameful Edict. 29. Maij 1600.
We George Blackwell Archpriest of England, and protonotary apostolical etc.
do strictly command in virtue of obedience, and under pain of suspension from
divine offices, A notorious usurper.
and loss of all faculties in the fact it self to be incurred, all
ecclesiastical persons, and also all Lay Catholics under pain of being
interdicted likewise in the fact it self to be incurred. Is not this a
strange charge considering the state, in which as well the Lay Catholic, as
the Ecclesiastical person now lives in England? Who is it that does not
expect a prohibition of some grievous crime? You have heard the charge, Now
listen to the matter forbidden: That neither directly nor indirectly they
maintain, nor defend in word, or writing, the censure of the University of
Paris, whether it be truly given or forged. Was there ever in Christendom
heard the like presumption, that a man of some two or three years study, and in
no Catholic Academi^ of fame should condemn the censure of the most famous
University in Christendom? But will you hear him excel himself, who has
excelled the most proud, and temerarious censurer in the world? Note that which
he adds, whether upon true information, or otherwise the Sorbonists have spun
a fair thread, when what informations soever be given unto them, their censure
is not to be regarded.

The second exception which this author seems to take, is that the Doctors
did lightly pass it over, and defined the matter in the senior Bedels house,
which such as have studied in Paris, do know to be the usual place of their
meeting, as standing most commodiously for all those, who are chosen to meet
upon all causes, coming to the University to be determined, they themselves
not living in any one place, but scatteringly in the City: Religious men in
their Couents; Pastors in their parishes; Readers, and other Doctors in their
several houses, or Colleges. How lightly they passed it over I know not,
neither is the matter of any such difficulty in it self, that it should ask
great study. But it is an argument that they were not over careless, what
they said, who commanded the Bedell to write it down, as their definition in
such wise, as every thing else does pass them, in their consultations of
greatest matters.

The third exception is, that it was given upon some sinistrous information:
and that therefore the Doctors did prudently give their censure in this manner:
They committed no sin at all in that fact in it self considered. And that
they added these words, for that they knew not what scandal, evil example,
sedition, and contention and hurt to the common cause had ensued thereof. Had
this author in place of this word thereof put after, he had done more wisely,
as I think: for in that he uses this word thereof, either he declares
himself to be very sottish, or else that the University was very unadvised in
adding these words: that fact in it self considered, for which words this
author commends their wisdom: for if the fact in it self, were such, as so
much hurt did ensue thereof, how could the fact in it self be cleared from all
sin? True it is that scandal followed after. But it yet remains unproven,
that it ensued upon the priests fact: does not much hurt come after much good?
and shall we say that the harm ensued upon the doing of the good, in such
sense, as that the good which is done, must be a necessary cause of the evil,
which had not perchance otherwise been? The fact then in it self considered
being without sin, we are to seek who sowed the Zizania, which perchance had
never been sowed where it was, had not the husbandman sowed good corn before.

The priests perceiving what was intended, and was likely to fall upon them, if
they sought not some means to prevent it, sent two of their brethren unto his
Holiness, to prevent it if they might (for contrary to all custom in
Christendom, there was a superiority challenged over all England and
Scotland, as derived from the Sea Apostolic, without any letters from the said
Sea for warrant thereof) and in the mean time the priests deferred their
submission to the authority, as well upon this cause as other contained in the
information to the Doctors of Sorbon.

The Jesuits and their faction (of which the Archpriest being now become the
head) were impatient of delay: and because the priests did not subject
themselves in this interim, but stayed their submissio^ until they did see the
Popes letters, they first used their tongues, then their pens, and both writ,
and approved seditious libels against the priests, tearming them therein
Schismatikes, excommunicate persons, irregular, fallen from the Church of God,
and what not, that malice it self could devise: from which slanders, while the
Priests sought to defend themselves, great troubles have risen in England. Now
then the question must be, whether the Priests were the sinful cause of these
contentions, by this their forbearance, to subject them selves before they saw
the Popes letters, or rather the Jesuits and Archpriest by those their
seditious and sinful tongues, and libels? The fact of the Priests in it
self considered, that is, their forbearance upon such causes, say the doctors,
and prudently (says this author) was no sin at all, but the doctors were not
truly informed (says this author) and therefore their sentence was of no force.

But what then were the defects in the information given to the doctors,
through which the doctors are thought to have erred in their sentence?
Forsooth, first the priests did not tell them, that the Card. was Protector of
the nation. What if the priests did not know, that he was Protector of the
nation, when his letters came into England, but only Protector of the English
College at Rome, as his predecessor was entitled, and never known by any
other title, as may appear by the Bull of Pope Gregory 13. for the institution
of that College, and the Thesis either in Philosophy or Divinity, which were
in the public exercises dedicated unto him? Moreover, it is evident, that this
which this Card. Protector did, he did it by a delegation from his Hol. and
not as a Protector, and therefore it had been impertinent to have said, that
he was Protector, and neither titles do multiply the person, nor any one
person carries that credit, that in all like cases he must be believed, except
his Hol.

The second defect which this author finds, was, that these doctors were not
told, that the Card. did all this expresso mandato, by his Holiness express
commandment, which (says this author) the Card. sets down clearly in
his letters. To this I answer, that the Cardinal sets down such words in
his letters, but he sets them down only in that place, where he is
commanded to labor or endeavor, that there should be peace in all other
places, as there was at that time in the English College at Rome. And he that
should have informed the doctors of Sorbon, that the Cardinals letters do
testify either clearly, as is here said, or obscurely, that he did all which
here he did, concerning this subordination or institution of this
Archpresbyterie, expresso mandato, by an express commandment of his Hol. had been similis vobis mendax, and there had been no truth in him in this point.

The third defect which this author notes, was, that they concealed another
thing uttered also (says this author) in the Cardinals letters. And what was
that? to wit, that a subordination was demanded by priests letters to his
Holiness, and that his Hol. had allowed of their reasons. To this I answer, as
to the former, that the Card. did not utter this in his letters, as may appear
also by the letters themselves, but by this he gives his reader to understand,
what substantial informations some agent for the Archpriest should have given
at Paris in his behalf against the priests, and how shamelesly these and such
like would have been there uttered, which are without all shame set forth in
print for all posterity to see, that their surest ancre by which they hold, is
a graceless boldness to auerre any thing, and a blinding their adherents,
that they shall not find their false dealing.

The fourth exception which this author takes at the information, is, that it
was given, that many refused to subscribe, whereas they were not the twentieth
part. This difficulty we will entreat some Grammar boy to assoile, and to put
it into the author of the Apology, in what number may be many. But in the
mean while, we shall consider how the Jesuits flattered with some, threatened
other some, and yet were forced to presume upon others, and thereupon set
others names to bills, without their consent or priuitie. And if to this I
shall join the course which the Archpriest took to compel men, to take him
for their Superior at the first, when he had no other warrant for it then a
Cardinals private letter, and particularly directed to him only (as may
appear by the letter it self) and compare this part of subscribers, with
those whose unreadiness in this action, was a sufficient argument of their
minds, the number of the willing subscribers will be found much fewer then the
other: yet was not the information given at Paris in any such sort, as this
author enlarges himself, to wit, as though they had been a great multitude, or
the mayor part, as the information it self does show. Neither did the Doctors
clear the priests, in any consideration of multitude, but in consideration of
the fact in it self as appears in their decree, which consideration
depends not upon how many, or how few, but upon the lawfulness of the fact
it self. And whereas this author adds, that if the Priests have increased
their number since, it has been by false information, as this was to the
Doctors of Sorbon, and by persuading them to the participation of their
liberty, and freedom from all government, which is a sore bayte for young
men, as all the world knows. If the Priests have not increased their number,
or were not known (when this Apology was written) to have increased their
number, how can he so peremptorily affirm, that those, who refused to
subscribe at the first, were not the twentieth part so many, having set their
hands to the appeal? And yet many more standing firm with them, whose names
are not there expressed, and yet are so many more, (if they knew how to live in
any reasonable sort, without holding with the Jesuits and the Archpriest in
this controversy) as they would leave a very poor many to stand against the
Secular priests: Such the baytes are, and so unpleasant which are laid to draw
them to the priests side, as they have no list to byte at them. The priests
have for Gods cause, put themselves in such state of life, as they stand in
need of the charity of Catholics, who being abused by the Jesuits and the
Archpriest, to disfavor all such as they dislike, and to relieve only those,
who shall stand with them: It is easily seen where the bayte is, at which a
young man will byte, besides the infamy which is continually spread abroad
against the Priests, that were it not, to betray God his Church, and their own
souls, no doubt they had rather themselves byte at the golden bayte, and
worldly favor which the Jesuits and the Archpriest do lay, to catch young
and old, both of the Laytie and the Clergy, then at a crust, as some of them
do call it: and to live so obscurely as many of them do, yea and in great
want, which patience only does often supply (a sorry bayte for young men) as
all the world does know. And this is a silly disposition to be persuaded by
any false information, especially in such matters, as of which they are
themselves eyewitnesses, how they are handled, and cannot easily be deceived.

The fifth exception is against the information, where it is said, that the
priests refused only to subscribe to the authority of the Archpriest, before
he had obtained letters from the sea apostolic for his confirmation: as who
would say, that this being done, they meant to be quiet. This good fellow should
have disproued this and that, at the sight of his Holiness Breue, of the 6. of
April 1599 all matters were not appeased, and that the Priests did not
(according to this information given) submit themselves. But this he can never
do, for he will be disproued by his Holiness himself, who in his Breue of
the 17. of August. 1601. affirms it. And their behavior in the mean time,
was as became Catholic priests, who had care to preserve their credit, in
such sort as they were bound to do, without persuading any against the Popes
ordination, or discrediting any letters of the Protector, more then this, that
they would not give any such credit unto the Protector, that they would
without his Holiness letters subject themselves to an extraordinary
superiority; to which without grievous penalties, no Covent or Clergy are to
subject themselves, as may appear in that Extrauag of Bonifacius the eight
Iniunctum de electione, which is afterward extended by Pope Julius the third in
his constitution which begins thus, Sanctissimus, etc. to all Prelates.
Although also in far lesser matters then this was, no Cardinal will
challenge any such prerogative to himself, that his word or his letter should
stand for a law, to bind all men to whom the matter appertains, to yield
their obedience under sin. And both falsely and foolishly it is here urged,
that it was the Popes ordination. First because the Cardinal affirmed in his
letters, that it was his own ordination, as may appear in those words of his
letter, Dum haec nostra ordinatio durauerit, so long as this our ordination
shall endure. Secondly because although his Holiness did declare, that it was
done by his commandment, yet this declaration came not in a year after, and
could give no more notice to the Priests before that he did any thing therein,
then this author of the Apology has knowledge at this present, by any lesson
which may be taught him a year hence, and yet cannot but think it great
folly, to be charged for not believing that, at this present, of which he is
not like to have sufficient knowledge, any time these twelve months following.
But now to the terrors which the priests are said to have cast into Lay men's
heads, of admitting sorraine authority from the Pope: I answer that the
priests did only cast, as in wisdom they might, whether it were convenient
for them upon so small a matter, as was a Cardinals letter, to incur the
penalties of such laws as were before of force among the Catholics. For their
submission to the Breue (so soon as they saw it) proved their ready
obedience, and reverence to the Popes authority, which they are often, but
falsely charged to have resisted.

The sixth is, that the doctors were told, that it might be seen by the Card.
letters, that the Archpriests authority was granted by false information; A
point largely proved by the priests and the place of the Cardinals letter,
quoted in all their books, and that partiality was used in the choice of him
and his assistants. Which clause this author has set down in such sort, as
his reader must conceive, that the priests had informed the doctors, how that
this also might be seen in the Card. letters; which is a false imputation: for
the priests did not inform the doctors, that any such thing appeared in those
letters, but only that they had noted that there was such a partiality used
(as may appear in their informations) without any relation to the Cardinals
letters. And no man can better justify this to the doctors to be true, then he
to whom in presence M. Blackwell took exceptions, for wishing some matters
were amended in the Jesuits, and told him that it was the only cause why he
missed an assistanceship. And F. Garnet dissembled not the matter in his letter
of the 11. of November 1598. to M Collington; where he makes this conclusion
about the middle of the letter, So that if they would have themselves, or
others that do not affect us, (though otherwise seeming never so virtuous) to
be chosen heads, let them first affect us so far, as in virtue they ought,
that they may be worthy of government. And at the beginning of this Chapter of
the Apology, fol. 99 the principal counselors in this action, are said to
have been F. Parsons, and F. Baldwin open Jesuits, M. James Standish a secret
Jesuit, or one at the least, who had promised to become a Jesuit, M. Haddock,
and M Martin Array, who having forsaken their course of life in the help of
their country, lay to defer some preferment by the Jesuits their
procurement, and have since been paid their hire, the one with the deanrie of
Dullin, and the other with a prouostship in Spain. And does not this confirm
that which the priests did most justly suspect, to wit, partiality in the
choice of the Archpriest, and his assistants? The readiness of the priests to
obey (here again objected to have been a false information) is proved by the
Popes Breue of the 17. of August 1601. The matters concerning the two priests
their journey, their restraint, the judgment of the two Card. against them,
the breaking forth of these present troubles after the peace made, are to be
handled in the Chapter following, and are here very impertinently brought by
this author, as also that it was said (God knows out of what office,) when
speech was of Fa. Parsons his procuring the Breue of the 6. of April, which
words, as it has been showed, were no discredit to his Hol. Breue, it being
acknowledged by the priests out of what office soever it was gotten, and the
words imply no more, then that it might be gotten out of diverse offices, and
that Fa. Parsons might use his talent, to have matters set down therein for
his best advantage, whereupon perchance it fell out, that the letters of the
Cardinal were mistaken in the Breue, as all the world may see, and it is
particulerly said where, in the book dedicated to the Inquisition page 59.

After this exception, there is yet again a refreshing of the memory of the
priests their pride and arrogantie, (for he draws now to an end of his
question which he proposed fol. 115. to wit, whether any sin were committed
by them, whereof (he says) he will not presume to determine any degree of
sin) their making a dangerous division among Catholics, in the sight of the
common enemy, and in time of persecution, and would not be brought from it by
authority, or gentle persuasions, whereof infinite hurts, scandals, and other
damages, have and do daily ensue. And if any man had proposed the state of the
question in this sort, is it likely (says he) that so learned, and godly
Catholic men, would have defined, that their fact had incurred no sin at
all? Is not this a pretty resolution of the question, which he had promised,
page 115. that is, whether any sin were committed by the priests their
forbearance to yield their obedience, at the first sight of the Card. his
letter? I would ask this question, when M. Blackwell himself sent first for
M. Collington, and M. Charnocke, and could not with all his threatenings,
obtain of them to say, that they did like of that which was done; what of all
these matters here rehearsed by this author, were then to be objected against
their fact? If answer be made, that afterward these things chanced, which
would not have chanced, had all submitted themselves at the first: This answer
is not to the matter: For we ask the question of the fact in it self
considered. And before these divisions among Catholics began, what was to be
thought thereof? Will you hear this author his own confession in this place.
And yet (says he) is their (the doctors of Paris) definition so limited, that
they determine only of the fact in it self, and this also, according to the
present information given them, excluding all other circumstances and
considerations, that do or may aggrauate the same. But what were these
circumstances, and considerations? Were they any other then the tumults which
are here so often inculcated? If they were, let them be specified, and they
shall be answered If they were not any other then these stirs, then how could
these vitiate an act before they were; the act in it self considered, was not
vicious, but lawful, (as here is avouched by the doctors) and lawfully done;
and consequently (to end this Chapter) all the evil which followed, was by the
misgouernment of the Archpriest, and the business of his adherents the Jesuits,
and such as stood with them, to defame the priests. And so for this matter, as
the Apology says, We end.

CHAP. 14. How this Apologie-maker persuades his reader, that his Hol. was
moved to imprison the two priests who went first to Rome, by certain letters
which were written long after his resolution to imprison them, and how he
iugleth about that which chanced unto them in Rome. Apol c. 9.
IN the ninth Chapter of the Apology, the author thereof promises to show,
how after the first contradiction made by the priests, against his Holiness
ordinance (as he falsely terms it, if the Cardinal said true in his
letters, Dum haec nostra ordinatio durauerit: So long as this our ordinance
shall endure) the Priests went forward, and sent a couple to Rome: and what
happened unto them: (in which the poor man commits very gross faults) and
how his Holiness confirmed the aforesaid ordinance, and Protectors letters with
a new Breue, (which is an argument that the ordinance was not his Holiness
ordinance, for then should it not have needed any confirmation) he begins
his ninth Chapter in this manner. We have showed (a brazen face) in the former
Chapter, with how great singularity and little reason (and yet not one
answered) our discontented brethren (not without just cause) being so few, and
such as they were, yet so many, and such, as their adversaries as yet never
durst adventure to buckle with them in the matter in question, holding it
greater wisdom for them to keep silence, then bewray their ignorance and
folly, as this author has adventured in this Apology, opposed themselves at
the beginning to the first institution of this hierarchy, ordained by his
Holiness; a point often urged, but never proved, there being nothing but the
Cardinals bare testimony, and some heare-sayes, which the priests have showed
was not sufficient, to prove that it was the Popes ordinance. Besides, (as it
is said) the Cardinal took it upon himself, as may appear by his letters:
and against the whole body of our English Clergy, besides themselves,
admitting the same, believing the protestations of some that it was his Holiness
ordinance, not having seen themselves the Cardinals letters, and being put in a
fright to be excommunicated, if they would not yield themselves. Now it
remains to consider with what resolution and obstinacy, they have prosecuted
this their division, (the priests affirm, that this is the Jesuits division,
and the faction adhering unto them) notwithstanding all the means used to
divert them from it, and quiet them, both by superiors commandments, and
friends persuasion. These friends perchance were they, who diuulged them to be
schismatikes, and the superior commanded them that they should not defend
themselves, and their fame, (special means for quietness.) And first of all,
about this point is to be noted, that if our said brethren had meant plainly
and sincerely (as often they do profess in the two first discourses of their
English book, entitled, Copies of discourses, etc. and in their Information
to the doctors of Paris, they do avouch the same:) to wit, that their scruple
was only, whether this matter came from his Hol or no? And whether Card.
Caiet. the Protector (abusing the Popes name) had appointed it of himself, and
that they deferred only to concur with the rest of their brethren, until
they might be acertained of this point. Well, good sir, if all this had been
so, as so it was not, but the priests professions in the places cited, are
either ignorantly, or maliciously misreported, as shall be showed, It had been
a very easy matter to clear the doubt by many ways, yea without sending any
to Rome, for that so public an act as this, under a Cardinals letters
patents, might have easily been enquired of without messengers. To what
purpose should they have inquired at Rome for the Cardinals letters, which they
saw here in England? patents, that is to say, private letters, directed to a
private man, for so were the Cardinals: the priests had no doubt of the
Cardinals good will, to further any design of the Jesuits, neither did they
ever doubt, but that he had instituted the authority, and therefore this was
not the cause of their sending to Rome, to be informed, whether the Cardinal
had done any such matter, for it was very credible, that he would have done
much more then he did (if he had known how) at the Jesuits request: but what
were the other means? One letter of their own either to his Holiness himself,
or to Card. Adebrandino his nephew, or any acquaintance of theirs that was in
Rome, might soon have procured them a certificate of this matter, if they had
been desirous to have known the truth; yea further, no man was there of the
contrary part it self, which in this behalf would not have endeavored to
have procured them satisfaction. Good natures, who would so friendly have used
the priests letters, and yet did cause the priests to be cast into prison: and
lest that they should have missed of their purpose, they came themselves with
the Sbirri, but they were the chief captains, and apprehended them, and were
their guard to their prison: What if the Priests letters to his Hol. or his
nephew, had miscarried (as ordinarily it is ominous to all such letters as
pass by the Post, and are suspected not to be to the Jesuits liking) might not
his Holiness have been induced to confirm the Cardinals act, as a matter
applauded by all the Priests in Englannd? If (says this author) our brethren
had meant plainly and sincerely (as often they do profess in the two first
discourses of their English book, entitled, Copies of discourses, etc. and in
their Information to the Doctors of Paris, they do avouch the same; to wit,
that their scruple was only, whether this matter came from his Holiness or no,
etc. Has this author too soon forgotten his pain and travail taken in the
precedent Chapter, where he brought diverse scruples by way of arguments, for
the proouing of the Priests their delay to be lawful, of which fol. 110. this
he affirms: And these reasons are set down and printed in two of the first
Treatises of the English book, entitled, Copies of discourses, etc. Has he
not spent paper and ink, and a great deal of foolish labor, in going about
(fol. 116. to the end of the Chapter) to disprooue, and cannot, the scruples
which were suggested by the priests to the doctors of Sorbon, and will he now
tell his reader, that the priests do profess, both in these Treatises, and in
their Information to the doctors of Paris, that their scruple was only,
whether this matter came from his Holiness or no? Is his memory so short? or is
his presumption such of the blind-obedient, that he may say what he list, and
contradict it at his pleasure? yet with all these arguments to the contrary,
the priests as well in these Discourses, as in their Informatio^ to the doctors
of Sorbon, affirmed, that his Hol. commandment lawfully made known unto
them, should end the matter: which was no proof, that they had no other
scruple, but rather of their ready obedience to the Sea Apostolic,
notwithstanding any difficulties, which did or might occur, and were
specified in these Discourses, and in the Information to Paris: and they
performed it with all humility and charity, by submitting themselves, and
forgetting those most impious slanders, which had been spread against them of
schism, etc. by the Jesuits, and had lien still to this day in their grave,
had not the Jesuits raised them again, and the Archpriest given them free
scope, to range in every seditious mouth without controlment, and for the
greater encouragement to such ouerforward Amalekites, he published a
Resolution, which he said he had from the mother City, that the refusers of
his authority were schismatics.

This then which this author affirms to have been the only scruple of the
priests their delay, being proved not to have been the only scruple, but that
there were many more, which this author took notice of in the places cited in
the 8 chapter: it is evident, that the sending of letters to Rome had little
auailed the priests, the letters themselves (if they had been delivered to his
Holiness hands) not being able to have answered to the devises of such
adversaries, as they had there found, and consequently it was necessary, that
some priests should be sent to deal with his Holiness in such doubts, as they
had, with this resolution, that they would stand to whatsoever his Holiness
should judge convenient for the present. And in this manner did the two priests
go to Rome. And now follows the story of their apprehension there by the
Jesuits and Sbirri, and what chanced unto them, while they were under the
Jesuits safe keeping. And because the blame of that which deserves blame, is
laid to Fa. Parsons; as that they were imprisoned before they were heard, and
such like, this author to save Fa Parsons his sides (of which, by his running
so quickly out of the fire of persecution in England, he knew Fa. Parsons had a
very great care) goes about to prove, that the two priests, there imprisoned
in Rome (before they were heard) did not proceed from Fa. Parsons; and if he
had gone no further then this, he might have left the matter in some suspense,
and men might have beaten their brains in conceiving how such an injustice
should have come into his Holiness head, but he will demonstrate how it came,
and thereby prove that Fa. Parsons was no medler in it, to wit, that diverse
did write to his Holiness against them, but alack their writing, although it
might have somewhat excused Fa Parsons: yet does it not show that F. Parsons
was clear. He argues, as though it had been an impossible matter for him to
have dealt in this action, because so many other did write: but what if all
these writers writ nothing concerning that point, with which Fa Parsons is
charged; to wit: the imprisonment of the two priests before they were heard, to
whom shall this fact be attributed? to his Holiness, who is known to be both
of mild, and most religious disposition, or to one of a clean contrary spirit,
but in that place, and credit, as he has been trusted, both by his Holiness,
and used by the Cardinal Caietane, Protector, as a chief director in all our
English affairs? But of this there can be no doubt, but that many did write to
some, or other, and those letters were perchance showed to the Pope, or else he
heard somewhat of them. Let us then examine this matter. The first place of the
letter writers is given to his Holiness Nuntij in France and Flanders. But in
this he has not done wisely, they being both strangers, and likely to have had
little commerce with the English, especially he in France (if then there were
any) and as for him in Flanders, I am certainly informed from his own mouth,
that he never writ against these Priests, much less would he suggest, that
they were to be imprisoned before they were heard, and be used, as shall be
declared. The next letters here mentioned (although not for such as should
persuade his Holiness to that course, which was taken) were written by Fa.
Bellarmine, wherein he certifieth Fa. Parsons, that his Holiness so greatly
misliked their troublesome fact, that he had told him, that if they came to
Ferrara he would cause them to be imprisoned: who gave these informations to
his Holiness, that without more ado he was resolved to imprison them, if
they had come to Ferrara? If the memory of some, who read the letter, do not
extraordinarily fail them, this was an answer to Fa. Parsons letter, which he
had written to Fa. Bellarmine, concerning the Priests coming toward the Pope:
But yet there is a starting hole left, and where is that? the letters of many
of our nation, some of the principal, some of the most zealous, and herehence
the Pope took his motive to imprison the priests. If this then be so, then
must these letters be written at the least, before that his Holiness could by
these writers persuasions determine, to cast the two priests in prison, and
yet not so long before, as it should be impossible that the writers could
understand of any such attempts, against which they are said to write, or to
persuade his Holiness to this or that course in this or that matter, but neither
of these chanced in our present case. For all the letters (at the least brought
here for proof or instance) were written either after that his Hol. was
induced to make this resolution, or else so long before, as it was impossible
the writers thereof should have knowledge of any such attempt.

The first in the rank of writers is D. Stapleton, who (as this author
thinks) was dead before the two priests came into Flanders (he forgot
himself that he had said fol. 120, that the priests came not into Flanders,
but passed by France. But (alack) the good man's memory does much fail him.)
How then? what is to be said of him, and his opinion, concerning these two
priests, and their attempts against the Subordination? and how was he one, upon
whose information, or instigation his Holiness resolved to imprison the two
priests? marie sir, you must go look in the 4. Chapter fol 40. a piece of a
letter of D. Stapletons to Fa. Parsons which was written the sixth of July 1597.
but what does, or can this concern the priests coming to his Holiness, toward
the later end of the year 1598, to deal about a matter which was not before
the 7 of March in the same year 1598, as appears by the date of the Cardinals
letter, Apology ca. 8. fol. 104? There is also a piece of another letter of
the same man to to the Cardinal Protector, of the first of May 1598, which
although it were written after that the Subordination was instituted, yet it
was written before that it was known in England: for (to our remembrance) we
had no knowledge thereof, until it was May here with us. But howsoever this
was, it was impossible, that it could concern the two priests their coming to
his Holiness, for this was not so suddenly determined in England, although upon
the first sight of the Cardinals letter the Archpriest was told, that there was
just cause for them, to go to his Holiness. By this then it appears, that
D. Stapletons letters, which were to Fa. Parsons and to the Protector, could
not induce his Holiness, to imprison the two Priests, who came to deal about
the Subordination. Let us now see what the second testimony avails him. This
testimony was of principal men, who writ some months (says this author fol.
124.) before these two messengers came over into Flanders (he said France 120.)
but their negotiations in England were heard of, and known, and these
principal men (of whom the most principal stands for the priests, and is
joined with them in affection, and action in Rome at this present) writ their
letter to the general of the Jesuits upon this voice, which they heard, when
you do justice, you shall make also peace, (a heavy saying for such as will be
proved to have done as great an injury as may be, by a public diffamation of
schism, and what not, against Catholic priests, without just cause.) But what
is this to the purpose? how was his Holiness upon this letter resolved to
imprison the two priests, who were in the way to him, for and concerning the
Subordination which was made? the General perchance of the Jesuits did show
this letter to his Holiness, and thereby the negotiations of these two, and
their fellows came also to be known to his Holiness: all this goes very
current. But what if those men (now become principal) neither heard of these
2. priests (as dealers in this action) nor of any other, not only not in
particular, but neither in general? What if they could not possibly hear, that
there was any Subordination known in England, and much less, that any did
delay to admit thereof, when they writ this letter to the General of the
Jesuits? How shameless will this author be judged, who would bring these
principal men their letters, as a motive to his Holiness, to imprison these
two priests, before he would hear what they had to say? This Subordination was
made at Rome the seventh of March in the year 1598, and if the messenger had
stridden a black horse to bring it into England, yet could there not be any
negotiations in England conveniently either by these two priests, or others
concerning the same, in so short a time, as that these 17 principal men
(unless they were altogether attending, as it were to have entertained the
same messenger in Flanders) considered maturely of the negotiations, which were
in England, could burnish up a letter, and dispatch it upon the eighteenth of
March, in the same year 1598, as here is cited in the margent fol. 123.

Now follow the letters of diverse zealous men. When (as this author says) these
messengers were in their way indeed for the other were written, especially
those of the 17. principal men, when the priests were in their negotiations,
before they set forward, as it is said fol. 124.) and these men writ indeed
very sharply, and with such confidence, as they might give some suspicion to a
wise man, that all was not well in England, but yet there is no persuasion to
have the messengers cast into prison, until they were heard: a duty which
they might challenge, if in no other respect, yet at least for their travail
in Gods Church, for which they deserved a good opinion of the governors
thereof. The first here cited are from Doway 25. October. 1598. to the Protector;
to which some have acknowledged their error in subscribing. These letters do
not clear Fa. Parsons for being the cause of his Holiness resolution to
imprison the two priests: for in this Apology it is confessed fol. 120, that
his Holiness was resolved upon the 17. of October 1398. to cast them into
prison, for such date does the letter bear, which F. Bellarmine (now
Cardinal) is said to have written to Fa. Parsons, to inform him, that his
Holiness so greatly misliked their troublesome fact, that he had told him, that
if they came to Ferrara, he would cause them to be imprisoned. If these then of
the 25. of October. came too late, to put such a resolution into his Holiness
head, what shall we say of these which came after? for the next letters are
from M. D. Worthington to the Protector, and these bear date the 30. of
October from Bruxels. Next March D. Peerse (who was the first in the rank of
the 17. principal men, but now God knows, what place he shall have, and
among whom, for that he is joined with the priests in Rome, and in that action)
D. Caesar Clement, that succeeded D. Stapleton in the office of assistance-ship
to the Nuntius in Flanders, in all English affairs (a man that was never in
England, but (to give him his right) the fittest man for that purpose, as
matters go, and worthy to succeed D. Stapleton, or any far greater man then
he, in that kind of managing English affairs) D. Richard Hall, three doctors,
but what these, or other writ most earnestly, and gravely to the same effect,
as the other did, by all likelihood this author knows not: For (as he says)
he had not the copies of their letters, when he writ this Apology, but he met
with a letter of M. Licentiat Wright, deane of Cortrac in Flanders to the
Protector, which is here set down in the Apology, wherein this deane has
little cause to thank this author, who would discredit him so much, as to set
down his judgment of two priests, whom he never saw. And although his letter
do exceed the limits of all modesty, yet does it not any whit avail this
author for proof of that, for which it is brought, that is, that his Holiness
was thereupon resolved, to imprison the two priests: for this letter bears
date 10. Nouembris 1598. as appears here fol. 126, which was a fair while
after his Holiness had that resolution, as appears by F. Bellarmine (now
Card.) his letter of the 17. of October. 1598. cited by this author fol. 120. yet
goes this fellow on very smoothly, and not without great applause of the
blind obedient in this manner.

By this then (says he) and other letters that came to his Holiness (as you
must suppose) or to the Protector (he should have added, or to the general of
the Jesuits, or to Fa. Parsons, for all these here related, are to some of
these, and not one to his Holiness, nor all to the Protector, nor about these
matters, as in their places it is confessed in the Apology) about this time,
and were related to his Holiness by him (his Holiness being all this while at
Ferrara, and the Cardinal at Rome, or at some place of recreation in those
parts) every man may see, whether he had just cause to be moved, or no, and to
resolve to restrain them at their arrival (you must understand at Ferrara
from whence Fa Bellarmine, now Card. is said fol. 120. to have certified Fa.
Parsons by his letter of the 17. of October, that the Pope had told him, that
if they came to Ferrara, he would cause them to be imprisoned) but much more
when after 17. or 18. days stay in Rome (as before has been said) they could
not be induced by the Protectors persuasion, to any quiet course at all. That
which was before said, was said fol. 121. which must be one day unsaid: for
there he affirms, that the Card. Caietan, and Burgesius said, and did many
things to the Priests, which are most falsely related. For the Cardinal
Burgesius entertained them very friendly, and being certified upon his earnest
request (set on by Fa. Parsons, to know it at that time) what was the cause of
their coming to Rome, he promised them according to their request, to procure
them audience, before they should be judged, which they did the more earnestly
request, for that they had understood by Fa. Parsons (who was then immediately
departed from the Cardinal, but was before certified, that the two priests
attended his departure) that his Holiness was incensed against them, and nothing
else passed between the Card. Burgesius and them at that time, and after this
they went to the Card. Caietan so soon as they could, after that they
understood of his return to the city, and he was also very importunate, to
know the cause of their coming to Rome, which when they discovered, he seemed
to be much troubled, especially when they talked of the Subordination, as his
fact: yet concluded thus with them, that they should bring in writing what they
had to say concerning the Subordination, and the appurtenances to which they
accorded, offering to have the matter (as belonging properly to him) ordered by
him (if so it could be) without troubling his Holiness therewith, and requesting
his furtherance in such other matters, as were only in his Holiness to grant;
And thus they departed with resolution to return to the Card. with their
difficulties in writing, and agreed with one, who should have written for them
the copy which they were to present to the Card. but they were intercepted by
the Jesuits and Sbirri, of which F. Parsons was the chief leader. And this was
al which passed between the Card. Caietan and them, as the Card. well knows,
and this was upon the feast day of S. Thomas the Apostle, when the waters had
begun to rise in Tiber, which ouerflowed the city, and upon S. Thomas of
Canterbury his day, about the first or second hour in the night, the two
priests were carried away to prison, perchance for the solemnising of that feast
in some reformed godly manner.

This Author having showed (to such as must not see) how that the Pope
resolved to imprison the two Priests upon the letters here cited: now he will
peswade (such as must believe) that it was not possible, that Fa. Parsons could
be the cause of their imprisonment. It may be seen also (says he) how
unjustly they do calumniate, and accuse Fa. Parsons, as the cause of all their
trouble, considering those letters were written from Flanders, upon the two
messengers first coming over, so as Fa Parsons had neither time to procure
those letters from Flanders, neither is it likely, that men so grave, learned,
and wise (as these are) would be induced by another man's request, to write such
letters under their own hands, to so great personages (the Protector, the
General of the Jesuits, and Fa. Parsons) and that in so important a matter,
except they had thought as they wrote, and their judgments had been conform
to their letters, and thus much of the first point about their imprisonment.
Are not these effectual persuasions, that F. Parsons could not be the cause of
their trouble? suppose all these letters had been written upon the first
coming over of the two priests (as they were not, nor the soonest of them
which concerned the two priests, in almost two months after) let us also
suppose, that his Holiness was induced to resolve upon the imprisoning these two
priests, by these letters which we have showed could not be (the soonest of
them being written upon the 25. of October 1598. as is confessed in the
Apology fol. 125. and his Holiness resolved upon the 17. of the same month
before, to imprison them at Ferrara, as is confessed also in the Apology fol.
120) it was so long before their going, and it was so well known, that some
were to go, as one of the now busiest Agents told one of them for certain,
that whosoever went in that affair, should at their arrival be cast into
prison. And although these Flanders men, who writ, were so persuaded in
conscience to write as they did, and did therefore write, because they were so
persuaded, this is no proof, that they were not induced by others, to have
such a conscience to think or to write in that manner, and some of them have
acknowledged, and have been and are very sorry, that they suffered themselves to
be induced by D. Barret to subscribe unto that letter from Doway. So that this
is a poor devise, and a silly persuasion, that Fa. Parsons could not be the
cause of the two priests their trouble, who was known to have his Agents in
all these parts, if himself were ashamed to have his letters to be seen for
any such matter. And it not being proved out of any of these letters of
Flanders, that any of these great personages ( the Cardinal, the General of
the Jesuits, and Fa. Parsons) to whom these letters were sent, were persuaded
by them that these two Priests were to be imprisoned, before they were heard,
the author leaves the wound in Fa Parsons side, as wide as it was before,
unless to heal up that, he will wound his Holiness much deeper, as who (being
reputed for a most mild, and wise man) should resolve upon the imprisonment of
a couple of Catholic priests, coming (as it were) bleeding from the camp of
Gods Church, to open unto him such difficulties as were to be redressed, either
concerning their whole Church, or some members thereof, who had lately
challenged unto them an extraordinary superiority over their fellow laborers,
without any warrant from him; and to open unto him what peril might thereby
come to the Catholic cause: and offering themselves and their cause with all
submission to his Holiness, as the effect also proved (whatsoever this
slanderous Libeller suggesteth to his blind obedient Reader) But this author
shows whatsoever he says that he cares not, if his Holiness his sides be
pierced, so that he may keep Fa. Parsons sides whole. Now to that which
ensues (says this author) there is extant a letter, written by F. Parsons to
M. Bishop, of the ninth of October 1599. containing a certain brief
capitulation of the principal points, that passed in this action of the
messengers restraint in Rome, etc. To which letter there is answer made in the
English book, where this letter is set down at large, and the answer is
such, as this author with a little snarling only at it, lets it pass
quietly, neither is it a cauilation, but a very material point, that the notary
(so much talked of in that letter, and in a wicked false letter of the 20. of
February 1599. under the name of M. A. as if M. Martin Array had been the doer
of it) was a Jesuit, and that he put in and out what F. Parsons would have
him, being himself the examiner (although the Popes Comissary did twice or
thrice show himself in that time) and if every days examination had been read
(as it was not) in the presence of him, who was examined: yet F. Parsons might
cause somewhat to be written otherwise then the prisoner did deliver it, and to
have somethings blotted out again, when the prisoners answer was contrary to
his former information, given by him, either to his Holiness or others;
neither was every days examination subscribed the same day for the prisoner
never set his hand, but to the last sheet, which was of such impertinent
stuff, as it might be added to any examination, and the same hand which writ
the examination, being a Jesuits hand, and at the commandment of F. Parsons he
might (notwithstanding the scoring of the margent, and the after registring (if
it were registered) show what he listed, and if their examinations be extant (as
here it is said) then will appear in some of them many things blotted out,
sometime some words, which F. Parsons caused to be writ contrary to that which
the prisoner delivered; sometime a whole question, with some part of the
answer thereto, when F. Parsons could not obtain of the prisoner to make such
answer, as he would have him: for remedy whereof F. Parsons took always
afterward this course, that he would never have his question written down,
until he had heard what answer the prisoner would make, that if the answer
were such as he could wrest it to his purpose, then should the question be set
down, and himself would for breuities sake frame the answer, about which
there was diverse times some alteration about words, which the prisoner used
not, but was often contented to let F. Parsons have his will, when the words
were such as he knew he could interpret to good sense, notwithstanding his
examinators false intention, hoping always, that he should have so much
favor, when the matter should grow to an issue. And although that neither all
the examination was ever taken, nor that which was taken, let to stand as it
was taken, but somewhat was blotted out (as is said) and many answers out off,
under pretense sometime of brevity, sometime that there should be another
Interrogatory, to which such an answer would be more fit: the prisoners
subscribed, and swear, but to what? Not that there was al which was asked, or
answered, nor that F. Parsons had not dealt in this kind, but that those
answers which were there made, were truly and sincerely given, which makes
nothing to the clearing of F. Parsons, or the proouing of his honest dealing.
And now you shall hear, what matters this author has picked out of their
examinations, and thereby perceive, what this good fellow would say.

First then, to talk of substantial points (says this author) the
examination of M. Charnocke beginning the 4. of January, and that of M. Bishop
the 10. of January 1599, and passing over all other demands, which these men
call impertinent, they were asked, what was the cause and reason of their
coming to Rome: who sent them, etc. To this M. Charnocke being first examined,
answered in these words: Causa aduentus nostri haec fuit, vt rogaremus
humillime, etc. The cause of our coming to Rome was this, that we might
beseech most humbly, and with all obedience the Sea Apostolic, that this
order appointed by Card. Caietan (for composing controversies in England, and
to make peace) not being hitherto confirmed by his Holiness (as we understood
it is said by diverse priests, and namely Fa. Sicklemore, and others) might be
mitigated or changed, or some other order appointed with it for satisfaction of
very many priests, who do think (reserving notwithstanding due honor to the
Sea Apostolic) that by this way appointed only, the strises begun cannot so
well be ended, etc. But if it should please his Holiness to confirm this
authority, and to admit no other, then are these priests content to yield all
obedience, etc. and as for the Superior appointed, ^ spoke with the Archpriest
before I came forth, and desired him not to be offended with me, if I went to
Rome about this matter, and he gave me leave to go to deal for the change
thereof. Thus far the Apology, by which it may appear, what cause there was
of the Priests so long trouble in Rome, their apprehension by Jesuits, and
Sbirri, upon the feast of S. Tho. of Canterbury, the most principal feast of
any particular in all our country, their keeping so close by the Jesuits, as
they might not go out of their several prisons, to hear mass upon some of
the most principal feasts in Gods Church; their being debarred to speak, not
only one of them with the other, but also with any, to ask council (except
the Jesuits,) their being debarred to come to the altar otherwise then lay men,
until the 7. or 8. of February, notwithstanding they had by virtue of a Iubile
received absolution, by the same Jesuits from all censures, which it was
supposed that either they had, or might have incurred by this journey to Rome,
their continuance in close prison, until the 8. of April (notwithstanding they
had so discharged themselves before the two Card. Caietan and Burghesius, upon
the 17. of February in the English College, as both they themselves and the
whole College were told, that they should within two or three days after,
have their liberty) their being afterward (although somewhat more easily)
imprisoned, the one until the 22. of April, the other until the 6. of May:
their being banished their country, and confined the one to France, the other
to Lorayne, without any one penny, or pennyworth allowed them, for their
maintenance in those places.

By this also it may appear, how injuriously they were accused of schism,
etc. and with what wickedness this matter was prosecuted in England against
them. but to this deposition, what says this author? Thus he said (says he)
which how true or probable, or coherent it is to that, which since they have
said, done, and set forth in their books, I will leave to the reader to judge:
and all the readers could never as yet find any particular, more then this
author does, in which they have been contrary thereto: but how does this
answer suite with the rest of this Apology, which refers the reader to the
priests their books, to see what he would have them understand, and yet has
he taken such order, as no man must read them?

The principal matters being then answered by this author in this manner, that
the Reader may see, where he is forbidden to look, he will answer to one
point, or two in M. Charnocks deposition. The one is where he said, that the
Archpriest gave him leave to go, which (says he) the Archpriest denies, for
that he saw no just cause. M. Charnocke affirms it, and can put the
Archpriest in mind thereof, and of the cause that moved him thereto: to wit,
when M. Charnocke told him, that the matter concerning himself in that kind,
it were a necessary point of modesty, to give leave: upon which he was bidden
to go, if he would; Neither does the Archpriest his answer to M. Bishop here
cited, make any thing against this. For there passed some months between, in
which space he might alter his mind by the advice of his privy Counsel. Yet
this much is here affirmed by M. Bishop under his oath, that he did not
prohibit him: which is an argument, that it was not a thing impossible for
him, to bid M Charnocke go, although no doubt he had rather they should both
have stayed at home.

The second point is, that M. Charnocke said: Quam plures sacerdotes, Very many
priests were not satisfied with his Holiness order. Where did M. Charnocke
affirm this? Is it not possible for this fellow to deal truly in any one
thing? Has not M Charnocke expressly called it An order appointed by the
Cardinal Caietane, and must we now have a trick to cosen the Reader, and
make him believe that M. Charnocke should say, that very many priests were not
satisfied with his Holiness order? But let us see how like he is still unto
himself; which speech of very many priests (says he) he does explicate
afterward, what number it might import in particular, being pressed thereunto
by an Interrogatorie in these words, Interrogatus, etc. Being asked, what the
number of priests now in England seemed unto him, he answered, that he could
not tell for certain: but he thought 300. more or less. Then being asked,
how many of these he did certainly know to approve this their missio^, and to
be privy to the matters that should be proposed, and would stand to those
things, that these two should handle, and conclude in their names: He answered,
I do know for certain 14. or 15, albeit I have not had conference with them
all my self. Thus far the Apology.

How feign would he play at some game, who stretches his point thus far? M.
Charnocke used these words, Very many priests, and M. Charnocke declared what
he said to be true, by auouching the letters, which he brought with him:
whereof some did testify, that the priests thereabouts residing were of such
mind; other residing in other places, witnessed as much of the priests who
passed by them. M. Bishop remaining in a third place, could testisie for the
priests which were near unto him: and himself remaining in a 4. place, could
say somewhat concerning them that were there resident. And thus was it
explicated, how he said, Quam plures sacerdotes, very many priests. But now
note, how this author would patch up some matter. F. Parsons not being content
with this answer, urged M Charnocke as it is here confessed; how many he did
certainly know to approve this their mission. To which M Charnocke (as I
understand) made this answer: that he would not depose upon any certainty for
more then those, with whom he had talked, or had some particular message, or
notice from them, which were to such a number. And this is that mystery
unfolded, even by the Apology it self, how that very many might be said to be
of such, or such disposition, and yet but few to be named, for whom, upon
certain and proper knowledge, a man may depose; as the question is here
confessed to have been asked. And in the same sense is M. Bishops answer here
also acknowledged in these words, Puto me certe scire plus minus 12. I do
think, that I know for certain 12. priests more or less to be of our opinion
and privy to these matters. And besides this changing of the case to a
certain knowledge, it is otherwise also altered. For the question was not
only for, how many do you certainly know? but for some particulers, which
perchance were not necessary for all to talk upon, who notwithstanding might
give their full confent to have matters altered from that they now were: and
reposed a trust, as well in the messengers, as others who were privy to all the
circumstances. So that notwithstanding this oath that 14. or 15. were thus
far forward in the action, there might be the better part of the 300. who
were said not to be satisfied with this order (most falsely and fraudulently
suggested here, to have been known to be his Holiness order) appointed by
Cardinal Caietan, as M. Charnockes words are a little before acknowledged fol.
129. But yet there is an other proof of the small number of contradictors: and
what is that? Mary sir, M. Charnocke confessed that the first to his knowledge,
who^ the Archpr. called to confer his new authority withal, was M.
Collington and himself, which answer is here both falfly and fraudulently
said to have been made to this interrogatory, who were the first beginners,
abetters, and setters on in this contradiction against the Cardinals letters.
It is very true that F. Parsons would sometimes use these words: and the bauble
that every one of the blind obedient are still playing withal, the faction.
But against these did M. Charnocke always except: and F. Parsons was to change
his lewd terms before answer would be made. But how does this prove any
thing to this authors purpose? Would he have his Reader to think, that a
matter first proposed privately at the courtesy of the proposer (for his
letters were to him in private, and not to the priests) to such as he should
pick out for his purpose (suppose it were the most wicked thing that could be
devised) should displease, or could be contradicted by more, then were called,
or sooner then by the first that heard it? The marginall note I take as his
cognizance to know him, and his fellows: The first beginners (says he in the
margent) of this sedition M. Collington, and M. Charnocke by his own
confession. He might better have made this note in the margent, The first
finders out of this most wicked, and seditious plot of the Jesuits, M.
Collington, etc. They (as is said) were first called, and in post haste they
were sent for, and M. Heburne to give their liking. And we (says the Apology
repeating M Charnocks answer) having read the Card. Protectors letters, began
to doubt not so much of the authority it self (that is, that the Cardinal
had appointed such a thing: for so does this Apology confess fol 129. that
M. Charnocke acknowledged this order, to have been appointed by Card. Caietane,
neither do M. Charnocke his letters of the 20 of February cited, and abused by
these fellows, prove that after he thought any other, then that it was the
Cardinals doing: Notwithstanding that the Jesuits labored to have him write,
that it was the Popes order, and would sometime make bold with this, where the
law was in their own hands) as of the good manner of procuring it. They
perceived that it was got by surreptio^, which is a sufficient cause to except
against it: whereby also it may appear, how ignorantly this fellow cumbreth his
marge^t, where he has made this note, Ergo not doubting you are bound to obey.
For first M. Charn. does not say, that they had no doubt of the authority it
self, but that they doubted not so much of the authority it self, as of the
good manner of procuring it. For they saw it evidently, that it was an
ordinance of the Cardinal under his hand and seal, though in a private letter
to M. Blackwell, and his words were plain: Dum haec nostra ordinatio
durauerit: so long as this ordinance shall endure. Yet knowing how this
Cardinal was carried in our English affairs by the Jesuits, it was neither
felony nor treason, to think he might stretch himself to pleasure them. And
if the matters had been handled with any indifferency, doubtless neither these
two, nor any other would ever have called the matter in question: but there
being a notorious partiality descryed in this order, and such as might be the
overthrow of our afflicted Church in England, the Priests had reason to make
some stop at the first discovery thereof, as justly they might have done,
although they had not doubted at al, but that it was ordained by his Holiness
appointment, or by his Holiness letters, there being sufficient cause to
persuade them, that it was gotten by surreption, which does vitiate or make
void his Holiness letters: as M. Collington proves evidently in his first
reason: and consequently the priests were not bound to obey it: and the less
for that they prepared themselves to go to Rome to deal with his Holiness
thereabout; and in such manner as is set down and acknowledged in this
Apology fol. 129. out of M. Charnockes examination. And the partiality which
was urged by M. Charnocke, as justly feared by M. Blackwell, is declared every
where by the priests to be this: that the Jesuits who were the chief head of
sedition and faction in England against the priests, were now become their
judges and executioners in the shape of a Secular priest, and no way subject to
any order, which was pretended to have been taken for peace between them and
the priests: and these to their judgments seemed serious and grave causes, not
to yield themselves at the beginning: which their not yielding this author
terms an opposition. Here we see (says he) how serious and grave the causes
were of this opposition at the beginning: and how at the first they did not
doubt of the authority it self, nor of the Popes will therein, as after they
have pretended. Where is this seen? or where is any mention of any such
persuasion, that the Popes will was known therein, or that the priests did not
doubt thereof? This fellow must needs borrow leave now and then to play with
his blind obedient, and make them believe that they do see that, which
himself does not, nor can see: for in this answer of M. Charnocke, there is
nothing concerning the Pope, but only the Cardinal Protectors letters, by
which the authority was instituted by him, and might have been thought to have
been authentically done (if he had any Commission from his Holiness) or not
authentically done (if he had none) so that no Commission appearing, the
priests might justly doubt thereof, although not so much as of the other, to
wit, the manner of procuring it, which they might perceive was by surreption.
And for this cause M. Charnocke said not, that they doubted not at all at the
first of the authority it self, nor of the Popes will therein, as this author
does most falsely suggest, but this only, we having read the Cardinals
Protectors letters began to doubt, not so much of the authority it self, as of
the good manner of procuring it, as in the same page this author himself
sets down M. Charnockes answer. But yet note another slippery part of this
fellow. He cites M. Charnockes answer concerning what was done the first day,
that the authority was made known unto them, in which you see how he abuses
his Reader, in proouing thereby the smalnesse of the number of the priests. But
he cease not here: for he concludes in this manner, We see also, that the
Priests could not be many, nor of great account, that resolved this embassage
to Rome. And good sir, how do you see this? Forsooth M. Charnocke said, that
the chief priests that dealt with him and M. Bishop, were M. Collington, M.
Cope, M Johnson, M. Monford, and others; and could not many be included in that
word others, nor men of great account? if these that were named, were of no
great account, were not this apparently an odious manner of writing? I could
retort the phrase, and show that some of these that are named, and others not
named yet, comprehended in this word others, were such as for their merit, and
labors in Gods Church can hardly be matched by all the faction which is
against them: but we will leave this fellow tumbling in his own dirt, and
pleasing himself in his folly, howsoever he displeases men of judgment, who
have often difficulties, whether they may better lament him (who by this
continuance therein gives an earnest penny, that others lamentations will
nothing profit him) or laugh at him (whose folly is without measure, and still
proceeds from folly to folly.) But now that he has properly let his Reader
see that they could not be many nor of great account, that resolved of the
embassage to Rome, he will prove, that the mission and commission was not
authentical, because M. Bishop, who was one of them that were sent, affirmed
that he did not know, who was the first author of this mission, nor why they
two were chosen above the rest for this mission: As though a matter might not
be as lawfully taken in hand by one, who knows not who first did motion it,
or why he was requested to it, rather then another, as by one who knows both
the first motioner, and why he was employed, yet his Reader must hereby
perceive, what authentical mission, and commission it was, and yet is there
much bad dealing in the relation of M. Bishops answer, as appears in a
treatise joined to M.D. Ely his notes upon the Apology, fol. 13 But yet
further (says he) to say a word or two of the very chief point of their
commission, and cause of coming to Rome, you have heard, that M. Charnocke
says, and swears before, that their only coming was to supplicate most
humbly to the sea Apostolic, etc. he has made his blind reader believe, that
he has seen, and perceived; now his Reader must in like sort believe, that
he has heard; what? M. Charnocke say and swear that their only coming was
to supplicate, etc. if his readers memory will serve him so far, as to
remember what he has lately read, concerning this point, or turn back some
two or three leaves, he shall find this word only foysted in by this author,
to make his Reader believe in the next page, fol. 133 that M Bishop and M.
Charnocke did scarce seem agreed in the causes of their coming to Rome.

After this boldness, to abuse his reader for his purpose, he says a word or
two of the very chief point of their Commission and cause of coming to Rome,
which he thus abridgeth, to supplicate most humbly to the Sea Apostolic, that
if the foresaid order of the Archpriests authority, were not yet confirmed by
his Holiness, as they had heard Fa. Sicklemore, and some others had reported,
that then the same might be either mitigated, or changed, or some other order
appointed together with it. Thus has he laid down the priests their plain
song; now mark what descant he has made thereon: so as now (says he) our
brethren seemed not to doubt of the truth or value of the Cardinals letters,
nor were not yet grown to be so bold, as to affirm that his Holiness could not
do it without their consents, except he violated the Canons; nor that it was
aforreine Jurisdiction subject to treason, and Praemunire, if it were
acknowledged: and other such like devises.

Our brethren never grew to any such boldness (as he terms it) as to affirm
any thing of Treason, or Praemunire, but only showed, that they had just cause
to forbear to admit the authority, both in regard that by the opinions of
diverse men of Judgment in the laws of our country, this our case may and
will be drawn within the Compase of an old law, etc. viz. the law of
Praemunire, as it is set down in the English book page 6. where also is
showed, that by the accepting hereof the priests might be taken, for to comply
with the chief authors thereof in all such state matters, as were practiced by
them. And these were rather causes for them, why they were not over hasty to
admit of this authority, then arguments urged against it: And yet neither of
these causes have or can be proved insufficient. And for more proof, that
these causes were not given in any other sort, the priests did submit
themselves, when they did see his Holiness letters in confirmation thereof.
But now let us hear the first part of this man's descant. So as now (says he)
our brethren seemed not to doubt of the truth, or value of the Cardinals
letters, nor were not yet grown to be so bold, as to affirm, that his
Holiness could not do it without their consents, except he violated the
canons. How does this fellow upon M. Charnockes answer gather this? If there
were no doubt of the truth, and value of the Cardinals letters, why is it here
said, that M. Charnocke put this doubt, if the foresaid order of the
Archpriests authority were not yet confirmed by his Holiness? Did this speech
imply a doubt or no? if it did, how boldly does this fellow descant upon a
doubt, and say that it was no doubt? if it did not imply a doubt, let him tell
us, how a man may more properly make a doubt, then by this word if? Perchance
he may mean, that the priests did not doubt, but that those letters were the
Cardinals letters, and then he says well: but he does not descant right: for
the question was, whether that the Card. letters had received any force by his
Hol. confirmation, as may appear by that, which is here by himself set down:
and whereas he says, that the priests were not so bold, as to affirm at
that time, that his Holiness could not do it without their consents, except
he violated the canons, the priests were bold to affirm (with humility, and
reverence to the Sea Apostolic) as much. But how does he prove, that they
were not yet grown to that boldness? Forsooth because no such matter was set
down in this point of M. Charnocks answer; as though every thing must of
necessity be set down, which the priests had to say, or could say* but this
is perchance an idle shift and now devised by the priests, and coined for the
purpose: Listen then to that, which is set down by this author in the Epistle
to his Holiness past the middle thereof: Yet a few not the twentieth part of
our English Clergy, and presumed to impugn the same, (the Subordination)
calling first in question the said Cardinals letters, their truth, faith, and
integrity, the indifferency of his person in judgment, and affection. Then
also your Holiness meaning, yea your authority it self, whether you could do
it without them or no, (the canons of Holy Church observed) with other like
unseemly oppositions for prosecution whereof they sent two of their company to
Rome. But this was forgotten when the author of the Apology came to this
Chapter. Furthermore it was objected against the two priests at Rome, that they
had there given out, that they doubted whether his Holiness could appoint them
a Superior without their priuitie and consent (observing the laws of holy
Church) as may appear by the libell Master Doctor Haddocke, and Master Martine
Array delivered up to his Holiness (as was said) 10. January 1599: for there in
the second Article are these words: Ipsi vero nihil credere, nec acquiescere,
sed haesitare ad omnia, non admittere authoritatem, vocare in dubium an vera
essent, quae literis illis continebantur; Sanctissimi iussu hanc esse
constitutam, and si verum id erat, dubitare tamen, an pontifex facere possit,
vt ipsis inconsultis, ac inuitis, superiorem ijs co^stituerit, quod postea
etiam quum Romam appulerunt dicere, ac saepius etiam repetere non sunt veriti,
vt per testes idoneos probare possumus. That is, but they (speaking of M
Collington and M. Charnocke) when the Archpriest first sent for them, would
believe nothing nor obey, but did stick at all things: they would not admit
the authority: they called it in doubt, whether those things were true, which
were contained in these letters (of the Cardinals) namely, that the authority
was constituted by his Hol. commandment: and if it were so, yet they doubted,
whether his Hol. could appoint them a Superior, unwitting, and unwilling
thereto: which afterward they feared not to say, when they came to Rome, yea
and repeated it often, as we can prove by convenient witnesses. And yet would
this fellow persuade his reader, that the priests did first contradict, or
oppose themselves against the authority, and then afterward find some reasons
for it, yea after the two priests were gone to Rome, notwithstanding these
plain testimonies of his own, that the priests had these difficulties at the
beginning. But perchance M. Charnockes answer put all these things out of his
memory: and non putarat, he thought not upon it. How so? Forsooth M. Charnocke
said, that the cause of his coming was to supplicate most humbly to the Sea
Apostolic, that if the aforesaid order of the Archpriests authority were not
yet confirmed by his Holiness, as they had heard that Fa. Sicklemore, and some
other had reported, that then the same might be either mitigated, or changed,
or some other order appointed with it, thus he collecteth M. Charnocks answer:
and thereupon comes with a, so as now our brethren seemed not to doubt etc.
nor were yet grown to be so bold, as to affirm that his holiness could not
do it without their consents, except he violated the canons, etc. The humble
spirit of the priests (who having many and most just causes to deal in other
manner then by way of supplication) being measured by his own proud humor of
wrangling where he had no just cause, brought him into this error. Next follow
the reasons or causes, which moved M. Bishop to come to Rome, which were six,
and he here sets them down, and proves that he, and M. Charnocke did
scarce seem to agree in the causes of their coming. And how so? Forsooth M.
Charnocke said, and swear, that his only coming was to supplicate etc fol
132. But whosoever will turn to M. Charnocks oath set down fol 129. shall find
this iugler, and how that this word only is here foisted in by him for this
purpose.

And so much (says he) of this, for that it were ouerlong to run over all
points (and not find one for his purpose, without a little of his art, which
will serve him no longer, then until it comes into the air; for then all
this painting and false colors will easily be descried, and himself worthily
laughed at, for his so gross counterfeiting:) yet this in brief they affirmed
both of them, that as for the Archpriest, they brought nothing lawfully proved
against him, either in learning, life, or manners: and the like they affirmed
of the Jesuits. An evident argument even to F. Parsons and the rest, that they
went to Rome, to deal in peaceable manner with his Holiness concerning these
matters; being able to bring more matters under the hands of sufficient
witnesses, then the Archpriest will be ever able to answer, and which in any
court of Justice would have hindered his confirmation. But this author sets
down his matters somewhat warily: the priests brought nothing against the
Archpr. lawfully proved (as for the Jesuits, let any indifferent man judge,
whether the priests were in place to have meddled with them further, then that
the Jesuits were their Iaylours) somewhat belike they could have said, but they
brought nothing lawfully proved: M. Bishop (says he) said he heard his fellow
Rob. say, that M. Collington and himself had heard the Archpriest utter an
heretical proposition: which was, that they could not appeal from him to
Rome. They both affirm, that he stood very peremptorily in it, after that he
was warned thereof: and if M. Bishop did affirm, that this proposition was
heretical, or the author of the Apology do think so of it himself, I
wonder that M. Bishops fellow Rob. was not asked the question, his examination
not being ended in some 6. or 7. days after that M. Bishop was dispatched, as
appears here, fol. 134. and this is one special matter which this author
choose out of many, over which it had been ouerlong to run over. Will ye
hear another in brief, as he says? M. Charnocke being asked, what money
they had, made answer, for 30. crowns more then M. Bishop took notice of:
which perchance this author here inserted, that his reader might give credit to
M. Bishop, when he said, as is extant in the English book, pa. 171. The
examinations were: what is your name: how old: where remained you in England:
how and which way came you over: what money brought you over with you, etc. and
much such like impertinent stuff to fill up the papers, that when we came to
the matter it self, they might be brief, taking barely what we came about,
without the reasons and persuasions of it: yea obiecting against it, and
perverting it what they could.

The third principal point which (notwithstanding the have) was in no case to
be ouerslipped, but rather run over, is a disagreement between M. Bishop and
M. Charnocke about one point of their commission. And thus forgetting how he
had before foisted in this word only to make a disagreement between them, in
that the one should say, that their only coming was to supplicate, etc. fol
132. and the other allege six causes of his coming: Now he is contented,
that M. Charnocke should say, that he had diverse points in commission: and how
comes this kindness over him? forsooth he would feign find another
disagreement betwixt M. Bishop and M. Charnocke, and for this purpose, he must
entreat his reader to forget, that he had before made him believe, how that he
had heard, that M. Charnocke said and swear, that their only coming was to
supplicate, etc. and now that it will please him to understand, that Master
Charnocke said, that he had in commission amongst other points for to procure,
that no books should be hereafter written by Catholics, that might exasperate
the state of England: M. Bishop said, that he liked not that commission, but
rather it should be left as hitherto, to the discretion of the writers: adding
further, that in his opinion such books, as before had been written, had
rather done good then hurt. M. Doctor Ely has noted upon the Apology, that
the author thereof is much troubled with the chincough: which in his relating
this point, may be very easily seen, by his leaving out of certain words at
the end of the point, avouched by M. Charnocke to have been in his commission.
The words are these, sine necessitate aut vtilitate: without need or profit:
which words being added unto the point (as he calls it in M. Charnocks
commission, or the petition of the priests, as they termed it) makes the
matter so just a request, as no man of sense can dislike thereof. But the very
thing indeed which troubled this author was, that F. Parsons urging very much
to know, whether that the book of succession were not one of these, which were
within the compass of this petition, was told directly by M. Charnocke, that
it was, and thereupon grew a little alteration between them (to fill up the
papers perchance, as M. Bishop says) and as for M. Do. Bishop it is so
plainly set down what he answered concerning this book of succession, or
titles, in the answer for M. Doct. Bishop, fol. 16. (which answer is annexed
to M. Doct. Ely his notes upon the Apology) that I cannot but wonder at this
fellows greediness to forge matters, to make some show at the least, that M.
Doctor Bishop and M. Charnocke disagreed. For first, M. Doct. Bishop was not
asked any question concerning this point, as there it is affirmed, but had some
private talk concerning the books of titles. And the effect of his answer
is, that the book is so penned, as that while many by warrant thereof may
justly strive for the crown, a stranger may come in, and take it from them
all: and how this agrees to that which the Apology says, of a difference
betwixt Master D. Bishop and M. Charnocke, an indifferent reader will quickly
judge.

Now follows a contemptible repetition of tickets and scrolles, the least
whereof was bigger, then any by which this subordination was requested (unless
we should say, as the author of the Apology would persuade us, cap. 8 fol.
98. and 104. that the 7. of March endured at Rome until many months passed in
other countries) and many of them were directed to his Holiness as humble
supplications, to which according to the old fashion men did not use to set any
seal, but their names only: and so were these subscribed in the best manner,
that the writers could, and the papers were of purpose so small, for the better
conueyance of them, if the bearers should have chanced to have been searched
(as this authors wit might have taught him) and not only the names were to the
petitions, but the matters which were demanded: by which these foolish doubts
here made, are easily solued: what manner of commission these men had, or could
have? from whom? by what means? for what matters? and whether they in England
would stand to all points which these men here should conclude in their
behalf? and whether these men's authority were general, or limited? For by
these letters it was seen, that they had such commission as many could give,
where there was no one in authority; the Archpriest not being as yet
confirmed, nor (if he had any) likely to have given any commission to any,
whom he should imagine liked not of such his preferment. It was also seen,
from whom they had the commission, for that the priests names were to their
petitions. The means likewise were fair, without threatenings of execution and
such like, as were used to make the priests subscribe to the Archpriest. The
matters also were specified in their petitions, and the priests in England
committing their matters to these two, there needed no great doubt to have been
made, whether they would have stood to that, to which they had agreed in that
behalf, as they did, when (receiving the Breue signed by their two hands, of
which otherwise perchance there might have been some doubt, unless the
original had been sent) they all submitted themselves. It was also evident by
the points set down in particular, what they had to deal in, in the names of
the rest, although they were not thereby debarred any way, to deal as they saw
cause, or had hope to effect any good for their country. So that his endless
folly might have been left out, where he concludes finally that the priests
did only agree in contradicting, and pulling down, but nothing that was
probable or facible for setting up, and so their examinations were ended etc. A
very good conclusion, and well deducted out of his principles.

All this being done (says he) and the whole process considered, and weighed
well by the Cardinals, and after related to his Holiness: it was resolved, that
the said Cardinals, with his Holiness Commissary Acarisius, should go to the
College themselves, and to see whether they had any thing else to say, or
write. Who does not now prepare himself to hear some matter to some purpose?
For all which hitherto has been touched in the Apology, seem to be but
praeludia, or an entrance to this act. Here was it to be tried how justly, or
iniustly the priests had done, and to be showed, how worthily they had been
imprisoned with infamy, kept close so long, debarred al help, one of the
other. Here was the proper place for this author to have answered the English
book, which was one of the two for which this Apology was written (this
appearance of the two priests before the Cardinals being set down so
particularly in the English book entitled The copies of the discourses page 95
96. 97. 98.) But alack the good man had not what to say, but that which would
have cleared the priests, nor was able to control any part of the narration,
which is made in the places cited, but turns off his reader with certain
general terms, to which he first disposes him with as idle discourses, First
taking occasion to exclaim upon D Bagshaw, for that he thought it requisite,
that the Archpresbytership should be recalled, as being neither requested by
us, nor any way profitable: and that some Hierarchy were instituted, which
were to be approved by the free suffrages of the priests only of the
Seminaries. And for this this author exclameth, Lo what a resolute lawmaker
here is, who recalleth the Popes Subordinations in a word, and sets up
another of his own making with as great facility. Lo what a resolute
ly-maker here is, who affirms that which is most false, and can no way follow
of the doctors words. For the Archpresbytership was not the Popes
Subordination, but the Cardinals, as then it was manifest by the Cardinals
letters, where he said, Dum haec nostra ordinatio durauerit, so long as this
our ordinance shall endure. Neither does the Cardinal in any place of those
letters affirm (as this resolute ly-maker does often inculcate in this
Apology) that he did it expresso mandato Sanctissimi, By express commandment
of his Holiness. Neither does the doctor recall it, but signify unto such as
were going to Rome, what his and others opinion was of the unprofitableness
thereof. And being thrust upon them unasked, that it was to be recalled by his
Holiness, in whom the author (as I trow) will acknowledge a power to do as much
as this was.

Lo likewise what a resolute lye-maker here is, who affirms that the doctor
sets up another Subordination of his own making with as great facility,
whereas the doctor writes in the same kind to have some other by his Holiness
appointment, of which he desires not, that himself should be the setter up,
but the priests whom it shall concern, which was according both to the Cannons
of holy Church, and his Holiness meaning, as diverse priests can witness, the Pope
having always borne that special favor unto the priests. But what else was
discovered in those papers of the doctors? Forsooth the changing of the
government of the Seminartes, especially that in Rome, yea the change of the
Protector himself. Very true, For that the unquietness which the Jesuits made
in Rome among the students, was a great cause of the unquietness here in
England; And seeing that there was no hope of any quiet so long as the Jesuits
had the government, what evil request was it to have them removed thence?
Neither was the request of the doctor, and some others joined with him, for the
change of the Protector absolutely: but that there might be some other, or some
joined with him in regard he was known to be one, who in the Jesuits quarrels
took part always very partially with them against the students, and the
students appeal from him, or their declining from his judgment had been in
former times admitted by his Holiness, who now is.

And further it was ^uered by the same papers (says he) and other letters out
of England, that they had particular designments, to make themselves Bishops
and Archbishops. And how was this discovered, or what proof has this author
of this? whereupon (says he) in some letters it was written, To your LL. This
is all the proof, that those to whom this letter was written, had particular
designments to make themselves Bishops and Archbishops. If one should write to
Rome to Fa. Parsons, and direct his letter in this manner, To your Grace: of
what could F. Parsons be convinced, others so writing unto him? But Fa. Parsons
in his letter of the 9. of October 1599. to M. Bishop, making mention of this
jest, is answered in the English book, page 127. and is told, that M.
Charnocke hearing thereof at Rome, did there challenge it as a feigned matter.
And there it is showed at large, in what sort it might be forged. And this
Apology being made to answer that English book, lets all that discourse
go quietly: the author having taken good order that his lewdness should not
be known among these blind-obedient: and has the less shame to iterate any
falsehood without disproouing that which has been before directly said against
it. And a particular discourse being diuulged at this time, under the
handwriting of one of their chief followers named M. Watson, was sent to Rome,
whilst these men were there: Whereunto was subscribed by another in these
words, Sic sentio W.B. By this discourse also this author would prove, that
the priests that went to Rome, went with hope of reward: to wit, to be made
Primats themselves; and to make other Bishops of their partners at their
return: yea notwithstanding their oath which they took, that they never heard
of any discourse, this author emboldeneth himself to burden them with it, or
at the least with the knowledge thereof. For such are his words, though these
messengers in Rome would not seem to acknowledge it, Fa. Parsons told M.
Bishop that such a letter he had, and requested to know, whether it were not
his name, that was subscribed in this manner, Sic sentio G.B. not W.B. as here
is most falsely suggested, perchance to take away the suspicion from such as
were the authors thereof for the disgrace of M. Bishop, and M. Charnocke (as M.
Bishop touches it in his answer to Fa. Parsons, set down in the English
book, page 159) To which demand of Fa. Parsons, M. Bishop made answer, that
it was not his name: and that he never had heard of the discourse before.
Moreover, he said that those letters might stand for Geor. Blackwellus, as
well as Guliel. Bishop. By which it is evident, that this author deals
falsely in setting down the letters W.B. For who is so foolish, as to think,
that M. Bishop would plead, that George was spelled with W? This is also
particularly set down in the answer made in the behalf of M. Bishop, which
is annexed unto M. D. Ely his notes upon the Apology fol. 17. where also it is
affirmed that D. Bishops answer for M. Watson was far otherwise, then this
author pretends: and is therefore challenged to have no tender conscience in
this dealing. But (as it seems) this author intended to disgrace M. Watson
all that he could: and at the first discrediteth himself in obiecting, that M.
Watson was a servant in the English College at Rhemes, as though that were so
great a blot (many most worthy men having been of as mean, or meaner
condition.) And this being truly considered, makes more for M. Watsons
commendation, that he would live in so mean estate out of his country for the
cause he did. And if this common wealth, here by a foolish digression inserted,
(being a matter as Fa. Parsons took upon his conscience before the Cardinals,
to which the two priests were never privy) were of M Watsons making, as he does
utterly deny it: as also that either he sent any such to Rome, or was privy
to the sending thereof, but rather thinks, as others also, that it was sent
by the contrary part to Fa. Parsons for some policy: yet he had not been more
idly occupied, then was the plotcaster of Reformation, the absurdities whereof,
were they yet perchance after so many alterations laid down, would far
surpass these of this common wealth, which is attributed to M. Watson.

This digression being made, and more seriously handled then any material
point in this controversy, this author falls again into the Cardinals
coming to the College, together with the Comissary. And to proceed (says he)
more substantially they heard first the aforesaid depositions read, (that is to
say some part of them, as is noted in the English book, pa. 95) as also the
procurators of the Archpriest, what they could say or demand, who bringing
forth the foresaid letters of the most grave of our Nation (that is to say,
the letters of D. Barret, subscribed by D Web, D. Worthington, and D.
Kellyson: and also the letters of M. Wright, the Deane of Cortrac: all which,
and only these were inserted into a Libell, which these Proctors for the
Archpriest put up to the two Cardinals against M. Bishop, and M. Charnocke)
against this new sedition begun, made supplication that some effectual remedy
might be put thereunto. Very well, good sir, thus much is confessed in the
English book, page 96. that M D. Haddocke, and M. Martin Array delivered up in
a dumb show a Libell, or bill of complaints, or accusations against M. Bishop
and M. Charnocke. But what answer made those priests unto that bill? The
messengers also were heard what they could say, or answer. But now in a little
honesty what said they? or what answer did they make to these matters? Is it
not possible, that any thing did pass worth the relating? was all this
preparation fetched from John of Gaunt for no greater satisfaction, then to
say, when it comes to the chief point: that the messengers were heard, what
they could say, or answer? If there has been found so much waste paper in
this Apology, for to entertain by-tales, and nothing to the purpose, could
there not be some spared, for the setting down of so necessary a point, as
this is, and such as was most likely to have benefited a just cause, more then
twenty tales of John of Gaunt? would not a discourse of what passed between
the Cardinals, and the two priests with the Proctors, have been more grateful
to the reader, after that the Cardinals coming to the College was mentioned,
then a relation of M. Watsons common wealth? In the English book to which this
Apology pretends to answer, it is set down page 97 and 98. that the
messengers were not heard, what they could say or answer, and it is not set
down in general terms, but particularly, in what sort they were not admitted,
to say what they would, or to answer: to wit, that the Libell being read, the
priests requested, that the Proctors might be put to their oaths, that no
falsehood was contained therein: and the Cardinal Caietane answered for the
Proctors himself, that it was not needful, and furthermore affirming (for the
poor dumb men who as yet had not discovered themselves, whether they could
speak or no) that they should prove what was denied: the whole Libel was
denied, and a copy thereof demanded, that answer might be made unto it. This
was it that the messengers did say, and the Jesuits gave this for one cause
afterward, why the two priests were not set at liberty the same day, that M.
Bishop had showed too much earnestness in this very point, for which he was to
be kept close some two or three days more, and M. Charnocke likewise: but yet
for no other cause, then that it was not convenient, that he should be at
liberty, until the other had satisfied by a longer imprisonment, for his
quickness of spirit, in demanding the Libell to answer it. But the Proctors
having before their lesson, what they were to say, or do, as it should seem,
the one of them stepped presently (without making his fellow acquainted
therewith at that instant) between M. Bishop, and the table, whereat the
Cardinal sat: and made humble request, that the copy of this libell might
not be delivered unto the priests, but rather that a peaceable conclusion
might be made. Of which the Cardinal taking present hold pursued that motion,
and would not deliver the Libell to the two messengers (whereby it is evident,
that this author follows his old trade in this place, where he affirms,
that the two messengers also were heard, what they could say, or answer) but
showed a good face to the priests, and used them so friendly as they expected
not to return to their prisons, especially being cleared from all matters by
the Cardinals, excepting this only, that many were scandalized in England at
their journey to Rome: which was a thing, that they could not help, nor were
justly to be blamed therefore: yet notwithstanding thinking it fit, to keep
the Cardinal in that good and friendly humor, the two priests made this
answer: that if by their journey to Rome, they had given cause of scandal to
any, they were very fory for it, and were ready to give satisfaction, and so
were dismissed, and all was well until the Cardinal Burghese was departed.
But soon after his departure, the Jesuit, who for this time had supplied F.
Parsons (the head Iaylors) place, locked them up again in their several
prisons, but for two or three days, as was pretended upon the foresaid cause:
and for that M. Bishop by his silence when he was bidden to speak, after his
examination read, did discontent the Card. somewhat. This author having told
his reader of the coming of the Cardinals to the College, and of the Proctors
demand of remedy against the new sedition: also how that the messengers were
heard say what they could (which as it is said is most false) he concludes
this matter as if some great act had been made, and the Proctors had had some
great day against the Priests. And finally (says he) after diverse grave
speeches used by the Cardinals against this division in our nation, they
departed, promising (perchance to F. Parsons) to relate all unto his Holiness,
and to take his resolution for the final sentence, which they sent afterward
sealed and signed by their own hands, and several seals, bearing date the S.
of April 1599. (upon which day in the morning the two priests their close
imprisonment first ceased) In which sentence for that diverse things were
inserted in the narration, which might seem gricuous, (which were perchance
according to F. Parsons informations, but not to be known abroad, lest his
doings should have been known) and the decree it self, which is yet extant to be
seen, appeared somewhat severe, (against men who were not suffered to make
their answer) Fa. Parsons as we understand (to the perpetual discredit of
the Cardinals (howsoever the infamy would have been wiped away from his
Holiness, if it were true which here is said, that the Cardinals took his
Holiness resolution for this final sentence) procured the said sentence to be
detained, until he had entreated the said Cardinals, to mitigate somewhat
that sentence, and to give another more mild of the 21. of the same month, not
so much by way of Judicial sentence, as of a letter (to wit, to the Rector, or
Vicerector of the English college, F. Parsons or the minister) under their
hands and seals, appointing that the said two messengers should return the
one to Paris, and the other to Loraine, as they had requested. (They both had
requested to be in Paris, being both to be banished their country) but this
not being to be granted, request was made for the other to be in Loraine, a
place that F. Parsons dreamed not of, when he debarred him not only Paris,
but all other parts of France, notwithstanding he urged that France was big
enough to hold him and his fellow. And these places are said to be appointed by
the letter Interpretatiuely (for neither of them are named in the Letter) but
not into England (he should have added, Scotland nor Ireland, for so runs
the sentence) without special license of his Holiness, or the Protector, under
pain of suspension, and other censures, etc. But wherefore was this sentence
given? True it is, that the two priests were banished not only their own
country, but Scotland also and Ireland, and confined in other countries, where
they were less likely to have wherewithal to maintain them, and had not any
thing given them to keep them in these strange countries from begging or
staruing: (a bountiful consideration of the Church, for so it must be taken,
toward priests who had left their right and possibility of all preferments,
to serve the Church with continual and evident peril of their lives; and one
of them had suffered imprisonment for the Catholic faith:) which sentence
(says this author) they accepted, and confirmed also by a corporal oath. This
fellow forgets himself: This sentence he says was by way of a letter (to
F. Parsons, who was Rector, or to the Vicerector) and by F. Parsons only was
this sentence showed first to M. Charnocke, who was yet in prison: then
afterward to M. Bishop, who was at liberty, and had been so some certain
days. And neither did F. Parsons exact any oath of them, neither did they take
any unto him. And in the tenth Chapter, fol. 155. it is urged, that this oath
was exhibited, by the immediate Commissarie or Delegate of his Holiness, which
titles belonged not to F. Parsons, to whom this letter was directed by the two
Cardinals, as shall hereafter appear. The truth of this story, and how this
letter lay hid (as was pretended) in F. Parsons chamber, for certain days (as
he told M. Charnocke) is set down in the book dedicated to the Inquisition,
page 88. and it goes uncontrolled and untouched, which in the judgment of any
indifferent man it should not, if any just exceptions could be taken against
it. Yet must his Reader be told, that this author proceeds no otherwise, then
in such sort as must satisfy all men: for this he says, fol. 126. speaking of
himself, offering for proof either the public testimonies of his Holiness,
the two Cardinals Protectors, Acarisius the Popes Fiscal, and other parties
that were actors, or privy to the cause: or else the depositions of the said
messengers themselves, under their hands and oaths: or finally the witness of
the whole English College and nation, that know what passed in this matter,
which is another manner of proceeding, then to publish things in corners by way
of libels, without any further ground of truth, then the will or malice of the
publisher. But these testimonies so much vanted of, are loath to come to light,
or are carried into some far countries, as disdaining to be in corners, such
as England, Flanders France, and Italy: for these were the corners, in which
the priests books were published: and in these corners have the priests
justified their books, which this poor fellow calls libels, to shift them
off by one means or other. And the priests were never so dainty of their
books, but that they who opposed themselves against them, might have Gods
plenty for their comfort: whereas contrariwise this miserable Apology, had a
quartane every time that it came to any of the priests hands: and when it was
to be seen by them, it was by stealth, and but for an hour or two, so did it
quake, for fear of being found to be such stuff, as since it has been
sufficiently discovered. Yet to encourage the blind-obedient, it tells them
of Popes, and Cardinals testimonies, and authentical matters, and brings
nothing which can please these blind affectioned, but some railing words
against Catholic priests, as though if it could persuade the reader, that they
were most wicked by often inculcating it unto him, the cause were won: and a
railing word of this authors mouth, would be of more weight to determine a
controversy, then all possible right in the part oppressed. But the
indifferent reader will weigh his reasons, and not his foul words; and judge
of matters, not as they are said to be, but as they are proved. And thus much
in answer to the ninth Chapter.

CHAP. 15. How this Apologie-maker shuffleth off the true cause of this present
controversy, and lays the blame thereof upon the Secular priests. Apol. cap.
10.
IN the tenth chapter of the Apology, the author thereof intends to show,
how that all controversies were ended upon the publication of his Holiness
Breue: and how that a new breach was made. He promises also to handle some
excesses of his brethren, and of their dealings with the Counsel. The first
point he handles very slenderly (as it should seem) for he forgets often
that ever the controversies were ended. The second he lays falsely to the
priests as shall be showed: and in the rest he only shows his merchandise.
And thus he begins this Chapter.

After that his Hol. had well considered the little weight of reason, which
these two former messengers had brought in the behalf of their partners in
England, for raising so great a sedition against the Protectors letters, and
Archpriests incitation, and had given some due reprehension to the said
messengers, as by their restraint, as well in Rome, as by that they were not
permitted to return presently into England, he thought convenient to confirm
the said Protectors letters etc. In these few lines it is to be noted first,
how that his Holiness is said to have restrained the priests (who went to
Rome) upon consideration of the little weight of reason, which they brought,
and permitted them not to return, or (as we say in English) banished them, not
only England, but Scotland also, and Ireland, yea and confined them to
several Countries, without allowing them any thing for their maintenance.
Secondly, how his Holiness confirmed the Cardinals letters. Touching the
first, it is known to all the world, or at the least in those parts, which
this author calls corners, those are England, Flanders, France, and Italy,
where their books have been published, or sent, that the two priests were
restrained before they delivered any reasons of their forbearance, to subject
themselves to the Archpriest, and as yet no one part of their relation has
been proved faulty. They have laid down an orderly narration of their
messengers disorderly restraint, through the false and wicked suggestio^s of
their adversaries, before that they had any audience, and thereby have made it
evident, that his Holiness did not restrain them, upon any consideration of
their reasons, because he heard them not, nor any cause else, before they were
restrained. Secondly, it is at large related both in the English book page
97.98.104.105. and else where, as also in the book to the Inquisition page 77.
how that when the priests came to their answer, before the Cardinals Caietane,
and Burghese, they were not suffered to have a copy of their accusations
brought against them, (although it were most earnestly demanded by them) that
they might make their answer thereunto, but a dissembling show was made to
have all matters taken up in peace and quietness. And this author not being able
to gainesay any of this: how shamelesly does he here tell his reader, that his
Holiness had well considered the little weight of their reasons: and had
therefore not only restrained them, but banished them, or (as he terms it)
not permitted them to return presently into England? And although it be true
which this author affirms, that his Holiness confirmed the Card. letters: yet
it is evident, that he did not upon consideration of the little weight of the
messengers their reasons: for they were never suffered to deliver them, as the
custom of God Church was, where a matter is instituted, and some do offer
themselves (to those to who^ it belongs) to show what they have to say in it,
before it be established. Neither has this author showed, or can without a
trick of his accustomed falsehood say, that the two priests ever appeared in
this action before any other, then those two Cardinals, upon the 17. of
February 1599. or that they did not at that time make request, to have the
copy of the Libel, to make their answer unto it. And as for their
examinations, who is so simple, as to build any matter thereon, as though that
were a place, or time convenient for them to deal in the charge committed unto
them, being both asunder, and privately talked with, or examined by their
professed enemies? The time, and place of trial was before the appointed
Judges: when, and where this author must show, that they did not offer to make
their answer to whatsoever was objected against them: and namely to that
absurd Libel, which M D. Haddock, and M. Martin Array put up against them
concerning a sedition (as the Libel terms it) supposed to have been raised
in England by them, and their fellows, by not admitting the authority upon the
sight of the Cardinals letters. Here was this author to have showed a defect of
the messengers their reasons, and not to have ouerslipped these partieulars,
which passed in this time and place, being the sole time and place, in which
the two messengers met, and might have showed their reasons, if they might have
been heard. But this author his fairest game is to slubber up al material
points, and to bear his reader in hand in general terms, with testimonies
of Popes and Cardinals; which indeed he brings some time, but not at all for
the matter, in which he ought to bring his testimony, or to control any
thing, which is set down by the priest. And so does he bring here an
authentical testimony, that his Holiness confirmed the Cardinals letters. But
he proves not thereby that the priests restraint and banishment were just.
But let us examine this testimony, which is here brought: and we shall find a
notorious falsifying of the Popes letters.

He (the Pope) thought convenient, to confirm the said Protectors letters, and
every part and parcel thereof, with a new Breue, dated the sixth of April 1599.
Affirming. omnia, and singula de expresso mandato, and ordine, and cum
participatione, and certa seientia nostris, facta, and ordinata fuisse, and
esse. That all and every thing contained in the same letters were done and
ordained by his Holiness express commandment and order, and by his certain
knowledge, and participation. All this is truly related out of the Breue. And
had he here made a stop, he might have been accounted an idle fellow, to cite a
matter, of which not one word proved any thing at all, that the little weight
of their reasons, was a cause of the priests restraint in Rome, confinement in
strange Countries, or confirmation of the authority. But he will go a little
further; and because if he had cited the Latin, he should have discovered his
falsehood, he makes a stop thereat, and goes forward with an English
translation of the Brene in this manner: And therefore to have been and to be
firm, and in force and of most full validity, etc and so to be taken, and
executed of all men etc. which couple of etc. is an argument that he went on
forward citing the Breue for his purpose, but how honestly, let every man
judge, the Latin being in this manner: Ac propterea, valida, firma, and
efficacia existere, and fore etc. decernimus. We decree therefore, that now
(upon this confirmation) they be, and shall be of force firm, and of efficacy.
And who is so blind, that does not see whether he will or no, that these words
here inserted by this author to have been, are falsely thrust in by him, to
cousin his reader, and to have him believe, that his Holiness declared in this
Breue, that all things were of force by the Cardinals letters: which besides
the most gross imposture is most absurd, and against all law and reason, as is
every where showed (the letters being no other, then from a Cardinal for the
institution of a very great authority given by him without showing any
commission from his Holiness, by which he might do it.) But there is no dealing
for this Author, if he should deal honestly in any one matter, concerning the
question in controversy. But the Archpriest has presumed to go a little
further, in adding these words, ab initio. And in this Edict against the
censure of Paris, he tells his subjects, that the Pope had confirmed the
Cardinals letters, as validas ab initio, to have been of force from the
beginning, which if they could beat into the cares of the blind-obedient, it
is as much as they desire. For they have taken from their sight the view of all
books, wherein they might discover how falsely they are lead, and persuaded by
guides blinder then themselves.

This declaration (says he) and confirmation of his Holiness, when it came
forth, every man was of opinion, that all questions, and controversies would
be ended thereby: seeing that nothing was pretended before by the troublesome
(so pleases it this foul mouthed fellow to term the Priests) but only to
have certain intelligence of his Holiness will and meaning. Doubtless all
that meant well and honestly, thought that here would have been an end of all
controversies, not because the priests pretended nothing else, then to know his
Holiness will, for this author knows the contrary, but yet must say
somewhat, although contrary to his own knowledge, manifested in the 8 chapter
of the Apology, fol. 107.108.110. where he pretends to give satisfaction to
the reasons alleged by the priests, before this Breue was made, but because
the priests did always offer (which also they performed) that so soon as
they should see any Breue in confirmation of this authority, they would yield
themselves, notwithstanding the reasons which they had to the contrary. But
this fellow imagines, that unless he practices his trade of lying almost in
every line, he shall lose that habit, which has, and must get him all the
credit which he looks for. The priests gave their words both in England, and
in Rome (by them whom they sent thither) that al should be quiet upon the sight
of the Breue. But the Jesuits and Archpriest did not give their words, that
the peace should endure. And thereupon was the peace broken, and not by the
Priests, as is set down in all these books of the Priests, and as yet neither
is, nor can be disprooued by this Author, who here undertakes an answer
unto them. I omit the kindness, which was offered unto the two priests by
F. Parsons, it is sufficiently discovered in the books already set forth. The
English Catholic nation in Rome, here spoken of, used them indeed somewhat
kindly, and friendly in all points to their power: but not for love of the
Jesuits, but upon their own honest dispositions: except it be meant by M. D.
Haddock, and M. Martin Array, unto whose lodging the two priests were sent: the
one upon the 22. of April, (for then he was set at liberty, and not presently
upon their sight of the Breue, or assurance that all would submit themselves,
for this was done upon the 8 or 9. of April, when F. Parsons did first bring
them the Breue to copy it out,) the other upon the 6. of May, (for then, and
not before was the other at liberty, and not presently upon their assurance
that all would be quiet, as here it is most falsely suggested.) And the truth
is, that this doctor, and his fellow Proctor did use that kindness toward the
two priests, as every day when the priests went abroad, the doctor himself or
his fellow Proctor would take the pains to rig up their chamber, that no loose
paper should be lost, which they might by any chance leave behind them. There
was also an honest man in Rome, of the Catholic English nation, who in respect
of old acquaintance with one, or both the priests, promised to go with one of
them to visit the 7. Churches (an act of devotion used by all that go to Rome)
but when the day came, he durst not go, fot fear lest the Jesuits should show
overmuch kindness toward him, for this love toward the priest. Fa. Parsons
his love and confidence specially, is not to be measured; who, as I have been
informed, objected to the priests, that they had brought with them a letter,
which was indorsed or entitled to them in this style, To your LL. by which he,
and others at that time, iested at their Lordships. And F. Parsons in his
letter to M. Bishop of the 9. of October 1999. urges the same; as also this
author in the Apology, cap. 9 fol. 135. But when these priests desired to see
that letter, alleging oftentimes what comfort it would be unto them, to see
their own Lordships (so often talked of by F. Parsons and other Jesuits) all
the love and confidence, especially which F. Parsons had, could not work it:
neither would this letter ever be showed unto them, as M Bishop testifies in
the English book, fol. 159. Although says he, it was most instantly desired,
yea and said to have been forged, as is set down fol. 127. and quietly let slip
here in the Apol which undertakes to answer that book.

Now follow certain letters of D. Bishop to M. Colington, not when he was at
liberty (as here it is suggested) but a prisoner still, although at more
liberty then M. Charnocke had: for he was commanded to the Proctors house (as
M. Charnocke was after his departure) and might not lie in the town where he
would, and might have lived without further charge, as also M. Charnocke might;
for that they had agreed for their chamber, and diet for a certain time, and
paid their money beforehand; and were carried away to prison, before half the
time was out: and were offered afterward to have their diet, for so many days
as were behind of the reckoning, which were more then either of them had leave
to stay in Rome, after their several enlargement, out of the College. And as
for this gloss, that M. Bishops letter was written eight days after the Popes
Breue was published, I should have let it pass as one of this authors pety
follies, this letter bearing date the 29. of April, as here is said, and the
Breue bearing date the 6. of April, as in the leaf next before it is twice
cited, and elsewhere often in the Apology. But there is a further folly
hereupon grounded, or at the least the like more grossly committed, to show
forth F. Parsons praises concerning a letter next following: at the end of
which, thus says this author, Thus wrote F. Parsons, even then when yet the
Popes Breue was not come forth: was not that kindly done and friendly of F.
Parsons? But how is it proved, that this letter was written even then? Mark
how he proves it: As appears (says he) for that this was written the 9.
of April, and the Breue bears date the 21. of the saidmoneth. The Breue which
has hitherto borne date of the 6. of April, must now for to claw Fa. Parsons,
be reported, yea and believed also by the blind obedient to bear date the 21.
of April. Is not this author very greedy that F. Parsons should be commended,
who will fetch a matter so far off, and so far from a known truth, to
further it; ergo not being more common in the schools, then a Breue of the 6.
of April for the Archpriests confirmation? This letter and other would ask
longer scanning, then would recompense the pains, but to every man's view they
present an argument, that the peace was made upon the Priests side; and
therefore I will briefly go over some marginall notes, which are made upon
these letters. And first I will begin with the notes made upon Master Bishops
letter, whereupon Father Parsons his information, (who was to ouersee what he
writ into England) how that he had labored for his liberty: he says, that
he had his liberty by F. Parsons procurement. There is this note in the
margent, How then does he deny this afterward; but he tells him not where:
you must go look for that. And in the mean time you must think, that M.
Bishop said one thing at one time, and at another time denied the same: which
he might very well do; speaking first according to such informations, as F.
Parsons gave him, which afterward he might understand to be false. The second
note is this, By this we see, how these men were pretenders, and could not
expect their own time. And this note is made upon M. Bishops good wishes to
one man, and certificate, that upon his peaceable behavior he should be
remembered. And what does this prove, that the same party pretended any thing
at all? upon the next letter which is F. Parsons to M. Collington, and M. Mush,
there is this note, An objection answered: and that was, Fa. Parsons is of an
other body, and therefore no friend of theirs. A shrewd objection, and how is
it answered? He has procured Seminaries for them: and if these Seminaries were
for men of his own vocation (as in deed they are, and to make his faction the
stronger) yet they are all to one end, and one public service of our
country. And if no man will this believe, let him look into his actions of the
years 1596, and 97. when diverse priests were to come in the Spanish Armadoes,
under pretense to restore the English to the Catholic religion; Let their
forced subscriptions to strange titles, prove Fa. Parsons and his agents their
public service of our country. But after this letter of F. Parsons,
follows another of M. Mush to him. And where M. Mush declares how much he
has been bound unto the Society: and that it is no joy for him to be at
variance with any: much less with him, or any of his society; there is this
note in the margent, Exore tuo te iudico, etc. If there be any relation to
that, which follows by etc. It is but an ordinary livery, which this author
gives at his pleasure, I judge thee (says he) by thine own mouth. as though
M. Mush did now profess, that he took joy to be at variance with any, or
that he denied, that he has been heretofore bound unto the Society, having
been many years taken as a member thereof, although in the end they would not
admit him, as here it is confessed fol. 107. In this same letter M. Mush
requesting, that M. Bishop and M. Charnocke might be sent home from their
banishment, bids him not to fear any disturbance by them: for (says he)
their own hands will testify against them, if they shall report, or attempt
any evil. Whereupon there is this note made, This testimony we accept now
against them; But he shows not where they have reported, or attempted any
evil. Let this be showed, and then let their testimony be urged against them.
To this letter does Fa Parsons reply, and speaking of the return of these two
priests, he puts this case, If their cooperation be understood, to work
with you by their letters, as here they promised, and I cannot doubt, but they
will perform. Upon this place there is this note made, Here we see the good
man was deceived. And why so good man? did they not cooperate with the priests
in England for the making of peace? Are not their letters continually urged
against the priests in England, as exhorting them to peace? did they not
testify the copy of the Breue to be a true copy thereof, by which peace was
made? Is not M. Bishops letter here inserted, a sufficient testimony of his
cooperation; and what testimony is that, which is accepted here (in a marginal
note upon F. Parsons letter;) but of peace wrought or persuaded by them? And
how then was the goodman deceived? Perchance it was in that, which for all the
rest also deceived him; that was, having now gotten a Breue for confirmation of
the Archpriest, he expected that his company might trample upon the priests as
them listed, and that now all the priests would be foole-ridden, or worse, and
must not stir for any injury, whatsoever might be offered them; wherein in
deed we may see, how the goodman was deceived. Upon the same letter there is a
note made, that the reconciliation of M. D. Bagshaw was an outward show. And
after the letter this insinuation is given, that any indifferent man may
perceive how F. Parsons was desirous and careful of peace. But of this more
afterward when I shall discover how he behaved himself for the putting all out
of hope of peace.

Diverse other letters follow of F. Garnet, and the Archpriest to F. Parsons:
all concluding, that there was a peace made, and that there was no doubt of
any, but of D. Bagshaw, who (what cause soever he had to stand upon the
restitution of his good name) being accompred (as other were) for a
Schismaticke, etc. yielded himself. And this author confesses here fol. 148.
that it is most likely, that diverse of them meant plainly, and sincerely indeed:
though of some of them it is doubted, that they made the peace only in external
show for the time, assuring themselves (says he) that there would not want
some probable occasion, afterward to break again, and to lay the cause of
breach upon the other side, as in effect we see it did ensue. But was the heat
of faction and sedition so great in the Jesuits and the Archpriest, as the
priests could perceive it, and thereupon assure themselves, that there would
not want some probable occasion to break again? Or had Fa. Parsons so laid
the plot himself, that there should be no peace in England, but with such
conditions as no honest priest could accept? Yet this we have, that a peace
was made by some for peace sake, and by the rest also, at the least upon this
assurance, that afterward there would not want some probable occasion, to
break again. But see how this fellow goes on with his tale: For that (says
he) a new devise being cast out shortly after, that satisfaction must be made
to them for some former hard speeches used, or written against them in time of
the contention, and that otherwise their good names should be taken from them.
This was a sufficient match to put fire again to all that, which had been
raked up before, by the endeavor of the foresaid peace. But this narration will
not pass so current. The priests have set down in the book dedicated to his
Holiness, page 63. and in that to the Inquisition, page 59.60. that after the
peace was made, a Jesuit Fa. Jones by name, began to raise that wicked and
senseless slander of schism against them. And M. Archpriest published A
Resolution, pretended to come from Rome in confirmation of that wicked opinion
of the Jesuits against the priests, and that the satisfaction which was
demanded was of this infamy raised, after the peace was made, and not of those
wicked slanders, which were raised by the Icsuites, the Archpriest, and their
seditious adherents against the priests, before the peace was made, as here is
falsely suggested. And this relation of the priests goes still uncontrolled,
and not disprooued by this author. And by this might this question be solued,
which follows in the Apology. Now then, all the question stands in this,
which part has broken the peace, or which was most like to have desire, to
maintain and conserve the same. For by this it is evident, that the Jesuits
and Archpriest did break the same peace, and put fire again to all that which
had been raked up before. But mark I pray you, how substantially this question
proposed is discussed by him: For discussing (says he) of which controversy,
we might use that argument of Cassius, Cui bono? who are like to receive most
good or hurt by the peace kept or broken? Here you see what argument this
author might use: you shall perchance hereafter understand what argument he
will use. For this in his own conscience was no sufficient argument, or
doubtless he would have used it, having so great want of good arguments, as
here he discovers, yet the margent must carry this note. The controversy
discussed, who did break the peace: to give the reader to understand, that
here the controversy is discussed, who perchance would think as little
thereof, as he who passes through Long lane, by Smithfield, and looks at the
sign of the Book, would think of the Bible if this note were not upon the
sign: The Bible. But as this author might make this argument, so might the
priests fit this answer; that such circumstances might be justly considered
in controversies, where no evidence is to be had which part had deserved blame,
although in such also there might be jolly wrangling, every circumstance almost
being of force to make the harm or the good greater, which should ensue upon a
peace broken or kept. But in this case there is no such want of evidence, as
the matter must of necessity be determined by any uncertain circumstances.
For the priests all ege and plead, that after the peace was made, Fa. Jones
the Jesuit raised out of hell that seditious, and most wicked slander of
schism against them, in which he affirmed afresh, that they had lived, while
they differred to obey the Archpriest, not yet confirmed by his Holiness in
that authority which the Cardinal Caietan had given him, and he had usurped as
an intruder, before he had the Popes letters for his lawful exercise thereof.
The priests affirm also that the Archpriest after the peace made, did publish
A Resolution pretended from Rome, wherein the priests were condemned for
Schismatickes, who were refufers of the authority appointed, as is aforsaid.
And this to have been done by the Archpriest, was so publicly known, that
every man, but the wilful deaf, did hear of it: and his letters flew about
with this Resolution. And will this author that this matter co^uinced by facts,
should be discussed by co^ceits and circumstances? If a man of possessions known
to be very rich, should spoil a man by the high way, and should be taken with
the manner, and brought before a Judge, why might he not affirm that the poor
man assaulted him, and plead before the Judge, Cui bone? He was a rich man and
of great possessions, the other was a poor man: what reason had he with such
danger to seek the spoil of the poor man? will the Judge leave the evidence,
and answer to Cuibono? But yet, notwithstanding that it is so evident, that
the Jesuits and Archpriests brake the peace (as this author taking upon him to
answer these books) lets the instances given pass by very quietly, not
being able to confute them, lest he should bring all but his like impudent
companions, about his ears; the Archpriest his letters being common enough to
disprooue his falsehood: the petition also being extant which the priests made
hereupon unto him, that the question might be disputed among themselves, and
(this being denied) their sending to the most learned University of Paris, to
have it there decided: upon the most immodest contempt whereof by the
Archpriest, the priests were forced to fly to his Holiness, and the Sea
Apostolic for succor:) yet (I say) let us see, how this author does handle
his Cuibono: For (says he) the Archpriest and the Clergy joined with him,
enjoyed by the peace all that they could desire: to wit, quiet establishment of
their subordination, honor, reputation, rest, quietness, and his Holiness
confirmation of all their doings. The Jesuits also had as much as they could
desire, and were satisfied in all points, as appears by their own letters
above recited. But on the other side ensued the quite contrary in all respects,
so as it could not be imagined, but that by this pacification they received
secundum hominem, much grief and inward indignation. See you not the
pregnancie of this authors wit, and what a strong argument he might use? A
tyrant having obtained by such means as he used, to be admitted as a lawful
king, begins again to show his disposition amongst his subjects;
especially against such as would not at the first yield themselves, or
acknowledge his usurped authority: and when he has destroyed them, or as many
of them as he may, or has a wicked mind to destroy, what hinders him, that
he cannot lay the blame of this breach of peace upon those whom he destroyed,
and plead for himself, Cuibono? For he enjoyed by the peace, all that he could
desire, to wit, quiet establishment of his kingdom, honor, reputation, rest,
quietness, his confirmation also perchance by some higher power. His intruders
also, or setters on in that course, had as much as they could desire, and were
satisfied in all points: but on the other side ensued quite contrary in all
respects. So as it could not be imagined, but that by this pacification, and
the tyrants atchieuing the sovereignty, they received secundum hominem, much
grief and inward indignation. Is not Cuibono a stout argument? But this
comparison is odious, between a tyrant, and a grave Catholic Archpriest.
There is no comparison made between them, but it is declared how foolish an
argument this author might have used, if he would have urged Cuibono. But yet
in this narration of honor, and reputation given to the Archpriest, there are
two things to be noted; the one is, that it is most false which is here
inferted, that the Archpriest, and the Clergy joined with him, enjoyed his
Holiness confirmation of all their doings. His Holiness confirmed the
Cardinal Caietans letters, by which M. Blackwell was made an Archpriest, and a
Superior: but to make this stretch to the confirmation of all that, which he,
and others joined with him did in that time, is both absurd, and a most impious
slander of the Pope, their doings having been most wicked and scandalous, yea
and most injurious to many Catholic priests, as it was openly enough seen by
diverse others, but principally by that infamous imputation of schism,
sedition, etc. The other thing, which is here to be noted, is, that this being
supposed, that all these had what they could desire, and contrariwise the other
had all the contrary, the Jesuits and the Archpriest could not without an
exceeding bad intention, raise again that slander of Schism against the
priests, after the peace was made; knowing, or being bound to know, that the
priests could not in conscience put it up, howsoever before they dispensed for
peace sake to forgive them their first outrage.

But now follows the argument belike which this author will urge: for all
this is only what he might do. And this new argument consists upon two
principal points: The first is, that supposing all the foresaid honors on the
one side, and the disgraces on the other side, were disgested by virtue of
patience, humility, obedience, and mortification of mind, his reader must
consider, how matters stood with them, or some of them at the least, and with
the Archpriest at the coming of the Breue. The second is, how these matters
stood with them and the Council, and some great men of the adversary part. The
first consideration is so slenderly handled, and in a manner annexed with the
second, as if the last were the only thing, upon which this author would
rely, for the declaration of this question, which he thus proposed: which part
has broken the peace?

The matters as they stood betwixt the priests and the Archpriest, he
explicateth by an appeal, which some priests had made a little before the
Breue came, which was an argument that the wound was green: and his reader
must understand, that by this appeal there was an egregious faction meant:
because the Appeal was made in the names of the present Appellants, and all
others that should join themselves unto them. (which clause was after the
Appeal, and only in a postscript, as it is set down in the book to the
Inquisition, page 52.) And to color this matter the better, the date of the
Appeal is transported to the postscript which he cites, which is (says he)
against the nature of just Appeals: for which you must take his credit. But
let us grant, that these Appellants had mistaken Panormitane, explicating the
rubricke of the chapter, Olim de occasionibus, and had put in this clause into
their Appeal, (which as is said is in a postscript after the Appeal) how is
it proved that there is an egregious faction meant thereby? How much better
might it be said, that there was a marvelous contempt of the Sea Apostolic
committed by the Archpr. in suspending the Appellants from the use of their
faculties, after this Appeal made to the Sea Apostolic? Again, if we shall
consider the backwardness of the Appellants, to do or attempt any thing which
might be offensive to any (which they sufficiently showed, in that they
hereupon refrained to use their faculties) and the forwardnes of the Archpr.
who would usurp such an authority; before he was confirmed by his Holiness
(sufficiently declared by this irreuerence, to the Sea Apostolic, in taking
away from the Appellants, the use of their faculties for Appealing) it will be
evident to the indifferent judge, which part was more likely to have a bad
meaning, for faction or disturbance of the Church. But this was devised perhaps
(says he) underhand by the persecutors themselves etc. and so he falls into
that point, of the standing of matters between the priests, and the Counsel,
which I will leave a little, and try, whether besides this conjecture already
given, of the Archpriests meaning, and his factious adherents, I can allege
any other matter, whereby it may be coniectured, that the Jesuits, and Archp.
did mean an egregious faction, whatsoever show they would make of peace, first
occurreth a letter which was written from Rome, by M. Martin Array, one of the
two Proctors appointed by the Archpr. and the Clergy united unto him, and
allowed by his Holiness, as in this letter he affirms. Which letter, being a
pretended relation of such principal matters, as you shall hear, was either
penned by Fa Parsons, or not without his priuitie: being (as all Rome can
testify) the principal agent against the priests, and one who thought nothing
could be well done to his mind, unless he were himself at the doing thereof,
as appeared by his apprehending them, his keeping them, his examining them, and
such like his charitable offices. This letter bears date the 20. of February
1599. And herein is his dear friend certified, that the matter, about which
the two priests went to Rome, was committed by his holiness special
commission, to Card. Caietane, and Burghese, to be examined, and heard by way
of congregation at the English Coll. it self. And so it was (says he) upon
Wednesday, the seventeenth of this month: when after sundry informations had
from Acarisius Fiscal, of his Hol Congregation of reformation, that had taken
their several examinations (by his attorney Fa. Parsons) upon their oaths.
And after they (the Cardinals) had read and viewed such letters, memorials and
papers, as the Ambassadors had brought with them, they came jointly together
to the College upon the foresaid day, and with them the said Fiscall. And
there having a convenient tribunal provided in form of judgment (a couple
of chaires set at a table covered with a green cloth) they heard the whole
cause, (but God knows who pleaded it.) And first each of the Ambassadors
confession and declaration (that is, as much, and what pleased Fa Parsons)
severally read by the Notary of the cause, ( Fa Henry Tichborne a Jesuit)
which were long, and euer^ one of them more then an hours reading. And
therefore perchance to avoid tediousnes, there was a little read here and
there, where Fa. Parsons had turned down a lease, and his fellow Jesuit (the
foresaid Notary of the cause) was made acquainted therewith, and read
accordingly. And then was each of them willed to say, if he had any thing to
add to his declaration more then he had set down, M. Bishop would say
nothing, for which as was said, the Cardinals were offended with him: M.
Charnocke delivered somewhat, until Fa. Parsons did break him off. And after
this their letters and papers brought with them were seen again by the
aforesaid judges, whereof the most part were translated into Latin. (Is it
likely that the priests would write to his Holiness in English? for the
petitions were to him, which were brought by the two priests to Rome, and
concerned their business) And besides that, were also Fa. Parsons, Rector of
the College, and Fa. Henry Tichborne Prefect of the studies willed to be
present (These were besides themselves: for as has been said Fa Tichborne the
Jesuit was the foresaid Notary, and Fa Parsons the man that had taken their
examinations) to interpret any thing that should be needful both the Judges
and the two priests spoke both Italian and Latin) And after this again were
both Ambassadors called in jointly, (for M. Bishop was locked up again, as
soon as he had heard his examinations read) as also M. Haddocke, and my self
as procurators of the Archpresbyter, and of the Clergy united to him,
appointed by letters from them, and allowed here by his Holiness, with whom we
had been, and had audience particular about this affair before: And being come
in, we were willed, as procurators, to speak what we had to say in this
behalf. But you must understand, that this charge was so secretly given by the
Judges, as the two priests there also present did not hear it. And these
procurators being willed to speak like Proctors, said not one word, but Fa
Parsons at their entrance began to declare unto the Cardinals, that those two
were Proctors for the Archpr. and that one of them was a Doctor of Divinity,
and the nephew of a Cardinal, and the brother of a Martyr, ( agnominations able
to credit the best Proctors in the world) After this preamble, he told the
Cardinal, what a perilous division was made in England: and that these
proctors, although they were very loath to deal against their brethren there
present, yet for the love of Justice, they were contented to be employed in
this action against them, and that they had a libell or bill of complaint
against them. At which words D. Haddocke (without any word speaking himself)
delivered up a libell to the Card. But let us hear what M. Array certifieth
his friend of his speeches or his fellow Proctors, when (as he says) they were
bidden to speak as Proctors. Our speech in effect was (says he, when they
said not one word) that albeit it grieueth us much to be driven to accuse or
plead against our brethren Priests, that had been of the same College and
University here in Rome, and had gone hence into England jointly to labor,
and adventure our lives for the same cause of the Catholic faith, though
before them, (and were quickly weary thereof) yet their manner of proceeding
had been, and was so prejudicial to common peace (these good Proctors were 12
years before, or there about gone out of England) and union, and so scandalous
to all good and honest men, that either we must oppose our selves against them
in the name of our head (they mean the Archpriest who was not their head, they
living at Rome) and of all the rest of our Catholic body in England and abroad
(they will make their foresaid head a young Pope) or else we should seem to
betray the same cause impugned by them. O scrupulous conscience! who would
think that all his tale were only an imagination, what might have been said,
neither he, nor his fellow Proctor having as yet uttered one word? But let us
hear this saint make an end of this lewd and loud lie. Wherefore we prayed
their Graces (in what language?) not to be scandalized to see this division
amongst us, for that these were the moaths (O gentle mouths speak) that did
breed in the best clothes, and the worms (O noble Proctor) that were commonly
found under the bark of every tree, if they were not looked to in time, and
that this happened also in the very primitive Church, permitted by God for the
better proof and exercise of good men. And that this was a very heresy in
manners, and actions, as the other in Protestants was in faith and Religion: and
that this would break into that in time, if that it were not looked into, as
in diverse (of the Jesuits darlings) it had done already, and must needs do:
For that it was contention founded upon the same grounds of emulation, every
ambition, hatred, covetousness and liberty of life, as the other heresy was,
and wrought a spirit conform to that in all respects etc. This letter being
written 3. or 4. days after that the priests had appeared before the
Cardinals; and after a friendly composition demanded by the Proctors, and
pretended by the Cardinals, Can it be an argument of any other thing, then a
desire to continue strife, and division? Could the most hateful professed
enemy in the world have disgorged his filthy stomache in more spiteful terms?
Had this been uttered by the Proctors before the Cardinals against the two
priests; with shame enough it had been written into England, but without the
least ^ot of honesty, the Proctors themselves having most humbly desired a
friendly composition. But the Proctors not having uttered one word (much less
in these most vile terms) who may not justly judge, that when this letter was
written (which was after the appearance of the two priests as appears by the
date) that it was not meant by that side, that ever there should be peace? But
mark I pray you yet a most wicked relation, and which may convince more
evidently (if it be possible) that these fellows would not have peace. And
then (says he) we gave up a writing which before had been exhibited unto his
Holiness, and was remitted hither as it seems, (it seemed so indeed, for D
Haddocke had it ready to give up to the Cardinals so soon as F. Parsons had
told his tale) that these men came hither only to trouble the peace of
England, and to revive stirs in Rome, and that of their own heads, as it
seems, for that they had brought no one letter of credence with them of
Superior, or other to his Holiness Protector, or other man in Rome etc.
wherefore we desired remedy in this behalf, and exhibited diverse letters of
the doctors of Doway, and M. Wright the deane of Cortrac, and of other grave
men of our nation to this effect. All these letters here said to have been
exhibited by the Proctors, were no other then one letter from the D of Doway,
and an other from M. Wright which are set in the Apology fol. 125, 126.
whereof the first bears date the 25. of October. 1598. and the second 10
Nouemb. 1598. and they were both to the Protector. Yet must M. Martins friend
believe that he and his fellow Protector did upon the 17. of February exhibit
many other letters to the Protector, (who was chief Judge, notwithstanding the
exceptions taken against him at this time,) But how were these letters
exhibited? In no other sort, then as a part of that writing: for they were
inserted in it, as may appear by the writing it self, of which I have seen a
copy. But let this pass, let us hear what he says was answered by the
priests to all these grievous accusations; Against all which (says he) the
Ambassadors were able to say little, and willing to say less, but only
excused their own intentions, and asked pardon, if they had given scandal by
their manner of proceeding, more then they ever meant. But put the case indeed,
as it was, and as the Card. Burgesius without doubt will acknowledge, and the
Jesuits with all the rest of that faction then present, must avouch it one day
against their own souls, will they, nill they, that Fa. Tichborne the Jesuit
(who here also supplied the place of a public Notary, and read this Libel)
had no sooner done reading it, then M. Bishop required, that the Proctors might
take their oaths, that the Libel contained nothing but truth. To which when
the Card. Caietan would not consent, he requested that a copy of the Libel
might be delivered unto him, and his fellow, that they might make their answer
unto it, as most false, and injurious: whereat D. Hadd. who had given up the
writing, stepped to the table, and requested that it might not be delivered
unto them, but that all things rather should be peaceably concluded. To which
the Card. Caietan presently consented, the sooner perchance for joy, that both
the Proctors were not dumb: for before this act of D. Haddocke, it is most
certain that neither of them spoke one word, howsoever that his fellow vanteth
of his workmanship, when he was bidden to speak like a Proctor. Now would I
ask of an indifferent Judge, whether it were possible that there could be any
desire of peace in fellows, who in cold blood, and after three nights rest (if
rancor and malice would suffer them to rest) would write thus into England,
clean contrary to all truth in a matter of such moment, as was the handling
of the cause, concerning which all the division was which was, or was like to
be in England? And if this were necessary to be done, lest that they should
seem to betray the cause impugned by the two priests, (as this fellow says in
this letter) must not consequently this cause be a most foul cause, which must
be vpholden with such shameless falsehood? could these fellows think that
Master Bishop, or Master Charnocke, should ever come to the sight of this
relation of theirs, and held themselves from declaring it to be (as in deed
it is) a most false, wicked, and malicious information? or can these men
think, that these means were means for peace, and not rather occasions to
break peace, when they should come to light? But this was not the first plot
which was laid, by which their intention is discovered never to have had peace.
There is another letter written by Fa. Baldwyn (as hot a shot, as any of the
rest) dated 25. Febr. 1599. out of Flanders to Paris to M. D. Cecill: wherein
also it may appear, that these fellows meant, that there should be no peace,
when they striued so greatly for the whetstone in their malicious letters
against these priests. Thus he writ. I have received, etc. I think you have
understood how the Ambassadors Charnocke, and Bishop have been entreated by
his Holiness, their articles and cause of their journey. They were imprisoned
upon S. Thomas of Canterbury his day, and remain yet prisoners. They have been
examined by a Fiscall, and now they shall have their sentence by two Cardinals,
Burghese and Caietan. Their request was, there might be no subordination: and
if it must be, then some one which favored them might be created Bishop: for
which they named, D. Gifford, Bagshaw, Collington, or Bishop. They say, if they
had not their request, experience would teach, quod indignabitur libertas, si
prematur, (that is to say, that liberty would be offended, if it were pressed)
These were their words. Now the case is altered, and they seem changed, and
sorry that they took such a journey in hand: seeing that nothing else, but
ambition has egged them thus far forth, etc. Could the spreading of these
most notorious falsehoods, be signs of any other thing, then of a desire that
there should be no peace? How could these fellows think or persuade
themselves, that when these tales came to the ears of the two priests thus
abused, they would not be contradicted? was this it, which is meant by the
Apology, fol. 148. where it is said, that the Priests assured themselves, that
there would not want some probable occasion afterward to break again? Was the
author of the Apology privy to these occasions? But how could these be
occasions of the breach: seeing that M. Bishop and M. Charnocke knew not of
this false dealing, as being in banishment, besides that the breach was made
again, before that these wicked dealings came to their knowledge. You are
therefore to understand, that these are brought to show that these fellows
could not have any desire of peace, who could disperse such false and wicked
tales against those Priests, and in them against all the rest, by whom these
were employed to his Holiness. And because perchance they perceived, that
these and other their plots would not fadge to their mind, and that
notwithstanding the solemn inquiry of their life, and manners commanded by
Cardinal Caietan, 10. Nouemb. 1598. the treatise of schism, and other
injuries offered unto them, and to the priests employed by them) they did all
(contrary to their adversaries expectations) submit them selves presently upon
the sight of his Holiness Breue, the Jesuits were constrained to go to work so
openly, as all the world cries out shame upon them. For when peace was made,
they fell to a fresh declaring, that the refusers of the appointed authority
had been Schismatikes: which in all reason they thought was more then a
probable occasion to break the peace again, and that their barbarous handling
of those priests which were first sent to Rome, to have dealt with his
Holiness, would be such a terror to them, as they would never send the second
time, so as they might tyrannize at pleasure, over whom they listed, and
principally intended (perchance at the first) as not being now very likely to
put up the second time so scandalous, and unworthy reproaches: nor (as they
hoped) would be forward to attempt again to get some remedy.

This first point being sufficiently declared, how matters stood between the
Archpriest, and his adherents on the one part, and with the priests on the
other part: now follows this Authors information, how they stood with the
counsel, and great men of the one part, and the Priests on the other part.
For out of these two considerations he will have his reader to gather, which
part broke the peace, or was more likely to keep it. The first consideration
he dispatched briefly, and declared that the wound was green, when the Breue
came: which he proves by an Appeal made by some of the priests: for which the
Appellants were by the Archpriest deprived of the use of their faculties. The
second he begins in showing, how by certain words in the Appeal it may
be gathered, that there was an egregious faction, as devised perhaps
underhand by the persecutors themselves. See how he falls into the
consideration with a perhaps, and then goes thus forwards: who having with
them at London at this time (if he were not very lately returned) D. Bagshaw,
called up as is supposed, by his own procurement, it is very likely they
agreed with him, that in no case whatsoever determination should come from
Rome, peace should be made, or kept with the Archpriest, and Jesuits. How many
things must a man suppose, before he come to imagine, that one man meant not to
have peace with the Archpriest and Jesuits? which, if it should be granted to
this fellow, how would he hereupon infer, that there was an egregious faction
meant by those Appellants, of which this man of whom he speaks, was none,
but rather of a contrary disposition, as this author confesses in this place:
where he adds, which point it may be Ma. Collington and Ma. Mush, two of the
three Appellants, did somewhat guess at, when they showed so much doubt to the
Archpriest, as before you have heard, of bringing D. Bagshaw into this
reconciliation? And to further this conceit, that M. Doctor Bagshaw had
dealings with the Council, there is a letter of a reverend priest dated the
15. of April 1599. which is full of foolish iealousies, and senseless surmises,
it being well known, that M. Doct. Bagshaw was sent for from Wisbich to
London, to answer for his life, being most falsely and unchristianlike accused,
to have had part in that Spanish treachery, for which Squire was put to death:
although this author in the 13. chap. fol. 207. does most shamelessely avouch,
that as soon as ever they (the priests) understood that their two messengers
were restrained in Rome (which was not before the 29. of December) and not like
to prevail (which could not be so soon known in England) then D. Bagshaw was
sent for from Wisbich to London to treat with the Council: and all England can
witness, that he was sent for by the Council about the Michaelmas before the
two priests were imprisoned. But next after these authentical surmises of one
of the fellow united brethren (but a reverend one, and therefore must carry
credit, howsoever this Apology has cracked it) there followed another letter
of another reverend priest, who affirms that D. Bagshaw is at the last
constrained to yield his obedience to their Superior, with the rest of his
confederats: If it be true (says he) that M. Mush and some others affirm.
And yet there is a greater argument, but it is against M. Bluet. If (says this
author) the said keeper of Wisbich castle do not greatly abuse M. Bluet. And
this standing upon so nice a point, I will leave to them, who have will to
compare their honesties together, and conclude contrarily to this authors
conclusion, fol. 153. for there he concludes in this manner: By this then and
diverse other ways, which we leave to speak of here, (the priests are much
bound to him for sparing them) it is easy to see what manner of negotiation
these men had in hand, when the Breue came, and how far they were embarked,
and entangled, etc. (you must conceive some strange link by this etc.) with
the Council at this very time. How gladly would any blind man see this, and
brag when he has done with the best sighted? For who, that has his eyes,
can see any such matter out of these fond surmises, out of their own letters,
and a memorial of a man of whom they themselves have some doubt, whether he
did not abuse the party, whom he took for his author? who does not rather
see, to what poor shifts this author is driven, who to determine so weighty a
question, as he proposed fol. 148. which part has broken the peace, can say
nothing, but perhaps, and as is supposed, and it is very likely, and it may be,
and it is thought: with other such foolish suspicions and doubts, of which all
this discourse is full, from the first entrance into the consideration of much
more consequence, fol. 144. to this conclusion, By this then, fol. 153. How
much more directly do the priests in all places solue this question, affirming
without any such foolish shuffling, that the Jesuits first (namely F. Jones)
began this breach, by broaching afresh, that the priests were schismatickes?
And the Archpriest seconded him with a most seditious letter which he sent
abroad: wherein he signified, that he had received a resolution from the
mother City, that the refusers of the appointed authority were schismatikes.
And this have the priests set down in their books, to have been the cause of
the breach: and this cannot be denied to have been done by the Archpriest
after the peace was made: although this author in chap. 11. fol. 167. takes
notice, that in the book to his Holiness, pa. 62. there is this marginall
note, Origo nouarum contentionum fuit Archipresbyteri Epistola violenta. The
beginning of new co^tentions, was a violent Epistle of the Archpriest. And upon
this note, he exclaimeth in his religious manner against the priests, that they
would break out again upon an angry epistle. And he runs himself so out
of breath, as although this note is set at the very bottom of the 62. page, he
could not step over to the 63 page, where some part of this angry epistle is
thus set down. Ab vrbe etc. we have received a resolution from the mother
City, that the refusers of the appointed authority, were schismatics. But the
marginall note was enough for him to exercise his mild spirit against the
priests: and by concealing wherefore that note was made, and what was in the
discourse, to cosen his blind reader, who must not once look into the
priests books, for fear lest their guides falsenesse be discovered.

And thus have I showed, how the Jesuits and the Archpriests want of
consideration has been the cause of all these present broiles, and that this
division should not only not be cured, but be brought in time to a greater
breach, as by the event we have seen performed. Whereby also it appears how
false this narration is of this author. For first (says he) under the foresaid
pretense of a satisfaction to be made unto them of their fames wounded, delay
was made of reconciliation. Has this fellow so soon forgotten himself what
he said in this 10. Chap. fol. 147. out of M. Archpriests letter to Fa.
Parsons, dated the 3. of June 1599? I was enforced (says he) upon their
contentions, and contemptuous behavior (that is their appeal from him to the
Pope, as is set down in the book to the Inquisition epist. 52. and 53.) to
suspend the use of faculties in M. Collington, M. Mush, and M. Heburne. But now
God be blessed, upon the sight of the Breue Apostolical, that you sent, they
have in such manner submitted themselves, that I have given them restitution of
their losses. The Breue also of the 17. of August 1601. excludes al delay,
affirming, that so soon as ever the priests did see the former Breue, they
presently submitted themselves, yet must this fellow to keep himself in ure
(as if all his discourses were bastards, if they were in the beginning, middle,
or ending any other then false tales) tell his Reader, that there was delay
made of reconciliation under pretense of having satisfaction; which howsoever
the accusers of the priests shall make to God, they are never able to make to
them. Then (says he) new quarrels picked, new complaints fained, new
exaggerations made, by words and writings both against the Archpriest (the
causes hereof are laid down before, and the whole story at large sent to the
Inquisition) the Cardinals protections, and F. Parsons by name, especially
concerning the treaty of their two messengers in Rome. Perchance Fa. Parsons
letter of the 9. of October 1599, which he sent into England, France, and
Flanders, and where not? came to some of their hands, and also the letter of M.
Martin Array, and Fa. Baldwines bolt to D. Cicyll before cited came to be
examined, and were evident arguments of falsehood (to say no worse) and lewd
dealing, and the breach renewed before by the Jesuits, and Archpriest (as is
showed) might give the priests just cause to look further into the matter,
then they could before suspect: but when were these quarrels picked? by whom? or
how followed? mark I pray you how he falls into a story impertinent to these
controversies. The peace was made by the priests in May 1599 as in this chapter
is confessed, the breach was presently after made by the Jesuits, and the
Archpriest, as this author does in a manner confess, in that neither of
himself, nor provoked thereto by the priests their books he will come near to
this point, which is the most principal in this present controversy; and now
he will tell you a tale of M Charnocke his return, which was a year after, to
wit in May 1600. who (as he says) was invited to come home, and so he did, no
doubt much against this fellows will, who (if I am not deceived) was the cause
of his banishment and confinement without any maintenance, to keep him in case
for ever coming home, and to aggrauat the matter M. Charnocke is said to have
made a ridiculous appeal from the sentence of the two Cardinals. But I think
that this fellows worship did not laugh when he heard of it Yea and more then
this he came to Paris, and took degree of Bachelor of divinity, which
perchance troubled this fellows worship, as much as the appeal, and thereupon
he does so iuggle it with M. Bishop his taking degree of doctor, forbidden (as
he says) by an express Breue, that his Reader may think M. Charnocke had
committed some great offense, and yet this author mean nothing less, but that
he laid all the offense upon doctor Bishop, who was before, and not at that
time made Doctor as he would seem to say, and was lawfully made, and worthily,
and no way contrary to the true meaning of the Breue, which was gotten of the
Pope not against the doctoring without approbation, as here is most falsely
noted in the margent, but against the doctoring of young men, and such (by
explication of those, who procured the Breue) as would take the degree more
timely, then the ambition of their adversaries could well like of. But to
return to his tale of M. Charnocke. Here then (that is at Paris) it was
resolved (says he) that M. Charnocke notwithstanding his Holiness prohibition,
(that is to say, the sentence of the two Cardinals, Caietane, and Burghese,
from which he had lawfully appealed, which also M. doctor Ely confirms in his
notes upon the Apology page 157. and thereby set himself free until the
matter were again discussed) and his own oath to the contrary (which he never
took nor was any offered him, when the sentence here specified fol. 155 was
showed him by Fa. Parsons in form of a letter to the same Father being then
Rector, or the vice Rector of the College) should go into England under
pretense of lack of means to live abroad. (This was the cause of his Appeal
in Lorraine before he came to Paris, as M. Archpr. understood by a letter from
M. Artur Pitts, the Deane of Le Verdun, and Chancellor of the Legacion in
Lorraine) and that only for fashion sake he should advise Cardinal Burghesius
thereof, which he did by a little short contemptious letter of the 25. of May.
The letter was written in very humble manner, as I understood by those that saw
it, and with the priuitie of others in Paris, who would soon have caused any
such style to have been altered and as it was not perchance very long so (as it
appeaeth by the authors relation) it was not very short (for here he says,
that the Cardinal did answer all the objections, or cauillations touched
therein, about their hard usage, and injurious sentence given against them, and
how he had appealed, which this author calls points of the letter) nor in any
such manner contemptible, for who can think, that this fellow were so modest,
that amongst all his co^temptuous terms, and narrow seeking for the least
matters to bring the priests into contempt, he would not set down some one
phrase or other, by which it should appear to his Reader, that the letter was
a contemptuous letter. To the which (says he) the most honorable, and gracious
good Cardinal answered with great patience and modesty the fifteenth of
September in the year 1600, beginning his letter thus: Reverend in Christ, as
my brother, your letters written at Paris the 28 of May, about your journey
into England, were delivered more slowly to my hand then I could have wished,
both that I might have answered sooner, and have dissuaded that journey of
yours, if they had come unto me, before your departure out of France, for that
I think the news of your departure will be ungrateful to his Holiness, as it
is unto us, for so much as it is both against obedience, and against an
express prohibition, and against your own promise confirmed with an oath, and
is thought will give occasion of new contention and troubles in England etc.
Thus far in the Apology. And afterward this author declares how the
Cardinal did answer the objections, which M. Charnocke had made, and that
notwithstanding this, M. Charnocke did not only persevere in England in the
exercise of his function of priesthood, having openly incurred the censure of
suspension, but also returned a more undutiful answer, then was his sonner
letter, which he proves by those words in M. Charnocks letter, Quam licet
tunc cluderem fraudem, ad maiorem securitatem vterque ab eo absolui curauimus:
although I did delude at that time the deceit used in making us swear, to
fulfill the sentence given against us, yet both of us afterward procured our
selves for more security to be absolved from this oath.

This letter of the Cardinal Burghese is set down at large in the book to
the Inquisition page 84. 85. 86. and 87. and immediately does M. Charnocks
letter follow, where who will may see them. I will here only touch so much of
M. Charnocks letter, as is in answer to that part of the Cardinals here cited,
leaving the rest to men of judgment; to consider whether M. Charnocke did not
what he did, upon sufficient ground to save himself harmless from all
censures, and blameless in the opinion of any honest man. Thus he begins
his reply, which this author taxes so deeply for undutifulness.

Most Reverend, and most illustrious prince: your letters dated at Rome 15.
September. 1600. I did receive at London in England upon the 21. of the next
month following. To the which I return this answer, with as great respect as
the law was in which they were written: I do not well understand how the
notice of my going into England, should be ungrateful, either to his
Holiness, or unto your Highness, when as neither a most loving Father, nor a
most just Judge, can be ignorant, that food is as needful for the living, as
punishment for the offender. The Rector, or Vicerector of the English College
in Rome was appointed by letters of the most illustrious Cardinal Caietan of
good memory, and of your Highness, dated from both your palaces 21. of April
1599. to signify unto us in your names, that we should not presume for a time
to go without leave into the kingdoms of England, Scotland, or Ireland, but
should live quietly, peaceably, and religiously in other Catholic countries,
where we should be appointed by you, and that we should procure the
conservation of peace every where among the English Catholics. If either of
them had signified unto us in your names, or in the names of any other, where
banished and confined men should have had those things which were necessary to
sustain life, and that these things had been at hand, I might have been
charged with disobedience, and breach of an express commandment, not obeying
so pious an intention of the decree, which laid upon me a most grievous
(howsoever undeserved) punishment, as being hereby made somewhat tolerable,
and the oath had not been a bond of so great wickedness, if I had taken any,
not to return into my Country. M. Acarisius upon the 22 of April 1599. having
first proposed unto us, not to return into our Country, under pain of
suspension, did after by F. Parsons suggestion, among other things, exact also
an oath of this: which deceit although then I deladed, for the greater
security we both procured to be absolved from it. Furthermore, if M. Acarisius
did receive no commission from the most illustrious Cardinal Caietane and your
Highness, or that this commission were recalled, before that he came unto us, I
know not what promise that is, with which any man may charge me, that I
confirmed it with an oath: but it is evident by the testimony of Fa. Parsons
and also by your own letters of the 21. of April 1599. to the Rector, or
Vicerector of the English College in Rome, that either Acarisius received no
commission from you, or that it was recalled before he came to us. For in these
letters the Commission is given to the Rector or Vicerector of the College, to
signify unto us, as prisoners in the College, in your names what we were to
do. And so does M. Charnocke proceed, answering every part and parcel in the
Cardinals letters, and showing out of the most approved Canonistes, that his
fact was lawful, and that he incurred no censures, by returning into his
Country, after his Appeal made in Lorraine. And by this it is made manifest,
what the deceit was, and whose, which M. Charnocke tells the Cardinal he
did delude, and the cauils are also answered, which are here made in the
Apology, where this author would ask: who could absolve from an oath
exhibited by the immediate Commissary, or Delegate of his Holiness? For to
this is answered, that if the immediate Commissary, or Delegate of his
Holiness ask an oath, beyond his Commission, any man may absolve from it. But
neither was here any immediate Commissary, nor Delegate of his Holiness, but a
fellow suborned (as it should seem) by F. Parsons to come do some act at
his request. For M. Acarisius seeming to read what he proposed, as sent to the
College by the two Cardinals, had not his lesson so perfect, as Fa. Parsons
had it without the book. And upon Fa. Parsons after-speech, M. Acarisius
repeated his lesson, and thrust in this devise, that the priests should swear
not to go into Englang without leave, whereas before there was only a censure
of suspension to be incurred, if they did return without leave, which censure
also, as M. Charnocke does demonstrate in his answer to the Cardinal, was
suspended by his Appeal. But this matter is more aggrauated yet against M.
Charnock for that the sentence was such, as otherwise they were bound to
accept, and fulfill under pain of deadly sin, that is to say, they were
bound to go beg or starve in some one place or other, out of their country,
unless this fellow can persuade his Reader, that they had some allowance for
their maintenance, to which if any man had been compelled to bind himself by
oath; I would ask any in different man, whether there could be maioris
iniquitatis vinculum, a bond of greater iniquity, especially if the Jurors
were never convinced of any crime (as their case was) which bond all learned
men do say, is no bond. And if this poor companion his opinion (that every
decree did bind under deadly sin) were received, all the Canonists must go
for egregious fools, who affirm both that some decrees are ipso ture, of no
force (and M. Charnocke in his answer to the Cardinal shows, how that
their decree was such) and also that a just Appellation such, as M. Charnocke
does there prove this to be in the opinions of Innocentius, Hostiensis,
Geminianus, S. Antonin, Coberrubias, Siluester, Angelus, Nauar, and others, may
take away the force of a decree, that it do no way bind, until the cause be
again judged against the Appellant: But this fellow speaks according to his
skill, when he tells the Reader, that the two priests were bound under
mortal sin, to accept and fulfill that sentence, which the Cardinal gave
concerning the oath. There is enough said, although also it may be added, that
there are certain in all countries, who have very large faculties, as this
author knows well, who can upon cause dispense with an oath extorted
wrongfully, by a greater person then M. Acarisius is, and by the suggestion of
an honester man then F. Parsons is, and the party inueighed may with greater
security receive the absolution. And upon occasion given him to speak of the
oath, as the Cardinal did here give M. Charnocke, he may say without any
bragging, that he did delude the deceit which was used by such cousening
companions as would exact an oath where they had no commission. But neither was
any oath exacted at all for the performance of this sentence, and this author
shows himself a notorious impostor in false translating those words, quam
licet, etc. Here has this author set down the decree of the two Card, to the
performance whereof he challenges an oath made by the priests, which he says
was as clear and resolute, as might be set down in these words. Quapropter
praefatis Gulielmo and Roberto sacerdotibus, etc. Wherefore both in his
Holiness and our names, we do ordain unto the foresaid William and Robert
priests, and do command them strictly in the virtue of holy obedience, under
the pain of suspension from holy orders and exercise of the same to be
incurred by the fact it self, and under other censures and punishments, to be
inflicted at the judgment of his Holiness, that none of them without express
license of his Holiness, or Cardinal Protector, do presume to go to any of
the kingdoms of England, Scotland, or Ireland for the time, etc. This etc:
cutteth off the principal point, which would here make against this author;
for in that which follows, it is evident, that not M. Acarisius, but the
Rector or Vicerector of the English College, were appointed by the two
Cardinals, to deliver their commandment unto the two priests, and consequently
what was before done by Segnior Acarisius, to have been some iugling of Fa.
Parsons: for that it follows in the decree, or letter rather, as also it is
confessed in his Apology, fol. 139. Sed apud alios, etc. Hocque nostro nomine
Beuerentia vestra eis significet. But live in other countries, etc. And this
do your Reverence signify unto them in our name. And if any man should doubt,
whose reverence it was, who was to deliver the Card. mind unto the two priests,
they may put themselves out of doubt, by looking upon this inscription,
Reuerendo in Christo Patri Rectori vel Vicerectori Collegij Anglorum de vrbe:
To the Reverend Father Rector or Vicerector of the English College in Rome.
But this and the latter part of the letter was left out, that the Reader might
conceive how that the priests had sworn to observe, or fulfill this decree,
and that this oath was exhibited by the immediate Commissarie or Delegate of his
Holiness, whereas this letter appeared not in many days after that M.
Acarisius the Commissarie came unto the College upon a sleeuelesse errand, as
by this decree it appears, although it bear a date of the day before M.
Acarisius came thither, to wit, 21. April, and M. Acarisius came not until the
22. of the same. And this was then used as an argument by Fa. Parsons, that M.
Acarisius should not have come, insomuch as he seemed to be somewhat amazed
(as I understand) when he showed this letter to M. Charnocke, what the reason
might be that Acarisius did take upon him to declare the Cardinals sentence,
seeing the Cardinals had committed the matter to others, as appeared by those
letters. And Fa. Parsons being asked by M. Charnocke, what should be the
reason, that these letters bearing date the 21. of April, were not seen in so
many days after? answered, that they were brought unto the College the 21. of
April, which was the day before M. Acarisius came thither, but were left in his
chamber the same day, and that he had newly found them, when he brought them
to M. Charnocke. M. Bishop was now at liberty, and had been some days before,
and had not seen this sentence of the two Cardinals, neither was it ever
showed him otherwise, then thus: Coming one day to see F Parsons, or M. Charn.
who was kept still as yet in prison, F. Parsons told him, that there lay a
letter upon the table for him to look on, which when M. Bishop had read, he
laid it down again, and never was any motion made to one, or other for any
oath; for the fulfilling of this sentence of the Cardinals, which was their
sentence, and no other, as is confessed in this Apology fol. 139. and is only
urged in this place to have bin transgressed with perjury: for so still does
this author go forward. This was the decree (says he) and it is strange that
any Catholic priest would adventure, to break it so openly, and to glory in
it by writing, when he had done. This man is vilely troubled that M. Charnocke
did nothing but for what he was able to give his reason, and such as when he
comes to answer, he lets all slip quietly. Yet he will here have a saying
unto him, and tell his reader that M. Charnocke did glory in the breaking of
the decree; which is most false: for neither did he break the decree, but
appealed in form of Law from the iniquity thereof, nor glory therein, but
proved the justness of his appeal out of most approved authors, as may be
seen in his answer to Cardinal Burghese set in the book to the Inquisition
page 87. But what? (says he) did he attend to observe the other part of the
decree, more then this, which was that they should live quietly and obediently,
and to procure others also to peace, and concord? I answer, that I understood
by such as lived in Lorraine, that he lived very quietly, and brought with him
a testimony of the same from M. Arthur Pitts, to whom he was so much beholding,
as to live in his house, until his breaking up house caused M. Charnocke to
return into his country: and he lived obediently to all his Superiors. And
in this very Chapter there will be a sufficient testimony gathered out of the
144 leaf, that he procured peace, and concord in such as loved peace. And as
for the others, it was neither in his power to procure it (being banished so
far off from them) neither could any man in wisdom ^e him unto it. But this
author will prove the contrary: but how, trow ye? Forsooth by the effects that
ensued his going in. As how? For within fourteen days after this his letter
to the Cardinal, there followed their greatest appeal from the Archpriest. A
great matter against M. Charnocke. Might he not as well have said, that it was
about a month after that Cardinal Burghesius letter came into England to M.
Charnocke, and have laid the blame (if appealing deserved blame) upon the
Cardinal? If any man will take the pains to look upon the causes of the
Appeal set down in English in Ma. Colingtons book page 192. to the 202 page,
he shall find as much reason for the one as for the other, and that the
grieuances were most intolerable which were offered them, long before M.
Charn. return into England, and were the principal causes of their Appeal.
But lest that all, even his blindest fools, should find him to be a poor
cauiller in this cause against M. Charnocke, he will tell them another
conjecture, and that is, that M. Charn. sought occasion to quarrel with the
Archpriest upon his first entertainment into England. And for proof hereof he
cites a piece of a letter, which M. Charnocke writ unto him 24. May 1600, of
which letter I will set some part down, according to the copy thereof, as I
have seen it: Right Reverend Sir, being returned into England, I thought it my
duty in most humble manner, to salute you, hoping my return cannot be
prejudicial to any your good courses, and desiring for your further
satisfaction, to speak with you, when it shall please you. This which
follows is inserted here in the Apology. In the mean while to request of
you thus much in charity, to write to me, why sending for me to declare the
authority given you by Cardinal Caietane his letters, you showed me such
instructions as when I came to Rome, I found were not annexed to your
Commission, as you at that time said were annexed. Thus far in the Apology,
and then toward the latter end: Reverend Sir, a small reason from you shall
give me satisfaction: for mine intention is not to argue any matters with you,
but to take your answer simply, as you shall give it, and rest therein
satisfied. And this scruple being removed, I shall the more confidently deal
with you in other matters which I am to impart unto you. Thus wishing nothing
more then peace and quietness amongst us, I cease to trouble you from your
charitable affairs, and do expect some answer from you at your best leisure.
24. of May. But of this has this Apology maker culled as much as is here
noted: which part if it were taken alone by it self, could not imply a quarrel
in any honest man's judgment, much less when it is taken with all these
circumstances. But this author must either add somewhat still to that which he
cites, or curtall it: or else he will shame himself. And as for that which M.
Charnocke affirmed in his letter, it is confirmed by an other, although the
Archpriests secretary gave M. Charnock the lie five or six times in the
answer to his letter, which how well soever it suteth with the new religious
managing of matters, did not so well become a priest to a priest: neither has
M. Charnocke so behaved himself, but that his credit alone without any other
witness may be thought as good as M Blackwels, or this idle authors, although
he does not envy their worships calling. But mark I pray you how this matter
would be here salued. The Archpriest denies that ever he said, that they (the
fained instructions) were expressly in his instructions from Rome. By which it
may be gathered, that the Archpriest did at the least propose such matters, as
were not in his instructions, which were sent from Rome. But this is not the
matter wherewith he is charged, that he should use these particular words: but
he is charged directly, that pretending to show the instructions which were
annexed to his Commission, he showed such as were not annexed thereunto. And
being taken in the manner he confessed as much. And who sees not what a poor
shift this is, the Archpriest denies that he said they were expressly in his
instructions? who doubts but that the man says truth, when answering his
neighbor who calls for him uses these words, I say, I am not at home,
although he be at home? For although it be false that he is not at home, yet it
is very true that he says he is not at home. And with this jest does this
fellow salve this matter; the Archpriest denies that he said that they were
expressly in his instructions. Who ever charged him that he should use these
words? These poor shifts may blind such as willingly will be blind, and
other men will soon discover the fallacy. The accusation was and is, that
pretending to show his instructions, which his Commission mentioned, to be
annexed unto it, he drew out false things, which were never annexed to his
commission: and he was taken in the manner. And this is it which both M.
Charnocke and M. Colington will justify, and many more such goodly matters, if
need shall require, where these poor tricks will not serve to any purpose, I
say not thus or thus expressly. Now follow certain exceptions against some
letters written by certain priests in Wisbich unto the Archpriest. I have not
seen the copies to my remembrance, and therefore can say nothing of them more
then this, that it is not incredible, that the Archpriest would give cause of
sharper words then are there used. But all serves to prove somewhat, namely,
what course was held by the troublesome, especially after M. Charnockes return
into England. But there is not one word, what the masters of misrule did
before M. Charnock returned into England, or what cause they did give of these
troubles, to wit, the raising of the slander of schism, and such vile
imputations, as the prisoners might accordingly have written to the Archpriest
in other terms, then peripsema tuum. There must not be a word of this matter
which made all the stir: for says this fellow with shame enough (ca. 8 fol.
115.) of the other point of schism we will not talk at all, and we are sorry
that ever it was mentioned or brought in question: unquiet people having taken
occasion hereby to continue contention, and to make more brables then were
needful. How easy a matter had it been then for this author to have solued
this question proposed in this tenth chapter fol 148. Which part has broken
the peace, since that he does acknowledge, that the bringing of schism in
question was the cause of this contention, and could not be ignorant, who
brought it again in question, being told so often that the Jesuits did it;
and the Archpriest both before and after the peace was made, and the Archpriest
his letter was cited for proof thereof in the book to his Holiness page 63,
and in the book to the Inquisition page 60? But this author must have his
Readers ears filled with other stories, such as are impertinent to his
question. And when he thinks that his Reader has forgotten the matter which
he proposed: then he slinketh away, and begins afresh with some other which
he handles as wisely.

But to make an end of this Chapter: here are certain letters inserted of F.
Parsons exhorting to peace, as though F. Parsons tricks were not known very
well. If this author could have brought forth any of F. Parsons letters to his
fellow F. Lyster, or F. Garnet, or F. Jones the Jesuits, who were the chief
mainteiners of that senseless Libel of schism against the priests, to
persuade them to retract their scandalous opinions, to correct their
forwardness in insuring Catholic priests, to exhort them to make
satisfaction for their unchristian detractions: such letters would have been
for F. Parsons credit. But to cite a letter, or exhortation to the priests
iniuried, to have peace: what does it argue but an obdurate malice in him, and
a wicked desire, that they should desist from that, to which they were bound in
conscience, to wit, the defense of their fame, and the clearing themselves from
such false, but most wicked impostures of schism, rebellion, and whatsoever a
mischievous head could devise, and spread abroad against them?

And so finally (says this author) after all their former resistance, and
appeals as well of D. Bagshaw and his fellows at Wisbich, as of M. Charnocke
and other abroad, they joined in greater number upon the 17. of November last,
if all consented thereunto, whose names are subscribed, whereof we hear the
contrary in some (some one or two, who had given their consents in general,
but had not seen this particular appeal, yet afterward confirmed it, and
appealed again, for so much, as there was any need.) In all which doing of
theirs one thing is especially to be noted, And what is that? That they have
never procured any one of all their appeals to be presented hitherto, or
prosecuted in Rome as far as we can understand, (this last clause will not
help, if the proposition be general of all the appeals: For M. Charnocks
appeal was presented and prosecuted in Rome, before this book came forth:
and this author could not be ignorant thereof, if I am not mistaken in him)
which yet they ought to have done within certain months, under pain that all
is void if it be not done. But how many are these certain months? The Lawyers
say 13. months, if we shall count them by the months: and upon just cause 26.
months from the Appeal, within which time doubtless the author of this
Apology, heard of the Appellants at Rome. And Lancelot l. 4. Instit. Iuris
Canon. de appellationibus cap. accidit. affirms, Yet a longer time might have
been granted for the prosecution of an Appeal: But as I think no man does
now doubt, but that the priests had intention to follow their Appeal, and will
give this cause of their publishing of books, pendente lite, that is, while the
controversies hang: for that the Archpriest (notwithstanding their Appeal)
denounced them to have incurred the censures, and lost their faculties, because
they subscribed to a thing called an Appeal, and he kept a foul stir by
some of his seditious Agents against the Appellants. An other reason was,
because they had a desire that their cause should be known sufficiently
abroad, which could not be known too much in their conceit, who sought
nothing but a trial of the truth, and for justice against their unjust
defamers. But what this author has to say against these books, you shall hear
in the next Chapter: and if you will have an answer from him to this question
proposed fol. 148. which part has broken the peace, you must go pick it up
where you can, now you know his worships mind.

CHAP. 16. How the two books against which the Apology is written, are
slightly run over with a few cauils against them. Apol. cap. 11.
IN the eleventh Chapter the author of the Apology intends to show, how
false, slanderous, and injurious the two books are which the Priests set
forth; whereof one was in Latin to his Holiness, the other in English,
entitled, The Copies of certain Discourses. He will also show how highly the
writers and publishers offended God, and all good men thereby. Lastly, he will
defend certain particular men, that are slandered therein. And first he
begins to show, how God was offended, supposing still, that credit must be
given unto him in all which he says, Now (says he fol. 160.) are we come
(gentle Reader) almost to the last, but the most loathsome part of all our
answer, which is to handle and examine in particular, the two contumelious
libels, etc. And after a holy protestation against so base and wicked a spirit,
never so much perchance as imagined, that it should be so manifest in himself,
does here, and since in his Manifestation of spirits, and a certain Latin
libell, entitled, Appendix, etc. he tells his gentle Reader, that the sin
of libelling is to be considered, how grievous it is in the sight of God, how
great censures are laid thereon, etc. O how would this man make a saint with a
little help? but his gentle Reader demands of him, where all these
considerations were, when the Jesuits writ their discourse, aduersus factiosos
in Ecclesia: against the factious in the Church: where were these
considerations, when this libell was generally approved by their fellow
Jesuits, the Archpriest, and all that seditious crew, which adhered unto them
in this sinful act, whereby many Catholic priests were most maliciously,
and most unjustly defamed, and (to omit other most malapert and scornful
speeches) were in spirit exclaimed against in this sort, Vos rebels estis,
etc. Ye are rebels, ye are schismatickes and fallen out of the Church the
spouse of Christ, you have trampled under your feet the obedience which is due
to the sea Apostolic, ye have rushed into excommunication and irregularitie,
ye have so scandalized the godly that ye are every where infamous, ye have by
disobedience sinned against the chief Vicar of Christ, and against Christ
himself the Judge and Iusticer. See, I pray you, how that ye are nothing
better then Southsayers and Idolaters, and as Ethnicks and Publicans, because
you obeyed not the Church when it spoke unto you by the highest Bishop. And all
this stir was, because the priests did not accept of the new authority upon
the sight of a letter written by one that was neither the highest Bishop, nor
the lowest, nor yet any Bishop at all, nor of any such credit, as he was to be
believed in this matter, as has been sufficiently proved by M. Doctor Ely in
his notes upon the Apology, and M. Collington in his defense of the slandered
priests, and was diversely touched before in other their books. But where were
these godly considerations, when this libell, so senseless, false, and
scandalous, was written and published? how was God offended hereby, or was he
not in your pious wisdom? were any censures incurred hereby of the Church, or
any punishments deserved which the civil law inflicteth upon Libellers? In
whom was that base and wicked spirit, against which you so godly inueigh in
this place, when Jesuits, the Archpriest, and their faction were authors,
spreaders, or approouers of such things? where were these godly meditations,
when the Archpriest after the peace made did spread and approve that
scandalous libell, or resolution (as he termed it) from the mother city, that
the refusers of the appointed authority, were scismaticks? I will omit to
speak of that base and wicked spirit, which carried certain gentlemen from
house to house (as he does the mountebanks from town to town) with certain
libels against particular men, where they seem to strive whether they can
excel those mountebanks in shameless and ungracious relations. I will here
say nothing of that base and wicked spirit, which makes every one of the
factious adherents to the Jesuits and Archpriest, a most infamous and
scandalous Libeller against such priests, as did delay to accept of the Archpr.
before they saw just cause, and denied afterward that they had been
schismatickes during the time of that delay. I will not urge this fellow his
Manifestation of spirits, in which all his holiness (which he pretends many
other ways) is discovered to be nothing but hypocrisy. I will only stand
upon this Apology, in which I have showed, and shall yet discover so many
falsehoods and slanders, as no man of indifferency can deny, but that it is a
most notorious libell, and proceeded of a most base and wicked spirit. And so I
will leave it to the author his own judgment here given, what sin it is to
libell, how grievous in the sight of God and man, and how great censures and
extreme punishments are due unto him for it, when he shall come to his
answer, as the priests have been in the face of the whole world: which in the
opinion of all learned men, has freed their books from the ignominious name
of libels.

But here are certain circumstances, which aggrauate the matter against the
priests: as first, that a religious community is here defamed: but this is
false, for the society is not touched by the priests, but certain men of the
society, such as we hope the whole society will not bear out in their wicked
courses. And if they should bear them out therein, and thereby make themselves
a party, then must the religious community expect no other privilege, then any
other irreligious company. And I cannot but marvel, how M.D. Ely in this
Epistle to M. D.W. (prefixed to his notes upon the Apology) blames the
Priests for opposing themselves (as he mistaketh them) against the whole
society: for they have not in all their books used any such general terms,
as may include the whole body of the society when they have spoken of
Jesuits: but in handling particular matters have sufficiently discovered whom
they have meant, when they have spoken of Jesuits, yea they have in plain
terms, and particularly affirmed, and published in print, that they do not
touch the body of the society, but some particular men, as may be seen in
their preface to the book dedicated to the Inquisition, page 5. where they make
this protestation, Neque quae de societate hic dicentur, in vniuersam
societatem dicta velimus, cui tantum tribuimus quantu^ eius virtus, and
doctrina postulant, hic tantum particulares quorundam actiones conquerimur,
etc. Neither will we, that what is said here of the society, be said of the
whole society, to which we do attribute as much as their virtue and learning
deserve, we do complain here of the particular actions of some only, etc.
And as it should seem, this matter troubles the author of this Apology much
more, as it is against a few Jesuits, then as it is against all the rest,
which causes himself still to forget himself, or his matter rather, when any
occasion occurreth as it does often to speak of the Jesuits, and here he
runs along after them with these admirations, what manner of people they be
for diverse respects, that are here discovered, although they were not the same
men, which are here discovered: and of what account with our very enemies
themselves, of what other then hypocrites, matchiuilians and traitors to their
Country? some of them being Superiors (as every parish in London has
scholemasters, yea and some in hier offices) some of singular merit toward the
common cause, such cause perhaps, as to which the infamy of Catholic priests
must be judged most necessary: others notorious for their known virtues, how
gladly would blind Hugh see some of them here in England, for then, neither
should the good have cause to grieve, nor the bad be conformed in their
naughty course, who seeing the supposed best to be so bad, they do rashly
conjecture, that there is none good, for which folly of theirs, they and their
bad guides must answer at the last day, and smart long before, unless they
repent themselves while they have time to repent. Thus much concerning this
authors conceit of the sin of libelling retorted upon himself and his
partners in this Apology, and other his Libels, which he will never be able to
justify. Now follow his exceptions against the two books, which he terms
Libels, wherein he purposes to discover foul faults to have been, as falsehood,
deceit, malice and slanderous calumniations. Always provided, that whereas
the Reader has still expected, and lived in hope to see somewhat to the
purpose, now he must take this cold comfort to be remitted back to the
Chapters before handled for a larger proof of what is to be said. First he
begins with the latin book, which is dedicated to his Holiness, whose
title is, Declaratio motuum, etc. A declaration of the sturres and troubles
that have risen in England between the Jesuits on the one side, together with
M. G. Blackwel Archpriest in all things favoring them, and the Seminary
Priests on the other side, from the death of Cardinal Allen of pious memory,
unto this year 1601. In this very title (says he) and first page 5. or 6.
abuses and sleights and shifts may be noted to be used toward his Holiness
etc. for first whereas the whole world knows, that their controversy is with
the Archpriest as appears by their Appellation to his Holiness, an. 1600. 17.
Nouemb. and others before, and that their stomach against the Jesuits is for
standing with him, and for as by the whole discourse of both these books
appears, here they change the whole controversy, and do say, that it is with
the Jesuits and M. Blackwell, that favors them so as he is put here, but as
an Appendix in the cause which is plain falsehood.

This is the first fault which is found in the Latin book: and all things
considered, it will not prove a fault, much less so foul as this author would
it should seem to be: the appellation was made from the Archp. and not from
the Jesuits, because appellations are made from such only, as are and take upon
them to be superiors. Such are not the Jesuits over the Secular priests,
neither does the appealing from the Archpr. clear the Jesuits, who in the
appellation it self are proved to be the chief fountains of all these
broils, as all the world may see in the Appeal. And he does very falsely
affirm that the whole discourse shows no other, as himself can remember,
when he lists: Namely in his table prefixed to his Apology number. 23. where he
cites this sentence out of his Latin book page 30. Iesuitae etc. The Jesuits
dispairing to be able to get superiority to themselves by way of voices or
suffrages (of the priests) and on the other side hating and flying to admit
episcopal dignity (into England) thought to procure dominion to themselves
under the mask of an other man's person, etc. Has this fellow now forgotten
what his own judgment was there of the priests their conceit of this matter?
has not he persuaded his reader, that the principal and only ground of this
our present contention, and scandalous controversy, is the very same disease
of emulation partly of Lay men against priests, and partly of priests against
religious men, especially the Fathers of the Society, with whom at this
present they have to do? Apol. cap. 1. fol. 2. And would he now have his
reader believe, that the whole world knows the contrary, and that it is not
principally against the Jesuits? And whereas it is here said that the Archpr.
is put as an Appendix, some indeed do think, that he has bound himself
Apprentice to the Jesuits: but I do not hear that the priests do talk of
the one or the other.

The second foul fault which here is found is, that the priests of the
Seminaries residing in England, are put for the opposite part, of which, says
he, these contentions are not the twentieth part, and this is proved by their
own confessions, in the former chapter. Perchance this fellow has relation to
the question made to M Bishop, and M. Charnocke, How many they did certainly
know to approve this their mission, and to be privy to the matters, that
should be proposed, etc. Chap 9. Apol. 131. To which these priests made their
answer according to their own certain knowledge, which answer is there
deceitfully inserted, as has been showed, and is here as deceitfully again
brought by him for his purpose, their confessions being, that there were Quam
plures sacerdotes, Very many priests, as appears where M. Charnocks
examination is set down fol. 130, which he there proved by certain letters,
which he brought with him, which testified as much. And by their answer of
their certain knowledge, which they could not have, but by present or
particular letter: this fellow takes a silly advantage to prove that they were
not the 20. part by their own confession. The priests did call themselves
priests of the Seminaries, because they were so, and by this name are
distinguished from the Jesuits, who are the principal faction against them,
and are priests, who sooner or later for the most part did forsake the
Seminaries.

Thirdly, they say in this title (says he) that their contentions against the
Jesuits began from the death of Card. Allen. They neither challenge unto
themselves any co^tentions against the Jesuits, neither do they say when any
begun, but only entitled the book in this manner, A declaration of stirs
and troubles which are or were between the Jesuits and them, since the death
of the Cardinal, unto such a year. If a man should write of the wars in the
Low Countries from the death of the Prince of Parma, until this present year,
must he be said to affirm, that the wars began then? yet cannot this author
prove, that there was any public opposition, or common stirs in England
before the Cardinals death: but that rather what was begun, (as he says Cap.
2. fol. 85. in the Cardinals time by Libertines, and factious people,) was
retained somewhat from breaking forth by his authority while he lived, and this
is most true: for the Jesuits who lusted after a superiority over the priests,
were afraid to make this their pride known, either by themselves, or by their
factious adherents, so long as he lived; But the good Cardinal being dead in
the year 94, all factious brake out together; Fa. Weston the Jesuit, and his
factions begun a common wealth in Wisbich, and under a color of a stricter
rule, all the priests there must become his subjects, or live in perpetual
infamy, some Jesuits abroad took order for the priests their welcome to all
such places, whither they were not directed by them. The matters of Rome I
leave to them to whom that belongs, and although this fellow is so impudent,
as to allege the Cardinal Allen his letter to prove that some of the
seditious (as he terms them) had begun to stir against the Fathers in
England in his days, his reader may easily discover his falsehood if he will
turn (not to the place by him cited, to wit, the 4. Chapter, for there is
nothing to be seen) but to the second Chapter, for there he shall find that
the priests are no more charged for any stir against the Jesuits, then the
Jesuits for their sedition against the priests, and moreover that what
difference there was, could not be but some private quarrels between some
private man, and not any such public difference or dislike, as this is of
which the book entreated which was dedicated to his Holiness, as I have showed
where this letter is set down by this author.

Fourthly they said, Ad S. D. N. Clementem 8. exhibita ab ipsis sacerdotibus,
that this declaration was exhibited by the Priests themselves to our most holy
father Pope Clement the 8. This word was is of his own addition. It is said to
be exhibited, in that it was presently to be sent by them; And if it came not
to his Holiness his hands so soon as they intended, the fault was not in them
who took all such means for it as they could, so that they might justly use
the phrase, which they did, without deserving any blame therefore. And the
priests are said to exhibit it themselves, for that they writ it, and were to
present it in their own names, and the not coming of it to his Holiness view
will justify their printing of many copies, that some one, by one or other,
might come into his hands, and the shamelessenes of this fellow may the more
now appear, who would so peremptorily inform his reader, that the priests
were loath, that he should know of it (having by printing taken a most certain
way for it) and much lother to answer it before him, before whom the whole
world will witness for them, that they have been to answer it. The fifth cavil
is at the sentence of Scripture, which the priests put to their books, as
though they had abused it in using it in that place; But gald nagges must have
pardon, if being touched they winch. The justness of the priests their cause,
will bear them out against all heretics, hypocrites, and Atheists, and will
stop the mouths of them, how potent soever they either are, or would seem to
be among their like. Thus much is implied in that sentence, and no less was in
the priests their meaning when they prefixed it to their Book.

Sixthly and lastly it is said in this first page (says he) that it was printed
Rhotomagi apud Iacobum, etc. At Roane in France in the house of James, etc. And
hereupon he keeps such a foul stir, as if it had been a whole halfepenny
matter, where the book had been printed, or that the Pope might have thought
the priests cause to be the more just, if the book were printed at Roane. I
pray you good sir tell me, what does the being here or there printed, help or
hinder the matter in question? what if it be printed at Constantinople or at
Cosmop? If this fellow could show what avail may come to the priests, or what
prejudice to the other part, by having their book go forth as printed at
Roane, he might have bestowed a little of his pains, taken here about it, to
some good purpose: but his exception being so absurd as it is, I will turn
him to the Printers boy to reason this matter with him, who, for any thing that
I can as yet learn, set this (which he cites) to the book, and the boy
finding this fellow some equal match for him, will perchance spur him this
question, Why he should conster Rhotomagi, Printed at Roane, rather then to be
^olde at Roane; or why he should interpret Rhotomagi, at Roane in France,
rather then at Roane in England, there being in England diverse places named by
as strange names as Roane is, as Scotland, Jury, little Britain, and such like;
yea the little boy will remember perchance that some of F. P. books, which
were printed here in England, are said to have been printed at Doway, and yet I
trow this author will not say for a hundred pound, that F. P. can lie, or at
the least, that he abused any man in saying so. But I will leave this author
and the Printers boy together, for they seem to be very well coupled to argue
this matter: only I wish, that this author would beware, what terms he does
use in his anger: for it may be, the Printer will call him twice or thrice by
his name, if he be miscalled himself, or perchance the Printer or his boy will
tell him, that there are as good Printers in London as in Roane, although they
themselves were not so expert, and put him to a nonplus, for saying, that the
book was printed under the protection of my L. of London.

Well then (says he) these six absurdities, shifts, and falsehoods, being
discovered in the very first page of the book, as a preamble to the rest, and
used even to his Holiness himself, we may imagine what the remnant will be. The
reader may imagine, that it is not worth the stooping for, which this man
lets lie, if it be not too hot, or too heavy for him, as here also he
excepteth against the priests their printing of their books: notwithstanding
the scandal which may grow by the coming abroad of these dissensions: to
which, answer is made, that they must look to it, who drive the priests to
this course, having no other way left for them to recover their fame, which was
most injuriously taken away from them. He excepteth also against that which is
said of Card. Allen his favor toward the priests, which he says he has
refuted in the third and fourth Chapter, in which this author has committed
(as often he does in this kind) a more gross fault, then if he had said,
that his book had been printed at Roane in France: for this would have
troubled none, but some cauilling fool: and these tricks to refer his
reader so often to such places, where he shall find nothing of that matter for
which he is sent hither, may trouble even his gentle readers patience. Well yet
you must go look in the third Chapter for a matter, which is not there
touched by him: there is in the fourth Chapter some proof, that the Cardinal
disliked some actions, in which were some temporal men, and some priests, long
ago, many years before these stirs began, which belong nothing to the
controversy now in question, which is, whether the priests were schismatickes,
who deferred to accept the Archpr. before they did see the Breue, or to these
private quarrels, of which it seems (by a letter of his set in the second
Chapter) he was informed before his death: or thirdly to the stirs which the
Jesuits began in the College about the same time. To conclude, there is
nothing recited there, which is here affirmed; neither is that which is laid to
Fa. Heywood his chalenging of legantine power in England any way solued, but in
this manner: and this is all the difference, that ever was between F. Heywood
and F. Parsons: as if the question had been, which is the way to Poplington?
yea there is as much confessed, as F. Heywood was charged with for the
particulars, as any man may see in this 164. leaf. The readers must go look
here and there for diverse other matters: but D. Haddocke and M. Martin Array
are here to be defended by the author, for that poor resistance which they
made unto the two priests. Indeed these good Proctors came unto the two
priests within two days, or three of their arrival at Rome, and were so hot
with them, as M. Martin Array stirred not out of his chamber above a fortnight
after: he had been all that while possessed with an ague, which some of his
friends said, that he had before he took that heat, but a sudden joy
perchance, that the two priests were that day to be apprehended, put life and
health into him upon the seast day of S. Tho. of Canterbury, and made him come
abroad: and what these Proctors did after, at the appearance of the two priests,
I have before shevved, and what M. Martin writ into England thereof.

The particulars which touch these Proctors their persons I know not, and
therefore I leave it unto them to declare, who thought it expedient to make
them know in this cause: yet do I not well understand, how there was any
affinity between Cardinal Allen and D. Haddocke (which this fellow will needs
have for the Doctors credit) neither of them having been at any time married,
and I have heard that M. Martin Array was extraordinarily favored by Sir
Francis Walsingham, by whom he was admonished to depart out of England, before
some matters should chance, which would shortly chance, and would be some let
to his passage: which kind of usage at that time, to wit, when the great
trouble was in the year 1586. being laid together with his being then set at
liberty, might give suspicion to some, that all was not as it should have been,
although in times of less trouble some men have found the favor by
extraordinary means to have their liberty at the intercession of some great
men, or some highly favored friends. Now follows his defense of M. Standish,
and diverse other. And whereas the priests have set down in their books, that
Master Standish had given his name to become a Jesuit, and therefore no fit
man to deal for them in the procuring of this subordination, which is
pretended to have been made, to take up controversies, which were between
Jesuits and priests, as cap. 8. fol. 124. this author affirms, or priests and
priests, and yet was the principal instrumentas is well known to all men) and
it is confessed in the same chapter fol. 98. and 99: this author lets that
go without any word to the contrary, for intrueth he cannot deny it, and
takes occasion to say somewhat, touching that which the priests affirm of M.
Standish, that is, that he did use the name of the priests, as if he had been
sent by the priests, whereas indeed he was not, and that he himself said at
his return (in the hearing of diverse priests, who will justify it) that he
had their interpretatiue consent, and that he presumed that they would consent
to that which he did. But when this author comes to prove, that M. Standish
did nothing without the priests their consent, in the procuring of this
Subordination, he returns his reader to the eighth Chapter for diverse priests
letters, which already I have showed were all written after that this
Subordination was made, which argues a notable impudency in this author,
that he will so peremptorily affirm, whatsoever may sound any way in the
ears of those, whom affection blinds, to make for his purpose, although in
the Judgment of the indifferent he works his confusion. For other disproofe
also of M. Blackwels, and the Cardinal Caietans ignorance in our English
affairs, his Reader must go back to the eighth and ninth Chapter: he sends
also his Reader to the third Chapter, to see how falsely the Jesuits are said
to seek their own, and that they trouble the peace of England, and persecute
more then heretics. To the which it has been answered, that they do seek
their own in some sort, for so much, as pride and what else follows thereon,
may be called theirs, and that also it might be said that they seek quae Jesus
Christi, (as this author does there challenge) those things which are belonging
to Jesus Christ: for so much, as the alms of Catholics for relief of priests
and other Catholics may be said to belong to Jesus Christ; and that they
labor by infamy to seduce the Catholic Laity from that love, and reverence,
which they owe unto Catholic priests, which is a persecution against the
priests more grievous, then any that has been raised by any heretics against
them. For whereas there has been a most charitable correspondence between the
Catholic Laytie and the priests: now the world is come to this pass, that he
is no zealous or godly Catholic, that will not run from place to place to
disgrace all such priests as refuse to be guided by the Jesuits, or in this
present controversy will not acknowledge, that they lived in schism, and
deserved eternal shame and reproach, because they deferred their obedience to
an authority, until they did see, what was their Superior his will
concerning it: at what time they all submitted themselves unfeignedly,
whatsoever this author most wickedly suggesteth to his reader in this place,
without any proof at all, upon certain of his most absurd surmizes; for which
also he sends his reader to the former chapter, where he shall see perhaps,
and as it is supposed, and it is very likely, and such like stuff, as a man
who esteemed of his credit would be ashamed of in so weighty a matter. And for
his foolish assertion, that if it had been unfeigned, it would have wrought some
permanent effect, there is an old saying, that there must go two words to a
bargain, and so say I, that if there must be peace between two parts, both
the parts must do their parts to preserve it: for who sees not that it is a
most absurd jest, that if peace be broken by the wickedness of the one part,
the other should be blamed for not dealing sincerely, and unfeignedly? the
priests have said, that the Jesuits and the Archpriest did break the peace,
and they have showed how, and that which they have said herein, cannot be
controlled, and that is, that Fa Jones the Jesuit, after the peace made,
fetched out of hell it self (as by the event it appears) that most wicked
paradox of his fellow Jesuit Fa. Lister, concerning schism, and the Archpriest
also after the peace made, brake the same peace by publishing a resolution from
the mother city, that the refusers of the appointed authority were
schismatikes, which resolution he affirmed he had either from F. Warford, or Fa
Tichborne, a pair of young English Jesuits, and this is the Epistle which is
not only mentioned, but set down in the book to his Holiness page 63, and
which this author slily ouerslippeth, and stops his readers mouth with the
marginal note, which is put by the priest, to wit; origo etc. The beginning of
the new contention was a violent Epistle of the Archpriests, which here this
author cites, and runs in his new found mild and religious terms upon
the priests; because they would break out for an angry Epistle, and so
laughing in his sleeue, to think how he can cousin the blind obedient, which
must believe any thing that he tells them, he shuts up this matter,
without telling them what this angry Epistle was, or that it was set down in
the book to his Holiness, least that he should have discovered the weakness
of his cause, and consequently his own wickedness, who in so weak a case would
use so wicked terms against Catholic priests.

This you see how this fellow has answered the book which is dedicated to his
Hol. and what poor geere he picketh out, sometime out of the discourse,
sometime out of the margent, and lets this discourse go quietly by him, and
with all this niceness, and choice of some place, to which he might make
colorable show of answer, he brings nothing, but what being examined will
breed his own shame and confusion.

The Appeal (he says) shall be answered by the Pope, who in a brief of the 17.
of August. 1601. refused it for peace sake, as there is said, being induced
thereunto perchance by such, as were loath to hear these matters come in
question: yet since this Breue, all the world is made a witness, that these
matters have been handled at Rome, and that there was just cause to appeal
notwithstanding the fine gloses here made by this author, who wishes
perchance by this time that he had not so much commended this Pope.

Lastly he agitateth a letter of M. Mush his writing to Mon Seignior Morto, a
Bishop in Italy who was joined with Doctor Jews Bishop of Cassana in many
affairs of the Church: which letter is said in the priests their books, to
have been sent by the two messengers unto him. And in reason the Priests (who
said so) should have had credit, until the contrary could have been proved
(which can never be) with more substantial arguments, then are here brought:
To wit, it was not found among their papers, as though they (having been 17.
days in Rome, before that the Jesuits and the Sbirri carried them to prison)
could not convey it (as it was directed) before that their papers were seized
on, or secondly the two messengers never spoke to Fa. Parsons of such a letter,
ergo they carried no such letter with them, as though Fa. Parsons were the man,
that must know all things, and was not rather kept so short, as diverse in the
City noted, how he was troubled for that he could get no other answer of the
priests to his curious question, then that time and place should discover what
they had to say. And although afterward he was admitted by them to be their
examiner, it was not without the condition, that they should not be bound to
answer to his questions, which condition the Fiscall did take, and agree unto,
before he could obtain of them to let Fa. Parsons be the examiner: and it may
be thought, that when they were asked such idle questions, they did use this
license, or their own rights, no oath in this kind binding any man to answer
to all things proposed unto them, and Fa. Parsons may call to mind, if it
please him, that to some questions he was directly denied an answer. The
matters contained in M. Mush his letter, are there so sufficiently handled, as
this author says nothing thereof in this place, but refers his reader
back to foam places already handled, and answered; he glaunceth at that which
is there said of the necessity of the sacrament of confirmation in England, for
which all the Catholics (if they will) may see his egernesse against their
good and comfort in this time of persecution, that he cannot hear of any who
shall say it is necessary, but he is straight on his jack for it. And because
one said once that it was either most necessary in time of persecution, or a
vain, and as a superfluous ceremony in Gods Church, because there only is the
proper use thereof, he plays upon the latter words, as if they had been
affirmed by any one, and applies them to such as speak for the necessity of
the sacrament. He excepteth also against that which M. Mush affirms of Fa.
Parsons his State books, and is agreeued, that he only is named among such as
have written of such a subject. And for the love he bears to Cardinal Allen,
and other of our Nation, he sets down in print, what they have written
concerning such matters, as though their fact did excuse Fa Parsons. but why is
Fa. Parsons only named? because Fa Parsons being only alive of those writers,
of which M. Mush spoke, was consequently more likely then any of the other to
write again of such matters, and also because Fa. Parsons his books of
Titles, are professedly State books, and (being writ in favor more of the
Spanish faction, then any other) were the more likely to bring affliction upon
Catholics, (the Spaniardes having given so often attempt to invade our
Country.) Fa. Parsons his dealings with the Students in Spain to come in
those Armadoes, are evident proofs of his meaning, and consequently his books
might be judged most hurtful to Catholics. This author also would persuade
his reader, that there was some great matters between Master Mush and M.
Collington, and others, and that they were discontented either with others
actions concerning the association, because they had diverse conceits for the
proceeding in it: which suspicion ought to be taken away from every indifferent
man, that shall understand, that they all came to a conclusion, what was fit to
be done, as in all orderly proceedings it falls out, where diverse men at the
first utter their diverse conceits. M. Mush is also here taxed for his letter to
F. Parsons, which is set at the latter end of the English book, and the matter
is made very holy, that a cow should give a good soap of milk, and kick it
down afterward with her heels, and so having commended F Parsons for his
writings, pertaining to devotion, and controversies, for which, and his good
will, as I think, all the priests do thank him, as also for what other good
deeds he has done, and for reward pray to God for him to send him his grace,
this author sets himself to answer the English book entitled, The Copies
of certain discourses, which also is here to be defended: but first this
author is to be told, that he does over lash too much, when fol. 171. he
affirms, that neither M. Mush nor his fellows have ever written any books
concerning devotion, or controversies, for they have written much in both
kinds, although they had not that means which F. Parsons had, to set them
forth: and M. Mush in particular put his pen to paper against M. Bell, now an
enemy, as now he has done against these factious Jesuits, which have
attempted to trouble Gods Church here in England. This author begins his
answer to the English book with as foolish an exception, as he took to the
Latin, to wit, that it is said to be printed at Roane: to which the answer is
already given, as also to that false tale devised by him, that their books
were printed under my L. of London his protection. The Meditation is as
foolish, which he makes upon the sentence of Scripture prefixed to the English
book, Dicet piger, etc. The slothful excuse themselves, saying, there is a
Lion in the way: which carries his sense with it so plain, that it needs no
such comment as this fellow makes; it being well known, that many priests
and lay men do stand for the Jesuits and Archpriest in this their faction
against the priests, which would not if they feared not the like hard measure
to that, which is meated to the priests He stumbleth very grossly at the
Preface, and the two first letters, with references where his reader should
find them confuted: but there he gives them small comfort, as may be seen:
he would seem a little to canuace M. Champneys letter, which follows, and
frames his adversary to his mind, finding fault where there was none, as any
man may see that will. That which Ma. Champney calls an extraordinary
authority; this author turns it to an extraordinary dignity, as if the
priests had pretended, that they never heard of an Archpriest before. Then he
comes on to prove the absolute authority of the Pope, to give the Priests a
Superior, which the priests did always acknowledge, as appears by their
yielding unto it when they saw his Holiness Breue, before which time it could
not be proved to be his Holiness order. That which the priests alleged out of
the Canons, was brought to prove what was the order of Gods Church, which
order was broken by the appointing of a Superior among priests, without their
priuitie or consent. The letters which are cited in the 8. Chapter to prove
the consent of the priests, or desire to have a subordination, are there showed
to have been written long after the Archpriest was appointed by the Cardinal
Caietane. In fine, M. Do. Ely in his notes upon the Apology, does defend M.
Champney against this Libeller, in so ample manner, as it were superfluous to
say any thing more thereof.

Next unto M. Champney his letter the priests set F. Parsons his letter to M.
B. upon which there is a censure by M. I. B. which sorely troubles this good
man's patience, especially for that F. Parsons letter is divided into 24 parts
by the censurer, and so (says he) leapeth from one to the other, forth and
back, referring you now to this, and now to that, etc. This man knows well
his own disease: he would go on still, and tell his reader now this, now
that, as it comes into his head, and if his reader should fall to conferring
one place of his discourse with another, then is he utterly shamed, his sly
tricks are found, his falsehood is discovered, his contradiction laid open, and
whatsoever an evil cause needs to color it, is showed to be in his: yet
lest he should seem to say nothing, he will show, that there was a
contradiction found in F. Par. letter, which he says was no contradiction. And
how does he prove this: F. P. says, that from May to November, is more then
half a year; A jolly wise saying of so grave a father. But where, or when did
this said saw pass him? Or how does this alter the case more then if there
were but two days between May, and November? The contradiction was, that F.
Parsons said in his letter, that no letter had yet appeared from M. Bishop, or
M. Charnocke. And in the same letter he confesses that he received a stale
letter from M. Bishop. The next point for which the censurer deserves blame
is, for that he affirms that F. Parsons said, that an heretical proposition
was laid to M. Blackwels charge, and would not himself affirm so much: he
knew nor perchance, what Fa. Parsons meant. F. Parsons said it, and Fa. Parsons
must prove it. And whereas it is here said, that M. Bishop affirmed it at Rome,
and proved it by a hearsay from M. Charnocke, but M. Charnocke said nothing
of it: I wonder why M. Charnocke was not asked the question, but if it had been
so, Ma Charnocke would have said so unasked; And so he must have done, if he
had spoken of it: for as it seems Fa Parsons had no will to have the matter
brought in question, and as it is to be thought not for any good will he bare
either to M. Charnocke, or any of his fellows. This author is also contented
to let go the 21. reasons given in the censure for the justifying of the
priests their forbearance to admit of the authority before the Breue came. His
reader must take his word, that he has assoiled all these difficulties before:
he was a cockish scholar, that made them, and there is an end of a lubberlike
answer to the censure, and the 21. reasons contained therein, and to the
particulers also, there discovered of the two priests their entertainment in
Rome, and what chanced to them there, and afterward: to wit, the Jesuits and
the Proctors inpostures to give a pious color to their wicked actions against
the two priests.

There follows lastly (says this author) the answer of M. Bishop to the
same Epistle (F. Parsons letter) containing two parts: the first about the
justifying the causes of their not yielding to the Card letters, wherein for
that there is nothing singular from those reasons, which his fellows have
alleged before, and by us in diverse parts of this Apol. have been examined,
and showed to be either false, or feeble, we pass them over in this place.
His reader must have a strong faith that he has seen wonders in the Apology;
And that he needs no note in the margent, to direct where any thing has been
proved false or feeble, he must remember, if he can: if he cannot remember, yet
he must make himself believe, that he does remember it, or else he shall be
accounted among the factious.

The second part treats of their usage (says he) in Rome, wherein diverse
particulers are said by him with such passion, as men that knew him before do
wonder at him, seeing the contrary may be proved by most authentical
testimonies and witnesses yet alive. But until these authentical testimonies
be produced, M. Bishops credit will ouerpasse this authors impostures, why were
not these testimonies and witnesses produced? wherefore are they kept, as
though they were ashamed to be seen? how could the story of their usage be set
down more in particular, then is set down in the books published by the
priests? and what one particular is proved to be otherwise, then there is
said? And as for the exception against M. Bishop for a passion: that is a most
foolish exception; for M. Bishop having showed how falsely he was accused and
slandered, uses these words, page 174. This fellow miscounteth the page, and
the sentence. What an irreligious and damnable slander then was that invented
of purpose, to have us taken, and shut up before we were heard, that they might
have the delivery of our message, and be our interpreters and Proctors, and so
make us say what they listed, and our matter to be such as they would have it?
This fellow cites his words in such sort, as if he would have his reader not
only to think, that M. Bishop was in a passion, but out of this sense also,
that an irreligious and damnable slander was invented of purpose to have us
taken and shut up before we were heard, etc. As though Ma. Bishop had called
his restraint an irreligious and damnable slander. For by this means will this
author turn away his readers conceit from consideration of the slander, to
consider only of the restraint, as if that were the slander mentioned, which
is a most absurd thing. Yet must his reader so conceive of it, and this author
in this 177. leaf (having played some of his old prancks,) concludes in this
manner; How then do they exclaim, and call this restraint of theirs an
irreligious, and damnable slander? But for the justifying of the restraint,
note I pray you, how this author bestirreth himself.

But to this (says he) we ask him ( M. Bishop) again, is this so heinous, or
damnable, or unusual a matter to restrain a couple of Priests, where so many
complaints had been written of their presumption and contempt, and of the
scandal raised by their contention, as we have set down before? And does not
every Prince thus to greater men then they are, committing them first, and
after hearing their cause? To this question I answer, that the two Priests
coming to the Judge at their great charge, and with great pains (as a winters
journey from England to Rome, will prove to an indifferent man) were not to be
thought either that they would run away, or hide themselves from the Judge,
neither does any Prince commit any man, that offers himself uncalled to his
trial, unless the subject be such, as the King may fear him, that he will
raise strength against him, as may overthrow him and justice. How many do we
daily see, that are subject to the law, even of life and death, who go at
liberty upon their friends bonds, that they shall appear before the judges at
the time appointed, to answer to what shall be pleaded against them? Prisons
are only used for such, as of whom there is cause of fear, that they will
not come to their trial. these Priests came to Rome voluntarily, and being
dealt withal very earnestly by Fa Parsons to return into England with letters
from the general of the Jesuits and the Protector to the Superior of the
Fathers, and the Archpriest (himself confesses in his letter of the 9. of
October 1599 which is set in this English book) it is an argument, that they
had no will to start, but to go forward in the business, for which they
voluntarily went. But besides all this, whereas this fellow talks of
informations given against them, and cites in the margent, cap. 9. we have
proved, that all these letters were written long after that his Holiness was
induced to restrain them: for as there we have showed, his Holiness was
resolved upon the 17. of October to restrain them, and the first letters,
which are brought there by this author, and could concern the two priests,
were not written until the 25. of that month, and were to go to Rome to the
Protector, and from him back again to Ferrara, where his Holiness lay, and
was long before resolved to restrain the two priests, as the letters of F.
Bellarmine (now Cardinal) do prove, which are cited by this author in his 9.
Chapter 120.

Further (says this fellow) we would ask them, Were not they heard afterward
so much, as they would say or write? No good sir: for when they demanded the
copy of the libell which was put up against them, before the two Cardinals,
Caietane and Burghese, by which occasion was given them to say and write, they
might not have it. And if their earnestness to have that libel to make their
answer, had not been so great, there would have wanted matter and cause to
have kept them prisoners afterward: for this was the cause why M. Bishop was
committed again to prison, for that he was over earnest (as they said) in this
point: and being demanded why M. Charnocke was also committed, there was no
cause given but this, that he and M. Bishop were fellows, and for good
fellowship they must be kept a while longer in several prisons close, as they
were before, that neither of them might come to the other, but at the Jesuits
(who were their Iaylors) pleasure, which within a week after this their
appearance, were once suffered to salute each other, and to recreate themselves
at such sport as the Students made, but the two priests were guarded by the
Jesuits M. Bishop was guarded by Tremaine, who was Minister, or Vicerector of
the College, and F. Tho. Owen, who was the Confessarius in the College, and M.
Charnocke was guarded by Fa. Parsons and Fa. Tichborne, who was the Prefect of
the studies, and then were these carried into the hall, where the Sudents were
to recreate themselves, and were set one in the one side of the hall, the other
in the other side between their guard, for an hour or more, and afterward were
committed, as before: but they were told, that this was the beginning of their
liberty, yet were they kept close prisoners about six weeks after this: and
this I have set down, as I find it written in the story, which I have seen
of their usage, to show that they were not heard, what they would have said,
and written, and that they were committed again, and kept in prison, because
of their earnestness to say, and write more then their adversaries had willed
they should. And to this second question, Had they not their papers brought
unto them, to see, read, and interpret? I answer, that in the time of their
examinations, the peticions of the priests, which they carried with them, were
brought unto them to see, and set down in their examinations, what they were,
and for what end they brought them, but no other papers were ever brought unto
them, neither could they obtain to see any of them, after that they were taken
from them, although they stood earnestly to the denial of some matters, which
were said to be in their papers, namely where it was said that they brought a
paper with them, which was directed unto them in England, in this manner, To
your L L. of which forgery there is enough said in the censure page 127.128.
Had they not license (says this author) after all examinations made to go,
and speak with his Holiness if they would? No indeed: For as it is here
confessed in the Apology cap. 9. fol. 134. M. Bishops examination ended 25.
January, and M. Charnockes 4 February, and M. Bishop was not set at liberty,
until the 22. of April following, nor M. Charnock until the sixth of May, to
wit, two days, or three after that M. Bishop was commanded away from Rome. So
that they were never at liberty together after that they were imprisoned, were
they abridged of any lawful justification, that they would make for
themselves, or was ever any petition of theirs, or demand not heard, or
considered of? Yes marry Sir: for whosoever did hear of their petitions, and
demands, or considered of them privately, it is most certain, that they were
neither suffered to confer one with another about those matters in which they
were joined, nor to have the advice of any advocate or Lawyer, as they desired,
when they were cast into prison they knew not why: neither was the exception
liked of, which they took against the Cardinal Caietane, as being no fit man
to be their judge, in a matter concerning himself, to wit, the institution of
this authority made by him, neither were they suffered to have the copy of
the Libel, when they demanded it of the Cardinal Caietane, to make their
answer thereunto. And if this were not an abridging of lawful Justification,
I confess I know not how a lawful Justification may be abridged. And thus
with judgment that the priests will abide no government, he ends this
chapter, and proves his suspicion out of an answer which M Bishop made, Sunt
Sacerdotes, etc. they are secular priests, and will live freely, as it
becomes priests, and will not be bound to Rules: for this indeed sticks in
the Jesuits stomachs, that they are not esteemed of all men as their Masters,
Directors, Lawmakers, and Rulers, and for that cause, under pretense of good
order, they do deface all those who will not subject themselves unto them. If
the priests determine to live as becomes priests, they do as much as
belongs unto their estate, which if other men would so have done, these
stirs had never been in England, howsoever they deceive the ignorant with a
false show of holiness, and the name of living under Rule. But now we come to
the principal part of all this Apology, and that is to maintain Fa. Parsons
credit, in which the twelfth chapter is almost all spent.

CHAP. 17. How this Author busieth himself to purge Fa. Parsons of his
expulsion out of Baliol College at Oxenford and other matters wherewith he is
charged. Apolog. cap. 12.
IN the twelfth chapter this author handles the accusations (which he calls
calumniations, and slanders) which he says are laid upon Fa. Parsons without
all foundation of truth, or regard of Christian and priestly modesty: hurtful
to the Catholic cause, and grateful to the enemy: Such a good conceit has
this author of Fa. Parsons. He will also here set down a letter of a blessed
Martyr, touching one of the chief calumniations: which letter he confesses in
the end of the Appendix, he did mistake, and has for shame pasted on a piece
of paper, where else all the world would have discovered him, to have been a
most wicked calumniatour: Thus he begins.

By no one thing more do we think our discontented and deceived brethren, to
discover the lamentable spirit, whereunto they seem to be given over at this
present, then by their passionate proceeding toward this Reverend religious
man, whose merits toward them, and theirs, and us all are not unknown. He
might have added, nor unrequited in all such sort as honest priests may: who
are always ready to discharge themselves in all grateful manner toward him,
or any other, who shall deserve it, which doubtless he does not, who for less
then a mess of pottage, looks for more then a large inheritance, and under
color of doing well for some, does mischief to all, and lays a plot only
for his own preferment: as has been showed by the attempts which have been
made by him, and his officers in the Colleges erected by his means, where
priests and others have been induced to subscribe to foreign titles, yea and
to come in person against their own country: for which in common sense he
looked for a reward at their hands, in whose behalf he had thus seduced those,
who were under his charge: which makes me marvel more at the boldness of this
fellow in his applying of Scriptures against the priests in the behalf of Fa.
Parsons, especially at his blasphemy, where he says that F. Parsons (a most
wicked, and sinful wretch, and in whom it is well known there is over much
possibility to deserve a far worse death, then stoning) may say with Christ
himself, and to his imitation, multa bona opera ostendi vobis, propter quod
eorum opus me lapidatis? They have returned me hatred for my love toward them:
they have hated me with unjust hatred, they have paid me evil for good, I
have procured them many benefits, for which now they go about to stone me. And
when poor fools do see such a conglomeration (to use his own word) of
Scriptures, they never reflect, how the devil himself, and other to his,
imitation does cite Scripures, and set a better show of matters, then these men
yet have done, who never came to the point of this controversy, but bear off
still. And when they say any thing concerning it, they fetch it so far off,
as a thing done in this month, must stay to be thought upon, by occasions
offered many months after, as is showed in the eighth and ninth Chapters which
this author here quoteth in the margent for his readers great comfort, and
edification: But he will pass to the particulars.

The first particulars are, that Fa. Parsons is called Parsons, alias Cowbucke.
And this is taken in very evil part, notwithstanding diverse in England are
called so alias so. And this being so ordinary a matter in England, many do
doubt that this author knows some cause, why he should winch at it, as he
does. And whereas he says, that no one of the kindred were ever so called: it
is certain that a brother of his, who lived in a house with M. Brinkly here
mentioned fol. 183. was called Cubbucke. And whereas it has been said, that by
occasion of his dealing, in some matters the capital laws were made in
England, his letters are showed of the 24 of January to the Earl of Anguise,
which do testify how he busied himself in State matters, upon his first
coming into England, although he would cloak his dealing with Religion.

The second imputation (as he calls it) that Fa. Parsons came away, is
evident, neither is it to be excused by his general care of the cause: for as
the priests say, and M. Do. Ely confirms it in his notes upon the Apology,
page 211. the two elder Seminaries did send into England more priests, and
nourished in them greater numbers of scholars at one time (as he thinks)
then these new Seminaries with the old now decayed will furnish to send into
England in diverse years. And for the number of students, priests, and proper
youths, there were more for many years together (so long as D. Allen governed)
in these Seminaries at one time, then are now, or hereafter like to be in all
the Seminaries, put them all together. I have seen (says Do. Ely) fifty
priests in one year sent out of Rhemes, and yet fifty other priests remain
in the College st^ll. Have all the Seminaries so many in them now? no, no. And
the Catholics in Scotland have had more increase by the Seminary priests, then
by the Jesuits, whatsoever this author affirms, fol. 185. For the Jesuits
taught the Scottish nation how to keep their consciences locked up, and to go
without any conscience to the protestants Churches, as good proof will be
made. But after all Fa. Parsons good deeds, for which (for so much as they may
be called good) he has and shall have many thanks, this author enlarges
himself very far, when he says, that without these good deeds it is like,
that the priests had not now been priests, neither without nor within England.
And why so? you shall find that many of them were sent in by him. This is true,
and more then a good many have been sent by him. And if we would wrangle with
him, we might say, that he sent some to disgrace the whole body of Secular
priests, or else they had never ben made priests by him, he being told before
such particulars of them, as if he had had any care of the Church, he would
not have made them priests. But put the case, that the Seminary of Rhemes, had
not decayed by the erection of the new Seminaries, why might not these, and
many more then now are, be priests, both within and without England? Can this
author say so much of all the new Seminaries together with the old also, as M.
Doct. Ely has testified for that of Rhemes only? But if this author can
deceive his reader, it is as much as he desires, which he thinks will take
best effect, if he could persuade him, that the Seminaries have more
flourished since F. Parsons going out of England, then before: although nothing
so many priests have come into England, as did before, according to the rate of
the time.

The third accusation against F. Parsons is (says this author) that after his
going out of England, he never ceased to exasperate the chief magistrates
with libels and factious letters.

This accusation depends in the proof upon the testimony of such, as to
whom his letters have been showed: and by his Greenecoat, and such like
pamphlets, but especially his book of Titles, wherein he discovers his
intention for the translation of the crown of England to the Spaniard, which
also his treacherous attempts in Spain among the students, have made more
manifest, by having them to subscribe to that title, and by thrusting them into
the inuaders ships: and all which here is saidin commendation of that book,
is and will be sufficiently answered by those, who have undertaken to answer
it. And thus also is satisfaction given to the fourth matter, against which
this author takes exception, as against a manifest calumniation; for his
letters have been intercepted and showed to diverse, although they are not put in
print. And in a late book, entitled, A Manifestation of spirits, there is
some fear showed, that his letter to the Earl of Anguise is intercepted.

The fifth calumniation (he says) might be divided into many parts: But to
quit the accusers he tells his readers, that the Temporal magistrate does
not press the priests, but favor them rather: which of late is very true,
since they have known the difference between priests and Statists, although
the favor be not so great, as it might be and may be, when her Majesty may be
thoroughly informed of the priests their truth and loyalty to her person,
crown, estate, and dignity, yet have not the priests used this little favor,
which they have had, to the afflicting any of their Catholic brethren in
durance, as here it is most maliciously suggested, but to the comfort of many.

For answer to the sixth accusation against F. Parsons, the reader must go
look in the eight Chapter, whither we also do refer the Reader for
answer, to what is there brought by this author.

Now follows a defense of Father Parsons against what is related in the
Latin book of the usage of the two priests that went to Rome. And this fellow
says all out of authentical informations. As first that Father Parsons did
interteine the two priests kindly in his own chamber. They confess they were
interteined after a long difficulty. But what authentical proof is there,
that he did it kindly, or that it was done without difficulty? He told them,
that they might not talk with any of the scholars, and no one of the
scholars can say, that ever they did talk with any of them, but one, whom M.
Bishop was very desirous to see: and he was brought to M. Bishop by the
Confessarius of the College, who stood by, and heard al which passed; M.
Charnocke did know, that there was one in the College, whose mother is his
cosen germane, and never coueted to talk with him. The quarrel which was
against these two priests, was for talking with such as were appointed by Fa.
Parsons to attend them in the hospital, whereof he, who is here said to be the
virtuous priest, was a Jesuit in a Secular priests coat, and shortly after wore
a Jesuits coat, and died among them. And the occasion of this talk was
ministered by this virtuous priest, and it was not of this present controversy,
but about M. Edward Tempest, concerning whom it was said, that he was hardly
dealt withal, in regard that such as used to intertaine priests at their first
arrival in England, were persuaded not to intertaine him; And that some of his
nearest friends were told, that in conscience they could not relieve him. An
other was a jest, which had chanced about 20. years since in the College of
Rome: which because it concerned one, who was chosen in England for an
assistant, the matter was taken hainously, yet was the occasion hereof also
ministered by tha^ virtuous priest, and the matter it self was but a merry tale.
And this is al, which was alleged by F. Owen the Jesuit in the name of F.
Parsons, against the two priests: yet does this author most shamelesly relate,
that the two priests had talked that, which might raise or renew sedition among
the scholars. But this, and all which follows, is doubtless brought in this
place, that this author might show, how he could gall his reader with his own
tale, as an authentical testimony, for other testimony there is not. That also
which is here gainesaid of Cardinal Bellarmines letter, was said upon the
relation of those who saw it, although they have not the copy to show. And for
so much as concerns the principal point of F. Bellarmines letter, to wit,
the imprisoning of the two priests, it is confessed in his Apology Cap. 4.
fol. 120. out of the same letter. The priests there being imprisoned in the
College, is reputed agreat benefit unto them. They thought it not so, but
only in this respect, that they thought their lives were more in safety in the
College, then in a common prison: But in respect of the common cause without
doubt it had been a great prejudice, had they had any hope of justice. But
their hope was small, when they saw that they were to be infamously carried away
to prison, before they could get audience. But it troubles this author much
that Fa. Parsons should be termed a Iaylor: especially there being another, who
had the keys of their chambers to bring them meat, and all other necessaries:
but he tells not who had the keys all the rest of the day. If F. Parsons had
not been seen to wear them at his girdle, this matter might have been
somewhat clenlier carried: but it was too open to be excused.

Next follows a defense of F. Parsons for his showing of M. Charnocks
handkerchiefs, and night coyfes, which (this author says) were so wrought with
silk, and gold lace, is they might seem to serve for any Secular prince in
the world, and the socks for his feet were of so fine Holland, as the
Commissary said he was well assured, that his Holiness never woare such for his
shirts. You must imagine, that this relation is very authentical, although M.
Charnock had neither handkerchiefe, nor night coife, that any Jesuit in
England would vouchsafe to wear, they were so mean: I have seen the night
coife, and it is wrought in deed with silk. For it has a border of black
silk about it 3. fingers broad: and all the rest of the cap is plain Holland,
it has some 6. pennieworth of gold, and silver edging, and as many as have
seen the cappe wonder at the impudency of this Author: who perchance did
think the cappe would not have been kept. The conceit which is made of his
handkerchiefes is much more ridiculous. And by the tale of his sockes this
Author brings into my mind a tale of a preacher, who told his parish, that
Christ fed five hundred with such a small quantity, and being told softly by
the Clarke, that they were five thousand, he bad him hold his peace like a
fool, and told him, that if he could persuade the people, that they were five
hundred, he had done a good days work. I understand that the Commissary said,
how that his Holiness did not wear so fine cloth in his bands. But this author
thought this was too much to be believed, and therefore he set it down, the
Popes shirts. Whereupon (says he) conferring with M. Charnocke himself (in
the presence of Fa Parsons and M. Bishop, upon the 8. of April, when they were
to have the first favor to speak together, and to walk at liberty in the
College at certain times) when answer was made, that priests now a days for
dissimulation are forced to use such things in England: he replied that at the
leastwise it was not needful to bring such strange delicacies to Rome, and
that albeit in some external apparel, dissimulation might be tolerable in
English Priests at home in respect of the times, yet in such thing whereof
their use was only in secret, as night-coifes, and sockes, and the like, he
saw no need of excess, or dissimulation. And this was all that passed in this
matter, upon the faith of such an honest man, as writ this Apology. But now
sir, one tale is told, the other is not told: which is that M. Charnockes
answer was to this effect, that Priests traueiling up and down in England,
were to use such things as were fit for such persons, as they bare in their
travail, especially when they lay not in Catholic houses, where they were
known, but in common Innes, where neither night-coifes, not socks were used in
secret. And for his bringing those things to Rome, his answer was, that he
had necessary use of them at his coming out of England, and making account to
return again, he had little reason to throw those things away, after that
they had the first time served him. And if it had pleased them at Rome to have
left his Truncke unsearched, the cap had never ben seen in Rome. And M. Bishop
being requested to say what he knew of this strange delicacie, affirmed that he
had never seen it before. But if M. Charnocke had either worn it by the way,
as he travailed in England to the sea coast, or at sea, where he was not
known, nor willing to be known for such as he was, what an absurd exception
was this, that he did bring such things to Rome, as though he ought to have
cast them away? But this fellow cares not what half tales he tells, to make
his Reader believe any thing, which might any way tend to the discredit of a
Priest.

The long tale which this author tells of Fa. Parsons departure from Oxford I
will omit: because it runs into many particulars, of which I have no
knowledge. But the truth is, he was expelled, and the bells were rong at
Magdalene College for his expulsion. And this author his charging the fellows
with the breach of oath, when they made known his expulsion, is very
ridiculous.

The causes of his expulsion I omit to set them down in this place, as they
are delivered unto us: only this I note, that it was not for religion,
howsoever he might have an inclination thereunto, and might be the worse liked
of therefore by some: for of this imputation or slander (as he called it) he
offered to a Gentleman of the Temple to clear himself by oath. But when the
fellows proceeded to his expulsion, and no man stood for him, he requested
that he might resign: to which the fellows yielded. Then did he write in this
manner: Ego Robertus Parsonus socius Collegij de Baliolo, resigno omne meum
ius, titulum, and claimeum, quem habeo vel habere potere, societatis mea in
dicto Collegio, quod quidem facio sponte, and coactus die decimo tertio mensis
Februarij, Anno Domini 1573. I Robert Parsons, fellow of the College of
Balioll, resign all my right, title, and claim which I have, or may have, of
my fellowship in the same College: which I do of mine own accord and
compelled thereto the 13. of February, in the year of our Lord, 1573. This
being done, he made request that this might be kept secret for a time, and that
he might keep his chambers and scholars as a fellow of the house, which was
also granted unto him: and thereupon was this decree written as follows.
Eodem tempore decretum est vnanimi consensu Magistri and reliquorum sociorum,
vt Magister Robertus Parsonus nuperrime socius retineat sibi sua cubicula, and
scholares quousque volucrit, and communia sua de Collegio habeat vsque ad
festum Paschatis immediate sequentis: That is, It is dereed at the same time by
the general consent of the Master, and the rest of the fellows that M. Robert
Parsons late fellow, do retain his chambers and scholars, as long as he
will, and have his commons of the College, vniill the feast of Easter next
following. But F. Par. perceining shortly after that his knell had been rung at
Magdalene College, and how he was mocked by some in the house, he left the
College and went to London, where he conferred with a Gentleman of the middle
Temple about his travail to study physic, to whom he offered to take his
oath, that he was slandered with the name of a Papist, and that he neither was
a Papist, nor ever meant to be one. But withal this is to be noted that this
author appealing fol. 193. to the Registers of Balioll college: the Registers
have been sought, and there is some little difference in the words of the
Resignation: for where we have cited it sponte and coactus, now there is a dash
through and, and this word non, written over head, a manifest sign of some
false dealing. For it is not likely that and in that place would have bin
written for non: it makes a clean contrary sense. Neither is the objection
well solued fol. 197. which brought F. Parsons in suspicion of bastardie: for
there are diverse, who confirm as much as the priests said: that is, that it
was the common opinion through out the whole Country. His quarrels with diverse
of his order, and others, will be justified: and the letter of M. Benstead will
also be proved to be falsified. But the patch which is clapped upon the 201.
lease, argues how forward these fellows are to discredit the priests with
most false and scandalous imputations, when they themselves are ashamed
thereof. That which concerns M. D. Bagshaw is to be answered by himself: who
no doubt knows in what cases doubtful answers and equivocations are to be
made to curious questions: neither is it to be thought, that he disallowed
thereof, but only of the liberty which is in the Jesuits, and their
adherents, in all their dealings with other men, through which all confidence
is taken away among men, as not knowing what senses these fellows will
allege, that they had in their speeches and actions.

CHAP. 18. How the Secular priests appealing to Rome, and going to his
Holiness for justice against the unjust slanders of the Jesuits and their
adherents are falsely, and with great ignominy to the Sea Apostolic, compared
by this Apologiemaker to Alcymus and to Simon, who went to Demetrius and
Apolonius, heathen persecutors of Gods people and his priests. Apol cap. 13.
IN the 13. Chapter this Author uses gentle persuasions to his discontented
brethren, and proposes certain considerations, and a better way for reunion
again, as he supposes. In the first consideration occurreth nothing worthy
noting, his railing speeches excepted, and hudling up of scriptures one upon
another, against the disobedient to their Superiors, which concerns the
priests nothing at all, who never disobeyed their known Superiors, but
always submitted themselves unto them, as it is manifestly proved in all
their books, and more at large in M. Collingtons book, and in M. D. Ely his
notes upon the Apology. He makes a recapitulation of some matters in the same
false vain, in which he writ this Apology, as is sufficiently discovered in
this answer to the places quoted by him: and in the same kind is his second
consideration, imputing the just defense of the priests from the Jesuits
imposture of schism, and other grievous sins to emulation, hatred, pride,
revenge, liberty, and other his own, and his fellows humors.

In the third consideration he does explicate himself, how the priests dealt
with the Counsel, and his first tale sounds so shamefully false, as it were
enough to convince an indifferent man, that this author had no honesty, nor
care of his credit. And doubtless had there not been a great dearth of paper,
this place should have had a patch upon it, as was put upon that malicious, and
wicked gloss against the same man, and his fellows fol. 201. Note I pray you,
the impudency of this fellow. First (says he) as before you have heard (and
in the margent he quoteth the 10. and 12. Chapters) as soon as ever they
understood, that their two messengers were restrained in Rome, and not like to
prevail, then D. Bagshaw was sent for from Wisbich to London, to treat with
the Counsel, etc. Could this man persuade himself, that every man's wit was a
woolgathering, when this doctor was sent for from Wisbich, and that no man
would remember, how that this sending for him was about Michaelmas, or not long
after, and that the two messengers were not restrained in Rome, until the
Christmas after? This fellow his affirmation that M. Bluet had conference with
the Bishop of London, Counsel, and Queen her self, for the printing and
publishing of these Libels (as he terms them) said to be printed at Roane,
is most false. For these books were not printed by any such means, but at the
charge of the priests, and in most secret manner. And their charge was double in
regard of the Printers danger; And this probable reason might satisfy an
indifferent man, that there want not as good Printers in England, as are in
Roane, and yet the books are full of faults. And if the books had been
printed by any such license, they would have had more skillful Printers, and
not have had so many, and so gross escapes, evident arguments of the Printers
insufficiency. This authors relation also, that upon M. Bluets conference with
the Bishop, etc. there was a general search for taking of Catholics, such as
never lightly before has been heard of, is to be convinced of great
impudency, in that the most busy Agents of the Jesuits and the Archpriest, in
the furthering of their seditious attempts, were never called upon or searched:
whereas contrariwise the houses where the priests friends remained, were
curiously searched, which was a greater argument, that the Jesuits, and their
faction caused the search, then M Bluet or any of his fellows. And this is
evident by recounting the chief of the faction of the Jesuits, and Archpriest,
who dwelled then in London, and were so far from the danger of being searched
or taken, as they were not broken of their sleep, or any way molested, unless
it were by the Officers their revel in other men's houses. The story also of
the discovery of their (the priests) print and books, but all restored again
with celeritie, and favor, is both false, and exceeding foolishly here
inserted. False in that the priests never had any Print, but to their double,
yea treble charge, and by great friendship of a gentleman got their books
printed, they themselves neither know where, nor by whom, but as it should
seem by some mean, and needy Printer, who in consideration of being well
paid, adventured to print them. Neither was any of their books at that time in
the press, or in any Printers hands, nor ever needed any restoring, either
with celeritie, or favor. I understand, that about the same time the Jesuits
had a press taken, and many books, which were restored again unto them, but
this was not in London, nor by occasion of this search. But by this may be
seen the falsehood of this fellow. Now it remains, that his folly also be
showed This search (he says) was an effect of M Bluets conference with the
Bishop of London, the Counsel and Queen her self, as the printing was, and
publishing of their books. Is it likely that the printing, and publishing of
these books could be a clear effect of M. Bluets conference with these, and
that the Print was subject to be taken, and the books also? Could neither the
B. of London, nor the Counsel, no not the Queen herself protect the Print and
the books, not only from being discovered, but from being taken away also,
that they should need to be restored again? this search being also a clear
effect of the same conference with the Bishop, Counsel, and Queen herself.
How does he forget himself? how grossly does he combine his matters
together? He must also tell his Reader, that the Bb. of London had M. Bluet to
his house at Fulham for fuller conference, making him good cheer, as though
the Bishop of London his table were not ordinarily to entertain a greater man
then M. Bluet, or that M. Bluet were of their disposition, for whom must
always be an extraordinary provision, for reverence to their fatherhoods.
Master Bluet was also suffered to go where he would without a Keeper. And
what harm was this? I have not heard of any sums of money which the Bb
should give unto him for any purpose, as this author suggesteth. But if it had
been so, yet whatsoever this author would have his reader imagine, he cannot
prove that M. Bluet has employed himself in any evil office. This most
wicked impostor does furthermore labor, to have his reader to make no better
conceit of M. Bluet and his fellows, then of Tirrell or Bell, a couple of
known enemies: yea a far worse, seeing (says this impostor) that neither
Anthony Tirrell, nor Thomas Bell, nor other (he means perchance some of his
fellow Apostataes Jesuits, that have precipitated themselves in this time of
persecution) did ever engage themselves further with the Council, then these
men seem to have done. And how does this companion prove this? Forsooth, by
a letter of M. Bluets (as he says) of the first of July unto M. Mush, to which
letter there is this subscription, Yours Thomas Bluet: and yet the letter
speaks thus of M. Bluet, as if he were not the Inditer thereof. I have
obtained by opening the cause unto their honors, and to Caesar, that four
principal men shall be banished after a sort to follow the Appeal, D. Bagshaw,
Bluet, Champney, and Barnley: would M. Bluet have written in this sort to any
man, and have set his name to the letter, as from himself? But mark, I pray
you, what follows: all prisoners, they shall be here with me on Wednesday
next. And afterward he follows on in the same kind, speaking of the same
men. A month they shall have within the Realm of liberty, to ride abroad for
money among their friends, and then choose their port to be gone, with some
countenance, etc. And after all this cloking himself, as if he writ not the
letter, but some other, his name is put to it, as is said, Yours Thomas Bluet.
Many ways are sought by this companion to bring Master Bluet and the other
priests, into an evil opinion with all Catholics, and many interpretations
are made of the co^tents in this letter. But among all the rest, I wonder how
the Jesuits come to be talked of: I have laid the fault (says this letter)
where it ought to be, and proved that the Secular priests are innocent for the
most part, etc. This companion in his commentary, expounds these words, where
it ought to be, in this manner, that is to say, upon the Jesuits. And why so?
what have the Jesuits at any time done, that no sooner can any mention be made
of a fault, but every silly fellow can interpret, what is meant thereby, to
wit, some fact of a Jesuit? have they so badly behaved themselves in all men's
opinion, yea in their own, as no fault can be, but a Jesuit must be at one
end? But this companion would have his reader have a conceit, that this their
fault might be the defense of Catholic religion, as though Ma. Bluet (whose
letter this is said to be) did esteem that a fault. Is he not full fraught
with most wicked malice, that would drive such a conceit into his readers head,
against a venerable priest, and one who has suffered in the defense of the
Catholic faith, before any Jesuit dared to come near unto England, for all
those proud vaunts that they were the men specially raised by God, to overthrow
Luther and his followers? What M. Watson did in Scotland, he is to answer it
himself: but doubtless he was not employed thither in any such affairs, as
this author affirms, by any of the priests He has spent time there (as other
priests have) to repress that wicked doctrine of the Jesuits, that a man might
lock up his conscience, after that he had heard mass, and then go to the
protestants Churches. Neither do we know what meaning any of those had to
deal with the French king in any State matters whom this author so taxes.
He who is so well acquainted with meanings, will perchance in his larger
Apology tell us more news thereof. The stories of Alcimus and Simon, and
others, who went to Demetrius and Apollonius, and others here named, can have
no place here, unless this companion do compare his holiness unto Demetrius,
as he compares the priests to Aleimus and Simon. For all the world is a
witness for the Priests, that they went to Pope Clement the 8. to seek for
justice, and that they sought not to any other for justice in the controversy
between the Jesuits and them: although they sought their princes favor,
which they might lawfully do, and desire to enjoy it, as the Catholics in
the primitive Church have sometime done: and do pray unto God duly for her
prosperous reign: and that God will incline her heart to have compassion upon
such her most loyal and faithful subjects, as have heretofore most unjustly
ben condemned for the evil practices of a few busy fellows.

The fourth consideration consists of twelve special points, which I fear
will lie heavy upon their souls, who are guilty of these stirs. The priests
make no doubt of the justice of their cause. And while this matter does hang in
question, this Apology, well considered, and advisedly read, does it self
very much prejudice their cause, in whose defense it pretends to be written:
If it shall be hereafter judged that the priests were schismatikes, because
they did not accept of the new authority, before they saw a Breue from his
Holiness, without doubt they have much to answer for. But if contrariwise it
shall be judged, that they were not schismatikes, then must the Jesuits and their
adherents be the men, who have been the cause of all the evil which has come
upon this slander raised by them against the priests: And upon this also
depends the fifth consideration: for if it be proved, that the Jesuits and
their adherents did injury the priests in so high a degree, and a public
infamy of schism etc. then will it not avail them to say, that the priests
should have considered, that it was a time of persecution, and that they should
have suffered this infamy, rather then have stirred in their own defense. If
this doctrine of his might pass current in temporal wars, there would indeed
quickly be an end thereof: for by this rate every man that is wickedly inclined,
might murder his fellow without any contradiction, for fear of endangering
the camp, if the unjustly assaulted should seek to defend himself. This
companion should have remembered that the priests sent to his Holiness, to whom
it belonged to determine this controversy, and that they have not stirred in
any thing, more then in procuring that the quarrel might come to his hearing:
For which purpose they judged it most necessary, to make the world acquainted
therewith, having once before been frustrated thereof, by reason of their over
great confidence in the justice of their cause only.

In the sixth consideration this author takes his pleasure in discrediting the
priests, who would not consent, that the Jesuits, the Archpriest, with the
rabblement of their most wicked, and seditious adherents, shall esteem of
them, as of schismatikes, soothsayers, Idolaters, Ethnickes, and Publicanes:
And he would persuade his Reader, that they are not only few in number, but
green in credit, without scruple of conscience what they utter; and therefore
not to be trusted in matters which concern the lives, states, and honors of
men, who shall fall out with them: yea his Reader must understand, that those
who have yielded to the enemy in one or two steps, could never go back
again, but must yield in greater matters, and discover all they know against
their brethren, if not more. He speaks as clerklike, as if he had searched
the greatest secrets of his factious adherents, which will one day perchance
come forth, and the parties named who have done as much, as he mentions. But
as for the appellant priests, he cannot charge them justly, that they have
yielded in any such thing. If any priest has yielded any further, then to
think himself highly favored, that there has been notice taken of his
faith, and loyalty toward his Prince and country; let the priest be made
known, and he shall be esteemed of accordingly by the priests: and if no man
have yielded in any other matter, then is the Apologie-maker a notorious wicked
imposter.

The last consideration is of the necessity of union (which is handled with
exhortations unto it: and disswasions from division) and of the facility of
making it again among us, and to show, that there is a great facility, he
will ask his discontented brethren that show themselves so mightily enraged,
what is there which they would have in this matter? who vexes, or urges them
so, as they may not live quietly if they would? A couple of reasonable
questions, and therefore this answer is made unto them. First they would have
that, which the Jesuits, the Archpriest, and all their seditious adherents are
bound under pain of eternal damnation to perform: that is, that these do
make restitution unto the priests, for those most wicked slanders of Schism,
sedition, rebellion etc. which are contained in Father Lister the Jesuits
book, and their own most malicious stomachs, without any just cause given
unto them by the priests. Secondly they have proved, that the Jesuits and
Archpriest (with all the seditious followers) do vex them so much, as in them
lies, and do urge them so, as they cannot live quietly by them: but in every
corner there is some of this sedition to warn all good Catholics to fly
them, not to give them any entertainment, or relief. And all this is to drive
them either to perish, or to belie their own souls, with the great dishonor
both of God, and his Church. And as for the Archpriests good nature, here
specified, it is very ridiculous. He recalled his Censures, when the priests
submitted themselves upon the sight of his Holiness Breue, which censures he
had used against three priests, because they had appealed from him to the pope
(as it is set down in the book to the Inquisition:) And I doubt not but that
the Archpriest would be as glad now, that all were well accorded, as he was at
the first atonement, and be as ready perchance to break out again, as then
he was: as it is proved in the books to his Holiness, and to the
Inquisition, neither is there any man, that is in his wits, but will think
that the Jesuits and Archpriest would have peace: that is, power to use the
Secular priests at their pleasure, and that the priests should suffer all
manner of indignities both in fame, and otherwise, and not to stir for any
thing, which may be done against them: least the Jesuits peace be broken,
which they love so dearly, and cloak it with extraordinary piety in this
place fol. 221: where they are said to have stood with the Archpriest and the
rest in defense of his Holiness ordination, as though the priests had ever
resisted his Holiness ordination, and not rather yielded themselves presently at
the sight of the Breue, before which, there was no Popes ordination. And to
this the Jesuits their standing in defense of his Holiness ordination, are
joined most absurd positions of their desire not to meddle in the priests
affairs: whereas it has been showed, that they have been the chief of this
sedition against the priests. And their interpretation, that their dealing
proceeds of love, is to men of understanding an argument of a factious
disposition, and desiring of governing all sorts of people, whosoever must
play the Apes part, to take away the envy for their misdeedes from them. They
intend not (says he) to prejudice them in any preferment for the time
present, or to come. He were worse then mad, that would trouble himself
with our Jesuits intentions, which vary as often as their tongues move, and
turn their intentions to serve best their own turns. Let the Jesuits their
hinderance of all our nation beyond the Seas from al promotion, speak for
their intentions: since that no place, or preferment there can be had, without
degrees in schools, which they have induced his Holiness to debar all the
English nation, under this other intention, that young men must not take the
degrees, when they depart from the Seminaries.

And that their intention may be the more evident, that they will hinder every
man's preferrement, they have put into the Popes Breue a bar not only for the
proceeding in Divinity, the knowledge whereof they have now also clean taken
out of the College at Doway: but in either of the Laws also Civil, or Canon:
which are not taught in any of our Seminaries. Yet must all their intentions
be most excellent, and must not be thought to prejudice any for the time
present, or to come. As for the time to come, were it in their hands to
prejudice any man, all their protestations, and oaths would carry little
credit but with such as know them not. In which as in all other their
dealings, especially in this action the priests do most willingly forgive them
their falsehood, and do pray for them, that God will give them and their
adherents his grace to amend, what they cannot choose but see is amiss in
themselves. To which they may make a good step, if they will enter into their
own consciences, and consider of what great scandals, and harms in Gods
Church they have been a very faulty occasion, by that most wicked imputation
of schism to most Catholic priests, and their obdurate standing in that
sinful opinion, without admitting any equal trial of the cause in question,
which the priests did offer in most humble wise, before they took the course
that now they take, and was only left unto them, to clear themselves of so
damnable a slander.

A REPLY TO THE Appendix of the Apology, by J. B.
THE author of the Apology having seen other two books beside those, against
which he writ his Apology, makes an answer (such as it is) unto them, which
answer he calls, An Appendix to the Apology by the Priests that remain in
due obedience to their lawful Superior. As though an Appeal made from a
superior upon just causes, and a lawful prosecution thereof could not stand
with due obedience. But somewhat must be said, and if it have no pith in it, as
every indifferent reader will soon discover that want in this Appendix, it
must be ouercharged with big words, which the blind obedient must imagine
would not have been uttered without just cause, although they see none.

After a long conflict then (as it should seem) in this author, whether he
should take notice of these two latter books, to which he has made it known
(both in this Appendix, and other two scurrilous Libels set out since this
Appendix came forth) that he cannot make any answer, he has adventured to say
somewhat of them, and that it might not be made too apparent to the world, how
little the poor man had to say herein, he stuffeth these few leafes with
exceptions against those books, to which he pretended an answer in his
Apology, and enlarges himself somewhat by way of a preface, wherein he
tells his reader, how unwillingly he put his pen to paper for the defense of
our Superiors, and their lawful doings, and proceedings against the
intemperate impugnations by tumult, and Libels of a few discontented brethren,
etc. And no man can but believe him, that it was sore against his will, that he
had such cause as he had to use his pen, although he never made dainty of his
pains and pen, where he thought he might discredit those priests, which he
could not bring to his lure. And as for the priests their doings or
proceedings, they have showed themselves ready to give account thereof, and to
prove both the lawfulness, and the necessity, which was in withstanding the
exorbitant proceedings of such, as having neither any Christian wisdom, nor
honesty, abused our Superiors, and procured that all the priests should be
brought into these streights, to wit, either to yield to the wicked designs of
others, or to be made infamous all the world over. And to this effect was the
treatise of schism written by the Jesuits, and sent abroad not only in
England, but into remote places beyond the seas, to persuade such as would be
blind, that Catholic priests, who had lived in a long and most dangerous
persecution for defense of the sea Apostolic, were now become schismatics,
and why? because they did not, contrary to the laws of Gods Church, yield
their obedience to a creature of the Jesuits, intruded upon them as their
Superior, without any warrant from the Sea Apostolic, which has commanded
that no such superior be accepted, without a special warrant, or letters from
the same Sea, as may be seen in that extrauagant of Pope Boniface the 8.
Iniunct. de electione, and was afterward extended by Julius the 3. to such as
is our present Prelacie. And all the scandal which has grown out of this
contention, must be answered by those who most injuriously did drive the
priests to so hard a choice, and if the priests have in the prosecution of
their just defense bin assisted by such, as in some other respect do disclaim
from them, and other their actions, the Jesuits and their adherents cannot so
carry it away, with saying that they have combined themselves in secret with the
known enemies and adversaries of our Catholic faith. But they must prove,
that they have made an unlawful combination, it being evident to the world,
that there may be as wicked and unjust combinations between men of the same
religion, as between men of diverse. And as it has been answered before, the
priests have justified and cleared themselves sufficiently, by their appearance
at Rome, from all suspicion of evil dealing, or other combinations, then which
Catholic priests might make, and think themselves infinitely beholding to
their governors, that they are accepted of by them in that degree in which
they are. But listen how fair as false a tale he tells his reader.

The Apology therefore (says this author) written by us, was to stay somewhat
this violent course (if it might be) by laying open quietly and modestly the
true grounds of all these stirs and perturbations, and that not by
inuectiues, exaggerations, or inventions of our own, as our brethrens books
do, but rather by calm, gentle, and modest narration, yea with the greatest
love and compassion of our hearts; alleging always most authentical proofs
for that we say, speaking also the same in the best and most temperate manner we
could, and pretermitting many things that might be more odious, if they had
been uttered: and of this we make Judges the readers themselves, that shall
have perused the same, or may hereafter. It is very strange that indifferent
readers cannot see any of this in the Apology. If we shall trust to M. Doct.
Ely, to whom the Apology was sent by a principal man of the Jesuits faction
to be read, we shall find by the notes which he made thereupon, that the
true grounds of all these stirs, are not handled in the Apology, but a foul
stir made with much impertinent stuff, full of innectiues, exaggerations,
and inventions of his own, and his fellow partners in this business, and no
proofs, but a few of their own letters (a most ridiculous manner of
proceeding) whereas the priests have brought their proofs out of the originals
of their adversaries letters and writings published by them: and this dealing
is also discovered in the reply to the Apology, how this author in most
intemperate manner, and most odious terms, seeks the disgrace of the priests
for want of other means to wrecke himself upon his adversaries, who have laid
too sure and firm a foundation for him to move: and unless a man will be
most wilfully blind, he may very well perceive the distemperature of this
brainsicke companion, where he terms the priests, children of iniquity,
libertines, and charge them with ambition, envy, hatred, contention, malice,
prink, malediction, and other like. His contemptible speeches also do argue
little modesty in him: but if he should say, that he had written no Apology at
all, his absurd faction must believe him, although they see him write it, and
have it in their hands: so religious are our new illuminated Catholics
become, if their guide tell them the tale.

But now (says he) since the writing of the said Apology, some other matters
have fallen out, which do inuit us to write again: and what are those?
forsooth, our discontented brethren have set forth two other books, and put
them also in print, intituling the one, The hope of peace, by laying open such
manifest untruths, as are diuulged by the Archpriest, etc. Consider you how
full of hope this way may be to peace. I have considered of it, and I judge it
a most effectual mean for peace to have falsehood discovered, and the doubts
or difficulties laid open, which were before shuffled up in such sort, as the
stirs brake forth again presently after, without giving so much respite, as
to say there was a peace concluded. The other in Latin, whose title begins
thus, Relatio compendiosa turbarum, etc. A compendious relation of troubles,
etc. But now good sir, what of these? wherein do these two books trouble you?
will you hear his grief? he has told you so many idle tales in his answer
to the two former books, that he has none left to bestow upon the answer to
these, and therefore he will make quick work with them: and to beguile his
devoted the more cunningly, he begins to tell them a tale of a Breue of the
17 of August 1601. which he pretends here, that he had not seen it when he
writ this Preface: yet he would not but his reader should conceive, that he was
very perfect in it, for he declares, that there is a full decision of the
cause in controversy, determining all points, that have been, or may be in
question among us, or between our brethren, and their Superior, or any body
else. But as yet could no man ever say, that the priests were cleared from
schism thereby, or condemned as schismatickes, and how then are all points
determined, that have been, or may be in question? or how are any matters
determined, which were put up in the appeal to his Holiness? nay the appeal
it self is not admitted, although the Archpriest did that, which his Holiness
could not without grief relate, as these words of the Brief import: Quod
dolentes referimus: neither is there any one word of the Jesuits, or their
disorders once touched, but in a very favorable manner: that most wicked and
seditious libell, which they writ against the priests, is only suppressed; and
herein do some of them most insolently glory.

This Breue also is proved in this preface both by the date thereof, and
otherwise that it was gotten by the information of the one part only, and how
then could any controversy be ended as it ought to be? for it bears date 17.
of August 1601, which was long before that the priests arrived at Rome,
although they were there long before they were bound to appear in the
prosecution of their appeal, as all men know, who know any thing in the common
laws, which allow two years to the Appellants: and when his Holiness wrote
the same (as though his Holiness wrote it) he had not understood (says this
author) of any of those scandalous books written, and printed partly before,
and partly since by our discontented brethren. If then he neither spoke with
the appellants, nor did see any of their books dedicated to himself, or the
holy office of the Inquisition, by whom could he be informed in their affairs?
or can any man of sense imagine, but that there was most unchristianlike
dealing, that his Holiness must be persuaded to shuffle up matters of so great
moment in our Church, to whom were presented in the priests their appeal most
evident proofs of the Jesuits, and the Archpriest their disorders, in the
managing of our Church affairs? And as for the style, in which his Holiness
is said to have written this latter Breue, we leave it to others to scan, who
have list thereto, and can understand how great the injuries have been and are
still offered unto Catholic Priests, without any one word of satisfaction to be
made therefore to them, who have been injured: and let men of learning, who have
read, or hereafter may read the priests their books to his Holiness and the
Inquisition, judge whether it was not most necessary for the priests, to
publish in their own defense: and the priests will not be their own Judges,
whether they have done, or do still, as they may in conscience do, in
publishing, until their fame be restored (which was unjustly taken away by the
Jesuits in their seditious treatise of schism, and the Archpriest his
pretended resolution from Rome) and the controversy decided, which has been
the cause of all these troubles: for until this matter be fully ended, and the
Catholics satisfied, that the priests did as become Catholic priests to do,
there will be hope, that his Holiness will not debar the priests of such
means as the law of Nature allows them, in the purging of themselves of
such crimes, as their silence must needs argue a guiltiness in, and their
own consciences tell them, they must (under grievous sin) free themselves
from them. But mark I pray you, what devises this fellow does use, to have the
priests forget the abuses, which were offered unto them by the Jesuits, and
their faction.

And for himself (his Holiness) seeing that the chief complaint and offense
and petra scandali (as it seemed) was about the name of schism and
schismatikes, he is said to have taken that wholly away in this cause, both
the matter, and name it self. See how he would have his reader to think, that
this controversy was about certain names, as though there was never any real
schism laid to their charge. Were the Jesuits such blocks, as that they would
for certain names exclaim in this manner against the Secular priests, Harken,
O ye factious, ye are rebels, ye are excommunicated, ye are fallen from the
Church, ye are nothing better then Soothsayers and Idolaters, and as Ethnickes
and Publitanes, besides the terrors of eternal damnation? Were the Catholics
so barbarous, that for certain names, they would in this time of persecution
thrust Catholic priests out of their doors, and some with most impudent
faces, some like eaues-droppers run, or creep about, to diswade the
Catholics from harboring them, or giving them any maintenance? But let us see
how his Holiness is said to take away the name, and matter it self, in this
Breue: forsooth, forbidding any books, treatises, or writings to be made,
read, or held thereof, and about that controversy. This is a fair taking away
of a matter: let us then suppose, that there be no more books, treatises, or
writings made, read, or held hereof, and about that controversy: I ask
whether the Priests were schismatikas or no: or what is this after-prouidence,
or order to the purpose, for matters past? If the priests had been as wickedly
disposed, as the Jesuits, and had procured an infamy to have run far and
near against them without just cause, as this of Schism against the priests
has been proved to have been most unjustly spread abroad, how could they
think themselves cleared of any such slander only by an after-suppressing
thereof? or how could they think that thereby any satisfaction were made unto
them? But gladly would this author have it so, that the priests being asked
the cause of these present stirs, might be debarred of giving the true cause
thereof: for then might their adversaries justly triumph against them as
troublesome people, and clamarous, and that they had busied themselves they
knew not why, or wherein. Had these Jesuits, and their adherents half that
valor in them, which they would be thought to have, they would not for very
shame indent with their adversary, that he must come to the field without his
arms, and themselves armed from the head to the foot: or were they men of that
wisdom, of which their followers take them to be, they would never have
committed so great a folly, as to leave no other hope of help for themselves,
then to procure that their adversary must be forbidden to plead for
himself. If it be true (as their Libels will prove it) that they accused
Catholic priests of schism, why should any priest be afraid to say, that he
was in such manner accused? And if for quietness sake the name must be avoided,
why for quietness sake should not the course be altered, which was taken
against Catholic priests, when the Catholic Laity was in that manner seduced
by the Jesuits, to use that sinful name, when they named or spoke of
Catholic Priests? But it is no matter perchance, how priests be abused by the
new illuminated, so that they be not hereafter named Schismatickes, and
therefore this author professes, that he procured to avoid it in his
Apology, though not knowing of this express prohibition. For (says he)
indeed the thing it self did ever mislike, and grieve us. Weladay, weladay,
what thing was that which misliked and grieved you? was it the wickedness
which was committed in the slandering so many Catholic priests, as would not
(contrary to the Canons of holy Church, and upon many just reasons) sacrifice
to an Idol, who how well soever it was meant unto him, by him who had
authority, had notwithstanding no authority at that time, at which he
challenged it, as has been evidently proved in the priests their books? did
you ever mislike that Catholic priests should be contemned, and despised by
every factious and seditious companion, who upon hope of some gain thereby,
would fit your ears, yea and your hearts with a placebo, without any regard of
them, to whom they owed love, and duty? harken I pray you, what it was, which
misliked, and grieved this fellow, that so much contention, and falling out
should be about a matter in the air, where no man was named in particular.
This then was it which grieved this good fellow, that the priests would not be
called, and used like Schismatics, but would prove themselves to be Catholic
priests, and to have discharged themselves in all points, as became Catholic
priests.

But this seems very strange, that Schism (against which there are so
grievous laws in Gods Church, and against which F. Lyster the Jesuit and his
fellows, the Archpriest and all his faction inueyed so bitterly, and seduced
the Laity in such sort, as they did as it were schismatically make a division
in prayer, and communication, and Sacraments even from their dearest friends,
and used themselves most ingratefully toward their spiritual fathers) should
now become no more then a matter in the air, where (says this fellow) no man
was named in particular. And this last clause happily is true: for that they
were nicknamed, and that in particular, and not only pointed at by every one
of the Jesuits faction, but thrust out of the houses of those Catholics, who
had drunk of the Jesuits poison, and were particulerly also decyphered in that
most wicked treatise of schism, which was diuulged by the Jesuits, the
Archpriest, and the rest, as may appear by that, which is said in that
treatise Paragraph 6 number. 10. Adextremum in suum sempiternum dedecus legatos
factiosos ad Pontificem factiosi isti destinarunt. That is to say, At the last
these factious have to their eternal dishonor sent factious ambassadors to
the Pope. And in the next paragraph are the crimes of these factious set down
under this title, Factiosorum crimina, the crimes of the factious. Which are
these, Ye are Rebels, ye are schismatics, and are fallen from the Church, and
spouse of Christ etc. Pretty names: and so he goes forward with such like; And
can his reader think, that a Jesuit would rage in this manner against an
adversary in the air? or that the particularities were not sufficiently set
down, by which all men had notice who they were, that were held for
schismatics, when the two priests were known, that were sent to his Holiness,
and many of them who sent them, or by whose consent they went? Can any man
think, that these fellows had either wit, or honesty, who would in action
omit nothing, which might further the infamy or misery of Catholic priests,
and in words pretend, that the matter was a matter in the air, as here it is
said, or as the Archpriest affirmed in his letter to his Assistants the 23. of
June 1601 (against which letter the hope of peace was written) a matter of
opinion, and therefore not worthy to make a matter of contention, which part
soever was true? So does it please these new illuminated to oppress their
brethren, and to make a sport of their miseries, and most absurdly condemn
themselves of want of al honesty and charity, who in a matter of so small
moment (as they do make show) would enter into so desperate courses, and
trouble our otherwise too much afflicted Church. But since that the matter, and
name of schism is taken away, I will not use it, but in such case as of
necessity it must be used, and necessity (as men say) is not subject to any
Law, neither can I think, that the priests being demanded the cause of their
grief, are forbidden by any Breue to say, that they were most unjustly both
named, and used like schismatics, neither can their adversaries easily
persuade them unto it, what holiness soever they do pretend, or strict charge
out of the Breue of the 17. of August 1601, of which Breue this author, not
having seen it, (as he pretends) undertakes to relate not only the
contents, but also some particular sentences, which he thinks do make most
for his purpose; and thus he goes forward in his Preface.

The principal points of this Breue (as they are written to us) are these:
First that his Holiness having read and perused the Appellation of our
brethren made upon the seventeenth day of November 1600, though not to this day
sent, or presented from them, as we are most certainly informed, but only
from the Archpriest, against whom it was made, after due deliberation he
admits it not, but wholly annulleth it. Here is one main point of the Breue,
his Holiness having blamed the Archpriest for his proceeding, as may appear
where these words are inserted, Quod dolentes referimus, which we relate (says
the Pope) with grief, yet notwithstanding does not admit the Appeal (yet does
he not annullate it) and if upon persuasion of such, as are loath to have it
prosecuted, he has been induced to have all matters slubbered up, as once
before they were; there is no doubt to be made, but when he shall have heard
both parts speak (which is requisite to all Christian justice) he will give
that satisfaction, which a tender father cannot deny to his oppressed children,
who have always borne that honorable respect unto that Apostolic Sea, that
if an Archdeuill had been appointed their superior, they would have
accommodated themselves so far, as they might, without dishonouring God,
betraying his Church, or preiudicing their own selves, yet would they have
sought (as now they have done) with all submission for relief of the like
miseries, or greater, if they could have been subject to greater. But the Breue
being made (as here it is confessed) before his Hol. saw any of the priests
their books, and also before he heard the priests (as may appear by the date
thereof) it is no great marvel, that the Breue runs in these terms it
does: yet is it somewhat strange, and perchance never had any president, that
the priests are commended who received the Archpriest, before they did see the
Popes letters, and that the other are discommended or checked, these having
done no other, then they were bound to do by the laws of holy Church, and
those other most contrary thereunto: for proof whereof I thought it fit to
set down the extrauagant of Pope Boniface the eighth, which does convince as
much as I have said. Iniunc^e nobis debitum seruitutis exposcit, vt qui ad
reformandos in Clero mores, and actus (prout nobis ex alto permittitur)
solertius intendimus, ibi praecipue reformationis accommodae remedium
apponamus, vbi maius respicimus periculum imminere. That is, Our office
requires of us, that we, who by Gods permission do attend more diligently to
the reformation of the Clergy, do there especially put remedy of convenient
reformation, where we see most danger at hand. And then he proceeds to tell
what this great danger is, and sets down the remedy. First therefore he
begins thus with the danger: Sane quam periculosum existat, quod aliquis in
officio, dignitate, vel gradu fore se asserat, and pro tali etiam habeatur,
nisiprius ipse, quod asserit, legitimis ostenderit documentis, tam ex
ciuilibus, quam ex canonicis institutis colligitur euidenter. Asserenti namque
cum mandatis principis se venisse credendum non est, nisi hoc scriptis
probauerit: nec similiter creditur se asserenti legatum. Nunquam enim
Apostolicae sedis moris fuit, absque signatis apicibus vndecunque legationem
suscipere. Sed nec dicenti se delegatum sedis eiusdem creditur, vel intenditur,
nisi de mandato Apostolico fide doceat occulata, etc. Quod autem in illis, qui
se Episcopos, vel superiores Praelatos, aut etiam Abbates, Priores, seu alios
monasteriorum rectores, quocunque nomine censeantur, appellant, sit discussio
celebris, and diligens facienda, luculenter apparet, si scandala and pericula
grauia (quae ipsorum parere possit communicatio indiscussa) diligentius
attendantur. Hinc nos euidens euocat ratio, vt cum praemissis alijs casibus,
qui minoris existant periculi, sit ex constitutionibus editis iam prouisum,
hunc vltimum, qui pericula grauior a minatur, nequaquam sine prouisionis
opportunae remedio relinquamus. That is, It is evident both in the Civil and
Canon laws, how dangerous it is, that any man should challenge and be taken to
be in such an office, dignity, or degree, unless he can make lawful proof,
that he is as he says: for there is not any credit to be given unto him, who
shall say, that he comes by commandment of his prince, unless he shall
prove it in writing; neither in the like case is credit to be given to him,
who shall say that he is a Legate: For the sea Apostolic never used to receive
an Embassage from any place without letters. But neither is any credit to be
given, or any reckoning to be made of him, who shall say, that he is a delegate
of the sea Apostolic, unless that he bring eye proof, that he has
commission from the Pope. Then speaking a little of the promoting of such, as
have taken some orders, and that one saying himself to be a priest, must show
it: he goes forward in this manner, It is also most apparent, that there must
be a very great and diligent search in those, who call themselves Bishops, or
higher Prelates, or also Abbots, Priors, or other governors of monasteries,
under what name soever they go, if the scandals and great dangers be
diligently considered, which may come of the not discussing thereof. Wherefore,
as in the former cases of less danger, there is provision made by former
constitutions, so in reason can we not but provide some convenient remedy for
this last case, which threatens greater dangers. Now the Pope takes this
order following, for the avoiding of these dangers, which if the indifferent
reader will attentively mark, he shall have light enough to judge, how
unjustly the priests were termed, and used like schismatics, and
excommunicated persons, in that they did not subject themselves to Master
Blackwell, who had not any warrant from his Holiness, nor could show any letters
from the sea Apostolic for proof of his dignity or authority, which he
challenged here over his fellow priests: he may also perceive, what iugling
there was at Rome, when his Holiness was induced to discommend or condemn the
priests, who did not receive Ma. Blackwell in that dignity or authority which
he challenged, without having his Holiness letters, and to commend those
priests, who presently admitted him, and maintained a most scandalous division
against the other, because they did not in the like manner subject themselves.
These are the words of Pope Boniface: Praesenti itaque perpetuo valitura
constitutione sancimus, vt Episcopi and alij Praelati superiores, nec non
Abbates, Priores, and caeteri monasteriorum regimina exercentes, quocunque
nomine censeantur, qui apud dictam sedem promouentur, aut confirmationis,
consecrationis, vel benedictionis munus recipient, ad commissas cis Ecclesias,
and monasteria, absque dictae sedis literis huiusmodi little promotionem,
confirmationem, consecrationem seu benedictionem continentibus, accedere, vel
bonorum Ecclesiasticorum administrationem accipere non praesumant, nullique eos
absque dictarum literarum ostensione recipiant, aut eis pareant, vel intendant.
That is to say, Wherefore by this present constitution, for ever hereafter we
decree, that Bishops, and other higher Prelates, Abbots also, Priors, and
others, who do govern monasteries (by what name soever they are called) who
are promoted by the Sea Apostolic, or are confirmed, consecrated, or blessed,
(that is, receive power to exercise their office) presume not to take upon them
that charge, or the administration of the Ecclesiastical goods; without
letters from the said Sea, which do contain this their promotion,
confirmation, consecration or benediction, and that none do receive, obey, or
respect them, unless they do show the said letters.

Now you have heard what remedy the Pope did take for preventing the dangers
of which he spoke, that is, by pretending to be in dignity or office, without
sufficient proof; and this were enough for an indifferent man to see, what
commendation they deserved, who received a Prelate, who challenged jurisdiction
from the sea Apostolic over two kingdoms, and had not any letters from the
said Sea to show for his promotion, confirmation, or right to exercise any
authority in either of them; and whether those priests do deserve a check,
who did according to the constitution or decrees of holy Church, in not
receiving, or obeying him, before he showed his Holiness letters: yet does the
Pope make this more plain by the punishment following. Quod si forsan contra
praesumptum fuerit, quod per Episcopos, Praelatos, Abbates, Priores, and alios
monasteriorum regimina exercentes praedictos, medio tempore actum fuerit,
irritum habeatur, nec quicquam interim ijdem Episcopi vel Praelati, Abbates,
Priores, vel regimina exercentes de Ecclesiarum, vel monasteriorum prouentibus
percipiant, eorundem capitula vero, and conuentus Ecclesiarum, and
monasteriorum ipsorum, and alij quicunque ipsos, absque huiusmodi dictae sedis
literis recipientes, velobedientes eisdem, tamdiu sint a beneficiorum suorum
perceptione suspensi, donec super hoc eiusdem sedis gratiam meruerint obtinere,
etc. That is to say, But if any shall presume to do contrary to this, that
which shall be done in the mean while by the aforesaid Bishops, Prelates, Abbots,
Priors, and other governors of monasteries, let it be as void, and of no
force: neither shall the same Bishops or Prelates, Abbots, Priors, or governors
have in that interim any thing of the profits of the Churches or the
monasteries: and the chapters or couents of those Churches and monasteries, and
all whosoever shall receive and obey them, without such letters of the said
Sea, shall be deprived of their fruits of their Benefices, until they shall
get pardon of this fact from the same Sea.

This decree of Pope Boniface is cited to this purpose by Pope Julius the third
in his constitution Sanctissimus etc. and also a decree of Pope Gregory the
tenth which we have Cap. Auaritiae de electione, and electi potestate insexto:
where the Pope having showed that some perceiving, that by law they could not
enter into the government of the Church, to which they were elected, before
they were confirmed, upon covetousness, and damnable ambition procured the
administration thereof, as Proctors, or Stewards, he makes this decree: Cum
itaque non sit malitijs hominum indulgendu^, nos latius prouidere volentes, hac
generali constitutione sancimus, vt nullus de caetero administrationem
dignitatis, ad quam electus est, priusquam celebrata de ipso electio
confirmetur, sub oeconomatus, vel procurationis nomine, vel alio de nouo
quaesito, in spiritualibus, vel temporalibus, per se, vel per alium, pro part,
vel in totum, gerere, vel recipere, aut illis se immiscere presumant etc. That
is to say, Since therefore men are not to be favored in their malice, we
(willing to make further provision) do decree by this general constitution,
that from henceforth no man either by himself, or any other, in whole, or in
part, under the name of a steward, or procurer, or other new pretense, do
presume either in spiritual matters or temporal, to exercise any dignity, to
the which he is chosen, before that his election be confirmed. And the same
Pope sets down in the same place the punishment, which such an offender
shall have, to wit a deprivation of all the right, which he had by his election.
After these constitutions of Pope Gregory, and Pope Boniface, there is another
constitution of Pope Paulus the third of the like matters recorded by the same
Julius the third, who noting, quod ante confectionem literarum gratia
Apostolica est informis, that is, that a grace given by the Pope is not of
force, until the letters be made: and showing what little regard has been had
thereof, by all sorts of Ecclesiastical persons (for all the former
ordinances, or decrees made for that purpose) he confirmed, and renewed the
same, and willed, that they should hereafter be observed, Et sanctiones ipsas
ad inferiora beneficia ecclesiastica (quocunque and quomodocunque qualificata)
amplians, and extendens, hac sua in perpetuum valitura constitutione statuit
etc. And amplifying, and enlarging those decrees to all inferior
ecclesiastical benefices, and howsoever qualified, he ordained etc. So that if
by any wrangling shift this prelacie of the Archpriest (having no other name
then of an Archpriest) should be said not to be included within the
extrauagant, although it be a much higher prelacie (as being over two
kingdoms) then a Bishop, yet is there no shift will serve after this
amplification of Pope Julius the third, beside the plain text also of the law
cited, where Pope Gregory the tenth forbids all administration, not only
in temporalties, but also in spiritualties, without a confirmation from the Sea
Apostolic; and the intention of Pope Boniface most manifest, to put a remedy
for such dangers, as might be by the challenging to be in any office, or
dignity whatsoever, as from the Sea Apostolic, before any letters from the
same Sea were showed in testimony thereof.

Upon these or the like considerations, the Cardinals of the Inquisition in
their congregation upon the 20. of July last past, among other oppressions,
which they concluded had been used by the Archpriest to the Appellants, numbered
this for one, and it was afterward confirmed by his Holiness. Cum saepe
declarauerit ipsos esse schismaticos, rebels and inobedientes, In declaring
often, that they were schismatics, rebellious, and disobedient. By which it
may appear, what dealing there was at Rome about the making of that Breue of
the 17. of August 1601: out of which this author cites this sentence against
the Appellants, Vos autem filij presbyteri, etc. But you my sons the Priests,
which neglected to obey the Archpriest your Superior: what cause had you not to
give credit unto the letters of your Protector Cardinal Caietane? truly you
ought to have submitted your selves to your superior, and to have obeyed him.
It is evident enough to all, that there did want no cause why we did not admit
of the Archpriest: for he pretended a promotion by the Sea apostolic, but
showed no letters from the same See, as he was bound to do before he should
practice his authority, or any receive him in it under grievous penalties.
Other causes were also given enough why he was not received before the first
Breue came, which if his Holiness had seen, who can imagine that he would have
rebuked the priests in this manner, in his Breue of the 17. of August 1601. But
he did neither see the priests books, wherein they set down their reasons of
their refusal (as is confessed in this present preface) neither had he spoken
with any of the priests, as is convinced by the date of the Breue, and their
arrival at Rome half a year after: And who knows not how matters may be
carried, when one tale only is heard, and that no just iudgemen can be given,
where one side only of a controversy is pleaded. And the case being now
decided in the Inquisition for the priests, and the Archpr. condemned, as one,
who many ways did most unjustly oppress them: it will not be hard for any
indifferent man to judge, where the burden of scandals, breaches, and other
hurts must lie, and how the highest Superior has been hitherto abused, and
consequently also God himself highly dishonored. But now letting go this most
absurd insinuation: So as all the sharp impugnations used against those
letters, and the Archpriests authority from the very beginning are here showed
to have been unjust, and against the express will, meaning, and judgment of
our highest Superior, and consequently also (as of necessity must be inferred)
against God himself; as though the highest Superior could not in these
matters, which do not apperteine to our faith, be induced by flatterers or
false fellows, to command that, which without offense to God cannot be obeyed,
or at the least wise does not bind others to obey it: let us see how this
author gathers his Corollaries.

It follows also by the sweet and mild declaration of his Holiness, though
it be like enough, that he will make some other of a more sharper kind, upon
the knowledge and view of so many scandalous books, as have been put forth
afterward by our brethren, and this lite pendente, while the suit hanged before
him without expecting his Holiness sentence in the matter, remitted to him by
them, it follows we say first that our good Archpriest, during all this time
of tumultuation against him has been, and is our lawful Ecclesiastical
Superior, and consequently that so violent impugning him, must needs have
been very offensive to God, and perilous to the impugners: and besides that
such prohibitions of books, writings, taking away of faculties, or other
punishments or censures laid upon any by him, for their disobedience are, and
must be of validity (seeing his Holiness here takes away none) until they
duly submit themselves, and he remit, or recall the same again, etc.

A very sweet and mild declaration of his Holiness, by which a most just
appeal to the Sea Apostolic is not admitted, but annullated (as this fellow
affirms) and a show made of determining of all matters, but no man the nearer
thereby: if this fellow say true, that his Holiness did take away none of the
censures or penalties, which the Archpriest laid or attempted to lay upon the
priests for defending themselves from the infamy of Schism, a most wicked and
senseless imputation. If this were so sweet and mild a declaration, being as
it seems hereby altogether against innocent priests, what shall we think of
that Declaration which was made the twentieth of July 1602 where in consult had
in the Congregation of the Inquisition (and was afterward confirmed by his
Holiness) the Archpr. is condemned for oppressing the said Priests: in often
declaring them to have been Schismatics, rebellious, and disobedient, and for
this cause forbid them the use of their faculties, and that they should not
defend themselves from that infamy, and lastly after other oppressions there
named, he is condemned because he did not admit of the Appeal, which they had
made to the Sea Apostolic. If his Holiness did with a sweet and mild
declaration annullate the appeal in that Breue of the 17. of August 1601. how
is the Archpriest condemned 20. July 1602. by the same Pope, and the
Inquisition for his not admitting thereof? And if his Holiness was induced only
under a color of peace not to admit thereof, notwithstanding it was a most
just appeal, because in the prosecution thereof might greater stirs arise,
how sweetly or mildely did he deal in not recalling the censures, or
penalties with which the Archpriest did unjustly oppress the priests, as is
declared in the last consultation in the Inquisition? But perchance his
Holiness, seeing the malicious proceeding of the Archpr. and that his will was
more then his power in the use of his authority, thought it a very frivolous
matter, to recall either censures, or other penalties, seeing that he did
exceed his faculties, as in this Consult in the Inquisition is declared, and
never kept the form which was prescribed unto him: which defect makes void
all the proceedings of a Delegate, as the Archpr. was in this his office over
the priests. And whereas the priests are charged, that they published books,
while the suit hanged before his Holiness, without expecting his sentence:
reply is made, that the Archpriest enforced them thereto by punishing the
Appellants while the suit hanged before his Holiness, without expecting his
sentence, and he punished and afflicted them by reason of their appeal, as
has been proved, and the Breue of the 17. of August 1601. was procured against
the priests before that either they were come to follow their appeal, or their
books in his Holiness hands, as here is confessed: so that his Holiness
could not be informed by them of their case, how it stood with them, and their
adversaries. And whereas also it is here said, that the Archpr. was all this
while their lawful Ecclesiastical Superior, this Author must find how to
satisfy all those lawyers, who affirm that a Prelate pretending to have an
authority from the Sea Apostolic is an intruder, if he use his authority,
without he show his letters in confirmation thereof from the same Sea
Apostolic, which it is evident the Archpriest could not show for a whole year
after that he took upon him to play his prize against his fellow priests.
During which time the priests had just cause (as is showed) not to accept of
him, and after his confirmation having behaved himself most sinfully in his
office, as it is determined by the Cardinals of the Inquisition, and by his
Hol. himself (as appears by the copy of that consultation, which was had the
20. of July 1602) his actions were justly impugned, and this error of the
author of the Appendix overthrown, where he holds it of necessity, that a
lawful superior cannot be impugned without offense to God. For these are his
words in this Preface: It follows we say first that our good Archpriest
during all this time of tumultuation against him, has been, and is our
lawful Ecclesiastical superior, and consequently, that so violent impugning
him must needs have been very offensive to God, and perilous to the impugners.
Can this fellow be any other then a limme of those, who were condemned in the
Council of Constance, Sess. 15. for maintaining neminem gerere vicem Petri, vel
Christi, nisi illum sequatur in moribus, or nullum esse Dominum spiritualem,
dum est in peccato mortali? This fellow must show how without maintaining these
errors he can make his consequent good: A lawful superior is impugned, ergo
it must needs be that God is thereby offended.

The second Corollary, which this author draws, is that the books against
which he writes are forbidden by this Breue of the 17. of August 1601. because
they treat expressly, and principally every where the matter of schism. The
procurers of this Breue are noted herein to have showed a little subtlety, but
neither wit, nor honesty: For how can they imagine that Catholic books
written in the defense of Catholics, who were most sinfully slandered as
schismatics by the Jesuits, and their seditious adherents, can be justly
forbidden to be read, or kept, the slanderers remaining uncorrected for their
wickedness, and no way abridged of their sinful courses against the same
Catholic priests? For in the same Breue all the charge which is given, is
given to the Secular priests, and they who were the malicious brochers of that
sinful slander of schism against Catholic priests (yea although there be
mention of their treatise of schism against the same priests) are not once
named, as a part in the controversy, but are at liberty to abuse the priests
as much as ever before.

By this the absurdity of the Appendix-maker appears also, in so often
obtruding to his reader, that all matters are declared and determined by his
Holiness, who never had seen the priests their books, nor heard them, what
they had to say: neither can this author show out of that Breue, that it is
declared or determined by his Holiness, whether the priests (who according to
the Cannons of holy Church, refused to admit a Prelate instituted, as is
pretended by the Sea Apostolic, but had no letter to show for his institution
from that See) were schismatics or no. Neither can this fellow show out of
that Breue, that it is declared or determined, whether those priests, who so
refused that Prelate, were for that cause excommunicated, or lost their
faculties, or could loose them, by defending their innocence by any law or
edict, which could be made by the Archpr. or at the will, and pleasure of a
Prelate, who had his Authority not as an Ordinary, but as Sub-delegate, to
whom was prescribed a set form of proceeding, in the inflicting of such
penalties, as he had power to inflict upon those, who should deserve them. In
fine it appears not in that Breue, that the chief doers in this controversy
are once named, or their facts censured: only a book of theirs is suppressed,
to wit, their treatise of schism, but not condemned, as false, or erroneous,
whereby any judgment might be made, whether the accusation were just, or not
just, or how the Catholics, who were most violently carried against the
priests, might be resolved upon the point in controversy: yet is not this
fellow ashamed to publish it unto the world in this manner. So as now those
matters being thus declared, and determined by his Holiness, we hope that every
good Catholic man, and especially our brethren, that are also Gods Priests,
will enter into themselves, etc.

The like boldness does this Author use, and liberty in the next sentence,
where he wishes the good Catholic man, and especially his brethren, to ponder
well the absurdity of spirit, and speech proceeding thereof discovered in
those their later books, beyond all measure unfitting for men of our vocation:
that is to say, the book to the Inquisition, and The hope of peace, against
which two books this Appendix is written, and because he will seem to say
nothing, but what he means to prove; this answer (says he) shall principally
consist in laying before them their own sayings in these books, with a word,
or two of advertisement, to make more deep, and full reflection thereof. Now
then it rests that he perform as much, and that he deal, both honestly, in
relating the words out of these books, and charitably in giving his
aduertisements.

The first of these later books, which he taxes for absurdity of spirit, and
speech, is entitled, The hope of peace, by laying open such doubts, and
manifest untruths, as are diuulged by the Archpriest in his letter, or answer
to the books, which were published by the priests. But before he touches it,
he discovers a little of his own spirit, and speech, which whether it be not
more absurd, then that, at which he carpeth, an indifferent Reader may judge,
while he charge his brethren (as he terms them) with fond, and passionate
proceedings in these their distracted agonies. In this title are 5. things
noted. First that it is a contrary means to make, or hope for peace, to impose
on the Archpriest and diuulge against him calumniations of so manifest
untruths, which can never be proved. Secondly, that the Archpriest is here
named by contempt without any reverence, or respect at all. Thirdly, that there
is mention of doubts, the Archpriest having no doubt in the points he touched
in his letter. Fourthly, that the Archpriests letter is termed an answer to
the former two books. Fifthly, that they call themselves the priests, being but
a few divided men frrom the rest, whose doings are utterly misliked and
detested by the better and greater part of our Clergy.

To the first, reply is made, that it is the most ordinary and surest means
to make, or hope peace, to open doubts, and untruths, which is performed in
The hope of peace, without imposing any thing upon the Archpriest but what is
there proved; and this author himself thought so well of those means
himself, as in the preface he took occasion to hope, rest, quietness, peace,
and obedience: because as he said, these matters were declared, and determined
by his Holiness, and there is no man can doubt, but that the cause of this
second division was the not laying open of such doubts and manifest untruths
about the slander of schism: which if it had been determined, when the first
Breue came, those wicked proceedings of the Archpriest and his seditious
adherents had never ministered any occasion to make a second Breue.

To the second there is this reply made, that if these words, the Archpr. imply
a contempt, then he is very often co^temptuously used by the author of this
Appendix both in the preface, and the discourse, where we read the said words,
The Archpriest, yea sometime concerning the Pope himself, the Popes Breue, the
Popes authority: and where speech is of the Provincial, and General of the
Jesuits fol. 17. Fa Parsons letter is cited, wherein there is no more
reverence, and respect, then this, the Provincial and General themselves,
which who will dare to say are named by contempt?

To the third, reply is made, that although to men of sense there is nothing
in the Archpriests letter, which should move any doubt, yet the letter being
carried about, and presented to the simpler sort, there are many things which
might move doubts in them, and particularly in the very first beginning the
Archpriest does show some doubt, where he says, (speaking of the books)
perhaps never meant to be presented to him, (his Holiness) And the fourth
principal point which he touches, is touched as a matter in doubt, for it is
(says he, speaking of the supposed schism) but a matter of opinion, and
therefore not worthy to make a matter of contention, which part soever was true.

To the fourth I answer, that the Archpriests letter is not absolutely called
an answer to the books, but a letter, or answer, as may be seen in the title
of the book: but if it had been called an answer, it was so christened before
this book was written, and the Archpriest himself uses the same word: for
not far from the beginning of his letter thus we read, and therefore (says
he) no other answer shall be sent now but this.

To the fifth I answer, that they used the name of priests, to distinguish
between the Jesuits and them, the controversy being principally between
them, as may appear by the groundworke of all this controversy, to wit, the
slanderous tongues, and pens of the Jesuits in the infamy of schism.
Secondly, if the controversy shall be said to be only among the priests, the
name of priests will most fitly be applied to them, who have behaved themselves
as became priests, and the fewnes of the number can be no bar unto them,
howsoever their doings are misliked, and detested by the greater part of the
Clergy, which part, if it were the author of this Appendix (as it seems
content to bear the name) it might with more humility have left out these
words, speaking of themselves, the better part.

After that he has canuassed the title of the book, he descanteth upon the
Scripture, which is prefixed unto it, Veritatem tantum, and pacem diligite:
that is, truth only and peace do you love: and he tells his Reader, that
the priests do impugn peace and truth: and this latter point he proves,
because the book is said to be imprinted at Frankfort by the heirs of D.
Turner: whereas (says he) the book is known to have been printed at London
by the favor of the Bishop, and permission of his Purseuants. This argument
has been often solued before, and the folly thereof discovered, it being an
usual matter among honest men (if Fa. Parsons may be counted an honest man) to
set out books as printed in one place, which are printed in another; and the
thing it self neither being of that quality, that it can induce any man into
error, and no just cause wanting, why such a point should be concealed. It was
never heard of, before the absurdity of this spirit appeared, that such
exceptions were taken against a book. Saint Peter did in a manner date his
first Epistle from Babylon: Salutat vos Ecclesia, quae est in Babylone: the
Church (says he ending his Epistle) which is in Babylon saluteth you: and no
man doubts, but that he was then in Rome, and meant no other then to write
from Rome. And shall we say, that he gloried in uttering an untruth? But
whereas this fellow affirms, that this book was printed in London by the
favor of the Bishop and permission of his Purseuants: he discovers that,
which was never known unto him, who paid for the printing thereof, as I have
been before very credibly informed. But to let pass these frivolous toys and
foolish exceptions, which might be quitted with a real falsehood, commonly used
by the author of this Appendix in publishing his libels, under the name of the
united priests, who poor fools must bear all the blame thereof, and run
thereby into perpetual infamy, I will show what exceptions this absurd fellow
takes at the preface of the book, which he impugneth.

Out of the Preface he has picked a few sentences, out of which he
gathers certain notes worthy himself: as first, that they are called the
priests, as if they were either far the greater part, or the most eminent
priests of all England. Secondly, that they affirm, how that they have set
forth two books in the necessary defense of their good name and fame, which
necessity he affirms to be no other, then the force of their own passions,
and tells a tale of King Edward (as he says) or some former King. Thirdly he
notes a comicall vein in the beginning of the Preface, and that the priests
do descrie a stage spirit, by mentioning fools and physicians, and morning
and evening meditations, which he affirms that they did use, when they were
under the Jesuits. Fourthly he notes more of this kind, mingled also with some
savor of impiety in these words of the Preface. The Jesuits might have played
with their Canons, upon such as resisted the Apostolical decrees, etc. And a
little after Fa. Lyster being always ready with his Canon nullifas est, etc.
Here lo, who sees not, that these men (says he) by scoffing at Canons (which
are nothing else but Ecclesiastical rules) mean to live under no rule at all,
etc. Fifthly he notes, that the same Fa Lyster, who cited that Canon, read
both Philosophy and Divinity with great commendations in other countries.
Sixthly he cites a sentence, of which he misliketh both the style, and the
phrase.

Concerning the first note or exception, sufficient has been said, and how
that the greater part in a community may be mislead, and the part which has
justice for it, deserves the title of the whole, for that in Courts of
conscience and justice, the faulty (although otherwise far exceeding in
number) is accounted either the lesser part, or no part at all, but only as a
faction against them, who have the truth on their sides: which has been
declared by the Cardinals of the Inquisition, and his Holiness also to be with
the lesser part of the priests. To the second exception it is replied, that no
man of any sense can deny, but that the most impious slanders, which the
Jesuits, the Archpr. and their seditious adhere^ts did raise against the
priests were a great necessity for the priests to set out their books, yea
after their appeal was made unto his Holiness: because these fellows desisted
not from their wickedness, but persecuted the Appellants, and the more eagerly
for this fact of their appellation, laboring in all places to defame them, and
abridging them of their charity, as they call it, which otherwise such of the
Appellants, as either in prison, or elsewhere are in want, were wont to receive
for their relief. And as for his tale of King Edward the Confessor, or some
former King, it is not his fortune, as I think, to thrive with his tales.
First because how commendable soever a touch of a comicall vain may be in
serious or grave matters, yet it is absurd in him who shall use it, and yet
find fault therewith in the very same matters, as this fellow does in his
third exception which I have noted. Secondly, because his tales are returned
upon himself much more fitly, then he delivers them against his adversary.
He remembered a story that is recorded in one of our ancient writers, either of
King Edward the Confessor, or some former King who being complained unto by a
certain woman with great vehemency, that an other had called her skold, she
being conuented, and not able to prove it, she was condemned to prison, but she
replied saying: well then I must to prison not for that I have spoken untruth,
but only for lack of a witness. Wherewith the king being moved said, In good
scoth I think you have reason, and that in this matter I may be your
witness, for that this woman in accusing you, and defending herself, has
proved her self a very skold in deed. Thus said the King, and the parable
needs no great application: for me think every man will understand it, and
our brethren are like to have the same success in the end, if we be not
deceived, which we leave to the event, and trial. Thus far the tale of the
skold, and in the very next words he blames a Comicall vein in so grave a
subject, as this is. But to the skold. This Author leaves the parable (as he
terms it) to every man to understand it; and if it be not understood as he
would it should, he is to blame himself, would propound such parables, and
would not expound them. This skold I take to be Fa. Lyster the Jesuit, and in
him his fellow Jesuits, and the Archpr. with his faction, who maintained that
treatise of schism, and infinite other slanders, and wicked actions against
the other priests, who being many ways put to silence, as having their
complaint by appellation not admitted, and commanded not to name it, wherein
they had been most injuriously slandered, do somewhat resemble therein the
woman, who could not prove the skolde to be a skolde. But if king Edward the
Confessor, or any other king (if not so saint-like, yet not altogether
senseless) would take that treatise Of schism, and attentively read it, he
cannot but see a singular president for all the skolds, which should for ever
after succeed. First, the very title of the treatise does show, that it was
made by a skolde; for this it is, Aduersus factiosos in Ecclesia, Against the
factious in the Church: and this word, factious, is often used, but because it
is not significant enough, in the third paragraffe toward the end, thus he
proceeds, Sed adeant nugaces isti, ac in theologia homunculi vllam
rempublicam, etc. that is, But let these triflers, and pigmies in divinity,
go to any common wealth, etc. Who would have thought that F. Lyster a Jesuit
would have grown to such an insolency against priests, whereof some were his
fellows in studies, some so far his ancients, as they might have been his
Masters in divinity, and many more of them might have excelled him (were he a
greater man in divinity then he is) if they would have omitted their course of
charity in helping their needy country, and stayed to have followed a course
of more knowledge, of which the Apostle said most truly in him, Scientia
inflat, knowledge puffs up? and it has made him so to swell, as he most
insolently, and contemptuously co^ceiueth of others, as of pigmies in
divinity, who perchance admire him as much, that he is become such a monster
inform, ingens, cui lumen ademptum, evil fashioned, and huge, and one who
has his sight taken from him. Yea the poor fools, who had hid themselves
with a marvelous wise, and sweet reservation of themselves in a tub of honey,
as it seemed unto them, were fetched out by the ears in his 4. paragraph,
where he concludes against them in this manner: Ergo in regnum Christi
Neutrales rebels sunt, Therefore the Newters are rebels against the kingdom
of Christ. But in the 5. paragraph he lays on load, and uses (as his
blindness would suffer him) this Canon of the Church against the Priests,
Nulli fas est, and when he has cited the Cannon, he concludes thus, Ergo
factiosi isti prostrati sunt ruinae suae dolor, eo quod co^traiuerint decretis
Apostolicis: That is, Therefore these factious are overthrown with the grief
of their own fall, because they have gone against Apostolical decrees. But if
any man should have asked him for these Apostolical decrees, where they went,
how, when, or by whom they had been gone against, he would have told no tale of
any other then a Cardinals letter, which none but a skold, to serve his turn,
would ever have called an Apostolical decree: for other there was none until
the 6. of April following. In the 6. paragraph among other skolds tricks he
does most lively represent himself in the objection, which he puts to
himself. Sed dicent fortasse, Pontificem haec decreuisse non sano aliorum
consilio incitatum. O mendacium: Quid? numquid factiosis istis licebit in re
grauissima tam impune, tamque impudenter mentiri? proferant si veru^ est suos
testes, ac alia argumenta, quae sapientem conuincant. De stultis enim no^ ita
curandu^ est, quid sentiant, quidue effutia^t. That is, But they may say
perchance, that the Pope was moved by the evil counsel of others to decree
this. O lie: What? shall it be lawful for those factious to ly so scotfree, and
so impude^tly in a matter of most great weight? If that be true, let them bring
forth their witnesses or other arguments which might convince a wise man, for
as for fools, it is not to be regarded what they think or tattle: and in the
seventh paragraph he concludes in this manner. Nunc vos appello factiosos,
etc. vos rebels estis, schismatici estis, etc. Now to you factious, etc. ye
are rebels, ye are schismatickes, and are fallen from the Church and spouse of
Christ: ye have trodden under your feet the obedience which ye do owe to the
highest Bishop: ye have offended against all humane faith, and authority in
rejecting a moral certeintie in a moral matter: ye have run violently into
excommunication and irregularitie: ye have lost the faculties, by which ye
ought to have gained souls to Christ: ye have given such a scandal to all the
godly, as ye are become infamous in every man's mouth. What shall I say more?
ye have so offended by your disobedience against the chiefest vicar of Christ,
and against Christ himself the Judge and revenger, as we may say against you
with the Prophet Samuel, Quasi peccatum ariolandi est repugnare, and quasi
scelus Idolatriae nolle acquiescere, (that is) It is as the sin of
southsaying, to repugne, and as Idolatry not to hearken. See I pray you, that
ye are nothing better then Southsayers, and Idolaters, and ye who did not hear
the Church speaking unto you by the highest Bishop, are as Ethnickes and
Publicanes. And here I make an end of saying, very earnestly beseeching the
very great God, that he will flow into your minds the very force of his grace,
lest that being thrust into eternal destruction, with Ethnickes and Idolaters,
ye abide immortal pains for this your so great disobedience and scandal. To
mine understanding, every man will say, that the priests had reason to think
the Jesuits and the Archpriest, with their seditious adherents, to be scolds
and most wicked slanderers, and that in this matter the readers themselves
might be sufficient witnesses for the priests: for that this Jesuit, and the
rest his partners in him, in accusing the priests, and defending themselves,
have proved themselves very scolds in deed: and the parable cannot be better
applied, as I do understand it, and the Jesuits with their adherents are like
to have but badde success in the end, if I am not deceived, which I leave to
the event and trial: yet one thing in the mean while, to requite his tale of
K. Edward, I thought good to advertise, that King Edward, not the Confessor, or
a former king, but a good religious king of that name, who lived long after K.
Edward the Confessor, and was the third of that name after the conquest,
amongst other enormous offenders, which he desired to have grievously
punished, or rooted out of his Realm, as great disturbers of peace, etc.
Falsarum querelarum assumptores, manutentores, and fautores eorum are numbered,
that is, beginners or followers of false accusations, and their mainteiners,
and favorers against whom this decree was made by John Stratford Bishop of
Canterbury in a Counsel. Superno Dei munere, etc. vnde nos piae mentis dicti
regis, innitatione laudabili excitati, audaciam huiusmodi perfidorum compeseere
cupientes, omnes malefactores praedictos taliter in posterum in nostra
Cantuariensi prouincia delinquentes, scienter, praesenti authoritate Consilij
maioris excommunicationis sententiam volumus, and pronunciamus incurrere ipso
facto: that is, We moved thereunto by the laudable solicitation of the godly
mind of the said king, and desiring to aswage the audaciousnesse of these
perfidious people, we will by the authority of this present Counsel, and
pronounce that all the aforesaid malefactors, who shall hereafter wittingly so
offend, in our province of Canterbury, do incur ipso facto, maiorem
excommunicationem. And so we leave these false accusers of their brethren of
schism, rebellion, disobedience, etc. and their mainteyners and favorers, to
reflect upon themselves in what state they live, and wish them to go seek
remedy, where it is to be had, and lie no longer wallowing in sin, which
daily increases upon them, by diverse and those many very sacrilegious actions,
for which their affected ignorance will be no excuse.

To the third exception I answer, that there is not any cause to note any such
vein in that place: for who knows not, that it is a word in every man's
mouth, a fool, or a physicion, and that it may be again said, that he, who
took exception hereat, was either a fool, o^ a physicia^? but how either
these words or the next following, to wit, morning or evening meditations, are
said to be more fit for a stage, then so grave a subject as this is; I
confess I do not understand, unless this author peradventure has gotten
somewhat by such exercises, and thereupon framed his conceit of a stage, where
the deeper the dissimulation is, and either true or false matters best
counterfeited, there fools and their money do part most joyfully. But mark I
pray you, what cause this fellow had, to except in these terms: these were
the words against which the exception is taken, people of all professions,
fools and physicians, make up their morning and evening meditations with the
most uncivil terms, which they may devise against them (the Priests.) The
holy Ghost by the Prophet David, used the like phrase against the persecutors
of Christ, and his Church: Quare fremuerunt Gentes, and populi meditati sunt
inania? why have the Gentiles been enraged, and the people meditated vain
things? by which it is evident that although some meditations may be good, and
to good end, some may be most wicked, yea and wickedness it self, as the holy
Ghost affirms by the mouth of the same Prophet, iniquitatem meditatus est in
cubili suo, he has meditated wickedness in his bed: and when morning and
evening meditations were thus mentioned, neither the holy Ghost, nor any good
spirit thought it a vein more fit for a stage, then any grave subject.

To the fourth I answer, that the Canons of holy Church were not scoffed at,
as this fellow does most maliciously inform his reader, but the Jesuit was
blamed for the evil applying thereof, as may be seen in the discourse: and
the reason hereof is given, for that the Canon, which he applies against the
priests, speaks only of such as do not obey Apostolical decrees, and the
question or controversy between the Jesuits and their adherents on the one
part, and the other priests on the other part, was, whether they were bound to
give credit to a Cardinals letter, for their subiecting themselves to one, who
had nothing else to show for the authority which he challenged. A man may admire
an ass, when he sees him under a huge burden, who yet will laugh heartily to
see him take a harp in his paws, to play thereon, or sing unto it: and yet
will another be very justly judged an ass, who will affirm, that this man
laughed at the harp, and not rather at the ass: yet will he have his reader to
conceive, that the priests did scoff at the Canon, yea more then this, that
hereby it is apparent that they mean to live under no rule at all. These are
the aduertisements, of which he spoke in the end of his preface, to make more
deep reflection of the sayings in the priests books, by which he has made
known also the absurdity of his own spirit and speech.

To the fifth note it is replied, that it was an evil turn for F. Lister the
Jesuit, to come into England to expond the Canon law, or descant thereon, if
he read Philosophy, and Divinity with great co^mendations in other countries:
for I doubt that he has so discredited himself in taking a Cardinals letter
for an Apostolical decree, as every man, who commended him for the other
matters, will judge that not only he was frantic, when he writ his treatise
of Schism, but as many other also as did applaud it.

To the sixth note which he makes, no other answer is to be given, then that
it might please him to read it over again, and show some particular matter
which he judges blame worthy: for diverse sober men have read it over, and
over, and they judge the style and phrase most meet for the matter, and the
matter most necessary to be known.

The Appendix-maker having discovered how little he had to say of the preface,
to the hope of peace, now he comes to the answer which was made to the
Archpriests letter, but first tells his reader, that the book to his
Holiness, and the English book, which were the cause of the Archpriest his
complaint, or advertisement, (as he says) were inuectiue and scandalous
libels, and that the English book contained many temerarious, false, and
scandalous propositions, as well in matter of doctrine, as about the actions of
Superiors, to all which answer has been made in the reply to the Apology,
the doctrine of the priests proved Catholic, and the obstinate mainteiners of
the contrary declared to be no better then heretics.

In this answer to the hope of peace, the author discovers an egregious
audaciousnesse, as well in making a show, that he can answer that, which in
very truth cannot with any reason be answered, as also in threaning overmuch
kindness upon the priests in mis-citing their words, and making them say that
which they never said: a silly shift, but necessarily to be used, when no other
is left, to minister at the least a supposed matter to make a book, which
falsehood being discovered, the Appendix is fully answered: for as appears by
the preface, this his answer shall principally consist in laying before the
Priests, their own sayings, with a word or two of advertisement.

In the fifth leaf, where he begins to except against the hope of peace, he
does falsely tell his reader, that the name of a rock was applied to the
Archpriest in this discourse: for the discourse speaks of rocks in the
Archpriests letters, and not as if the Archpriest were the rock himself, and
because Dauus desires to be instructed, what is meant by rocks, in the hope of
peace, he is to understand that such things are meant, as lie either openly,
or more hidden in those letters, in which the rocks are said to be, as are in
the Seas, upon which ships are violently carried or do run infortunately,
when either the storms are too great, or the Pilot unskillful.

In the sixth leaf exception is taken against the application of Scripture
which our Savior used, if any of you asks bread of his father, will he give
him a stone? but here is not one word in answer to that which was applied, to
wit, that M. Blackwell sought by all means to drive us to say against our own
souls, that we were Schismatickes, yet cries he out that passion ouerbeareth
judgment and modesty, and all other good respects.

In the same sixth leaf he threatens the priests down, that they should say,
and not deny, that the Archpriest confessed, that the instructions, which he
first showed, as from Rome, were not made in Rome, but some in England, by
virtue of those, which came from Rome, giving him authority to make particular
orders or instructions, etc. alas the goodman is much mistaken, for the two
priests here named, to wit, M. Collington and M. Charnocke (who will give over
the office of accusers, and witnesses, for which they are here challenged, to
M. Blackwels own conscience, where this poor shift will not help him) never
said that M. Blackwell had such a shift at that time, but being taken in the
falsifying his instructions, or propounding other instructions in place of
such, as he said were annected to his Commission, simply confessed the fraud,
adding that indeed some of them were of his own making, and all this story of
a virtue from Rome, was devised afterward and set out for a poor satisfaction
for his former falsehood. For if he had had all the authority in the world, by
virtue whereof he might have made instructions, yet was it a false tale, to
say that instructions made in England were made in Rome, or annected to his
Commission, which he pretended to have received from Rome.

In the 7. leaf this fellow raileth at the hope of peace, because there are
not other accusations mentioned against the Archpr. as though the poor man had
not enough of one, and in this his absurdity of spirit, and speech, he tells
in a parenthesis a most egregious known fitten: for (says he) it seems they
M. Collington, and M. Charnocke were sent to him (M. Blackwell) of purpose to
catch him in his words. And all the town rung of it, that M. Blackwell had
conuented M. Collington, and M. Charnocke, upon which speech M. H. H. one of
the first Lay factious, was called the Sumner, for that he was the man, who by
M. Blackwels appointment, hunted up and down to bring M. Collington and M.
Charnocke unto him, as after two days seeking he did: but the new illuminates
must believe all things which this companion utters. And this much for his
parenthesis. Now concerning the principal matter here handled, this fellow is
as false in repeating it: For thus he tells his tale, About an heretical
proposition said to be uttered by him, in that he told them, that they could
not appeal from him in some points. The priests have affirmed, that M.
Blackwell, notwithstanding that he was diverse times admonished by M. Collington
and M. Charnocke of the danger thereof, persisted in this proposition that the
Priests could not appeal from him to the Sea Apostolic, and these words, in
some points are foisted in by this author, and kindness threatened upon the
priests, that they should say that he said so, whereas if he had, he had said
more then truth, having no color therefore, because he had no cause
subdelegated unto him, nor he put in any authority to judge any matter, with
this clause, Appelatione remota. But this helps to gall the new illuminated, as
also that contemptible conclusion, and laying all other arguments, proofs, and
probabilities aside, will ponder only but the difference between the accused,
and the accuser in this case, shall quickly satisfy himself; for M.
Collington and M. Charnocke were then known to be two honest priests, and M.
Blackwell was but one at the most, and it will be apparently known, that they
have patiently suffered much injury, for their mainteyning a just quarrel, and
he will be convinced to have been a long time an intruder, or an usurper, and
afterward an abuser of his authority, when he had it, against them without
just cause, when they shall be cleared from Schism, rebellion, and disobedience,
which he and his adherents have most maliciously, if not ignorantly objected,
and caused them to be persecuted therefore.

In the same leaf this poor fellow inculcateth his Hol. confirmation of this
authority, as though that were a conuincing argument, that there was truth
used either for the setting up thereof, or the mainteyning of it, whereas it is
well known to those, who will know ought in these matters, that his Holiness
may be misinformed, and thereupon do that, which may be afterward recalled, as
no doubt this will be, which is urged in the same lease, out of the second
Breue of the 17. of August 1601. Sane vestro superiori vos submittere, atque ei
obedire debeatis, Truly you ought to have submitted your selves to your
Superior, and to have obeyed him. For as I have before showed, he was at that
time no other then an intruder, until he had his confirmation from the Sea
Apostolic, and he was to be punished for his audaciousnes, and al who
received him at that time, and since, the matter having been examined by the
Cardinals of the Inquisition, 20. July 1602, the priests are cleared from
disobedience.

In the 8. leaf he cites two sentences out of the hope of peace which tend to
this effect, that the testimony of one Cardinal, does not bind in conscience
to believe a thing prejudicial to a third: but he answers not one of those
authors, which are there cited for proof hereof, page 32. and 33. He tells
also his reader that when the first Breue came, the priests seemed to
accomodate themselves for a time, yet soon after they brake forth again, and
fell to writing, and examining the said Cardinals letters, more then before,
rejecting and discrediting the same with all manner of contempt, and so they do
now in these later Libels, as though his Holiness had never allowed or confirmed
them. But he concealeth the cause of his writing, which was the Jesuits
reviving the slander of Schism, and the Archpr. his furthering thereof with a
resolution pretended to come from Rome, to that purpose: which wickedness of
theirs did drive the priests to declare the state of the question, as it was
before the Breue came, and to prove that they were not Schismatickes in that
time, in which they were falsely said to have been such, and in this doing they
were to abstract from the Popes Breue, whose after coming could not make the
former cause better, or worse, except only in this respect, that it convinced,
that the Archpr. was an intruder, who would exercise any authority, to which
he was elected, or deputed by the Sea Apostolic, before he had his letters
from the said Sea in confirmation thereof. And it may appear very evidently,
because in that Breue there are not any such words, as the Jesuits and
Archpriest do often urge, Valida ab initio, (that is) that these things
concerning the authority were of for^e from the beginning, but valida existere
(says the Breue) and fore, That is to say, now and hereafter to be of force,
as may be seen in the first Breue, which bears date the 6. of April 1599.

In the ninth leaf he cites a sentence out of the 34. page, out of the which
he notes a restraint of the protectors authority to the court of Rome, and
also authority to demurre upon the Popes letters: for the first (says he)
they say that the office of a Protector stretches not it self any further,
then the Court of Rome, which they prove by the words of the Popes Breue, it
self, Nationis Anglicanae apud nos and Apostolicam sedem Protector: that is,
Protector of the English Nation with us, and with the Sea Apostolic. And to
help the matter they do add of their own, in their English translation, the
word Here which is not in the Latin, to the end it may seem to tie the
Protectors office to the place it self, which is most absurd to any man, that
will consider the meaning of these words, which is, that the Protectors office
is given, over any nation, order of religion, or the like to protect, or defend
them in all occasions with his Holiness, and his successors, understood by the
words, Sea Apostolic, whether it be in the Court of Rome, or out of Rome: for
when the Pope lay at Auignon in France (for examples sake) yet was the office
of Protector also in use. And when Cardinal Caietane our late Protector was
Legate in France, and Polonia, his office of Protectorship ceased not
whenever he would deal in any matter etc. and this is sufficent for this
first point, which seems to include both folly, and audacitie.

In this story were first to be answered, why apud nos is thus translated, Here
with us: But I will leave this to Grammar boys, who know that this word apud
does import a place consequently in the very nature of the signification, and
as I think never until this day was this translation judged faulty, est apud
me, he is here with me: or est apud illum, he is there with him: and it cannot
but argue a greater will in the Appendix-maker, then power to find a fault.
The rest of the story is as absurd: for who did ever say, that a Protector did
leave his office when he was out of Rome? the priests words are, that it did
not stretch further then the Court of Rome, which are true, although the
protector be in Polonia: for although he be there in person, yet may he deal
by letters in the Court of Rome, and at Rome, and all this while, although the
man who has authority be far from Rome, yet his authority in that kind
stretches it self to deal no further then in the Court of Rome. And put the
case that the Pope should go again to Auignon, and come no more at Rome, this
fellow will not deny, that he remains still Bishop of Rome, and that as
Bishop of that Sea he governs the Church, and consequently there must be the
Court of Rome, and not in Rome, for that (as I take it) the Court is where the
prince is, and this way also are the words true, which were used that the
Protectors office, stretched not it self any further then the Court of Rome,
wheresoever that Court is kept. And this is sufficient for to show the folly
and audacitie of the Appendix-maker, who would take upon him to correct what it
seems he understood not. In hoc Consistorio etc. In this Consistory, (that is
the College of Cardinals, or the Popes Counsel says, Zechi de statu Illust. D.
Card. Number. 9.) every Province, and congregation of regulars, and kings, have
their fathers gardians, which are called Protectors, who in the Consistory do
propound the elections, and other causes of the Province committed unto them,
and answer to those who oppose against them.

And for the second (says he) about demurring upon his Holiness letters, we
judge it to be of much more importance, and far more perilous, yea temerarious
doctrine: for if it be lawful for any man, as our brethren here auerre, to
demurre upon his Holiness letters, with mind to give a reasonable cause
thereof afterward; what end will there be of strife? what obedience? what
resignation of wills, and judgments to our Superiors commandments? etc. See
how this ignorant companion urges it, as perilous and temerarius doctrine,
notwithstanding he was showed in The hope of peace, that it was most Catholic
doctrine, and according to the ordinances of holy Church, and he was referred
for his learning to the order of Pope Alexander the third, Cap. Siquando de
Rescriptis, where the Pope writes in this manner to the Bishop of Rauenna, Si
quando, etc. If at any time we direct any thing to your brotherhood, which may
seem to exasperate your mind, you ought not to be troubled; and afterward,
having considered upon the quality of that business for which you are written
unto, either reverently fulfill our commandment, or signify some reasonable
cause by your letters, why you cannot fulfill it, for we will bear it
patiently, if you shall not do that which has been, or shall be suggested
unto us by evil insinuation. There is in the same place another saying of the
same Pope cited, Cap. Cum teneamur de prebendis, and dignit. to the same
effect, and this poor fellow not being able to make any answer hereunto,
tells his blind obedient a tale of obedience, as though this Pope Alexander
had exhorted men to disobedience, when he told them, that they should give him
a cause by their letters, why they did not or could not do as they were
commanded by him.

In the eleventh leaf for want of matter, in the hope of peace, he falls
into the Copies of discourses, and according to the erroneous vain, in which
he was in the Apology, he excepteth against that, which is said by the
Priests, that authority is not an infallible rule of truth in all who have
authority, and out of that which is said, that but one upon earth is warranted
from error, and not he in all things. And hereupon he infers thus: how
(says he) can our English people assure themselves, but that this institution
of the Archpriest was one of the things wherein he might err? By what Law,
Logic, or Divinity can this fellow show, that his Holiness cannot upon false
information do a greater matter, then the confirmation of an Archpriest, in
the authority of an Archpriest? It was wont to be no temerarious or perilous
doctrine, to affirm, that a Pope could commit a sin, which is a greater
matter, then not to be well advised in the institution of an Archpriest: for
the sin grows of frailty in the man: and evil advise or information, by
which the Archpriest is instituted in his office, may come from another, in
whom his Holiness may repose a trust, and be deceived. All the rest, which
follows in this eleventh lease, is often answered in the priests books, and
lately more at large by M. Doctor Ely, in his notes upon the Apology, and by
M. Collington in his just defense, etc. and there is a reason given in the
place, quoted in the 11. leaf, of that which is there brought out of the hope
of peace. And the fault or disgrace (which this fellow would should light upon
his Holiness concerning the institution of the Archpriest in that manner that
it was) the Priests have always laid upon the informers, who procured such
dealing as was, in a matter of so great moment: neither have the priests
challenged the ordination at any time for a matter of plot, as proceeding from
his Holiness, but as it proceeded from the Jesuits, who were known to attend
principally to such matters, and were the sole actors in making this
ordination, and moderating thereof, as has more apparently since been seen:
and at the very first they did so grossly interesse themselves therein, as the
Archpriest must needs have one of his instructions, not to do any thing of
moment without the advice of the Superior of the Jesuits here in England.
Although now in a consult in the Inquisition it is adjudged to be taken away,
notwithstanding his Holiness former confirmation thereof in the first Breue the
6. of April 1599. which also conuinceth, that his Holiness may do that, which
without offense may afterward be undone.

In the thirteenth leaf this author repeateth more matter out of the Copies of
discourses: for the hope of peace ministers little matter for him to speak
against, and the book to the Inquisition much less, as it should seem by
this Appendix: but it is sufficient that there is a pamphlet entitled, An
Appendix for the examination of these two books, it skilleth not how little
thereof is handled therein: but let us see what this gear is. They add (says
he) in the same page, that by the opinion of diverse men of judgment in the
laws of our country, this our case may and will be drawn within the compass
of the law of Praemunire, lo here these men seem to be counselors that can
say it may, and will be drawn, for that perchance themselves had suggested it
against other Catholics. But do ye mark the reason why it may and will be
so drawn? because, say they, it is an external jurisdiction, brought into the
real me against the will and notice of the prince and country* do you not see
his Holiness Ecclesiastical jurisdiction wholly here excluded by these good
men, as external, unless it be allowed by the prince or country,
notwithstanding any difference in religion? And do we marvel, that these men
are favored by the Counsel, that will publish such things in their be half
against their own religion?

A marvelous story, and stoutly urged. If the holy Ghost himself should say
as once he said by the Prophet David, Dixit insipiens in cord suo non est
Deus: The fool said in his heart there is no God: would this companion
challenge the holy Ghost, that he said there is no God? yet is it true, that
these words proceeded from him, but not proceeding from him as his words, but
as the words of a fool related by him, they might well be spoken even by God
himself. The like case is this of the priests, who affirmed in this place,
quoted by this Author, no other matter then this, By the opinions of diverse men
of judgment in the laws of our country, this our case may and will be drawn
within the compass of an old law, enacted as well by our Catholic Bishops
and Prelates, as by the Prince, above 300. years ago, viz. the law of
Praemunire. Is here any assertion of the priests, that it may and will be
drawn? etc. Have they not delivered it in as plain terms as they may, that
it was the opinion of other men? they then are the counselors, and not the
priests, who only have related what they said, and this poor fellow shows,
that his wits were small in this device, and that his honesty was much less,
in that which follows, for that perchance themselves had suggested it,
against other Catholics. Is this a matter of so little weight, as it may be
published at a venture? Is the fame of Catholic priests no more to be
regarded, but to have such surmises cast abroad against them? The new
illuminated may see if they will, in whose paws they have put their souls,
and what spiteful guides they have chosen in place of their spiritual
fathers. But concerning this law of Praemunire mentioned by those, whose words
or opinions the priests did only allege, there is enough said in the reply to
the second Chapter of the Apology: here only is to be noted, what this author
has since manifested in a late libell, commonly called, The manifestation of
spirits, concerning this statute: Wherefore (says he) a contention being in
those days, about the collation of benefices and Bishoprics in England,
whereof the Popes were wont to dispose for the most part, they concluded in
England, after many contentions and disputes, and many sendings forth, and
back to Auignon in France, where the Popes at that time resided, that such
provisions of benefices should not be sought, nor made from the Pope
immediately, for the time to come, but only in England, by consent of the
Prince, and confirmation afterward of the Pope, for the most principal
benefices and dignities: and whosoever should contrary to this, procure
provisions immediately from the Pope, or any other power or jurisdiction,
contrary to this law, should incur the penalties thereof. And this to have
been the only true meaning and intent of the said law, and lawmakers that
were Catholics, is evident by all authors, that have written thereof. And in
this sense there is no controversy among us, for that latter Popes have either
agreed thereunto, or permitted the same: and we see the like in use also in
other Catholic countries at this day, by agreement and composition between
the Sea Apostolic, Princes, and Catholic Clergy.

Can the priests themselves give a plainer testimony for confirmation of the
Lawyers their opinions by them cited? But (says he) in this sense there is no
controversy among us. In what sense then is the controversy? forsooth beside
the sense and meaning of the law, there has been another invented by
heretics and enemies since that time, etc. And in the same sense and
signification, being plainly false and heretical, as you do see these
libellers urge it now against the Archpriest and others, etc.

If one and the same sentence do bear a Catholic and an heretical sense, it
was wont to be judged according to the party his disposition who pronounced
it: as for example this sentence, Pater mayor me est: my father is greater then
I am, being spoken by a Catholic was taken for Catholic; but being spoken
by an Arrian, was taken for heretical. Such was the guise of Christians before
these new reformers appeared in the Christian world: but now the world seems
to be otherwise instructed, and Catholic priests how Catholikely soever they
behave themselves either in words or actions, must be taken for heretics,
schismatics, and such like, at the discretion of such, as whose actions
(although they are most damnable, as was the writing, spreading, and approouing
of that most impious treatise of schism, and other heathenish proceedings
against Catholic priests) must be counted religious, and the authors to seek
nothing but the glory of God. And no man must say otherwise, when the very
stones in the street are ready to cry out of their wickedness, which they have
used against Cath priests.

The other place noted in this same lease, out of the copies of discourses, is
there evidently seen to have been spoken upon just cause, and this author is
not able to answer the reason there given: neither is it true, which here also
he affirms, that the Breue of the sixth of April is called in question whether
it were not forged: it is only said, that it was procured by Fa. Parsons, God
knows out of what office: and the reason is there given of these speeches,
and it is further showed in the Reply to the second chapter of the Apology,
how that his Holiness does not ordinarily see the Breues, which he grants.

In the 14. and 15. leaf this author indeuoureth to satisfy his reader, why
he does often name and insinuate their (the priests) patrons, and their
dealings with them in prejudice of Catholic religion, and when he has spoken
his pleasure, he solueth all himself in this manner. And albeit some perhaps
may excuse the matter, as though this conjunction were not directly to the hurt
of Catholic Religion, yet every man sees, that by consequence it is seeing
heresy is strengthened by our own division, and voluntary weakening of the
Catholic party in their favor. But perhaps an honest man will say, that this
conjunction is neither directly, nor by consequence to the hurt of Catholic
Religion, but rather the unjust prosecution of those, who pretend to be Cath.
through which heresy may be strengthened, and those priests tired, who have
and must deserve best of the Catholic Religion. Neither is this any novelty
in Gods Church, that those who should be nurses of Gods people become cruel
unto them, and they who used cruelty, become pious in relieuing the needful.
S. Hieremie lamenting the desolation of Jerusalem, among other things breaks
out into these words: Sed and lamiae nudauerunt mammam, and lactauerunt
catulos suos, filia populi mei crudelis, quasi struthio in deserto. Those
creatures who were wont to tear their young ones in pieces, prepared their
teates and gave them suck, the daughter of my people is cruel as an Ostrich in
the desert. But to return to our purpose: It is most true, that some priests
have received very great favors of the Magistrates, who notwithstanding they
are of a contrary Religion hold it fit, that such have favor, as they are well
assured do neither themselves plot, nor combine with others, who have
manifested themselves to plot against the temporal State, under a fair
pretense of Religion, and in this ought these priests to think themselves most
deeply bound unto them, for that they will take notice of their loyalty: and
if M. Bluet, as here it is affirmed, have laid the fault, where it ought to be,
what reason has this fellow to tell his Reader, that he will easily imagine
that this fault is laid upon the Jesuits, and other, of their side? Master
Bluet said no such thing, but perchance the matters have been so grossly
handled by these fellows, as no man can imagine other, and this fellow his
guilty conscience makes him to utter it, when the Jesuits are not charged
therewith. That which this fellow carpeth at in the hope of peace page 13. and
14. concerning the casting out of devils, is plain enough against him; the
only difficulty is in his own opinion of the Jesuits, that hearing of the
casting out of devils, he is straight afraid of the Jesuits, as though they were
not only devils, but the only devils. That which is brought in, in the hope
of peace, is brought to show, that it is not unlawful to take assistance in a
good cause, even of such, as are otherwise contrary unto us. And therefore if
there be any impiety in the application of the scripture there brought, the
impiety is in this author, who places the Jesuits in the devils room, and
perchance he mistaketh, when he affirms, that the Protestants have them for
Religions sake, it being well known, that many of the Jesuits friends are
highly favored who are known not to differ one jot in religion from them, and
the priests whom this author affirms to be patronized by the Protestant
magistrate, are true Catholic priests, and have so showed themselves, and are
resolute to live, and die in the Cath. religion: so that there must be some
other cause of the hatred, if any be in the Protestant magistrates against the
Jesuits, then their religion. But see how he proceeds: and they are so
resolute (says he) in this holy doctrine, as they doubt not as it were to
anathematize any man, that will not stand with them therein; for thus they
write a little after. Who does not now expect some sentence out of the hope of
peace to this effect? yet when it comes it is of another matter, nothing
appertaining to this, but here foisted in by this author to serve his turn.
For as it is evident to be seen in the hope of peace, this discourse of the
casting out of Jesuits, as this fellow expounds it, was clean ended; and
another passage of the Archpr. his letter taken to be answered, where he writ
in this manner. It cannot be liked of, that we should write one against another
etc. Whereupon it being first declared, what the Jesuits writ against the
priests namely in the treaatise of schism, and what infamy grew thereby unto
them, the necessity of writing on the priests side is proved, and the sentence
here alleged by this author is used, to wit: And if the priests have been
compelled to this hard choice, as either they sustain infinite injuries, and
obloquies, or redeem themselves in this sort, (that is by writing) from so
undeserved an oppression, no superior in the world can justly find himself
touched in credit, but such whom the Apostle calls principes, and potestates
mundi, rectores tenebrarum harum. This sentence being in this sense used by the
priests, note I pray you how this companion draws it to another matter. And
is this true in deed good brethren (says he) that no Superior in the world
can think himself touched in credit by this your dealing with heretics
against Catholics, but that he must needs be accounted a prince of
darkness? is there no exception at all with you? what if his Holiness that
has brought you up etc. And so he goes on in this vain most idly, and
clean contrary to the intent and purpose of the sentence which he brought, as
may be seen in The hope of peace page 16. And yet after all this (which in
his modesty he calls, a malepart kind of writing) he tells his reader
that some may excuse the matter, as though this conjunction were not directly
to the hurt of the Catholic Religion, yet (says he) Every man sees that by
consequence it is, seeing heresy is strengthened by our own division. If this
then be the matter, return in Gods Name to unity, and do that, which
Christians ought to do in satisfaction to God, and your injured brethren, who
by you, and your means have suffered more indignities and affliction, then ever
they had, or could have of the Protestants.

In the 16 leaf he runs over the reasons, which are given for the priests
their turning again, after that they had been often, and grievously wounded by
the Jesuits, and the Archpr. and plays his prize upon this question proposed
in the hope of peace, page 15. Is it to be thought, that Gods cause can suffer
dishonor in any course, which is necessary for the recovery of his priests
there honored? But the point he stands upon is the scandal, which may grow
thereon, and charge the priests with a new divinity, as though they had
never heard of the scandal of the Pharisees, which Christ himself taught us to
contemn. That which this companion, and his fellows shoot at is, to have us
learn the divinity, which the ass had, who starued to death least by eating
any thing which was necessary for his own life, some other beast might have
miss thereof, and die after it. But himself must have liberty to write, and
practice his pleasure without any fear of scandal, for so he writes in his
Preface to the Apology: which respect of scandal should have withheld us
wholly from putting pen to paper in this case, if the intemperance of some
persons, etc. Possibly this preacher would have his audience do, as he says,
but not as he does, and this is a special guids trick, but very far
different from the spirit of our Savior, and S. Paul whom here he cites, as
earnest forwarners that no scandal be given.

In the 17. leaf he cites a place out of the hope of peace, where was proved,
according to the Logic, which some of the new illuminated had used, that all
men, who had any trayning up under any master, must subject himself to every
punie Scholemaster. To which (to omit his falsehood in relating the sentence) he
tells his Reader, that our bond is greater to Spiritual, then temporal
parents. And so with some of his modest terms he shuffleth up the matter, as
if this had been the question, or the point there handled, and not rather
whether it be fit, that because a man had once a Scholemaster, he must always
be subject to every puny Scholemaster during his life. The place is to be seen
in the hope of peace, page 18. and 19. That which follows in the 17. leaf
concerning a letter of Fa. Parsons is foolishly answered: for (as there it may
seem) this author says no otherwise, then was before said in the place
against which he excepteth.

In the 18. leaf that which is affirmed of F. Parsons his bringing in of rules
into the English College at Rome contrary to his promise, is to be declared by
them whom it concerns, and were present when it was done, and are to be
credited. The other matter concerning the new buildings, is here falsely
related, as made by the Jesuits, and namely Fa. Parsons; All which is foisted
in place of this, But they were not at the charge of the Jesuits, but of the
College. A simple change, but all is to the glory of God: but would a wise man
have talked so vainly of new buildings in the College by the Jesuits, and
namely Fa Parsons: and in the same place tell his reader of the want which the
College had by the discontinuance of a monthly pension, which they once had of
Pope Gregory the 13? was it a time for the Jesuits, and namely Fa. Parsons, to
spend the revenues of the College upon making a larger College, when for want
of money there could not be scant half so many Students, as were sufficiently
accomodated, before these new buildings were made? Is this fellow in his right
wits, that would thrust such a matter upon the Jesuits, and namely Fa. Parsons,
to whose charge this absurdity was not laid in the hope of peace, as may be
seen page 20. which place is here cited by this author?

That which is affirmed in this 18. leaf out of the hope of peace concerning
the Cardinal Allen his dislike of the Jesuits, toward his latter end, and also
that M. D. Haddocke affirmed himself, that he had written to sir Francis
Inglefield into Spain, is again confirmed. And if D. Haddocke will deny that
he said it, he may mend in his honesty when he will: for what was written, was
written from his own mouth.

In the 19. leaf there is a recapitulation made of that, which is said in the
hope of peace concerning the Seminaries erected in Spain by the Jesuits
means, of which it was said in respect that there were Seminaries ynow, and
the wants of many poor Catholics were great, that the money employed in those
buildings, might have been given with more merit to the relief of them; And
this is heynously taken by this author, but nothing showed what extraordinary
good has come by those Seminaries. That Fa. Parsons entered into other men's
labors is confirmed by the testimony of Ma. doctor Cecill, who and another
Priest laid the first foundation thereof in Spain; And as for the subscribing
to the title of the Infanta, and to certain blanckes: there are diverse
priests in England, and out of England can testify it. And what is said in
the hope of peace page 28. concerning the blotting out of an interrogatory made
by Fa. Parsons to M. Charnocke is most true, although this fellow do falsify
the place, which he quoteth, for there is no such matter in the hope of peace,
as this fellow cites, to wit, that D. Barret, D. Elie, and others were
hindered by Fa. Parsons; but unless this companion have one false trick or
other, he fears his pen will grow too soon out of ure.

In the twentieth leaf this Author grows to an end of his answer to the
hope of peace, and willing to leave a remembrance behind him of some notorious
matter, he tells his Reader, that almost in every other leaf of both
Books, that is, as I conceive, The hope of peace, and The copy of discourses,
(because these only are in English, the other two were in Latin) when the
priests touch the institution of the Archpriest, they affirm, that it was
nothing worth, for that it was procured upon false, wicked, deuilish, and
impious suggestion of discord between the Priests and Catholics, whereas
there was no such indeed. And thus says he, they repeat again and again
without all modesty in every place: but you must go look where: for I have
gone over both these books again and again, and I do not remember that this
which he has alleged is in any one place of their books: and if any man be
so well sighted, as to find it in some one place, then shall not this author be
utterly condemned of want of all modesty or honesty. True it is, that
surreption is often alleged, to make void the Popes grant, which both
according to the Canon laws, and al interpreters thereof, does always suppose
this clause: Si preces veritate nitantur: that is to say, if the petition be
grounded upon truth, and no man of reason or learning ever taught the contrary,
howsoever any law made by prince should stand in force, although he were
induced thereunto by false motives, and therefore is this comparison fasely
made here, and most ignorantly. And no less false it is, which is here
affirmed, that there was a division begun between Catholic priests, and
Religious men, as well for the matter of the pretended association, as also
about the slandercus Memorial fent over by Robert Fisher: for so soon as the
priests perceived that some did dislike of the association, they gave over the
soliciting it here in England, and this matter of the Memorial came too late
from England to Rome (as is showed in the reply to the 8. Chapter of the
Apology) to be a case of this subordination, but somewhat must be said to
patch up a broken matter, and rather then fail, the religious men shall now be
brought in, who were clean out of the Card. Caietanes letter, as now we have
it.

In the same 20. leaf, this author says, that he will end with one trick
more of theirs, wherewith they end this book: that is, that Fa. Garnet having
written to them a letter, exhorting to peace, and telling them, that he doubted
not but they sought the glory of God, and consequently would hearken to the
means etc. they now will needs take him at his word, and threape upon him,
that he knows they seek nothing but the glory of God in all these their
actions and scandalous attempts: Fa. Garnet (say they) knows we do seek
the glory of God, and witnesses so much in his letter dated on Midsommer day
last past. Lo here how substantially they prove by F. Garnets testimony,
that they do seek the glory of God: every child will laugh at this, and so we
need to say no more of it.

First it is false, that Fa. Garnet is said to have written unto them: for his
letters were to certain other prisoners, to deal as it were between both
parts. Secondly he proposed such means, as he himself best liked, but were
not indeed any means for peace. Thirdly, howsoever this fellow cauilleth, or
commenteth upon the hope of peace, there is nothing there cited, but what F.
Garnets letter will bear: I know also (says F. Garnet) that those which
complain against us do desire Gods glory: but it is to be understood,
according to the meaning of the Jesuits (as it seems) who always do mean
what they list, and every child may very well laugh at it, and he who takes
hold of any thing which proceeds from them, is as sure as he is of the wet
Eele which he has by the tail: yet true it is, that thus the Jesuit writ,
but what meaning he had, he shall expound himself, for so he will whatsoever
his words are: and so we need to say no more.

The Appendix maker having scurried a little over the hope of peace, of which
he would gladly have bin discharged much sooner, runs over the book which
is dedicated to the Inquisition, in which his labors there occurreth no new
thing worth the noting. In this he spends almost four leaves, and the most
part thereof is in gentle persuasions, yet can he not ouerpasse Ma. Charnocks
going into England contrary to the sentence, wherein he was charged under
mortal sin, not to go (as he interprets the sentence:) he tells
moreover, how that Cardinal Burghese writ a letter unto M. Charnocke while he
was yet in France, dissuading and condemning that fact, if he should do it,
etc. which the letter it self, and the Apology also, fol. 156. conuinceth of
an egregious falsehood. Afterward he tells his Reader, that M. Charnocks
reply was so irreuerent and malapert, as any modest man that shall read it, can
but feel his ears burn in behalf of so honorable and venerable a man, as
the good Cardinal is: but there is not one of M. Charnocks reasons answered,
which do justify his return into England, notwithstanding that sentence,
which was given in the letter of the two Cardinals, Caietane and Burghesius:
neither is it the fashion for this fellow to answer the reasons otherwise then
as old heretics were wont, who when they had not what they could say against
the Catholics, they would break into railing: and in the 24. this fellow not
knowing, in what particular to take exceptions against the narration of the
usage of M. Do. Bishop, and M. Charnocke at Rome, he tells his reader, that
they set it forth so tragically, as any act ever done by Nero, Caligula, or
Dioclesian. A good commendation for those, who were the cause thereof, nothing
being there set forth, but what was most true. Lastly, there is a little
somewhat in the defense of F. Parsons, of whom this author cannot deserve too
much: but his actions have been too gross in the managing of this matter to be
now concealed, or smothered up. God send him his grace, that he may see his
own naughtiness in time, and save his soul after so many desperate
adventures, which also I heartily wish to them all, who have either maliciously
or ignorantly run this wicked course against Catholic priests.

The Contents of the Chapters, with the page wherein every Chapter begins.
Chap. 1. HOw the Author of the Apology plays at All hid with his Reader,
and while he is covered under the name of united Priests, he discovers
himself to be a Jesuit. page 5. Chap. 2 A Table of some notorious falsehoods
and apparent shiftings which are contained in the Apology. page 8. Chap. 3 An
answer to those calumniations which the Apologie-maker sets out in a book
entitled, Of certain principal deceits, falsehoods, and slanders. page 18.
Chap. 4 How the Author of this Apology follows that counsel which Achitophel
gave to Absalom 2. Reg. 16. that other seeing how he abused his Holiness,
might the more desperately adhere unto him. page 39. Chap. 5 How the
Apologie-maker by the same reason which he gives for the publishing of his
Apology, does give light to his Reader to conceive the just cause which the
priests had to print their books. page 55 Chap. 6 How this present controversy
about the abuse of this new Subordination, is deduced from John of Gaunt, and
other matters most impertinent thereunto. Apol. cap. 1. page 63. Chap. 7 How
this Author of the Apology while he would inueigh against dangerous and
temerarious propositions, engages himself further then becomes a Catholic.
Apol. cap. 2. page 105. Chap. 8 How this Author lays his plot for the
disgrace of Secular priests, and draws on his Reader with diverse idle
stories. Apol. cap. 3. page 142. Chap. 9 How this Author pursues his
impertinent discourses of troubles among the English in Flanders, France,
Italy, and Spain. Apol. cap. 4. page 147. Chap. 10 How the stirs in the
English College at Rome began, the cause whereof this Apologie-maker does
seek to color and to lay it, where it should seem it was not. Apol. cap. 5.
page 151. Chap. 11. How this Author be stirs himself to lay the fault of
the scandalous division in Wisbich, upon those Priests, who would not subject
themselves to that insolent Agencie of the Jesuits. Apolog. cap. 6. page 153.
Chap. 12 How this present controversy is dissembled, and fetched from a head
in Flanders, by the Apologie-maker. Apol. cap. 7. page 158. Chap. 13 How the
Author of the Apology to cloak the Jesuits their dealings concerning the
institution of the new Subordination, persuades his Reader that his holiness
was moved thereto by certain letters which were long after written. Apol. cap.
8. page 171. Chap. 14 How this Apologie-maker persuades his Reader that his
Holiness was moved to imprison the two priests who went first to Rome by
certain letters which were written long after his resolution to imprison them,
and how he iuggleth about that which chanced unto them in Rome. Apo. cap. 9.
page 228. Chap. 15 How this Apologie-maker shuffleth off the true cause of this
present controversy, and lays the blame thereof upon the Secular priests.
Apol. cap. 10. page 264. Chap. 16 How the two books against which the Apology
is written, are slightly run over with a few cauils against them. Apol. c. 11.
pa. 300. Chap. 17 How this Author busieth himself to purge F. Parsons of his
expulsion out of Baliol College at Oxenford, and other matters wherewith he is
charged. Apol. cap. 12. page 322. Chap. 18 How the Secular Priests appealing to
Rome and going to his Holiness for justice against the unjust slanders of the
Jesuits and their adherents, are falsely and with great ignominy to the Sea
Apostolic, compared by this Apology maker to Alcymus and to Simon, who went
to Demetrius and Apollonius, heathen persecuters of Gods people and his
Priests. Apol. cap. 13. page 331. A Reply to the Appendix of the Apology. page
341.
FINIS.

