A compe^dius and a much fruytefull treatise of well living, co^taynyng the
hole su^me and effect of al virtue. Written by S. Bernard and translated by
Thomas Paynell.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

To the high and excellent Lady mary, dear daughter to our most pusaunte
soueraygne lord the king. T. Paynel, sends gretyng.
AFter I had gathered and translated certain chaptters of this fruytful and
virtuous book Lady most excellent: I with my self imagynyng and reuoluyng to
whose tuition and defense I should give or commit the same, your excellence
apeared to my mind most metest, and among all other the most apteste, and for
this thing most convenient For who can deny but y^ your grace thus well
learned (as in deed ye are) and thus inclyned to the obseruacio^ of Christ's
laws, is a right good bulwark, and a sure defense against the gnawers of
other men's labors and this proper book replenished with all godly and spiritual
lerning? I dare bebolde to say, that your grace (ponderyng the sayenges and
intent thereof) never red thing in english, that aluerde or styrd you more to
deuocio^, to the love of god and your neighbor, to fulfill his sweet and easy
commandments, to exchue and utterly avoid all wantonness, all ydelnesse,
all vanite, al trifelyng, dalyance, all worldly pastyme and pleasure, then
does this book, the which. S, Bernarde at his systers request co^piled and
made, exhorting her, and all other to gods service, to his fear and love,
and to the complement of his most swetest precepts and commandments.
Considering then, the vtilite, the devout pretense, and sweet argument of
this treatise, remembering also the integrite of him that made it, and again
the devout purpose of her it was made for, po^derynge also your graces most
curious and exquisite insuynge of their virtues and heavenly living, could I
have dedicate this my simple and rude translacio^ (rude it is and not
eloque^tly painted, because I would be plain) to any other, then to your
excellence a very mirour and glass of all goodness, of all virtue, of all
devotion, and perfet faith? Meruell it is to hear how men ertoll your pure and
virtuous living, and there with your constancy in all goodness, your
bou^tifulnesse and opende hand to the poor, verteous most commendable, and
the true pathway to conducte and bring al such as truly and customably use
the^, to eternal beatitude. I will not at this time express your many fold
other virtues, and gifts of nature, nor speak of your divine and humayne
knowledge, of your patience and lowly behauoure, nor of your humilite and
chastity, things (considering your gracys estate and age) to be wunderde at.
But by this your clean living and long contynuance thereof men may now se,
perceive and feel, the effect of godly and virtuous educacion the very rote
and spryng, of all godly operacyon, of all virtue and clean life. What needs
me (I say) to speak of your beutyfulnesse, of your most amiable and lowly
cou^tinance, of your wise and chaste co^muninacyon, or of your well
proportioned body in every behalf? The which gifts of nature to many other,
are as i^ticementes and occasions of evil disposicion. But to your grace, they
are (as I conjecture) virtuous prouocations, and the fresh remembrance of the
high and marueylons works of almightye God, whom I heartily beseech, and pray
to continue your grace this new year and ever in virtue, and to send you
long life to his pleasure.

Here begins the table of this present book.
The prologue.
OF faith. Folio.iii. Of esperau^ce and hope. fol. v Of grace. Fo. vi Of fear.
Fol. xi Of charity. Fol. xviii Of the contempt of the world fo. xxiii Of
co^uenyent garments. Fo. xxviii Of compunctyon Fol. xxxii Of heaviness Fo.
xxxix Of the love of God Fo. xlv Of y^ love of thy neighbor. Fo. xlvii Of
compassyon Fol. lii Of mercy Fol. liiii Of examples of saints Fol. lv Of
contentyon and strife Fo. lx Of dyscyplyne and correctyo^ Fo. lxii Of obedyence
Fo. lxviii Of perseueraunce. Fo. lxxiiii. Of vyrgynyte Fo. lxxx Of contynence
Fo. lxxxiii Of fornycatyon Fol. lxxxvii Of abstynence. Fo. lxxxxiii Of
drunkenness Fo. lxxxxvii Of sin. Fol. ci Of co^fessyo^ of syns and penance.
fo. ciiii Of communyon Fo. cxiii Of thought Fol. cxviii Of scylence. Fo. cxx Of
lyenge Fo. cxxii Of perjury Fol. cxxiii Of detractyon Fol. cxxiiii Of envy Fol.
cxxv Of anger Fol. cxxvi Of hatred Fo. cxxviii Of pride. Fo. cxxix Of vayue
glory Fo. cxxx Of humilyte Fol. cxxxiii Of paryence Fo. cxxxv Of concord Fo.
cxxxvi Of sufferaunce Fo. cxxxix Of syckenes Fol. cxlii Of couytousnes Fol.
cxlvi Of cupydyte Fol. cxlviii. Of pouertye Fol. cxlix Of murmuracyon Fo. cliii
Of prayer Fo. civ Of holy lessons. Fol. clvii Of works Fo. clix Of life artyue
and co^te^platyue. fo. clxi Of curyosyte Fol. clxix Of watch Fol. clxxi Of
wisdom Fol. clxxvi Of temptacyon. Fol. clxxx Of dreams Fol. clxxxiiii Of
shortness of life Fo. clxxxvii Of death. Fol. clxxxxi Of Judgment. Fol.
clxxxxiii The brothers exhortacio^. ^o c. xcvii
Finis Tabula.
A very convenient form and manner of living, for every man o^ woman that is
minded to live in Christ's laws.
The prologue.
MY right webeloued sister in God, it is long sense that ye very effecteously
desired me to write you a few of good and holy admonitions. But it is (as men
do say) a point of pride for a man to go about to teach his betters: and
therefore esteming my self unworthy, to take this thing upon me, I have
differde and prolonged to acco^plyshe your desire, but for asmoche as ye have
renewed your peticyon, and instanstly desired me to the same. I remembrynge
also the words of Christ's saying, M^^h. v.
whosoever shall constrayne the to bring him a mile of his way, go with him
two miles And again give to those that ^
shall require of the such things as shall be for there profit that requires
them, and his ease that shall give them. I found that I was constrained by
charity, and led there unto through your holy oracio^s and prayers. Therefore I
have gathered under the table of good holy fathers a few cru^mes of bread, if
I have not gethered them as I ought to do yet I have done the best I could the
which cru^mes I send unto you comprised in this book, for your instruction.
Therefore my well-beloved sister take this book and set it as a glass before your
eyes, and behold it well, and contynually, for the commandments of God be
as it were glasses, in the which man's soul should evermore be lokynge.

For by them men shall know the fylthynes of syn (for there is no man clean from
syn and) amend John 1.
there evil thoughts, whesshi^g there faces clean from all lubricite, and
ordure of sinfulness, if men set al there mind upon gods commandments,
and behold well these glasses there is no doubt but they shall se and know all
that shall be both pleasant, and displeasant unto god. Therefore my webeloued
sister, read this book willyngly, and read it over again and again, for by it
ye shall know, how ye shall love both god and your neighbor, how ye shall
regard and dispyse these wordly and tra^sytory things, how ye shall desire and
covet that is eternal and celestyall, how ye should suffer patiently for
gods sake all worldly aduersytes, and little or nothing regard flattery and
wordly prosperyte, how that in your infirmytes and sycknes ye shall tha^k god,
and not to be proud of your health, and how that in prosperyte ye shall not
eleuate or exale your self, nor in aduersyte vnderpresse your self. Therefore
my well-beloved sister in Christ / it shall pertayne to your wisdom dilygently
to study, and to read this book and to ensue and follow the same. Thus god
aimyghtye save you and keep you from all evil.

Of Faith. j. cha.
THe lord says that all thing is possible Math. ix.
to him that be leueth. No man can come to etnal bliss without faith, he is
right fortunate and happy, that believes well, and believing well lives well,
and living well, keeps well his faith. For. s. Paul says, that it is
impossyble to please GOd Hebre. vi.
without faith, and. S. Isodore says, that no man can please God without
faith. Men are not constrained to believe, but they are drawn unto it by goodly
examples / and reasonable persuasyons, for if man should be constrained to
believe, the constraynt and fere onse gone, he would return and wax worse, then
ever he was before. Faith without good, and charytable Iam. ii.
works is but dead, and of none effect, for he that is not ornared with good
works, let him trust nothing to faith, for it is but dead. He that bears
the cross, ought to be as ded in this world, for why to bear the cross, is
nothing else but to mortifye himself. And he that says he bears the
cross, and does not mortifye him self in this world, is a very hypocrite,
and a false dyssembler. But he that doutythe not at all, but fermly and
steadfastly byleueth all y^ is heavenly and good, look what he demau^deth he shall
obtain it. He y^ bileueth Johan. iii
in Jesus y^ son of God, shall obtain etnal and everlasting life, and who so
byleueth not in him, shall never come thither. S. James Ia^, ii.
says, y^ as the body without the soul is but dead, so in likewise, faith is
but dead, and of none effect without good works. My well i. Cor. xiii
beloved sister faith is an excellent, and a great thing, but of no substance
without charity. Therefore look ye have good faith and keep it as pure, and as net
as ye may, take heed y^ ye be uncorrupted, yt it continue in you. And y^ ye
confess the self faith, without any corruption, or folish co^municacio^ of
christ Jesus, suspecte no cruelnes or evil in him / lest ye so thi^king by him,
ye offe^de, and diminish the love ye have, or should have unto him be just in
your faith, and look ye have Joined to right fay the holy conuersacyon, and
that in deeds ye do not deny him that ye do pray unto with mouth, for an
evil thing myngled with that, that good is does infecte and mar all, as
through a little pride, all other goodness and virtues are stained, look therefore
y^ ye (the which through grace are perfaith in Faith) do not amiss i^ deed, nor
yt ye besmutter not your faith nor polute not the integrite thereof by naughty
living nor that ye myngle not vice with virtue, nor join ill to good. Thus my
good sister God preserve you in health.

Of esperance and hope. ij. c.
THe lord says despere not Mark. xi.
but look that ye have the faith of God in you hope that may be seen, is no
hope, for Roma. viii
what Hope is in that thing a man seyth, but if we Hope that thing we se not
we do patienly tarry for it / whereupon Solomon Prouet. x.
says that the abode and expectacion of just men is ioyfulnes, but the hope
of evil men shall peryshe Therefore my right well beloved sister tarry for the
lord, and keep his ways that is, keep his commandments and he shall so
exalte you, that ye shall have heaven for your heritage. Dear sister I say
tarry for the lord, and declyne from al evil, and at the day of dome and
judgment he shall exalte you, for they ye will not leave to doyl, do lose but
there labor to tarry for his mercy, of the which they might be sure of, if they
would leave there mysse living. Whereupon s. Isidore says that we should fere
lest y^ through the great hope ye god does promis us, we continue in syn. And
again, y^ we fall not in dyspere, because of his just punishment, and
correction, the which are to great fautes, y^ is to co^tynew in syn, and to
despere of Gods mercy. And therefore it shall be best to exchew the^ both, y^ is
to avoid and to renounce y^ is ill, and to have good hope in the great mercy
of god, for every good man does enforse him self through hope, and fere to
come to everlasting life, hope eleuathe a man to joy, and anon aft the
remembrance of everlasting pain brings a man to fear: and truly who so
desperith to optain remission and perdon of his sins, does condemn him self
more by desperatio^ then by sin. Therefore good sister, let your hope be sted
fast in christ Jesus, for mercy shall co^pas them y^ trust in god, trust Psalm.
xxxvi
steadfastly in him therefore, and do well and inhabit the earth, that is y^ holy
church, and ye shall be nouryshed with his goods, y^ which the church possesses,
for ye thing y^ is done without y^ auctorite of y^ church is of no valor nor yet
of no merit. Good syst leave of, all varyghtfulnesse y^ is all works which are
contrary unto god, or your neighbor, and trust in gods mercy, leave of al
iniquite and specially all pride, the which is called iniquite and trust in
thy savor christ Jesus, amend your self, and hope in the great mercy of god,
put away all prauite and all noughtynesse, and hope to have pardon, correct
your life, and trust to have life eternal, to the which I desire him to bring
you that has chosen you before all worlds.

Of grace. iij. chap
Saint Paul say Roma. v.
the, where has been much sin, there has been much grace, so that where syn
has reigned unto death, grace may Roma. vi.
also reygne through pardon to come to eternal life, for the salare and
reward of syn is no another thing but death^, but the grace of god, is
eternal beatitude god has distributed and given Ephe. iiii.
grace to every man according to the measure of ye gift of christ Well-beloved
sister, the profit of a spiritual man (as says. s. Isidore) is a gift of
god, then if when profit through the grace of god, it must needs follow, and
necessary it is that we laud god, of our good deeds, and not ourselves. Nor no
man can be corrected, but it must come of God for man has nothing that is
good of him self, nor the occasion or ways to do well comes not of man, as
says the Prophet Hiece. x.
Hierime: good lord says he, I know well that the ways of man is not
sufficyent to order his affares, that is to say, it is not in man's power to
wauke in the ways of Justice, if God led him not, the which fails noma^ y^
wylduly are him ye way But there are many y^ deserve to be depryued of yt way.
And when man has received any gift of god, he should require nothing else,
but well to use the same, lest be the vsurpyng of another man's office, he lose
the gift that was given hi before. For why he troubles all y^ hole order of y^
body, y^ is not content with his own office, but usurps another man's. In y^
division of gods gifts, y^ one takes one, y^ other another, for they are
never given all Roma. xiii
to one man, but to diverse, so that by humilite, some one may have that another
may marvel at For when it is written in Ezechiel Ezeche (...)
that the beasts wings smite one upon another, be that is sygnified, that the
holy saites through there manifold, and diverse virtues, provoke and move each
others affections, and that the one through good examples techeth the other. O
honest virgyn I would ye should know, that with out the grace of god preventing
accompanynge, and helpyng of us, we can do nothing that good is, the grace of
god does prevent us, to thentente we should will that is good, and verteous,
it accompaneth us, because we should begin to do that good is, it helps and
works with us, to thentent we may make perfyte and bring to pass that,
that is good and verteous.

Then it is given unto us by GOD, to will well, to begin well, and to do
well, it fo^t follows then that virtue is given us by god, and that vice and
syn comes of our selves of god comes charity, purite, and honestye, but as
for pride couetusnesse, and cupidite is of our selves, for when can do nothing
ye good is without the aid and help of god, and through the grace of god when
may do great good, without Gods grace when be very tradius slothful and
cold to all goodness, but his grace cadyng us we be right dilyge^t to al
virtues operacio^, without God, that is without his help, we be ever more ready
to sin, and to al noutynesse, but by his grace when be delivered thereof
without the help of god when be inclined to love these wordely things more
then it becomes us a great deal, but by his grace and gracious assistau^ce we
despyce these vain transitoryous and worldly things, and delyre celestial,
we war e^ected out of the celestial paradyse for Adams mistaute, but through
his grace we trust to come thither again, through Adams wretchedness and syn
we descended to hell. But by gods grace we trust to assende to everlasting
joy. And not withstanding we be rich, wise, and strong, yet it is all of
his grace. And I would ye should know my dear sister, that all the good that we
have in this world, we have it of him, and that all our aduersytes and
sorowfulnesse do come of our mislyuyng, god through his great mercy deuydeth
his gifts among us but all evil comes for our sins. Of the grace of god
comes all prosperyte, and of our syn and wickedness, all aduersite by Gods
grace we optaine that is necessary, and through vice the contrary. Therefore it
is very expedy^t and necessary evermore with thanks according to remember the
great benefits of God, of the which our holy mother the church speaking to
Christ Jesus her spouse says. They that remember thy grace, thy ^an. 1,
mercy, and thy benefytes, love the, ye is to say, they love y^, y^ are well
minded, they are well mynnyd and of good heart, y^ ascriue no ryghtfulnesse,
nor no holiness to there propre merits but al to the grace of GOD. And they
love ye, which are saved and remember thy grace. O honest virgyn look ye
remember evermore ye grace of god, for all the goodness that ye have, is by his
grace. Hear what Paul says, by the grace of god, says paul, I am Cor. xv.
that I am. Also by the grace of GOd ye are that ye are, for that ye have
despised the world, and utterly left your fathers house, and are appointed to
serve god, and to live with the handmaydens of god, al these virtues, and
goodness do only proceed of the grace of GOD, and that ye are a pure and a
clean virgin, and so does intend to contynewe, it is not of your self, but
of the great grace of god.

The sisters demand.
GOod brother Irequyre you Mark. x. Luke. xviii.
to tell me, what this text of scripture means. There is no man that is good,
holy, or just, but only god.

The brothers answer.
GOod sister, it is even so, as it is wryte^ For god is alonly good, holy and
just, for he is good only of him self, and by him self. But men are not good
of them self, but by God, and holy and just through his grace, the which
thing is well declared in the ca^ticles. Can. ^i.
I am the flowers of ye feld and the lilies of the vallee^, for I spread y^
sweet sauer of my virtue throughout all the world.

I am the holiness, the goodness the Justice of them that humly do trust in
me, for there is noman that can be holly or good without me, as I have said in
the holy Gospel, without me ye John^. xv.
can do nothing, I am the flowers of the fleldes, and the lillees of the
vallees. For as the feldes are ornated and goodly beset with flowers, so all the
world, shyneth and is ornated with y^ faith and knowledge of Christ Jesus, I am
the flowers of the feldes, and lilees of the valles, for I give abundantly of
my grace to such as trust more in me, then in there own goodness. Therefore I
exhort you that ye attribute nor ascriue nothyn ge to your own merits, nor
that ye presume no thing of your self, nor that ye put nor trust nothing to
your own virtue, nor yet to your audacite or boldness, but I will ye ascriue
all to the gift of god, and to his divine grace. And in all your works thank
god, in all your deeds thank god, and in all your conuersacyon thank god, let
your hope be evermore in GOD, that made you of ^ought.

Of fear. iiij. cha
MY we beloved siter, harken what I say, harken unto my admonition, and to my
words, fear God above all things, and Ecclesi. (...)
keep always his commandments, for the eyes of GOD, are always upon those
that fere him, and upon those that fere him, and upon those that trust to his
mercy. And Solomon Prouer. iii
says, fear GOD, and leave al wickedness, he that fears god forgets
nothing, and a certain wise man says, that the fear of god is glory, and
that gloriation is the mirth, and crown of all exultacyon, the fear of Eccle.
i.
god shall delight the heart, and with long life give joy and myrthe, for he
that is without y^ fere of GOD, can not be justified Eccle. i.
the fear of god, is wisdom and discipline, doubt not in the fear of god,
nor approach not toward him with a double heart.

You that fear God, sustain and keep well his mercy, and depart not from him,
least ye fall, ye yt fear god, believe in hi, and your reward shall not be
diminysshed. You ye Ecclesi. ii.
fear god, love him, and your hearts shall be illuminated, and inflamed, they
that fear god, believe his words, and they that fear him, will keep and
follow his waves, they y^ fear god will enquere for such things as shall plese
him, and are replenished with his laws. They that fere God will prove there
hearts, and in his presence sanctifye there souls, they that fear god, keep
his commandments, and have patience until he look upon them, that is until
they depart the world. Gods eyes are always upon them that fear him, and
Eccle. xv
he knoeth all there works, wisdom is the end of the fear of god, he that
fears god, is very fortunate, and god in time of temptation shall deliver him
from all evil. The spirit of those y^ fear god shall be required, and sought
for, and be blessed in his sight. The fear of god is lykened to paradyse, and
shall be couerde with all benediction and glory. Hap is he, unto whom god has
given his fear, for the fear of god, is the beginning Eccle. xxv.
of the love of god. O my well-beloved sister, there is nothing that keeps or
defends us better from syn, then the fear of hell and the love of god to
fear god is to do no evil, and to leave no goodness undone, the which are
much necessary to cause and to engender in man the fear of god, that is the
fou^tayn of wisdom. blyssed shall he be at the hour Eccle. i.
of his death, that feryth GOd. Good sister, it is a very good John^, ii^^
thing to fear God, for the fere of god does exile and banysshe syn, and
repress vice, the fear of god causyth a man to be wise and dilligent, where is
no fere of god, there ye soul is in great parell and danger. Where is no
fear of God, there is mys and dissolute living, where there is no fear of
God, there is abundance of syn. Therefore honest virgyn, look that fere and hope
be in your heart, and that they contynewe in you. And trust so unto the mercy
of GOd, that ye always fear his justice.

But yet ye shall understand ye there are four manner of fears, fear humane,
fear servile, Iniciall, and chaste fear, fear humayne (as says Cassiodore)
is when we fear to suffer any danger of the body, or ye fear of loss of our
worldly goods and substance, this worldly and noughtye fear is left in the
world, in his first degree, for the Lord Math. xv.
says, ye shall not fear them yt kill the body, and can not touch the soul.
The second fear is called Servile, as says blissed S. Austen, for he yt for
the great fere of the pains of hell leuyth to sin, and does no good for
Gods sake, but for fear of pain, he fearythe after the manner of a servant,
the which does such good as he does, not for fear of lesinge of that he
loves not, but for fear of punishment which he fears to suffer, such men
fear not to lose the sweet imbrasynges of there sweet spowse Jesus. But they
fear to be condemned, of this fear, saint Paul says. Uerely says he, ye
have not received Roma. viii
the spyryte of seruytute in fear, but ye have received the spirit of chyldly
adoption.

This fear seruyle is good and profitable, notwithstanding it be not
sufficye^t nor yet perfyte, for thereby, grows by a little and a little, a
custom of Justice and of good works. For when man begins to believe the
day of Judgment, he begins also to fear it. But he that fears it, has
not perfyte trust thereof, nor there is no perfyte charity in him that fearyth,
for if he had perfyte charity, he would not fear for perfyte charity should
Johan. iiii
cause perfyte justice in man. And so he should have no cause to fere but rather
a good cause to desire that all iniquite war paste and gone, and that the
kyngdo^e of heaven war come. What other thing is perfyte charity, but perfyte
holiness, he has perfyte charity, that lives perfytely, and he that lives
perfetly, has no cause to be condemned, but to be crouned in heaven, he that
has in him self, perfyte charity needs not tofeare to be da^ued but to hope
to be a glorious saint in heaven. And of this speaks David, saying. All they
that Psalm. v.
love thy name, shall be gloryfyed in the, so it follows ye fear is not in
charity, but that perfyte charity chaseth all fear away. To this kind of
fere succedeth the third fear called Iniciall, that is when a man begins
to do that thing for Christ's sake, the which at the beginning he did for
fear of eternal dampnatio^, of this fere speaks David saieuge, that the fear
of Psalm. cx.
god, is the beginning of al wisdom, for Inicial is, when a man begins to
love God, whom he feared before And so the second kind of fear, is excluded
from the heart of man. Unto this Iniciall fear succedyth the fourth kind of
fear, called chaste fear be the which we fear least that the lord tarry to
long from us, and that he will leave us, and that we shall offend him, and
move him by our sins, and finally lose him. This manner of fear does descend
and spryngeth of love, of the which we read in y^ sauter. The fear of god,
Psalm. xviii
says David, remains eternally for evermore, fere comes first to man's
heart, why so? To prepare a place for charity, when charity shall begin to be in
ye heart of man, then fear which had prepared a place for charity, is rejected
and send from thense.

Lysten good sister unto this example or similitude. We se that by the bristell
the threde is brawen throw, for the brystell enter the first, and ledithe the
threde throw the seem In like manner, fear does first enter into man's soul,
and after it, comes charity, but after that charity is onse enterde she
chaseth fear away This chaste feary, is a very holy fear for it in genderth
all goodness in ma^s thought. This is a holy fear, yt brings to man's
thought perfect charity, for perfet charity, is perfect holiness, this is a
fear that is very chaste, for it falls into no auoutery, but loves GOD
above al thing, and preferthe nothing above ye love of GOd, this fear is also
caulde chyldly fear, for it fears not god, as a servant fereth his cruel
master, but as a child fears his sweet father. But what meneth David be this
saying Psalm. xviii
, yt fear of god remains for evermore. When saint John lays, that perfet
charity does repel and chase fear away. John^. iiii


This is that we told you before, that he has chaste fear in him, that
fereth not GOD because of the pains of hell, nor for the torments of the
fire, but for the reverence and love he has unto GOd, and this reverent, and
loving fear to God shall endure for evermore. He that fears god for the
pains of hell, has not this chaste fere, but the fear called seruyle, nor he
has no perfyte charity, for if he loved god perfetly, he would have perfyte
justice in him self, and should not fear god for fear of the pa^es of hell,
but only for reverence and good love, and therefore the fere of pain is not in
charity for perfyte Charity puts all fear away. A servant fears his
master after another sort, then the child the father. The servant fears his
master with dispeare and hatred, the child fereth his father with all love
and reverence.

Therefore I advise you to fear god with all love and reverence I will not ye
should be evermore under the yoke of fear, but that ye should lift up your
self unto god the father, that made and created you as his own daughter. Also
I exhort you to love god chastely, and that ye prefar nothing above his love,
but y^ for his sake and love, ye esteem little all worldly things. Ferthermore
honest virgyn, I desire you to amend your living as much as ye may possible,
and in such manner that your words and co^municacio^ may be pudyke and chaste,
your pase all honest, your cou^tenau^ce humble and meke, your tongue affable,
your soul replenished with the love of God, your hands full of good works, the
lord helpyng you, without whose aid it is impossible to do well. My dear
sister in christ, yfye fear GOd, withal your heart, ye shall have great
abou^daunce of riches not only in this present life, but also in time to come.

Of charity. v. cha.
THe king has brought (...).
me into his wine celler, and has ordained charity in me. This wine celler is
y^ church in the which is the wine of prechyng of y^ gospel. Into this celler
is brought ye lover of ye spouse y^ is y^ devout soul of man wheri^ charity
is ordained and set, for eueri thing ought not to be equally beloved but in
diverse manners, we should not love all things alyke and with one affection, but
one more and another less, for why to know what we ought to do, and not to
know how to order it, is no perfect science, for if we love not such things
as we should love, or if we love such things as we should not love, our
charity is not well orderde, or if we love any thing more or less then we
should do, our Charity is not well ordered, for Charity well ordered, wylleth
y^ we fear god above all thing, we should love god with all our heart, that is
with all our under Math. xxii
standing, and with all our mind, and that is with all our will, and with all our
thought, that is with all our memory, we should also e^alte and lift up unto god
all our understanding, all our thought, all our life, of whom we have
althynge. And beware that there be no part of our life in ydelnesse, but what
soever y^ comes to our mind: redress it unto him, from whom finally all
feruentnes of love does descend and flow. Therefore my dear sister it is a
right worthy thing and a very necessary, that we love God above all thing,
for he is the sovereign goodness then to love the sovereign goodness, is
sovereign beatitude, and the more a man loves god, the more he is fortunate,
he that loves god is reputed to be good, and if he be good, it follows y^ he
is fortunate. Of the which thing it is written in the canticles. The love of
god is as strong as death, that is well said, for as death does violently
separate the soul from the body, so the love of god, does violently separate
man from all carnal, and worldly love, and verily the love of GOD is, as
strong as death, for when that through the love of god, we be mortified from
vice, then what soever death does in man's body, the same does the delection
of god in the cupidites and pleasures of this world. God should be beloved for
his own sake, for he is the souerayn goodness of all goodness and he that has
created us of naught. Charity is the delectio^, by the which the lord is loved
for his own sake, and a man's nyghbour forgoddes sake. Above all thing and
first god ought to be beloved as I have showed you, that is before all other
thing, and seco^darely your neighbor in god, that is in all goodness.
Charity has two commandments and precepts. The first pertayneth to the
dilection of god, the which is y^ principal point of all. The second
pertayneth to the dilection of your neighbor, the which is like unto the
first, as it is wryte^. Thou shall Math. xxii
love thy lord god, and thy neighbor as thy self, as though he would say, y^
should love thy neighbor for ye thing and to y^ end y^ do love thy self, ye
i^, ye he may be good and come the bliss of heaven. And of this godly and
neighbourly dilection christ in the Canticles says unto his spouse, (...)
charity, for if charity were in him god should be in him, for God is charity.
Also we should love our neighbors and kynsfolke, if they be good, and gods
servants, but yet we should rather love a stranger copelyd unto us by charity,
then our kynsfolke that neither love nor serve GOd: Why so? For the conjunction
and copulatio^ of men by charity, is of a more per fectio^ and holiness, then
only bodily conjunction. We should love all faithful people, but for asmoch as
we cannot profit the^ all, we ought principally to profit the^ the which by
reason of in habitatio^ time, and other oportunites, are straytly joined unto
us by charity, but yet with like love, we should desire every man's saluatto^, and
love al manner of people charitable that is, we should love them to thentent
they may love God and be saved, yet we ought not to show the works of mercy
egally to every man, but to some more, to some less. My well-beloved sister, if
we keep true, and perfyte charity, by Gods help, and grace we may come to
salvation, and for the love of god, we should love our enemies, as it is written.

Love your enemies, do good to Luke. v^.
those that hate you, and pray for them that persecute you, that even so, ye
may be the children of GOD. Then good sister, Charity is very necessary for
without it no man can please GOD, he loves not GOD that hates his people, nor
he loves not god, that dispeseth his Hevre. xii.
commandments, charity is the very rote of all virtue, without charity what
soever we do, it helps not, al our diligence is vain without charity, where
that charity is not there raygneth flesly cupidite and lust, and therefore a man
is called perfyte, when he is full of charity, for without charity
(notwithstanding a man believe never so well) he shall never come to eternal
beatitude, the virtue of charity is so excellent and so noble, that without it,
all other virtues avail not, but if charity be in man, as it ought to be, he
has all thing, he that loves not GOd, loves not him self. Therefore now at
this time, I monyshe you, that by perfect love ye annexe and join your self to
your i^uiseble spouse christ Jesus, and that be no means ye covet not, these
worldly things. And haste you also be affection to be out of this dale of
wretchedness, and thynk it a pain to be long here, nor take no pleasure theri^,
but with al your might and desire be as faruent as ye may to depart unto god
your lover, and that for the love of him, ye esteem and repute your proper
health as nothing. And look yt ye be evermore throw pearsed with the wounds
of his excellent love, and so, that ye may say these words, I am wounded with
charity. My well-beloved lyster in christ Jesus, harken unto gods words.
Whosoever sethe, that he loved me, shall John. xiiii
be beloved of my father, and I will love him, and manyfestly vysclose my self
unto him. Therefore good sister, love him in this transitory world, that he
may love you with his father in perpetual beatitude.

Amen.
Of the contempt of the world. viij. cha.
MY Well-beloved sister, Math. xix. Mark. x. Luke. xvii.
harken unto Christ Jesus the which says. Whosoever will forsake and seue his
house, his father and mother, his brethren and systers, or his children, his
feldes, or his heritage for ye love of me and my name, he shall receive a
hunderth times asmoch, and therewith eternal and everlasting life. Wherefore
good sister it is for our great luker and profit, to leave al earthly Iaco.
iiii.
things for Gods sake to get eternal, for whosoever be a friend and a
fauerer of y^ world, he is gods enemy. Wherefore let us not love the world,
least that God shall hate us. He shall easily despise all thing, that
rememberth evermore that he shall dye. If we daily call our death to memory, we
shall wyllyngly despise all earthly things, if we think daily upon the day
of our death, we shall efthsones forget and despise all worldly pleasures.

The sisters demand.
O My good brother I would be well content for ye name and the love of god, to
leave all ye is in the world if I had any thing but forasmoche as I have neither
gold, silver, nor yet no other riches of this world, I ca^ not tell what I
should leave for gods sake.

The brothers answer.
O Christ's spouse ye leave many things when ye leave your will to have, ye leave
many things when ye put back your desire of bauynge, ye leave much, when ye
leave all carnal and flesly desire ye leave much, when that for the name of god
ye leave all delectations and plesures of this world, ye leave much, when ye
renounce these worldly, and couetus desires, GOd loves more the soul of man,
the^ he does worldly riches. The lord loves much more the holy and pure
mind of man, then any worldly substance, good sister the kingdom of heaven is
worth all that ever ye have, god axeth no more, then he has given you.
Therefore render up unto him that he has given you, ye is, a holy, a devout,
a chaste, a pure, a religious, a fere full mind, and a well manerred. Then good
sister, the kingdom of heaven is asmoch worth as ye are able to give or make,
give and offer up your self un to god, and ye shall soon obtain the kingdom
of heaven. Let not the price thereof trouble you, trouble not your self for the
price, nor thynk it not much, for christ Jesus to deliver you, from the hands
of the devil to win, and to bring you to god, delivered him self up. Therefore
give your self wyllyngly and holy unto him, that has bought and delivered
you from the hands of your enemy, for why to save you, he did holy deliver
him self: good sister set not by ye mucke of this world, that ye may obtain
the riches of heaven, riches does bring and lead man to the danger both of
body and soul.

Riches bring a man to his death, Many a man has been destroyed by riches, by
riches many a man has been in extreme danger. Many a one has been banyshed
and outlawed for riches Riches has been the death of many a man Who so
troubles him self with these earthly and worldly busynesses shall never be at
rest nor yet inquiet. The care of worldly substance does trouble a man's mind
maruelously, and man given and occupyde about such vile, and earthly matters,
is in continual vexation and trouble. Wherefore if ye will be at rest and in
tranquilyte, desire noone of these worldly things. Ye shall be evermore in
quietness of mind, if ye leave these worldly cures, ye shall be at rest, if
ye avoid and leave al worldly actions and busynesses, for riches are never
gotten without the great danger of sin. No man melleth with worldly matters,
without parel of syn, and it is a very rare and a seldom seen thing that they
come to eternal rest, that Math. xix.
meldle with the world. He that in wrappeth him self in worldly matters,
gothe from the love of god. He that is fixed in the love of these earthly
things, takes little or no pleasure in god, these temporal cares and matters,
elienate a man's mind from god, there is no man that at once can both love the
glory of heaven, and of the world. No man can love god and the world
together, it is a very hard thing to apply celestial, and worldly things
together. Yt is a hard point to love god and the world together, no man can
perfetly Math. vi.
love god and the world, noman can egally love them both, at once. O honest
virgyn, I pray you to harken unto me, for not withstanding a man do florysh
in the glory of this world, not withstanding he be clothed with purpure and
gold, notwithstanding he seems to be excellently well arrayed, floryshynge
in gold, and precious stone, not we dyng he has his guard of goodly men
about him, and his armed watch men, and environed with innumerable company of
servants. Yet he is evermore in pain, in anguish and heuines, in parell and
danger. And not withstandyng he be among his goodly tapettes and rych
hangynges, yet vexed and much troubeled he lies in his beds of gold and
silver, and being full feeble and frail he rests in his beds of down, all
mortal.

Good sister in christ, I do show you these things, to thentent ye may know
how vain these worldly things be. The felicite of this world is very short,
the glory of this world is small, this temporal power is exceeding frail and
bryttell. Wherefore, look ye despise all worldly about dance, and that
wyllyngly ye forsake these earthly things, to come to eternal. Refuse that is
tra^sitory, to come to everlasting Give away these tryflynge and worldly
things that god may give you eternal, exchew and fly the world, and the
company of man, y^ ye may come to that goodly and celestial company of
angels, to the which company I desire he will bring you, that bought you with
his precious blood.

Amen.
Of the ha^yte, and convenient garments. cap. ix.
THe lord says Math. vi.
They that are delicately and softly besene, are in great men's houses. A man's
garment is called soft and delicate, because it mollefyeth and corrupt the
mind, great men's houses delight in such wanton, and delicate vesture, but the
church of god deliteth, and takes pleasure in humble and sharp arraye. In the
vesture of christ servants and of his hand mayde^s should not be, nor yet a
pear newfangelnesse, no vanite, no superfluite, nor no sign of pride, or of
vain glory. Whereupon. S. Hierome says that the tender and soft vesture
does not ornate nor set forth gods servants, but the clerenesse of thought.

Therefore my well-beloved sister, let us deck us, with spiritual ornaments,
that is with charity, humilite, gentylnes, obedience, and patience, these be
the very ornaments with the which we may please our celestial spouse christ
Jesus, for our invisible spouse requires no erteryoure beutie, but the
interior and inward beutie, as David the Prophet says. All the glory of the
kings daughter, that is of god, is Psalm. liiii.
inwardly, and all such glory is in a good, in a humble, and in a pure
conscye^ce, and in such things they that be good, do only glory, but these
idiotes do ever more glory i^ these exterior things. Therefore let good manners
be your riches, let good living be your beutye, for I would my good sister,
that that thing might be said by you, that is red in the canticles. My sweet
Canti. x.
heart ye are all goodly, nor there is not a spot in you. And again it is
written, come from the mountain of Libano, for ye shall be crowned. Truly that
soul may well be called fortunate, that seruyth god vndefyledly, ye shall be
very fortunate, if ye may serve god your spouse without any spot of syn, in
deuer not your self to plese god with your fair face, but with your heart,
your vesture shall neither be to precious, nor yet to vile, but moderate and
co^petent. And so says saint Austen of him self.

I confess (says he) that I am a shamed of my goodly array.

And again he says, that such goodly array besemeth not his profession, it
pertayneth not to these members, it besemeth not these graye ears. Be therefore
good virgyn well and honestly besene, not to apeare to be bewtifull, but only
for bodily health, least that when ye are trymblye besene, ye fall to sin,
for the more that the body is wantonly set forth invayneglorye, so much the
more the soul is inwardly bespotted and defiled. Therefore good sister show
your profession to your pace and in your habyte, and that in your pace be
simplicite and honest, in your mouynge pureness in your gesture grauite, and
in your manner of going honest, and that therein appear no dishoneste, no
wa^tonnesse, no pride, no sluggesneshe, nor no lyghtnesse, for why the will and
mind of a man does appear, and is known by the gesture of the body, the
gesture of the body is the declaration of the mind, by a man's gesture his
courage is soon perceived. Therefore good sister let your manner of going and
pace have no symilitude of lyghtnes in it. Let not your pace ofte^de man's
sight. Let it not cause men to gase upon you, or be any occasyon, why men should
slander and speak evil by you Good sister cleanse your conscience so, from
all malice and iniquite, that christ Jesus your spouse may say thus unto you.
Canti. (...).
O ye are fair, ye are fair, your eyes are as goodly as the doves ye are
fair by perfection of heart and cle^lynesse of mind, ye are fair for your
intencyon is good, and full of all simplicite, for all that ye have done, ye
have not done it all to please man withal, but only for the pleasure of god.

Look your eyes be like unto the doves eyes, for so shall ye keep them
undefiled from al malice, su^lacion, and fiction. I write unto you these
things good sister, because ye should rather rejoice inwardly of your
excellent good virtues, then outwardly of your fresh and gay clothyng Whereupon
saint Gregory says, that noma^ desires rich, and goodly apparel but only
for vain glory, that is because that me^ should extol and laud him, and
think the^ more honorable then all other. There is no man that desires to be
well decked but there only, where he may be seen, and so it is manifest that he
desires it only forvaine glory. O good virgyn, by the desire of such rich
and worldly apparel, men know we do love this world, for he ye loves not the
world, cares little or nothing for such vanites. When man reioyseth in such
goodly and rich habyte, then his heart is far from the love of god his maker,
how much the more we delight in the fashonyng and trymmynge of our bodies, so
much the more farther of be we from the love of god. How much y^ more we take
our pleasure in these earthly, and transitory things, so much the less we
desire celestial and heavenly things. Truly that woman that delyteth and
loves precious array, can not be but defiled with syn, the spouse of christ
loving such clenly and goodly apparel can not be without syn The handmayde
of GOd, that has earnestly left the world, desires no such apparel, humble
and simple vesture is a token of the contempt of the world. Therefore good
sister I pray you that good manners may be your habyte, and be no another
inwardes, then ye be outwardes. Look ye be in very deed the self ye would be
esteemed and reputed to be And as ye be to ma^s sight, so be in all your
operatio^s and works, and as ye are in countenance, so look ye be in very
deed.

Of co^punction the, x. cha.
THe co^pu^ction of the heart, is ye humi^ite of the mind, the which proceeds
of the remembrance of syn, and of the fear of Gods judgment, this
co^punction is a perfyte thyn g, by the which all carnal delectacyon is
avoided, and the mind intention and study of man fixed in the meditacyon, and
contemplacyon of god. We read of two manner of co^pu^ctio^s, the tone is when
the soul of gods servant is moved, and therewith reduces his sins to
memory, the other is, when the soul with great and deep sythes desires to
come to everlasting joy the soul of every just man is moved by co^pu^ctio^
four manner of ways. The first is by y^ remembrance of his syn, the second
by the remembrance of the pains y^ be to come. The third is by remembrance
of the peregrinacion of this mortal life. The fourth, by the desire of heaven,
the which the soul of man does greatly covet. Every wretched syn^er knows
that god does then visyte him, when that by compunction he is provoked to weep,
for. S. Peter did weep through great compunction, when god beheld him, for it
is written, that our lord turned him, and beheld Luke. xxii.
peter, and that incontinently he went out and wept bytterly, and of this
speaks the Psalmist. Psalm. xvi.
God looked; and the earth moved and trembled. The earth does then tremble, when
the poor and wretched sinner is moved to bewail his si(...)es. Wherefore good
sister I would counsel you, to call your sins to remembrance in prayer, and
sorowfulnesse, for his prayer is not clean nor yet acceptable, that prays
without co^punction or contrition. I pray you to harken unto the examples of holy
saints, ye which by co^punction and lamentacyo^ have obtained of god pardon,
and forgiveness of their sins. As Samuels mother by compunctyon i. Reg. (...)
deserved to have a child, and ferthermore she optayned of god the gift of
prophecy David by long waylyng and co^punctio^ optayned pardon of his
adventure and murder, (...). Reg. xii.
for the prophet said thus unto him. Thou shall not die, for the lord has
translated thy sin. And good father Tobias by such co^pu^ction and tears,
was restored to his sight, and helped of his pouerte, for the angel Raphael
said thus unto him, be glad quod Raphael, and again / ^^be. xi
be of good chere, for y^ shall be shortly helped. And the glorious Magdalene
through great co^punction and manyfolde tears Luke. vii
hard these words of Gods own mouth, thy sins be for gyne^the. Good
sister I have recyted these examples of holy saints unto you, that your tears
and lame^tacyon for your missautes with co^punction may be sweet unto you, for
co^punction is a desyrefull treasure, and to man's mind a joy ine^arrable, he
that prays with true compu^ction, does prophet his soul very much A
strong champion is no less worthy of praise, being in lamentation, then
being in battle, considering then that after our bapteme, we have
bespotted and defiled our life with stynken syn, set us now baptyse and rynse
our conscience with tears, for where is weeping, there is spiritual and goostly
fire, the which shall illuminate and kyndle ye secrets of ma^s mind, y^
weping and the tears of penitent persons, are unto God as a chrystendome.
Well-beloved sister in christ, if ye have co^punctio^, ye are hap, for
co^punctio^ of ye heart is the health of ye soul the co^punction of the mind,
and thought, is the illumination of the soul, for the^ the soul is kynled
when that by co^punction it is moved to weep, the co^punctio^ of teres is the
remission of sins, for then a man's sins are for given him, when with bitter
weeping and tears he reme^bereth them, co^punction does bring the holy ghost
to man, for as soon as the holy ghost does visyte man's mind, by and by the
poor sinner shall bewail his mislyuynge.

The sisters demand
O Good brother, I require you to tell me for what causes in this mortal life,
we should weep.

The brothers answer.
GOod sister there are four causes the first is, for our own sins. The
second for the wretchedness and misery of this world. The third is, for the
compassyon of our neighbor. The fourth is for the pleasure of the celestial,
and heavenly reward. He wept for his sins that said, I will Psalm. (...).
wash my bed every night, and with my tears, I will wete the couerlet of my
bed. And again bewailing the misery of this wretched world, he said. Alas I
am in great sorowfulnesse, for Psalm. cxix.
why my labor, that is my life is prolonged, and in these my wretchedness I
dwell not among good men, but among sinners, the which are understood by this
word cedar, my soul has been very long absent from god Also y^ good lord
wept through pite and co^passyon upon Lazarus, Luke. xix.
and upon the city of Jerusalem, saying, for if thou hadest known the time
of the visitacyon. etc. And S. Paul commands, Roma. xii.
that we should rejoice with those that are in joy, and weep with those that
weep, and being in great heaviness he said. Who is sick, and I am ^
not sick. And they y^ are good just men weep for joy of the ^eward of life
everlasting, rehersynge the words of Dauyd say enge. We sat apo^ the floodes
of psalm cxxxvi
Babilo^, and wept, when we remembered the Syo^, that is, when we remember our
celestial reward. This present life is but death, for it is full of misery and
wretchedness the which things are not in heaven, but only in this present life,
the which is never at home, but always as vanished, for being in this world we
be never in the city, but wandering abroad, and as strangers (as it is
written) Hebre. xiii.
we have no parpetuall demore in this world, but we seek and search for a
place yt is to come, that is for heaven. Therefore good sister first above all
thing, I would ye should bewail your sins, seco^darely ye wretchedness of this
world Thyrdly your neighbor and fourthly for the love of the celestial
reward. Honest virgyn look ye pray to god with good devotion desiring him to
give you true co^punctio^ of mind and of heart contrition, for compunction
causes god to be with us, as he himself says, I and my father will come to
him that John^. xiiii.
has co^punction, and we will tarry with him. Where is much wepinge and
wayling, there are lightly no evil thoughts, and if paraduenture at some time
they approach nygh, yet they take no rote, and therefore they can not abide,
long weeping causes a man to have good confidence in God. Harken good sister
unto gods own words. Stand up good daughter, and Canti. ii.
come unto me, for truly winter is gone and past, the flowers begin to
appear, and the time of loppynge is come, for we have hard the voice of the
turtyll in our country, that is to say, the voice of the preachers, and of the
apostles, are hard in gods church. This turtyll is a very chaste bird, whose
custom is, to build her nest in high trees, and by her, is signified the
apostelles and other good docters, which may say, our inhabitau^ce and
dwelling place, is in heaven, the which turtyll rather mourns then syngeth,
whose mourning does signyfye the tears and sorowfulnes of good saints,
exortynge there friends to mourning and lamentacyon saying, be petyfull and
mourn you. Therefore well-beloved sister taken an example by y^ turtyll, and weep
until ye may se the lord in his high majesty it were better for you to weep
for the love of christ Jesus, then to weep for the fear of hell. Thy chekes
are as fair as the turtyll doves, the nature of the turtyll is, that if by any
occasion or chance she lose her mate, never to take no another O christ's
spouse, follow and be like the turtyll, and look that beside Christ Jesus ye
take no another spouse nor lover. Be like the turtyll, and weep both day and
night with the desire of Christ Jesus your lover, for he is now ascended to
heaven, where ye may se him sit upon the right hand of his father. Your chekes
are as goodly as the turtylles, honest shame fastness is wont to be showed,
and apeare in the chekes, ye have the chekes of the turtyll, if for your
spouse Christ Jesus sake, ye do nothing against his will, ye have the chekes
of turtyll, if ye have no another lover then Christ Jesus: that is to say, if
ye love no another creature more then him, and all other for the love of him: ye
have the turtylles chekes, if for the love and reverence of GOd, ye leave of al
things that should displease him Therefore good sister bewail and wheshe out
your sins, and wheshe them with compunctyon and many fold tears wheshe
away your neglygenses, and your manyfold transgressyons with contynual
tears, obtain by compunction and waylynge the remissyon of your sins, and
be sorrowful and often syghynges find the means to optaine and possess joy
ever lastyng, bewail your iniquites bewail the horribilnes of your sins,
and by great lamentation call them to memory, and all to be sprynkyl them with
the abundance of water, and with contynuall and bitter tears, deface them
with continual deploracyon, and with manyfold tears wheshe out, that ye have
done by iniquite and against gods laws, for if ye lament not your sins in
this world, when shall ye say these words. Good lord ye have received and
laid my tears before you, if ye bewail not your iniquite in this Psalm. iv.
world, when shall ye say. My tears have been to me as bread, both by night
and by day.

Therefore christ's spowse I monyshe, Psalm. xli.
and exhort you to bewail your syn in this mortal life, that ye may be
confortyd in heaven, for it is written, fortunate be Luke. vi. Math. v.
they that weep in this world, for they shall be conforted.

Of heuinesse the.xi. Cha.
THe lord says / John^. xvi.
Amen amen, this is gods oath, and his manner of swerynge, as though he would
say I swear unto you, that ye shall weep, but the world shall rejoice, ye
shall be very heavy but your heaviness shall be turned into great ioyfulnesse and
pleasure, and Solomon saves, a merry Prouet. xv
heart, causes a merry count nau^ce, a heavy spirit is dejected in to the
heuinesse of the soul. A joyful heart and mind makes a man lustye, but a
heavy spirit, ^^o. xvii
dries up man's bones, good child make no strife, nor no contradiction in good
things, and in all thing that is given you, look ye use no angery nor no evil
words, for tribulacion is the heuinesse of the heart, and ye ioyfulnesse of the
heart, is man's life, a troubelous mind ingendereth heaviness, but a wise man
will resyst it, by heaviness comes death, heaviness does alter the force and
strength of man's heart, but a merry and a light heart inge^dereth health,
heuines dries up man's bones. And the holy man Athanasius, says, that a heavy
and a melancolius person, is evermore malitius, and causes the holy ghost given
unto him by GOd, to be heavy, as S. paul says. Cause Ephe. iiii.
not the holy ghost, that is in you to be heavy, by whom ye are marked in the
day of redemption.

Therefore good sister take good head ye cause not the holy ghost being and
dwelling in you to be heavy, least he leave you, and depart from you, put al
manner of doubt, and all high myndefullnesse from you. For they do cause the
holy ghost to be in care, and heaviness, therefore leave of all heaviness, for
heaviness is sister both unto doutefulnes and high myndefulnes, verily seculer
heaviness is of all evil spirytes y^ very worst, and very noyful to gods
servants, secular heaviness hurts, and feblished y^ servants of god the holy
ghost can not away i^ no manner of means with bodily heaviness Therefore good sister
order your self so yt ye may be evermore in spiritual gladness and ioyfulnesse,
the which god aloweth greatly, all spiritual gladness is good, and thinks
upon nothing but that good is, despisynge all vain and worldly heaviness, if
spirytual mirth were not good, the Prophet David Psalm. xxxi.
would not say, be you merry, and joyful in God, and ye that are just me^,
rejoice you, and ye that are right hartyd men glorifye Psalm. lxiii.
your selves in god, and again The just man shall be merry in god and shall put
all his trust in him, and all that are right hearted men shall be rejoiced and
conforted.

The sisters demand
O Good brother, if heaviness be so evil and noyfull to gods servants as ye
make it, how chau^ceth it then, that Solomon Eccle. vii.
says, that a wise man's heart and mind is where is heaviness, and a foles
heart, where is joy and myrthe.

The brothers answer.
WOrshypfull sister, these words of Solomon, a wise man's heart is where is
heaviness, and the folysshe man's heart, where is myrthe, and joy, are to be
understood only of spiritual heaviness, and worldly joy, as though he
would say more plainly, a wise man's heart and mind is there, where is
spiritual and goostly heaviness. And the heart of a foie is there, where is
worldly myrthe and joy, they are wise, that are in goostly heaviness, but they
are very foles, that are in worldly joy. And of this thing speaks the lord
Luke. x
saying, be you glad and merry for your names are written in heaven. And saint
Paul says, (...). Lor. vi.
be as though ye were heavy, but trusting and reioysynge evermore in god. And
again he says, be ye merry in god, I say again, be ye merry in god, so it
follows then, that spiritual joy Philip. ^iii
is very good and confortable.

But the sorowfulnes that comes by the covetousness of worldly goods is very
evil, of spiritual heaviness ye have in the Math. vi. Luke. vi.
gospel: blessed be they that weep for they shall be conforted: and of Ecclesi.
xxx
worldly and secular heaviness Solomon says. Heaviness has been many a man's
death, and has no manner of vtilite ne profete in it: and of spiritual joy
David says, his heart that seeks Psalm. ciii^.
god, shall be in joy, of the worldly joy, it is written. Out Luke. vi.
upon you that laugh and be merry now, for ye shall wale and weep Yet good
sister lyste^ unto saint Paul's words, saying, that ii. Cor. vii
such spiritual heaviness brings a man to pena^unce, and that worldly
heuinesse brings a man to death.

His prayer that is evermore in heuinesse is of no virtue, nor ascends not up
to GOD, for who so ever he be that appears heavy to the holy gooste, his prayer
is not acceptable, but feeble, and not hable to asce^de unto god, wherefore leave
all heaviness, leave of to be heavy, set all heaviness apart, give not youreself
to heaviness, continue not in heaviness, set not your heart and mind upon heaviness,
heaviness is one of the seven princypall vices, and therefore gods servants
should clearly and utterly avoid, and fly it. Whereupon the holy. S Isedore
says, if ye have loved well and mercyfully, ye shall never be heavy, for a
good life is always in joy and gladness.

Therefore honest virgyn avoid all heuinesse, for as the mothe co^sumeth the
gown, and as the worm gnaweth asu^dre and consumes the wood, so does
heuinesse noye and hurt man's heart. Therefore pourge your mind from al
worldly mournefulnes, and so shall your oration and prayer be acceptable unto
God, weep for your sins, and rejoice in the love of god, bewail your
mysfautes when ye remember them, and rejoice in the hope of the celestyal and
eternal reward be sorry for your sins and neglygences, and merry that GOd
has promised you to come to heaven, be heavy for such things as ye have
mysdone, and glad of the eternal reward, to the which I desire and pray god
to gyde and to bring you.

Of the love of god the xij. Chap.
THe lord says, John^. xv.
he that loves me, will keep my commandments, and my father shall love him,
and we will come unto him and dwell with him. And saint Johan says. We love
god 1. John, iiii
for he has first loved us, he ye loves god shall pray for the forgyuenesse
of his sins, and take heed he fall no more. My well beloved sister, love
almyghtye god, and call unto him for help for the love of God, is the very
life, and his hatred very death. God will not be beloved only with word, but
with heart and good works, he loves not god that dispyseth his
commandments, the mind of him that loves God is not in earth, but in
heaven, and evermore desyryng of celestyal and heavenly things. Good sister I
exhort you to love God above all thing. We should rather love GOD, then our
fre^des, why so? For he has created and made both us and them with his own
hands, that is, through his own propre virtue and power as it is written.
psalm. x(...)


He has made us, and not we have made our self. Also he has given us
greater gifts, then either father or mother did and therefore we ought to love
him above them. Yt is a great fooly to love any thing more then GOD, yea he
synneth greatly that loves any creature more then GOD, he is in great arrour
that preferth the love of any creature above the love of GOd, and therefore God
must be beloved above al thing. O honest virgyn, I pray you to say thus by
christ Jesus with love Canti. ii.
and dilection. My well-beloved god, of whom I am greatly beloved, the which
pastorth among the liles until it be day, that is, aslonge as it is day, and
till the clouds go downewardes, that is, until the cloud of this present life,
swage and avoid, and that the day appear, that is, until the clerenesse of
the spiritual beatitude and bliss does appear. It is a point of Justice to
love god with all your heart, and wyllyngly to cleue unto him. And to love the
soueraygne goodness is sovereign beatitude, he that loves god is good. If he
be good, he must needs be blessed, and how much more a man loves god, so much
the more he is blessed. Dilectation and love is the proper virtue of sai^tes, I
have said these things unto you, to thente^t that the love of this tra^sytory
world, should not separate you from god And hearewith I pray you to tell and
to declare unto us somewhat of the love of your spouse Christ Jesus. My Canti.
(...).
lover is unto me as a handful or a shefe of myrre, he restyth apo^ my pappes.
Declare this thing a little more plainly to us, that we may the better
understand it. My lover (I say) is unto me as a little shefe of myrre, he
shall rest betwexte my pappes, the place of a man's heart is betwext the pappes,
that is to say, the memory, Canti. i.
ye dilectio^, the love of christ Jesus shall be evermore in my heart And whether
it be in prosperity, or in aduersyte, I will evermore call and reduce to my
memory all the godnesse that he showed me, for he has loved me, and suffered
his death for me, and is asce^ did to heaven, to the^tent I should come unto him.
He does daily call me, sayng. Leave the world my spouse, come unto me and ye
Canti. iiii.
shall be crowned. The left hand of my lover and spouse, is under my head, yt is
to say, the gift of the holy ghost rests in me in this present life, and I
would the understanding of holy scripture were in my mind that I might love
him and know him perfytly. His right hand shall in brayce me, that is, he shall
Canti. (...)
convey and bring me to eternal life and bliss. O good sister say thus unto
the handemaydes of GOD, underset me with flowers, vnderbolster me with
appelles, Can. ii.
for why, I consume away in the love of my spouse Christ Jesus. O my holy
systers, y^ love God above all thing, and prefer Can. ii
no worldly thing above his most swetest love, uphold me by your good
examples, and show me how I may find my lover Christ Jesus, for I am sick
for the love of my spouse. This love is sweet, this sycknesse is very holy,
this dilectyon is chaste, this conjunction is intemerate, this copulacyon is
inuiolate, this imbrasynge is with out any spot of sin.

O my holy systers sustain me with the flowers of your good examples and of
your holy co^uerfation, for I am sick for the love of my spouse. Uerely ye
keep your bed of contemplacyon for his sake, if ye love him above all things,
verily ye are sick for gods sake, if ye esteem that is celestial above that
is earthly, verily ye consume and waste away in the dilection and love of
christ and in your bed of inward dilection and swetnesse, if ye be strong in
holy operations and works, and feeble in worldly work and operatyon. Good
sister, if ye love Christ with all your heart, nor prefer nothing above his
love, ye shall be with him in great joy in the kingdom of heaven, if ye follow
God with all your mind, and love him with all your heart, without any doubt,
ye shall be with him in heaven, and follow him with other holy virgyns whether
soever he go. If ye cleue unto god with all devotion, and with great desire do
sithe in this present world to come unto him, without doubt ye shall be with
him in great joy, and pleasure in the high palece of heaven, and with other
holy vyrgyns ye shall sing to his laud and praise, holy songs, and devout
hymns, as it is written in the cantykels. Thou that art Can. i^
nuryshed among the lilees, environed and co^past with the co^panes of
virgyns, glorifyenge your spouses with glory, and giuynge them great
rewards, and gifts, whethersoeuer ye go the virgyns do follow you, and
singing behind you, they beset you, and delight and conforte you with many
fold sweet songs and hymns, that is, with deep love, and devout prayer. O
well-beloved sister let nothi^ge be sweet unto you, but only christ Jesus,
requere no another love but his only, love no another man's beutefulnes but his
only and look ye weep and wayle to come to his love, and until ye may se him
sit upon the right hand of his father.

Of the love of thy neighbor the.xiij. chap
My well-beloved sister, harke^ what the lord says to his John^. xiii.
discyples. Men shall know that ye are my discyples if one of you do love
another. Whereof follows this good lerni^g, that who so will be and i^te^des to
be christ's discyple, must indeuer himself to love his neighbor as him
self: neyghbourly love causes no harm for the consumation of the law, is
dilection and love. And saint Paul says. Walk so in love, as god has Roma.
xiii
loved us, and delivered him self for us. And saint Johan says i. John^. ii.
He that loves his brother, is in the light, and there is no shame in him. He
that hates his brother is in darkness, and knows not wether he goes, for
y^ darkness has blinded him. Who so ever says y^ he loves god, and hates
his brother, he lies falsely, and there is no truth in him, and this is
gods commandment, that he that loves god must love his brother. For i.
John^. iiii prouer xvii
how shall he love god whom he sees not, that loves not his brother, whom
he sees? And salomo^ says a frynd is always in love, and a man's brother is
proved in necessite. And S. austen says. A man is ouercommed by humane
felicite, and the deueil by loving of our enemy. But yet good sister among
gods servants must be no carnal love, but only spirytual love. There is
nothing more acceptable to god, then the virtue of love, nor nothing that the
deuel desires more the^ to quinche charity, good spiritual love contains
nor has no shame in itself. And look ye think every good faithful man, to
be your brother and remember that one workema^ made us al, true love has no
bitterness of shame by loving of your neighbor, ye shall learn and know how
to come to the love of god, and as love does eleuate ma^s mind, so does malice
and hatred depresse it, ye can never love GOd truly and as ye ought to do, with
out your neighbor, nor your neighbor without god, ye have the^ true charity,
if ye love your friend in god, and your enemy for Gods sake, and the more
large and faruent ye are in the love of your neighbor, ye more higher shall ye
be in the love and favor of god. If ye love your neighbor truly, your mind
is in tra^quilite and rest, he that hates his neighbor, is beset and compast
with darkness and envy, by loving of your neighbor, ye shall pourge the eye
of your heart and mind, and se god the better. Yet good sister I would ye
should love no man carnally, whereupon says saint Isydore. That man (says he)
is very deep in earth, that loves any mortal man more then he should do, we
cannot be in gods company if we love not one another. A friend is known in
time of nicessite. If we keep Gods commandments, we must love our
neighbor as oureselfe, and if a man love his brother without dissymulatyon,
he shall soon please the father of heaven. He that loves his neighbor, can
not commyt murder, aduoutery, theft, periure, nor bear false witness, nor
have any enuyousnesse or strife in him. Therefore good sister let us evermore
think upon the love of GOD, and of our neighbor, in the which Math. xxil
two, depends all the law and Prophettes, and let us do so indede, for if we
can be sorry for our neighbor when we se him in tribulation, or syckenesse, in
any loss, or in prison, then we be of Christ's church, but if we be not sorry
for him, we be even as people separated from Christ, and his congregacyon.

For as long as any part of man is adheruet, and joined to the body, so
long it sufferth with the body, but after it be cut of, it can not feel, nor
nor suffer, if a man's hand, or foot, or any otherpart of his body be cut from
y^ body or if it be divided in many parts, or cast into Cor xii.
the fire, the for said hand or foot, feleth nothing, because it is divided
from the body, so in like manner it is with all such chrystians, the which are
nothing sorry for their neighbors tribulation, loss, or necessite, but rather
reioyleth therein, such a neighbor is divided from the body of the church,
and is none of christ's flock. Honest virgin if we keep true and perfyte
charity, we must needs love al faith full people as our self, for through such
concord, charity, and true dilectio^ we shall appear with him in his glory. We
love our friends if we love them for gods sake, and not for their own sake.
Whereupon says S. Isodore, he that intemperately and immoderately loves his
friend, loves him more for his own sake, then for Gods sake. And who so
despises his friend smyt ten with aduersite, does contrary to the Justice,
and goodness of god, trewloue by no manner of occasion can be defaced, nor lost
at no time, for how soever the world goes it remains steadfast. But there
be very few that charitably do contynewe in frenshyp, and that is reputed to
be true love, that only requires of his friend, his good beneuole^ce, that
is, love for love. Therefore I exhort you, to love your fre^des in god, that is
in all goodness, and in like manner your enemies for Gods sake, as it is
written. Love your ennemies and do good to them that hate you. And if your
enemy be an hungerde, give him meat, if he be a thryst, give him drynk Luke.
vi. Roma, xii.
And again, bless and say well by them, that trouble you, bless them, but
speak no evil by the^ Dilectio^ is charity, charity was never without
dilection, nor dilection or love without charity. Therefore good virgyn
dilectio^ and love is very necessary, out of the which do spring many great
virtues, Dilection has two wings, the right wynge is the love of god, the
left wyng is the love of our neighbor, there is no man that can fly to
heaven with one wynge alone, for the love and dilection of god without the
dilection and intere love of our neighbor helps nor avails not to come to
heaven nor the love of our neighbor without the love of God preuayleth not to
come to eternal beatitude. Wise and prudent virgyn take these two wings unto
you, that is the love of GOD and the love of your neighbor, for so without any
impediment or let ye shall fly, and come to the celestyall kingdom of heaven

Of compassyon the xiiij. Chapter
MY well-beloved sister, lysten what the lord Christ Jesus Math. vii Luke. vi.
says. All such goodness as ye would other me^ should do to you, look ye do
it unto the^ And s, Paul says, be merry with those that are merry, and weep and
be Romans xii.
sad with those that be sad. And i. These. v prouer xiiii
again, receive the poor man unto you, and be patient with every man. And
Solomon says, he that despises his neighbor does sin, keep your promis with
your neighbor in his pouerte, and rejoice in his prosperyte, be faithful to
your neighbor in his tribulacyon, he that makes a hole to deceive his
neighbor shall fall in to it. And he that prepares a lake for his neighbor
shall peryshe in it, of the which thing speaks the Prophet Dauyd Psalm. vii
saying. He has opened the lake and the dyche, and is fallen into it, he
does not perfytly love his neighbor, that does not su^ccoure and help him
in his necessyte, how much y^ more we succor and help our neighbors in
there necessite and pouer te, somoch the more we approach unto god, we should so
care for our self, that we forget not our neighbor. Wherefore good sister look
what thing ye would not that should chance to your self, ye shall not delyre
it may chance and happen to your neighbor. Be sorry for poor strangers and
enforce your self to be sorry and to weep for other men's losses and damages.

Be heavy for other men's tribulation, and be sick with those that be sick,
bewail other men's pains and heaviness, as your own. Weep with those that weep
be to all other, as ye would they should be to you, do not y^ thing to another,
that ye would not a another should do to you, forgive other as ye would be for
given, if ye se your enemy in misfortune, rejoice not in his aduersite, nor
in your aduersires death, least any such mischaunce should fortune unto your
self, be not glad of your enemies fall, least god turn his anger upon you,
mysfortune shall soon fall upon him that reioyseth in his enemies aduersite,
let us therefore be loving to the misfortunate, let us sorrow and take
compassyon upon the poor, let us have mercy upon the wretched, if your enemy
be a hu^gerd give him meat, if he be a thrust, give him drynk despise not the
poor, nor the Romans xiii
pore orphalines, be no occasyon of heaviness to no man, let no man depart from
you in sorowfulnesse, visyt the syckman and comfort so the weke, that ye may
have gods aid and comfort, in the kingdom of heaven.

Of mercy the.xv. cap.
Well-beloved sister harken what GOd Math. v.
says. Blessed be they, that are merciful, for they shall have and obtain
mercy. And again, be ye mercyful, for your Luke. vi.
father of heaven is merciful.

And Saint Paul says, be ye good and merciful one to another, and clothe
you with this virtue of mercy as y^ elect children Ephe. iiii.
of god. Salomo^ says, y^ pity and Pro. xxi.
justice pleases god much more, then does sacrifyce, mercyfulnes prepares a
place for man after his merytes and deservings, the pite and mercy that man
has, is but only for him self, and his neighbor, but y^ mercy of god is
upon every man, to be mercy full is as it were a sacrifyce unto god, it is
calde mercy, because it should have pite and compassyon upon another man's
misery and wretchedness. For he that will not be pitefull unto other, shall
never find ne obtain the mercy of god. Therefore good sister look that
Justice, and pite be ever more in your sight, never leave of to be merciful
for if ye be merciful to other, ye shall do your self great good He that is
pitiful unto other, shall find god merciful unto himself. Good sister
bestow such things as ye have, in works of mercy, and show mercyfulnesse
without any grudge or murmuracyon, for your works shall be esteemed after your
intention. Where is no benevolence, there is no mercy, and take heed ye do your
good deeds mercyfully, and not for vain glory, do nothing for wordly laud
ne praise, but only to obtain joy and reward everlasting, do nothing for
any temporal opinyon, but for celestyall remuneracyon, do nothing for worldly
name and fame, but to conquer and get life everlasting, to the which
almyghtye GOd bring you my good sister.

Ame^
Of the examples of saints the.xvj. Chap.
THe good examples of saints, are very necessary and profitable for the
amendment of Christen people. And therefore good sister there mysfautes and
sins, and likewise there good ame^deme^t are written, that we most wretched
sinners should not fall in to desperacion, but rather hope and trust after our
fall to amend our self by penance, co^sideryng through the great goodness
of god to what ame^dement, and joy these blessed saints after there fall be
co^me^ unto. And therefore god to our example has opened there good virtues,
that following of them and doing as they have done, we may obtain the
celestial kingdom of heaven, but if we follow not the steps of there pain
and penance in this world, we can not be eccused from such pains as we have
meritoriously deserved.

The holy saints for the time they were in this world, never seized to occupy
the^ self in good works, as in fasting, almis deed, chastity, continence,
long animite, patience, prayer, persecucyon, beniuole^ce, hu^get, thrust, cold,
going bare, and in manifold other good works for gods sake The blessed
saints despised y^ world, to co^quer and get the kingdom of heaven, nor being
in this world they have not taken nor yet received y^ wretched promyses and
miserable riches thereof, y^ which bring the^ to the torments and pains of
hell, y^ mys use them but with all their intention and will they have forsaken
this miserable world, lyftyng up their eyes to jerusalem that heavenly
mansion. These blyssed me^ have avoided sin, both in word and deed, i^
thought in sight, in hearing, in mouynge there eyes, and there hands, in
anger, in going, in skoldynge, in furye, in discention, in vain glory, in
pride, in elation, in couytousnesse, in glotony, in tomochslepe in fornication,
in violence. And to save both body and soul, they have fasted two manner of
ways Two abstain from delicate meats is very good, but yet to abstain from
vice, is much better, of the which to our mother the holy church says. My
hands have distilled myr, what Canti. v.
signifye the hands but ye good works of blessed saints, and what other
thing betokens the myr, but the mortificacyo^ of the flesh, and the
mortifycacion of vices, the hands of the church are the holy and blessed
saints of heaven, the which do, and have done many good deeds, of the which
saint Paul says, they have done good works, and the hands of the church
have distylled the myr of good works for they have showed examples of good
living, and of mortifyeng the flesh, of the which one of them says, if ye
live after the appetite of the flesh, ye shall Romans viii.
dye, and again. Ye that are in the world, mortifye your members, that is to
say, ye that are dead in soul through vicious living, mortifye your
me^bres, that is your body, the which has many me^bres. And again the
church says. My fyngers Can. ii.
are full of myr most approved, then truly it is myr most approved, when the
flesh is perfetely mortifyed: and all manner of vice and syn clean set a side
and removed. Therefore well-beloved sister, if we desire the societe and fellowship
of saints, it is requisyted we follow there examples, but if we syne, we have
no manner of means how to excuse it, why so? For the law and the
commandments of God do daily exhort us to live well, and the examples of
good holy fathers, do daily incite and provoke us to do well. And if
peradventure we at any time be prompte and ready to follow those, and there
examples that are naught, why be we not much more redye and dilygent to follow
the examples of those yt are good? Let us therefore good sister pray unto
almyghtye god, yt such holy virtues as he has prepared to the salute and
coronatyon of his saints, be not to our da^natyon, but to our salvation and
profit, for we doutelesse believe, that if we follow there good examples, that
after this mortal and transytory life, we shall reygne with them in
everlasting bliss.

And how much the more we read there holy lives not folowi^g there good
example, so much the more we shall be blamed and found fauty O honest vergi^ I
beseech god almighty, to grant you ye virtue of the holy fathers. That is the
humilyte of christ Jesus, the devotion of saint Peter, the charity of saint
John^, the obedience of Abraham, the patience of Isaac the tollerance of Jacob,
the chastity of Joseph, the mansuetude and swetnesse of Moses, the co^stance of
Iosue, the benignite of Samuel, the mercy of David, the abstience of Daniel,
and the other good deeds of our fore fathers, ye after this wretched and
mortal life, ye may come to their blessid company. O good virgin consider I
pray you, with what moderacyon, with what intency on, with what co^punction
christ's servants have pleased him? Of the which thing in christ's person, it
is written in the canticles. Canti. vii.
O kiges daughter, how goodly are your goi^ges in your prynsely shoes. The
Lord through his divine power is lord of all creatures, and therefore our
holy mother the church, is called his daughter, for by holy and devout
preaching, he has reduced her to a new manner of living. And what other
thing is understood by the shoes of the church, but only the examples of
saints, by the which she is defended, and by there aid passes over al
worldly tribulation. Good sister we do then put on our shoes spiritually, when
we accept the good examples of holy fathers, for by following of them, we may
over come all worldly tentations.

And again it is written in the Canti. vi.
cantycles. I went down in to a garden, to look upon the appelles of the
vales, and to know whether the vines were flourished or no, and wether the poone
Garnettes were spronge or no.

The vynes do floryshe, when we return to Christ's church, to his faith and
to good and holy co^uersacyo^ grounded upon good works, the poone Garnettes do
spring, when that perfyte good men, through the examples of there good
works, edifye their neighbors in virtue, and when that be good living, good
works, and holy predicacio^ they reduce the^ to holy co^uersatio^. Wherefore my
spiritual friend I exhort you, that as long as ye shall live, that your good
examples, and good living may iluminate al other, for as says saint
Gregory. They that hyde there good living are as touching them self well
inflamed, but they give no light to no another, but they that by examples of
virtue, by good living, by goodly sermons, declare and show to other the ways
of salvation, for they are the burning la^pes, they show to other the ways of
salvation. Of the which thing the lord says. Let your light Math. v.
that is your good works, glyster and shine in the sight of men, that they
may se them, and gloryfye your father that is in heaven, for all glory should
be only attributed and given to god. Yet nevertheless good virgyn I counsel
you so to open and so to manifest your good works to y^, profit of your
neighbor, ye your inte^cyo^ be ever more close and secret in god, and that ye
look for no worldly praise, for it is but vain.

And as I have showed you before, in all your actions, in all your works, and
in all your co^uersacyon, ye shall follow the blessed saints, having
contynually there noble, and virtuous examples before you, conterfetynge and
following the^ and accepting them as a glass of good and godly learning, mark
and consider well there virtues for following of them, ye may do well,
understand there good doctrynes to live well, for in so doing nothing shall
stayne, nor yet defyle our life, nor no evil opinyon shall bring you to any
sorrow or heaviness, learn to shine by good manners, have good witness in you
keep your good name, and beware in any wise it be not defiled with the dark
spots of syn, nor imbrued with any other opprobryusnesse or vyllany.

Of contention and strife the.xvij. chap.
Saint paul the Apostle says. When i Cor. iii.
there is envy and contention among you, ye walk as men, and ye are carnal.
And Solomon Pro. xiii.
says, among proud me^ there is always strife and debate, a evil person
is always seeking for contention and strife, and the evil angel is sent
against him. He that goes by ioperdus ways, is soon down, and he that is
evermore at debate and words with his neighbor comes very soon to shame, all
such as have this goodly virtue commended unto us by Christ, called mansuetude
neither speaks, nor does evil to no ma^nor gives no evil examples, but does
for every man. Al such as have this goodly virtue be never contentius, nor love
neither debate, nor strife. Few or none do love those y^ are continually in
strife and contention. And therefore peace and concord is very necessary for
all men. O dear sister harken unto saint Austens saying, O how
irreprehe^syble shall we be, if we would be as dilligent to amend our own
vices, and syn, as we be to correct other men's? But if we take good head we
may soon spy and correct many of our own fautes. I would ye should know,
that there is nothing more dishonest, then is strife and contention among us
chrystians, the which should be in concord love and unite, and no another wise
shine and glister in this world, then the stars in the fyrmament. Conte^tyon
is wont to proceed of envy and detractyon, but if contentyon, debate, and
strife, be among us chrystia^s, where is charity, then where is peace and
unity, where is brothely concord, and lowlyfelowshyp. Alas, alas. all these
things are come to naught, fraternall charity is greatly dimynyshed and
debated if they ye should live in peace begi^once to strive and stroggell, where
is al quietnesses, all honest al modestiusnesse become, where is the^ (I pray
you) the contemplatyfe and the angelical life? Uerely there ca^ be no perfet
peace, where slanderous tongues do ruell, there can be no perfete charity
where strife and debate does reygne.

Therefore good sister take heed I pray you, that ye lose not your time and your
labor, by such contencyon and strife. Look that ye lose not by such detraction
and contention the heavenly promyses.

Beware that by light and folyshe co^municacio^ ye lose not the ever lastyng
joy of heaven, refrain your tongue, and ye shall be counted a good chryste^
woman, for if ye re frayne not your tongue, ye can not be religious. Hear what
S James says. If any man believe Iam. i
he be religious, ye is, of christ's religion, and refrayneth not his tongue,
but seduceth his own heart and mind, his religyon is but vain, the tongue is
but a small part and member of man, yet if it be not well brydylde and well
ruled, it corrupts all the body. For as a little dow destrueth the hole mass,
and as a little fire James. iii,
burns a hole forest, so the unruled tongue puts both lord, master,
and subject, to rebuke and shame, and provoke them to anger, if the
conte^cius tongue be unbridled, there is noman y^ can live in peace, for a
debateful tongue is full of venym, and poison, and if it be not moderated and
chasted, it shall bring his friends and fellows to shame. Good sister it shall
be for your great vtilyte and profit to charm your tongue from evil, and
your lips from al fraud and deceit, consider from whence and wherefore ye
are come Ye are come from the world to gods te^tes, ye have refused al
worldly riches, and are come he there to obtain the riches of heaven, and for
this cause willyngly ye have chosen wylful pouerte, therefore ye must now
utterly forget all such things as ye have left and forsaken for gods sake.
And therefore take good head ye prefer not your self above all other, and the
higher and greater ye be, the more look ye do humble your self in all thing,
and leave these conuentycles of conspiracyon and detraction, lysten to no
murmuracyon exchue and avoid these slanderous persons as poyso^, for they
infecte them, that give them audyence, he that bacbyteth and slaundereth man,
and he that wyllyngly, and gladly does hear him, be both in syn. Honest
virgyn harke^ what the psalmist says. I have not ben Psalm. xxv.
says he, in the counsel of vanyte, nor I meddyll / nor am not among those
that do iniquite. Wherefore good virgyn look ye sit not with the counsel of
vanyte, nor meddle not with them, y^ speak of iniquite. Nor ye shall not strive
nor co^te^d in no cause, for contentyon ingenderth debate, contentyon takes
away the tranquilite and peace of the mind, contentyon ingenderth strife,
conte^tio^ ki^deleth the fire bra^des of hatred contention breaks all
concord, contention (as David says) troubeleth y^ eye Psalm. iii.
of y^ soul. My fure (says he) troubeleth mine eye. Wherefore I warn and
exhort you, to contend, and strive only, how ye may please almyghtye god.

Of disciplyne and correction. xviii. Chap.
THe Wise man solomon says. My Prouer i.
son (says he) harken unto my discyplyne, Pro. i^^i.
and forsake not thy mothers laws, that grace may come to thine head, and a
goodly chain to thy neck keep discyplyne and for sake it not? Keep it well for
it is thy mother: receive discyplyne and refuse it not, he is but a very fool
that refuses correctyon, he that sets little by good monityons and
correctyo^ does are very sore, he that dyspreyseth discyplyne and correctyon is
in great sin.

And who so will not keep and regard correctyon shall peryshe. He that sets
little by correction, shall be always in necessyte, shame, and pouerte. He that
will here hi^ that corrects hi^ shall cu^ to glory, a fool regardethe very
little his fathers correctyo^, but he that keeps and takes heed to correctyo^
is reputed to be wise: a word among wise me^ does more then a hundred strypes
among foles. He that is wise and corrygyble shall never be mysco^tente with him
that correctethe him. And yet castigation must be used moderatly, whereof saint
Ambrose says, he that is menely and gentely corrected bears reverence and
gives thanks unto his correctour, but he that is vyolently and without
measure chasted and corrected, is never the better. They must be ge^tely
supported and borne that by infyrmyte and feebleness cannot be corrected. And
after the dyfference and qualyte of the mysdoer, some must be corrected, and
some other gentely and loui^gly supported. The prelates of the church should
supporte and be^e with those they do correct, and correct and chasten al such
as comfort them in sin. And therefore Solomon says, that under the pyllers
of gods temple, he caused Lyo^s o^en and Cherubyns to be made What other
thing betoke^ these (...)gum. iii. Can. vi.
Images, but y^ prelates of the church, for all such as take upon the^ to
govern and to rule, are as the fou^dacyo^ of pyllers, to supporte and bear
that, that shall be laid and set upon the^. Cherubin is as much to say, as
the fullness of perfytenes of science and lernig, so that ye cherubi^s declare
that the forsayde prelates should be full and perfyte in the celestyall
science. Be the Lion is sygnyfyed the fear of seuerytye and punyshement, and
be the ox is declared pacye^ce in all swetenes and gentylnes, be y^ Cherubins
is sygnyfyed that the foundacyon should be perfyte i^ scye^ce, nor ye lyo^s are
not graued and set without y^ oxe^, nor yet y^ oxen without y^ lyo^s, for the
prelates at sometimes should sharply and ernestly correct their subjects, and
sometimes softly, su^times be words sumtymes by strokes. For he yt is
corrected be word and amendeth not, must needs be otherwise ha^deled. Uerely
such wou^des and sores as can not be esely heled, nor without pain, must needs
be healed with pain, he that is secretly and ameable warned, and regardethe
it not, nor will not amend his fautes must be openly corrected and before
witness, that so the sore that could not be helped secretelye, may be helped
apertly and manyfestly. For they y^ hurt their neighbor openly must be
punyshed openly, that be such open punyshement, they that ensude and followed
there naughtines, may the sooner be helped, and that the punysheme^t of the one,
may be the amendment of the other, for it is much better that one be punyshed
for the saluatyon and sauegarde of many, the^ that for one ungracious person,
many should peryshe. And Saint Gregory says, there are many that harken
dilygently to their words y^ chaste^ and corrects the^. But nevertheless
they return not to penance. Every man does here of the joys of heaven, and it
pleases them, but let them also here of the pains of hell to fere them, that
if they return not to God for love, at least way that they return unto him
for fere. These ar y^ words of saint I sydore, they that are good me^ receive
correctyon and reprehe^cyon very gentely. Good sister dyscyplyne is the thing
that a mendyth all fautes, the which ought not to be abiected.

And therefore we be bound to love our prelates and other our superyours and
to accept there words ge^tylly, for be their correccyon and castygacyon they
take away our will and cupidyte from us, and of these prelates it is written
in the Cantycles. The kepers of y^ cyty have found me, they have beaten me,
and wounded me, and they have taken away my cloak, be the kepers Canti. v.
of the walls and watchemen, we understand y^ prelates and such as keep and
defend the state of our holy mother y^ church, the which also do find out
the devout soul, and be there preaching stryke and wound her with ye love of
Christ's charytie: neither does this suffice the^ but they also take away her
cloak from her; that is, al temporal substance, and erthlye delectatio, that
so they may send her (free from worldly riches and sin) to the kingdom of
Heaven.

Wherefore dear sister i^ christ, it is very fit yt we love our prelates so yt
we may receive from the^ ye dycypline of our salvation, according to the
counsel of King David saying Apprehe^d discipline lest Psalm. 2^
su^time ye Lord be wrath, and y^ perish out of ye just way. It is expedient
y^ we embrace dyscipline. If he that receive it not shall perish out of ye
right way: doubtelesse he shall be co^fyrmed in ye just way yt receuyeth
discypline.

Now therefore venerable sister I monyshe you yt you wittyngly accept
dyscipline, that you may be freed from y^ anger of God almig^tye and confirmed
in the just way. Give him many thanks yt shall chastyse you. If your Abbess,
or Prioresse shall reprehe^de you for your good, be not grieved: and when they
shall show you the way of salvation, liste^ wittyngly unto their doctrine: when
any one seeks to advance you i^ ye spiritual course which you have
vndertake^, be not rebellyous toward him. Love them yt shall reprehende you
for your offenses reuyle not them yt rebuke you: neither render evil for good,
ne answer churlishlye to good instructions: render not unto them cross
words for their courteous admonicio^s. And why so? For he that lerneth
dyscypline loves wisdom, and therefore if you will love Pro. 12
discipline you will become wise and prudent, if you will pacie^tly endure
chyding, you will become patiente, if you endure correction humbly. Honest
vyrgyn, for this cause we are chastysed of our Lord and of our superiors in
this life: that with y^ world we be not damned. It is far better for us to be
corre^ted in this life by our superiors for our neglygences, then to be
damned i^n yt life to come. It is better for us to be chastysed now for our
transgrecio^s and faults the^ to be punyshyd in the next world. It is better
for you to be scourged by ye hand of your Abbess, then to endure eternal
sorrow and anguysh. It is better for you to be chastysed by ye hand of your
Abbess the^ to sustain those torments that are endeles, those torments y^
shall never cease, those torments i^ternal which shall last for ever. It is
better for you to be temporal lie scourged with twigges by ye hand of your
Abbess or Priores the^ to be eternally scortched in those hellish flames. From
which he vouchsafe to deliver you, who with his precious blood has redeemed you.

Amen.
Of Obedyence. Chap. xix.
My dear sister, hear ye words of y^ Apostle S. Poule Let every soul be
subject to ye higher powers, for there is no power but of God. Those yt are of
God are ordained. To resyst ye power of god is to resist ye ordinance of God,
we should despise no man's power, whether he be of ye church or of ye world,
for they be ordained of God. Therefore when so ever be inobedyence we resyste
against our prelates, we do iniurye unto almyghtye god, and when that be
pride or be inobedyence, we be rebellyous and sturbburne against our
superiors, we do against gods commandment, and as inobedyente persons,
we despise god saying, They yt here you here me, that Luc. ix.
is to say, they that obey you obey me, and they that despise you, despise
me. Good sister in God they that despise their prelates, despise god, and they
y^ honor their prelates honor god, and they y^ be obedient to their
prelates, are obedyente to god. The Prophet Samuel does greatly praise
obedyence, saying, that obedience is much greater and much more acceptable to
god, then is sacryfyce i. Reg. xv.
And to obey, is much more acceptable, the^ to offer up y^ fat of sheep, for
why, to repugue and not to will obey, nor accord to our superyoures, is
reputed as Idolatry. Mary through pride and inobedyence murmured against her
brother Moses, and Annie. xii.
by and by she was smitten with the lepre. This Mary that rebelled against
Moses that is against her prelate, does sygnyfye the soul of every man, y^
by iobedyence and pride does murmour against his prelate, to y^ which he will
not obey, nor receive his good and wholesome precepts of salvation, and therefore
it is smytten with the lepre that is with stinkynge syn. And in like manner
Chora, Dathan and Abyron, the which by pride and inobedience withstode Moses
and Aron, were through the represumptyon punyshed as it is written by David.
The earth Psalm. cv.
did open and swalowed in Dathan, and closed it self upon the congregacyo^ of
Abyron, and y^ fire burned their church and them. And when king Ozyas ii.
Para. xxvi.
be pride and inobedyence took upon hi to sense against gods law, intendyng
to do sacrifyce the Lord smyt him with the lepre in the forhede to learn him
that he should have been a shamed of his folyshe enterprise. And king Sall
through his i. Reg. xv.
inobedyence lost his kingdom and was taken by his enemies. And the whale
swalowed in the prophet Jonas, ye which flede his ways be inobedye^ce, and
keep him in the bottom of the Sea three days.

Therefore we must take good head we rebel not against our Johan. i. and. ii.
cap.
prelettes and our superyoures lest the Lord vysyte us and sharply punyshe
us be them, for they are in his stead and place. Good sister the lord has
apoi^ted and ordained the prelettes of the church with other rulers for our
soul health, to provide for us, and to give hi acou^pt of our deem nour, and to
co^serue and keep us from al sin and unthriftiness, of y^ which thing sait Paul
writes sayng, Be obedyent to your superyours, Heb. xiii.
and subject unto them, for they watch to give acountes for your souls The
superiors and prelates of the church should take heed and rule Christ's people
with all solicitude and diligence, of the which thing it is written in the
Canticles.

Three score of the most stro^gest and valyanstes of all Israel, stood Canti.
iii.
about Salomons bed holdi^g swords i^ their hands, and well a poited to
fight, and every one had his sword hanging upon his thygh for the fere of y^
night The true Salomo^ is christ h^ self for he is very peasyble, and has
made peace and concord betwyxte god and man. By Salomo^s bed is understood
y^ congregation of faithful people with whom god does dwell and rest. The
valyau^t and strong men which do compass about Salomons bed, be the
prelates of the church the which be reprouynge correctynge, and exhortyng of
men to virtue, do compass and defend gods church against vice and other
enimys, both vysible and invisible: the which prelates are therefore called
strong, because they are or should be perfet in the obseruauntes of gods
commandments holdyng^ their swords in their hands, that is the word of
god, for in their prechynge they should repress the vice and sins of their
subjects. And they are very well apoi^ted i. Ephe. vii
to war, for it is needful y^ they be always ready to withstand all
spiritual battelles. And they have their swourdes upon their thyghes, that is
they should first repress and correct them selves of all carnal and flesshly
lust: and then their obediences and subjects. They do all this for y^ fear
of the night that is against the secret tem tatyons of the devil, the which
in the night of this world does prove, and attempt the foresaid prelates very
sore, to this entente, that after they have deceived them, they may the more
easlyer bespot and defyle the for said Solomon, that is the foresaid
congregacyon of faithful people, and goods servants, in the which through
grace, the true Solomon Christ Jesus do the rest.

Well-beloved sister I have declayred these things unto you because ye should
know that humbly we ought to obey our prelates and superyours. Obedyence is
the only virtue, that brings all other virtues to the soul, and when they
be there it keeps the^ there, of the which obedyence the wise man says
Obedyence is better then sacryfyce. i. Reg. xv.
For by sacryfyce other strange flesh is devoured and slain, but by
obedyence a man's proper flesh and will is ruled. He that is obedye^t,
speaks of vyctory, for who so mekelye Prouer. xxi
is obedyent to another man's word overcomes him self. Adam fell because he
was inobedient, Christ mounted up to heaven because he obeyed his father even to
death, and as by Adams inobedyence, there are many sinners, so be the
obedyence of Christ, there are many just men. And as by Adams Romans (...)
mysfaute and sin every man and woman is in the way of da^nacyon, so by ye
justice of christ every man is in the way of iustyfycacyon. And as the
inobedyence of our first father engendered death, so the obedyence of christ
engendered life.

Therefore my sister, if for the love of god, ye be obedyente and buxum to your
superyours, ye shall obtain the kyndome of heaven, say nothing nor be never
rebellyous against them Look yt i^ no case ye speak against those y^ be ordered
to rule you, honor those ye ar better the^ ye in science, and in good
living, honor every man as his good life does require and deserve, do
reverence to those that are in high degree, do them reverence after your
possibylyte, be obedyente to your elders, and humble at their commandment,
give place to those that be i^ authoryte, and do condige service to your
superyoures, be obedyente to every man: in all good works and godly
commandments.

O Christ's spouse, obey man so, that ye offend not the will and pleasure of
God, be never obediente in evil, be not obedyente to him, that shall command
you to do that is noughtes, nor never consent to evil deed, be obedyente to no
man in evil, of what power or authorytye so ever he be, notwithstanding he
command you under pain of death, it were better to suffer death, the^ at any
ma^s co^mau^demente to do evil, or again gods commandments, better it
were to be hanged with all abhominacyon and shame, then to be dampened etenally.
We owe our obedience to god only nor to no another man, but only for his
sake, our prelates and our superyours are in gods rowme, and for his sake, we
be obedient unto the^. Therefore good sister, look ye be to them obedient, and
god shall give you y^ crown of everlasting life.

Amen.
Of perseuerau^ce.. xx. cha.
WEelbeloued Sister, harken unto saint Hieromes words, Men do not seek among
chryste^ me^ for their beginynges, but for their end, and their contynuaunce,
Saint Paul began but easesly (...). ix.
yet he made a good end, Judas Skaryot began well, but Math. 27.
he made a shrowed end Judas begini^g is allowed, but the end of his life is
reproved. And sait Gregory says, y^ perseueraunce and continuance is the
virtue of al good works, he laborth i^ vayn that begins well, and leueth of,
and Saint Isydore says, God does not judge a man after his living in time
paste, but after his end. For it is written as I find the, so shall I judge
the. And glorious saint Magdalane, Mar. xvi,
because she continued still sekyng of Christ, she after his resuscytatyon
deserved to se him first of all other, it is also written in the Canticles. In
my Canti. iii.
little bed be night I sought him whom my soul does love.

Therefore I exhort you good virgyn, to seek Christ Jesus i^ your bed, that is
in rest and quietness and in conte^placyo^ of y^ mind, and ye shall seek him by
night that is in this world, sythynge unto hi and desiri^g him, yt ye may
perfytely find hi in time to come, and se hi reign i^ his fathers sete, seek
him contynually be good life, yt ye may se his blissed face, in y^ celestial
kingdom of heaven.

I pray you good sister to say with David: my soul is maruelously a thyrste,
that is it has Psalm. xli.
great desire to come to god the fountain of life. And when shall I go, and
apere before the face of god. Uerely your soul does desire god, if it love
him above all thing, truly your soul does desire god, if for his love, it
dispyse all earthly things, certainly your soul does desire god, and does
love him, if it desire to se him syttyng in heaven upon the right hand of his
father. And the prophet David exhorting us says. Seek Psalm. c. i^i^.
the Lord, and ye shall be confyrmed, seek to come to his face, y^ is in
prosperyte and in aduersyte, in pouertye and abundance, in syckenes and
health, in youth and in age, we should seek him, and axe for him, with all our
mind, and all our intentyon, to be confyrmed in all deuouce and holy
conversation, and if we covet to se him in the kingdom of heaven, we must
cleanse our self from all fylthynesse, for why at the day of the general
ressurection, there shall no man come to eternal bliss, nor se the glory of
his deuyne majesty, but they only, that are clean and pure both of mind
and heart. The kingdom of heaven shall not be given to idle persons, nor yet
to no vagabou^des, but to those only, that seek and demand it, and that
enforce them self to get it, for the Lord says. Axe and ye Math. vii.
shall have, seek and ye shall find, knock and the door shall be opened unto
you,

Therefore we must go to the gates of heaven be good prayer, and seek the^ by
good life, and knock at the gate, by perseueraunce and the contynuall service
of God. Nor it is not suffycyente to begin well, but we must study to
begin well, and enforce our self so to co^tynew all the days of our life.
For it were much better not to know justice, then ii. Peter. ii.
after a man knowethe it, not to follow it. And hereof says the Lord.

Such as put to and prepayre Luke. ix.
their hands to do well, and after they have begun, look backewardes, are not
mete for the ki^gdome of heaven,

Therefore good sister it is greatly necessary that we with great desire and
affectyon do knock contynually at gods ears, and that we never leave of to
do well, until heaven gates be opened unto us, me thynkethe that to contynewe
still in gods service is an excellent virtue.

For they y^ leave his service to be worldly, are made much blacker then coals,
why so? For through a certain feblenesse and vnlustynes of mind, they are
deed, and clean without the heat and fire of charity.

And of such says saint Isodore. They that return from a good life to an
evil ar through ^upedytye be smuttered with the blackenes of vice and syn^e,
and are removed far from the light of charity. They that go from gods
service to the world, are separated from the company of aungelles, and
assocyated to wicked deuilles. They that leave the holy congregation to come to
a worldly life, are put out of gods company and do submytte them selves to
the deuylles good grace.

Good sister take good heed what ye have done, and ever more remember from
whence ye came whether ye be come, and wherefore, ye have left and despised for
gods sake all worldly thiges, and for his love ye have chosen to contynewe
and dwell in holy co^gregatyo^, ye have bought heaven and paid your own body for
it, labor therefore with all dilygence, that ye lose not this goodly kingdom,
the which ye have thus conquered and gotten.

Look ye lose not this kingdom y^ which ye have bough with your own body,
harke^ what. s. paul says. There shall no man be crowned, but they yt fight
lawfully, i. Timo. ii.
he fights and laboreth lawfully, that continues all his life i^ good
works, he fights lawfully that without fraud or any dissymulacyo^
co^tynueth in gods service, he serves god worthily, y^ follows his good
works begun. He labors well in good works, yt finyshethe that he began
well. And the church of his members contynuyng in goodness says. The beams
and the timber of our houses, Canti. x.
are of Cedern, the couerynge^ of Cypers, that is to say, the howses of the
church, are the holy congregacyon of faithful people, and gods servants
that contynewe in such things as shall please him, for Ceder and cypers be
such trees, as never putryfye, and they syngnyfye the blessed saints of god
the which with a marvelous and a contynuall affectyon, do desire him,
co^tynuyng in good operacyon, and works as long as they live. Therefore good
sister look ye be y^ cyper tree in gods house, by the contynuaunce of a good
and a devout life.

And also that ye be the Ceder tree in the house of god, the which thing ye
may be, if ye will give y^ example of good life, and the sweet fragraunte
sauers of good conuersacyon, thus I do write, because ye should with all your
heart and mind despise the world, and contynewe in virtue. For ye should not
will to leave virtue, to require this worldly life. Also and again I counsel
you to tarry still in gods service, and never to return to the world again,
why so? For in that, is life co^templatyfe, and in the world, nothing but
labor, i^ that, is a holy life, in the world, a sinful life, in that, a
spiritual and a gostlye life, in the world, a carnal and a flesshly life, in
that, a heavenly life, in the world, a earthly life, in y^, is a peaseble life,
i^ ye world a troubelous life, in that, is a a quiet life, in the world a
man's life is full of contentyon and strife: in that is tra^quylyte and rest,
in the world, a lytygeus and a contentyous life, full of all reproach, in
that, is a chaste and a perfyte life, in the world, a luxurious and a vycyus
life, in that, is a life full of al virtue, in the world full of all vice and
vnthriftynesse, in that, is a very devout and a holy life, in the world a
life full of al iniquyte. Now good sister ye have hard both of life and death,
now ye have set before you both good and evil, ye se both perdycyo^ and soul
health, ye se both life and death, fire and water, put forth your hands, take
what ye think best and most necessary ye se before you y^ way to heaven and
hell, the tone leads a man to life eternal, the the other to perpetual death.
Therefore take which ways ye will, I desire you only to take the best.

The sisters demand
Well-beloved brother, I will accept and receive your counsel, and chose the
best way Also it is much for my profit to follow counsel, and to walk in
that way, that may bring me to eternal joy and bliss.

The brother.
HOnest vyrgyn I am right glad and thank god that ye will take and follow the
best way. Therefore look ye leave not the way ye have begone all ready, but that
ye keep your purpose of good life as long as ye shall live, for then shall
your works be perfyte, if they co^tynewe. God does promys heaven Math. x.
to those that continue in goodness. Reward is given to those that contynewe,
he is not good that does good only, but that contynually does good. Therefore
if ye contynewe in faith, and good works, ye shall be saved.

Of virginite the xxi. chapi.
THe prudent, and Math xxv.
wise virgyns took and put oil in there lamps. Harken unto my words, they
(...) are clean virgyns both of body and mind, are no fools, but very wise
and, may go to mete their spouse, for they have oil in there vessels, that is
they have chastyte in their souls, but such as ve only virgyns of body and
not of mind, be very fools, nor can not go to mete their spouse, for they
have no oil in their vessels, ye is, they have not chastity in their souls
And s. Isodore says. She ye is a virgyn in body, and not in soul shall have
no remuncracyon ne reward. And y^ lord speaking of these foolysh virgyns
says. I know not what ye be. Math. xxv.


Wherefore I exhort you, to be a virgin both in soul and body, y^ hereaft^ ye
may be set in the celestial rha^bre of your spouse christ jesus. Uirginite is
not commanded but yet our holy fathers do counsel 1. Cor. vii.
us to keep it, as a thing most excellent. The gift of virginyte is double,
for it has no carfulness in this world, and in time to come, it shall be
excellently rewarded, without doubt they that continue chaste and in virginite,
shall be egal with gods angels. And the prophet Izaye, does bear wytnes
that virgyns above all other shall be most fortunate i^ the eternal beatytude, be
says those words, speaking unto the Enuques, that is to those that be
chaste and I^a lvi
live chastely for gods sake.

I will give them my house, and a place within my walls, and a better name
then has my children a name that shall dure for evermore, and never perysshe.
All manner of sin through penance deserves pardon and forgyuenesse, but
virgynite once peryshed and lost can in no manner of wise be recovered, for not
withstandinge a man by penance does obtain pardon thereof, yet he by no manner
of means can return to his first estate, and pureness. O my good sister
bodily virginyte is of no valor, where is no integrite of heart, and mind.
All such virgyns as glorifye them self of their merytes, are compared to
Ipocrytes, the which require exteryor glory for their good works and deeds,
the which they should have inwardly and in conscience And this is it that is
written.

How the foolyshe virgyns had Mah. xxv
no oil in their vessels, that is how they kept not inwardely in their
conscience the testimony of good works, but that they would be glorified hear
in this world among men, and not in heart with God. Saint Austen says that
the virginyte of the body helps not, where that anger does rule. And there
is a great difference betwyxt pure virginite of the soul, the which is not
poluted ne defiled with contagyousnesse, and that, that has been subject to
many bodily pleasures. Good sister I pray you harken unto. Saint Hierom words,
saying. That it profyteth nothing, that the body be chaste if the mind be
married. Also it is as nothing to keep the body chaste, if man refrain not
his eyes from concupiscence and wanton lokes. Norvirgynyte profyteth nothing,
if their be in the mind no charity, nor no humilite. Wherefore good sister I
would counsel you, to take the oil of good works with you, and that ye
garnyshe your lamps with good and clean manners, and that ye kyndle and light
them with good and goostly virtues, that when so ever ye shall hear, that the
bryde grome is coming, ye may go and mete him, that is to say, ye may go
and mete with Christ Jesus your spouse, and be received and set in his
celestyall chamber.

Of continence the.xxij chapitur.
Good sister I pray you to harken with all devotion unto my admonicyon.

The number of thyrte, is the first no^bre, and it sygnifyeth the co^federatyon
of marriage. The no^bre of three score, is the second degree of no^bres, and it
sygnifeth the co^tyne^ce of wydowes. A hundred is the third degree of nombers,
the which is deputed unto virgyns, for the glory and crown of their
virginyte, Saint Isodore says y^ there be which in there youth lived
luxuriusly, and in age do inte^d to live chastely, and that will live then in
continence and chastity when voluptuousness and bodily pleasure has forsaken
and left them, but such men shall have little or no reward, for they have taken
no pain to resyste temptacyo^. They shall be rewarded, and the crown of glory
appertains to them, that valya^tly have foughten and warsteled for it, the
fruit of chastity is swetnesse. Chastity is the sauegard of the soul, and the
health of the body. Luxuriousness does feeble a man's body, and causes man to
seem old and aged before his time, continual and long chastity is reputed
for virginite. Therefore good sister the beutifulnesse of chastity, oug ht to be
loved and myche made of. They that live continently and chastely, prepare them
self as and humble sinner, is more to be laudyd a great deal, then the proud
just man. Therefore dysprayse no women, for many a holy woman has been married,
and have had children, truly if ye blame or accuse any such, ye are culpable
before god. For the holy prophet saint ^n, was married. Yet nevertheless she
prophesyed Luke. ii
of Christ, and deserved to se him. Also Mary Magdalene Mark. xvi
was a secular woman, and yet she saw christ after he was risen from death to
life, and deserved to be christ's messenger to his apostles, we should never
have them in co^tempte, the which god has chosen to be his servants.
Wherefore I exhort you that for the love of christ, ye do them the service, and
pleasure ye may or can, and that ye love them, as mothers. And good sister, ye
ought to love them as your own children, for god has converted and drawn
them from the world to his service. If ye then despise them, because they be
his handmayde^s and servants, ye do him iniure. O good sister in Christ Jesus,
never say, or think your self a dry stock or an unfruitful tree. For if ye
love the lord as ye should do, ye have seven goodly children. The first is
called shamefastness, the second patyence, the third soberness, the fourth
te^peraunce, the fyfte is charity, the syxte humilyte, the seventh chastity.
Behold now good sister, how that by the great grace of GOD without any grefe,
or corporal corruptyon, ye have brought forth to Gods honor seven fair
children.

And so ye have fulfilled that is written. The barre^ has brought Reg. ii.
forth seven children. Therefore good sister, ye must nouryshe repast confort
and chasten these your goodly children, ye must nouryshe them with good
manners, with devout contemplacyon, with the milk of eternal sweetness, ye
must repast them with the love of heavenly pasture, ye must conforte them, with
the bread of the word of God. Ye must chasten them, with the rods of the
fear of god, and command them to fly, and avoid all pride, and lyghtnesse,
and that they never transgress his commandments, and that they never go ne
depart from you. Now ye se then, how that virgyns find out and obtain the
most excellentes and most souerau^ce place of the kingdom of heaven, and not
without a great cause, for they have despised this present world. And therefore
they are come to everlasting joy, to the which I desire that he do bring
you to whose service ye have consecrated both body and soul.

Amen.
Of fornication the.xxiij. chap.
Dear sister I exhort you, that with all devotion ye lysten unto the words
Luke. xii.
of our lord Jesus. Look that your loins be gyrded, and that ye have burning
lamps in your hands we gyrd our loins when that by contynence we repress
all fleshly and bodily lusts. We hold burnyngelampes, in our hands, when we
show good example to our neighbor, bodily fornicacyon if it be taken largely,
is (as says saint Isodore) adultery. But fornication of the soul, is
Idolatre. The first assautes of fornicacion, are by y^ eyes, the second by
words. He that is not taken by the eyes, may soon resyst and withstand
words. Al fylthe pollucio^ is called fornication, notwithstanding that all
the kinds thereof, bye diverse voluptuous pleasures, are common. And of this
vain fornicacyon are in gendered diverse great sins, by the which the
kingdom of heaven is closed up, and man separated, and put from god. And among
all other capital and deadly sins, fornycatyon is the cheyffest by
extencyon, that is because it is more common then any other, or else because it
has mo branches then any other. By the vnclenlynesse of the flyshe the
temple of god is defeyled, and by taking away of christ's members, they make it
the member of a stru^pet, that is of that vile woman, the which out of wedlock
Cor. vi.
does make her self a common brodel. Wherefore good virgyn, if this be true,
that god lives in you, look that all fornicacion be dead in you. Lechery is
Gods enemy, and the perdicyon of eternal bliss, and of all wordly
substance. Fornicacyo^ does not only bespot ma^s body, but also his soul and
conscience, and not wtstanding that he that commits fornicacio^ seems to
live, yet for all that he is dead, god shall judge these aduouterers and
fornicatours Hebre. xiii.
that is, he shall co^dempne them. Harken good sister unto Saint Isodore words.

Yt is a great deal worsse, to be defiled with fornycacyon, then with any other
syn. For fornicacyon, (as I have said before) is greates of all syn.
Fornication is a very grievous syn. Fornicacyon surmou^teth, and excedeth all
other fautes. Fornication is more grievous then death. Yt were better to dye,
then to commyt fornycacyon, or to be in any manner of wise bespotted withal Yt
were better to dye, then a man by fornycion should dampne his his own soul.
Lechery brings a man to the pains of hell Lechery drowneth man's soul in hell.
Lechery se^deth a man to damnacyon. The eyes are fornycacyons messengers. The
sight is the first cause of fornication, the soul is oftentimes taken by a
man's eyes, by y^ eyes the darte of love comes to the soul. Wherefore my
well-beloved sister in Christ Jesus, refrain your eyes, pluck back your
sight. Fasten not your sight upon the goodlynesse of the flesh. Look ye cast
your eyes upon no man, to dysyre his company. Behold no man's face to love him
in evil, turn away your eyes from al vanite, look ye never desire the
beutyfulnesse of man. O my good sister tell me I pray you. What vtilite is there,
in the carnal bewtye of man? Is not man as dry as hay? And does i Peter. 1.
not his goodly beutye vanyshe away, as does the shadow? And when death
comes, I pray you tell me, what goodlynesse shall remain in the body? when
ye shall se his body swolle^, and turned into all fylthy stynche, and sauer,
shall ye not then stop your noose from such unsavory sauer? And from such a
stynkynge body? Tell me I pray you where shall his goodly and his amable face
be then? Where shall his sweet words be, with the which he was wont to melte
their hearts he spoke unto? Where is then his sweet and merry communication?
Tell me honest virgyn where yt his laughing cou^tynance, and his dishonest
sportes be then? Where shall his vain and his unprofitable ioyfulnesse, and
myrthe, become then? Yt is gone consumed to naught, and vanyshed away in
likeness of smoke. This is the end and the consu^macyon of bodily beutye.
Therefore good sister, learn now that beutyfulnesse is but a vain thing.
Consyderyng the^ good (...). ^1.
sister, that bodily shape is but a vanite, a corrupt matter, nothing but
earth, nothing else but duste and asches, look ye behold no man to desire him.
Why so? For the world and all his concupiscence and pleasure vanysshet i.
John^. ii.
away. And all that is in the world, is but the concupiscence of the flesh,
or of the eyes. Therefore this world should be despised for gods sake with all
that is in it. And you that have left it for the love of God, should never
rejoice in the beutyfulnesse of man. Therefore I exhort you to love christ
Jesus your spouse above all thing, for if the desire of carnal fornicacyon
does delight and please the soul, more then the love of chaslite, it is in
continual syn. But if the most excellent virtue of chastity please the soul
more then fylthy fornicacyon, then there is no syn in it but justice. And
notwithstanding a man be chaste of body and in mind luxurius, yet syn does
remain in him. Fornicacyo^ of ye mind is taken for Idolatre.

There is another spice of fornycacio^ of y^ which y^ lord speaks sayng. Who
so looks upon a woman desiryng her company, co^mytteth Mah. v
fornicacyo^ in heart and mind Me^ are more subject to the deuel by bodily
fornicacyo^, the^ by any other syn^e, or vice. Chastity is the goodlynesse of
the soul, and by chastyte man is made egal, to the merytes of Angels many a
one for fault of keeping there sight have fallen into the danger, and parell of
their souls.

The sisters demand
I Pray you dear brother tell me, whether ye have known any man that has been deceived by his eyes.

The brothers answer.
YE verily good sister, I have known many that have been deceived, and wrapped
in the deuilles snares, by there sight, and I will show you of some that I have
red of. The first is Dina the which went into strau^g countrees to behold and
se the men of those regyons, and anon Sychen emors the prince of gene. xxxiiii
that country son, beheld her, and was taken with her love, and rauysshed
her, and defloured her. And so the poor wretched woman, because she was
desirous to se that becomde her not to se, lost her virginyte.

And king David standing in his chamber, saw a woman named Bersabe, and in
contynent ii. Reg. xi.
he was taken with her love and rauysshed her, and for her love committed
aduoutrey, and murder, and so doyeng, he tra^sgrest the laws, and beholding
of that thing he should not have looked upon, ne regarded he was in greatfaute.

And Samson the strong went into the regyon of the (...)ilistyans, where he
saw a certain woman and fell in love with her and slepynge in her lap, she
cut of the here of his head, and delivered him to his enemes, the which by
and by put out both his eyes. And so the poor wretched man for asmoche as he
beheld that he should not have looked upon, he lost his sight, and was in
danger of his life.

Now good sister ye se that many a one by the sight of the eye, have been
both in danger of body and soul. Wherefore I exhort you, to make a bargayne
with your eyes and that ye never look wantonly upon such things as ye should not
look upon, and beware that death enter and descend not by your eyes Iere. ix
into your soul, but if your flesh (as I have said before) do assale you, if
lechery do tempt you if misorderd appetite do provoke you, if the remembrance
of fornication do yet torment you, set death in the presence of all these
things, and cast before your eyes, the end of your life, call also to your
remembrance the pains of hell that be ordained for syn^ers. Let the horrible
day of Judgment be before your eyes and in your mind, and Imagyn with your
self how straight it shall be, for if it were not the great mercy of God, there
were no man able to abide it. The remembrance of y^ horrible pains and
vehement fire of hell, shall quynche the heat of fornicacyo^ the memory of
the perpetual flame and fire of hell shall cause you to forget all manner of
fornicacy on. For the greater heat quinched always the lesser, and
overcomes it. And the often thinking upon the horrible fire of hell, quinchet
the vehement and burning fire of fornicacy on.

Good sister I beseech GOd to give you true chastity both of body and soul.

Of abstinence the.xxiiij. chapter.
THat is called, a perfyte fast when we fast outwardely, and pray inwardly. By
fasting man's prayer is soon hard. By fasting and prayenge, man's soul is
joined to the angels, and coupeled to God. Fasting is as strong armoure to
feyght against the devil as may be, by fasting and prayenge the wicked
spirytes are ouercommed.

My well-beloved sister in GOd, will ye know how fornycacion may be best
restrained, and kept under? Ye good brother, if it please you I pray you show
me: harken then unto me. By fasting and by abstynence, fornicacyon is soon
laid a side. By fasting, voluptuous pleasure and lechery is quicly
restrained. Never fill your self, and luxuriousnes shall never ruell you.
Abstynence overcomes y^ flesh, abstinence does brydell bodily pleasure,
abstyne^ce does break and diminyshe all fleshly lust and mo cyon. Abstynence
does utterly destrowe the power of fornicacion, hunger and thryst does over
come all carnal concupyscence and lust. That soul that is given to diuersyte
of meats, and drynkes, leseth the vigure and effect of good prayer. That
soul that of long season has not ben repasted, nor fed with the word of god,
is like the body yt has been long without meat. Saint hierome says, that a
man must fast meanly, and with moderacyon, least that to much fasting should
febly she the stomach. For meat moderately taken, is both profitable for y^
soul and the body. A fat bellye and much aboundau^ce of meat causes dull
wits, and dull understanding. Also it is much better daily to eat little,
then to eat but seldom and much, he fasteth well, that exchuyt syn Better it
is to abstain from vice then from meat, but to abstain that ye may
afterward fyl your self, is not laudable, nor such abstinence is nothing
commendable. A void belly provoke a man to prayer and deuocio^, and a full
belly to sleep and slothfulness, keep the body dry by the desire of the
kingdom of heaven to thentent ye may fulfill that is written. My soul and my
flesh does greatly desire god, y^ flessh Psalm. xii.
does then desire God, when by much fasting it abstayneth and wareth dry. Good
sister if ye perfytly desire god in this mortal life, he shall satisfye and
co^te^t your mind, i^ y^ glorious ki^dome of heaven: abstine^ce does both kill
and give life for it quyckeneth y^ soul, and mortifyeth the body. Abstyne^ce
does edifye and inge^der virtue in man's soul, and destroys the vicyousnes of
y^ body. We should with all diligence despise glotony, the co^cupyscens and desire
of dilicate viandes and meats, should be left and little regarded. A man should
not care for his belie, when the belie is to much replenyshed, then the body
is inflamed with wanto^nesse and lechery. We should not ear to fill the bellye,
but to sustain the body. For when the belie is full, then is the fire of
fornycacyon kyndeled, that body that is chasted, and kept low by abstynence,
is never inflamed nor hurt with the fire of voluptuous pleasure. The rich man
clothed in purpure, Luke. xxi
the which to every man's judgment and sight, lived in great abundau^ce,
because he would not abstain in this world from immoderate meats and drynkes,
was cast into the fire of hell, and desired but one drop of water to
refreshe and cole his tunge withal, yet he could not have it Luke. xvi.
nor never shall. And as be abstinence all virtue is roted and edyfyed in the
soul of man, so be the abundau^ce of meat and drink, vice is noryshed in
ma^s body, nor man shall never obtain the perfytenes of virtue, if he do not
first tame and refrain the glotony of the belie. The three children were not
burnt nor consumed, because they were abstinent and sober. And Danyell Daniel.
iii.
was delivered from the lion because he was abstinent. No man of him self can
repel temptacyon, if he refrain not Daniel. vi. and. xiiii.
from i^moderate eati^g and dri^kyng.

The systers demand
Dear brother I pray you to tell me how I should chasten my body with abstine^ce

The brothers answer.
GOod sister ye must nourishe your body under such a fassio^ y^ it wax not
proud and rebellyous, ye must so keep it under, and so repress it, that it
fall not, ye must so refreshe your flesh, that it may do you service, and so
chaste^ your body with abstinence, that it peryshe not, if ye punish your body
more then nedethe, ye kill your friend, if ye keep it to wa^to^ly, ye nourish
your enmy. Good sister in all abstynence, beware ye hurt not your body, but
the vycyousnes thereof, absteyne from meats, look your face be pale and not
ruddy, look your body be lean and not fat, eat so, that ye may be always
a hungerde, never i^ferce nor fill your bellye with much meat. Be evermore a
hungerde, a thryste, in abstynence, and leanenes, ye can not overcome
temptacyon if ye chaste^ not your body. For by much eating and drinkyng,
lechery does encrece, y^ abu^dau^ce of wine and dai^ty metes, does styr y^
flesh to bodyly pleasure, luxuriusnes is evermore joined to saturite, y^ cold
of much watchi^g does quench the heat of carnal lust, evil spirytes are very
much there, where is superfluytye of meat and drink. Therefore good sister in
Christ Jesus, if ye inte^d (as I have said) to avoid and fly the te^ptacyon of
the body, keep abstinence, not only from meats and drynkes, but also from all
manner of worldly delectacyon, that after this wicked life, ye may rejoice in
heaven with gods angels.

Of dro^kennes. the.xxv. Chapi.
Dear Sister, I pray you harken to gods own words. Take head your Luke. xxi.
bodies be not grieved with ebryete and dro^ke^nes. And saint Paul says, be not
dronken with wine in the which is excess. Ephesi. v.
And Salomo^ says, wine is a lechetous thing, and dronke^nes Prouer. xx.
is full of strife and debate, be hold not wine when his color is goodly and
pleasant, for it goth down full swetely, but at length it will byte and cast
out his venomous poyso^. Where dronke^ship rules, there is no secretnes. Wine
has brought many a man to great peril and danger both of body and soul. Wine
was made in iocundyte and mirth, and not i^ ebryete and dronke^nes. Where so
psalm. c. 3.
ever fulthsu^nesse does abunde, there rules fornycatyo^ and lechere,
voluptuous pleasure foloth a well fed belly. Dronke^nes does feblyshe the body,
and deceyueth y^ soul, dro^kennes troubles ma^s understanding, and augme^teth
y^ fury and madness of the heart, dronke^nes does nourysh the flame and fire of
fornycacyo^, dronkennes does so alienate a man's under sta^dyng, y^ he knows
not himself. A dronke^ man is so far be sides hi^ self, that for the most
part he knows not where he is. It is to many a man a lawde to drink well,
and not to be dronken, and of those speaks the prophet, sayng. Out apo^ you
that Iza. v.
are strong to drink wine, and to follow dro^ke^nes, and again he says. Out
apo^ you y^ rise betimes to drink from morning till evening. And the prophet
cries sayng. Awake ye dro^kardes and weep awake you y^ drynk wine i^ swetnes,
Ioal. i.
he says not awake you y^ dri^ke wine for necessite, but you that drink wine
in swetenes, y^ is, with great delectacyo^ and pleasure Dro^ke^nes acustomed is
deadly sin, dronke^nes is a grievous sin, dronkennes is rekened among
murder, aduoutry, and for Gala. v.
nycacyo^. Dronkennes casts a man out of heaven, dronkennes does drown and
cast man into hell. Noe drank wine and afterward dysclosed such preuy parts
of his body, the which he had Gene. ix.
kept close the space of syx hundred years. And Loath ouercu^med with wine,
lay with his Gene. ix.
own daughter, yet he felt no sin, for his mind and under sta^di^g was
alienate. Now good sister think and esteem you, how excecrable a thing y^
dro^kennes is, and how much gods servants ought to exchewe and to avoid it.

The sisters demand.
GOod sister it is then syn to drink wine?

The brothers answer
WOrshipful sister to drink wine temperatly, is no sin, that is to drink it
with sobernes, for Saint Paul writing to his dyscyple Tymothe, says. Drink
Timo. v.
a little wine, to ease your stomach, and your many fold syckenes, and
Solomon says, Eccle. xxxi.
wine mesurably dro^ke^, is health some both for the soul and the body, wine
without measure, is poison, wine taken without measure overcomes a man's
understanding, by to much wine man's wits be troubeled, by wine lechery
does increase, by over much wine voluptuousnes is moved and provoked, by much
wine voluptuousnes is nouryshed. God has given and prepared wine to rejoice
man's heart with all, and not given it to be dronken with all.

Therefore let us not drink as much as glotony, but asmoche psalm. ciii.
as necessyte shall require, let us beware we use not that thing to
superfluyte, that god has given and ordered to sucker man's body with all,
let us take heed we use and turn not to vice that thing, that god has
given to man for his bodylye health. Let us beware that we turn not our carnal
medycyne to the vice of ebryete and dronkennes, many a man through wine, has
been dystroyed by evil spyrytes, and dronkennes it self is no another thing,
but even a manyfeste devil.

Therefore my well-beloved sister in Christ Jesus, if ye drynk wine moderately and
temperately it shall be for your bodyly health, and ye joyfulness of your soul.
Drink wine soberlye, and it shall deliver you from all sluggyshenes, and cause
you to be dylygente and devout in gods service. For wine mesurablye used,
causes a man to be dylygente and feruente in prayer.

Of sin. the.xxvi. Cha.
Sister lyste^ unto gods saying. Who so ever does sin John^. viii.
is servant to si^ne. Sin is committed and done two diverse manner of ways,
for either it is done by cupydyte and desire, or else for fear, as when a man
would have that he desires, or when he fears to come to that, yt he should
come unto. Sin is committed in man's heart four manner of ways, and four
manner of ways in deed. It is committed in heart by suggestion and the
instigacion of the devil, by delectatyo^ of y^ flesh, by volu^tary co^se^t,
and by ye defense of pride It is committed i^ deed su^times secretly sometimes
manyfestly, sometimes be custom, and sometimes be desperacyon. Under these for
said manners, we sin in heart, and do it in deed. Sin is also committed three
other ways, that is by ignorance, by infyrmyte, and industryously, that is
malycyously. Eve synde by ignorance, as says Saint Paul. The ii. Cor xi.
man was not deceived but the woman, so that Adam committed sin
i^dustryously, and Eve by ignorance. He that is deceived knows not to what
thing he consents unto: Saint Peter co^mytteth sin by a certain
infyrmytye and wekenes, when Math. xxvi
for the fere of a maid servant he denyde the lord his master. Syn done by
i^fyrmyte is much more grievous then that, that is done by ignorance: but yet
that is more grievous that is committed by malice, the^ y^, that is done by
ignorance, and syn which is done openly, is much more grievous the^ that, yt is
done secretly. He that synneth manyfestly, does double his sin. For he
sineth him self and gives evil examples to other, it is a great point and a
part of justice, for a man to know his own iniquyte, and to be ashamed of his
mislyuyng. It is much better to abstain from sin for the love of god, the^
for fere of the pains of hell. Also it is better not to sin the^ after y^ a
man has sinned, to correct and to amend his fault. Every sinner is bespotted
with pride. For he y^ does that, that is forboddo^ hi^, dyspiseth gods
commandments. Harken unto me good sister, hark I pray you what I say unto
you. By one mysfaute many virtues do perysh, keep therefore your soul from
sin. For he that synneth James. ii.
in one, is culpable in all, by one sin, many merytoryous works do perysh.
Incline nor bow not your mind to those things that the body desyrethe. Nor
set not your soul in the power of the flesh, consent not to no flesshly
delectacyon, for if ye live after the flesh ye shall sone perish. Look
therefore that your conscience be purged from all sin, and that your thought
be net and clean, puryfy your body from al i^iquyte, and your heart from al
manner of spots of syn, the body can not be defiled, but that the soul must
be first bespotted, if the soul stomble by and by, the body is pressed and ready
to follow, the soul gothe before the flesh, and in all iniquite and sin
the soul is the first that synneth, the body can do nothing, but as the
soul will.

Therefore keep your soul from al iniquite, and your flesh shall never sin.

The systers demand.
I Pray you good brother tell me, whether the soul of a si^ner bespotted with
sin be stynkynge and black, and the soul of a good just man fair, and full
of all beauty.

The brothers answer.
Well-beloved sister in god, there are three things blacker and worse, then any
other, that is, the soul of a continual sinner. The ill angels which shall
receive it when it deperteth the world, and hell, into the which it shall be
cast for evermore. There is nothing worse nor nothing more blacker in this
world, then are those three things. Also there are three other things which
are the best of all other, that is the soul of a just man, contynuyng in good
works. The holy angels, the which shall receive it, at the day of his
departing, and heaven, where it shall rest perpetually. There are no better
things in the hole world, then these three things are, the holy angels
receive y^ just soul, and present it before god, saying. Behold good lord y^
thing that ye have chosen, and taken, it shall co^tynue and dwell perpetually
in your eternal palace. Good sister if ye pourg your soul of al iniquite, and
if ye continue in Gods service as ye have promised, without dout ye shall
reioye with him in his celestyall chamber of heaven, so be it

Of confession of sins and penance, the.xxvij. chap.
THen a man begins to be just when he accuses him self of his sins, and
here of speaks the wise tha sayng. A just man first of all Prouer. (...).
accuses him self, and there is nothing worse for ama^ the^ to knowledge his
fautes, and not to be sorry for the^. A sinner should bewail his misdedes two
manner of ways. First because yt through negligence, he has not done so well
as he should have done, and again because yt through boldness, he has
committed and done y^ evil, the which he should not have done. He that
bemourneth, and bewayleth his sins (taking good head he faule to no moo)
does co^dyng and very good penance, but he y^ lame^teth his misdedes, and
begins to fall to the^ again, is lykened to him that wessheth a raw bryke,
y^ is, he labors in vain. For ye more he wessheth, ye more fylthynes
comes thereof, but he y^ does penance when he might sin, and in time of his
life corrects his liui^g, wtdrawi^g him self from syn, shall have everlasting
rest. But he y^ leueth evil, and begins to do penance when death calls
him, the^ as it is uncertain whether he shall be damned, so it is uncertain
whether he shall be saved. And therefore he y^ will be sure at his last end to
have remissyo^ and pardone of his sins, must do penance whylest he is i^
good health and prosperity, and in health must lame^^ and bewail his misdeeds:
and co^sideri^g y^ the mercy of God, is secret and so far from ma^s knowleg yt
shall be and is very necessary y^ we continually bewail our sins. Harke^
good sister unto. S Isodores words. A man that does penance should not, nor it
is not necessary he should have sure knowledge that his sins be forgyuen him,
wherefore? For such sure knowledge does ingendre negligence, the which
negligence oftentimes makes many a one to take no head, and so leads the^
again to there first nautye manner of living. Therefore my well beloved sister
accept and take this my counsel, and whylest ye may, look ye amend and
correct your living, whylest y^ god does give you leave, open your sin lament
your sins, do penance confess your sins, whylest ye live lament your
misliuyng, and let them that be called to dye, by your amendeme^t. Amend your
misdedes whilst ye may, revoke and with draw your self from syn, call upon god
whylest ye may, and whylest ye live, seek for remission of your sins, do
penance or ever death do come. Do penance or ever the pytte of hell do
swallowe you, lament your disordonate living, or ever that hell do take you.
Bewail and morn your sins, or ever ye be drownde in the deep pyt of hell,
for there is no pardon to be gotten, there is neither joy nor yet pleasure,
nor no license or space to do penance, nor no time to amend, nor no place of
co^fessyo^, why so? Because that in hell is no redemptyon. In this world, (not
wtstandyng ye be never so great a syn^er) yet through penance ye may obtain
remissyon and pardon. Nor there is no syn so grievous, but by doing of penance
a man may obtain and get forgyuenesse and pardon thereof Disperacyo^ increases
a (...) dym darkness do inwrap me. O good lord aid me and help me or ever I
come to pain, or ever the fire of hell devour me, or ever I be tormented in
hell. O my lord god what shall I do at the day of thy terryble judgment. Alas
what shall I answer at the examinacyo^ of thy judgment? Alas what shall I
wretched sinner say, when I shall be presented before the Iudicyall seat of
christ Jesus? Cursed be the day that I sinde and misdyd and falsely transgrest
the commandment of god. Would to god the son had not shyned, nor risen upon
me. O wretched day O ab hominable day, o a day unworthy to be named, that
first brought me into this world, that opened my mothers women for me to come
out at. It had be^ better I had never be^ borne, the^ to be perpetually
dampened. It had been better I had never be^ borne the^ to be borne to suffer the
eternal pains of hell. It had been better I had never be^, the^ to suffer
perpetual torment and pain. O heaven and earth lament me. O all ye creatures of
god lament me. O all ye creatures that have any felyng of life, bewail me, and
shede your tears upon me. For I have sinned grievously, unhappily, miserably,
my sins are innumerable. I have oftentimes promised to live well and to
amend, but I kept not my promis, I return evermore to syn again, and have
increaced and renewed them, nor I never changed my vnthryftye manners nor I
never ceast from doing evil O ye holy fathers pray for me. O ye holy saints
pray for me. O all ye yt are good men pray unto the lord to have mercy upon
me. And that it will please his grace, to deface my fautes, and to wype out all
mine iniquite.

O my wretched soul who shall have mercy upon the. Who shall comfort y^. O
miserable soul who shall bewail the. Alaswhere is the keeper of man. Where is
y^ redemer of al souls? O goodshepparde where are ye. Alas why have ye
despised me? why turn ye your face from me? Good lord forget me not at the
last. Leave me not good lord for evermore Leave me not in the deuyls power. I
am a sinner, I am a wretched person, and yet good Lord I come to the for
help, ye are very kind, ye are sweet, and merciful Ye refuse, nor despise no
man, nor put no man from your mercy. Ah good lord show thy great mercy upon me,
I heartily beseke the deny me not that thing, that ye mercyfully have granted
to many other. I do not defend my misdedes. I hyde not my sins. I am right
sorry for them. Alas wretch that I am, I have synde, I confess my error, I
open my fault. I knowledge mine iniquite. Good lord I have done amys, be
mercyful unto me wretched syn^er, perdo^ me my misdeeds. For give me my sins.
O good Lord if ye regard psalm. c. xxix.
iniquite, who shall sustain it. No man can then be sure at the day of your
examynacyon, nor yet the just man, with all his justice, for who is he, be he
never so just, that dare say, he is without syn? there is no man with out syn.
There is no man clear i. John^. i.
from syn in thy sight, nor among all the holy saites, there is none
vnbespotted nor they that served god, were not steadfast, and iniquite has been
found among the angels, y^ stars be not clear before the lord, and heaven
in thy sight is not clear. The^ good Job. xxv.
lord if no man be without spot in thy sight, then can not I being a vile
syn^er, a vile piece of earth a vile worm, the child of man the which has
drunk up iniquite as water, and multiplied and increaced in sins, be clear
and without syn. And yet I sit in duste, and dwell in a house claye, and my
foundacyo^ is but earth. Good lord give me wretched sinner thy right hand, I
pray the good Lord to remember of what substance and where of I am made
Remember good lord that I am but earth, but powdre and ashes. Give me some
manner of medecyn, where with I may be helped, where with I may be cleansed and
purifyed from all syn. For I am fallen into the dept of all my sins, I am
fallen into the deep pyt of hell, deliver my soul good lord from the
captiuyte of hell, that the deptnesse thereof do not enclose me, that hell do not
swalowe me, and that the deep pyt of hell open not his wide throat upon me, and
that the profoundnesse and deptnesse of hell let me not to depart from the^se
Now the dredeful day of donie approchet nygh, the last day is come, y^ time
of death is at hand I have now nothing left me but my grave, good Lord
forgive me or ever I go to ye place of darkness. Help me good lord Job. x.
or ever I go to the land of wretchedness. O redemer of man's soul succoure me
or ever I depart. Unbynde and lose me from all my sins or ever I come unto
death.

The brothers answer.
Well-beloved sister in Christ Jesus, I be seche God almyghtye to have mercy upon
you, and to forgive you al your sins, al your n^sdedes, and to pardon you of
your sins all your misdedes, and to pardon you of all that ever ye have done,
and from hense forward do as ye should do. Purpose steadfastly in your heart
never to sin more, stablysh your mind never to misdo, never to return unto
syn, never to defile your self with sin again: and after penance return
not again to vnthryftye living. He is not reputed nor taken as penitent but as
a gester and a discem let that renueth yt he has done penance for, nor he is
not esteemed to pray humbly but rather to mock with god, y^ renueth y^ thing for
the which he has done penance, for s. I sodore says, that penance to be
but as vain, the which afterward is defiled and arayde with syn, for a renewed
wou^d or sore, can hardely be curyd again, and he that synneth often and repent
him often shall scacely besaued. Therefore be sted fast in doing of penance, and
leave not of the good life ye have begone, for everlasting life is promised to
those that contynew in goodness, and Dauyd says. Blessed be they that
evermore Psalm. cv.
keep judgment and do justice, and it is written. That he that contynueth
until the end shall be Math. 24.
laued. Honest virgyn I exhort you to have always a shamfast countenance,
and to be ashamed of your sins when ye remember the^ Be a shamed to lift up
your eyes when ye think upon the^, when ye walk hold down your heed: let your
cou^tenau^ce be sorrowful.

Let your smock be made of here let the earth be your bed, ye are but dust, sit
therefore in duste, ye are but ashes, therefore sit in ashes, be evermore in
heuines, evermore sobbi^g and sythyng, and having remorse of conscience, and in
heart co^punctyon, be always weeping, and morning, be always ready to weep. The
servants of god good sister, in this world be they never so good should never
be in suerte, gods servants should always be watching and with great
lame^tacyo^ and many fold tears reduce their misdeeds to memory. To y^ laud
of Canti. v.
Christ, it is written in the Can tycles, that his heir is as high as is y^
palm try, and as black as the crow. By Christ's hear is understood good
faithful people, y^ which keeping in heart the holy faith of ye trinite. and
cleuige unto god, do yt they believe and as ha^ging upon his head, do honor hi^
The palm tree growi^ge vpwardes of heyght, does betoke^ vyctory. Christ's heir
is lykened unto apalme tree, for good people mou^tyng and evermore asce^dyng to
the height of virtue, ar brought through gods grace to victory, but yet they are black as ye crow. For not wtsta^dynge yt by virtue, they do evermore asce^d
toward heaven, yet they knowledge the^ self to be siners. So good sister,
notwithstanding ye live well and serve god iustlye and devoutly, yet I would ye
should never leave weeping. Therefore if ye will wasshe clean away your black
spotted sins, love to be ever more mournyng and weeping, let your teres be
sweet unto you, let wayling and weping delight you, be as inclining and ready to
weep, as ye were to do ill, and as ready to do penance, as ye were to faule. A
man's me dicyne must be minystred unto him after as his infirmite is.

Great sin requires much waylyng and great repentance. Good sister I pray
him to comfort you, and help you in this world, the which the angels do
worship in heaven,

Of co^munyon, that is of the receiving of the very body and blood of Christ.
the.xxviii. Chapter.
WHo soever shall eat the bread of the lord and drink of his cup
unworthily shall be culpable of his blood and body, that is to say, he shall syn
greatly, and fylthyly bespotte his soul, why so? For there comes yt is
bespotted and noughtes to that thing yt is good. And therefore man should prove
him self, that is, he should reason with him self and so eat of this bread and
drink of Corin. xi.
this cup. As though. s. Paul woide say, that every man should consider his
own living and pourge his mind of al sin and myschefe, to the tent he may
worthily come unto ye blessed sacrament of ye auter. For who so receives the
precious body and blood of Christ Jesus unworthily, he does eat and dri^ke his
own judgment, that is to say, he eats the cause of his da^nacio^ And of this
thing says. s. I sidore that al such as live ill in christ's church, receyui^g
daily the blessed body of Christ thi^kyng y^ by such daily co^munyo^ they may
be pourged of their sins. I would al such should know says he, that it
profyteth the^ nothing toward the purgation of their sins, for it is
written. Why has my lover Hiero. xi.
committed so many crimes and sins in my house, holy flesh shall never purge
hi^ of his fawtes.

Therefore he yt will receive ye blessed body of Christ, must or ever he receive
it stand steadfast i^ faith and delectio^ of god. And saint John^ says. He
that eats my flesh and drynketh my blood, is in me and John^. vi.
I in him, as though he would say, he is and does dwell in me, that doing
good works fulfilleth my commandments. For if dwell not first in me by
faith and good works, and I in him, he can not eat my flesh nor dri^ke my
blood. What thing is it the^, that me^ receive, the which do commonly receive
the sacrament of the auter? They do receive it in very deed, but some receive
and eat his flesh and dri^kth his blood spiritually, and sacrame^tally, some
other receive it only sacrame^tally, that is the very body of Christ under
the sacrament, but not the thing of the sacrame^te. This sacrament is called
the very body of Christ borne of the clean byrgyn Mary, but y^ spiritual
thing thereof is Christ's flesh. The good christian man being i^ the state of
grace, receives this sacrament, both sacrame^tally and spirytually, but so
does not the evil lever, for he receueth it unworthily, and therefore (as says
the apostle) he, receyuethe his ^Corin. xi.
judgment, for he proved not him self, or ever he received it, nor made no
dyffere^ce betwyxte the flesh of Christ, and other flesh. What thing does
ye mysliuer receive the^? Truly he receives another flesh nor blood
spiritually, nor yet for his soul health, but he receives his judgment to his
da^pnatyo^, not with standing it apeare that he receives ye sacrament as other
do. And so the one receives the body of Christ to his saluacyo^, and the
other to his da^pnacyon. He that received it as Judas did, shall be dampened with
Judas, And he that receives it with saint Peter and other faithful people
devoutly and laufully is sa^ctytyed in ye bydy of Christ with. s. Peter and the
other apostles Harken good sister unto saint Austen words. He that comes to
theauter to be howfled, being chaste of body, clean of heart, with a pure
co^scye^ce, and a devout mind, shall come to the heavenly auter before the face
of god. Well-beloved sister lysten to the wisdom of the sarpe^t, when y^ sarpe^t
does i^tend to dri^ke, or ever he come to y^ well, he i^forceth him self to
vomit out al such venym as is in him, and then he drynketh. I pray you good
sister to follow the serpente in this thing and to vomit out all your poison,
or ever ye come to the fou^tayne, that is, or ever ye come to receyne the very
body and blood of our lord Christ Jesus, vomit out all hatred, anger, malice,
envy, evil will, hurtful thoughts, and forgive al your neighbors and all
such things as they have wronfully done unto you, that your sins also may be
forgyue^ you. For the lord says, forgive Luke. vi
and ye shall be forgyuen, and doing thus as I have told you ye may come to the
fou^tayne of life, that is to Christ Jesus, the lou^tayne of all goodness. For
he says, I am y^ bread of life yt is John^. vi,
cu^ from heaven, and of this bread speaks Da. Men has eaten a^gels Psa. lxx
vi^
bread, and not wtsta^dynge this bread came from heaven, yet because it is a
bodily thing, it was nothing co^uenyent for angels, but that thing only that
was prefygurde and mente by yt bread and wine. God is ye angels bread, and the
sacrament of ye auter is his very flesh and blood, the which man does eat
and dri^ke spirytually, and by the self same thing that angels do live by in
heaven, by the self same, man does live i^ earth, for that thing that man does
receive is spirytuall, but as the apostle says. Some i. Corin. i.
that were in wilderness did eat this meat spiritually, and yet they be dead,
and so it is now in gods church. For to some the body of Christ is very life,
and to some other it is pain, and the punysh me^t of syn, without doubt this
blessed sacrament is a very life to those y^ be gods servants, and to those
that through neglyge^ce and ignorance are me^bres of the devil it is death.
Wherefore good sister A exhort you ye whensoever ye receive this blessed
sacrament, y^ ye steadfastly believe it, to be a another thing, the^ it seems to
be by y^ taste. Here good vyrgyn what y^ pressed says when he does co^seerate
this blessed sacrament. We desire and pray (says the pressed) that this oblacyo^
may be made blissed, by the which we be blessed, and to be written, by y^ which
all we are written in heaven, and ratifyed, by the which we are rekened to be in
Christ, and to be reasonable, by the which we are delivered from all
bestyalyte, and that it will please god to make it acceptable, to that intent
that we being dysplesed with our myslyuyng, may be acceptable unto his blessed
son Christ Jesus. Therefore good vyrgyn Christ (as I have told you be fore)
in him self does feed the angels in heaven, and also in earth, he in
himself, does norysh all good faithful people. Christ by his only presence
does feed y^ angels in heaven. Christ of himself does feed us by faith i^
this world, that we faint not in the way. Christ does repast both angel and
man of him self, and yet he remains holle in him self. O how good is this
bread. O how maruaylous a thing is it, by y^ which the angels of heaven and
we of the world are satysfyed.

Christ is y^ bread of life, which is the angels fode and refectyo^, and our
only redemption.

Now good sister pray unto god with all your heart and mind, that it will please
hi^ so to puryfy your conscience, that ye may receive the mysterye of his
precious body and blood.

Amen.
Of thought the.xxxix. Cha.
Dear sister hear I pray you what God says by y^ prophe Isa. Take and remove
all evil from your cogytacyons Ezai. l.
and thoughts, not with standing a man cease and leave of to do evil, yet if he
be in thought and i^ heart defiled, he is not wtoute fault, and therefore says.
s, Isodory. Man does not syn only in deed, but also in thought and mind, if
such thoughts do delight and please him. For as the vyper is killed and
dystroyed by his yonglinges being yet in her belly, so our own evil and
myscheuous thoughts consume and slay our souls if we nonrishe them within us.
Wherefore good sister I counsel you, that with all diligence ye take good head
to your heart and mind, for from the heart comes both life and death. Harke^
also what y^ spouse says in the Cantycles, to the laud of y^ holy church. The
heat of thy Canti. vii.
head is like y^ kings purpure joined to prelates. The hear of the church is
the little bed of the devout soul, and it is in memory as is the kiges purpure
joined unto the prelates, for purpure is bound by ha^dfulles to those
prelates, whereupon they cast water, y^ which water runs through the
prelates, upon the cloth and so is purpure died, and of this does purpure take
his name. And all this does agree and is right co^uenyent and meet for the
devout soul. For the hears of y^ head are the thoughts of the mind y^ which
are bound unto these condettes, for they are fast bound in holy scripture,
because they should not ru^ne over and belost in vayn. Therefore keep your heart
and mind from such noyfull thoughts, and look it be net and pure lest yt any
such vayn thoughts cu^ crepyng in unto it. For god does not only examine
man's body, but also he examyneth his soul. God judges man's conscience,
God iugeth man's thought and y^ soul of man, if any vayn thoughts do move or
troble you, consent not i^ no manner of wise unto the^, but i^co^tynent eiect
the^ from you. And as soon as y^ scorpio^ shall appear break his head, that is
break and cast away al such evil cogitacyo^s. A fault must be amended there
where it has his beginning, that is in man's heart, put out of your heart the
head of all evil thoughts, for there ca^ no thing be hydde^ from god. God is
every where, the spirit of god Sapi, i.
fulfylleth all manner of places, the majesty of god almyghtye pereseth the
eleme^tes, god knows ma^s thought. Good sister will ye never be heavy? Ye good
brother. The^ inte^d to live well, for if ye live well ye shall never be heavy.
For a sure and a vncarefull mind sets little by heaviness, a good and a clear
conscience is ever more in mirth, if ye contynew in goodness, all heaviness shall
from you depart, if ye co^tynew i^ holiness and deuocio^, ye shall have none
occasion of heuines, If ye live well, ye need another to fere plage, nor yet
death. But the conscience of a sinner is evermore in pain, he that is gylthy
is never at rest. And a sinful mind, is always vexed with the pryckes of his
own conscience. Good sister listen what the lord says of the woman to the
serpent, she shall break thy head. The serpents head is the^ broken Gene.
iii.
when a ma^s fault is there amended, where it had his beginning. I pray GOd to
puryfye your heart and your mind from all syn, and evil cogytacyon, that ye
may serve him in all pureness and clenlynesse both of mind and thought.

Of silence the.xxx. cha.
I Say the prophet says. That scyle^ce is the honor of justice and his
perpetual Ezai. xxxii.
sauegarde and suertie, and the prophet David says, put some defense and
custody about my mouth Psa. c. lx.
and a door of circu^stau^ce about my lyppes. The holy fathers keeping there
silence applide and gave all there mind to know and to se the sweetness of
the lord, and leauyng of all worldly care, they gave them self holy to
co^templatio^. Good sister I pray you to despise and to avoid al dishonest
co^municacyo^, and to fle from all uncleanly words, for vain co^municacio^
does right sone polute and defyle man's soul. And man does that thing right
willyngly that he hereth gladly, never speak such words, that may let any
virtue or goodness, nor never speak y^ thing, that shall not become you to
speak. Let no such words escape you, that may hurt those that hear them,
flee all uncleanly and wanton co^munycacyon. For vain words betoken a vain
conscience, man's tongue declares, and opens his conscience, and look what a
man's words be, such is his heart and mind. For the mouth speaks after the
abundaunce and courage of the heart. Refrain Math. xil.
yourself from all idle words. Use to tell no vayue fables, for idle words
shall be conde^pned. Every man shall give a tekenyng of his words, and at the
day of judgment every ma^s Mah. xil.
words shall stand before his face. Look therefore that your words be full of
grauyte, of sadness, and of good learning and that theybe irreprehensyble.

Look that your tongue be not the cause of yourda^natio^, enuiro^ your mouth
with good watch me^ and seal up your lips. Put y^ clausures of scilence unto
them Look what time ye do speak, and in what hour, and speak in conuenyent
time, hold your peace when time shall require, speak not until ye be spoken
unto. Let a another man's demand opon your mouth, speak but few words, and
pass not your measure, for in many words is syn. A babbeling and Prouet. x.
a chatterynge made, is counted but a fool. For she that is wise, uses few
words. Wisdom causes few words, and it is a great folly to speak many
words. (...) Look therefore ye in words ye pass not your measure Good sister
I pray him to keep your mouth, ye has chose^ you to his spouse and servant.

Oflieng the.xxxj. cha.
Liars are often times the occasyon and cause, that men believe not those which
tell the truth. Man should avoid and exchue all kinds of lies,
notwithstanding there are some of less syn, then some as when a man fayneth
some pretye lie for the wealth of many other. But yet because it is written, the
mouth that lies kylleth Sapi. i.
the soul, perfyte good men have also avoided this manner of lienge, nor would
in no manner of wise defend any man's life by deceyte least y^ by helpyng of
other me^ they should hurt there own souls. But yet I believe y^ such manner of
lyenge is lightly for given. My well-beloved sister in god. I exhort you to flee
asmoche as is possible, all manner of lies, nor willigly ye shall not speak
that is false nor study to lie, notwithstanding ye may do another man pleasure
withal, nor ye shall defend no man with lyenge. There is no lie, that is
just. Lies in every thing are syn. And all that agrees not with truth, is
iniquite. The temporal law punyshed those that are false, and those that are
liars, if every man reprove lieng, if the law of man punish all falsehead,
consider how much more that such liers shall be punished before god, the very
witness Math. x^.
of word and deed, before whom, every man must give account of every idle
word he has spoken, and be punished therefore. Of this thing speaks David
saying. Psalm. v.
Thou shall destrew and condemn al those y^ lie. Shall false witness be
unpunished? no verily. There Pro. xix.
fore good sister fle and avoid all lyeng, and al false co^municacyon, speak
that thing ye is true, nor never lie for no man. Be true, and deceive no man
by lienge, nor say not one thing and do another. I pray god send you the grace
to speak that thing that is true

Of perjury the.xxxij. ca
THe lord says. Swear Math. v
neither by heaven, nor yet by the earth. For heaven is gods seat, and the
earth is his footstool, nor swear not by thy head for thou can not make the
least here of thy head neither white nor black. But let your oath beye ye, nay
nay, for if it be any more it is of evil. And as he that speaks not, can
not lie, so he yt swears not ca^ not be for sworn How craftily so ever a man
does swear yet god yt bears witness every man's co^scye^ce, takes every man's
oath after the mind and intent of him that swears, nor we should not fulfill
yt we have promised if it be noughtes. Good sister will ye ye I show you how ye
shall never be for sworn? never swear. For if ye swear not, ye shall never
be forsworn. So without swearyng, a man shall never fall into perjury. Leave the
use of Eccle. xxiii
swearyng, for ye custom thereof, brings many a one to perjury, swear by ye,
and by nay. For ye truth has no need of oaths, and faithful and true words
are in the place of a nothe. The holy ghost give you grace to speak and to use
your words moderately, and modestyously.

Of detractyo^ the.xxxiij. cha.
Well-beloved sister harke^ unto my words, and to my exhortacyo^, and consider
well what I say unto you Detraction is a very grievous syn, a grievous vice, a
grievous exclamacyon, and a very grievous crime, every man does reprehe^d
detractio^, every ma^speaketh shame by stau^derous. Every man does dishonor
them, except such as be slauderous and bacbyters, or such as fauer the^, and
take pleasure in them, and Dauyd Psalm. c.
says. I did persecute him y^ secretly bacbited and slaundered his neighbor.
There is nothing more haynus then detraction.

Detractours bark as dogs do, and as dogs do bite those y^ pass by, so
these detractours and batbyters do gnaw and byte there neighbors good name and
fame Therefore good sister, remove this slau^derous vice of detractio^ from your
tongue. Gnawe at no man's living, reprehe^d nor hurt no ma^s living. Defyle not
your mouth with no another ma^s iniquite, bacbyte not the syn^er, but have
co^passyo^ upon him, and fear that thing in your self, that ye reprove in
another, and amend that thing in your self, that ye reprove in another, and
look that ye be as diligent to correct and to amend your self, as ye be to
correct and to reprove other. And when ye intend to slander another man,
look well upon your self, and first or ever ye backebyte or slander any other
man reprove your own mysliuyng. For if ye look well upon your self, ye
shall never hurt nor yet slander no another man.

Therefore take good head that with all dylygence ye reform your own self,
and amend your own evil demeanoure. Listen not to these detractours, nor
give no ear to these whysperers and mutterers. For he that slaundereth a man,
and he that harkeneth unto him, are in like fault These detractours are never
like to come to heaven, that virgyn that intends to come to everlasting joy,
must slander no person.

O venerable virgyn, if ye remove your hearing from there detractours and
common bacbyters, and refrain your tongue from all evil and uncleanly
co^munycacyo^, ye (as I have said before) shall be counted among the prudent
and wise virgyns.

Of envy the.xxxiiij. ca
THe enuyous man is Sapi. li.
a member of the devil By whose envy death came i^to y^ world envy consumes
clean away all the branches of virtue. Envy through his pesty ferus heat,
deourneth all goodness envy is the mothe, and the worm y^ co^sumeth and
destroys the soul, envy hurts it self sooner the^ any other man. Envy
gnaweth and byteth it self much sooner, the^ any other. Envy byteth his own
master first of al, envy co^sumeth a man's senses and understanding. It burns
and wastes his breast. It teareth his soul, and as a pestiferus thing, it
pearseth and runs through ma^s heart. And therefore goodness must with stand
envy, and charity must be prepared against it.

Good sister look ye never be sorry of another man's virtue, nor of no another
ma^s, perfyte, torment not your self, y^ your neighbor does prosper, there is
no virtue but y^ envy hates it, and is clean against it. And there is nothing
(except misery) but y^ envy is as an aduersate to it, why so? For noma^ hates
y^ wretched, y^ virgyn yt desires to inhabit heaven, must envy nor hate no
person, the virgin y^ desires to go to the marriage with christ Jesus, must not
be sorrowful of another man's promocion and honor. Dear sister I beseech and
pray almightye god, to cleanse and to purifye your heart and mind from al
maliciousness and envy, to the^tent ye may serve him in all pureness and
clenlynesse of life.

Of anger the.xxxv. cha.
HOnest virgyn harken Pro. xv.
unto Salomo^s words. A ge^tyl and a louly answer, breketh anger. And hastye
words make anger and debate, and again he says. Sweet and ge^tyll words do
mitygate anger, and encrece fre^des. The more Prouet. xv
that a man is vnpacie^t y^ more me^ do judge him to lack wisdom. By anger,
y^ eye of the heart is troubeled, by anger wise me^ lose there wisdo^e. By
anger me^ fall be side the^ self. Many me^ are sone angery and sone pacifyed and
plesed. Some there be yt are very slow to anger, and very hard to be pacy fyed
again. Some other there are which are sone angery, and very hard to be
pleased, but yet better is he y^ is sone angry and soon pleased, the^ he, yt
will belong or ever he be angarde, and long or he be pleased. Dear sister I
pray you harke^ unto. s. James words James, i.
sayng. Let every man be (says. s James) hasty and dilligent to here, and
tardius to speak, and slow to anger, why so? For ye anger of man does not
effectuously cause y^ justice of god, nor ye anger of a virgyn can not work
after his justice a virgyn that should be y^ temple of almyghtye god, should in
no manner of wise be angery, it is against al good honest, that the spouse of
god should frete and be angery. A virgyn y^ which prepares in her heart a
dwelling place for god, should enforce her self to expel and eiecte all
anger from her heart and mind. A virgyn y^ desires to come to GOd, and to his
celestial chamber should avoid from her heart all anger. Good sister if anger
prevent you refrain it, if it take you suddenly, mitigate and appayse it. Coule
your furiousnes, and your inding nacio^, bridle in all manner of mocyons of
anger. If ye can not avoid anger, or swage it, yet let it not cast you in to
a furye, or in to much hastiness or iudyngnatyon, let not the son goo
Ephesi. iiil
down upon your anger, that is, be not long angrye nor contynewe not in anger.

Of hatred. the.xxxvi. Cha.
HOnest virgi harken what I shall say. Hatred does separate a man from y^
kingdom of heaven. Hatred remoueth a man from paradyse. Hatred does draw a man
from heaven. Hatred another by passion nor by merterdome nor yet by effucion of
blood can be defaced pourged or wasshyd away. We should not hate man but the
vice of man, he that hate the his Psa. ix viii
brother is a murderer. He y^ hates his brother is i^ darkness. He loves not
god yt hates man Their is as great difference be John^. iii,
twyxt anger and hatred, as there John^. il.
is betwyxt a rish and a great beme for hatred is an old roted anger, by anger
the eye of y^ heart is troubled, but by hatred y^ joy of the heart is utterly
extyncte and put out. Well-beloved sister hark unto my words. If so be ye have
angerde your friend make him by and by amends, if ye have offended him, do
penance before him, and if ye have slau^derde or put any man to rebuke, desire
him to forgive you and make have to be reconciled, sleep not until ye come to
satisfaction rest not until ye be set at one, if your enemy do fall, rejoice
not there at, nor be not glade of his death, nor yet of his mysfortune lest
parauenture like fortune chance unto you, and lest that god turn his anger
upon you, take a pleasure to be sorry for those, y^ are i^ affliction, and
misfortune, have co^passyon upon other me^nes pouerte and misery, be heavy for
other me^nes tribulation, weep with those Rome. xii.
y^ weep. Good sister be not hard hearted, revenge not your self upon him, yt
has done you dyspleasure. Forgive ye god may forgive you, for if ye forgive
not, ye shall not find nor yet have forgiveness, exclude al hatred Luke. vi.
out of your heart, and beware hatred never remain in you, or in your mind.
My good sister, god send you his delectyon, and the love of your neighbor.

Of pride. the.xxxvii. cha.
Pride is the beginning and Eccle. (...)
the rote of al evil, ye proud man is odius, and hated both of god and man,
the proud man is lykened to the devil, pride and couytous are under such a
fassion one evil, that pride can not be without couytousnes, nor couytousnes
without pride, the devil by pride said. I will asce^de in Isai. xiiii.
to heaven, but Christ with great humilyte said, My soul is humilyated Psalm.
xliii.
unto duste, the devil by pride said, I will be like god above, Christ by
humylyte was obedye^t to his father unto death the devil through pride was
thruste in to hell, and Christ by hu Phill. ii.
mylyte exalted to heaven. What other thing is sin, but the co^tempte of god,
whereby we regard not but despise his commandments. O dear sister if our
long watchynges, out prayer, our charytable deeds, and al our labor and
pain we take, end with pride, god reputeth it as nothing. Therefore extend
not the wings of pride, nor lift not up his feathers, why so? For pride has
deposed the angels, and ouetrhrowe^ the mighty, god has dejected the proud,
and does resyst the^, and gives his grace to those that are humble. Also Luke.
i.
good sister, I exhort you to rejoice more in the socyete and feloshyppe of
good men, then in the nobylytye of your stock or lynage, and pray you to
rejoice more in the company of virtuous and poor men, the^ in the nobylytye of
your rich and abundant kynsfolke, Wherefore? For god makethe Romans ii.
no dyffere^ce nor yet no exceptyon of persons, and he that dyspiseth the
poor, does god in iure, he that dyspyseth the poor man rebukes his maker.
Good sister god send you profounde humilyte and true charity.

Of vain glory. the.xxviii. Chapt.
WE should esche we and avoid vain glory as well in deed, as i^ word. Wherefore
good sister, look well upon your self, and appropryate nothing that is in you,
to your self, but only your misdeeds and sin. Keep your self from vain
glory, take heed ye desire not vain glory, glorifye not your self, bost not
your self, presume nothing of your self, life not up your self with pride,
ascriue nothing to your self that good is. Gloryfy your self of no good
work, despise y^ laud and praise of man, enquere not whether any man praise
or disprayse you, let not worldly laud or praise deceive you, nor dispraise
break or disco^fort you, he that desires not to be lauded sets by no
co^timelious words nor be no injury, all such virgis as do glorifye the^ self
of their good works before man, have no oil in their vessels, for through y^
desire and appetite of vain glory, they lose their rewards, the which they
trusted to have had of god They should daily behold and mark their sinful
fylthynes and fragylytie, and despise all vain glory, and be right sorye
that they have lost their good works, y^ which they did for vayn glory, of
the which thige y^ lord says. Ueryly says he, Math. vi
they have receued their reward y^ virtues of good me^ through the desire of
vain glory, are submytted unto the devil. As king Ezechyas, the which moved
with pride, showed all his tresour i. Reg. xx.
and riches to the Caldens, and therefore the prophet brought hi^ word he
should lose them. And the pharyse y^ came to ye church to pray, lost his good
deeds, because that by iactance and vain glory, he showed and opened the^.
Luke. xvlii
And as the egle comes from above to seek her food, so man through the
appetyde of vain glory comes from the heyght of good co^uersacyon to these
in feryor things. My well-beloved sister, set not your conscience in a another
man's tongue, let a another man praise you, but in no manner of wise praise not
your self, be your own judge, and judge your self by your own judgment,
and be no another man's. For there is no man yt knows you and your conscience
so well as you your self. Good sester will ye that I show you, how ye may
increase in all virtue? Ye good brother, and I pray you show me: harken then
unto me, If ye will increase your virtues, look ye disclose the^ not, but hyde
the^ for fear of elatyon, hyde your good works for fear of arroga^ce,
evermore fly to be seen, or esteemed such as in very deed ye be, hyde your
virtue, and open your mysfautes, and y^ vices of your heart and mind. And if ye
ever did well or said well, never show it in the presence of other, open
inco^tynently your evil thoughts, for sin detectyd with humilite and
displeasau^ce is lightly pardoned and forgyue^, sin does increase by keeping
i^, and hydi^g thereof, for if it be cloked of a little it waxes great, if it be
manifestid and showed out it decreaseth, and again, if it be kept in, it
increasethe, whenne virtue is cloked in, then it augmenteth and increasethe if
it come abroad and be known, it vanishes away and decreaseth. Virtue
through vain glory comes to naughtes but if it be hydde^, and with humilite
kept in. it augmenteth meruelously. Wherefore good sister as cryue your
counsel and all your acts to god, and i^ al your operatio^s and works call
upon god for help and ascryue al thing to y^ gift and grace of god, nor
appropriate nothing to your own merits, presume nothing upon your virtue.
Harke^ good sister unto the words of y^ apostle, he that glorifyeth, should
glorify in god. 2. Cor. x.
Therefore let all your glorify cacyon and laud be in your spouse Christ Jesus.

Of humilyte the.xxxix. cha.
ODrare sister harke^ unto your spouse Christ Jesus, the which says in his
gospel. Learn of me for I am meke and humble of heart, Math. xi.
good sister humilyate yourself under the mighty hand of god, y^ i^ time of
tribulacyo^ he may ex iPeter. v,
alte you and help you, y^ co^scye^ce of a virgi^ should evermore be humble and
heavy, yt be humilite it may be preserved from pride, and by heuines from all
lasciuyusnes and wantonness, humylyte is the most sovereign virtue a vyrgyn ca^
have, pride is a very evil vice and a myscheuous, a vyrgyn that is humble (not
wtsta^dyng she be but evil decked) before god is glorious in virtue, but the
proud and stately virgyn (not wtstanding in the sight of man she be good and
well besene) yet in gods sight, she is but vile and reproved, why so? For the
soul of the just man, is gods seat, and he says, upon whom should I rest,
but on Esai. 66.
ly upon him, that is humble, quiet, and feryng my words? Good sister be
ha^ble and ground your self upon humylyte, be the lest of al other, never
prefer your self above other, repute not your self to be superyour to
other, but thike all other to be above you, for y^ more higher ye be, so much
the more, ye ought to humilitate your self in all thing, ye shall come to the
glory, if ye keep humylyte, Eccle. iii.
and the more humble and meke that ye show your self, y^ more higher shall be
your glory, come down, that ye may ascede, hymylyate your self that ye may
be exalted. Exalte not your self, lest ye be humilyated and deposed. For it is
written, who Luke. xilii.
so humilyateth and mekethe him self, shall be elevated and exalted, and he that
exalts him self, shall be humylyated and brought low, the higher a man does
fall the more grievous is his fall, humilytye knows not what falling means,
humilyte is subject to no ruin. O good virgi Philip. ii.
remember yt god came very mekely i^ to this world, and that he humylyated hi^
self in form of a servant, and was obedient to his father unto does. Good
sister walk and follow his example, and fotesteppes, be vile, despised,
abiecte, and displesau^t in your own sight, for he yt judges him self here
to be vile, in the sight of god he shall be hyghly esteemed, he that hates him
self in dyspleasure, shall please almighty god hyghly. O drare sister, be
humble and low in your own conceit and presence, that ye may be made great
and high in the presence of god almighty, how much ye less ye esteem your
self, so much the more shall god esteem you. If ye have profou^de and perfyte
humilytye, ye shall (being assocyated with the wise vyrgyns) rejoice in the
eternal blys of heaven.

Of pacyence. the.xl. cha.
THe lord says, blessed be Math. v,
they that live peacibly, for they shall be named the Luke. vi.
children of god. Then good sister, if they ye live in rest and peace be
blessid, and called the children of god, pacyence is very necessary for you,
pacye^ce is a perfyte thing of it self, a pacie^t virgyn is rekened to be
wise, and she that is impacie^t and testy, is counted a fool, ye may (if ye so
will) be marterde without any sword, that is, if ye keep true pacye^ce. A pacyent
person, shall come to the company of angels, but the enuyous and the
impacyent shall be partycypant and part taker with the deuel, the peacyble man
auoydeth all dyscorde, and the impacie^t styreth up strife and debate, a meke
vyrgyn is content to take and to suffer injury, a pacyent maid prepares her
heart as a place for god to dwell in. Why so? for Christ Iesusis the very
peace, and is wont to rest Roma, vi.
in peace, the daughter of peace should love peace. O good vyrgi ye should
rather prepare your self to take and to suffer injury the^ to do any, learn
rather to suffer harm, the^ to do harm. Be pacye^t, modestyous, and amiable,
love peace, and be at peace with every man, love every body in charity and
mekenes, and strive to love all other, better then they love you. But yet be
not to light in love, break no frenshyp, be always pacyent in mind, be
ge^tyll, and affable in your words and co^municacion, show your self merry
spryted fle all occasion of debate, despise strife, and live in peace and rest.
And good sister if it be possible be at one with all the world, overcome al
slau^derous iniurys with patience, with the buckler of patience, break y^ darts
of all injury. Hold out the shylde of good conscience against the sharp and
litigius tongue, for as. s. Paul says. ii. Corin. (...).
The witness of good conscience shall be sufficient for you. Ye are well armed
with virtue if ye hurt not him, yt burieth you, ye are worthy of great glory,
if ye forgive him, and let him go, whom ye may displese The piece of god which
passes al understanding, defend your heart and soul from all parel and
danger.

Of concord the xli. ca.
THere are six things (says the lord) Pro. vi
that my soul hates and the seventh is, that I detest and abhor, that is, a
man yt sows dyscorde among his brethren, he is acursed that sows dyscorde
among gods servants, he does Ephe. ii
greatly against god, yt breaks peace and co^corde. And he that causes
dyscorde among gods servants does christ great injury, why so? For christ
is our peace, y^ which has made of two things one, y^ is the angels, and man
to be of one accord. The concord of evil me^, is y^ contrariete of good me^.
And as we should desire ye good men might be in peace, so we should desire that
the peace, concord, and unite of evil men might be broken. For concord and
unity to do evil is not laudable.

But concord to do well, to serve GOD, to follow Justice, is laudable. And the
congregacyons and coming together of Christen people into the church is to
serve god in one spirit, and in one will. For so should they do, that inhabyte
gods house For it preuayleth not to be together, if our wylles be not al one,
for GOD loves much better the humilyte of the will, then the humilite of the
place. We be many together in one house, of diverse manners, of diverse hearts, of
diverse minds, al these thiges must agree in one intencyon, in one mind, and
one love in god.

Therefore we must be all of one mind, of one will, to serve god, and to love
him with all our hearts, with all your souls, and our neighbor as our self.
And therefore concord is very necessary for us, for if I follow my will and
pleasure, and you yours, and he his, then must there needs be division,
contention and anger, the which things as says paul are works of the
flesh. They ^^la. v.
that do such things, shall never obtain the kingdom of heaven. Bileue me
good sister, all our fasting, praynge and sacrifice pleases not god so much as
does good concord, and therefore he says. Go thy ways first, and Math. v
reco^cyle thy self to thy brother, and then come and offer up thy gift.
Honorable sister the virtue of co^corde is very great, to ward god, without the
which our sacrifyce can not please him.

The sisters demand
TEll me good brother whether the devil be a ferde of any thing.

The brothers answer.
MY worshypful sister, there is nothing yt he fears so much as concord, and
charity, if we give all that ever we have for Gods sake, he fears it not.
For he gets nothing thereby. If we fast he fears it not, for if he never
eath. If we watch he fears it not, for he never slepeth. but if we live in
good concord and charity, he fears it very sore, why so? For then we
observe and keep that thing in earth, that he kept not in heaven. And this is
the cause why men say that our holy mother the church is as fearful and as
terryble to her enemyse, as is a great company Canti. vi.
of me^ of war, well armed and set in good order. For as our enemies be in great
fere, when they sethere adversaries coming against them in good array and
order, so the devil is in great fear, when he sees y^ Christen men be well
armed with virtue, co^corde, and unite. Therefore all we should live together in
good accord, ye is in the church, to overcome the devil. The handmayde of
GOd, that will live in co^corde and tra^quilite must first of all, leave and
cast a way all evil customs, least by her peruersite she put other to rebuke
and shame. Also she must moderate her works and deeds, her mouyng, her
words, and al her life, and after the laws of God agree with all other.

Therefore good sister, I exhort you to live in good accord, and in humilite,
and to revoke all hatred and strife to peace and concord. Use no such words
as may break good agreement and concord.

Of sufferaunce the xlij. chapter.
Dear sister learn modestyusnesse, and sufferaunce of CHRIST Jesus, and mark
him well, for so doing no man shall put you to heuines he has suffered death
for us al and has left us an example of sufferaunce. He was beaten scourged,
whipte mocked, bespued, naylde to y^ cross, crowned with thorn, and condemned
to be hanged upon the cross, and all this while he held his peace, nor murmurd
not against it. But if any man does us iniure, it is for our sins, our
myscheuousnesse, and sinful living is the cause thereof, for whatsoever does
chance against us, all is for our sins, and we shall y^ better suffer al
such aduersytes, if we consider upon what occasion and for what cause they do
chance unto us. Therefore if a man do you displeasure, speak fair unto him, if
he curse you bless him. if he be angery Romans xii.
with you, speak patiently unto him. Dissolve his furiusnes with ge^tyll words,
overcome his iniquite with softnes, his malice with goodness and his iniure with
tranquilite. Good sister prepare your self, and be always ready both to good
and evil. And as they chance, so suffer and bear them, suffer both
prosperity and aduersyte, and as they chance take the^ mekely, and set not by
iniurius nor by co^tumelyus reproaches, for by despysyng of such iniurius
words, ye shall overcome all der^sion, and by dissembulyng of such things,
ye shall little or nothing regard such men's fautes and errors. And
notwithstanding good sister, that men do stir you, provoke you, assail you,
re proche you, and blame you, although they speak iniuryusly unto you and do
you injury, although they provoke you to anger, and do you great wrong, yet
for all that hold you your peace, keep your silence, care not for it dissemble
the matter, answer not to their iniures, speak no crabbed words unto the^,
set aparte all co^tumelius and iniurius words, say nothing, for by holding
your peace ye shall sone over come the^ O christ's spouse, strive against these
worldly greues and wretchedness, be steadfast and strong in all aduersite,
suffer althyng patienly, take it well in worth, and suffer that is commen to
all men.

For he that troubeleth, and he that is troubeled are mortal, and he that does
wrong, and he that suffers wrong shall dye. Believe me good sister. No man
can trouble you, no man can be against you, if god suffered him not, nor the
devil him self has no power upon you, but by acts. xiii^
gods sufferaunce. We must come to heaven by great tribulacio^, yet all the
passions, and adversities of this world are not to be Romans vi(...)
compared to the great glory and joys of heaven It is impossible being a
woman, but nedesye must taste the troubelsumnes, and misery of this world. And
being in this world, we ought to suffer every thing in like manner There is
noman living in this world, but must needs syghe and mourn atsome times, for
this mortal life is full of heaviness, the beginning of this life is waylyng,
and weeping. The child that is now borne, begins his life with weeping. The
child when it comes out of his mothers womb, or ever it laughe, it wayleth
and mourns, worldly tribulacyo^ is very necessary.

The storms of this world are profitable, the more we be tormented and
troubled in this world, the more we be co^fyrmed, and the more we be vexed in
this vale of mysery, the more shall our joy be in heaven. If we be troubled
and punyshed in this world, we shall be, god wyllyng, found pure and without
fault atthe day of judgment.

Of sickness the.xliij. ca
THe lord says. Those that Idoloue Hebre. xii.
I chasten. God does chasten and corrects men in this world, three manner of
ways, he corrects those that are noughtes to their dampnacyon. Those yt he
has chose^ if they do are, to there purgacyon. And those that are good me^, to
y^ augmentacyon of their glory. God punysshed the egiptiens to their
dampnation. Lazarus to his purgacion. And Job, to his probacion. God also at
some time does punish man or ever he syn, and that because he should not syn,
as was saint Paul. The which by the instygacyon of the devil, suffered ii
Corin. xi^
the temptacyon of the flesh. Also God punyssheth man after that he has
trespast, to the^tent he should amend, as he that is delivered to the devil
to be punished in body, for the salvation of his soul. Also it is very ii
Lorin. xii
profitable for those that are welthy and in good health to be troubeled with
sycknes, least that be to much health they take greater pleasure in these
transytore and earthly things, the^ they should do, such bodily health as
causes the soul to be sick is not good But bodily tribulacyon and sycknesse
bringinge a man's soul to salvation is right p^ofytable. The apostle prayseth
the sycknesse of the body, saying. The weker I am in body, y^ more stronger ii.
He. xii.
I am in spirit, A man should never murmur against gods punyshmentes for by
such correctyon he amenth his disordinate life and mislyuynge. But if we would
remember the syns we have displeased God withal, we should suffer the sycknes
of the body much better then we do. A man should not murmr Psalm. c. viii
against GOd, when he visete him with sycknes, why so? For god whose
judgments are just, has judged him to have deserved it. If then in his
sycknes he murmour against gods vt sytacyon, he estemeth the judgment of GOd
to be untrue, and so he provoke God to anger. Nor that thing cannot be
just, that pleases not god the right judge. God does Apoca. iii,
chasten those that he loves, and scourges all such children as he draws
unto him. And takes no less pleasure in them, then does the father in his
children. God in this life does spare and is very gentle to sinners, and not
to those that are good men. But in another world he does not so. For there he
does spare and uphold the just, and sharply correct the unjust and mysdoer.
Dear sister dolor and heuines is common to all men. There is no man with out
sorrow in this world. God does ever more correct and chaste^ those he would
should be saved. Good sister be not moved, nor chafe not in your sycknesse. But
when ye be sick, tha^k god thereof and rayther desire soul health, the^ bodily
health. For the aduersites of ye flesh, is ye remedy of y^ soul, Sickness
wou^deth and hurts the body but it curith the soul, sickness consumethe vice,
syckenes couleth and que^cheth the heat of al bodily lust, by syckenes a man
is proved, and not dystrude, gold is proved by fire, pourge your self in the
chymney of tribulatyo^, that ye may be and appear un defiled, suffer to be
burnt with the fire of persecutyo^, y^ ye may appear immaculate and pure, for all
these things that ye suffer are for your probacio^. Therefore my well-beloved
sister in god, murmour not in your syckenes, blaspheme not, nor ye shall not
say. Why do I suffer all this trybulacio^, why does god punish me? Good
brother I pray you tell me what I should say when I am sick and in tribulatyo^,
and how I should accuse my self. Dear sister accuse yourself after this form
and manner, I have sinde and done a mysse, I am not punyshed as I have deserved,
I perceive not that god takes egall ve^geau^ce upon my sins, I feel yt I am
gentlier entreated the^ I have deserved, my tribulatyo^ is much less, then is
my fault, my pain is nothing in co^paryson of my sins, my torments are
nothing like my myslyuyng. O good sister, will ye be pourged of your sins?
then in trybulacyo^ and pain accuse your self, and extolle the justice of god,
it is suffycye^t for your purgacyo^, if ye ascriue your punysheme^t and pain
to gods justice, if ye humlye and mekely gloryfye god, for y^ syckenes and
trouble he senteth you, for god does correct you with the scurge of pytyfull
castigacton, he does use very gentle correctyon, and he that lettynge you
vnchasted did despise you and cast you of, does now correctynge you, desire
ye should return unto him again. O honest vyrgyn, think and call all
worldly torments to your mind, and all manner of pain all manner of
crudelytye and tyranny, all oppressyon, all heaviness, and compayre me all these
things to the pain of hell and ye shall find that your pain is very easy
and light. Good sister if ye fear any pain, fear the pains of hell. For the
pains of this world are temporal, and the pains of hell eternal, if a man
desceyse and dye i^ these pains the pain remaynethe here, but if he be in the
pains of hell, they succeed still, and continue for evermore. Ueryly if ye
fortune to amend and return to goodness, the^ all the pains and tribulation
that ye suffered were your amendme^t, for trybulatyo^ does lose him that is
converted from sin. These present and worldly troubles are as a purgacyon to
him that is amended, he that is tormented and chasted in this world, is
delivered in a another but they that are not chastened nor corrected here, are
in danger to be dampened both te^porally and eternally. For they are first
judged in this world and finally in a another for evermore, and such have
double pain and da^pnacyo^, they are twysevexed and trouled, for they are here
judged and troubled, and hereafter i^ perpetual pain. So it follows the^, y^
it is gods hand y^ does punish you, and his indyngnacyo^ y^ does vex you,
and being angry with you, he has commanded ye should suffer such torment and
trybulacyo^. That ye are brought low by syckenes, y^ ye are tormented with
the sharp te^ptacyo^s of y^ flesh, that ye are vexed with sorrow, and with the
passyo^s of the mind, that ye are troubled with evil spirytes, all this the
justice of god does send you for your sins, your own wepens fyghteth
against you, ye are wounded with your own arrows, ye are hurt with your own
da^te, for that, that has caused you to trespass does trouble and vex you, and
because ye have followed your bodylye lust, ye are tormented in your body ye
complain of that thing, that ye trespaste with all. Good sister ye are
tormented in your body, because ye have synde with the body, ye are troubled i^
that thing, that has been the cause of your trybulacyon, look by what thing
ye fell to sin, in the self ye suffer pain and tormente. O good Christ's
spouse ye are justly punished, ye are justly scourged, and justly conde^pned,
the pain and torments ye are in, do justly chasten you.

Of couitousnes, xliiii. cha
THe Lord says in Luke. xii.
his gospel, fly from all couytousnes, for the life of man is not in the
abundaunce of those things that he possesses upon earth. And saint Paul
Ephe. (...).
says. Let no fornycacyon, no immundycyte, nor yet no couytousnes, be spoken
of among you, And again he says, such as are fornycators, uncleanly of life,
or couytous, shall not be part takers of the kingdom of heaven, and of this
thing says Solomon. He that follows couitousnes, Prouer. xv
does trouble his house, the couytous shall never be satisfied with money, he
that louethe riches, shall never have profit be the^, there is nothing worse,
Eccle. (...).
the^ to love money, for his soul y^ loves money, is evermore ready to be
sold, and as couytousnes does drowe^ a man in hell, so does almous deed done
with lyberalyte, eleuateth and bri^gth man to heaven. The couytous man is lykened
to hell, for as hell is never satysfyed, no more is the auarycyous man, and the
more that he that has the dropsy does dri^ke, the more he may, so y^ more that
the couytous man gettethe the more he desyrethe. Auarycyousnes and couytousnes
are systers, and pride is their mother, for pride was never without
auarycyousnes, nor auaryce wtoute couytousnes. Good sister let not yourhandes
be ready to take and receive, but rather redye to give. I would ye should delight
more in gyuyng the^ in taking, it is a greater virtue and much ^cia. xx.
better to give the^ to take. Good sister take heed that auaryce fasten not her
roots in you, look there be no spot or smacke of couytousnes in you, if for
Christ sake ye utterly despise al worldly things, ye shall rejoice eternally
with him in heaven.

Of cupidyte the.xiv. cha.
CUpidyte is the root of all i. Timo. vi.
myschefe, no man can perfytely take upon him to make spirytuall war,
without he tame and refrain al bodyly pleasure, the soul of man can not be
set nor given to conte^p lacyon, if it be entangled with cupidyte and the
desire of transytory and worldly things, the eye of the soul can not behold
celesty all things, if the dust of earthlye cupidyte do blind it, cupidyte is
a grievous sin, and the matter and very occasion of all other crimes, Wherefore
it is no marvel if they be tormented with the fire of hell, that i^ this world
would not quench the flayme of their cupydyte. Good sister not with sta^dyng ye
have no money, yet that shall nothing prevail you if ye be desirous thereof. It
preuayleth not to be bare, if a man be desirous of goodly array, Judas through
cupydyte sold Christ, we came bare in to the world, and shall depart from
hence bare, why should we the^ covet or desire these worldly and Job (...).
tra^sytorye things? And if we know yt the goods of the world shall perisshe
and come to noughtes, why do we love the^ so effectuouslye? If we love these
transytory things more then reason requires, we offend greatly. Therefore
good sister consider the course and breuenes of your time, and ye shall
manyfestlye know and perceive, that a very little thing will serve you, If
cupydyte (as I have said before) be the rote of all other myschefe, it is
necessary ye expel it, lest it be the occasyon of other, let there be no
evil, nor no perverse cupydytye i^ you, the good lord give you of his grace to
despise for his love only, the prosperyte of the world and not to fear the
aduersytes thereof.

Of poverty the.xlvi. Chapi.
BLessed be they that Math. v. Luke. vi.
are poor in spirit, for the kingdom of heaven is theyrs. There are many
power me^, whose poverty makes the^ rather wretched the^ blessed, because
they suffer nor take not their poverty pacye^tly for gods sake, but full
sore against their will, other there be, that pacye^tly do suffer their
pouerte for gods sake, and through their meke sufferau^ce are blessed, of y^
which it is wryte^, blessed at they y^ ar pore in spirit. Ye have hard Math.
v.
good sister of y^ tribulacyo^ and pacyence of Job. Wherefore I exhort you, to
take heed that another worldly trybulacyon do oppress you, nor prosperyte
exalte you, ye read that y^ patryarches were very rich of substance, and
meruaylous humble and meke of stomach, such a one was Abraham, that said. I
will speak to my lord god, which I, am but Gene. xviii.
earth and ashes. So my good sister, if in your wealth and woo ye give thanks
unto almyghtye god, ye shall believe and well perceive that the felycyte of this
te^porall life vanysheth away as smoke and comes to nothing, for saint
Paul says, If we trust only upon goods reward in i. ^omi. xv
this world, we are the most wretched of all other, the which take y^ fruycyo^
of their goods here, and we great pain and torment. Christ Jesus promysyng us
perpetual life, taught us to despise gold and al other gifts, and because we
should not fere hunger, he fasted forty days, because we should Math. iiii.
not fear to be bare, he commanded his discyples they should Luke. iii.
have but one cote, because we should not fear trybulacion, he suffered great
trybulacyon. And because we should not fere death he suffered death for us. All
these worldly things, are but fleshly co^cuptscence, the co^cupisce^ce of the
eyes, and wordly ambition, i. John. ii.
and the world shall perysshe with all his concupiscence. Therefore good sister
let us not love these wordly things lost we peryshe with the^. King Dauyd was
a mighty prince, and notwithstanding he had great treasoure, and ruled his
people with strong hand, yet he knowledge and showed him self to be full of
humilite, saying, I am but poor, and i^ co^mmual labor. And again Psa 87.
he says, I am poor and i^ great necessite. And again, I am but Psalm. 28.
as a poor laboring man, in this world, and a pilgrim as my fore fathers
have been before me. Good sister let not the flattery of this transytory world
delight and please you, take no pleasure in this worldely co^modite, nor rejoice
not i^ worldly lucre, nor be not moved with earthly losses. For it is written,
If riches come plentifully and abundantly unto you, set not Psalm. lxi.
your heart nor your mind upon them, for if man be in amors and love with
them, he shall lose them with great pain and sorrow. O Christ's spouse lysten
unto me, he (whom heaven and earth does serve) made him self, pore for our
sakes. Why so? that by his pouertye he might inryche us. Therefore good vyrgyn
follow y^ way of Christ Jesus and leave not of to follow his footsteps for
without doubt, if ye follow him, ye shall come to the everlasting kingdom of
heaven. Behold good sister the virginite and pouerte of our blessed lady the
which was so in gods favor, that she by hi^ deseruyd to be his mother, and
yet at y^ time of. Christ's birth she was i^ such pouerte, yt she had another
mydwife, nor yet maid to help her, her goods were so skarce, that she was
feign to lay her dear child i^ a crybbe, and yet not with standing her husband
Iosephe was a very good and a iustma^, yet through pouerte he was fayn to
labor for his living. For it Luke. ii.
is written, that he was a carpe^ter. Also we read of the holy apostles yt they
served god in great hunger and thyrste of y^ which thing saint paul says. In
hunger and ii, Corin. xi
thryste, in fasting, in cold, barenes and great watch, ye have many
examples, by y^ which ye may learn to despise these worldly riches, and desire
celestial. For such i. The. (...)
as covet to be rych and abu^dant in this world, do fall into many te^ptacions,
and in to many gi^nes, and snares of the devil, and in to such hurtful
desires, as does bring the^ to everlasting da^natio^. But they y^ wyllyngly
and perfytely trust to obtain celestial riches, set little by worldly
substance, for wylfulpouerte, brings a man to heaven. We come not into this
world to live in pleasure. But that by great watch, fasting, prayng, and
feyghtyng against our aduersare the devil, we may by the aid of god come to
the everlasting bliss of heaven. And therefore we come bare into the world,
and are borne bare to y^ font of bapteme, that we in like manner may come Job. i
bare and without any impedyme^t to joy everlasting. O what a shame, and how
inco^uenient a thing were it, for man y^ comes bare in to y^ earth, to enter
in to heaven with great treasure and riches? Yt is much more easy to nedel a
gabell of a ship, the^ for a rich ^u^e. xviii
man to come to heaven. Yt were better to have to little, the^ to much He is to
auaricius ye god ca^ not content and satisfye. Good sister if we suffer for
gods sake, hunger thryste, and barenes in this world we shall be with him for
evermore in his per petual kingdom of bliss.

Of murmuracion the rlvij. cha.
THe ma^tion and dwelli^g place of our heart, is sanctified by the grace of
almyghtye god, and by the i^habitacio^ of y^ holy ghost, yt is, when charity,
peace, goodness, humilite, concord with other like virtues, are in us.

These are our riches, yt is good manners and virtue are our riches. But if we
begin to strive and to murmur in co^tinent we lose these spiritual virtues,
and remain clear without them. Why so? For virtue and vice can not dwell
together. And a little dow i. Corni. (...)
marthe a great deal of leuent.

And therefore every good servant of OOD, should thynk and reuolue in his
mind how grievously he offe^deth that murmurth for these worldly gooddes, for
he i^poueresheth hi self of that he should be rich of. Why what is our riches?
Virtue, the^ if we murmour either for meal or drynk, or for any other thing we
lose virtue, for murmuracio^ is a haynus and a grievous syn, and s. Gregore
says. That he that murmurthe, shall never come Eccle. xxiii
to heaven. No man yt murmurth, shall obtain the celestial court of heaven, the
heart and mind of a unwise man is compared to y^ cart whele, that caryeth hay,
and murmurth, of this co^dicio^ are many chryste^ men and whome^, the which
being subject and obedient to carnal desire, never cease to mutter Therefore
good sister s. paul's counsel is very necessary, sayng Ye shall not murmour as
some ii. Corin. x.
of the children of Israel did in wilderness to their destruction So then it
is a very dau^gerus i. Corin. (...)
thing to murmur. Least we perysh here, as they did in wyldernes. Let us
therefore charm and tempour our tongues, y^ in time to come we misfare not, as
they did in this world, let us not murmur, lest we suffer i^ soul, yt they
suffered in body. And S, Paul i. Corni. (...)
giuyng us counsel, says. Let us not te^pte god, as some of the^ did the
which were destrued with serpe^tes, he te^pthe God that murmurthe other for meat
or drynk psalm.. lviii
or cloth. And again it is written. They mourmurde in their tabernacles, and
would not harken Psalm. c. v
to gods saying. He tempthe god that with murmuracio^ requires y^ is
superfluus. They were destrued with serpe^tes, why so? By cause they were full of
venym and poyse^ so there tongues y^ murmur are infected with deuyllysh poison
and. s. James says, the tongue is a shrode and a unquiet thing, and full
James. iii.
of deadly poiso^, and therefore we should exchue al murmuracyon and beware y^
we be not smytten and that we perish not by such deuellyshe poison. Well-beloved
sister harke^ what god says. I woldye should neither care for food nor yet
for clothyng sayng these Math. v,
and like words, what meat shall we eat, or where with shall we be clothed? As
though he would say more plainly. God y^ has given you life, will, puyde ye
shall lack neither meat, nor yet cloth to sustain your bodes withal. He says
also. Behold the birds of the air, the which neither so we nor thresh, nor
make no manner of provision, and yet God does nourysh the^, that is, if god
nourysh the poor bird, the which is mortal, how much more dilyge^tly shall
he nourysh man and his soul the which is immortal, and to whom he has
promised the kingdom of heaven. And again he says. Consider and look how y^
goodly lyles grow, they neither spyn nor card, and yet y^ lord does clothe
them. How much more shall he clothe you his servants and handmaydes. God will
never undo his servants for lack of meat drink or cloth. Ferther more he
says. Seek for y^ king dome of heaven and his Justice, and ye Math. vi.
shall lack nothing of al these for said things, as though he would say,
serve God in all melody and fear, and he shall minyster unto you, all that
shall be necessary, Psalm. xxxiii
for they that seek god, shall lack nothing.

Of prayer the.xlviij. ca
HArke^ unto my words good sister. To pray or necessite compels man, is
called prouydence, to pray at times appointed is called obedience. But to let
pass the time of prayer is called negligence. The more profitable y^ prayer
is, the more often it should be used. The lord says. Look what soever ye
demand Mathe. ix.
by prayer being in good steadfast bylyue, ye shall have it. And S. paul
exhorts us to pray (...). v.
continually. And. s. James says That the continual prayer of a James. v.
Just man, is much worth. Good sister or ever ye begin to pray, prepayre your
heart unto it, and be not as one y^ would te^pte god. Prepayre your self to
prayer, and open your heart and conscience, that ye may have cause to obtain
y^ more of his grace. Ama^ prays truly when word and heart accords
together. And y^ sooner ye the sinful man leueth his misdoing, the sooner is his
prayer hard.

A prayer must be spoken and pronounced with heart and not with thy lyppes only,
and it is better to pray under silence with heart, the^ in word with out good
inte^cio^. Amans prayer is the^ most purest, when it is not corrupt with
superfluus thoughts, such men's minds are far from god, whose prayers are
troubeled with worldly busynes. Prayer is let from his purpose two manner of
ways. The first is, when man intends not to leave his synful living. The
second is, when man will not forgive such msfautes and injuries as has been
done unto him. A man's soul and mind is the^ celestial and wholly in the
meditacyo^ of god, when it is not disturbed nor troubeled with worldly works and
busynesses When a man does pray, he calls the holy ghost unto him, after
whose coming al such deuellysh te^ptacyo^ as do vex and trouble his mind
vanissheth away, for the devil can not abide the presence of y^ holy ghost. He
y^ is hurt, must pray continually for those yt did hurt hi^, or else he is in
great defaute and syn. For as the surge^ or medecyn cannot remedy the wound as
long as their is hyerne in it, so y^ prayer of him y^ bears maliee does
profet hi^ little Luke. xviii.
or nothing. And he does syn, y^ in his prayer to GOd does repete and open his
good deeds, as did y^ pharise laudi^g hi^ self more then god of his good deeds
O good sis^ pray to god continually with tears, pray night and day, cease not
from prayer. Be evermore well armyd with harnis made of good prayer, Let prayer
never fall from your mouth, be often in prayer, weep and wayle continually.
Rysevp in the night to pray, watch and pray, watch al night in prayer, take a
little nap and then pray again For continual prayer puts a way all
deuyllyshe te^ptacyon. Quotidiane and daily prayer overcomes y^ deuelles
darts and al his malice, prayer is the first and cheyfest virtue against the
assauttes of the wicked fend and his te^ptacyo^s oration and prayer does
overcome all ye temptacyons of our gostly enemy, it sermou^teth and overcomes
al evil spirytes. Good syst let your prayer be pure and clean, and I exhort
you to pray for those yt be good, yt they may co^tinew in their goodness And
for those y^ are noughtes, yt they may turn fro^theyr noughtinesto goodness.
Pray for your fre^des and for your ennemies, and for all christen souls.

Of holy lesson the xlix. cha
BY prayer we be purified from al syn. By good lessons we be taught what we
should do, both are good. But yet it is better to pray, the^ to read. For
when we pray, we speak to god, when we read, god speaks to us Good syst if ye
desire to be co^tynually with god, be always prayenge and redi^ge for divine
lesson, is very necessary and profitable. By such lessons we learn what we
should do, what we should exchew, and where to we should tend, of this thing
says David. The word of god is as a lantern for my fete, y^ is, for my
affections. psalm. c. xiiii
And as a light to my foot patthes and going, by divine lesson a ma^s
vndersta^dng is increased^ good lesso^s do instruct man to prayer and good
works, good lessons do inform both life active and co^templatyue. And
therefore it is written. Blessed is he y^ does Eccle. xiiii.
thynk both day and night upon the law of god. Prayer and good lessons are y^
wepe^s, with the which y^ devil is over co^med, and the instruments, be y^ which
me^ co^ to eternal beatitude. By prayer and lesson vice is expelled and virtue
in ma^^ soul i^cresed. The hand maid of god, should continually pray and
read. For it is written. I shall never Psalm. c. x viii
be co^fou^ded, if I consider welthy commandments. Therefore my well-beloved
syst in god, pray often, and co^tynew in the meditacio^ of holy scripture, by
dilygent in redynge of Gods laws. Use your self to read scripture. Let it
be your daily lesson, your daily meditacio^. For such holy and devout lessons
remove the mind from worldly vanite, and augme^teth the understanding, such
deuyne lesso^s do tech man what he should do, what he should exchue and fly, ye
shall profit greatly if ye follow y^ ye read. I pray y^ lord to open your heart i^
his laws and commandments

Of works the.l. cha.
THe prophet Ieremias says. Three. ii.
Let us lift up our hearts with our hands to god. He y^ prays and labors
does lift up his heart and his hands to god. But he y^ prays and labors
not, lift up his heart to god but not his hands And he y^ labors and
prays not lifts up his hands to god but not his heart. Wherefore good syst
it is very necessary y^ we lift up our hearts by prayer, and our hands by good
operacio^ and works why so? Least y^ we be rep^he^ded to be negligent in
obserui^g and kepi^g of gods commandments, thi^ki^g to optaine by only
prayer, or by onl^ labut y^ thing y^ we demand and desire, of this says s.
Paul. i.. These. iii
He y^ will not labor shall not eat ye should evermore pray, read, or labur, lest
peradue^tur ye spirit of fornicacyon deceive your Idle mind al fleshly and
carnal desire is ouercomde by labor. O welbe loved sister deuyde your time in
three parts, in the fyrstye shall pray, in the second ye shall read, and in the
third ye shall labor and work. King Salomo^ through Idilnesse wrapped him
self in to iii. ^^g. xi
diverse kinds of fornication, and through the great and fervent desire he had
there unto, he worshypped Idolles. Good sister these three things prayer,
lesson and labor, are very necessary. For by prayer we be pourged, by devine
lesson, we be instructed, and by labor and works we be beatifyed and blessed.
As it is written.

Thou shall eat y^ laboururs of thy hands, y^ shall be blessed and well Psalm. c.
xxvii
y^ shall be. And it at any time ye do leave of reding, the^ to avoid ydelnes,
ye shall labor for idelnes is enmy to the soul, the devil does very esely
deceive those that he finds idle. O Christ's spouse, beware lest when he
shall behold and enquire of other men's doings, that he find nothi^ge i^ you,
he may accuse you of. And therefore I exhort you, that ye be never idle, and
pray god that ye may show al other ye love of god, not in words only but also
in good works, for the^ ye love god when for his love ye do al y^ good ye ca^,
for every good and devout soul should manifestly both in word and deed open
and show, y^ he loves god, of the which thing it is written. The bryde grome
that is, Christ Jesus, appareli^g Canti. viii
the bryde, that is y^ devout soul says, Lay me upon your heart as a sygnacle,
and allo upon your arms. In y^ heart, is ma^s thought in his arms, his labor,
So y^ well-beloved bryde grome is laid upon your heart and harms as a sign For
by the good will and operacyo^ of man it is soon known what love the soul
bears to her bryde grome Christ Jesus, for the love of god, is never Idle, and
if it be true love, it does many great works. Therefore good sister, I pray you
to love god perfytely, and that for his sake ye be never idle, if ye love god
perfytely, ye shall never be idle, if ye love god truly, ye shall avoid al
ydlenes, if ye love god with all your heart, and with all your mind, then for his
sake ye shall lay aside and despise al ydlenes, the kingdom of heaven shall not
be given to those that are idle, but to those y^ be studius and dylige^t i^
gods service, nor to no vacabu^des or erronius persons, but to those y^ for
gods sake do truli labor i^ his service. They y^ are slouthful to do good
works shall not be pertakers of y^ ki^gdome of heaven. Lururiousnes and bodily
lust does sone deceive those y^ a^ idle and great wa^derers Luxuryousnes does
trouble hi^ very sore who^ she fi^deth idle, carnal appetyte and lust gives
place to work to diligence, to labur and occupatio^. Ama^ may be dilligent
labourouertred such wa^to^ lusts and desires, for when y^ body is well traueled
and we ^yd with labor, it settethe not greatelye by such tryfelynge matters.
Wherefore good sister beware and prevent idleness, love no idleness, werye your
body with labor, excercyse your body with good works, and inquyre evermore for
some profitable work, y^ your intentyo^ and mind may be occupied, Let your
good works and your good intentyo^ be evermore in god.

Of life actyue and co^templatyue.the. (...). Chapter.
I Acob saw a lather standi^ge upon the ground, and angels asce^dyng, Even.
xxviii.
and desce^ding, and the top of this lather touched heaven, All those y^ are
predestynate to be saved, and those that are in y^ way of salvation, are set
upon this lather. This lather does sygnyfy y^ church, as well milita^t as
tryu^pha^t. The milytant is y^ church of this world, the tryu^phant y^
celestial church of heaven. There is upon this lather three orders of men,
seculers, actyues, and conte^platyues, The seculers are in ye lowest degree, the
actyues, in the higher, and the conte^platiues in y^ highest, of these three
orders sumare in y^ myll, some in the field, and some in their beds. The myll
is the seculer life, the field is y^ will of y^ seculer man, In y^ field are
the preachers of y^ word of of god, In thebed, is the love of god, they y^ are
in y^ myll, be they that compass the world, and that leke and love these
worldly things they y^ are in the field, are they y^ ear the land, and sow
the word of god among the people, they are in their beds y^ utterly despise
all worldly substance and riches, at the foot of this lather, stand they that
are worldly. In y^ middle part thereof, at they, that are called acryues and in
the hygheste part thereof are ye conte^platyues the which are very nigh unto
heaven. For they think upon nothing, but y^, that is heavenly, they that go up
and down this lather, are the angels, ye which asce^de up to god by
co^te^placyo^, and desce^de to their neighbor, by co^passyon, life actyue is
ye inoce^cy of good works, the co^te^platyue life, is the imaginacyo^ and
speculacyo^ of celesty all things, the actyue life is common to many, the
conte^platyue to very few, ye actyue life, uses well all worldly things, but
the conte^platyue given all to gods service, does little or nothing regard
the world.

The sisters demand.
Well-beloved brother, I pray you to open unto me the differences between the
life actyue and the contemplatyue.

The brothers answer.
Dear sister there is a great dyffere^ce between the^, for the active is to
give hi^ bread yt is a hungerde, to give wise counsel, to teach his
neighbors, to reduce and correct those that are in error, to brige the
proud to humylytye, to accord those yt are at debate, to vysyte y^ sick, to
very y^ deed, to redeem poor prisoners, to dispe^ce and provide for every man
as need shall require, ye have hard y^ works of life actyue. Now I pray you
harke^ to y^ works of life co^te^platyue. This co^te^platyue life keeps
together y^ chatyte of god and man, and is quiet from all exteryor actyo^,
ha^gyng and cleni^g only to gods desire, taki^g no manner of pleasure i^ these
wor^ly things, but dispysyng them to come to the very sight and fruy cyon of
god, and being very sorry to remain long in this my serable world, and
ponderous body, desires effectuouslye to come to the company of angels,
there to laud god with hympnes and other spirytuall songs, desiring also to be
among the celesty all cytyzens of heaven, and there in the sight of almyghtye
god to re: oyce in the eternal incorruptyon. Now good sister ye have hard both
of the actyue and the co^templatyue life, and therefore I would that with Mary.
Luke (...).
Magdalene ye chose the best part, that is the co^templaty us life, y^ life
actyue is right good, but the conte^platyue much better, he that can profit i^
the actyue shall the better come to the co^te^platiue, of this ye may take an
example by Jacob, the which loved Rachel intearely, Rachel Gene. xix.
does sygnyfye the conte^platyue life. Then they gave him Lya, the which does
sygnifye the actyue life, this actyue life does serve god in great labor and
travail, y^ is fedyng, nourishyng, receyuyng, clothing, vysytyng, co^fortyng,
and beryenge of ye pore, with many such works of mercy, and yet Lya is the
second child, for there are many mo actyue people, then contemplatyue, but
Rachell is as much to say, as a sheep, or syeynge the begi^nyng, for
conte^platyue persons are si^ple and as Innocent as sheep, far from all worldly
tumult and strife, cleuyng only to deuyne conte^platyo^, and that to come to
his sight y^ says, I that speak unto you, am the begi^nyng. This John^. viii.
Rachel had two daughters, for there are two manner of co^te^platyues, some
there are y^ live i^ come^, other there are, y^ are solytary, and separated
from al other, but life conte^platyue is much more perfyte, then is the actyue
life. And as y^ egle does fycher eyes i^ the son beams, nor remoueth the^ not,
but when he takes some sustenau^ce, so devout persons given to co^te^placyo^,
at some times return from co^te^placyon to the actyue life. For not
wtsta^dynge heavenly things are much profitable, yet these inferyor and worldly
things are so necessary ye we can not well be without the^. In so much y^
Christ speaki^g unto the devout soul given all to co^te^placyo^ says thus.
Rise up, and have you my well-beloved and fair lover, Can. ii.
and cu^ unto me, as though he would say more plai^ly. Rise up and have you my
lover by delectio^ and faith, my dove by innoce^ce and si^plycyte, my fair
sister by ye virtue of chastity. Rise up from your sweet estate, y^ is from
your rest of co^te^placyo^, i^ the which ye desire to co^te^t and to please me
i^ salmode hipnes, prayer, and such other spiritual so^ges and melody, have you
therefore and cu^ hither, y^ is, come out to profit your neighbors and cause
the^ by predycacyo^ and good example to follow you. The vysyo^ Ezechi. (...).
of y^ bestes in Ezechyel, y^ which went and returned not again, do pertai^e to
y^ co^tinua^ce of y^ active life and y^ bestes y^ went and returned agai^e,
pertayne to life co^te^platyue, for when man boweth his mi^de thereto by and by
through his infyrmyte, he is dejected and clean turned, but after he
reme^breth him self again, he retourneth from that he came fro, the which
thing cannot be done in actyue life. For if a man fall from it never so little,
by and by he is inwrapte and inta^gled with vice. Often times the soul of man is
exalted from the earth to heaven, and ouercomed with carnal infyrmytye, it
descends again from heaven to earth. Also god does vysyte many seculer men,
and through his great grace, does lift the^ up, in to co^templacyo^, Also by
his secret and unknown judgment, he suffers many a conte^platyue man to
fall to these earthly matters and so leueth them. And as he y^ is deed, and
buried does cease from al worldly busynes, so does the co^te^platyue man cease
from all worldly works, and as they that come from the actyue life, be buried
in the quyetnes and rest of conte^placyo^, so y^ conte^platyue life does
receive the^ as buried in it, that depart and come from the worldly life, and
as the actyue life is y^ grave of the seculer and worldly life, so is y^
conte^platyue the monument and grave of the actyue life. And as good holy men
at sometimes come from the secretnes of conte^platyo^ to the active life, so
they return again to the secretenes of life contemplatyue, and their in
ward contemplatio^, there to laud god where they lernde how to do good works
abroad to the laud and praise of almyghtye god, and as it is gods will that
man given to co^te^placyo^ at some times should leave it, and come abroad for
other me^nes profit, so at some times his mind is that no man should dysturbe
or unquiet them, but that they should rest in their secret and sweet
conte^placyon, the which thing, god does declare for byddyng the mayde^s of
Jerusalem, that they awake not his spouse, layng. O ye madens of jerusalem, I
adjure you, by the wild gottes and hearts of the feldes, Canti. ii.
that ye awake not my lover until she have lust to rise, that is to say, that
ye call not up nor awake not the devour soul given to co^te^platyon, and
ocupyed in prayer, and dyuyne lectures, nor provoke her not to any vtward
operacyon, until that she will her self, that is awake her not until y^ time
of her co^te^placyo^, be exspyred, and until she will be awaked from her
interyor rest and sweet quietness, yet i^ this mortal life, there is no man
that can perfytely conte^plate god as says saint John^ in his apocalypsys.
There was scylence in heaven about Apoca. viii. cha.
half an hour, heaven is taken for the soul of every just man, as god says
by the prophet Esaias. Heaven is my seat, so that Isai. lxvi
when quyetnes of life contemplatyue is in the mind, then there is scyle^ce i^
heaven y^ is in the soul, for the trybulacyon of all earthly things are the^
in quiet and far from ma^s cogitacio^ and thought. But for asmoch as
co^te^placyo^ cannot be perfyte i^ this world we said not that there was
scyle^ce, in heaven a hole hour, but half an hour, but he that will live
perfytely in co^te^placyo^, must leave all worldly matters, and of this
speaks God in y^ Cantycles. I sleep, but my heart is a Canti. v.
wake, as though he would say more plainly. When I sleep and keep me from
worldly troubles, inwardly in my mind, I reuolue and think upon celestyall
and spiritual things. Also y^ arche of Noe the which was double cha^berd,
sygnyfyeth the life actyue and co^te^platiue, of y^ which two, the actyue is
lowest and the co^te^platyue highest. And it had (as some say) three cha^bers
y^ which do sygnifye three orders of me^, that are co^prysed in the church, that
is, those y^ ar married, those that are contynent, and those that live chaste as
virgyns of this contemplacio^ like god says in his gospel. If ye will be
perfyte, sell al y^ ye have, and give all to the poor Math. xix.
and ye shall have a treasoure in heaven, and come and follow me. And again he
says. Mary has Luke. (...).
chosen the best part, the which shall not be taken from her. For the life
contemplatyue shall neither be taken away in this life nor in no another, but
the actyue life takes his end in this world So does not the life contemplatyue
for it continues for evermore. The life actyue does end in this world, the
co^templatyue begins hear, and is made perfyte in heaven. Good sister I
exhort you for the love of god to despise this present world, and for his
love to leave of all worldly cares and thoughts. Give all your mind and study
to god. Let no worldly care wtdraw you from gods service. Avoid and cast
from you, al such things as may let your good purpose. And I would counsel
you to hate wtall your heart and mind, all that the world does love. Be dead
in this world, and with draw your self as a dead person from this present
life, and as a dead person desire not y^glorye of this world Good sister have
no mind upon the world but even as thought ye were beryed, withdraw your
self from all worldly businesses for if ye so do, ye shall obtain y^ eternal
and everlasting bliss.

Of curiosite che. lij. cha
MY well-beloved Sy^er I exhort you to study continually to profit in good
works, and y^ ye desire not the vanites which other do desire. But I exhort
you to consider the goodness ye should do, for a certain wise man says. In
vanite^ and vain things be not curiouse, nor it is not for your profit, nor
yet needful to know that passes man's wit to know And reason would y^ heshuld
i. Corni. iiii
leave of to judge other men's minds that can not perfetely know what men think.
Why so? For we judge that, y^ is uncertain until y^ lord come y^ which shall
give clear knowledge of al such things which a^ secret and far from ma^s
knowledge, and shall manifestly open the secret counsel of men's hearts. Also
reason requires that he refrain from syn, that desires to correct other
men's, unwise persons of tentymes by the correction of other men's fautes,
disclose their own. For as long as man knows not his own fautes (the which
he should both know and bewail) he goes curiously about to know other men's.
But if he remember and behold him self well, he shall not greatly i^quire of
other men's misdedes, for he shall find in him self, that he may be wayle and
amend. Saint I sodore says. That we can sooner correct other men's vices, then
we can augment, or increce their virtues. Nor we be not so dilyge^t to know
what good me^ do as we be to know what evil they do. Wherefore good sister I
exhort you reyther to amend your own fautes the^ to correct other men's. And
first to look upon your own misdeeds, and then upon other men's. Be dilygent
for your own correctyon, and careful for your own wealth and amendment.
Never desire to meddle with that thing, that ye have nothing to do with all.

Nor be not curious to know where of men do speak, nor what other men do. Fly
curiosyte, leave to be curiose, and to know how other men live. Let no
curyosyte trouble or deceive you. Look not so upon other men's manners that ye
for get your own, and take heed ye be as diligent to correct your own
mysdoynges, as ye would be to correct other men's Be not curiose to know y^
thing that is secret, beware yeinquire not to know that pertayneth nothing
unto you. Keep that thing secret that ye have learnde by holy scripture. Seek
for no more the^ is written, seek for no more then holy scripture does show
you, nor never go about to lern that ye should not learn, learn y^ curiosite
is a very daungerus and a perilus presumption, curiosite is a perilus science,
for it provoke man to heresy, and brings a man's mind to noughtie tales and
fables, and makes a man bold in y^ thing, y^ is very dark, and hard to be
understood and does cast him into ignorant matters. Good sister amend your
life with all the diligence ye can, ye ye may here af^ come to everlasting

Of watch the.liij. cha
MY well-beloved sister liste^ to y^ lords sayng. Watch, for math. xxii. ii
ye know not when the lord shall come. And again I say unto you all, watch
you, and SPeter says. Be wise and watch i. Peter. iiii
in prayer. For when men shall say that their is peace and securite, then shall
sodeyn death and destruction come upon the^, and Salomo^ says. They are just
and wise, and their works are in gods Eccle. ix.
hands, and yet they can not tell whether they be ^orthe to be loved or hated.
Why so? For all uncertain things are reserved to the time ye is to come, My
good sister, god has kept and hydden from us the time of his coming, that by
such vncertaynte and long taryeng, we should often times think that he is
evermore ready to come. For we be ignorant of his coming. We must so pass
forth the joy of this world, that we forget not the bytternesse of the
judgment that is to come.

The devil does often times deceive man, and so leads him to syn. For when he
perceyueth that man is troubeled and sorry for his misfaute, then by a certain
securite and surenes he deceyueth hi^ again. Wherefore good sister when so ever
we do any good deeds, it is needful also yt we remember our misdedes, least
that by ignorance of our fautes, we rejoice unwisely in our good works. And
god would we should be ignorant of our last hour, because we should be
evermore indoute thereof, and redely prepare our selfs unto it with out any
assurance. s. Isodore says. Let not the just trust in his iustnes, nor y^
sinner mistrust nor despere of y^ great mercy of God but let them have in heart
both hope and fear. And so to trust unto his mercy, that they forget not to
fere his justice. For notwithstanding that the conuersacyon of holy men is
probable and well allowed, yet it is uncertain, to what end they are prepared
unto. And therefore a man should never be without fear, for it is not man, but
GOd that judges man's penance and satisfaccyon. And of this thing says
Cesarius, how much as man is in suertie of his mysfautes ye are past somoch y^
more he must take heed and fle those that are to come. Good sister believe me,
yt meditacyo^ of death is the very life of a wise man. Therefore ye shall do
wisely, if ye continually do think upon god, and at some times vpo^deth for a
certain wise man says.

Blessed is he that is always in fear. Wherefore good virgyn I exhort and
monyshe you, to be always in fear, in doubt, dilligent, and subtyl against y^
te^ptacions of the devil, and to be in continual watch, stryte, and battle,
against him, his subtle, and crafty te^ptacyons. Harken good Chrystys spouse,
what god says. Blessid is that servant, whom God at Luke. xii.
his coming does find watshi^g Wherefore if ye will watch and set all your
mind upon him, ye shall be counted in eternal beatitude among those that are
fortunate and blessed. Ye shall be esteemed to be blessed, if ye lift up the eyes
of your soul with good devotion unto god y^ very true light, and without dowte
ye shall be greatly fortunate and blessed, if ye diligently and effecteously do
watch to god ward, for he has promised to crown those yt watch of this it is
written, her eyes are like doves eyes upon y^ful rivers Canti. v.
y^ which are washte with milk, y^ eyes of y^ spouse, are the good and devout
people, the which like doves do live in simplicite, and by their good preching
and good example giuyng bring many other to the way of salvation. They are
esteemed to be vpo^y^ river because they are co^tynually i^ y^co^uersacio^ and
study of holy scripture and washed with milk, yt is, they are through the grace
of god, and the blessed sacrament of bapteme pourged from all syn, and what
other thing may we vedersta^de by the full river, but the profou^de and secret
lernyng of holy scripture, ye which when we here it, does co^forth and refresh
us. Ferthermore the doves sit most come^ly upon ye river to se ye shadow of the
birds yt fle in the air, ye which by going into the water, avoid al danger,
so good me^ by redyng of holy scripture, perceive and se the subtilite and
crafty nesse of ye devil, and by such description of things, they know him as
by a shadow, and so auoydeth both him, and his deceytefulnesse. Therefore look
yt ye be co^tynually occupied in ye meditacyon of holy scripture, for in yt ye
shall find how to avoid al Sata^s craftynes and wylynes. And again good
virgyn I exhort you, to commit your self holy to the good counsel of holy
scripture, y^ is, that ye do nothi^ge but as holy scripture shall learn and
inform you, for ye shall find therein, how ye may exchew and avoid y^
deceytes of the devil. Ferthermore I exhort you to keep you upon y^ banks of
holy scripture for fear of reueners, that is, least y^ wicked spirit do
suddenly engrype you, and deceive you. Therefore I would counsel you to watch,
and with all diligence to avoid his fraud and deceytefulnes. Alas wretches as
we be, why do we not learn and understand y^ all our thoughts are openly
known to god, or ever we put the^ in execucio^? Dauyd says, God psalm. xiv.
is he only that knows and searches man's heart and mind. Therefore good
sister let us think that we be continually before God, let us learn and know
yt we be but earth and ashes. Let us also consider yt the lord is ter^yble
rewardyng every man after his deseruyng. He is not far from us, nor will not
tarry very long. He will come and save us. Let us therefore watch continually with
good deuocyo^, yt at his coming and when he shall knock at our doors, he
find us not a sleep, but broad waki^ge in his lawde, love, and holy service.
Let us therefore run Ioh(...). ^ii.
whilst we have light, lest y^ darkness do over take us. For Salomo^ says
Blessed is he, y^ hears Pro. viii
me, and that keeps daily watch at my door, and at my postornes. For he y^
shall find me, shall find life, and shall have the goodness of god. Therefore good
sister I monyshe you, that with all your heart and mind ye watch in the love and
service of god, y^ at the dreadful day of dome, ye may find him kind and
merciful unto you. Let no chance find you unprepared, thynk upon al cha^ces,
and remember yt there is nothing but y^ may chance. Thynk evermore upon the
wretchedness y^ is to come And i^ prosperyte, remember y^aduersite may assail
you, think evermore upon evil, lest any such thing chance, for it is a point
of a wise man, to premeditate and fore thynk y^ loss of such chances, for if
it be thought upon it is y^ more easyer to be suffered, and born if ama^ look
for amishap it may be y^ bett born the premeditacio^ and forethynki^g of a
thing, breketh and diminishes the grefe thereof, but if any such thing chance
unlooked for, it greueth a man very sore, for soden harm troubeled a man
grievously, y^ a man has not provided for does vex him shrodly, all soden
tempest do put men in great fear and every soden thing is much more
troubelous, then is y^, that man thinks upon. Therefore prepare your heart and
mind both to good and evil, and in prosperity remember aduersite, and
inaduersyte remember prosperity. Be always wa^ thing, ^est evil thoughts
assayl^ you. Love holy scripture, and despise all carnalite, for so shall ye
come to the celestial court and joy everlasting.

Of wisdom the.liiij. cha
MY dear sister har^e^ unto gods words, be you as wise as the Serpente, and
Math. x.
as simple as y^ dove and Solomon says. The symplycyte of just men shall
dyrecte Prouer. xi.
them, and the subplantacyon of perverse persons, shall dystroye the^. The good
si^ple man's way, is gods way, and they that do naughtely, shall be ever more
in fear, the Justice of the simple man shall gyde his soul, but y^ proud
man, shall dye in his naw tynes, the Innocent person believes every body, they
y^ deceive the just and lead him to sin, shall dye, and the simple shall
possess his goods, they that are evil, do hate the simple, but they that are
just, shall guide the^, holy and simple rusticyte profyteth it self only,
and as much as it through good life, does augme^t and profit the church so
much it damageth and hurts it, if it resyste not those y^ wtsta^de veryte and
truethe. And. s. Hierome says, that man should not require of gods servants
bodily orname^tes, but y^ si^plycyte and mekenes of mind, nor esteem al
holiness to be i^ their tongues, but to be only in the pure and si^ple
conscience. And of two imperfect things, holy rusticyte is much better the^
synful eloquence, holy rusticyte is much more allowed, the^ vain loquacite.
Good sister if your inte^cyo^ and mind be simple before the syghte of god, your
works at y^ day of judgment shall not be obscure and dark. And they that can
not be chaste^ by the works of Justice, ca^ by no means be innoce^tes by
symplycyte. The church does begin the way of truth and of simplycyte with fear,
and ends it with charytye. God does not only take heed to man's words, but
also to the heart and mind of man, and he louethe those that serve hi^ with the
si^plicyte of heart, of this speaks god in the Can tycles sayng. My dove is
but Canti. vi.
one, my perfect is alone and only chose^ out for her mother. Our mother be
generacyo^ is y^ grace of god, to the which there is chosen out a dove, for she
brings them only together, that abide in symplycyte, and unity, For when
many faithful people set their hole mind and intencyo^ upon god, when they
with one mind desire god only, and when they are assembled i^ charity with one
heart and one mind, the^ they so joined make of diverse me^bres but one body. And
al they that live in simplicite and unity are but as one dove, and they that
men do dispraise and gest at, in this world are greatly in gods favor.
Therefore good sister let us pray Sapi. v.
god, that it will please him to se^de us from heaven the holy gooste by whose
aid we may obtain the si^plicyte of the dove, the wisdom of the Sarpent, and
that we may be simple in malice, and wise in doing of good works. A sarpent is
a very subtle beast for we read of y^ Serpent called Iaspys, the which
perceyuyng the inchau^ter comi^g toward her, does lay one of her ears upon
the ground, and stops the other with her tail, lest she should hear the
voice of the inchanter. And the prophet speaking of those y^ are cruel and
wise in all naughtynes Psalm. lvii.
says, that they are in a fury as is the death sarpe^t stoppi^g of her ears,
because she would not here y^ voice of y^ incha^ter. Therefore good sister in
Christ Jesus, follow the sarpe^t in this case, y^ is, stop your ears y^ ye
here no evil words, pray god that the oil of sinners anoynte not psalm. cxl.
your head, the oil of the sinner, is y^ laud of a flatterer, the sarpent
stops her ears because she will not here the inchanters voice, and so must
you stop your ears, that ye here not the vycyousnes of flatterers and
slau^derers, the sarpent Iaspis is wise for he will not here yt words of the
inchanter, lest he should dye loone after, be you wise also, and let no evil
words enter in by your ears to your soul, lest he did: oye you, therefore
yemust another have the wisdom of ye sarpe^t without y^ symplicite of y^ dove nor
the simplicite of the dove with out y^ wisdom of y^ sarpe^t, to the^ te^t y^ the
wisdom of the sarpe^t may ^uycken up si^plicite, to avoid that, y^ is not
good, and that the symplicite of the dove, may temper wisdom to do that thing
that is good. This dove has, vii. propre virtues i^ her, y^ which ye your
self through ye grace of the holy ghost may have. The dove does sytte very often
upon the river side to se the commi^ge of the hawk, so to avoid him and to be
out of danger. The dove choseth evermore of y^ best corn The dove never
smyteth with her byll. The dove does often times feed the yonlynges of other
birds. The dove has no gall, the dove makes her nest in y^ holes of old
walls, and for her song she has lame^tacyo^ and mourni^g. Therefore pray god
with all dylygence, that it will please him to send you these goodly virtues,
that is to say, that ye may rest your self upon the river side of holy
scripture, to avoid by the good admonycyon and lernynges thereof, the wilyues
of the devil. Chose out the best sentences and sainges thereof to feed your
self with all, and feed the yonlinges of other beasts, that is to say, revoke
those by good example, and simple co^munycacyo^, yt by syn are alyenate from
god, convert the^ and bring the^ to god again. Smite not with your byll, that is
to say, Ye shall another say nor do no evil to your neighbor. Nor ye shall have
no gal in you, that is, ye shall not be furyous nor angery, ye shall build
your neste in old walls, y^ is, ye shall have al your hope i^ god. Take
mournyng for your so^ge, yt is to say, As men of this world rejoice in
worldly musyke, so take you your delight and comfort in spirytuall sythyng and
heaviness. Therefore good sister as I have said unto you before, with all study and
dylyge^ce ye must fly and avoid the subtyl craftynes of y^ devil, and with
the simplycyte of life, ye must have wisdom. For he that does not mingle
simplicite and wisdom together, shall be deceived. And again good sister I
exhort you, to prepayre a dwelling place for god in your heart, that when it
shall please him to come with the father and the holy gooste, he may remain
co^tynually in you.

Of te^ptacyo^ the.lv. cha.
GOod sister harken unto. s. James words. Resyst the James. iiii
devil, and he shall fly from you, and saint Hierome says. There is nothing
stronger the^ he is, that ouercometh y^ devil. And likewise there is nothing
more feeble and wake, the^ he is, that the flesh ouercometh. The deuyls darts
must be quenched and ouercomed with cold, with watch and great fasting, our
subtle enemy y^ devil looks daily how he may deceive us, nor he cares not to
distroy our bodies, so yt he may dystroy our souls, he does dystroye our
souls, when be te^ptacyo^ of syn he distroyeth y^ chryste^ and faithful
people, but yet he te^pteth gods servants no more the^ god does suffer hi^,
such te^ptacyo^ is right profitable for gods servants, for by such
te^ptacion he does not deceive the^, but le^^e and i^struct the^, for god does
often times turn such temptatyon prepared for man's destruccyon, to the
comfort and profit of ma^s soul, for y^ servants of god could never suffer
such deuilysh te^ptacyo^, but that god through great pytye refrained their
malice. And not with standing y^ devil does covet and desire to tempt man yet if
god suffer hi^ not he shall never prevail, the deuyls mind and intent is
evermore wicked, yet by gods suffrau^ce his power is just, the devil
naturally does seek to te^pt man unjustly, but yet he ca^ not tempte hi^, with
out the lyce^ce and suffrau^ce of god, and of this thing it is written, The
spirit of god did vex Saull full shrowedly, i. Reg. xvi
he was there as the spirytie, of god, Why was he evil then? and if he were
evil, wherefore was he ye spirit of god? In this place is co^prysed i^ two
words the just power of god, and the unjust will and intent of y^ devil, For
this spirit of hi^ self was noughtes, he was y^ spirit of god through the
just power, the which he receued of god, nor it is not the devil, y^ se^deth
vice to man, for he is the only nourysher thereof, nor he can no where noury
she nor increace it but there only, where he perceives to be great
delectacyo^ and pleasure, but if we would reject such vile delectacyo^ and
thoughts he as utterly confounded would soon leave us, and so might we
break the wepe^ and armor of all his te^ptacyo^. The devil fayneth hi^ self
to be a good spirit and the angel of light, and would of te^ times deceive
gods servants but the dyscresyon of good men must be such as may judge
betwyxt good and evil, to avoid his fraud and tru^perye, or else by this
inq^sicyo^ of Iosue sayng. Are ye our friend or our adversary? And Iosue. v.
it is written in Hieremy, if ye divide yt is good from that, yt is ^uil ye
shall be to me as my nowne mouth. The devil to y^ sight of worldly me^ is
terrible, but he is but vile to ye syghte of the chose^ servants of god,
unfaithful people fere the devil as a lion, but they y^ are strong in believe
and faith, set no more by hi^ the^ by a small worm, and when they see hi^,
they dispyse hi^. The devil is a very slyperus sarpe^t, for if his first
suggestyo^ and te^tacyo^ be not with sta^ded and resysted, he crepethe into man
or ever he feel hi^, the vycyous te^tacyon of y^ devil, is a easy thing to be
broken, but if it be not well taken head of and avoided, or if we let it run i^
a custom it will so increace and prospere, that it shall be very hard to overcome
it. The devil or ever he te^pt man does first consider his nature, prepayre his
wepens, and then besege him on that side, where he supposes he may by syn
so^est overcome hi^, and s. Isydory says, that he ^e^pteth man most in that
thing, whereto he perceyueth his co^plectyo^ most inclyned, as he does that
draws water, ye which will draw i^ no another place, but where he perceives
that it runs most swyftest. The devil coueteth to deceive man at al times,
but specially, at his departing, and y^ is it, that was said unto ye sarpe^t
at the beginning. Thou shall lay watch for hi^ at his end, not with sta^dynge a
Gene. i^i.
man be never so good and vpryght yet he is not sure in this world, And
therefore he must daily humiliate hi self, and take good heed that he be not
deceived. Wherefore good sister, it is very necessary we pray unto god almygh
tie yt he suffer us not to be tempted in this world, more then we may bear or
suffer, for god does restrain our enemies power, because he should not do such
hurt, as his will is to do. And in y^ can tycles y^ holy ghost reproves hi^
Canti. iii^.
saying. Lift thy self up thou north wind, and come hither you south wind,
and blow over al my garden, and the^ shall y^ aromatyke and sweet fragrant
sauers cu^ sorth. The north wynd y^ which through his great and fervent cold
causes slouthfulnes, does sygnyfy no another thing but our gostly enemy the
devil, the which at the has once tempted man, and is i^posse ssio^ of hi^,
causes hi^ to be slouthful i^ al good works y^ southwi^de being both sweet
and hot does sygnify y^ holy ghost y^ which after he has never so little
towched the souls of good me^ loses the^ from al slouthfulnes, making the^
steadfast i^ the love of god, let therefore this north wind, that is, this evil
spyryte depart from gods church and from every devout soul, that he tempte
no man more the^ behooves, and let the southe wind come and blow upon the
garden, and the aromatike sauers shall comfort, then shall the holy ghost come and
power the fire of charity into their minds, and unbind the^ from al
temptation and slothful negligence. The which thing ones done the sweet and
redolette sauers shall spring and come abroad, for at the coming of the holy
ghost, the heart y^ was slouthful shall change, and be moved to good works, and
shall flower like a garden, and after the flower it shall bring forth sweet
redolent, and nuryshyng fruit with the which he may by good example repast and
refresh both him self and his neighbor.

The systers demand.
GOod brother I pray you to show me what remedy there is, against the temptacion
of the deuell,

The brothers answer.
MY well-beloved sister in Christ Jesus the best remedy for him that is yet sore
vexed and tempted with vice and deuyllysh temptacyons, is this, that the more he
is tempted the more he takethe him in his prayers. And therefore if any
worldly thought do trouble your mind, or intyce and persuade you to do any
thing wrongfully, by pure prayer and devout watch it may sone be shaken of.
And therefore when ye pray, be customably with all devotion in the sight of
almighty god, that the temptacyon that is now at hand, may the more easily
be repelled and ouerco^med. Also good sister, ye shall understand that we must
not only strive against such deuyllish te^ptacyo^s but also against y^ vice
of the foul fylthy and stinkynge flesh, why so? For ye flesh does covet
against the spirit, and the spirit ^ala. v.
against the flesh. And therefore we should so contyne w in prayer that through
the grace of god we might ouerco^e such suggestyons, such carnal desires, and
deuylly she te^ptacyo^s, for contynuall prayer does quench and debate such
vycyous impugnacyons, contynuall prayer does surmou^t and overcome the deuyls
darts, prayer is the head virtue against the assaults of all te^ptacyon.
Therefore good sister as I have told you, by pure orason and prayer, with holy
watch, ye may overcome all diabolyke te^ptacyo^: but if ye feel y^
molestiousnes of y^ flesh, if your flesh does yet prycke you, if as yet y^
remembrance of carnal delectacio^ does trouble you, if your flesh do ve^e
you, if lechery do ^e^pte you, if delecracio^ do provoke you to syn, call death
to remembrance, think upon ye ingeme^t yt is to come remember the torments
and pains of hell, the perpetual fire of hell, and the horrible pains that be
there, for the remembrance of the hot burning fire of hell shall quinche the
heat of al luxuriusnes and lychery.

Of dreams the.lvi. ca
MY well-beloved sister harken unto me. The wicked spirytes do oftentimes by
night trouble men's minds and understandings with diverse visyons and
ofte^tymes they do manifestly beat men's bodies. Dreams do chance after diverse
manners, some by repletion, and some chance as we know by experience by
euacuatyon, and some by thought, for most commonly of that thing that man
thinks upon in the day, he shall dream in the night. And many dremes do
chance by y^ illusyons of the devil, as says Solomon.

Dreams have caused many a Eccle. 34.
one to err, and they that have trusted in them, have been destrued. There are
certain visyons which are to be regarded for they chance by Godly reuelacion,
as we do read in the old testament of Joseph Jacobs son, the which through
dreams was preferde Gene. xli.
before all his brethren. We do read like wise of Joseph, husband Math. ii,
to our blessed lady mother and maid, the which in a dream was warned he
should fle with the child into Egypt. Sometimes such visions are myngled with
cogitacio^ and illusions, or with cogita cyon and reuelacion as says Daniel.
Dany. ii
He that opens the misteres, shall show things yt are to come. And
notwithstanding y^ some of these dreams be true, yet we should not lightly
believe them. For they chance by diverse Imaginations and we know not perfetly
from whense or by what means they come, and therefore we should not be light of
crede^ce lest y^ the find tra^figure him self i. Corni. xi.
into an angel of light and through our siplicite deceive us. At sometimes the
fyndes deceive those that be curious to take heed to dreams, and tell them the
truth in some things, to deceive the^ in many other. And notwitstandynge
such dreams chance to be eue^ so as they said, yet men should not believe
them, lest they proceed of illusio^, as witnesses scripture sayng If they tell
you and it chance to be so, yet believe it not. Dreams ar likened unto augures,
the which do Judge things by the chatteryng and flight of birds, and they
that behold such things, are called auguriens, therefore men should not believe
them, notwithstanding they appear to be true they that trust in dremes or
in these so the sayers have no trust in god, and they are likened to him yt
follows ye wind, and to those yt go about to take a man's shadow These so the
saynges ar but lies dremes, and deceytefulnesse, we should never believe dreams
least they deceive us, let our hope be only fyred in god, and as for dremes
let us not care for, ye which thing shall be very acceptable unto god. And
therefore my good sister I exhort you, that ye put not your confidence in
dremes, but in almyghtye god. For if ye trust to such vanites, ye shall be right
soon deceived. Therefore regard the^ not, but set your hope perfetly in the
prouydence of god, and so althynge both in this world, and in time to come,
shall prospere with you.

Of the shortness of life the lvii. Chapter.
Dear sister, harken unto Salomo^s words. A^ that ye ca^do, Eccle. ix
do it out of hand.

For neither work, nor reason, nor science, nor yet wisdom shall be in the
inferior pertes to y^ which ye ar going. Ama^alo^ly may do good i^ this world,
for in another world good works are not looked for, but the reward of good
works. This life is very caduke and short, where of s. Isodore says, y^ his
thought is good and profitable yt co^sydereth by the space and end of this
life, how long, and how short and likewise how miserable it is.

Therefore my good sister in christ, if ye seek for the true way, go toward
christ and seek for eternal life, for that is everlasting and this but
mortal. And therefore in body ye must be in this world as a dead woman, that
in soul ye may be quycke and gods servant, for he is esteemed a live, y^ is
deed carnally giuyng his hoole mind unto GOd, to whom he promised to live
after his laws, it is a pain for a good man to live long in this world for
he thinks it long or ever he come to the perpetual joys of heaven. Noman
knows the end of his life, and when a man thinks him self most surest
thereof, by and by he is gone.

Let every man therefore make have to amend him self, least he depart in
iniquite, and end his life and his mis^iuyng together For the devil goes
about to bring the^ to perpetual torment and pain at their last end, the
which in this life he enticed and brought to syn. And not with standi^g a man be
both good and just yet when he shall depart, he fears he shall be punyshed, y^
pesable and the ge^tyll departing of good men out of y^ world, causes men to
thynk yt they depart in good estate, and to be associated with angels in
everlasting joy. Of this speaks y^ spouse in the ca^ticles, saying. My lover
is come into my Canti. vi
garden, to the crown of bliss and of all sweet aromatike sauers. For GOD
visitinge his church, comes unto the^ with great grace, y^ which he knows
has given the good sauers of good examples and virtues renome unto their
neighbors, he takes a delight in garde^s, reioycyng in the virtue of good
souls, he gathered lilies, when he calls his elect and chosen servants
from this life to everlasting joy. Whereof it is written. The death of holy
saints, is very precious to god psalm. c. xv
Cloth is endid by thredes, and a ma^s life by days, when death comes the
souls of gods chosen servants are in great tear, and uncertain wether
they shall be saved or dampened. Sum good men at there departing are pourged of
all their venial sins. Su^ other at the same self time, are in great
ioyfulnes reme^bringe the joys yt ar to come. And it is Gods pleasure we
should not know the time of our departi^g because we should think y^ it is
evermore at hand. For the more that a man is uncertain thereof the more he
shall apply and give him self to good works. The devil at the departing of
all mys livers does receive their souls, ye their inticers to pleasure and
syn, may be their punisshers and tormenters in pain. At man's departing ye
wicked spirits give and employ all their diligence to bring to man's
reme^beraunce all y^ ever they persuaded them to do in this world, and yt to
bring them and their pore souls to everlasting pain. The sinner after his
death is brought to torment and pain, but the good syuer to continual joy and
bliss. And as we do believe that good men after their great pains and labor
taken in this world do rest and be in quiet, so must we believe that mildoers
be in great pain and torments. Good sister I tell you this, because ye should
know, yt it is very nedeful, and necessary for us, to despise all earthly
things, and to remember that we shall dye. Hark what y^ apostle says. What
other thing James. iii^
is our life but even a vapur appearing for a while. And Solomon says. Never
put trust Pro. xxvii.
in the next day following for ye can not tell to what chance it shall prepare
you, and therefore my well-beloved sister ye should in co^tynually consider y^ end
of your life and despise the flattering inticementes of this world to come
to everlasting joy and bliss In all your busynesses consider Eccle vii.
your last end, and ye shall never do annsse. And therefore I exhort you that ye
take no pleasure in these worldly trifylles. For with out doubt ye shall heuse,
trust not to these temporal things, for their isno ways to sckape death, a
why should this wreched and slynkynge flesh rejoice in worldly goods,
considering it is prepared to feed worms, This I tell you good sister,
because ye should not for get the order of your estate and condycyon.
Remember ye are but ashes, Gene. iii.
and that ye shall return to ashes, and that ye are but dust, and shall
return thereto again, and so said the Lord unto Adam. Remember also what Job
was wo^te to say unto him self, Gene. iii.
I shall be consumed as dust, and like unto the vesture that is eaten Job. xiii.
with mothes, call to remembrance that ye shall dye, and remember it
contynually that through the remembrance there of ye may eschew and avoid
all vicious living.

Of death the.lviij. cha
WHorshypfull sister I pray you to harken unto the sainge of y^ wise man. O
death, Eccle. xli
how bitter a thing is it for him that is in quiet, and restfulnesse of his
substance to remember the? And again. O death thy judgment is good to those
that are in wretchedness, and pouerte. Unto this agrees S. I sodore, saying. O
death how sweet art thou to wretches, and to those that live in bitterfulnes
How pleasant unto those that be in heaviness and lamentacion? Death is the end of
al worldly mysere, of all wretchedness and of all calamite, death brings a man
to the end of all worldly tribulation, but alas death comes very late and
slowly, to those that are i^ tribulation. Wherefore good sister it were better
to dye well, then to live wretchedlye, it were better not to be, the^ to dye
unhappily and myserablye.

The systers demand.
Dear brother I pray you telme, whether we should bewail those that ate dead
and weep for our friends that are departed.

The brothers a^swere.
GOod sister unto this saint I sodore does answer you, saying, that not with
standing pytty enforces and wylleth us to bewail such as dye in good belefe,
yet our faith do the inhybyte us to weep for the^. And therefore we should not
weep for the death of such good people but rather thank god y^ it has pleased
his grace to deliver them out of all worldly wretchydnes, bryngyng them (as
we do believe) to perpetual light, rest and peace. And therefore we should not he
wayle such good christen souls, as we verily suppose to be saved. Harke^ unto
me good sister, I say that we should lament their death, the which y^ wicked
spirytes do hale and carye to everlasting pain and torment, and not those the
which the angels receive to great joy and honor, and to the celestyall
court of paradyse. I say we should mourn their death the which are buried
in y^ deep pyt of hell, and not those the which are exalted to y^ perpetual
joys of heaven, we should weep for those that dye evil, and in sin, and not
for those that die well. Good sister when I bewail the^ that dye well, I hurt
my self, and do them no good, and they that lamente and weep for those that
dye, they in a manner deny the general ressurection, and that god rysse from
death to life. And therefore good sister we y^ believe that all such as dye are
in heaven with Christ, should not weep for them, nor lament their death, but
rather pray for them, that if perchance they be in any danger of pain that
it would please his gracyous mercyfulnes to deliver them.

Of judgment the.lix. cha.
THere are two divine judgments, the one in this world, the other i^ the
world y^ is to come. Many are so judged in this present world by syckenes,
by poverty and by other diverse worldly tribulacyons, that here after they
shall not be judged, for such te^porall pains to some are i^ stead and place
of their purgacyon. Other there be that begin their da^pnacyo^ in this present
world, of whose salvation there is often times another trust nor hope because
they contynew in sin and ungracious living. Some there be that are judged in
this world by tribulacyon. Some other are judged i^ time to come by fire,
after the examination of the streyte judge, nor the justice of the just man
shall not then be sure, and therefore Job says. He Job. ix.
consumes the Innocente and the wicked, for the innocent shall be consumed, and
as nothing regarded, if his innocence beco^ pared with gods innocence GOD
shall consume the wretched and wicked sinner and through y^ subtilyte of his
deuyne examination his naughtynesse shall be showed him, and he him self
ryghtfully condemned. Christ after as the life of good me^ shall require so in
his judgment he will be favorable and good unto the^, but to those that be
wicked sinners he shall appear very terryble and fereful, and at the day of
judgment Christ shall show him self to every man, as every man's conscience
was being upon earth, and remaining still in his piece and tra^quilite, he
shall appear terrible to them only, whose proper conscience shall accuse
them. My good sister harken unto. s. Isodore words There John^. i.
is no man clean without syn. And therefore their can no man be sure of gods
Judgment for then we shall be contable of every idle Math xiii
word that is spoken. Alas what shall we wretches say at the day of judgment,
the which do not only amys using of idle and fylthy words, but that commyt
daily so many abhomynable, and enorme crimes, never leaving our
noughtynesse, with other unrightful operacyons and works? And if to be that
the right delyng man be not the^ sure of gods judgment, what shall be come
of us most wretched sinners? and if the Justice of the upright and just man
be in no surance, at the examynacy on of this streyte Judge, what shall we
catyues do then, that daily do augment and increace our noutynesse and syn? And
if at the day of dome the just man i. Peter. iiii
shall scacely be saved, where shall we that have sinned without measure and
without end appear upon that day? Who shall not be in dread and fear when
heaven and earth shall shake, and quake, and all the elements be resolved by
heat? Of this day it is written. This is the day of ire of trybulacyo^, of
mysery, and vengeance, Isai. xiii
the day of dym darkness, of the trumpet and of al or ryble sound, upon this
day the strongeste man that ever was shall be troubled.

The systers demand.
ALas good brother what shall we say when y^ strayte judge shall come unto us,
For when ye put me in remembrance of his co^mi^g, ye cause me to weep, and by
the rehersynge of that terryble and fearful day, ye have provoked me to
heaviness.

The brothers a^swere.
MY good sister it is well done if ye for fear of this eracte and strayte
Judge do weep. For or ever this day does aproch and come, we must appear in
confession and great waylyng before him. The acceptable and helthsome day, is
whilst we be i^ this world of the which it is written. Seek god whylste he may
be found, Ezai. lv.
call upon him whylste he is at hand. The judge ca^ not be seen in this
present life, and yet he is even by us, he shall be seen in another world, and
shall be far from us. Therefore good sister we must needs seek god with all
our heart and mind in this present life, if we intend here after to find
him, for if we dylygentlye seek him now abstanynge from all evil works, at
the day of judgment he shall be favorable and merciful unto us, for he is
maruaylous ge^tyll and full of all mercy. For it is written, that he is sweet
and gentle to every man, and that is mercy is above all his Psalm. 144.
works. Therefore good sister let us pray unto this terrible and most just
judge, with tears and great lamentacyon, with all devotion, that at the day
of his judgment, he reward us not after our merytes and iniquites, but after
his great and abundaunt mercy, and that we with other mysdoers here not this
terryble sentence. Get ye hence ye dampnable sinners in Math. v
to perpetual fire. But that it will please him we may with his elected and
chosen out servants here these most joyful words. Come hither ye most
blessed and receive the kingdom of heaven the which has been prepayred for you
sense the beginning of the world.

The brothers exhortacio^
GOod sister now I trust I have brought my ship into the haue^, and made
an end of my exhortacyons and good monytyons, yet that notwithstanding, I
return once again, intendyng to speak a few mo words with you. Ye desired
me to write you a few good monycyo^s the which thing I have acco^plyshed and
done, not parauenture so well as I should have done, but yet by gods grace as
well as I could, I have chosen out of holy fathers saynges for your
instructyon the best sentences I could find, y^ which I have presented unto
you in this book, Take heed therefore my goo sister, for ye have now the good
admonycyons and instructions of perpetual life, ye have now good counsel and
as it were a rule to live well. Now there ca^ no ignorance of syn excuse you,
ye know now how ye shall live well and virtuously, ye can not say now that ye
did a mysse and fell by ignorance, why so? For now the law is expou^de and
declared unto you, the which ye must follow, the precepts of good living are
showed you, and how ye shall order your self in gods house. Ye have now the
knowledge of gods commandments, ye know now how to live justly.
Therefore take heed ye fall not, take heed that from hence forwards, ye forsake
not such things as ye know are good and virtuous. For by sinful living, ye
despise y^ goodness of gods laws, if ye little regard such virtuous points
as ye do need, and live naughtelye, god shall greatly blame you, why so? For
it were much better not to know the ways of virtuous living, then to leave
the^ after yt we know them. And therefore retain and keep in mind and deed,
the gift of science and knoledge that has been showed you, fulfill that ye
have learned, and with all dylygence, keep the fruytfull precepts and
admonycyons of this book.

Imprynted at London in Paul's church yearde, at the sign of the maidens heed,
by Thomas Petyt.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


