LOOK Up and see Wonders.

A miraculous Apparition in the Air, lately seen in Barke-shire at Bawlkin
Green near Hatford. April. 9th. 1628.



Imprinted at London for Roger Mi^^^^^ 16^8.

To the Reader.
AS thou do Read, so practice to Understand, and make use of thy Labor:
Let not this Knowledge vanish away like a Dream, but keep it as a Monument
engraven in Brass or Marble. This is a strange Chronicle, written by a strong
hand: The best Antiquary in the World has set it down, for God himself puts
his own Name to it: A few leaves of his Filling, are an ample Volume: Every
small Epitome Written by him, is a Book in Folio. Here thou shall find no
great number of Lines, but much more Matter comprehended in them, then the
Words seem to carry. This is but a Picture of a Battle fought in the Air: A
naked Description of a terrible Fight; fearful no doubt to the Standers by;
but it may be Comfortable to thee, if hereby thou getst thy self Armed to
Combat with thy sins, for questionless upon some such occasions grew this
Quarrel; which may easily be taken up, if thou (and every one of us) submit
our selves, confess wherein we are faulty, and so plead for Atonement.

Nothing is here presented to thine eyes, to fright thee, but to fill thee with
Joy, that this Storm fell so far off, and not upon thine own Head. Yet
beware, for the same Hand holds a Rod to strike every one that deserves
punishment. Pray to Heaven to free Thee from it; and so wishing thee the strong
heart of a true Christian, to bear with Patience, what thy Self shall feel,
and to pity others, I bid thee farewell.

Look Up, And See Wonders.
SO Benumbed we are in our Senses, that albeit God himself Holla in our
Ears, we by our wills are loath to hear him. His dreadful Pursiuants of
Thunder, and Lightning terrify us so long as they have us in their fingers,
but being off, we dance and sing in the midst of our Follies. So blind are
we in the understanding of Heavenly matters, that we cannot see our way to
Goodness, but run headlong into the Paths of our own everlasting undoing.
Dangers have not the skill to fright us; Death only is the Man, that can do
good upon us: And yet, though Death knockes at our very Doors, nay; albeit we
see him sit at our Bedside, yet the hope of Life, plays her idle, vain, and
wanton Music under our Windows.

Into what a miserable Sea of calamities does a man then throw himself, when
in this his earthly Navigations, he sails he cares not how, nor knows where
to find a safe Landing-place.

We had need therefore to make much of understanding, wise, and skillful
Pilots, for the best of us all is an ignorant Mariner. Apt enough we are, to
run upon Rocks and quicksands; but an excellent Seaman is he, that in all
weathers can bear up Sail, and by the virtue of his good Compass, is able to
avoid such mortal Dangers.

The four Elements have been Preachers to us, yet we get (or at least, show)
little amendment by the Doctrine, they have Read unto us. The Earth, (once
fruitful) has of late years felt the curse of Barrenness: Her womb has
been the deuourer of many thousands of her own Children; she has not played
the part of a Mother, but a Step-dame, for instead of strong wines, she has
bin drunk with blood.

How has the other Element of water been troubled? What Monsters has the Sea
brought forth? The sons of Murder, Rapine, Fury, and Pyracy. As for Fire, it
has denied of late to warm us, but at unreasonable rates, and extreme hard
conditions. But what talk I of this earthy nourishment of fire? how have the
Fires of Heaven (some few years past) gone beyond their bounds, and appeared
in the shapes of Comets, and Blazing Stars? The Air has bin infected, and
millions have dropd into Graves, by sucking in her mortal poison. The Air is
the shop of Thunder and Lightning: In that, has of late bin held a Muster of
terrible enemies, and threatners of Vengeance, which the great General of the
Field, who Conducts and Commands all such Armies, (God Almighty, I mean) auert
from our Kingdom, and shoot the arrows of his indignation some other way,
upon the bosoms of those that would confound his Gospel.

Now, albeit that these four great quarter masters of the World ( the four
Elements) have in former times, and in this of our own, bin in civil Wars
one against another, and bent their Forces at the Heart of this Kingdom; yet
how happy are we, to eat our bread in Peace, and to drink our wholesome and
sweet Waters? No Nation beneath the Sun has more cause to sing Praises to
God, and send up Thanks to Heaven then ours.

The Drum beats here, but the Battles are abroad: The Barbed Horse tramples
not down our Corne-fieldes: The earth is not manurde with man's Blood (as it
was in the Wars of the Barons; and those of the two Royal contending
Families, of York and Lancaster.) Here we press Soldiers; but other
Countries bear the burden of their Armies. Here they kindle their Match, but
the fire is not given, till they come into Foreign Kingdoms.

This Security yet must not be suffered to rock us fast asleep; and so with
Sampson, to have our strength cut from us, by the Strumpet of our carelesnes:
For albeit, our Gates have no Canons planted against them* Nor no
scaling-ladders se^ to the Walls of our Cities; yet there are Whole Ambushes of
enemies lurking in our private Bosoms; And those are our sins, which daily
lay traynes of powder, to blow us up, and confound us.

For these, there is an Eye open, which day and night does over look our
actions; and if mild and gentle chidings cannot call us home, let us thank
our selves, and the stubbornness of our hearts, if we groan under the
stripes of correction.

Let us turn to God, and God will not turn his Face from us: Say thy sins
were as black as Hell; yet Repentance shall make them like the Wings of a
Dove, covered ( as the Kingly Prophet sings) with silver, the Wings bearing the
color of yellow Gold. Repentance is able to make the soul as white as the
snow in Zalmon; Psalm 67.
and Gods mercy like the mountain of Bashan.

Repentance is a golden Key, which opens Heaven, and looks up to Gods anger.
Repentance wins him to smile upon us, and to say thus; If thou still art
climing up this Hill of Repentance; Blessed shall thou be in the City; and
Blessed in the Field: Blessed shall be the fruit of thy Body; and the Fruit
of thy ground, and the fruit of thy Cattle: The increase of thy Kine; and the
Flocks of thy Sheep: Blessed shall be thy Basket, and thy Dough: Blessed
shall thou be when thou come in; and blessed also when thou go out.

Thy Land-Souldiers ( O England) shall not stand in fear of any Italian
Spin^laes; nor thy Navy Royal of any Spanish Armadoes: For, thine enemies that
rise against thee, shall fall before thy face; they shall come out against thee
one way, and fly before thee seven ways.

His word that speaks this, may be taken better than any Kings in the World;
and therefore hold out both thy hands, under this Tree of Blessings, and catch
the golden Apples, when so freely they are shaken down into thy lap But if
thou trample these gifts under thy feet, and spurnest at Gods Favors bestowed
upon thee; New quiuers of punishments will then be opened, and other strange
fearful arrows be shot at thy bosom. Heaven shall be turned to Brass; earth
to Iron; dust and ashes be given for Rain; Deuteronomy. 20.
our Wives shall have others lie with them; our great houses shall have others
dwell in them, our Vineyards to be planted, yet we shall never taste them: Our
sheep to be given to our enemies; and our sons and daughters to be led into
Captivity.

If therefore with Naaman, thou would be cleansed from thy Leaprosie of sin,
2 King. 5.41
thou must obey Elisha, and wash thy self seven times in Jordan: Weep seven
times a day; nay seven times an hour, for offending thy merciful Father:
Whosoever with Ahazia, the King of Samaria falls sick, and sends for
recovery to Baal-zebub (the God of Ekron) and not to the true God indeed, he
shall not come from his bed, but die the Death.

For, we sink to the bottom of the waters, as the Carpenters axe did ( in
the second of the Kings,) but, though never so iron-hearted, the voice of an
Elisha (the feruency of Prayer, and praising God) can fetch us from the bottom
of Hell, and by contrition make us swim on the top of the waters of life.

Stand therefore at the Gates of Gods mercy still; beg still; knock still;
and knock hard: For Hannab, was barren, yet being an importunate suitor, her
petition was heard, and signed: She was fruitful, and had three Sons and
Daughters: So, when we are barren in Repentance, in Thanksgiving in Charity, in
Patience, in Goodness, let us unfeignedly pray to Heaven, we shall be fruitful,
and these five shall be our Sons and Daughters. By this means our Mara shall
change her name to Naomi, Ruth. 1.20.
and our bitterness be turned into sweetness.

Have we not great cause then to magnify him, Psalm. 65.
who Crowns the year with plenty, Psalm. 104.
and whose steps drop fatness: Have we not reason to tremble at his
Threatenings, who covers himself with Light, as with a Garment, and spreads
the Heavens like a Curtain? who lays the beams of his Chambers in the
Waters, and makes the Clouds his Chariot, and walks upon the wings of the
wind? This Almighty Thunderer, has Spirits attending upon him, for his
Messengers are flaming fire to run of his errands: If he but looks upon the
earth in anger, it trembles: If he but touch the Mountains, they smoke, and
are consumed: So that if we fall not on our knees, to do him reverence. If we
open not our lips, to glorify his Name: If we fall not flat on the Earth, at
the sound of his dreadful voice; woe be to us, we are lost for ever, undone
for ever: His blessings (if we receive them not with the right hand) are to us,
as messes of meat set upon a Grave What then are his chastizements? O^ they
are terrible and not to be indurde. Many windows has he set open in Heaven,
to show what Artillery he has lying there, and many of our Kings have
trembled, when they were shown unto them. What blazing Stars (even at
Noone-dayes,) in those times, hung houering in the Air? How many frightfull
Ecclipses both of Sun and Moon? What apparitions of battles? How many times
have Armies fought against Armies, in the disturbed upper Regions?

It is not for man to dispute with God, why he has done this so often, nor
rashly to pronounce judgment upon any thing, it pleases God to accomplish
now; but, with fear and trembling casting our eyes up to Heaven, let us now
behold him, bending his Fist only, as lately he did to the terror and
affrightment of all the Inhabitants, dwelling within a Town in the County of
Barkshire.

Look up therefore now; and see a New Wonder.
THE name of the Town is Hatford (in Barkeshire) some eight miles from Oxford.
Over this Town, upon Wensday being the ninth of this instant Month of April
1628. about five of the clock in the afternoon. This miraculous, prodigious,
and fearful handy-worke of God was presented, to the astonishable amazement
of all the beholders, Men, Women, and children, being many in number.

The weather was warm, and without any great show of distemperature, only the
sky waxed by degrees a little gloomy, yet not so darkened but that the Sun
still and anon, by the power of the brightness, brake through the thick
clouds, and made them give way to the Majesty of his beams.

A gentle gale of wind then blowing from between the West and Northwest; in an
instant was heard, first a hideous rumbling in the Air, and presently after
followed a strange and fearful peale of Thunder, running up and down these
parts of the Country, but it struck with the loudest violence, and more
furious tearing of the Air, about a place called The white Horse h^ll, than in
any other. The whole order of this thunder, carried a kind of Maiesticall state
with it, for it maintained (to the affrighted Beholders seeming) the fashion of
a fought Battle.

It began thus: First, for an onset, went on one great Cannon as it were of
thunder alone, like a warning piece to the rest, that were to follow. Then a
little whileafter, was heard a second; and so by degrees a third, until the
number of 20. were discharged (or there abouts) in very good order, though in
very great terror.

In some little distance of time after this, was audibly heard the sound of a
Drum beating a Retreat* Amongst all these angry peales, shot off from Heaven;
this begat a wonderful admiration, that at the end of the report of every
crack, or Cannon-thundering, a hizzing Noise made way through the Air, not
unlike the flying of Bullets from the mouths of great Ordnance: And by the
judgment of all the terror-stricken witnesses, they were Thunderbolts. For one
of them was seen by many people, to fall at a place called Bawlkin Green,
being a mile and a half from Hatford: Which Thunderbolt was by one Mistress
Green, caused to be dug out of the ground, she being an eyewitness
amongst many other, of the manner of the falling.

The form of the Stone is three-square, and picked in the end: In color
outwardly blackish, somewhat like Iron: Crusted over with that blackness
about the thickness of a shilling* Within, it is soft, of a gray color, mixed
with some kind of mineral, shining like small pieces of glass.

This Stone brake in the fall: The whole piece is in weight nineteen pound and
a half: The greater piece that fell off, weighs five pound, which with other
small pieces being put together, make four and twenty pound and better.

At the hearing of this horrid Thunder, all men (especially about Sheffington)
were so terrified, that they fell on their knees, and not only thought, but
said, that verily the day of Judgment was come. Neither did these fears take
hold only of the people, but even Beasts had the selfsame feeling and
apprehension of danger, running up and down, and bellowing, as if they had bin
mad.

It is in the Country credibly reported, that some other Thunder-stones have
bin found in other places: But for certainty, there was one taken up at
Letcombe, and is now in the custody of the Shriefe.

Many do constantly affirm, that the shape of a Man, beating of a Drum, was
visibly seen in the Air, but this we leave to prove.

Others report that he, who dug up the Stone in Bawlkin Green, was at that
instant stricken lame, but (God be thanked) there is no such matter.

Report in such distractions as these, has a thousand eyes, and sees more than
it can understand; and as many tongues, which being once set a going, they
speak any thing. So now a number of people report there were three Suns
seen in the Element; but on the contrary side, they are opposers against them,
that will affirm they beheld no such matter, and that it was not so. Admit it
were, how oftentimes have three Suns, four; nay five, and sometimes more
appeared in the Air, both in England, and other Countries round about us? They
who out of their Astronomicall judgments write of such apparitions,
alleging, and proouing by strong arguments, that such disturbances in the
Caelestiall bodies of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, do more often from
Natural causes, than Supernatural.

Howsoever, it is not fit that any man, should take upon him, to write too
broad and busy Comments on any such Textes as these Let us not be so daring as
to pry into the closet of Gods determinations. His works are full of Wonders,
and not to be examined: Let us not be so foolish, as turn Almanacke-makers,
and to Prognosticate, Prophecy, Foredoome, or Foretell, what shall happen,
fair weather or foul, to our own Kingdom, or any other; scarcity, or
plenty* War, or Peace, for such giddy-brayn^d Medlers, shoot their arrows
beyond the Moon.

The Heavenly designs are of a higher Nature, than to hold any correspondence,
commixture, or conjunction with the fantastical compositions of Humane
frailty. Gods Books are not so easily opened: Man's eyes are too weake-sighted,
too dull-poynted to look into his Voluminous, and Misterious Wonders. The
Learning of all the Universities in the World, is mere ignorance, to the
Almighties understanding.

Lay by therefore thy Jacobs staf^e, thou that art too scrutinous, to look into
the Thunderers treasury; forbear to take the height of these false imaginary
Suns; and fright not thy Country with thy ouer-daring, foolish, and vain
glorious predictions. I speak not this to Arm any Man with security,
negligence, or misbeliefe; or to make him think, that God when he shows us
such signs, such rods from Heaven, (doing so but seldom,) does it to no
purpose; But let not us be too inquisitiue what that purpose is: the wranglings
of Schools, is not so unpleasing, to ignorant standers by, as our contentions
and quaeres about this business, should be to God.

Enough it shall be for us to see, and fear; to hear, and not meddle; to
apprehend what our weakness can, and to admire the depth which we cannot read.

The Master of the household being angry, it is the duty of us his servants, to
do our best to please him, keep him quiet, and not to provoke him to a higher
indignation, least in his just fury, which every day (every hour,) we are apt
to run in. to, he utterly confounds us, and bring us to nothing. Which, the
Almighty for his own mercies sake, forbid forget, and forgive our sins. Amen.

FINIS.

