CHRIST'S CONFESSION AND COMPLAINT, Concerning HIS KINGDOM AND SERVANTS;
Conuincing Jews of obstinacy, Romish Catholics of Conspiracy, Seducers of
Sedition, Arminians of Apostacy, and diverse others of Coldness, Schism,
Treachery and Hypocrisy.

By J. P.

1. TIM. 6.13. He witnessed a good Confession before Pontius Pilate.

Bernard. De ordine vitae. Vbinam quaeso vera prudentia nisi in Christi
doctrina? Soli ergo qui eius doctrina imbuti sunt, prudentes dicendi sunt.

Printed, M.DC.XXIX.

TO THE HONOR OF ALMIGHTY GOD.
ETERNAL and incomprehensible Lord God, who have given to thine only begotten
Son Jesus Christ, dominion and a Kingdom, that all people, Nations and
languages should serve and obey him; and who having first sent this Kingdom to
the Jews, who rejected it, and since to diverse other Nations that have fallen
a way from it, and follo wed Antichrist, have of they great goodness,
vouchsafed among other places, to have thy Kingdom now these many years in
this Island: yet have not we O Lord, in humility and thankfulness, in all
matters of faith and salvation, subjected our selves to the same; but the
Corner stone has been in sundry points, of diverse Builders refused: who have
brought in new and contrary doctrines against the word of they Grace and
Kingdom; and many, O Lord, have followed their pernicious ways. We have
sinned and done wickedly, and have rebelled by departing from thy Precepts; and
thereby have deserved, that thy Kingdom should also be taken from us, and
given to a Nation bringing forth the fruits thereof:

But, O Lord God, if the foundations be destroyed, yet what has the Righteous
done? What has they holy Son Jesus done, that he should lose his Kingdom,
and so many people here, and in other Nations? or if he lose none that thou
have given him, yet that he should not have them to serve him with more
freedom? He is worthy to be served of all, without fear of Enemies, who
redeemed us to thee by his blood, out of every kindred and tongue, and people
and Nation. It has been said, The Kingdoms of this world are become the
Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ, and he shall reign for ever. We
know O Lord, that thou will make good they Word; and if we believe not, yet
thou abidest faithful. Nevertheless, the Kings of the earth have set
themselves, and the Rulers take counsel together against thee, and thy Christ:
In many Kingdoms and Provinces, where the Gospel has been lately preached,
they seem to have prevailed and reduced people to Antichristian slavery: but
thou, O Lord, have promised to speak unto them in thy wrath, and by thy Word
to overcome them. Up, Lord, therefore, and let not man have the upper hand:
Awake, awake, and put on strength, O Arm of the Lord, awake as in the ancient
days, when thou did divide the Sea; and brakest the heads of the Egyptian
Dragons in the waters: take unto thee again, O Lord, they great power, and
reign over all Nations, Jews, and Gentiles: though they and we have deserved
no such King, but rather the most contrary; yet in the multitude of they
mercies, bury the multitude of all our transgressions: suffer not them nor us
to walk in darkness; but for thine own Names sake, send out thy light and
thy Truth, and let them lead us, and bring us to the saving knowledge and
obedience of thee and thy Christ.

Give a blessing, O Lord, to all good means conducing to the same, and namely
to these few proofs and observations, gathered, by thy assistance, from the
Confession and Complaint of thy dear Son. In them, O God, defend what is
thine own: And let not those, O Lord God of hosts, that put their trust in
thee, de ashamed of the Truth because of me, for who am I, dust and ashes, one
of the lowest rank of thy Servants, that when many great and learned dare not,
or do not, I should adventure to show the wrongs done to the Kingdom of my
Savior, that am not able of my self to think a good thought? Thou know, O
Lord, that most men have the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, with respect of
persons, looking more who writes, then what is written; though they confess,
that it often pleases thee, out of the mouths of Babes and sucklings, to
ordain strength, because of thine enemies; for their greater shame and
confusion, that so thou might still the enemy and auenger; when they shall
see, that if they could get all the wise, and learned, and mighty men in the
world, to be on their side, yet thou can choose and enable the foolish things
of this world to confound the wise, and the things that a^e not, to bring to
naught the things that are. Thou, O Lord God, art to such weakeones, the best
Patron, the surest Sh^eld and Buckler: Show therefore thy marvelous loving
kindness, O thou that sauest them that trust in thee, from those that resist
thy right hand. Thou that can manifest thy might in weakness, Bow the
heavens, O Lord, and come down, and make thy Name known to thine adversaries,
that the Nations may tremble at thy presence: Cast down the strong holds and
high conceits of proud Heretics, exalted against the knowledge of thee the
only true God, and thy Son Jesus Christ whom thou have sent: Bring into
captivity every thought, to the obedience of thy Christ: for thine, O Lord, is
the Kingdom, that then thou should rule all, thine the power and the
glory, of giving and effecting all good things: to thee, O Father, together
with thy Son our Savior, and thy holy Spirit, three Persons, one true and
everliving God, be given, as due is, all obedience, honor, praise, and glory,
now and for ever, Amen.

TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE, CHARLES, by the grace of God King of great
Britain, France, and Ireland, Defendor of the Faith, etc.
THere was a Law (Dread Sovereign) among the Romans, Gueuara in his Epistles.
That upon pain of death, none should presume to approach the Tent where the
Emperor did eat and sleep, except such as did serve him by day, and guard
him by night. The Emperor Aurelius being in the wars in Asia against
Cenobia, in the night a certain Greek Soldier entered the Emperors Tent, who
being taken to be executed for the same, the Emperor from his bed cried out
with a loud voice, If his man did come to sue for any thing for himself, let
him die; but if for another, let him live. The matter being examined, it was
found that the poor man came to sue for his three companions that were taken
sleeping in the watch, who thereupon were then all saved: whereby that good
Prince got to himself an immortal name of clemency. Now seeing I also (a
common Soldier) come not to sue for my self, but my Savior, nor in my own
Name and words, but in his Confession and Complaint; and about those, who if
not in your Majesty's service, yet in Christ's Camp, have been taken asleep
being of the watch, no man will (I hope) be so rash, as to conceit that your
Majesty a Christian King should not overcome a Pagan Prince, in that much
honored virtue; much less so far to forget the duty of a subject, as to infer
from this example, that we under the Gospel of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, have lived to a time, when it should be accounted a crime in any
Christian, to confess and defend the faith of Christ crucified. Ide^ in orat.
ad C^rol. 5. inter Epist.
Your Majesty by your Royal title is Defender of the faith; and
consequently of all those your Majesty's subjects that profess and maintain
the same. Then, says Gueuara, is the Prince natural of the Kingdom when he
does observe and defend the Gospel of Christ.

I confess, right high and mighty Monarch, your Majesty's affairs are many
and important; that among many things offered to your Princely consideration,
some may be of greater consequence in the conceit of the preferrers, then in
true substance, and may perhaps be therefore answered with parturiunt montes,
nascetur rediculus mus, or with that, Non vacat exiguis rebus adesse Ioui. But
this Confession, among other things, manifests that the success and safety
of temporal Kingdoms, depend on the due receiving and maintenance of Christ's,
and extirpation of all the open and secret enemies thereof. Knowing then, that
in this Island, Christ has had a Kingdom these seauenty years or upwards;
that there is noe true Christian, nor good subject, but would be loath to see it
eaten out by Jesuitical or Pelagian practices; what honorable or loial
Servant is there in youre^ Majesty's Court, that if a man, Ieh. 9.1.30.
as weak, as he that was blind from his birth, should, by Gods assistance,
plead Christ's cause to the Rulers with good proofs, would not take that of
our Savior into consideration, chap. 12.48.
He that rejects me and receives not my words, bath one that judges him,
the Word that I have spoken, the same shall judge him in the last day?

The first part which conuinceth the Jews, may seem at first sight, to make
nothing for, or against, any here, nor much to concern; Christ's cause in this;
Island; but as it like a great wheel moves all the lesser, and like a Root
yealdeth sap and life to all the branches: the work it self is but little, and
that subject fills not a fifth part of it; vouchsafe therefore, great King,
your Royal and Princely patience, and your Majesty shall soon see how
revived heresies do eat at the root both of Church and State, and that with
noe ordinary danger. Yet do I not strike at the Arminians, but through the
sides of the Pelagians, nor so much at their tenets, as at their practices:
nor at them, but as they are against the Kingdom of God, the honor of your
Majesty, and the peace, safety, and strength of your Kingdoms: Neither is
that done by me, but by Christ's own Confession and Complaint, and such
consequences as necessarily follow from the same: the examples out of holy
writ, and other Histories, here gathered, being only Instances of the
neuerfailing truth of that, which Christ in his Confession denied or affirmed:
Now therefore, the great God of heaven and earth, in whose hands are the
hearts of Kings, give your Majesty to see, embrace and establish the things
that belong to the peace of your Kingdoms, Luk 19 42.
and now perplexed subjects, which, is the thing herein desired, and daily
begd of God in continual prayers, by your Majesty's most humble subject, and
Vassal,

To the Christian Reader.
CHRISTIAN and Truth-louing Reader, I offer here to thy most retired and
serious considerations the Confession and Complaint of Christ Jesus our
Savior, with such undeniable consequences as necessarily follow from the same;
that so thou may observe from his mouth, who is the best Pilote, what course
to steer in this troublesome and tempestious age, to bring that precious
Jewel and Vessel of thine, thy yet floting Soul unto the Haven of true
happiness; that it may not be surprised by Seducers; suffer shipwreck against
the Rocks or late sunk Vessels of error, nor run a ground in the shallowes
of ignorance; Ephesians. 4.14.
That we henceforth be noe more children tossed to and fro, and carried about
with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness,
whereby they lie in wait to deceive: But following the Truth in love, may grow
up into him in all things which is the head, even Christ: A work that might
have been undertaken by one more experienced in such sacred mysteries, and
better qualified for them, then I am. Yet if a man that is but an ordinary
Passenger in a ship, shall epsy it to be near a Rock, a Ship sunk, or some
other Sea mark, set up to discover a danger; who will blame him, if, while
others that should watch, are sleeping, or otherwise buisied, he give notice
thereof to them that are with him embarked in the same Ship, or in any other
within hearing, that the dangers may be avoided?

Such as bear good will to Sion, pray for, and truly seek the peace of our
Jerusalem, will soon perceive that my endeavors, herein, are only exercised
in seeking the Kingdom of God, the honor and safety of our Sovereign Lord the
King, the peace and happiness of his Majesty's Kingdoms, and of Gods Church in
them; together with the conviction and amendment of such as have done evil
offices to any of these, 2. Tim. 2.25.
If God peradventure will give them repentance to the acknowledging of the
Truth: and that they may recover themselves out of the snare of the Devil, who
are taken captive by him at his will. But on the other side, if any that have
exchanged their best judgments for such honors, and other gifts of the World,
as blind the eyes of the wise, or for the hopes of them; If any who are
Iesuited, or poisened with Romish or Pelagian errors, finding themselves
touched with these lines, shall make a worse construction of them, to clear
themselves or their adherents, then can with good Conscience be given, and
framing a mind to me out of their own, shall thereupon begin to inueigh
against this little tratise, or the composer thereof; the Book it self will I
hope say enough to stop such men's mouths; and if that do not, I know a long
Epistle can not do it: I will therefore leave all further Apollogies, and
appealing from them to God, to whom all hearts lie open, implore his almighty
protection: In the mean time hopeing such things of thee as accompany
salvation, and beseeching thee to excuse and correct with thy pen such faults,
as (not without wrong done to me) have escaped the Printer in the printing; I
rest

Thine in Christ Jesus I. P.

CHRIST'S CONFESSION AND COMPLAINT.
Ioh. 18.36.37. Jesus answered My Kingdom is not of this world: If my Kingdom
were of this world then would my Servants fight, that I should not be delivered
to the Jews: but now is my Kingdom not from hence.

Pilate therefore said unto him, Art thou a King then? Jesus answered, Thou
sayeest that I am a King. To this end was I borne, and for this cause came I
into the world, that I should bear witness unto the Truth: Every one that is
of the Truth hears my voice.


THAT which S. Paul says of all holy Scripture; 2. Tim. 3.15.
can not but be verified in this, that it is given by inspiratio^ of God, and
is proffitable for doctrine, for reproefe, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness; That the man of God may be perfect: because in saying that Jesus
Christ witnessed a GOOD confession before Pontius Pilate, 1. Tim. 5.6.13.
he must needs have respect to this here prefixed: for there is noe other
mentioned by all the other Evangelist save this, that when Pilate asked him,
Art thou the King of the Jews? he answered him, Thou say it. Which is
comprehended in this confession, recorded by S. John: for these words of our
Savior Christ, spoken in the morning of his Passion unto Pilate sitting in the
judgment hall, are an answer to that question asked by Pilate in the forgoeing
verse. Ioh. 18.13.
Art thou the King of the Jews? to which question Christ answers first by a
question, neither plainly affirming himself to be the King of the Jews,
least being mis^enderstood of the worldly Kingdom, he should offer them some
show of cause of putting him to death, because that Kingdom was accounted
Csars; nor yet denying the truth; but rather confessing and implying himself
to be a King, saying, Say thou this thing of thy self? or did others tell
it thee of me? verse. 34.
As if he said, Do thou thy self imagine it? do thou think it? or have
others told it to thee, that I am a King? or have made my self one, that thou
ask me this question, either as thinking me to be King of the Jews, or
seeking to have wherewithal to condemn me? do thou ask this question of
thy self, to get matter out of my own mouth against me, as the high Priest
did? Verse. 35.
or did others tell it thee of me? At which manner of speaking Pilate somewhat
offended, answered, Am I a Jew? that is either in opinion and religion, as some
are, who think thee to be the King of the Jews, Math. 27.17.
and their expected King or Messiah, as he says, who is called Christ; and,
whom ye call King of the Jews: or in malice, as others are, who being of a
contrary faith, hate thee, and seek thy life, because thou art thought to be
that King, and better then themselves; they therefore make it matter of
accusation; I though a Gentile, and Cesars Deputy have not sought out this
thing, nor thee to find matter against thee; Ioh. 18.35.
but thine own nation, and the cheifs Priests have delivered thee unto me. As
if he said, The envy is not mine, but theires; for he know that for envy
they had delivered him. Mat. 27.18.
Yet to satiffie them in examining him* he adds, What have thou done? as if
he said, to make thy self King of the Jews, and thereby an offendour against
Caesar. To which Jesus then answered more directly and plainly, saying, My
Kingdom is not of this world: if my Kingdom were etc.

The causes of this Confession.
THE causes that both moved Pilate to examine him upon this point, and Christ to
make this answer, were the invectiue exclamations and accusatio^s of his
obstinate enemies the Jews, who said, We found this fellow perverting the
nation, and forbidding to give tribute to Caesar, saying, that he himself is
Christ a King. They here accuse him of three things. 1. They say they found him
perverting the nation. 2. Forbidding to give tribute to Caesar. 3. Saying that
himself is Christ a King. Or if you will, they accuse him of perverting the
nation, which they would seem to prove by these two, that he forbids to
give tribute to Caesar, and that he says that himself is Christ a King. That
of the tribute was a most false accusation, and only a charging of him, with
that which they would have had him to say, not with that which he did say: for
when they fauninglie applauded his integrity, and the truth of his doctrine,
then they said, Tell us therefore what think thou? Mat. 22 16.
Is it lawful to give tribute unto Caesar or not? But he perceiving their
wickedness, said, Why tempt ye me ye hypocrites: Ye that pretend that ye think
me true, and that I teach the way of God in truth; that in respect of it. I
care not for any man, nor regard the person of man, so as for man's sake to
bauke or wrest the truth of God: A thing indeed as odious wicked and detestable
as their dissembling; who do not now speak lies in hypocrisy, but truth in
hypocrisy, for what they said of Christ, was noe lie; he was true, taught the
way fo God in truth, and in respect thereof cared not for any man, but was
indeed Doctor resolutus, and therein a perfect pattern for all his Elect to
imitate, as besides other times appeared now in his confession, first before
the high Priest, and after before Pilate; where he would speak the truth,
though he knew it would cost him his life: and yet as they speak these words,
they are lies; yea they are also lies spoken in hypocrisy, because they do
not speak the truth that is in their heart, they do not think as they
speak, but speak against their seared consciences, which will needs be
persuaded (notwithstanding all good proefes of life, miracles and doctrine)
that he is a deceiuer; or if some of them were thereby convicted in their
consciences, that he was true, etc. yet they envy, and hate him for these
things, there is noe love, noe desire to learn or be informed, but rather to
catch and ensnare, and so noe truth, but trocherie in these their speeches;
and even in that respect they are Hipocrits and Liars; convicted for examples
to us, and that by Christ himself, who at the general day will thus judge of
all that speak well to an ill end.

He asks to see the tribute money; they show him; he asks whose Image and
superscription it is, They say unto him Cesars: M^t. 22.
Then says he unto them, give unto Caesar the things that are Cesars Caesari
nummos, Deo vosipsos. Aug. in Joan Tract. 40.
; and unto God the things that are Gods. This is not to forbid tribute to
Caesar; they could prove noe such thing out of these words. Pilate h^mselfe
that heard all they could suggest cleares him hereof, while after examination,
he says, I find noe fault in this man. They therefore knowing they could not
p^oue it directly, go about in th^s their accusation to prove it indirectly,
and by consequence, saying, We found this fellow perverting the nation, and
forbidding to give tribute to Caesar, saying, that he himself is Christ a King;
as if they said, in this that he says himself is Christ a King, in this he
forbids to give tribute to Caesar: for if he be Christ a King, then he is
King of the Jews; and tribute from Jews only begongeth to him. For they
conceited that their Messiah to come should be a temporal King, or if
spiritual, yet withal temporal and as externallie glorious, as David, or
Solomon, if not more magnificent; not himself subject or tributarie to any on
earth, nor yet suffering them to be subject or tributarie to any, but himself;
one f^eeing them from subjection to all other Princes, and rather making all
Kings his tributaries: and therefore they infer that to make himself this
Christ, this King is to forbid ^ribu^et^ C^sar, and to pervert the nation; as
they say soon after, whosoever makes himself a King speaks against C^s^r
And it seems Pilate did so understand their meaning^ for thereupon he
asks, Art thou the King of the Jews? All the^ that they have to accuse him
of, whether justly or vniustli is that he makes him self the Christ, for
though they sought false witness against him, and many false witnesses came,
yet their witness agreed not. Marc. 14.58.
At last came two which said, we heard him say, I will destroy this Temple
made with hands, and in three days I will make another without hands. But
neither did their wi^nesse agree together. How could it? Ioh. 2.19.
For he s^ake not any such words, as with hands, or without hands: but only
destroy this Temple, and in three days I will raise it up. Some of them
understand, or at least w^ll needs seem to understand this of the Temple of
Stone; But he spoke of the Temple of his body. Mat. 27.63.
And it seems the chief Priests and Pharisees did so understand him, though
sometime dissemblingly they seem to take it otherwise: For after his death,
they come to Pilate, saying Sir we remember that that deceiuer said while he
was yet alive, After three days I will rise again; command therefore that
the Sepulcher be made sure.

This then is all that they have to say against him, Christ's Confession to the
high Priest.
that he made him self the Christ: therefore after the high Priest, his
enemy, had willingly heard all that his most malicious adversaries could lay
to his charge, and could find nothing proved, so ill their witness agreed;
Mat 16.63.
to get this confession out of his own mouth he said unto him, I adjure thee
by the liueing God that thou tell us, whether thou be the Christ the Son of
God. Jesus, knowing their unbelief and malice, was not forward to answer
directly, Luk 22.67.69 70.
but said first, If I tell you ye will not believe. Hereafter shall the Son
of Man sit on the right hand of the power of God. Mat 26.63. Mar 14.62.
Then said they all art thou the Son of God? And he said unto them, ye say
that I am. And to the High Priest, thou have said. I am. Then the high Priest
rent his clothes, and says, What need we any further witnesses? Luke 22.71.
ye have heard his blasphemy. Therefore after buffetings and many contumelies
heaped on him, they led him away to Pilate, with this accusation, and noe
other; thence inferring, as I said, Luke 23.2.
that making himself the Christ, he perverted the nation, and forbad tribute
to Caesar. And therefore when Pilate had examined him and said. I find noe
fault in this man: they were the more feirce, Verse. 3.4.
saying, he stirs up the people, teaching thorowout all Jury, beginning from
Galilee to this place As if they said, he stirs up the pecp^e by his
teaching; viz. to believe that he is the Ch^st a King of the Jews. This then
is all their accusation they stick to, and this or the like all their proof:
Ioh. 19 6.7.
therefore when Pilate haueing heard the accusers, and the accused, said
again, I find noe fault in him. The Jews answered, we have a law, and by
our law he ought to die, because he made himself the Son of God. As if they
said and consequently our King: where by the way the high Priest and they
confess in effect, that the Messiah should be the Son of G^d: yet for this
only thing must he suffer, as appears also by this that when Pilate to
iustefie himself would write on his Cross his accusation, this was all they,
or he could prove, Mat. 27.37. M^r. 15.26. Ioh. 19.19. Verse ^21.
or find to write over his head. Jesus of Nazereth King of the Jews. Therefore
when the chief Priests saw it, they said to Pilate, write not, the King of
the Jews: but that he said, I am King of the Jews. and that (as ye saw) was
by confessing to the high Priest, that himself was the Christ the Son of
God. The end^ of C^^^^ts preaching, ^^d (...).


True it is, that this was a main end of his teaching and mi^acles to make me^
believe in him, and ob^y the truth of God yea tru^ it is that when before this,
Ioh. 10.24.25.
the Jews urged him to it, saying, How long do thou make us to doubt? If
thou be the Christ tell us plainly. Jesus answered them, I told you and ye
believe me not: the works that I do in my Fathers Name, they bear witness
of me. And most true it is, that the great works which he did in his Fathers
Name, and which indeed could not be done, but in Gods Name as the giueing unto
blind men their sight, to lame men the use of their limbs, to deaf men
hearing, clensing the lepers, raising up the dead, and working by his doctrine
regeneration, faith and obedience in men dead in sins and trespasses, were
all infallible witnesses, that he was of God, that God was with him, that he
was true, truly sent of God, and consequently the true Messiah, as he told
them; Verse. 30.33 34.35.
and that he did not blaspheme when he added, I and my Father are one. For when
they answered him; for a good work we stone thee not, but for blasphemy, and
that thou being a man make thy self God: Psalm. 82.6.
Jesus p^oued it, while he answered them, It is written in your Law, I said ye
are Gods: If he called them Gods unto whom the Word of God came, and the
Scripture can not be broken: Say ye of him whom the Father has sanctified,
and sent into the world, Thou blasphemest because I said I am the Son of
God? which argument, S. Augustine purposely expounding the place, does verry
well understand, Augustinus in Joan. Tract. 48.
and reinforce, saying, If the word of God came to men that they might be
called Gods, wherefore is not the same word of God GOD which is with God? If by
the word of God men are made Gods, if they be made Gods by pertaking of the
word, is not that where of they partake, God? If they that are heated by the
fire, are made to be in some sort greeted Gods, how is not that God whereby
they are made hot? If lights illuminated be Gods, is not that light which does
illuminate them God? thou come to the light and art illuminated, and art
reckened among the Sons of God, etc. If therefore the word of God make you
Gods, how is not the word of God GOD? And indeed such must needs be the
meaning of our Lord, that the same word of the Father was incarnate, and sent
into the world, because his Disciple and Euangclist S. Ioh. 1.
John affirms him to be the word, yea the word, by which all things were
made, Reu. 19.13.
and says plainly, His Name is called the word of God. Reu. 19.13. and that
indeed, because when he himself was asked by some Jews, Ioh. 8.25.
what art thou? he answered, From the beginning that (viz. that word of God)
which I speak unto you: therein, as also in diverse other places, affirming and
proueing himself to be from eternity the very wisdom and word of God, which
he speak and declared unto them, and the same to be the Son of God, and the
promised Messiah: which point, though it be proved more at large by Scriptures
and Fathers in another Character of a Christian page 25. to page 88.
treatise, yet may it not be wholly omitted here, because, ye see, it is the
only thing for which he is accused before Pilate, delivered to death and ever
since rejected by the Jews; and it is a shame for Christians to be ignorant in
that principle, which distinguishes them from Jews, and wherein Jews are to
be conuin^^d.

The things then that we have to prove, at least breifely before we come to
the other part of his confession, are 1. That the pr^mised Messiah was to be
the word of God, and that way the King and Gonvernour of his people, viz
spiritually. 2. That Jesus Christ was this word incarnate, the true Messiah.
Whence these things will follow which are in his confession, that he is King
of the Jews, and indeed of the Gentiles also; that he had and has a Kingdom;
that his Kingdom is not of this world etc. as he confesses before Pilate.

For the first: It is said in the second Psalm, Christ was to be the Son,
the Word. Psalm. 2.
I will declare of the Decree (Law or Word) the Lord said unto me, thou art my
Son. Wherein it is spoken of the Decree or Word, thou art my Son. And so
indeed el in the Hebrew is taken for of, Genesis 20.2. Abraham said of Sarah his
wife, she is my Sister. And twice in another Chapter Job 42.7.8. also 2. King.
19.32. Others read it more plainly, thus, I will preach the Law (Decree or
Word) whereof the Lord has said unto me thou art my Son. That is, of which
Law, Decree or Word, the Lord has said unto me thou art my Son. And thus it
is read in the translation appointed to be read in the Churches of England. And
indeed the very name Son is so ^endred by some verse. 12. for that which is
said there, Kiss the Son, the Septuagint reads receive instruction, and
the Chalde, receive doctrine; as if they both said, receive and embrace the
word of God, which is the Son of God. Also Psalm. 7. where it is said,
Jehovah shall judge the people, the Chalde reads, Psalm. 7.9.
the word of the Lord shall judge the people. And indeed the Prophets Isaiah,
Isa. 2.3.4. Mich. 4.2.3.
and Micah do plainly affirm as much, saying, The Law shall go forth of
Zion, and the word of the Lord out of Jerusalem. And he shall judge among the
nations. He, that is, he the word, who indeed is the Arm of the Lord, he shall
judge. According to which our Savior says, Ioh. 5.22.
first, The Father judges noe man, but he^h committed all iugment to the Son
(the Father only judges by Christ Romans 2 16.) and then shows who the Son^e
is, Ioh. 12.48.
saying, He that reicteth me, and receives not my words has one that judges
him, (...), the word which I have spoken, (...), He shall judge him in the last
d^y. Among which words, there is an emphasis, and a verrie g^eate proof in
the pronoune relative (...), which pointing out a verrie person, and namely the
person spoken of before, proves the word which he spoke to be a person, yea to
be that person spoken of before, August in Ioh. Tract. 54.
the one that should judge. Saint Augustine on these words comparing the
places together shows they must needs be understood thus; and therefore
concludes, he has s^oken h^mselfe, he has shown himself, etc. Idem Tract.
41.
And he is the word of the Father which he spoke to men. Wherein therefore
Christ shows that ^errie word, which he spak to be the Son, and that verrie
wo^d where of the Prophets prophesied, The law shall go forth of Zion, and the
word of the Lord out of Jerusalem. And he (viz. the same word) shall judge
among the nations; Act. 10 42.
whereof Peter s^^th, It is he which was ordained of God to be the judge of
q^ick and dead and whereof the Father himself says, I have set my King upon
my hol^hil of Zion: Psalm. 2.6.
even the word to whom in the next words he says, ^hou art my Son, Isa.
^1.4.5.
of whom also he says, A law shall proceed from me, and I will make my
judgment to rest for a light of the people. My righteousness is near: my
salvation is gone forth, and mine Arms shall judge the people: the Isles shall
wait upon me, and on mine Arm shall they trust. That is on my word, on the
Son, as Psalm. 2. Blessed are all they that trust in him. Therefore the
Prophet speak^ and prays to this person, even unto the word of the Lord, when
he says in the same Chapter, V^rs. 9.
Awake, awake, put on str^ng O Arm of the Lord, awake as in the ancient days
in the generations of old. Art not thou he that has cut Rahab and wounded the
Dragon? Art not thou he which has dried the Sea etc. to show us, that as God
made all things, so did all his great wonders by this person the Word, which
brought lice and locusts on the Egyptians, Psalm. ^05.31.34. Which also was he
that went before them into Canaan Exodus 23.20.21. chap. 33.2. as Captain of
the Lords host. Ioshu 5.14. This Arm is the glory of the Lord, which taking
flesh should be revealed. Isa. 40.5. and after p^t to death according to the
flesh, as the Prophet says, Who h^^h believed our report, Isa. 53.1.2 3.
and to whom has the Arm of the Lord been revealed? that is being
incarnate: for says Isaiah, He shall grow up befort him as a tender plant,
etc. that is, he the Arm shall, Cyprian^ adve^^. Iudaeos. li^. 2. cap 1.
the same person as he^s n^a^ shall g^ow though he be wounded and suffer for
us, as it f^llowe h^ there: We^l therefore does Saint Cyprian understand, that
Christ the Son^e is the Arm mentioned here, and also chap. 52. Isa. 52.1^.
The Lord has made bare his holy Arm (viz his holy word:) in the eyes of all
nations and all the ends of the Earth shall see the salvation of our God.

And indeed Saint John seems to vnde^sta^d Christ to be this Arm while he
says of the unbelieving Jews They beleeu^d not on him, that the saying of
Esaias might be fulfilled, which h^ spoke, I^^. 12.3^ 38.
Lord who has believed ou^ report, and to whom has the Arm of Lord been
revealed? For says Saint Augustine on this place, August in Joan. T^a^t. 53.
The Son is the Arm, because all th^^g^w^re made by him: l^ke as that is
called thy Arm by which thou workest; so the Arm of God is h^s word beca^se
by the word he made the world. And indeed the Word is the Arm, 1. Cor. 1.24.
the power and wisdom whereby God ma^e the World and does all things: and so
as the Apostle says, Christ is the power of God and the wisdom of God. Isa. 40
10. Ioh. 12 48.49.
And so Isaiah says of the Father, The Lord God will come with strong hand,
and his Arm shall rule for him That is, his word shall rule for him. Therefore
Christ who is the Word says, The word that I have spoken, he shall judge: for
I haue^ or spoken of my self, etc. therefore as in the following words he
proves the word he spoke to be the Fathers, and the same to be Si ergo vita
aeterna est ipse Filius, and vita aeterna est mandatum Panis: quid alind dictu^
est, quam ego sum mandatum Patris* Aug. in Joan Tract. 54.
Eternal life; so also in foregoeing verses he that is the Word says there,
verse 44. He that believes on me, believes not on me, but on him that sent me:
that is, whose Word I am (as Augustine excellently understands the like Quid
est, audit verbum meum, nisi audit me credit autem ei qui misit me, quia cum
illi credit, verbo e^us credit: cu^ aute^ verbo e^us credit, mihi credit: quia
verbu^ Patris ego sum. Aug. in Io^^. 19
words Ioh. 5.24.) for we believe him whose word we believe; and we
vnde^stand and see him whose word we understand; h^t declares him: therefore
Christ adds verse. 45.46. And he that sees me, sees him that s^nt me. I am
come a light into the world, that whosoever believes on me should not abide in
darkness, as John says of the word, That was the true light, which lights
every man that comes into the world. And so indeed we may hear God saying
to the Messiah, Isa 42.6 7.17.
I will give thee for a covenant of the people, for a light of the Gentiles: to
open the blind eyes, to bring out the pris^o^s from the pr^son, and him that
sits in darkness out of the pr^son house. Where ye may see that both here
and also Isa 49.8.9. it is expressly showed, that he is the Covenant, viz. the
Word, and ^herein the Light that reueales the Father touching the Salvation of
sinners; and that the end of his coming should be to en^ighten those nations
and people, Jews and Gentiles, which lay bound and overwhelmed in the prison
of sin and ignorance; as it follows there, I will br^nge the blind by a
way that they have not known, I will make darkness light before them, and
crooked things straight. And chap. 25.7.8. He will destroy in th^^ mountain
the face of the covering cast over all people, and the veil that is spread
^uer all nations. To the like effect chap. 29.8.24 chap. (...). chap. 11.9. All
this should be, as he says, chap. 40 5.10. When the glory (viz. the Word) of
the Lord should be revealed, and all flesh should see it together: when his
Arm should rule for him, and be made bare, chap. 52.10. for therefore is the
Father called the Father of glory, Ephesians. 1.17. and Christ is said to be
raised from the dead by the glory of the Father. Romans 6. that is by the
almighty Word of the Father, which is the Son, and the Fathers glory, as
our Wo^d or tongue is ca^l^d our glory, because it Speculu^ enim mentis
plerunque in verbis refulget. Bernard. de ordine vitae. Psalm. 66.7.
express^th and ^e^ealeth us (and sometimes rules for us) Psalm. 16 9. howsoever
Gods Word rules for him: for as he made all things by hi^ Word, which is his
power, so says the Psalmist, He rule^h by his power for ever. that is by his
Word, which is the power of God Now if he rule by his power for ever, then the
Messiah, who should rule for ever for him, must needs be his power: but he
does rule by his power for ever; therefore the Messiah should be his power.

And that the Messiah should be the word of God the ancient Jew, The ancient
Jews prove him to be the Word. Isa. 45.17. Hos. 1.7.
prove out of Isaiah, where it is said, Israel shall be saved by the Lord with
a^ everlasting salvation And also our of Hosea: I will save them by the Lord
th^re God. Both which sayings Ionathas translateth by the word of the Lord
the^^e God. And it is not to be doubted, but that by the said word, they meant
the Messiah. For in psa. 110. which as themselves affirm contains the
mysteries of the Messiah, Psalm. 110.
where it is said, The Lord said unto my Lord etc. Ionathas reads, The Lord
said unto his wo^rd sit thou on my right hand, til etc. And so indeed
howsoever the words be, The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou etc. to show that
this person though he be David's S^nne i^ David's Lord, yet seeing it follows
there, Rule thou in the midst of thine-enemies, it must needs be meant of the
word of the Lord, because it is said, His Arm shall rule for him, that is his
word; Isa 40.10. chap. 2.3.4. chap 51.5.
which he says shall judge among the nations; and whereof he says, mine
Arms shall judge the people, and on mine Arm shall they trust: the word
b^eing the Son, and the King mentioned Psa. 2. as was showed before. And
Rabbi Isaac Arama upon Genesis 47. expounding this text of Psa. 14^. He
s^ndeth out h^s word, says expressly, that this Word is the Messiah, who should
be Gods word. Job 19.26.
So likewise that of Job, I shall see God in my flesh, etc. Rabbi S^me^n vp^n
Genesis ^o^* gathers thereupon that the Word of God shall ^^k flesh in a
woman's womb. Philo that lea^ned Jew shall end th^^ point, touching the nature
and person of the Messiah, as himself writes in h^s book, De Exulibus: By
trad^^on we haue^ (sa^t ^he) that we must expect the death of a high Pre^st,
who shall be the ver^ Word of G^d, void of all ^nne, as well willing as
vnwi^^ing, whose Father should be God, and this Word shall be the Fathers
w^s^em by which all things ^n this world were created.

Now that Christ Jesus was this Word incarnate, That Jesus was the word.
the true Messiah, which (as John says) reuealeth the Father our Sa^^our
himself further proves, while when he had showed himsel^e to be the Word, and
therein the Son of God, as above said, to those Jews that counted this
blasphemy, he added, Ioh. 10.36.37.38.
If I d^e not the works of my Father, believe me not. But if I do, though ye
believe not me, believe the works that ye may know and believe that the Father
is in me, and I in him. As if he said, the works prove it. Therefore in
another place he says, I have a greater wi^nesse then that of John: Ioh. 5.3^.
for the works which the Father has given me to fin^sh, the same works that I
do, bear witness of me that the Father has sent me; and etc. Now therefore
let us take a short view of some few of those works or witnesses, to see how
they prove it; and so proceed to the rest of the confession before Pilate.
Luke 11.13.
When he had cast out a Devil out of one that was dumb: some of them said, he
casts out Devils through Beelzebub the chief of the Devils: to which he
answered, But if I with the finger of God cast out Devils, noe doub. but the
Kingdom of God is come upon you: that is no^ doubt but the Word is now
incarnate, which should come and rule for God: for the Word is the finger, Arms
or power, by which he made and g^^erned all things: Psa. 66. Luke 4.33.
He rule^h by his power for ever. Therefore the Messiah who was to be^h^s
Power, ^s come and works by ^t, because^ by that power cast out Devils.
Therefore ^n the S^nagouge the Devil in one posessed cri^d out, what have we
to do wi^h thee thou Ies^s of Nazareth? ^rt thou come to destroy us? I know
thee who thou^rt the holy one of God And Ies^s reb^ked him s^ying, Ho^d thy
peace, and come out of him. And when the Devil h^d hrowen him in the midst, he
came out of him: And they were all amazed and spoke among themselves saying,
(...).
What a Word is th^^? Our Euangel^st will answer: All things were m^de by him.
In him was life, and the life was the light of men. The life of the Word was
here manifested in the sight of many, while so great a miracle was done
thereby, and the li^e was the light of men to thei^e convertion wh^le in
amazement they say, What a Word is this? for with authority and power he
commands ^he unclean spirits and they come out. The Euang list will answer
again The w^rd was made flesh, and we behold his glory, the glory as of the
only bego t^n of the Father, full of grace and truth. verse. 32.
And so when he ^au^ht, They were aston^^d at his doctrine, for his word was
with power. There was life therein, acco^ding a^ Ch^^st sai^e The words th^^ I
speak they are Spirit, and they are life; yea eternal life, Ioh 12 5^. as
Peter says, Thou have the words of et^rn ^ll life, and we believe (viz. and
therefore we b^le^ue) and are sure the u^r^ the Christ the Son of the
liueing God. S^^nt Matthew says, Mat. 8.17.
They brought to him many that were posessed with Devils, and he cast out the
Spirits wi^h his Word, and healed all that were sieck, wi^h his Word; that is,
with the power by which God the Father works. Io^. (...).5.
At the poole of Bethesda there was a Man that had ^^en lame eight and thir^ie
years. Jesus says unto him, Rise, take up thy Bed and walk. And immediately
the man was made whole and walked. This could be done by noe other then the
Word of God, whereof the Psalmist says, when their Fathers were in like
distress, psa. 107 20.
He sent his Word and healed them. Upon this miracle there was great dispute
between our Savior and the Jews, Aug. in Joan. Tract 19.20.21. etc.
where^n he proved himself to be the Word of the Father, as Saint Avgustin
sh^weth on that Gospel. See also the Character of a Christian. page 63. etc.
Ies^s with clay made of spi^te healed a man that was b^rne blind: Ioh. 9.6.
Ve^^. 3^ 3^
Which man being brought before the Phari^es reasoned thu^; We know that God
hears not sinners: but if a man be a worshipper of God and do his will, him
he hears. Since the world began was it not heard that any man opened the eyes
of the blind. If this man were not of God, he could do nothing. This
unlearned man could not give such divine proofs, but by Gods Spirit, that thus
makes the Pharisees his adversaries more inexcusable. Lazarus had lien four
days in the grave. And when Jesus was come with Martha, Marie and diverse Jews
to the place where they had laid him, at last, Ioh. 11.30.
He cried with a loud voice, Lazarus come forth: And he that was dead came
forth. Verse. 43.
What Word could d^^e this, or any work so great, but the mighty Wo^d of
God, which made the World? If then Ie^us did it by his Word it is plain that
in him the Word was made flesh, and they saw the gl^rie thereof in this
miracle, the glory as of the only begotten of God. But that he did it, is
manifest: for some of the Jews that saw it, went their ways to the Pharisees,
and told them: V^rs. 46.47.
thereupon the Chief Priests gathered a counsel, and said, What do we? for
this man does many miracles If we let him thus alone, Verse. 53.
all men ^ill believe on him, And the Romans shall come and take away both our
place and Nations. From that day they took couns^ll to put him to death; and
did it. But this polecie brought on them the judgment, it went ab^ute to
prevent: and so must all such polecies needs do, which for worldl^e respects
any way hinder Gods Kingdom. Now then seeing Jesus did so great works by his
Word, it is plain that he was the Word, and that Word the Son that should
come in the flesh, and be the M^ssiah.

Which thing the Father himself openly witnessed by voices from Heaven: first
at his Baptism when he came out of the water: Mat. ^3.16.
and lo a voice from Heaven saying, Ioh. 1.33.
This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. John Baptist heard this,
and th^n saw the Spirit of God descending on him like a dove: and therefore
bare record that this is the Son of God.

Now noe man could except against John's testimony, he was so generally
believed to be holy, just and a Prophet Aga^ne when Jesus prayed Father
glori^ie thy Name; Ioh. 12.28.
Then came here a voice from heaven saying, I have glorify bit, and will
glorify it again* He had glorified the word (which is also the Fathers Name,
because it is his word) when so great miracles were den by it, and so many
conue^ted thereby: and so it was glorified again after his death by the
mi^istrie of his Apostles and others to the healing of many, and the conversion
of millions of people. Lastly at his transfiguration on the mount: Mat. 17.5.
behold^ a voice out of the cloud, which said, This is my beloved Son in
whom I ^m well pleased: hear ye him. As if he said, for he is the promised
wo^d.

To his Apostles which heard him and were witnesses of his resurrection, he
gave commission to preach to all nations, and so his miracles, Heb. 2.3.4.
life, doctrine, and resurrection were confirmed to ^s by them that heard him:
who also sealed the Truth of all with their bloods, God also bearing them
witness, both with signs and wonders, and with diverse miracles and gifts of the
holy Ghost. As the hea^ing of a man lame from his mothers womb, and many
others manifested to his and thei^e adversaries. All which proved that Jesus
was (as he taught) the word, and that word the Son, the Messiah which was to
come, and that he did not blaspheme when he c^^fest as much to the high Priest.
Mat. 26.69.
For this yet do they p^esently spit in his f^ce, buffet him, smite, revile
him and lead him a ^ay to Pilate, to be for this only thing put to death,
this being all they could prove or he find, and that, not that he made
himself a temporal King, but spiritual; for when he v^ged him with these
words, Art thou the King of the Jews? what have thou done? Jesus answered, my
Kingdom is not of this world: if my Kingdom were of this world, etc. and when
Pilate (gathering by these words that he confessed himself to be a King)
therefore said unto him, Art thou a King then? Jesus answered, thou s^iest
that I am a King. As if he said, and I must not deny it, for to this end
was I borne, and for this cause came I into the world, that I should bear
witness unto the truth: every one that is of the truth hears my voice.

This then being his plain answer concerning his Kingdom, and the true
subjects thereof, we may consider in this confession these things. 1. A
Kingdom acknowledged, in these words, my Kingdom: which are thrice repeated in
the former of these verses. 2. That this Kingdom is not of this world, as he
says, my Kingd^^ is not of this world. ^. A proof or reason thereof in these
words, for if my Kingdom were of this world, then would my subjects fight that
I should not be deli^ered to the Jews. 4 A conclusion following from the
premises, in these words, but now is my Kingdom not from hence. In the first
there is the Kingdom of the Messiah, and that claimed by out Savior who here
calls it his, as he says my Kingdom. First then we will endeavor to find
out of the old Testament, what the Kingdom of the Messiah was to be, whether
spiritual or temporal, and where the seat thereof should be. And secondly
whether this Kingdom properly belong to Jesus the Son of Marie, who claims
it while he confesses himself to be the Christ and says my Kingdom.

Where first ye know it is already manifested, The Kingdom of the Messiah.
that the M^ssiah was to be the Word, and that therefore his Kingdom and
government must needs be spiritual (ruling men's souls for God his Father) as
was proved from tho second Psalm; where indeed the Father also calls him his
King, that is one ruling for him, saying, I have set my King upon my holy
hill of Sion, psa. 2. Isa. 40.10.
where also while he says my holy hill of Sion, he shows it to be his
Kingdom. So of the Father it is said, His Arm (that is his word) shall rale
for him. It is his Kingdom: for the Kingdom is the Lords, and he is the Gouerno
or of his people. Therefore it is added, verse 11.
He shall feed h^s flock like a Shepherd: he shall gather the Lambs with
his Arm: to show that Christ succeedes David as a Shepherd of the people
feeding the^ with the spiritual food of the word; Fzech. 34.23. and chap.
37.21.24.
and so rules in his throne spiritually. He shoul be their Shepherd: ^zek.
34.23. and Chap. 2^.22.24. So David says, The Lord said unto my Lord sit thou
on my right hand, (that is, rule thou for me) until I make h^^^ enemies thy
footestoole. psa. 110.1.
Thereby intimating that all enem^es of the word shall be either subjected to
the word, or confounded thereby. Therefore it is added, verse. 2.
The Lord shall se^de the R^d of thy strength (viz. the Word) out of Zion^ to
this word therefore he there speaks saying, Rule thou in the midst of thine
e^em^es; Isa. 2. Mic. 4.
a^cording to that of the Prophets Isaiah and Micah. The L^^^ shall g^efoor^h
of Sion, an^ the word of the Lord out of Hier^s^em* And he shall judge ^monge
the Nations: He, the word shall, as the Father says, Mi^e Arm (tha^ is my
Word) shall judge the people. From which places we may see, that this Kingdom
was to begin to be preached in Sion and Jerusalem, unto it was the Kingdom and
dominion first to com^ Mica. 4.8. and thence to go Forth into all the World,
ha^e^ng noe other certain seat, then there wheresoever the Word should
enlighten and rule the Souls of men: Isa. 42.6.
therefore the Lord says to him. I will give thee for a covenant of the
people, for a light of the Gentiles: to vp^n the blind eyes etc. Isa. 55.3.4.
And in another place, I will make an everlasting covenant with you, even the
su^e Mercies of David, Behold I have given hi^ (viz. the Word or covenant) For
a witness to the people, a leader, and a commander to the people. Viz. a
spiritual leader, therefore he says to him in the following words, verse. 5.
Beho^d thou shall call a nation that thou know not, and nations that knew
not thee shall run unto thee, because of the Lord thy God, and for the holy
one of Israel, for he has glorified thee: this then is the glo^ie that he
gi^es the Messiah, who is the Word that he should call nations to the knowledge
and obedience of the Wo^d: therefore in this sense God says to the Word in the
second Psalm, Psa 2.8.9.
Ask of me and I will give thee the heathen. For th^ne inheritance; and the
v^term^st parts of the earth for thy posession: the most remote nations shall
come to the knowledge and obedience of thee; or else as it is added, Thou shall
b^eake them with a Rod of iron (that is with thy own power, as he says
elsewhere with the Rod of thy strength Psa 110.) thou shall dash them in pieces
like a potters ve^^^ll* that is, if they go about to h^nder thy Kingdom, will
not suffer the Word to rule in their dominions but either hinder the preaching
thereof, and so the reign of the Word, or do not further it, but s^t up or
suffer another Word, new and contrary doctrines; a thing endangering the
bruising and ruin of any Kingdom or nation, as it was of the chief Priests and
Jews, and may be of others, as it follows, verse. 10.11.
Be wise now therefore, o ye Kings: (be wise in this point) be instructed ye
Judges of the earth: (be conten^ed to be instructed in the Word:) Serve the
Lord wi^h fear: (viz in obeying and farthering his Word) and ve^^yce with
trembl^ng. Be glad his Kingdom may come into youres, embrace it, for it will
honor and strengten youres, and noe way endanger it, unless when ye neglect it:
verse. 12.
therefore he adds, K^sse the Son lest he be angri and ye perish from the
way etc. Where to Kiss the Son is nothing else them to receive and embrace
the Word of God, as ye saw proved above.

All this is confirmed unto us in the vision which Daniel saw, that is to say,
that the Messiah was to be such, and such his Kingdom for when Daniel had
beheld the four beasts, See willer on Dan. 7.
which were four Kingdoms, the last of them, being indeed that of the
Selucians and P^olomies, signified also by the two legs: Dan 2.33.40.44. the
Dominion whereof should verse. 12. verse 13.14.
be taken away about the time that Christ's Kingdom should come, ^he adds; I
saw in the night visions, and behold one like the Son of man came with the
clouds of heaven, and came to the Ancient of day^s, and they brought him before
him. And there was given him Dominion and glory, and a Kingdom that all
people, and na^ion; and languages should serve him: h^^ dominion is an
everlasting dominion, which shall not pass aw^y, and his Kingdom that which
shall not be d^stroied. Lo this Kingdom of the M^ssiah must endure for ever:
but then it must need^s bespirituall, and last after his death; for it is after
showed him, that the Messiah should soon be cut off, even a little before the
destruction of the city and sanctuary: chap 9.26 and the Prophet Isaiah says
plainly, Isa. 53. that he should die for our sins, Isa. 53.8.9.
that he was cut off out of the land of the liue^ng, for the transgression of
my people was he stricken. And he made his grave with the wicked etc. But
though he should suffer and die according to the flesh, yet he should rule
still as he is the Word, and more after his death then before, as it follows:
He shall see his seed, verse. 11.
men begotten again by the Word: He shall see the travail of his Soul, verse.
12.
the fruit of his death and sufferings: for when he had said, He shall bear
thei^e iniquities, the Lord adds, therefore will I divide him a pertion with
the great, and he shall divide the Spoil with the strong, because he powered
out his Soul unto death, he should have the heathen to his inheritance, and
the utmost part of the earth to his posessio^. His Apostles and ministers
should conquer Kingdoms, and bring whole nations to be subject to the Word.
D^n. 7.18. verse. 27.
Which thing is so expounded there unto Daniel: But the Saints of the most
high shall take the Kingdom and posesse it for ever: and again. And the Kingdom
and dominion, and the greatness of the Kingdom under the whole heaven shall be
given to the people of the Saints of the most high, whose Kingdom is an
buerlasting Kingdom, and all dominions shall serve and obey him. Lo the
greatenes of the Kingdom under the whole heaven is given to the Saints: for
Christ their Master is out of this World, yet they shall subject people to
him, whose Kingd^m is everlasting; therefore it is added, all dominion, shall
serve and obey him: the Kingdom is given to them, yet the subjects thereof
serve hi^; which could not be after his death, unless he were the Word, and his
Kingdom truly sp^rituall, Gods Kingdom. Which is answerable to that Prophecy
or promise ^^z k. ^4: Ezech. 34.23.24.
I will se^ up one Shepherd over them and he shall feed them, even my servant
David, he shall feed them. David the type of Christ was now dead, therefore
this was meant of the Messiah, who was to be David's Son; so it is added, And
he shall be their Shephe^rd. And I the Lord will be their God, and my Servant
David a Prince among them. One Chap. 37.22.24.25. etc.
King shall be King to them all they shall have one Shepherd, who should
cleanse them, and make them walk in his judgments and observe h^s S^atutes; so
his Tabernacle should be with them and he would betheire God. There is but one
chief Shepherd, the rest are his ministe^s, and they ^ub^ect people to him:
they are all governed and fed by the Word, as well after his as^ention as
before. Thus the Angel said to Marie: He shall be great and shall be called the
Son of the highest, Luke 1.32.
and the Lord God shall give unto him the throne of his Father David. And he
shall reign over the house of Jacob for ^uer. For that is, he the Word should
reign for ever as the one and only Spiritual King and Shepherd. And indeed
at last when the Jewish nation that had refused him, and was therefore
scattered, should be called and brought back into their own Land, Mic. 4.6.
then as it is added, The Lord shall reign over them in mount Zion from hence
forth even for ever. Where he that is called the Word that should rule and
judge among the nations, verse. 2.3. is now affirmed to be the Lord: to show
that he is God and Lord, and indeed that his Kingdom is the Kingdom of God his
Father, and that it is so meant in those places of Ezechiel above mentioned,
and in others that speak of the Messiah and his Kingdom.

Now we have already showed that Jesus was the promised Messiah, Jesus Christ
preached the same Kingdom.
and consequently that he had and has this Kingdom; but to prove that
accordingly he preached the same; ye may find that when he the Word was come
in the flesh, and now ready to be baptized, and so to enter upon his
ministration and government, by revealing himself and thereby the Father; his
p^ecursor John Baptist came preaching in the Wilderness of Judea: Mat. 3.1.
Mark. 1.2. Mal. 3.1.
And saying, Repent ye for the Kingdom of God is at hand. As it is written in
the Prophets, Behold I send my Messenger, and he shall prepare the way before
me: And the Lord whom ye seek (viz the Messiah) shall suddenly come to his
Temple. viz Ioh. 18.20.
there to teach and rule spiritually, this Temple being indeed a figure of the
Church where in he should rule: which came to pass not, when Antichr^st came
to sit in the Temple of God as God whereof in the s^quel; but when Jesus
Christ, who is the Word, came and decla^ed himself in the Temple, and thereby
signified his own government in his Church; which is there where the Wo^d
rules: this was accomplished suddenly after the preaching of his forrunner
John Baptist, Luke 3.4.
who came (ye see) as it is written in the book of Esayas the Prophet, saying,
The voice of him that cries in the wilderness, prepare ye the way of the
Lord; make straight in the desert a high way for our God. Every valley shall be
exalted, Isa. 40.3 4 5.
and every Mountai^e and hill made low: and the crooked shall be made straight,
and the rough places plain: (the Scriptures should be so clearly expounded)
And the glory (viz the Word) of the Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh shall
see it together. And a little after, verse. 9.
Say unto the cities of Judah behold your God: Behold the Lord God will come
with strong hand: And his Arm (viz. the Word which is his Son) shall rule
for him. For that we might be sure that this Kingdom belonged to Jesus Christ,
John preached, I baptize with water, Ioh. 1.
but there stands one among you mightier then I, whose shoes lachet I am
not worthy to unloose: this was Christ, who could not have vnde^stood by
Scriptures, what manner of King the Messiah should be, no^ have preached and
wrought miracles so according to the Prophesies of him, if he had been a
deceiuer, and had not b^ene the Christ the Son of God: but he was approved to
be the Christ. For when Jesus was baptized of John in Io^dan, M^k. 1.10.^
and came out of the water: John saw the Heavens opened and the Spirit like a
dove descending upon him. And the^e came a voice from Heaven, saying, Ioh.
1.33.34.
Thouart my well-beloved Son i^ whom I am well pleased. Which coming to pa^^e
as God foretold John, he says, I saw and bare record that this is the S^nne of
God, and consequently that his is the promised Kingdom of the M^ssiah.

Which was soon manifested: for after John was put in prison by Herod, Mark.
1.14. Luke 4.43.
Jesus came into Galilee preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom of God. That is,
the glad tidings of the Kingdom of God. And so he says, I must preach the
Kingdom of God to other cities also. Therefore he calls his doctrine the Word
of the Kingdom, saying, Mat. 13.19.
When any one hears the Word of the Kingdom, and understands it not. So he
says, Every Scribe which is instructed unto the Kingdom of God, is like unto a
man that is an howseholder, which brings forth out of his treasure things new
and old. New, that is the tre^sures of the Gospel; and Old, that is the
testimonies of the Prophets, which foretold and prefigured this grace that
comes to us: Luke 16 16. Luk 17.20.
Since that time the Kingdom of God is preached and every man presses unto it.
And when he was demanded of the Pharisees, when the Kingdom of God should come,
he answered them and said, The Kingdom of God comes not with observation:
Neither shall they say, lo here, or lo there: for behold the Kingdom of God
is within you. That is, they shall not say it is in this nation or in that, in
this city or in that, haueing the seat thereof here or there: for the Word is
within you, Romans 10.8.
in your mouth, and in your heart, illuminating and ruling some of your Souls,
and therefore the Kingdom of God is within you. And indeed God who by voices
from Heaven and by miracles app^oued him, had promised and foretold, that so it
should be: for Behold the days come, Ier. 31.31.
says the Lord, that I will make a new Co^enant with the horse of Israel, not
according to the former, when I brought them out of ^gypt, which my co^enant
they brake: but this shall be the covenant that I will make with the house of
Israel, I will put my law in their inward parts, ^ndw^i^e it in their hearts:
And they shall all know me; for I will forgive their iniquity, etc. and in
another place: I will give them a new heart* with many the like promises. Lo
he would write the law in their hearts, the word should rule there, and
enlighten them with the Isa. 54.13. etc. 53.3. etc.
promised knowledge of God, and his remission and salvation in the death and
doctrine of Christ Isa. 53. and so his Kingdom should be in their hearts and
souls, within them, Tit. 2.11.12. Ioh. 8.32. Character of a Christ. page 329.
etc.
as Christ says; that is, when the grace of God bringing salvation was
preached, and the same taught me^ to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts: The
Truth known makes men free, from serving sin: even as Joseph was taught by
the favor of his master to deny the ungodly lust of his mistress, and escape
away; for so men escape the p^llutions of the world through the knowledge of
Christ; as did Zacheus: Luke 19.8.10.11.12. to 28.
so he says there, The Son of Man is come to s^eke and save that wh^^h is
lost. And as they heard these things, he added and spoke a parable, because
they thought that the Kingdom of God should immediately appear. A certain
noble man went into a far country to receive for himself a Kingdom. And he
called unto him his ten servants, and delivered unto the ten pounds, and
said unto the^, Occupy till I come etc. This noble man was Christ, who before
his ascension deliuerd the Word of truth unto his servants, and since gives of
the same Word to others by his Spirit, and so will till his second coming:
these ten servants are his ministers, and other his servants: the pounds or
talen^s, were several portions of the Word of grace, of the mysteries of God
d^uers Romans 12.3. 1. Cor. 12.11.
measures of the knowledge and faith of Christ, wherein they ought to increase,
and to show the fruit thereof in a holy life, also to use their skill to
bring others to the knowledge and obedience of Christ, which is to give him
his own with vantage: for they are Stewards of the mysteries of God, 1. Cor 4
1.
and it is required in Stewards that a man be found faithful. Delivering
nothing for doctrine, but that which was Chap. 11.23.
received of the Lord by his Apostles and Prophets; neither hiding his talent
of doctrine, nor teaching for doctrines commandments and opinions of men
things not commanded in the Word. For as when among the Romans there was
difference about meats, the Apostle said, The Kingdom of God is not meat
and dr^^ke; that is, Romans 14 17.
the Word of God does not command and teach these things, which are held
abonte them, But righteousness and peace etc. So may it be said for other
traditions and preceps of men; the Kingdom of God is not the single life of
Romish Priests, their observed fasts and feasts, invocation of Saints, the
Popes succession in Peter's chai^e, as head of the Church, private masses,
drawing Souls out of purgatory, and the like; which as themselves confess
are not commanded in the Word; but righteousness, peace, and all such things as
are taught in the Gospel. Ministers must be faithful Stewards, and dispensers
thereof by preaching; and others that have the gift by persuading, exhorting,
writing and the like: As every man has received the gift, 1. Pet. 4.10.
even so should he minister the same unto another, as good steward of the
manifold grace of God. He that had one talent dit not so, others did.

The Citizens in the parable that hated him, and said, we will not have this
man to reign over us, were such as opposed the Wo^d, or any part or portion
thereof, delivered in t^^ents, h^ting the light manifested by them; which is to
despise and re^ect him the Word, that comes to rule their hearts, to
enlighten them and reign there, of whom therefore he says, Those mine
e^emies that would not that I should reign over them, bring hither etc.

All which proofs of Gods Kingdom duly considered do manifest that the Pope
and church of Rome do grosely deceive and are deceived, The Pope can not be
Christ's Vicar, nor the Church of Rome his Kingdom.
who oppose the Word of grace revealed in teaching for doctrines those precepts
and traditions of men above mentioued, and diverse other strange doctrines of
free will, ignorance, force of their traditions, merrits worshipping of
Images, with many the like, not commanded but forbidden and confuted in the
Word; and yet bea^e the World in hand, that the Pope is Christ's vica^generall,
head of the church, that the church of Rome is the true church of Christ, and
so that Rome is the seat of Christ's Kingdom, that Gods Kingdom is there; when
yet God by the Apostles says, 2. Ioh 9. 1. Tim. 6.3.
He that abides not in the doctrine of Christ, has not God, If any man teach
otherwise, and consent not to the wholesome words, even to the words of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is according to godliness, he is
proud, knowing nothing; the man of sin and his ministers proud above all
other heretics; and ye see Gods Kingdom is there only, where though men so
n^ime sin of infirmity, yet (as is requi^ed) the Word of God is consented
to, and received in all things, and not rejected in any thing it teaches.

From all which we may reason thus. Christ is the Word revealed in Scriptures,
and that Word alo^e must rule in all matters of faith, and salvation. Whosoever
therefore shall not consent to that Word in all matters of faith and salvation,
but shall of his own pretended authority set up for doctrines any that are
not taught in the Word, or that are new or contrary thereunto, he is
rebellious and an usurping Autichrist, and he that does it in most points, and
so as none other does, he is the grand Antichrist. But the Pope does not
consent to that Word in all matters of faith and salvation, but of his own
pretended authority sets up for Doctrines many others, that are not taught in
the Word, and that are new and contrary thereunto; therefore he is rebellious,
and an usurping Antichrist, yea the grand Antichrist; because he does it in
more points then ever any did, and so as none ever did; as in those perticulars
above mentioned, and diverse others; which we shall have occasion to p^oue in
the sequel: here it needs not, because also many have sufficiently done it.
Now from this proposition and conclusion follows another.

They that do not consent to the Word in all matters of faith and salvation,
but receive for Doctrines those new and contrary precepts of the Pope which he
of his own pretended authori^ie sets up, they are conspiring rebels, and give
him the Kingdom, he power and the glory of commanding, and being obeyed in
such things. But the Papists do not consent to the Word in all matters of
faith and salvation, but receive for Doctrines those new and contrary precepts
of the Pope, which he of his own pretended authori^^e sets up: therefore they
are conspiring Rebels, and give him the Kingdom the Power and the glo^^e of
commaund^ng, and being obeyed in such things.

Both these are so manifestly true, that all that are of any reasonable
understanding must needs perceive and confess as much unless, because they
have not received the Love of the Truth, nor continued in the Word, they can
not know the Truth, but are by God given over to belee^e lies; or because they
teaching or rece^^ing for doctrines precepts of men, the wisdom of their w^se
men i^ hid, and they in Gods just judgment are given over ^o such blindness,
that they can not see things see evident; that is to say, Romans 10.11. Psa. 66.7.
that they are rebellious and conspiring usurpers, a disobedient and
gainesaying people: Psalm. 33.6. Heb. 1.3. Rom 1.16. 1. Cor. 1.18. Heb. 1.3. 2.
Pe^. 3.7. see Character of a Christian* page 47.
For God rules by his power for ever; that is by the Word, which is his power,
whereby he has made, gouernned and vpheld all things; and Christ is that Word,
the power of God, and the wisdom of God. 1. Cor. 1.24. therefore when he had
said, he rules by his power for ever, his eyes behold the nations, who obey
it and who not; he adds, let not the rebellions exalt themselves: viz.
against it, or above it in any point, as psa. 107.11. they rebelled against the
words of God, that is against the power by which he rules against Christ. But
in the Pope of Romes Kingdom, the Word is not consented to ^n all things as is
requ^^ed (...). Tim. 6.3. But rejected and opposed; he Ide^ page 249. and 293.
and they are rebellious and exalt themselves against the word in many great
ma^ters of says and salvation, which it teaches, and so above all that is
called God, so that he as God sits in the Temple of God as God, showing
himself that he is God, viz. most master in these things, one whose Word is
the supreme law and must be believed and obeyed: which the Turk does not, he
gives not forth his words for laws, binding the conscience in matters of
faith and salvation; as the Pope does, and so takes the Kingdom the power and
glory from God and his Word, to himself and his errors; therefore Gods
Kingdom is not in the Romish church, the Pope is an usurper: and Papists, that
defend or follow his laws and doctrines against the Word, are rebellious
conspirators, giueing to the Pope Christ's government, the Kingdom, the power
and the glory, choosing rather to be ruled by him, then by the Word, and so
rejecting Christ, and his Kingdom, they break his bands asunder, and cast his
cords from them. In further proof whereof, Psa. 2.3.
observe; He, who is the Word, says to his Disciples, Luke 10.8.9.
Into whatsoever city ye enter, and they receive you, say unto them the
Kingdom of God is come near unto you; that is because in their preaching the
Word is come to rule and enlighten them in all things needful to salvation;
the Arm that should rule for God is come, the Word of which is said, He shall
judge among the nations; and to whom is said, Rule thou in the midst of
thine enemies: verse. 16.
for he said then to his Apostles, He that hears you, hears me: (viz. me
the Word) and he that despises you despises me: and he that despises me
despises him that sent me; viz. whose Word I am, verse. 11.
and who should rule for him: therefore he says there, And if they receive you
not, say unto them, the verrie dust of your city, we w^pe of against you:
notwithstanding be ye sure of this, that the Kingdom of God is come nigh unto
you. viz. in the Word there preached, though they will not receive him to rule
them, but Psalm. 107.11. Dan. 9 5. Romans 10.21. Mat. 21.43. Chap. 23.37.
rebel against the Word, and conspire to expel him and his Kingdom out of
their city.

First then we see, that this being the fault of Jerusalem, of the chief
Priests, and other Jews, who gainsaied his doctrine, put him to death and
persecuted his servants, Therefore (says he) say I unto you, The Kingdom of
God shall be taken from you, and given to a nation bringing forth the fruits
thereof. Often would I have gathered thy children together, as etc. and ye
would not. Behold your house is left unto you desolate, for I say unto you,
you shall not henceforth see me (viz. me the Word) till ye say, blessed is he
that comes in the Name of the Lord. viz. with the Word, and Truth revealed.

And secondly hereby also we may see the great wickedness of the Pope and
Church of Rome, Verse. 13.
who also shut up the Kingdom of God against men, like the Scribes and
Pharisees, Luke 11.52.
neither entering in themselves, nor suffering others that would: for they also,
take away the key of knowledge; they will not suffer the (Word manifested in)
Scriptures in diverse points of faith and salvation to be preached among the^,
nor read in a known tongue, but fight against the doctrine of Christ and his
Apostles, persecute the professors thereof, give their traditions Council. Tri.
Sess. 4. Mark. 7.13.
equal authority and reverence with the Word, obey them more; and indeed
make the Word of God of none effect with their traditions, and in all these
things conspire and rebel against the Word, and expel him and his Kingdom out
of all their Cities, Vilages and Howses.

Which in some degree is also done by such carnal and feigned Gospellers, as
call themselves Protestants, and yet are enemies to preaching, hearing and
writing; or what worse is set up new and contrary doctrines against the Word
of Grace, such as those of Pelagius, Arminius and others: for false doctrines
are by Christ called tares, Mat. 13.25.
and he that sows them is judged an enemy of Christ and his Kingdom; and if
that be true which our Savior says of Neuters and lukewarm Ministers, Who
do not seek the Kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof, but their own
gain, ease or honor, He that is not with me is against me, Mar. 12.30.
and he that gathers not with me scatters: How much more will they be found
against the Word, who either oppose and scorn preaching, or set up new and
contrary doctrines, hindering his absolute reign, and the peace of his Kingdom?
this do all Heretics and Seducers, who bring in another word to rule in
matters of faith and salvation. Their word eats at the Word and Kingdom of
God, 2. Tim. 2.17.
and so at the root like a canker, or gangrene: and therefore they are
seditious Preachers in Gods Kingdom, moueing people to fall from Gods word and
obedience, to theires; and what in them is, ^. Thef. 2.16.
Forbidding men to speak to people some things of the Gospel that they might
be saved, to fill up their sins always: for the wrath is come upon them to
the uttermost.

This Kingdom Christ had in some, Christ had and has this Kingdom.
as in the Apostles and many other Disciples and believers, who by the Word
were regenerated and governed in all matters of faith and salvation: and to
such, he, the Word, Mat. 19.2^.
says, Ye which have followed me in the regeneration, when the Son of man
shall sit in the throne of his glory, ye shall also sit etc. and inherit
everlasting life. Chap. 24.14.
This Gospel of the Kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a witness
to all Nations. Walk worthy of God, 1. These. 2.12.
who has called you to his Kingdom and glory. Who has delivered us from the
power of darkness, Col. 2.13.
and has translated us into the Kingdom of his dear Son. This Kingdom he
commended to his Apostles and Ministers, saying, Seek ye the Kingdom of God
and the righteousness thereof. All power is given to me in Heaven and in Earth.
Go ye therefore and teach all nations, baptizing them in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Teaching them to observe all
things whatsoever I have commanded you: and lo I (viz. the Word) am with you
always even unto the end of the World. As if he said, because all power is
given to me, therefore ye may go into all Kingdoms of the world and teach the
Gospel, noe man, noe King ought to forbid you: because if they do not subject
to him, it is said, Psalm. 2.
He shall bruise them with a rod of iron: and again, Be wise now therefore, o
ye Kings: Kiss the Son lest he be angry etc. And when after his
resurrection they asked of him, Act. 1.6.7.
saying, Lord will thou at this time restore again the Kingdom to Israel? He
said unto them, it is not for you to know the times and the seasons, which the
Father has put in his own power. But ye shall receive power after that the
Holy Ghost is come upon you, and ye shall be witnesses unto me, both in
Jerusalem, and in all Judea, and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the
Earth. Act. 26.17.
I now send thee to the Gentiles to open their eyes, to turn them, Dan. 7.27.
etc. Wherein that of Daniel was fulfilled, The greatness of the Kingdom under
the whole heaven shall be given to the people of the Saints of the most high,
whose Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and all dominions shall serve and obey
him. For these brought whole Nations to the knowledge and obedience of Christ:
so that Paul says, From Jerusalem and round unto Illyricum, Romans 15.19.
I have fully preached the Gospel of Christ. He turned people from darkness to
light, and from the power of Satan unto God. The Pope and Papists turn men
from light to darkness, and so from God to Satan. Peter did not so.

And with what weapons did they subject men, The weapons of this Kingdom. Heb.
4.12.
save with the sword of the spirit, the Word of God, which is the power of God
to salvation? For the Word of God is quick and powerful, and sharper then any
two edged sword, peircing etc. Therefore saint Paul says, The weapons of our
warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God, to the pulling down of
strong holds: casting down imaginations, and every high thing that exalts
it self against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every
thought to the obedience of Christ. viz. to the obedience of the Word: for this
sword, or spirit of his mouth, is the Rod of his strength, his own divine
power and virtue, unto whom is said, Rule thou in the midst of thine enemies.
As in Kingdoms of this world, if any subject hold but one castle or town
against the right and power of his lawful King, he is judged a traitor, an
enemy, and his pertakers Conspiratours; so is it if a man maintain but one
error, one strong hold against the knowledge of God; much more if he hold
diverse as Pelagius did; or many with a high hand, as the Pope does Moulin
Buckler of the Faith.
about free will, merrits, justification, purgatory, supremacy, the Church
of Rome, Priests marriage, praying to Saints, worshipping Images etc. Who yet
will be obeyed and defended in these and other his errors; and so he is by
all Papists; which proves him the grand Antichrist, and them rebellious
conspiratours, maintaining strong holds of error and sin against the Word
and Kingdom of God. Saint Paul says of some that were with him, These only
are my fellow workers unto the Kingdom of God: Col. 4.11.
that is in those regions, where with him they preached the Gospel, and
stablished men in the obedience, knowledge and truth thereof; and as Apollos
who mightily co^uinced the Adversaries by the Scriptures. Act. 18.28.


And where as some do not obey but resist the holy Ghost, as S. Steven said
and are gainsayers, Heretics, enemies, Act. 7.51.
and neglectours of this free grace of God offered in the preaching and
manifestation of the Word, whereby men are made true Subjects of this Kingdom;
this comes to pass as Christ said to some proud and obstinate Jews, ye
believe not, because ye are not of my Sheep. My Sheep hear my voice, and I
know the^, and they follow me: Ioh. 10.26. verse. 14.
Therefore he who is the Word, and therein the light of the World said unto
the^, I am known of mine, see charac. of a Christian. page 303.
not of others to whom it is not given: It is given to you to know the
Mysteries of the Kingdom of heaven: but to them it is not given. Mat. 13.11.
Chap. 11.25.
The Father hid them from the wise and learned and reu^aled them to babes;
because it seemed good in his sight. Romans 11.7.
Israel has not obtained that which he seeks for; But the election have
obtained it, and the rest were blinded. Yet a little while is the light with
you: walk while ye have the light, lest darkness come upon you: for he that
walks in darkness knows not whither he goes. Ioh. 12.35.
Which being also the case of diverse proud Papists and Pelagians, who do not
hear, receive and read the Word, much less with loue^ of the Truth; noe
marvel if they know not whether they go, that is, that they talk so much
against the promised perseverance of the Saints, Luke 19.47.
and certainty of salvation. For such as do not delight in the Word, but
rather maintain diverse strong holds of error against the same, can not have
a sense thereof, nor consequently that they are true Subjects of this Kingdom,
but rather of the contrary: for therefore Christ, who is the Word says, Those
mine enemies, which would not that I should reign over them, bring hither
etc. and in another place, This is the condemnation, that light is come into
the world, and men loved darkness rather then light, because their deeds
were evil. For every one that does evil hates the light, neither comes to
the light, lest his deeds should be reproved, or discovered, This shall all
such know to their cost, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven
with his mighty Angels: 2 Thessalonians. 1.7.
In flaming fire taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not
the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: and so that are not true Subjects of this
Kingdom. Ioh. 3.
But, says Christ, he that does truth comes to the light, that his deeds
may be made manifest that they are wrought in God. And so, that he is a loueing
and an obedient subject of this Kingdom; as diverse are, in diverse Cities and
Kingdoms of this World; and as all should be. Thus then we see that Christ had
and has the Kingdom, and what it was, and is.

Now we are to see what it is not, Christ's Kingdom not of this World.
which our Lord tells us, saying, My Kingdom is not of this world. This has
partly appeared already, because as we proved, this his Kingdom is the
Spiritual reign of the Word, and therefore not of this World, and
consequently not any thing prejudicial or deragotory to Cesars, as his
accusers pretended. The malicious and subtle Jews, that they might be sure to
lay such things (whether true or false) to the charge of Christ as might
certainly procure his death, thought noe accusation so like to prevail with
'Pilate, Caesar's Deputy, as to say that he moved sedition, and labored to
bring the people from Caesers to his own obedience, and so to get the
Kingdom from Caesar to himself. This they thought Pilate durst not but
question, and strive to prevent, though it were with the death of Christ; and
that whether he were found guilty thereof, or not: therefore they say, we
found this follow perverting the nation, saying, that himself is Christ a
King: and after He that makes himself a King, speaks against Caesar. Luke
23.2.
Whereas that was not to move sedition against Caesar: for on the contrary he
said, Give unto Caesar the things that are Cesars, Ioh. 19.
and to God the things that are Gods. Wherein though indeed, he seek Gods
Kingdom also, (viz. that men would be ruled by Gods Word in all things) and
consequently his own Kingdom, because he is the Word of God by which all men
should be ruled; yet when he seeks this, he neither hinders nor endangereth
Caesar's Kingdom, but rather helps and stablisheth it.

For if Gods Word enioine subjection to Princes, Christ's Kingdom stablisheth
Caesar's.
then Gods Kingdom ratifieth and establishes Cesars Kingdom, and Christ the
Word, who rules for God, rules people in this point, and makes them more
obedient, then otherwise they would be: for there is noe greater tie of
subjection in subjects to Princes, in children to Parents, in wives to
husbands, in servants to Masters, then the bond of religion; because these
and all others that owe subjection to any, shall find their duties commanded
in the Word, 1. Pet. 2.13.17.18. etc. Ephesians. 6.1.5. Rom 13.1.
as they are often: so that if either Princes, Parents or Masters do not
find them selves duly obeyed, let them confess that it is, because they seek
not Gods Kingdom, they do not carefully cause their subjects, children and
servants to hear and reverence the Word, which enioineth subjection in all
these, and namely in subjects to Princes, and Magistrates; while he who is the
Word of God says, Give unto Caesar the things that are Cesars. Viz. tribute
subjection, honor, etc. and after by his Apostle, Let every Soul be subject
to the higher powers, etc. for this cause pay ye tribute also etc. and to the
like effect in diverse others places, whereof more in the sequel: Therefore not
only to Pilates question, but also against the accusations and suggestions of
the Jews and all others, he says, Audite Iudaei and Gentes, audi circumcisio
and praeputium, audite omniae regna terrena; non impedio dominationem vestram
in hoc mundo, regnu^ enim meum non est de hoe mundo. Aug. in Joan. Tract. 115.
Regnum se Christus habere concedit, sed non qui alios expellat. Tol. in 10.18.
My Kingdom is not of this world; as if he said, mine accusers pretend love
and true allegiance to Caesar, in haueing great care of his right, that I
should not usurp nor disturb his Kingdom, nor any part of his government, nor
did I ever: for my Kingdom is not of this world. The Kingdoms of this world
often endamage and endanger one another by worldly polecies, secret practices,
and open hostilities, whereby the greatness of one Kingdom often rises out of
the ruins of another; and imbred rebels sometime accheiue their Sovereigns
throne by clandestine practices, and crafty insinuations; but there were noe
such devices used by Christ; he did not as Absolon, 1. Sam. 15.2.3
who rose early, and stood by the way of the gate, and when he saw any man that
had a controversy to come before the King for judgment, he called him, and
with insinuating speeches inueighed against the government, and wished himself
a Judge to help them, but on the contrary, when one came to Christ, saying,
Master cause my Brother to divide the inheritance; he answered, Who made me a
Judge or a diuider? so far was he from seeking any worldly government. Luke
22.24.
Neither did his doctrine allow, but expressly forbid it in his Disciples. For
when there was a strife among them, which of them should be gratest, He said,
the Kings of the Gentiles exercise Lordship over them, and they that exercise
authority over them are called Benefactors; But ye shall not be so; but he that
is greatest among you, let him be as the younger, and he that is chief, as he
that does serve. 1. Pet. 5.3.
Where whatsoever the Papists say to the contrary, he would have among them
noe supremacy or dominion as Lords one over another, like as in the Kingdoms
of this World; but he that was greatest among them by reason of his age, or
being first called, which is all the greatness or Prioritie Christ would here
acknowledge, he should be as the younger, that did serve in some kind. Rightly
therefore does he say against the suggestions of his Accusers, my Kingdom is
not of this world: thereby showing that his Kingdom has noe worldly or
pompeous dominion, and so does nothing hinder nor hurt Caesar's; as even Pilate
himself found and testified, when after examination had of the matter, He went
out unto the Jews, Io^. 18.38.
and says unto the^, I find in him noe fault at all. Chap. 19.12.
Which thing he affirmed twice or thrice; yet for all this his adversaries
envying, and hating his doctrine and fame. Cry out, saying; If thou let this
man go, thou art not Cesars friend: whosoever makes himself a King speaks
against Caesar. As if they said Caesar is King here: In this land, we have noe
King but Caesar. He therefore that makes himself a King here, speaks
against the right and prerogative of Caesar, whose Kingdom can not be in safety
while this man is suffered to preach: his doctrine draws them to the
obedience of another King, and it stands not with the safety, and polecie of
a Kingdom to suffer it: for when Pilate said, he found not that fault in him;
Luke 23.5.
this is all the proose they bring of perverting the Nation, saying, He
stirs up the people, teaching thorowout all Jury. His teaching is that which
they will needs account dangerous.

This is that which they and other obstinate enemies of the Truth did ever
pretend, that the Kingdom of God, Jews account Christ's preaching dangerous to
the Nation.
viz. the preaching of the Word disturbeth and hinders the peace of Kingdoms
and endangereth their being, at least their well being.

First because they wilfully persuade themselves that the Neighboring
Kingdoms, which are of contrary religions will the sooner invade and spoil
them.

Secondly because they also will needs be persuaded that the daily preaching
of the Word makes the hearers stout and stuborne against their Kings and
Governors.

For the first, They say that it would cause an inuation.
this was the wilful opinion of the cheise Priests and Pharisees, that if
Christ's doctrine were suffered to be preached and followed, the heathen who
were otherwise affected would invade and ruin them: therefore upon report of
that great miracle of raising Lazarus, they say, What do we? for this man
does many miracles. If we let him thus alone, all men will believe on him,
Ioh. 11.42.
and the Romans shall come, and take away both our place and nation: therefore
die he must. What do we? as if they said, what sluggish Governors are we?
how dull, how sleepie? how negligent in our offices? how careless of our
countries safety? how improuident in preventing foraigne invasion, that we
suffer this doctrine to carry so many away after it, to incense the Romans
that worship other Gods, and that are so zealous of their honor, that they
brook not to see any more honored then their own idols, and that if a few
follow him, it must needs vex them, but if we let him thus alone, thus to
work miracles for confirmation of his Doctrine, all men will believe in him,
it can not be avoided; and then the great and iuuincible nation, the most
puislant Romans, must of necessity be much more ptouoked to Jealousy, envy
and wrath, and consequently to take away both our place and nation: Our place,
that is where our God is somewhat worshipped in sacrifices etc. This is somewhat,
and better this then none at all; if we go any further, to suffer a deal of
preaching of a new law and Kingdom; that is further from the heathen religion,
and so we may anger them more and loose all; seeing in policy to please
them, we should rather come nearer them, at least in things indifferent.

Therefore also when Paul preached at Thessalonica, Act. 17.5.
The Jews which believed not moved with envy gathered a Company, and set all
the city on an uproar, and drew out Jason and certain brethren unto the
rulers of the city, crying, These that have turned the World vpside down are
come hither also: and these all do contrary to the decrees of Caesar, saying
that there is another King one Jesus. Whence we may see that though they knew,
that Jesus had long before left this life, yet they wilfully infer that his
followers contest to have him to be another King besides or against Caesar,
Jews say that preaching disturbeth Caesar's Kingdom.
and that this Kingdom, in the preaching of the Word, turned the World vpside
down, and so disturbed, dishonored and endangered Caesar's Kingdom. And this
the high Priest and Elders say of saint Paul, We have found this man a
pestilent fellow, Act. 24.5. And mo^eth sedition.
and a mouer of sedition among all the Jews throughout the World, and a
ringleader etc. That is by preaching Jesus Christ, and obedience due to him; as
if they said, this doctrine makes them stuborne and seditious against C^sar,
and his ministers. This or the like has been and ever was the wilful
assertion of all enemies of the truth, whether Infidels or Papists and other
heretics, and profane scoffers of preaching and hearing: but against this out
Savior says, my Kingdom is not of this World, and consequently hurts not
the tranquillity of temporal Kingdoms, but rather makes them floorish and
excel in Justice and honor, as the experience of all ages has openly shown
in the sight of all traducers of the Word preached.

And first that the same does not make nations of a contrary religion the more
ready to invade them: Preaching of the Gospel does not cause inua^ions.
or if it do, the more the true preaching of Gods Word is maintained by a
Prince in any Kingdom, the more does God defend that King and Kingdom from
invasion and ruin, and to the honor thereof turn the destruction upon his and
their inuaders and enemies. David was a great lover and maintainer of the
teaching of Gods Word, also of prayer, reading, and holy conference: for these
have their due and how exceedingly did his Kingdom flourish, and he prosper,
and prevail against the enemies thereof? 2. Chro. 1^2.
And Asa did that which was good and right in the eyes of the Lord, He took
away the Altars of the strange Gods, and the high places, and brake down the
Images. And commanded Judah to seek the Lord, and to do the law, and the
commandment. And the Kingdom was quiet before him. Mark here quiet, and free
from sedition: And when Zerah the Ethiopian came out against him with a
thousand thousand and three hundred charets. Asa cried unto the Lord, and he
smote the Ethiopians before Asa and Judah. So that the Prophet said to them,
Chap. 15.2. Chap. 16.2.7.
The Lord is with you while you be with him. But if ye forsake him he will
forsake you; as this Asa found, when after leaving to trust in God, he sought
to the King of Syria and relied on him, Chap. 17.3.4.6.7.8.
The Lord was with Iehoshaphat because he walked in the first ways of his
Father David, and sought not to Balaam, but to the Lord, and Walked in his
comandements and took away the high places, and sent diverse priests and
others; who took the book of the law of the Lord with them, Verse. 5.10.
and went about throughout all the cities of Judah and taught the people.
Therefore the Lord stablished the Kingdom in his band, and all Judah brought to
Iehoshaphat presents, and he had riches and honor in abundance. And the fear
of the Lord fell upon all the Kingdoms of the lands that were round about
Judah, so that they made no war against Iehoshaphat: but some of the
Philistines and Arabians brought him presents, and he waxed exceeding great:
behold here ye traducers the fruit of due preaching and teaching. Hezekiah
also did that which was right in the eyes of the Lord, Chap. 31.20: 21. Chap.
32. Chap. 34.
wrought great reformation among the Priests and people, to seek God;
wherefore he prospered, and God delivered him and his from the great Host of
Senacherib. Josiah also purged Judah and Jerusalem from the high places, renewed
the covenant between God and the people, and caused the book of the Law to be
read and observed; Wherefore it was said to him, thou shall be gathered to thy
grave in peace, and that evil should not come upon the city in his days. The
Emperor Constantine, notwithstanding that in a manner all his Predecessors
were Pagans, most of them persecutors, Maxentius and Licinius sharers with him
in the Empire, heathen Tirants, persecutors, and his enemies: and though
(besides an infinity company of heathen people) almost the whole Senate of
Rome were of the heathen faction, and so continued after him; yet did he
embrace the Christian Religion, fight for it, seek to propogate it, called a
general Council to repres the Arrian heresy, afther the council caused the
books of the Arrians to be burned, and greatly loved and furthered the
preaching of the Gospel, and all the truest Professors thereof; and how
exceedingly did God defend him from his mightiest enemies, and bring them into
his subjection? In so much that some have thought, that that which is spoken in
the Revelation of a man child, Reu. 12.
which the Church should bring forth, that should rule all Nations with a rod
of iron, was fulfilled in him. But to come nearer our own times. Popish error
and superstition had greatly corrupted the Christian Religion and doctrine in
many parts thereof, when God raised up in France, Waldo a mean man, who yet
studdying the Scriptures, discovered many of their errors and abuses, and had
many followers; who were mightily and miracalously preserved for a long time;
and though in the end they were vanquished by the Beast, that for a time
should war with the Saints and overcome them: Reu. 13.7.
yet because the Scriptures show, that the Beasts Kingdom must also go to
wrack; God at last raised up against it Luther, a Mean Monk, a private
Doctor, who notwithstanding that he and his Protector the Duke of Saxony,
were exceedingly opposed and persecuted by the Pope, the Emperor, and other
mighty adversaries; yet were they delivered and wonderfully prospered and
prevailed. The like might be showed of diverse other Princes of Germany, who in
man's sight were but weak in respect of their adversaries, and yet maintaining
the preaching of the Gospel, and the expulsion of Popery were maruelously
defended, and prospered. King Edward the Sixth expelled Popery out of his
Kingdom, maintained and furthered the preaching of the Gospel, and though he
were but a child, how yet did God bless and defend him from his mightiest
enemies? Queen Marie leaving the Kingdom Popish; Queen Elizabeth again
excluded Popery, See the thankful Remembrance.
commanded the preaching of the Gospel and punishment of Popish Priests for
their seditious intrusion; and yet though she were but a Woman, and found the
Kingdom in weak estate, and had at her entrance great adversaries, as the
Pope, Spanie, France, yea and Scotland also; besides discontented Popelings and
Rebels in her own Kingdoms of England and Ireland; yet she cleaving to Gods
cause, and maintaining it with all her heart, was not only miracalously
defended from al foreign enemies and homebred Conspirators, but also acheiued
many glorious Victories, and grew a terror to her mightiest adversaries; so
truly does God seek their Kingdom, that sincerely seek his, as David did.

And here let noe man object the late losses that protestant Princes, Kingdoms
and provinces have sustained. An objection of late losses with the Reason of
them.
For if the Word of God had in these later times been countenaneed, preached,
and furthered with that sincerity, and zeal of advancing Christ's Kingdom, and
received with that affection, joy, reverence and obedience, and that the
Princes of the reformed Churches had all stuck to Gods cause, and to one
another, as zealously now, as in those former times, these damages could not
have befallen them. It is said of Hezechia that in every work, 2. Chro. 31.21
that he began in the service of the house of God, and in the law, and in the
commandments to seek his God, he did it with all his heart, and prospered. If
then Princes in doing the things they did, have not done them with all their
heart, but coldy, slowly, sparingly, not timely, nor without great
importunity, and that to stop men's mouths; If in policy or for wordly ends,
they have conniued at popery, suffered supplies and materials of war to go
to their adversaries in religion, thought they might so far permit help to
both sides; 2 Chro. 26.2.7.
or with Asa have sought and made lauges with the adversaries of religion, and
relied on them; noe maiuaile if their defensive wars at home, and their
undertakings abroad have not succeeded well, which otherwise must needs have
prospered. For if Princes that are men be sometime true, and firm to those
their confederates of the same religion, that mutually seek the good of each
others Kingdom; how much more, must God needs be always sure to those that
sincerely seek his Kingdom? seeing he is Justice it self, and Truth it self,
yea almighty and therefore of power to do more for such as cleave to his
cause, then Kings can for those that adhere to them. Vor^. 9.
For the eyes of the Lord run to and fro throughout the whole Eareh, toshew
himself strong in the behalf of them, whose heart is perfect toward him.
Thus then the due preaching of the Word, does not make the enemies thereof
invade the Nation that has the same in esteem, or if it do, God turns the
shame and loss upon the Inuadors thereof, to the greater honor of such as
stick to his cause sincerely, and with true zeal, as in England in the year
1588.

Indeed true it is, Maintenance or sufferance of Heresies causes seditions
and invasions.
that when Rulers hinder God in his ordinances, by suffering the preaching and
maintenance of errors, as that is plainly repugnant to Christ's Kingdom, to the
reign of the Word revealed; so has it much infested and disturbed the peace
of all such Kingdoms as have permitted it. I might instance in the Jews, Ioh.
11.48.
who being in polecie hinderers of the Word, and suffering and maintaining the
opposers of Christ's doctrine, came the sooner to destruction. Howsoever this
did the Arrian Heresy in the times of the Emperors Constantius, Constans and
Valens; A short time suffices not to recount the troubles, seditions, wars,
losses and bloodshed that followed thereupon, mentioned by Vincentius
Lerinensis Nee enim tantu^ affinitates, cognationes, amicitiae, domus, verum
etiam vrbes, populi, prouinciae, nationes, vniuersum postremo Romanum Imperiu^
funditus concussum and emotum est. Vin. cont. Haer. cap. 6.1. King. 4.24. etc.
Chap. 11.4.9.14. Chap. 12.15.
, as an example of Gods judgments following the Suffererers and Supporters of
error. And that not only intestine among themselves: but indeed the Emperors
and Rulers permitting such errors, and the ambitious rising of the Popish
Primacie, together with the intrusion of his authority and heathenish
superstition, who now began to make the Word of God of none effect, with his
pretended power and traditions, God in justice suffered and sent the Goths and
Vandals, and other heathen Nations to invade and spoil the Empire and Churches
of Christendom: according to that which he did to the house of Solomon, who
while he walked in the ways of David his father had peace, prospered and grew
rich and mighty, but when his Wives turned away his heart after other Gods,
the Lord was angry with him, and stirred up Adversaries unto Salomo^, Hadad
the Edomite and Rezon, who did him and his Kingdom much harm; also Jeroboam
the Son of Nebat; and finally rent ten Tribes from Rehoboam his Son: who
hearkened not unto the people: for the cause was from the Lord: who used this
his austere answer as a means to punish his and his fathers idollatrie. Even
as also in the time of the Judges, Iud. 3.7.8.
when the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the Lord; forgate the
Lord their God, and served Baalim, and other Idols, it is said, Verse. 12.
Chap. 4.2.
Therefore the Lord sold them into the hands of their enemies: The Lord
strengthened Eglon the King of Moab against Israel. The Lord sold them into the
hand of Iabin. Chap. 6.1.
The Lord delivered them into the hand of Midian. Again, Chap. 10.7.
Again, He sold them into the hands of the Philistines, etc. Errors are in
effect idols. Heb. 13.8.


And let noe man say here, that the maintenance or sufferance of Heresy is a
less sin in Princes, then the maintenance or sufferance of Idols. For Christ
is the eternal and unchangeable Word of God: Jesus Christ yesterday and to
day, the same also for ever. Whosoever therefore sets up any new, or
contrary word against the Word of his grace, he sets up an idol to be of
men believed and reverenced: The errors of Heretics are strange Gods, as Qui
sunt D^j alteni, nisierrores extranei, quos ignorabas, id est noui and
inauditi? Vine. Lerien. aduer. haeres. cap. 15 Photinus credita^ sibi plebem
Dei persuadere coepit, vt sequeretur Deos alienos, id est, errores extraneos,
grauiter disputaret ac scriberet. Idem cap. 16.
Vincentius Lirenenses shows. And therefore when Saint John, who affirms
Christ to be the Word, had said of the Father, 1. Ioh. 5. We are in him that
is true in his Son Jesus Christ (that is true in his Word.) This (viz. this
Word, this Son) is very God and eternal life; he adds, Babes keep your
selves from Idols. Viz. from all idols, as well errors as others. For while he
says of the Word, which was in the beginning, this is verry God; it follows
that whosoever sets up a new and contrary word, sets up an Idol or false God,
and is therein an Antichrist: for therefore he says of Cerinthus, Ebion and
other Heretics, and Deceivers that brought in a new and contrary word, (Chap.
2.) even now are many Antichrists: such as would not have the revealed Word of
God to rule in some matters of faith and salvation, but therein give the
Kingdom to the idols of their own brain, as all Heretics do.

And here because Iuxta Apostolicam comminationem ^elagiano illi prouenisse
cernimusluliano. Idem cap. 40.
Julian was a Pelagian, take an example in the Pelagians; who affirmed, that Ex
Aug. de nupt. Homo no^ na^^^tur cum originali peccato: peccatu^ originis no^
est peccatu^: quiae non est volun tarium.
Original sin is nothing, and does not make men guilty of death. Contrary
to that Romans 5.12. By one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin,
and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned. And verse. 16. The
judgment was by one to condemnation. Verse. 19. By one man's disobedience many
were made sinners.

Also for the free Will of an unregenerate man to conversion: They affirmed
Epi. Hila. ad Aug. Arb^^riu^ ad hoc liberu^ asseru^t, vt velit, vel nolit
admittere medecinam Ephesians. 1.19.^.
the will to be so free, that it can of it own accord admit or refuse cure:
and so that those that have sinned may by the power of nature repens without
inward grace from the Spirit. Contrary to that Ephesians. 2. Ye were dead in
trespasses and sins. Ioh. 5.25. The dead shall bear the voice of the Son
of God, No^ quia v. ^ vunt audiunt, sed audiendo reuiscunt. Aug. in 10. t. 19
and they that hear shall live. Being borne again not of corruptible seed,
but of incorruptible, by the Word: not of blood etc. Which places show that an
unregenerate man has noe more power actiuely and of it own accord to admit or
refuse the regenerating power of Gods Word and Spirit, then a dead body has to
raise it self: Ioh. 1.9.13.
which might be showed in the conversion of Paul; Indeed there is a passive
power in the elect, who by God are made as fit to receive illumination and
regeneration by the Word, as a kandle vnlighted is to receive light by another;
which power is not in blocks and stones: but the kandle that is near the
light, does not light it self; noe more is man lighted, but by the Word, the
true light that lights every man that comes into the world. Which are borne
not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God.
Therefore the Apostle says, Ephesians. 2.3. to 10. Ier. 31.33. Ioh. 15.6. Romans 5.5.
Philip. 2.
that the exceeding greatness of his power to usward who believe, is according
to the greatness of his power, which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him
from the dead: that it is of his grace and gift. God says. I will put my Law
in their inward parts etc. I will give you a new heart, and a new spirit.
Christ says, Without me ye can do nothing. The love of God is shed abroad in
our hearts by the holy Ghost. It is God which works in you both to will and
to do of his good pleasure.

Also touching the signification of the word grace, They affirmed, Ex Aug. Epi.
105. gratiam illam, quam volebat I'elagius sine vllis praecedentibus meritis
dari, esse humana^ natural in qu^ conditi sumus etc.
By grace is meant nature endued with reason and will; contrary to that Ephesians.
2. By grace ye are saved through faith, and that not of your selves, it is the
gift of God. Also touching the cause of the increase of grace, They affirmed Ex
concilio Diospolitano, Gratiam Dei secundum hominu^ meritae dari. and Aug. de
bono persevere. Cap. 2.
that by the works of nature man promeriteth (or gains) the aid of grace.
Contrary to that To. 9.16. It is not of him that wills, nor of him that
runs, but of God that shows mercy. And 1. Cor. 1.7. Who makes thee to
differ from another? and what have thou that thou did not receive? And thus
also they made foreseen faith and good works to be the Ex Hilar. Epist.
Praedestinationem ad id valere conte^dunt, vt eos Praedestinauerit, vel
praesciuerit vel eligere proposuerit, qui fuerant Credituri. Ex Prosperi Epis.
ad Aug. Eos Praedestinasse in Regnum suum, quos gratis vocatos diguos futuros
electione, and de hac vitae bono fine excessours esse praeuiderat.
causes of praedestinatio^. Contrary to the Scriptures, which show faith and
good works to be fruits of election, and of his free grace in electing us to be
ingrafted into Christ the true vine, in whom we bear fruit. Ioh. 15. Ephesians.
4.5.6. He has chosen us in him before the foundation of the world (not that
we were, but) that we should be holy and unblameable before him in love, etc.
2. Tim. 1.9. He has saved us and called us with an holy calling, not according
to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace, which was given us
in Christ Jesus before the world began. Romans 9.11. to 20. The children being
not yet borne, neither haueing done any good or evil, that the purpose of
God, according to election might stand, not of works, but of him that calls
etc.

Thus then they presumpteoufly held (against Gods Word which should rule,
against Ephesians. 156.
the good pleasure of his will, and against the praise of the glory of his
grace) that a man is without original sin, at least that it makes him not
guilty of death; that such a man in the state of nature may of his own free
will, either resist Gods converting power, or repent and be regenerated, and
that without the help of Gods grace and Spirit; or if by grace, or at least by
help thereof, yet by grace in meant nature endued with reason and will; or if
it be by aid of Gods grace, yet by the works of nature man promeriteth that
aid of grace: and what more is, the works of nature, viz. the well using of
free will and natural power is the cause of Predestination; and so in effect
of redemption, of vocation, justification, glorification and all: which their
gross errors (being also followed and mantained by the Arminians of our
times, as the Pelagius rediuiuus: Parallelismus. With the second Parallel.
Parallel proves) do take the Kingdom, honor and power from the Word of God,
from grace which should reign, Romans 5.21. and give it to nature and the
foreseen works thereof, yea all the honor and power of election, conversion
and salvation from God, and his free grace and Power in Christ, and give it to
nature and the works thereof.

Thus while they presume to make to God a mind and word out of their own,
noe marvel if they, to these errors, add others as presumptuous against
the perseverance of the Saints, and certainty of salvation. For how should they
believe perseverance, that give so much, and even perseverance it self, where
it is, to frail nature? Men that are called into the grace of Christ, Gal. 1.6.
Men that stand by grace (Romans 5.2.) and that are Romans 6.14. Gal. 5.4. Reu.
9.1. Isai. 14.13.14
not under the Law, but under grace, will easily believe, that they that thus
highly exalt nature are fallen from grace: Even as the Star is said to fall
from heaven, who would exalt his throne above the Stars, and be like the most
high; that would be universal Bishop, usurp Christ's place, and take the
Kingdom, the power and the glory from the Father and his Word, and give it to
himself and his traditions and errors of free will, merrits, satisfactions
etc. And how then should they but fall away and doubt of the certainty of
salvation, who build upon such rotten foundations of their own? the Saints
may be more certain: for their perseverance and assurance is built upon a
surer Word: and not on such Pelagian and Popish dreams and novelties, which
indeed are doctrines of this World and Antichristian, not the Word of that
Kingdom, which is not of this World; Ioh. 8.44.
but errors coming from the Father of lies, doctrines of devils, and so mere
Idols: clean contrary, ye see, and opposite to the whole purpose and scoape of
Gods truth and new covenant of grace revealed in the Gospel, as might be showed
more at large, if many others had not already done it.

The Pelagians therefore and Demipelagians, Papists, Arminians and others of
that stamp, who thus bring doctrines contrary to the Word of grace, Act.
13.8.10.
as with Elimas the sorcerer they turn away Princes and Magistrates from the
faith, and are therein children of the devil, and enemies of all righteousness,
perverting the right ways of God; so do they not less then set up Idols,
other words to rule men's souls, and to be reverenced, believed and followed,
and consequently draw the judgments of God on that Kingdom or nation whereinto
they intrude the^, and are therein noe better then seditious preachers in
Christ's Kingdom, mouers of rebellion and apostacy against Christ, if not
traitors to those Princes also, whom they persuade to receive them, to the
extreme danger and hazard of their Kingdoms: (as Bishop Carlton also proves
page 214. against the Appealer) because God almighty, that is ever just, must
needs do to them, if they do not repent and amend, as he did to those
Emperors and Kings, that suffered these and the like errors in Saint
Augustines days, when the Goths and Vandals ouerran all: and as before that
he had done to Solomon and others in like case: 1. King. 12.27.28.
and namely to Jeroboam, who when he and his council in polecie to preserve
his own Kingdom brought in some new doctrine and worship, set up Idols,
stretched out his hand against the prophet, Chap. 13.33.34. Chap. 16.2.3.
made priests of the lowest of the people, and ordained high places, the text
says, This thing became sin unto the house of Jeroboam, even to cut it off,
and to destroy it from of the face of the earth. So was it with Baasha and
others. And seeing the Apostle says, let noe man deceive you with vain words;
for because of these things comes the wrath of God; Ephesians. 5.6.
so must it needs be in the Christian Church with them that maintain or
suffer errou^s: for therefore Christ's says to the Church of Thyatira, which
suffered the woman Iezabel to teach and to seduce his sernants: Behold I will
cast her into a bed, and them that commit adultry with her into great
tribulation, except they repent of their deeds. And I will kill her children
with death, etc. Thus therefore must it needs fall out with those Churches and
states that suffer the Bomish superstition and laws or other heresies to be
taught in their dominions, much more if they maintain them, and so commit
fornication with that whore, or any other heretical teachers. And this as I
said have those Emperors, Kings and Princes found, that have either received
(whether in polecie or otherwise) the errors of Heriticks, or the
Antichristian doctrine of Rome; as for suffering of heresies was instanced in
some Emperors, and might be in many others. Now for popery, it would be to
long to recite the examples of Gods judgments that fell upon those Emperors,
Kings and Princes, or on their issue and Kingdoms in Germany, England,
France, Spain and other parts, who subjected themselves o^ their people and
Kingdoms to the Popes Supremacy, and to his superstitions laws, rites and
errors, or temporised with him in some of them: therefore omitting the most,
observe only these few.

The Eastern Emperors, Judgments that fell on temporisors in religion.
Justinian and after him Phocas in polecie the better, to recover and keep
Italy, did the Popes much honor, and greatly furthered their supremacy, who
soon after (by Gods just judgment) in requital setting themselves against the
Emperors their successors in the cause of Images made the greatest part of
Italy revolt from the Emperors obedience. After this the Emperor Constantine
7. and his mother Irene to get the Popes fouour, and thereby to recover some
parts of the western Empire, or keep those they had from reuolting, summon a
second council at Nice; and there with strong hand, they get the worshipping
of Images established: which temporising God so cursed, that within twelve
years after, God suffered the more full reu^lt and the Pope to crown Charles
the great Emperor of the W^st.

The Emperors of Greece had long held war with the Turks: at last leaving
to trust in God, and relying on humane polecie, to get the Popes favor, and by
his means the aid of Christian Princes, the Emperor John Paleologus brings
the Eastern Bishops to reconcile in all differences the Greek Church to the
Lat^: Council. Flo^. anno 1439.
and there in the council of Florence, he gets them (besides other articles)
to agree that the souls of the faithful that have not yet satisfied for their
sins go to purgatory: that the Pope of Rome is head of the universal
Church etc. The fruit of this earthly wisdom was this, God suffered not the
Pope to stir up Princes to rescue him, but the Emperor to be wholly left,
and Constantinople yea the Empire to be lost within 14 years after that
council.

The french King Henry 4. a professed Protestant, prosecuted by the leaguers,
that he might posesse life and Kingdom in peace went to mass, and let in the
Ies^ts: the issue was, God lest him, and suffered him to die by a Iesuited
Vilaine; so dangerous is temporising and newtralie in matters of religion. And
thus Barneueile and others letting in Arminiaisme in the low countries, the
States suffering it a while, seditions arose, whereby they had like to have
lost those provinces, and so had, if by wisdom and valor that traitor and his
accomplices had not been suddenly subjected, a Synod assemb^ed, and some of the
Arminians banished: since when they have had some better success; which might
be a warning to England now infested with that pernicious Sect.

Thus then it is not the preaching of Gods Truth, but the maintenance or
sufferance of errors that hurts and endangereth temporal Kingdoms. If
Princes will not suffer the Lord to come into their Kingdom and fight against
such heretics with the Spirit of his mouth: that is, if they suffer not his
Ministers and Servants with the Weapens of their warfare, 2. Cor. 10.
to cast down these strong holds, and high things exalted against the
knowledge of God* but forbid or hinder then, then they may fear the judgments
written; because this is to break his bands asunder, and cast his cords from
them, Heb. 10.
and indeed to tread under foot the Son of God (who is the Word) and do
despite unto the Spirit of grace. And how then can God uphold their Kingdom,
that do not endeavor to uphold his? or which do not suffer those that would,
but rather hinder them? Psa. 2.
Be wise now therefore, says he, o ye Kings etc. serve the Lord with fear and
trembling: Kiss the Son lest he be angry: and they had need so to do: Hos
13.1.
for when Ephraim spoke trembling, he exalted himself in Israel, but, when he
offended in Baal, he died: God turned his blessings into punishments, his
victories into losses, his glory into shame.

Now then as to the second inference which the Jews make here before Pilate,
Preaching of Gods Word does not mak^ hearers stubborn and seditious.
and Heriticks and profane persons have made at all times, and in all Kingdoms
where the Gospel has been freely preached: viz. that the daily preaching of
the Wo^d revealed in the New Testament, and the maintenance of the Truth there
manifested, makes the hea^ers stout, and stubborn, if not contentious,
heretical and sed^tious against their Kings and Governors: I answer, that as
it was in the Jews, so is it in all others a mere slander, a wilful cavil
and calumny, a Mache^illian trick of those who love not the Light of Gods
Word, and whose deeds and practices, discovered thereby, Ioh. 3.
will not stand with it. When the Kingdom of God so comes into any Kingdom of
this World, that the preaching of the Wo^d is courtenanced, and in all points
received, it makes the same so happy both to Prince and people, that the one
will not oppress, nor the other rebel, though they be oppressed. Here let
them not tell us of the Waldenses and others in France or Bohemia; who, rather
then they would be compelled to idollatrie, or butchered and murdered, took
up defensive arms for their lives, like the Jews under An ioch^^ Epiphanes,
of whoms is said, Dan. 11.32.
The people that do know their God shall be strong and do exploicts. For
noe Nation or commonwealth so peaceable and obedient to Princes, as that
wherein the Word is duly preached and reigns: God gives this blessing to the
preaching of his Word, that in the Kingdoms where it is received and
contenanced, the same is a bridle holding the heart, a rod awing the
conscience, making men suffer much rather then be rebellious: witness this
Kingdom of England, how free has it been from these evils for these 70.
years, wherein the Gospel has been preached and maintained?

Whereas before in the time of Popery, Where errors are maintained, there
rebellions have followed.
how many dangerous rebellions? what resisting of the higher powers? what
killing of Officers and Magistrates? The people join in rebellion with the
Sons of Henry II. against their own Father: diverse also took part with the
Traitor Becket; a Bishop stouter in the Popes quarrel, then ever any since
the falling of popery has been in Christ's. The subjects of King John rebel,
and many, stand out against him after he was reconciled to the Pope. The Ba^on^
and people for a few taxes and court fauories rebel against Henry 3. in a
long and bloody war. Also under Edward^. the barons and people rose against
his fauorit Ga^eston, cut of his head, and held long wars with the King for
favoring the Spencers; at last Mortimer and the Queen are aided to depose
him. For a subsidy granted in Parliament to Richard 2. John Or B^^l.
wall a Priest easily caused that great and dangerous rebellion of wat Tiler
and his companions, whom mulitudes of ignorant people followed; after diverse
armies are leauied by subjects against the King and his fauorits; at last the
people revolt and he is deposed and murdered. Owen Glender and others rebel
against Henry 4. Jack Cade and others raised diverse stout rebellions against
Henry 6. The Yorkshire men and diverse others for small causes rebel against
Edward 4. After his Brother Richard practices, murdereth and usurps, but not
without help. Lord Louell and others raise rebellion in the North against
Henry 7. Lambert causes another rebellion. A tax imposed by Parliament
causes another rebellion in the worth. After another small Parliamentarie tax
causes the Cornish men rebel, and come with power as far as Kent. After
others join with Perkin Warbeck. Under Henry 8. besides evil may day, the
lincoln shire men rebel, and after them the northern men more then once.

And yet you may find it to have been formerly, and in this later age also,
much worse in other countries where popery has reigned, or does still reign.
So also was it lately among the Turks, who for small greiuances have deposed
their Emperors Killed Osmond and his chief officers; so unbridled and
unstable are all forts of people that are not guided by the Word of God. And
that also appeared by the most famous common wealths that ever were in the
world, as the ancient Lacedaemonians, Romans, Carthaginians and others, who
wanting this bridle, all the wisdom; power and laws of all their greatest
Princes, Senators and Philosophers, sufficed not to keep the people in
obedience, but upon every light occasion they have rebelled, reviled, and
killed their Governors, and filled their chief cities with harliburlies,
mutinies, rapins, murders and alterations. The Popes of Rome themselves after
they began to keep the people in ignorance, and to make the Word of God of
none effect with their traditions, Anastatius in Vigilio.
have no^ been free from their outrages and insolercies, as we may see in
the lives of V^g^lius, Leo the third, Zonar. to 3. page 79.
John the fourtenth* Gregory the fifth, and many others: and indeed, seeing
they would not let them know the things, that belonged to their peace, how
could it be otherwise.

Whereas here in England under the Gospel, Gods Word makes the heaters luffer
and be peaceable.
notwithstanding all those greiuances, whereof the commons have of late years
complained so much in Parliaments, and now this last summer in their
remonstrance of diverse leuies, and other things against their priueleidges,
the laws, liberties and religion established; of the increase of popery, the
friends that Papist. and Arminians have had in court, and the carriage of many
things at home and abroad by the late Duke and his faction, to the great
los^e and dishonor of this Kingdom and advantage of the adversaries: yet
blessed be God, and to the honor of his Word preached, it may be spoken, noe
man ever saw a sword drawn to remedy these things; but the commons and
diverse of the Lords, have still sought redress by humble petition, and not as
in time of popery, or as the Jesuits hoped and practiced, who love to fish in
troubled streams. The Duke and others of his party, that for the most part
defeated and prevented the house with whisperings, and were so great friends
to Arminiaisme and popery, knew that the Gospel awed Protestants, and kept
them from arms and revenge; and that they could not have escaped with so many
injuries done to any other religion whatsoever: so unkind in the mean while
were these detractours to that religion, by which cheifely under God they have
held their lives and honors, without the least violence offered by such as
groaned under the^.

And whereas of late there has been some unruliness in Sallours and Soldiers;
If men consider that the remonstrance declares the increase of popery and
Arminiaisme, the favor that those of these religions have found of courtiers,
as well of Bishops as others; that Scholars find the latter the way to
preferment; that orthodoxe preachers (though conformable in rites formerly
commanded) are not preferred, but rather molested and opposed; lectures and
books against these adversaries prohibited, or hindered the^ they will
confess, that this unruliness of Saylours and others comes rather from hence,
that the preaching of Gods Truth, which restrains all sorts of people, is not
so much countenanced now, as formerlie, but insteade thereof contrary
doctrines find the favor. The true knowledge and worship of God, being
failed in the days of Solomon and Rehoboam, then the people began to wax
stout, to mutiny and revolt.

The preaching, manifestation and knowledge of Gods Word are the Psalm. 2.3.
cords and bands of Christ, which hold and restrain men; so that these
things, when they are countenanced, prevent such mutinies, and sau^ Magistrates
much labor in government. The knowledge of Christ who is our wisdom, makes
Soli qui ejus doctrina imbuti sunt prudentes dicendi sunt Bern. de ordi. vit.
Psalm. 18. Psalm. 66.7. Psalm. 76.10.12.
men wise. They are easily ruled by a few, whom God rules: It is God that
subdueth the people under me, says David: and it is hard to govern them by
many and wise whom the Lord does not govern and restrain, who rules by his
power for ever, even the rebellious; who restrains wrath, stilleth the raging
of the Sea, and the madness of the people. Psalm. 127.1.
Except the Lord build the house, they labor in vain that are builders of it.
Except the Lord keep the City the watchman waketh but in vain. For if they
hear not Moses and the Prophets, nor Christ and his Apostles, neither will
they be persuaded though one rose from the dead. Heb. 4.
For the Word of God is mighty in operation etc. 2. Co. 10.5. Romans 1.
Bringing into captinitie every thought to the obedience of Christ: and
consequently to the higher powers, to whom he has commanded every Soul to be
subject, as to the powers ordained of God. And that in every ordinance that
does not resist ^he Word, or the manifestation thereof: Act. 4.19.
but if they do, then whether it be right to hearken unto you more then unto
God, judge ye.

If any say, that preaching and writing about Predestination, Free will,
perseverance and the like, cause discord and trouble: I answer there may be a
time, when men may be to buisie and curious in disputing and writing on such
points, that is, when in them the Church is at rest in the Truth But if
Pelagians have perverted the truth in those points, and infected people with
the poisen of their doctrines, then it is noe time to forbid preaching, or
writing against them. 1. Because Pelagian and Arminian Prelates may press such
decrees with all power to suppress Orthodoxe labors in that kind, and
sparing their own men's works at pleasure, may prevail thereby; and this were
not to work a right peace and union. 2. Because the Truth of God must be
vindicated, least as a worthy Bishop inferred, Bishop Carlton Examinat. of the
appeal. page 126.
the infection should spread further, the greah mysteries of our salvation
should be shaken, and by giueing liberty to these beginings, a more general
apostacy should follow, and that as much in other points, as in these. 3.
Luke 19.41.
And principally because Christ with tears said to Jerusalem of the mysteries
he taught, that they were the things that belonged to her peace, wishes that
she had therefore known, and received the^, because he knew they would work
peace, and that when they were hid from her eyes, sedition and ruin must needs
follow; and so they did, as ye may see in the Acts, Josephus and others. Act.
21.29.30.
Besides as the faithful Bishop proves, they are the Appealers doctrines, B.
Carlton in Exam. p. 214.
if not confuted that endanger the State, though he say they are not ap^ae
natae to breed dangers: like a desperate man that sets a house on fire, and
says there is noe danger. The ignorance of Gods Word, and Truth therein
contained, so deeply concer uing Gods glory, is able not only to breed
danger, but to cause destructions of Curches and States. The Prophet
complains that the people of the Jews were destroud, and led into Captivity
for want of knowledge. Then the want of knowledge of God, and of the holy
doctrines of Gods Word, is a thing aptanata to throuw States and Kingdoms into
destruction. And the true knowledge thereof is a thing apta nata to keep
States and people from destruction. To prevent such ruins and the cause of
them, apostacy from God, he says, I desired the knowledge of God: But they
like men have transgressed the covenant: there they have dealt trecherously
against me. Hos. 6.6. hindering knowledge and perverting his truth which being
known makes men free from feruing sin. Ioh. 8.32. Character of a Christian.
page 329. etc.

If therefore any that frequent sermons have been seditious, contentious,
heretical or wicked, let noe man say that the preaching of the Gospel is any
more the cause of it, then Christ's preaching was of Judas his treason; or the
preaching and conuincing proofs of the Apostles, of the Simonie of Simon
Magus, the divisions of the Corinthians, the heresies of Himeneus, Philetus,
Cernithus and Ebion, the worldlines of Demas and insolency of Diotrephes: when
indeed the due preaching of the Word, and conuincing of Heretics by it, are
(as ye see by our Saviors words to Jerusalem,) the best means to restrain
and amend such disorders, and to work peace.

As therefore it was of old a mere trick and cavil of the Jews to infer that
preaching of the Gospel makes hearers seditious or disobedient and fleeting;
so is it in these days in such as are the favorers, or flaterers of popery
or Arminiaisme, and their supporters: Who though they know that Arminianisme
is a mere stirrup to help men into the saddle of popery, that to suffer
these is to provide the Romish Adversaries friends in Court and country, to
make divisions in counsel and action, and so to make some swaied by
conscience give them intelligence and advantage in all treaties and wars;
that these sects must needs fructify and increase, if by preaching, writing,
disputing, countenance and authority they be not the sooner silenced: yet they
strive by devises and calumnies to make Princes discountenance the preaching of
the Word, and confutation of Heretics by it, and rather in polecie to
temporise with Popish Princes in some points of doctrine, which they are
pleased to style indifferent and reconcilable, or at least disputable,
arbitrarie, and fit to procure peace and union with the more moderate Papists,
if not their conversion. Never considering, or at least not regarding, 1. Cor
1.30. Vbinam q^^^^o vera prudentia nisi in Christi doctrina? Bernar. vbi supra.
Reu. 2.14.
that Papists do not the like by us, that it rather makes them more obstinate
and proud; that Christ the Truth is wisdom unto us; that therefore Christians
must not in polecie admit communion with the least error in faith, much less
with these Pelagian Blasphemes; that to call for some yealding and union in
these things is Balaams doctrine, to cast a stumbling block before people, to
make them fall to spiritual fornication: for this is to make way for men's
falling to Arminianisme, and so to popery; for the increase of these Sects
and their party and friends; and finally that all this is the direct way to
provoke the Lord, who is a jealous God, to visit these sins, wheresoever
they be; as he has in all ages done the like, Ephesians. 5.6.
to the great punishment of some Kingdoms, and ruin of others; as was
instanced in sundry examples; and in a Word that such worldly pollecies, can
not be of God, nor make for his Kingdom and service, who against all these and
the like faith, my Kingdom is not of this World:

If my Kingdom were of this world, Christ's proof.
then would my Servants fight, that I should not be delivered to he Jews This
is Christ's proof or reason; as if he said, If my Kingdom were of this world,
and as the Jews pretend, deragatorie or praeiudiall to Caesar's by the power
thereof; which power in Kingdoms of this World does commonly consist of
strength in subjects: then would mine fight for their King, in hope of offices
or honors, at least of Wordly protection under him: but behold they do not
fight for me, as not expecting for their service any such things, but rather
Ioh. 16.33.
affliction, as I have taught them: therefore they have all forsaken me, and
are fled from me, the Shepherd is smitten, and the sheep are scattered; there
is not one man stands to me to defend me from the Jews by sword or Word, that
I should not be delivered to them.

This is somewhat a passionate speech proceeding from the great discomfort of
his Soul, that not one stuck to him: for though it be true that when one that
was with him drew his sword, and stroke a servant of the high Priest, and cut
of his ear, he healed him, and checked the smiter: yet the same as well as the
rest forsook him, and fled or denied him; and that could not choose but greiue
him: yea that they did not so much as stay with him to witness, speak and
contest for his innocence, and so fight the good fight of faith for him with
the sword of the Spirit, 1. Tim. 6.12. 2. Tim. 2.1.3
like good Soldiers of Christ, at least by confessing him in that day of his
sorrow and bitter Passion, when he was so extremely reviled and slandered: but
on the contrary one denies him, all forsake him: this was a great grief:
though he had done noe violence, Isa. 53.9.10.
neither was any deceit in his mouth, yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him,
and put him to grief: and namely to this grief of being forsaken of all them
to whom he had been so loueing and gracious; and for whom he was now ready to
lay down his life, to free them from the bondage of sin and Satan, from the
wrath of God and hell fire; and to purchase, heaven and everlasting glory for
them: yet not one to fight for him, nec gladi^s, nec argumentis. Lament. 1.12.
O consider this all ye that pass by, if there were ever sorrow like this
sorrow!

And can it choose but greiue him now think we, that of them that may, so few
Princes fight for him with their swords and laws? so few Scholars with the
sword of the Spirit? nay, that some who profess themselves his Ministers,
fight for Pellagian errors against him? Others to prove the Church of Rome to
be a true Church of Christ, which yet they confess to be Babylon and fallen?

Her Bishop taking on him to be vniuersell Bishop, is said to be a star
fallen from Heaven: The Church of Rome can not be a true Church of Christ. Reu.
9.
that must needs be from the true Church, and so therefore must the members of
that Church that approve or follow him therein, and in other his errors: for
though he be said to sit in the Temple of God, this proves not the Church of
Rome to be a true Church of Christ, but the contrary. For in a vision the
Church of Christ is set out to Saint John by the old Temple of the Jews: Reu.
11.1.2. Character of a Christian. page 212.
But in the measuring of it, The court without, which of old was the greater
and more vissible part of the Temple, that into which the people came to pray,
which was called the Temple, and which seems so to be in the vision, must not
be measured; but Saint John is commanded to leave or cast it out; that is, not
to reckon it the Church of Christ, as not continuing in the Word, and so not in
Christ, but fighting against those that do: Which things are so apparent in
the Church of Rome, that therefore her head the Pope, and her true members are
in Gods account as Gentiles or heathen: many of See the Original of
Idollatries printed an. 1624.
whose idollatries and superstitious rites and ceremonies they have taken up,
and used with verrie little alteration: therefore that part of the Temple
signifying this Church, is reckoned heathenish, not to be otherwise measured:
and they that are of it as heathen Gentiles: for it is given to the Gentiles:
And not in the other part, but in this Antichrist sits, and so is said to sit
in the Temple of God; in that part to which God has right as well as to the
rest, though it be pofessed and usurped by one that sits as it were for Christ,
but commanding things contrary to the Word, and so showing himself that he
is God; that is most master in those things, and one whose laws bind in
matters of faith, and must be obeyed: though this Church hold some of Christ's
doctrine, (as other heretical churches have done) yet by other doctrines and
traditions contrary to the Word, she makes the Word of God of none effect, and
indeed warreth against the true Church and the members thereof, and they
against her: Seven Angels come out of the true Church, and power out their
vials upon her and other enemies; and her members blaspheme his Name, that is
his Word: therefore God will not have her reckoned to be his; he will only have
the inward rooms measured for his Temple, with them that worshipped therein,
Reu. 14.9.
the holy place place, the Altar, with the most holy place. which was the Arc
of the Testament; which John saw there when it was opened: there was noe other
Word therein, none in Christ's true Church but Gods Testament; noe other Word
received in matters of faith and salvation; the Papists, in receiving
Antichrists, are not of this Church, but Character of a Christian page 214. and
288.
are said to have see page 292.
the mark of the Beast, to worship him and to fight for him against Christ,
especially since the Council of Trent, for which hell fire is assured to them.
Now it is not possible that they that are so marked, so fight, and shall be so
tormented should be a true Church of Christ, or of it. Her often pronounced fall,
her scarlet die in the blood of the saints, her fighting against them, and
against Christ that sits on the white horse, and whose Name is called the Word
of God; her cup, Reu 19.
and names of blasphemy, with diverse other things do all prove the contrary;
but to leave her: we hear what Christ says before Pilate, If my Kingdom were
of this world then would my servants fight that I should not be delivered to
the Jews.

Yet surely as for fighting with swords to keep him, Why Christ's servants did
not then fight for him. Mat. 26.53.
at that time, from being surprised, taken and delivered to the Jews, he
says to him that smote the high Priests servant, Think thou not that I can
not non pray to my Father, and he shall presently give me more then twelve
legions of Angels? But how then shall the Scriptures be fulfilled, which show,
That thus it must be? and after his resurrection he said, Thus it is written,
and thus it behooued Christ to suffer: even thus, that of his servants not one
should then fight for him to rescue him: thus it behooued then: not that they
were bound to forsake him; but that though they should have followed, and
defended him by all lawful means; yet thus it behooued him to suffer, thus
forsaken of all, that the Scriptures might be fulfilled.

But does it behooue him now he is risen and entered into his glory, That there
is not the same reason now.
that thus he should suffer forsaken in his cause in his members? that men
should not now fight for him? Surely noe: For he shows that his servants
should stick to him, and follow him better after his resurrection; then they
must confess him, and contest for him before Kings and Princes, and even
Emperors Kings and Princes should fight for him and his cause when they should
embrace the Christian faith; great rewards are propounded to him that
ouerommeth, Reu. 2.
which though it be principally meant with the sword of the Spirit: yet in
Princes that may draw their swords to desend the faith, it may also be taken
that way. When John saw them that had gotten the victory over the Beast, Reu.
15.2.
and over his Image, and over the number of his Name, questionles there were
among these some Princes, Captains, Soldiers, States men, and Magistrates,
that did it, or helped to do it by their swords and laws, as well as others
that did it by preaching, disputing and writing: for we know the Beast and
whore are both to be overcome by fire and sword; Reu. 14. cap. 18. and cap. 19.
and not only by the sword of the spirit. Christ is the Prince of the Kings of
the earth: Reu. 1.5.
therefore they ought all to defend the faith of Christ's, to defend the Word,
and his cause both by their laws and swords: and also to suffer any of their
subjects to maintain it against all Heriticks and seducers by the sword of the
spirit, and noe man to forbid them.

For the first, He is the King of Kings and Lord of Lords, and therefore they
ought to follow him, and be led by him to fight against Antichrist and his
supporters and against his other enemies, yea not to fight for him and his
Kingdom now may prove a curse to them, as of old to Meroz and the Inhabitants
thereof that came not to the help of the Lord against the mighty. For though
it be true that the Revelation says of the Kings, which are the horns of the
Beast. These have one mind, Reu. 17.13.
and shall give their power and strength unto the Beast: Yet this does but
show the sin these Kings would fall into, committings Fornication with the
whore, by enforcing the Beasts, and her laws on their own subjects, or
suffering Antichrist and his ministers to seduce them: which is accounted a
wicked war against Christ, though he at the last overcome them: therefore it
is added, verse. 14.
These shall make war with the lamb, and the lamb shall overcome them:
(viz. with the spirit of his mouth, the power of the Word preached, and
written:) For he is the Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, and they that are
with him (viz. that fight against these Kings with the sword of the spirit to
convince them by preaching or writing) are called and chosen and faithful.
Ioh. 3.8.
Called of God, whose Spirit blows where it lists; 1. Cor. 12.11 psa. 8.
mat. 21. Luke 19.40. Reu. 1.6.
Dividing to every man severally as he will: and who out of the mouths of
Babes and sucklings ordains strength, and who would make the Stones to speak
if these should hold their peace. And let noe man object their baseness: for
he has made them Kings and priests unto God his Father; and so much the
fitter for this work. They are also Chosen by him. For ye see your calling
brethren, 1. Cor. 26.27 28.29.
says Paul to the Corinthians, how that not many wise men after the flesh, not
many mighty not many noble are called, But God has Chosen the foolish things
of this world to confound the wise, the weak things of the world to confound
the mighty etc. That noe flesh should glory in his presence. They are also
faithful; they do not bauke the cause of God, and for the richers or honors
that these Kings, or their fauorits, or the Beast, or seducers ofter them,
they do not call evil good and good evil, put darkness for light nor light
for darkness, that is error for truth and truth for error; Isa. 5.20.
nor do they justify the wicked for a reward, and take away the righteousness
of the righteous man from him: but with the psalmist they speak the truth that
is in their heart; Reu. 14.5.
In their mouth was found noe guile. And with Paul they set themselves against
seducers, as he against Elimas, Act. 13.
that sought to turn away the deputy from the faith, and to pervert the right
way of God.

And when some of these Kings and States are converted. From popery to
Christ, that is when a tenth part of the city seated on many waters fell from
the Church of Rome to the Gospel, Reu. 11.13.15.
or soon after, it is said, The Kingdoms of this world are become the
Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever.
Because, not the Beast but the Word does now govern Souls in them. They
therefore that are protestant Princes, and foe have given their names to
Christ against Antichrist, should draw their swords and not suffer any of
these Kingdoms, provinces or cities to be wo^ne again by the sword or
seducers from Christ, to popery; but rather endeavor to win from the Beast
and his vpholders; and as soon as may be to execute upon the whore the
judgment written, seeing such honor have all his saints; Psa. 149.9 Reu. 17.
and it is said, they shall make her desolate and naked and burn her with
fire: and herein they are said to follow Christ: the war therefore is not
bloody and unjust: for it is said there, chap. 19.14. verse. 11.13.
In righteousness does he judge and make war, and his name is called the Word
of God, and that the armies followed him upon white horses clothed in fine
li^en white and clean: and consequently the blood of these his enemies does
not defile them: for they follow the Word of God, and fight for his Kingdom,
who is the Word, against these that oppose the Word, and make him and his
Kingdom of none effect with their traditions and errors. Therefore though
peace can never be sufficiently commended; yet it can not be good to have peace
with her, nor with those Kings that fight her battles to support and
propagate her Kingdom, espetially when they are in those wars, as in these
days, striueing to bring all to her obedience. Reu. 19.6.
When Rome which is the great whore is burned, a great voice is heard,
Saying, Alleluia, for the Lord God omnipotent reigns. Whereas before, not the
Word, but she governed the Souls of thousands in matters of faith and
salvation.

And will they then be slack in giueing their weapous, moneies, labors and
counsels to this work? the Papists and their Princes are not so in their
wars against us to bring us to the Popes obedience. We are to remember what
Christ says, He that is not with me is against me. Epis. Winton. Tortura
Torti. in Epist.
And therefore as a great Prelate said in a like case, This cause is of that
kind where when a man gathers not with Christ, he scatters with Christ's
adversary, where unless one deliver the faith, neither shall he deliver his
soul. Also when the common cause is brought into danger, let no man be a
spectatour, but every one an actour: and when the cause of all men is handled,
there with all power and labor, with all study and endeavor to skirmish
stoutly for it. And herein in what low state soever a man be, yet let him be a
Christian. Aug. de peecat. merit. 18.
And as Augustine says, Neither is there any middle place for any man, that he
can be with any other then the devil, who is not with Christ. That also is true
of Princes in this case of war, They that are with him, are called, and
chosen and faithful. They are not like the children of Ephraim, who being
armed and carrying bows turned back in the day of battle: Reu. 17.14. Psalm.
78.8.9. See Character of a Christian Page 217.
they do not on every flight occasion desist and start aside like a broken
bow. Or which is all one, they do not trust the managing of these wars, and
the counsels thereto belonging, to such as are newters, lukewarm or
temporising Arminians; much less to any that are apparently Popish, and so
will sooner betray forces, and counsels, or bring them to nothing, then
rightly use them against the Beast or his supporters; but they are like good
Soldiers of Christ, watchful and careful to do this work, or see it done
with all zeal and diligence; and like the Adversaries, they trust none to be
commanders or councillors herein, but such as they find by experience to be
truly zealous in the cause of Religion: whatsoever they do this way, in the
work of the Lord, 2. Chron. 31.21.
with Hezechiah, they do it with all their heart; and like those first
conuerts in the Acts, who did things with gladness and singlenes of heart. Act.
2:46:
Thus faithful are they that are with Christ in his wars against the Beast,
and his adherents. But to leave the further prosecution of this point to a
Treatise of Romes Ruin.

Notwithstanding all these things and diverse others that might be alleged to
this purpose, the Papists without any great resistance of auxiliarie forces,
have acheiued many notable victories, and greatly triumph in the Provinces and
Cities they have reduced to the Romish obedience. In diverse Kingdoms, Provinces
and Cities, where the Gospel of the Kingdom has been freely preached, where
the Word has reigned, they have in a manner excluded him and his Kingdom, and
subjected the people to Popish superstition, error and servitude: so that
though Christ be now in his glory, we may as it were here him again, and
again complaining, and resounding these words against those Potentates and
States, that are cold in defending and maintaining his cause, My Kingdom is not
of this world, for if my Kingdom were of this world, then would my Servants
fight that I should not be delivered in Garmanie, Bohemia, Silesia, the
Palatinate, Denmark, Rochel, and other parts, to the Emperor, the Duke of
Bauaria, the French King, the King of Spain and other Champions of the Romish
religion; who subject all they can to the Romish Beast and his religion: If my
Kingdom were of this world that men might get Earldoms, Dukedoms and other
places of proffit or honor by fighting for me, as the Duke of Bauaria,
Spinola, Tillie and some others have gotten by fighting on the contrary part,
then would my Servants truly fight for me, that I should not be delivered in my
Gospel, my Kingdom, my Body, my Church and members to the Pope, and these
Popish Princes, that fight feircely to subject people to him; as if I were ever
to suffer, and as if Princes had been persuaded, that they do God service,
who do not fight so earnestly and seriously for me; but suffer me to be
delivered to mine adversaries, Antichrist and his Adherents. If there have
been any such perswaders in Princes Courts, who to get money or preferment of
some Popishly affected, have hindered timely supplies, by casting in flattering
scruples, exclaiming against these defensive and aiding wars, extolling peace
or the like, while the adversaries have proceeded and prevailed, they have cause
to fear, that the just Judge of all the world will find this little better
then plain treachery; that howseuer it may also be said to them by Christ,
my Kingdom is not of this world: for if my Kingdom were of this world then
would these be my Servants, and fight for me; at least by their persuasions,
councels and purses, that I should not be delivered to Antichrist or his
champions. For we may be sure, Act. 9.4.
that he that said, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? is sensible of all
the miseries that his Church and every member thereof, have of late suffered by
treachery, officious flattery, want of supplies or the like; and that he is
yesterday, and to day, and the same also for ever, in whose Word this is
written, Curse ye Meroz, Iud. 5.23.
said the Angel of the Lord, curse ye bitterly the inhabitants thereof:
because they came not to the help of the Lord, to the help of the Lord
against the mighty.

Secondly that Princes ought themselves to maintaime the truth of the Gospel,
and to suffer any of their subjects to maintain it against all Heriticks and
seducers, this is plain by many places of Scripture; by this that they are
enioined to be nursing Fathers and nursing mothers; Isa. 49.23. Chap. 60.16:
by this, that David, Ieboshaphat, Hezechia and Josias did maintain the truth
of Gods Word, putting down false prophets and Idollators, and commanding
others to instruct people in the true knowledge of Gods Word; that those that
put down idollatrie, and false Prophets are commended; those that suffered
them, or but the high places are condemned: by this that the Angels of the
seven Churches are blamed, Reu. 2.14.
one for suffering there some that taught the doctrine of Balaam, ^ors. 20.
others to hold the doctrine of the Nicolaitans, another for suffering the
woman Iezabel to seduce. For if these things were found faults in the Angels,
which were Pastors or Bishops; how much more may Christ lay them, or the like
faults to Princes and States, who are armed with more power to repress, punish
and help such things? and who being ^ursing Fathers should strive to save the
Church and members thereof from Antichrist and all Herticks and seducers, as
parents and nurses do their children from beasts and wicked people, that
would bite, devour and misleade them.

Neither ought they to hinder any of his Servants from fighting for him with
the sword of the spirit, Ephesians. 6.17.
which Saint Paul commanded the Ephesians to take: saying also to the
Philipians, Philip. 1.7.
In the defense and confirmation of the Gospel, ye all are pertakers of my
grace. Therefore he wills them to stand fast in one spirit, with one mind,
striueing together for the faith of the Gospel. Verse. 27.
And in nothing terrified by their adversaries. Not to multiply many proefes
in a point so clear, Saint Jude in his general Epistle says unto all, It was
needful for me to write unto you, Jude 3.
and exhort you that you should earnestly contend for the faith that was once
delivered to the Saints: that is against all new and contrary doctrines. Yet
neither by these nor by any other places do I understand with any Seperatists
or other Sectaries, that lay men may preach, but that they, or rather such only
of them, as God has enabled, may contest and write in defense of the faith
against all adversaries. Those foolish and weak things of the world, 1. Cor.
1.27.28. Ioh. 3.8.
have of God a calling as they are Christians, to confound the wise and
mighty: for the Corinthians had it: The wind blows where it lists: so
does the Spirit, 1. Cor. 12.11. 1. Pet. 4.10.
dividing to every man severally as he will. And thus Saint Peter says in his
general Epistle to all, As every man has received the gift, even so minister
the same to another as good stewards of the manifold grace of God. If any man
speak, let him speak as the oracles of God. At our Baptism we all, when we
are received into the congregation of Christ's flock, are obliged not to be
ashamed to confess the faith of Christ crucified, and manfully to fight under
his banner against sin, the world and the Devil, and to continue Christ's
faithful Soldiers and Servants to our lives end.

And if lay men, espetially those to whom God has given gifts fitting, be
thus obliged; how much more are all Bishops, Pastors and Ministers of the
Church? they are Soldiers so bound to it, that they should not entangle
themselves with the affairs of this life, as the Apostle says to Timothy, 2.
Tim. 2.3.4.
Noe man that warreth intangleth himself with the affairs of this life. They
are blamed, if they suffer any error in doctrine, as ye may see in the
Epistles to the seven Churches of Asia, where particular Pastors, or Bishops
are taxed of negligence herein: Act. 20.17.28.29.30.
and in the charge Paul gives to the Elders, to take heed to the flock over
which the holy Ghost had made them overseers, or Bishops, to feed the flock,
and to keep them from Wolves, and speakers of pernerse things. Also to
Timothy and Titus, 1. Tim. 1.18 chap 2.3.25. Tit. 1.9. 2. Cor. 10.
that they should war a good warfare, as good Soldiers of Jesus Christ;
instructing those that oppose themselves, and conuincing the gainsayers, such
as Himeneus, Philetus and others. That to this end the weapons of Ideo fortes
esse dicuntur quia Praelati Sancti Ecclesiae perfecti sunt in obseruatione
mandaroru^ Domini: omnes tenentes gladios, id est spirituale verbum quia
predicando vitia Subditorum debent reprimere. Bernard. de obedien. Sermon. 19.
their warfare are mighty to cast down the strong holds and high things of
Heretics, which exalt themselves against the knowledge of Christ. Indeed if
Princes will not suffer these of the Clergy, or others to cast down these
Holds of Heretics with the sword of the spirit, but like the Arrian Emperors,
and others, will kick against the pricks, and with Saul breath out threatenings
and slaughter against the Disciples of the Lord, such as are subjects of this
Kingdom, or labor to bring others to the true knowledge and obedience of the
Word, if they will adventure to provoke God by such persecutions, to the danger
of their own Kingdoms, who shall hinder them? their subjects may speak in
Gods cause, but if that will not serve, they must suffer and not resist by the
sword, not run into rebellion. Yet ought they to confess Christ's name, who is
the Word before Kings and Rulers, and even to fight against the mightiest of
them with the sword of the spirit: Reu. 17.14. and chap. 19.21.
Because, so the Lamb ouercomes them, who is the King of Kings.

We all ought to bear witness unto the Truth, though it cost us our lives;
Bishops and Ministers more espetially, who are Isa. 62.6. and Heb. 13.17. Mat.
28.18.19.20.
watchman set which should never hold there peace, not keep silence, as they
that must give account. For he is the Lord of Lords, who says, All power is
given to him in Heaven and in Earth, and who therefore bids his Disciples go
into all the world, and reach all Nations to observe all things that he
commanded them; who after his Ascension carried themselves accordingly. For
when the Rulers examined them, Act. 4.11.12.
they contended stoutly to prove Christ, a stone of them rejected, ver. 18.19.
to be the Head of the corner. And after when they and the high Priests called
them, and commanded them not to speak at all, nor teach in his Name; they
answered, Whether it be right in the sight of God to bearken unto you more then
unto God, judge ye: for we can not but speak the things which we have seen
and beard. Act. 5.28.
And after when for teaching in the Temple they were questioned by the High
Priest, saying, Did we not straightly command you, that you should not teach
in his Name? And behold ye have filled Jerusalem with your doctrine; Peter and
the other Apostles answered and said, we ought to obey God rather then men.
The God of our Fathers raised up Jesus. Him has God exalted with his right
hand, to be a Prince. viz. to rule in all matters of faith and salnation.
Behold now again and again, they contest and fight with the sword of the
Spirit for him and his Kingdom against his greatest opposers, and were therein
examples to all ministers and Servants of Christ to the worlds end. This did
the man borne blind before Christ's death, and that by good proofs.

Steven, Act. 7. chap. 18.26.28.
Apollos and many others did as much after his resurrection against opposers
and Heretics. The Apostles Paul, Peter, John and Jude wrote and contended
against Heretics, and peruerters of the Scriptures, and commanded others to
do so, but more espetially Bishops to hold fast the faithful Word taught
them; Tit. 1.7.9.10. chap. 3.10.
to look to deceivers; whose mouths must be stopped, who subvert whole
howses; teaching things which they ought not for filthy lucres sake; Act. 20.
to reject Heretics, as being Wolves, Thieves and Speakers of perverse things.

Judge yet when there many such have not crept in, who came not with the Spirit
of Truth, but with the Spirit of error, as the Appealer, Cosens, and others;
who entered not by the Word, that is by Christ the door of the sheep, but
rather by error and the Father thereof, who abode not in the Truth; and
whether Bishops, that would be counted Christ's Watchmen and Servants, have not
slept while enemies have sowed tares. The Remonstrance of the Parliament, in
summerlast, manifested that many Arminians, and Popish teachers have risen in
these our days, with their cousening tenets and devotions, and yet have not
the Bishops their superiors and overseers, that should watch over men's
souls, Heb. 13.17.
as they that must give account, reproved and convinced, nor suffered others to
publish books to confute them, but rather preferred the Seducers, and hindered
the preferment of their opposers: so far has hopes of preferment from some
courtiers, and other gifts blinded these men, as of old it did some Pharisees,
and after them the Bishops and Clarks of Italy, to justify the wicked or
their doctrines and practices for a reward. Indeed the Archbishop of
Canterbury showed his dislike of these Seducers, and their books. Bishop
Carlton writ against the Appealer, and proved him a dangerous peruerter of the
Scriptures, and of the Articles; and it may be there are two or three Bishops
more, that have showed some little distastof their tenets and practices: but by
means of the late Duke, and other Courtiers, the greater number have gonne the
clean contrary way. Doctor White, that for the Dukes favor, approved the
Appealers book, was in recompense of that 1. Tim. 1.19.
Shipwreck he sustained, elected Bishop of Carlisle, made Amner, and since
translated to Norwich. Other friends of these Pelagian and Popish teachers and
tenets, have also had their reward. Mr. Cosens his Master, Doctor Neale was
removed to Winchester Doc. Laud to London, Doctor Field to S. David's, Doctor
Buckridge to Elie, Doctor Mountain to York; after his death Doctor Harsnet
was translated to York; Doctor Howson to Durham; Doctor Maw Chosen Bish. of
Bath and Wels; Doctor Corbet B. of Oxford; and Doctor Curle late Prolocutor in
the convocation house, for his favorable carriage in that place toward these
new Masters, was promoted to the Sea of Rochester. Doctor Lindsey and others
have acheiued Denaries, or other preferments. On the other side, these and
some others, so wrought that the Archbishop of Cant: was put besides the
execution of his place, and the Appealer himself was set up in his verrie
seat that writ against him; and that presently after that the Parliament, that
co^^^^^ned of him and them, was prorogued: which Scholars in th^^^ iuersities
and other parts perceiving, according to the deui^^ (...) the pioiectors, bent
their studdies toward the mount, or ra^^ (...) molehill, of preferment. When
the Parliament approached, the^ labored to have it put off; or if not, that the
house might no^ ^^estion such men, nor others preach, dispute, or write against
their tenets and perverting faculties; but that themselves might be the only
Judges in their own cause: yet for fear of the worst, they at last get the
Appealers book called in, but so fauourabl^, as the like was never seen: men
must bring them to the Bishops of ^uerie Diocese, or to their Chauncellors,
or to the Chancelors or Vicechancelors of the universities; which they knew few
o^none would do: for who would bring any to the Appealer himself, or to B.
White, and such others, to burn them, as we (...) both Judges and parties in
the cause? which made men say, it (...) long ear this came, and then this was
not to suppress a book.

Whereas when any book has but never so little touched their own glory or
ceremonies, what exceeding diligence has been used for suppressing it? as
that of the original of Idollatries; wherein if it were granted, that it was
unjustly fathered on Causabon, that there was somewhat in it that seemed to make
against some of the constitutions, rites and ceremonies of the Church of
England, that the same rites are all tolerable; yet how little is there in that
book that makes against any of them? nauertheles what great zeal and care
was used in suppressing of it? a most dilligent search was made through the
whole company of the Stationers for them; the printer was examined what number
were printed, he for whom they were printed was examined to what Stationers he
delivered of them; how many each man had, and they were examined to whom they
were sold, that so they might be fetched from the buiers: all with such exact
care and diligence, that if it had been the most blasphemous, heretical and
dangerous book that ever was published, more could hardly have been done to
suppress it. Wherein yet if any thing did touch any rite or ceremony, that
was but against things, which themselves confess to be indifferent, not
matters of faith and salvation; yet o the zeal! but all this was for their
own Hierarchy and constitutions: they fight not so eagerly against Pelagian
and Popish errors which are against the Scriptures in matters of faith and
salvation; and indeed exceedingly against Gods Kingdom, and the Word of his
grace: the Appealers books were not searched for at all, when they were called
in, but even in the Parliament time to be sold in every book sellers shop that
would; and so were other Popish and Aamin^an books, as the Stationers proved
in Parliament, and that they licenced and let pass these, but would not
license such as in defense of the Truth were written against them, that in
others they put out whole pages, w^itte^ to show the vtillity and necessity of
preaching and hearing, as in Doctor Maiers book. All which things are so
apparent, that both in Parliament and elsewhere men have cried out there is
treachery used in Religion and toward the Kingdom of God.

As also because the tenets of these Seducers have been so weak, and
stubble like, 1. Cor. 3.12.13. Ier. 23.29.
unable to endure the fiery trial of Gods Word, that when the Parliament has
approached, then they have labored, by all the pretexts that could be invented,
to get it dissolured or adiourned; if not, then they seek protection and
pardon: and when the ^owse have complained of them; then they hide their heads
and labor to have their tenets and practices past over in silence, at least
by caring or helping with others that the house may have work enough fesides
to defend their priueleidges, and throw out the bones cast in to breed
division, and beget some pretexts of accusing them to their Prince of
maleuolence and sedition, and of urging the necessity of dissoluing that
assembly; all which they neither neded, nor would seek, if their doctrines
were Christ's, and according to the Scriptures: for then they would boldly and
with Zelus cum in bono accipitur, est quide^ fernor animi, quo men's relicto
humano timore pro defensione veritatis accenditur. Alcuinus. and Aquin. in Joan.
Zeal maintain them against Parliament and all the world. But while they then
willingly admit noe dispute, nor appear publicly to maintain the^ by the
Scriptures, and (fearing that the verrie Articles should prove them Apostates)
appeal to Bishops and others brought by the late Duke and his to favor the
same opinions, or conniue at them; and labor, by pretenses of avoiding curious
disputes, and other devises and shifts, that their tenets may not be then
examined, judged and tried, unless by men made for their party, according to
the pollecie of the Trent Fathers; it evidently shows the badnes of their
cause, that they do not (as they are willed Pro. 23.23.) Buy the Truth, but
sell it for a little preferment, for a buble of honor; and that they blind the
eyes of the wise, that such buiers and sellers are not convinced, punished and
cast out of the Church: Mystice quotidie Deus spiritualiter suam ecclesiam
intrat, and qualiter vbi vnusquisque conuersetur attendit. caueamus ergo ne in
ecclefia Dei fabulis, vel rifibus, vel od^is, vel cupiditatibus vacemus, ne
improuisos veniens nos flagellat, and de ecclesia sua eij^iat. Idem Ibid.
God sees this, and that they do not like his Servants, with the weapons of
their warefare cast down these strong holds of Heretics, exalted against
the knowledge of God, and Kingdom of Christ. So that he may now again
complain and say: My Kingdom is not of this world: for if my Kingdom were of
this world, then would my Servants fight, some with the sword of the Spirit,
others with their Laws and authorities, that I should not be delivered in my
person, as I am the Truth, nor in my members, as they are of it, to Pelagians,
or Demipelagians and Popelings, and so by degrees to the grand Antichrist of
Rome; neither would these be made such slight matters, as they are in these
days; as if it were enough that men are permitted to preach charity,
patience, temperance, humiliation, penitence, mercy, and against carnal
filthiness, adultrie, pride, murder, coueteousnes, and the like, allowed even
in these days, to be preached in Rome, and so were of old among the Arrians
and other Heretics; and as if, for these Pelagian and Popish opinions and
tenets of free will, predestination, certainty of salvation, perseverance, and
the like, it mattered not to confute them, noe nor other points of Popery, but
were better to forbid them, as curious and unnecessary disputes, and command
peace and union in these points: (whereby the buisie practicing Papists and
Arminians are sure to get ground and strength:) whereas if these reasons were
sound, as much might be said for those Popish points of justification by
works, the real presence, the church can not err, and such others, being all
pits that should be discovered, least men fall into them, and among Papists
matters of faith and salvation: but the others are so indeed, and highly
concern Gods Kingdom, and the glory of his grace; therefore preaching of
them, or writing to keep men form errors, contrary to them, and stablish men
in the Truth, may not be forbidden; espetially when Pelagian and Popish errors
are set up against them, and driven in like the sharp point of a wedge to make
the thicker end, that is, the whole thicknes and breadth of Popery to follow.
If a Town or Castle be beleaguered, and a breach made; do not men run to it
and maintain that place of all others? shall any man be blamed for so doing?
and if any, whether Governor, Captain or Citizen shall forbid them, and under
some pretext command them to lay down arms, and quit the place, is he not
counted trecherours to the Town and King thereof? So is it in Gods Church and
Kingdom beseiged by Heretics, who shoot at the faith, and make great
breaches, Tit. 1.11. 2. Tim. 2.17.
subuerting whole howses: for their word does eat as a gangrene. But for the
maintenance of the Truth, and the keeping of Gods favor to the people that
hold it fast; the Lord says, Ho^ 6.6.7.
I desired the knowledge of God: which of old some hindering, Luke 19.41.
There (says he) have they dealt trecherously with me. Christ shows that to
manifest the mysteries, he taught is to make men know the things that belong
to their peace, that when they are hid from their eyes, sedition and ruin
follow; taking away the key of knowledge causes trouble, and that the Jesuits
know to well.

Besides the Apealer draws the sword of error, sets up unsound tenets of free
will, praedestination, falling away, and the like, imprudently See Bishop
Carlton. Exam. of the Appeal. page 62.137.149.225.231.233
peruerts the Articles for his tenets; and then he and his faction, get it held
fit that these things should not be disputed and written against, as curious,
desperate, etc. that so he and they may prevail and carry his and such like
doctrines away undiscovered, unvanquished by the Word. Whereby intime, as
Bishop Carlton observed, Idem page 126.
in place of Communio Sanctorum, may creep in Apostasia, and all our religion
might in like sort be lost and sunk into Popery. The late Duke their
honored Lord, while he lived to such ends (as it seems) favored these
their opinions and devotions, though perhaps he did not well understand them,
and willingly suffered none to be preferred, but such as would maintain them
or conuiue at them: Which could not but be pleasing to the Countess his Mother
and her Priests: and hence it came, that he being great in this World, and
able to advance men to honor, offices, and wealth, wanted not Scholars and
Courtiers to fight by disputes and reasons for these errors. Who can think,
but that he would strengthen himself in Court and Universities with such men?
and these being by his means engaged in the cause while he lived, to save
their own stakes and reputations, uphold it (what they can) now he is dead,
though it be against the honor of God, against Christ the Word and his
Kingdom; yea and against the truest honor of their Royal Master (whose
honor they pretend to seek, and whom they would seem to love) and against
the peace and strength of his Kingdoms, by them thus dangerously divided and
weakened in themselves.

Here yet let us not to much wonder, that so many wise and learned men of our
time should be so far overcome by these preferments and hopes, as to consent
to these doctrines or conniue at them. For hopes of preferment and gifts
blind the eyes of the wise. Men are apt, Ioh. 10. Phil. 2.21. Sunt quidam
Ecclefia propofiti, de quibus Paulus Apostolus dicit, sua quaerentes, no^ quae
Jesus Christi: quid est ^ua quaerentes? non Christu^ gratis diligentes, non Deum
propter Deum quaerentes, temporalia commoda sectantes, ^ucr^s inhiantes,
honores ab hominibus appetentes. quisquis est talis inercenarius est. August.
in Joan. Tra. 45.
like Hirelings, to seek their own, not the things which are Christ's; who
says Ioh. 5.44. How can ye believe which receive honor one of another, and
seek not the honor that comes from God only? they seek their own, not
the Kingdom that is not of this world. But if it were of this World, then they
would seek it. Our Saviors own Disciples left him for a short time, and made
him say, If my Kingdom were of this world, then would my Servants fight, that I
should not be delivered to the Jews, who accuse him and his doctrine of
perverting the Nation. His Servants did not then fight for him by arguments, or
otherwise, to clear him in this: therefore he concludes;

But now my Kingdom is not from hence. As if he said; that all my Servants
leave me, and neither fight for me by sword or word, it is manifest that is not
of this World, nor praeiudiciall to Caesar's: this argues it is not from hence,
that they look not for any thing by it here in this World. He had told them,
that the Princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion and authority over them.
But it shall not be so among you: but that they should be delivered up, Mat.
20.25. Mat. 25.9.
killed, hated and betrayed for his names sake. Therefore now they leave him,
and fight not for him any way to rescue him. Which proved that his Kingdom was
not from hence; who hereby infers, that in the Kingdoms of this World
Servants and Subjects will fight, in hope of the riches and honors, they
afford to their defenders.

And here let not Papists brag to much of their late acheiuments by sword or
practices, whereby they daily subject many to the Pope. For if our religion
have been weakly, theires thoroughly, maintained, it argues that ours is of
Christ's Kingdom, not from hence, theires of this World and of Antichrist; and
that therefore Princes and Priests fight for them and not for Christ; because
they have riches, honors and such worldly rewards to give them for their
Services, as one proves at Relation of the Religion used in the West.
large. (Neither is it any such strange thing that the Jesuits and other of
their Clergy and Church, who effect these things, should go in the way of
Kain, perish in the gainsaying of Core, and be cast away by the deceitfulnes of
Balaams wages.) Here therefore not to speak of the many great Countries,
Provinces, Kingdoms, titles, dignities, and other rewards that the Church of
Rome has conferred on such Princes, Captains and Soldiers, as have defended
them and their cause with the Sword; such as were Pepin, Charles his Son,
and diverse other her Champions; wherein yet she has still cut large thonges
out of other men's hides: I will pass by that part of their avarice, pride and
arrogancy, who not content to get to themselves and their Monasteries, and
Orders by fables and flattery, the greatest part of the riches and Lands in
the Kingdoms of this World, have taken on them to take the verrie Kingdoms
themselves, with their titles and proffits, from the right owners, and give
them to their Champions; and come to that, which now they seem to have of
their own.

How many great dignities and officies have they in their Church, endowed
with proportionable means for theite great estates? What a great number of
Cardinals are there, who from a mean place, See the Apology for the oath of
allegiance, also Tortura Torti. page 2.
office and beginning are come to be held in dignity equal to Kings? besides a
number of Arch-Bishopwricks and Bishopwricks, verrie rich and potent in this
world, as Cullen, Ments, Treuiere and others: with an number of other places of
proffit and honor in Cathedral Churches, Colleges Monasteries and orders of
religious howses. The hope of rising to some of these makes a great number of
Priests, Jesuits, friars and others contest, practice and strive to intrude,
propogate and increase in all contries the Popes Kingdom, and prower, with all
the labor and might they can invent or procure; often venturing their lives,
(I might say their Souls) to work his ends, and bring people to his
obedience; because they see, he and his chief prelates have wherewithal to
reward their greatest services. Noe Friar so mean, but he may hope for his
deligence and service to be Prior of his Covent; the Prior to be prouincial;
the prouincial to become General of that order. And so Priests and Jesuits may
in like manner hope to come by degrees to be Bishops and Cardinals, and some to
clime to the verrie papal throne. What will not frail men do for such
rewards. Which made many that were noe true Pastors, but Ioh. 10.12. Sunt enim
nonnulli qui dum plus terranneam substantiam quam oues diligunt, merito nomen
Pastor is perdunt, non enim Pastor, sed mer cenarius vocatur, qui no^ pro amore
intimo oues dominicas, sed ad tem porales mercedes pascit, mercenarius quippe
est qui Pastor is locu tenet: sed lucrum animaru^ non quaerit, terrenis
commidis inhiat honor praelationis gaudet. Gregori. hom. 14. and Aquin: in
Ioa. 10.
hirelings contest, daube, excuse, practice and by hook or crook, maintain
points in the council of Trent, who were after rewarded according to their
service, and some before hand, as the history shows: For they followed the
way of Balaam, who loved the wages of unrighteousness. 2. Pet. 2.15. And thus
both before and since in their diucrs cases and causes. Which has made many
venture far. We have seen also, that those follewers of the Trent practices,
the Arminians have had their rewards for straining their wits and consciences.

And true it is, that both the one and the other, may rise in judgment with
many, who profess themselves their adversaries, and Christ's Servants against
Antichrist and all opposers, and yet do not strive so much, nor with such
true zeal to win Princes and people by all honest and lawful means, from
Popery and Arminiaisme, to the obedience of the Word, nor indeed to
strengthen keep and confirm such as do yet embrace the Truth, and not oppose
it in those points, nor in others; but rather by their slacknes and coldness
suffer them to prevail daily, and proceed further and further in conquests
and practices; which the Adversaries do prosecute with fervent zeal to
advance and propogate their religion; for their Kingdom is of this world,
Luke 16.8.
it is from hence: And as our Lord says, The children of this world are wiser
in their generation then the children of light; more vigilant, more zealous,
more circumspect, and constant in the prosecution of their ends, and in
perseverance therein, because thereby they attain and keep a little
momentarie bubble of wealth and honor, then Christ's Servants are for the
seeking of that Kingdom, and the righteousness thereof, which makes truly rich
and honorable here, and rewards those with everlasting life and happiness
hereafter, who fight the good fight of faith for Christ and his Kingdom: for so
inseparable are the work and the reward, that Saint Paul says to Timothy,
Fight the good fight of faith, 1. Tim. 6.12.
lay hold on eternal life: To show that to fight this good fight, is to lay
hold of eternal life, to make our calling and election sure: and therefore he
says, I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, 2. Tim. 4.7.
I have kept the faith. Hence forth there is laid up for me a crown of
righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that day: and
not to me only, but unto them also that love his appearing. And so live as
those that love it, and look for it.

But the children of this World that fight for other Kingdoms, that give them
somewhat in present, they will have somewhat in hand; they will have wealth and
honor here. And so they that will be honorable and have command, as they
that will be rich, 1. Tim. 6.9.
fall into temptation and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts,
which drown men in destruction and perdition: this also does the love of a
money, the root of all evil, which some coveting have erred from the faith.
Among other lusts, they fall into this of fighting for Antichrist or
Heretics, for the present honeur or proffit they hope to have by it, the love
of these makes Jesuits, and others venture to disturb Kingdoms and States, to
further the Popes Kingdom, that rewards them. And this is a maine reason, that
moves some Kings, Ren. 17.14.
free Princes and States to hate the whore, and make her desolate and naked and
burn her with fire. That is, to take all from her, and fire her, that she may
not have to give rewards to them that disturb their Kingdoms, and hinder the
Kingdom of God, and his blessings from their Kingdoms, which they should be
sure to enjoy in all peace and plenty, if in matters of faith and saluotion
they were only governed by him: who the more to animate them to those wars
has given them all the riches that are hers, and indeed her champions also:
for therefore they are also called to the Supper of the great God: Reu. 19.
to eat the flesh of Kings, and the flesh or Captains etc. That is, to take
their wealth, riches and honors, and posesse them: which besides the heavenly
reward, is a feast of fat things, that God will then make them. But in the
mean while, Christ, while he is to suffer, gives noe such things, and
therefore says, But now my Kingdom is not from hence.

Pilate therefore said unto him, Art thou a King then? Pilate therefore asked
this question, because Christ in saying, and thrice repeating these words my
Kingdom, had confessed that he had a Kingdom and consequently that himself was
a King: and yet not out of any ostentation, or desire that he had to speak
thereof here before Pilate, where he was sure it would cost him his life; but
being urged by their examinations to tell them, Isa. 53.9.
he would neither lie nor aequiuocate; he knew noe sin, neither was any
deceit in his mouth; and in this case keep silence he might not; he must
needs confess the truth, because that was for the honor of God his Father,
for whom he ruled; and therefore not to have acknowledged this Kingdom, was to
have denied his Fathers Kingdom and right to rule all men; therefore he adds
that he was borne to bear witness unto the Truth. Yet that he might not in
the least measure be guilty of his own death, he thrice affirmed that his
Kingdom was not of this world; and consequently not praeiudiciall to Caesar's,
nor to the right he challenged in the temporal Kingdom, and that Pilate well
understood, when in that sense he said, Art thou then a King? for when in
that sense,

Jesus answered thou say that I am a King; as Pila^um credisse Christum
Regem esse, non tame^ ejus regnum aduersarium esse regno Caesaris, sed
pertinere ad quandam singularem Iudaeorum religione^ id probat, quod
perseueranter eu^ Regem appellauit. Ecce Rex vester, Regem vestrum crucifigam?
Jesus Nazarenus Rex Iudaeoru^. Tolet. in 10.18 Ioh. 19.4. verse. 6. Verse. 7.12.
one that talked more of it then Christ did, Pilate went out again, and says
to the Jews, I find in him noe fault at all: and Luke 23.14. Ye have brought
this man unto me, as one that peruerteth the people, and behold I haueing
examined him, have found noe fault in him, touching those things whereof ye
accuse him: Noe nor yet Herod; for I sent you to him, and lo nothing worthy of
death. And after when they cried, not him but Barabas, he when he had scourged
him went forth again, saying I bring him forth to you, that ye may know
that I find noe fault in him. Why then did he against law and conscience
scourge him? and when they seeing him cried, crucify him, he said again,
Take ye him and crucify him: for I find noe fault in him. And after when they
said, by our law he ought to die, because he made himself the Son of God;
Pilate was the more afraid, and sought to release him. But the Jews cried
out, if thou let this man go, thou art not Caesar's friend: whosoever makes
himself a King speaks against Caesar. When Pilate heard that; his desire of
freeing Jesus began to stagger, though he believed, that if he had any Kingdom,
it was not of this world; yet as thinking that if he should not proceed, it
might work him Caesar's displeasure; therefore bringing him forth, he says
not now, as before, behold the man, but behold your King; and after shall I
crucify your King? The chief Priests answered, Verse. 14.
we have noe King but Caesar. Yet he washed his hands, and then with this
inducement, Mat. 27.24. Luke 23.23.
he willing to content the people delivered him to be crucified: For the voices
of them and of the chief Priests prevailed.

Whence we may behold the misery that often follows greatness, The misery of
greatness.
appearing both in the chief Priests and Pilate, the one carried a way with
such extreme envy and implacable hatred, that the judgment of innocence often
pronounced by a Judge would not satisfy them; the other with importunity and
respects of contenting, appeasing, gratifying others, and preventing complaints
to Caesar, of suffering another King, to an act of injustice so much aginst
his own conscience, and often reiterated sentence of aquitment.

A poor fruit, to often following the great and incessant labors of
ambitious climing; when for fear or favor, to gratify or content, they are
often feign to punish innocents, and acquit men guilty and wicked, and sometime
in matters of Christ's cause and Religion. Yet am I not of their opinion, who
think a States man can not be an honest man. For under Godly Kings walking in
the right path of Religion, as faithful to their maker, such as David,
Iehoshaphat, Hezekiah, Josias and others, they may carry themselves justly,
and do God great service: such Kings move them not to any act of injustice,
nor to maintain Idols or Heresies, much less to punish or molest true
believers and innocents. But if the Prince they serve be an Idolater, an
Heretic or Wicked, they can hardly hold their places and keep a good
conscience. 1. King. 21.8. etc.
For when Ahab reigns, Iezabel writes her letters to the Elders and Nobles to
subborne false witnesses, and to stone innocent Naboth, and it is done. Iehu
writes to the Elders to kill all Ahabs children, and it is done. Diverse Kings
were displeased with Prophets, and the Nobles wrong them, as they did Jeremy
and others. Ioh. 12.42.
Among the Chief Rulers many believed on Christ, but because of the Pharisees,
they did not confess him, lest they should be put out of the Sinagonge. For
they loved the praise of men, more then the praise of God. Act. 24.27.
Felix willing to show the Jews a pleasure left Paul bound. When Iustine the
Emperor had deprived the Arrians of those Churches they held in Greece,
Theodorick King of Italy, Liber. Pontif. in Johan. I.
sent John Bishop of Rome assisted with Senators, to entreat him to restore
them, if not to tell him, he would serve the Catholics with the like sauce.
The Pontifical book says, they entreated the Emperor with tears, and
prevailed; that is, to have wolves restored to the Sheep. Belisarius, by the
command of the Empress Theodora an Eutichean, thrust out Siluerius, and
placed Vigilius in the Popedom, that he might according to promise condemn the
Council of Chalcedon, and write Letters in confirmation of the Eutichean
faith: Baron. Vol. 7. ann. 538. art. 20.
whereupon Baronius calls Vigilius, a Thief, a Wolf, an Antichrist. Ye have
seen that the Eastern Emperors made their Bishops consent to the Pope, in
worshipping of Images, and at last in Purgatory, Superemacie and other
articles, and what followed.

It would be to long to relate how the Judges, nobles and prelates under
Emperors and Kings, have made Priests abandon their wives, and people receive
his other laws and errors, when their Princes in fear or flaterie
temporised with the Pope. For Prelates, nobles and people are naturally prone
to fashion themselves into the religion of their Princes and patrons: and that
has made Iesuited Spirits practice to make reformed Princes lukewarm, Popish
or Arminians. 2. King. 16.10.
For when King Ahaz seeing a strange Altar at Damascus sent the Pattern of it
to Vrijah the Priest to make such a one, and offer on it, he not minding that
these things ought not to have differed from Exodus 25.4^. Act. 7.44.
the pattern given to Moses, that noe other things were to be intruded into the
Temple of the Lord, refuses not, but does it, be it never so bad, Regis ad
exemplum totus componitur orbis. A wonder therefore it is, that men be so
ambitious of these places, wherein their souls are in such danger; seeing
that if Princes be Heretical and persecute the godly, their Ministers must
follow them and afflict and punish them, or loose their places: for when those
that cleave to Gods Word, and contend for it, are examined; they must confess
the truth, though it cost them their lives, as our Savior here did; for when
Pilate said, Art thou then a King? Jesus answered thou say that I am a
King; af if he said, and I can not, I must not d^nie it; For

To this end was I borne, and for this cause came I into the world that I
should bear witness unto the truth. That is, indeed to confirm the Truth
and every clause of it, whereof this of his Kingdom and office is one, with his
blood; to witness and seal the truth of it with his blood: for though he knew
that to confess this would cost him his life; yet he considers that to this
end he was borne, and for this cause he came in the world, that he should
bear witness to it with his blood, 1. Tim. 6.13.
and therefore Saint Paul says, that he witnessed a good confession before
Pontius Pilate. Sealed as ye see with his blood, Tolet. in Joan. VXIII. Vt
veritatem Dei oftenderet, and regnum Dei manifestarer, ac tyrannidem Diaboli,
and dolos ejus detegeret.
to make his witness the more effectual: Seeing indeed he came into the
world as Tolet says, that he might show the truth of God, and manifest the
Kingdom of God, and discover the tiranie of the devil and his deceits, whereby
he deceives men, whether by his own suggestions, or by his Ministers, the
teachers and maintainers of idollatrie and errors. For to this purpose the
Son (viz. the Word, the Truth) of God was manifested that he might destroy
the works of the devil. He came to confound all these in this, that he came
to bear witness unto Gods Kingdom, unto Gods Truth, whereby all these are
confounded; and those also, that live as if they were borne to noe other end,
and for noe other cause came into the world, then to flatter, daube, and
temporise with sins and errors, or, which is as bad, frowardly to contest
against the truth with sophisticated arguments and praeuaricating shifts; for
that they might all be sure of it, and repenting, receive and confess the
Truth in all things, he here inforceth the certainty of it with a kind of
ingemination, or reinforcing of his asseueration to the Souls of men; as if
they could never enough mark and remember this point, saying; to this end was
I borne, and for this cause came I into the world, that I should bear witness
unto the Truth. O thou eternal and almighty Son of God, Heb. 1.2.
by whom he made the worlds, thou heir of all things, the brightness of thy
Fathers glory, and the express Image of his person, thou that thoughtest it
noe roberie to be held equal with God; surely it was for some great end that
thou wast borne of a Woman, for some great cause that thou came in the
World; Lord let us know it, let us hear it, o thou King of Saints, that we
neither despise nor slight and neglect it: thou tellest us with a witness, and
a dear witness it was to thee; for thou sealest it with thy most precious
blood, shed in the greatest pains, the greatest sufferings that ever any felt
in this world, to see if yet we will receive the truth and the love thereof,
2 Thessalonians. 2.10.11:
that we may be saved, and not be given over to believe a lie: for this cause
was I borne and for this cause came I into the World, that I should bear
witness unto the Truth.

Some man will say, If it were to this end that he came, and thus sealed the
truth, what Christian is there that will not receive the love of the Truth,
that will not in all matters of faith and salvation hear his voice, obey it
and so receive his testimony? I answer, thou hear him affirm it and
reinforce it, what then needs further witness? Luke 19.10:
for if thou say, The Son of man came to seek and to save that which was
lost: That is, by showing them Gods Truth and bearing witness to it, and so
loosing the prisnors bound and lost in the prison of sin, error Sedebas o
homo in tenebrosis and vmbra mortis per ignorantiam veritatis, sedebas vinctus
catenis delictorum. Bernar. de ordine vitae. Nos de Adam caeci nati sumus, and
illo illuminate opus habemus. Aug. in Joan. trac. 34. Act. 26.18. Mar. 10.46.
Gal. 4.4.
and ignorance. Ioh. 12.48. He came a light into the world, that whosoever
believes on him should not abide in darkness, but should have the light of
life, to make them children of the light. God sent him for a light of the
Gentiles, Isa. 42. but that was to open their eyes, and to turn them from
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that they may receive
forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among them, which are sanctified
through faith that is in him. Not otherwise. The Son of man came to minister
and give his life a ransom for many: but that was to minister the Word, and to
witness that his death was a ransom for many, to seal that truth, in his
blood. God sent his Son made of a Woman, to redeem them that were under the
Law, and thereby Servants obnoxious to sin and death, that they might receive
the adoption of sons: but that is by receiving the Word, the Truth, who to as
many as receive him, Ioh. 1.12.
gives power to become the Sons of God, even to them that beleene on his
Name, viz. on the Word: by letting them Chap. 8.32.34.36. Character of a
Christian. page 325. etc.
know the Truth, that the truth might make them free, and free indeed, from
sin, Satan, errors, snaring scruples etc. There is noe true freedom, but
what the Truth gives; and it must needs be true if the Truth give it. As he
there says, If the Son therefore shall make you free, Ye shall be free
indeed. Thereby showing himself to be the Truth as Augustine proves on Ioh.
17.17. Sanctify them in thy Truth, thy Word is Truth. August. in 10. trac. 108.
To this Truth he bare witness; and this Truth freeth, being believed, known
and received with love. So was it with the Corinthians, who being enriched in
all knowledge, Paul says the testimony of Christ was confirmed in them. 1.
Cor. 1.6. which that we might so receive and obey in all that it teaches, and
every part of it, he bare witness to it with his blood. Which therefore
indeed is called the blood of the Testament, sealed, confirmed and dedicated
in blood; Heb. 9.18.19
Whereupon neither was the first Testament dedicated without blood. For when
Moses had spoken every precept, he took the blood of Calves and sprinkled
both the book, and the people, saying, this is the blood of the Testament
which God has enjoined unto you. That was a type of this Testament sealed, and
dedicated to all ma^kinde in Christ's blood, which sprinckleth both the
Testament as a witness and seal of it, and the people as redeemed and sealed
unto: therefore this blood of the everlasting covenant is called a witnessing,
Heb. 12.24.
a speaking blood, The blood of sprinckling, which speaks better things then
the blood of Abel: It witnesses the Truth of all things declared in the new
Testament, and so speaks reconcilliation, grace, peace and life to the
consciences of all them that receive the same Testament, and the love of the
Truth, therein manifested, in all things necessary to salvation: See that ye
refuse not him that speaks. verse. 25.
For if they escaped not, who refused him that spoke on earth, much more shall
not we, if we turn away from him that speaks from Heaven: viz. by this
blood, and the representative signs thereof in his Sacraments, therefore Saint
John says, 1. Ioh. 5.8.
There are three that bear witness in Earth, the Spirit, and the Water, and
the Blood, and these three agree in one. They all witness and seal the same
thing, they agree in witness of one Truth one Testament. Ioh. 14.26. chap.
16.13.
The Spirit, that is the holy Ghost that brought all things to the minds of
the Apostles that Christ had told them, and that witnesses the same Word, and
noe other unto us: for he guided them into all Truth, he was not to speak of
himself, but to take of Christ's and show unto them: nothing but that which
Christ had Ioh. 15.15.
made known unto them; save only that he should show them things to come: viz.
touching, the coming of the man of sin; his lying wonders; him that let;
Seducing Spirits, that should forbid marriage, and some meats; the seven
seals; the 7. Triumpets; the 7. Vials; the Dragon with ten horns; the
Beast; his mark; them that receive it; Babylons Ruin, and the like. Whereof
our Lord speaks when he says, I have yet many things to say unto you, Ioh.
16.12.
but ye can not bear them now. these can not be, as the great whore and her
members, most impudently affirm, the traditions of the Church of Rome, as
invocation of saints, single life of Priests, distinction of meats, their
observed fasts and feasts, the Popes succession in Peter's chair as head of the
Church, private masses, drawing Souls out of purgatory, etc. For this is a
bold divination for thire own proffit; any other Heretics may say as much for
their herefies, if that would serve; and to disprove them all our Savior
speaking of things absolutely necessary to salvation says, All things that I
have heard of my Father have I made known unto you. Ioh. 15.15. these the
Spirit brought to their minds, and in their writings Act. 20.27. 1. Ioh.
1.3. chap. 2.27. Charac. of a Christian. p. 86.96.106.110.
they manifested them to us; and to these the Spirit bears witness on
earth: And the water. viz. in Baptism; it is a seal of that Covenant, and
Truth; it exhibiteth and witnesses the same things vissiblie, and to the Soul
in a sealing sign that the Testament does: And the blood; this did Christ's
bloods shed on the Cross, and this does the cup in the Sacrament: for
therefore Christ gives to the sign the name and sealing virtue of the thing
signified, saying, This is my blood of the new Testament; viz. that witnesses
and confirms the truth of it, and of all that it offers and teaches to
your Souls: This cup is the new Testament in my blood; the Testament
witnessed, sealed, confirmed and dedicated to you in my blood, as the first
Testament was in the blood of Calves, of Goats etc. and therefore Saint John
there adds, If we receive the witness of men, 1. Ioh. 5.9.
the witness of God is greater: for this is the witness of God, which he
testifies of his Son; that is, which he testifies of the Word, of the
Truth, which is his Son, and which God witnessed and sealed unto us, not only
by voices from Heaven and miracles, but also by the blood of his Son, and now
by his Spirit, by the water of Baptism, and by the cup in the Lords Supper;
therefore it is said, Him has God the Father sealed. Ioh. 6.27. and therefore
John Baptist says of Christ (Ioh. 3.33.) He that received his testimony, has
set to his seal that God is true; that is, true in his Word, and true in the
sealing that he gives to it; he justifies him in his sayings Romans 3.4. He that
believes him not in every thing he has said, but rejects the Testament,
the Truth in any point of faith and salvation, he believes not God, but has
made him a liar, verse. 10.
because he believes not the record that God gave of his Son. He believes
not the witness of the Spirit, of the water, of the cup; not the witness which
Christ bare unto the Truth in his blood; he refuses him that speaks by
these; yea he rejects Christ the faithful and true witness, and the Seal
or mark of God, Reu. 1.5.
even the testimony of Jesus chap. 19.10 see Character of a Christian. page
228.
, received by all them that are in a right and saueing manner of the true
Church: Wherein there is noe other Word received in matters of faith and
salvation, but Gods Testament. Noe vain brags of the spirit; but by the
Scriptures the 1. Ioh. 4.1.6 Act. 17.11. 1. These. 5.21. Isa. 8.20.
Spirits are tried. To the Law and to the testimony: if they speak not
according to this word, it is because there is noe light in them. And
consequently noe spirit of prophecy in them. If a man be well skilled or
mighty in the proofs and power of the new Testament, as Apollos was said to
be mighty in the Scriptures, Act. 18.24.
then he has the spirit of prophecy, otherwise not: for that true member of
the true church, endued with such excellent knowledge, that John would have
worshipped him, Reu. 12.9. chap. 19.10.
says, I am of thy Brethren the Prophets, and of them that keep the sayings
of this book. Which expounds that, I am of thy Brethren that have the
testimony of Jesus: he had nothing else but his Testament; he came out from
the Arc of his Testament, out of that Temple, wherein was noe other Word, he
was powerful in that; nor would he allow any doctrine, which was not agreeable
thereto, to be of the Spirit: therefore he says, for the testimony of Jesus
is the Spirit of prophecy: noe other. If therefore men bring not that
testimony, they vainly talk of the Spirit of prophecy, as Papists for their
traditions, Anabaptists for their dreams, and others for their Heresies;
wherein they reject the testimony of Jesus, and do despite to the Spirit of
grace. Wherefore the Apostle says, Heb. 10.26.
If we sin willingly after we have received the knowledge of the Truth,
there remains noe more sacrifice for sins, but a certain fearful looking
for of judgment and fiery indignation, etc. If we fall away and reject the
truth in any point of faith and salvation, we have noe benefit of that one
Sacrifice: for as it was a price of redemption, so ye see it was and is a seal
and witness of the Testament that conueis the benefit of it, to them that
receive that Truth, not to them that despise it; for it rather seals to them
the damnation assured Mark. 16.16. Ioh. 3.18.20. He that despised Moses Law,
verse. 28.
died without mercy under two or three witnesses; (though he despised but one
or two commandments thereof, for that made him guilty of all.) Of how much
sorer puishment suppose ye shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden under
foot the Son of God (viz. the Word, the Charac. of a Christian. p. 34.
new Testament, not the letter, but the spirit. For the Lord is that spirit. 2.
Cor. 3.6.17.) and has counted the blood of Covenant wherewith he was
sanctified (that is, sealed and dedicated) an unholy thing. He that reiects
his testimony in any point and takes other, he departs from the faith, as
those do who take theires that forbid marriage and meats, and so he does this
verrie thing, he makes the blood that speaks an insufficient witness, and
so an unholy thing, and does despite unto the Spirit of grace, (that also
witnesses the same) like as all Heretics and hinderers, and slanderers of the
Word do:) though Christ came with his blood and bitter passion to bear
witnesle to the Truth, and to make him receive the love of it; yet he receives
it not. Mark this ye Papists, Pelagians and other Heretics; and never tell
men of your meditations of Christ's wounds, and hopes in his blood and
sufferings, and in your receiving it in the cup, nor of your prayers to be
cleansed by that blood, if in any thing you obstinately reject his testimony,
and receive not the Truth to which he bare witness with his blood; because
this is not to receive, but to tread under foot the Son of God, and count
the blood of the Covenant wherewith he was sanctified, sealed and confirmed to
us an unholy thing. How the^ would they have benefit by it? God has chosen
men to salvation (and so to have benefit by the blood and by the Sacrament)
through sanctification of the spirit and belief of the Truth. Such as receive
the love of the Truth have it, 2. These. 2.
not others that will not. The like may be said of their Baptism, I mean
not generally; because at least some of their children, dying before they come
of age to receive, or reject the love of the Truth, may yet have benefit of
their Baptism to life everlasting: but they themselves that oppose the Truth
in any thing, or will not hear the voice of the Charmer charm he never so
wisely; and presist therein without repentance to the acknowledging of the
Truth, what benefit can they have by their Baptism? It is not that, but
their being Charat. of a Christian. page 81. etc.
and continuing in the Word, that makes them such true Christians as shall be
saved. For Baptism also is a seal of the Covenant, by it God bears witness
to his Covenant; and it is of great force and virtue to him that receives the
love true of the Truth sealed; as the seal is to a covenant of this world, and
to him that receives it, and whatsoever it conueieth. But if in any point men
reject and oppose the Truth, and so tread under foot the Son of God, they
make the Water and the Blood thereby signified an insufficent witness, and so
an unholy thing; they refuse him that by it speaks and bears witness to
his Truth; and what benefit then can they have by it, without receiving his
Truth to which it is a seal?

He that receives the broad seal of a King, if either in part or in whole he
reject, oppose or disclaim the deed to which it is annexed, or the things
therein conveyed, or will not hold them so as the writing binds, whether it
be in capite or other tenute, but as he list himself, or if he cut of a piece
of the writing, or tread it under foot, what good does the Seal do him?
surely none: he forsakes the substance and foundation of his assurance. But so
do the Papists and other Heretics by Gods Truth and covenant as in these
examples.

The Covenant of God witnesses that, He has chesen us in him before the
world, (not that we were, but) that we should be holy. He has saved us and
called us with an holy calling, Ephesians. 1.4.5.6. 2. Tim. 1.9. Romans 11.15. chap.
9.11.12 16.
not according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace,
given us in Christ before the world. There is a remnant acording to the
election of grace: and if by grace, then it is no more of works; otherwise
Grace is noe more grace etc. Noe man can have these but he must thus hold them
in Capite of God, and that his eternal Truth and purpose: but both Papists and
Pelagians oppose this, some more, some less, and will have and hold this
election calling and salvation from and according to foreseen faith and
works, and so of and by them. And is not this then to fall from God and his
eternal purpose and grace to themselves and their own works? From the
fundamental Truth and true foundation to a false one of their own? The
Covenant of God witnesses of the elect that they are borne again not of the
will of man, Ioh. 1.
but of God; of and by the Word: Phil. 2.
that God works in us both to will and to do: The Pelagians and Papists will
not hold this Sonneship and power to do good so wholly of God, but of free
will, which at least must share with God in that power and honor: Is not this
to disclaim God in the foundation, and the things it gives? Indeed they have
free will, but it is to contend against the Word, Iud. 11.
and by gainsaying with Core, to show they are not of the Truth, and so to
prove that they have not this free will to good which they talk of. Gods
covenant gives the cup to all, Mat. 26.27. 1. Cor. 11.26.27.28.
saying, drink ye all of it; and so did the Corimhians e^ce this bread and
drink this cup. The Papists yet take the cup from the laietie; and so, as it
were, what in them is both cut of a piece of the Coueant, 1. Tim. 2.5.
and break of a part of the Seal, yea forbid and deny it to Gods people.
Gods Covenant and Truth will have them come unto him, and by Christ the Heb.
1.4. and
one and only Mediator; Papists will yet pray unto Saints and make them
Mediators: Gods Covenant allows 1. Tim. 3.2.12.
Marriage to all; they forbid it to Priests. A man would think this were not
to depart from the faith, to forsake the foundation: But though sins of
infirmity against the new Covenant, are not a departing from it; yet as for
teaching or receiving any new, or contrary doctrine, and not 1. Tim. 6.3.
consenting to Christ's in all things, in this case it is with the new Covenant,
as it was with the Law, Gal. 3.10. Deuteronomy. 27. Iam. 2.10.
Cursed is every one that continues not in all things, which are written in
it: and whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point, he is
guilty of all: and must have forer punishment, Reu. 22.16.18.
as one that tradeth underfoot the Son of God etc. vt supra. For the Angel
and Christ by him assures eternal plauges to him that shall add to his Word,
or take away from the words of his book; and Saint Paul says of these that
give beede to such as forbid marriage and some meats, that they depart from the
faith: Much more if they do it in other points also, as the Papists do; who
in many great points of faith and salvation do not continue in the Word, but
1. Tim. 6.3.
teach other wise and consent not to the wholesome words of our Lord Jesus
Christ; but are gainsayers with Core, Jude 11.

Gods Covenant witnesses that he does freely justify his by the blood of
Christ, and his free grace therein, Romans 5.9. Romans 3.24.28. Gal. 2.16.
and on our part by faith only, without the works of the Law: for Saint James
speaks of our justification before men, show me thy faith by the works; Iam.
2.18.
make it appear to us by thy works, that it is not a dead faith, Romans 4.2.
but true liueing and saueing; If Abraham were justified by works, he has
wherein to rejoice, but not before God. Yet they will have a man to be justified
before God, not by his free grace, and only by faith therein, but by the works
of the Law. Which is against the maine scoape of the Gospel and Truth of God
touching salvation, and so against the foundation, as also in other points.
Heb. 7.27. chap. 9.26.28 chap. 10.12.14.
The Covenant of God witnesses, that Christ was once offered; after he had
offered one Sacrifice for simes for ever, he sat down at the right hand of
God. By one offering he perfected for ever them that are sanctified. The
Papists will yet daily offer him by the hands of the Priest, a propitiatory
sacrifice for the sins of the quick and dead, to get remission by an idol,
or false Christ of their own making, Ioh. 8.32. see Charac. of a Christian.
page 329. etc. ad finem.
and so by a new price of redemption. The Covenant of God witnesses that the
Truth makes men free, and free indeed, from the servitude and imputation of
sin, that men can not otherwise have true freedom; but as if it did not, the
Papists will have freedom by pardons, merrits, satisfactions, masses etc.
Surely this is to forsake the true foundation of assurance for a false one of
their own. Yet some unadvisedly say, they hold the foundation; which can not
be maintained. For Christ is the eternal Word and Truth revealed, and that
Word is in himself most simple and indivisible, one foundation, not to be
divided, though we can not come in any measure to know the same, but as it is
revealed for our weak and finite understanding, as it were by parts and
principles: yet it is true in them all and in every part, he was and is
eternally that Truth of God; and other foundation can noe man lay the^ that is
laid which is Jesus Christ. Now therefore whoseuer in points of faith and
salvation forsake and oppose that foundation in any one principle, and insteade
thereof intrudeth another for men to build upon, he forsakes and opposes
Christ the eternal foundation, and thrusts in another for men to build upon;
and they that in matters of faith and salvation receive and build upon the
intruded foundation, they forsake Christ the eternal foundation and build upon
the other intruded: but the Popish clergy in points of faith and salvation
forsake and oppose that foundation in diverse principles, and insteade thereof
intrude others for men to build on: therefore they forsake and oppose Christ
the eternal foundation and thrust in another for men to build upon; and the
Papists that in matters of faith and salvation receive and build upon the
intruded foundation, they also forsake Christ the eternal foundation and build
upon the intruded.

If an Executour, or one that has diverse legacies given him, reject a dead
man's Testament in any one thing, to get the same by some other right and
title, or add one thing to it, we say he forsakes, breaks and dissanuls the
will or Testament, and so the verrie foundation of all he has by it; much more
if he do it in many, as the Papists do by Christ, who reject his Testament in
diverse maine points of faith and salvation, to hold the legacies thereof by
other doctrines and titles; and add to it their own traditions, which they
will have received, pari pietatis affectu ac reuerentia. For faith S. Paul, If
it be a man's Testament, yet if it be confirmed, noe man dissanulleth or adds
unto it. Gal. 3.15.
Much less to Gods Testament, which is the Truth Christ spoke and confirmed in
his blood; seeing indeed Christ himself is the Truth, which he spoke, as Aug.
in 10. trac. 41. B^da Feria. 5 po^t ^^uocau^t Aug. in Joan. tr^c. 115. cum
Chrutus etc. Ioh. 8.
Angustine and Beda show on the words, I speak that which I have seen with my
Father: and as the same Augustine on these words does well understand, when
Christ bears witness to the Truth, truly he bears witness to himself;
for surely it is his own voice. I am the Truth. And he also says in another
place, I am one that bears witness of my self. Which needs noe further
proof here; because in sundry places above, he is manifested to be the Word,
and that Word the Truth. Now seeing he bare witness to that Truth, to the
Testament with his blood, and this Testament being the doctrine taught by him
and his Apostles and Evangelists, and by them left in writing, is called Reu.
19.10. chap. 22.9. Character of a Christian. page 228.
the testimony of Jesus, received by all that are his, as of one that, is
therefore called the faithful and true witness (Revel. 1.5.) one that should
be believed and obeyed in all matters of faith and salvation; therefore against
all opposers and Heretics, who refuse his testimony in any point, he adds;

Every one that is of the truth hears my voice. That is, every one that is
of me, and so is a true Christian in being of the Truth. Those are not such,
who for a while receive the Word with joy, as the stony ground does the seed,
Mat. 13.
but when persecution arises because of the Word, by and by they are offended.
Some with the verrie manifestation of the Word, that the poor have the Gospel
preached unto them; the Truth manifested to them: chap. 11.5.6.
he therefore who is the Word, who is the Truth, says, Blessed is he whosoever
shall not be offended in me. And in another place, If ye continue in my Word,
Ioh. 31.
then are ye my Disciples indeed: that is, Christians of me, Character of a
Christian. page 199. etc.
that am Christ the Truth: for so he adds, And ye shall know the Truth, and
the Truth shall make you free. Act. 11.26.
In Antioch the Disciples were first called Christians. As a Disciple of Plato
is called a Platonist, of Arrius an Arrian, and as the Disciples of Nicolas,
all that held his doctrine were by the holy Ghost called Nicolaitans; Reu.
2.6.15.
so the Disciples of Christ, that in all things consent to his Word and
continue therein, are of him the Truth, and so called Christians. One is your
Master even Christ. We must not be of Paul, nor of Apollos, nor of Cephas,
which is Peter; much less of his supposed Successor (or any other Heretic)
as those that will be called Latin or Roman Catholics, that is vniuersalls,
in their relation to their holding of him and his See, after whom all the
world wondreth, and who is called the universal Latin, or Roman Bishop, and
so have the name of the Beast; and are more truly called Papists then
Christians: because they hear and obey him more then Christ, and against
Christ.

We must not in matters of faith and salvation hear any man's voice, Ephesians.
2.20.
further then he comes with the Truth of God, to which Christ bare witness
with his blood, the Truth which is the foundation laid in the doctrine of
Christ and his Apostles and Prophets; and in building, or seeming to build
thereupon, the same must not be wrested; 1. Cor. 3.10.11.
but every man must take heed how he builds thereupon: for other foundation
can noe man lay then that is laid, which is Jesus Christ. Noe other word.
Saint Paul will have us to be of none but of God; chap. 1.30.
Of him are ye in Christ, who of God is made unto us wisdom: It is wisdom in a
man to be of this wisdom, of the Word, of the Truth, and so of God; for it is
Gods Truth: Ye are Christ's, chap. 3.23.
and Christ is Gods. Therefore he says here, Every one that is of the Truth
hears my voice. He therefore that will not in all matters of faith and
salvation be truly a Disciple of Truth, but teaches new or contrary doctrine,
he becomes a Master of error; and they that receive it and abide in it, are
his, not Christ's, His Servants ye are to whom ye obey; Romans 6.16.
whether Christ or Antichrist, the true Shepbeard or a Seducer, though it be
but in one or two points; as the followers of Nicolas, though they held all the
rest sound, they presently loose the name of Christians, and are called
Nicolaitans: for one strong hold, held against such a King, is enough to make
the Captain that holds it, and all his followers to loose the name of
Subjects, and to be rightly called Traitors: men can not serve two Masters,
not God and Mammon; much less Christ and Antichrist, the Truth and error: if
he cleave to error, he despises and hates the Truth; which is not the fault
of one sort of Heretics and evil doers, Ioh. 3.20.
but of all: Every one that evil does hates the light, neither comes to the
light.

These things me thinks should fill the Papists, and our new Masters the
Arminians with horror. For though Christ say, As Moses lift up the Serpent in
the wilderness, verse. 14. see Charac. of a Christian. page 205. Ioh. 5.24.
so must the Son of man be lifted up, That WHOSOEVER believes on him should
not perish, but have eternal life; and of a believer in the present tense, He
that bears my word and believes on him that sent me, HAS everlasting life,
and shall NOT come into condemnation, but IS passed from death to life; And by
his Apostles, Romans 8.30.
Whom he did predestinate, them he also called: and whom he called, them he
also justified: and whom he justified, them he also glorified. For the gifts
and calling of God are without repentance. Whosoever is borne of God, chap.
11.29. 1. Ioh. 3.9.
sins not (viz. the sin unto death) for his seed remains in him, and he
can not sin, because he is borne of God. To show that a true believer, called
and justified, may be certain of his salvation, and can not fall away totally
and finally: Yet our Arminian Pelagians, and the Papists fear not to maintain
that persons truly justified can not be certain of their salvation, and that
they may nevertheless fall away totally and finally; wherein many follow them,
and therein follow new Masters, and like rebels maintain strong holds of
error against the knowledge of God, and obedience of Christ the Truth.

But they say, that to preach these doctrines of certainty of salvation, and
perseverance, as also of election and conversion of grace, and not of works,
not of free will; if they were true doctrines, which they will not grant, yet
they who teach the^ to the people, teach desperate doctrines, and open a gap to
all licentiousnes, carelesnes, prophanenes, and neglect of holy life; and show
a great want of wisdom and discretion, or to the like effect. Here I might
tell them, that their own broaching and maintaining of errors, in these
points, have caused more preaching and writing to defend the Truth, and to
keep people from their errors and apostacy, then otherwise had been
requisite: But I answer they see not, or will not see, that this is in effect
to charge Christ with want of wisdom and discretion; who, in the infancy of
the Church, did himself and by his Apostles, teach all these things by
preaching and writing unto the people; that whatsoever his Word be, it still
ministers grace to those hearers that are his Sheep, Tit. 2.11.12
teaching them to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, it softeneth and
molefieth their hearts as the Sun softeneth wax; that 2. pet. 2.20
they escape the pollutions of the world through the knowledge of Christ; that
those that are not Christ's, are as well hardened by other points, as by these,
even as the sun hardens clay: and so it does these new Masters and their
followers: for the more the Truth is manifested, the more they hate that light
and Truth, and would hinder the setting of it forth in Sermons and Books; the
more they despise Christ, who is the Truth and rebel against him. Is this
their wisdom and discretion? I confess they have some, such as it is. For
first, for gain or preferment, they will obscure, betray and sell Christ the
Truth, yea fight against him with errors and arguments, wrest the Word to
their eronious tenets, that is in effect to prove him error and his father a
liar; like mercenarie Soldiers that will fight of that side which gives them
most pay: and then they have wisdom to get great ones of their side; to
hinder others from confuting them, and to keep the people from knowledge, that
so they also may fall the sooner to their party; and by these things to
deal trecherously with God; as also by perverting the Articles, to make, if
they could, their mother an adultresse, and the present Church of England as
adulterous in Religion as themselves; to extenuate the heinousnes of Popery,
to draw our Religion nearer to it, and thereby to get the Romish Adversaries
friends in Court and Universities; by seditious whisperings to alienate the
heart of the Prince from his most Religious and Truth seeking Subjects, to get
Parliaments dissolved, and so overthrow a chief remedy under God, to divide a
Kingdom at unity in it self, to fire all, so they may, but get their
Princes favor to rule for their own times; and by all these things to throw
Churches, Kingdoms and States into destruction; to provoke God to power out his
plauges upon us: If this be their wisdom and discretion, surely it is not
sapere adsobrietatem, Iam. 3.15.17.
it comes not from above, it is not pure and peaceable, but earthly, sensual
and deuilish. But they have one point of wisdom more, to show, if not by all
these, yet at least by stopping their own ears (and other men's also, what
they can) against the voice of the charmer, by disputing and fighting against
the Truth, that they are not of the Truth, nor of his Kingdom, but of a
contrary; that they ran gredily after the error of Balaam, for reward, and
will perish in the gainsaying of Core, unless they repent: Jude 11. For Christ
says, Tole^. in Joan. 18.
Every one that is of the Truth hears my voice. Tolet. Therefore the Jews
believe not me, not because I speak not true things, but because they are not
of the Truth. It is a like saying, Joh. 3. he that does truth comes to the
light. Romans 2. 2. These. 1.7.8.
But to them that are contentious, and do not obey the Truth, but obey
unrighteousness indignation and wrath. Which indeed they will find when
Christ comes, taking vengeance on them that know not God and that obey not
the Gospel, who shall be punished with everlasting destruction etc. Reu.
14.9.10.11. verse. 12.
As is said to those his enemies that would not that he should reign over
them, and to them that receive the mark of the Beast, and worship him and his
Image in receiving, and obeying for doctrines their commandments and
traditions; as they would have all do, or suffer for refusing the^; a great
trial: therefore it is there added, Here is the patience of the Saints:
Character of a Chr^stian. page 282. and 292.
Here are they that keep the co^mandeme^ts of God, and the faith of Jesus.
They that are theires, hear the^; * but they that are Christ's will in matters
of faith and salvation only hear him, as he says, Every one that is of the
truth hears my voice.

Augustine, Aug. in Joan. trac. 115. gratiam commendauit etc.
He has commended the grace whereby he calls according to his purpose: of
the which purpose the Apostle speaks; All thing^s work together for good to
them who are called according to his purpose, to wit, according to the purpose
of the caller, not of the called. He has called us with an holy calling, not
according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace: without
doubt noe merrits goeing before, least grace should, not be grace. For if he
bad said, Every one which hears my voice is of the truth, he should have
been thought to have been named of the Truth, because he obeieth the Truth.
He says not this, but thus, Every one that is of the Truth hears my voice.
And hereby he is not therefore of the Truth, because he hears his voice, but
he therefore hears because he is of the Truth, that is because the Truth
conferreth this gift on him: which what other thing is it, then Christ giueing
him the gift, he believes in Christ? This he manifests against the proud and
pestilent error of the Pelagians, which takes from God the glory of his free
grace and power in election, calling, conversion etc. And gives these things
to their own free will, and Foreseen faith and works; and by such disputes
against the Truth prove that which they deny, viz. that they themselves can
not hear, beleene, and obey the truth, because it is not given them of God,
because they are not Christ's; as he says, Ioh. 10.26.27.
Ye believe not, because ye are not of my Sheep. My Sheep hear my voice,
that is because they are of me, chosen in me: Ioh. 8.47.
He that is of God hears Gods words: ye therefore hear them not because ye
are not of God. That is indeed, because ye are not of Gods elect, and so of
the Truth, 1. Ioh. 2.19.
and called according to his purpose. They went out from us, because they were
not of us: Act. 13.48. Act. 2.42. verse. 47.
for if they had been of us, they would have continued with us, etc. As many
as were ordained to eternal life believed. Such continue steadfastly in the
Apostles doctrine, as is expressed there; Such as should be saved. Others, that
are not so of the Truth, do not; only the elect and called, as he says, Every
one that is of the Truth hears my voice. Tolet in Joan. 18. vide o Pilate
quos audis contra me, qui ex veritute no^ sunt.
Tolet. Behold, o Pilate, whom thou hear against me, those that are not of
the Truth. So indeed of Papists, Pelagians and other Heretics, Christ may
complain and say, Behold, o ye Princes and people, whom ye hear against me,
2. Tim. 2.19. Ioh. 10.
those that are not of the Truth. The LORD knows them that are his: Christ
says, I know my sheep, that is, who are given me, who shall hear my voice,
and who not. Act. 18.10.

Yet true it is that me^ commonly judge of the tree by the fruit, and so that
those are not of God, who hear not Gods words; likewise of others, because
they do hear his voice, they are of the Truth: 1. Ioh. 4.6.
and this is good, and if not opposed to the former, noe way amiss. He that
knows God hears us, he that is not of God hears not us, hereby know we
the Spirit of Truth, and the Spirit of error. For Christ is known Ioh.
10.14.27. Character of a Christian. page 329.
of his, and when they know the Truth, the Truth makes them free: free from
presumpteous sinning; they hear his voice; they may not, nor will not so
neglect hearing and holy life as presuming upon praedestination to say
desperately, Si Saluabor Saluabor, there is noe danger of that, because they
not knowing the secret counsel of God, who are elected in Christ to be
called, justified, sanctified and glorified, and who not, look to the means,
hear his Word, pray and give all diligence to follow it in holiness of life;
that so themselves (and others also) may know the tree by the fruit; which is
to make their calling and election sure to themselves: but howsoever both the
one, and the other show that they only are of Christ, be they here or elsewhere,
that hear his voice, as he says, Every one that is of the Truth hears my
voice. As we have many liueing in our Church, and pertaking with it in some
outward ceremonies and services, who for diverse respects would have some men
think the^ Protestants, yet are in heart and faith Papists, abborring those
doctrines of our Church which dissent from Popery; so may Christ have some of
his elect in the Church of Rome, that by that little light they get of the
Scriptures perceive the errors of that Church and abhor them; and there may
be some such in the city of Rome it self, when it is ready to be destroyed,
to whom he cries come out of her my people; but where ever they be, you hear
he says, Every one that is of the Truth hears my voice. Which may serve to
answer them that would prove the Church of Rome to be a true Church of Christ,
because he has people in her, when indeed the Inquisitors, when they find
them, prove them to be rather of our faith and so of our Church and religion.

Yet do I not excuse them, that holding our faith and religion in their
hearts, outwardly profess popery; Christ would have it otherwise, and
therefore calls to them to come out of Babel, to live where they may with more
safety confess him the Truth; which indeed is to have Gods Charac. of a
Christian. page 245. and 282. Romans 10.10. Mat. 10.32.33.
mark in the forhead. For with the heart man believes to righteousness, and
with the mouth confession is made unto salvation. Whosoever therefore shall
confess me before men, him will I confess before my Father. But whosoever
shall deny me before men, him will I also deny before my Father.

Which things should methinks fill all our Church Papists with horror,
espe^ially some great ones, who would seem to be true Protestants, and for
fashion sake come sometimes to Church, and say over the prayers, which some
Papists think are not repugnant to their Religion, yea and hear some men's
sermons; but it is that they may the better hold places and offices, get the
more trust in great imploiments and counsels; that so pretending many matters
for the good of our Religion, they may the better under such colorable
pretenses practice and secretly carry them to the furtherance of the Popish
cause. These are such as seem to admire the outward rites, and all the most
gaudie vestments and ceremonies; because indeed they love little else in the
Church, would have more of them, and more near to popery, even such gay
shows as in Mr. Cosens set up in the North. Yet some of the Clergy are so
fond, as to cry out for little or nothing else but the service, the ceremonies,
outward habbits, and Music; pretending that by pressing the use of such
things, they shall the sooner draw Papists to come to Church; (but not to be
there convinced; for points controuerted must not be preached to discover
errors;) they might add, that they shall thereby get some doubtful friends,
if not secret enemies, and gain as much by it, as of old the Church of Rome
did before the year 420. by imitating and using some rites of the heathen, the
sooner to win them to embrace Christianily; the issue whereof was this, that
God so abhorred their temporising, that he suffered them in few years to be
over flowen by a flood of Goths, Vandals: and Alanes, etc. The Lord God
deliver us from such an inundation of Papists. I read of some that were to be
overcome and converted by the sword that comes out of Christ's mouth, Reu.
19.21. But of none by shows, music and ceremonies: Yet I will not say that
other reformed Churches that have fewer Ceremonies gain more conuerts; but
this I may say, that they get such as are more sincere, constant and faithful
to Church and State: and further to all such Church Papists (who it seem for
an advantage, get dispensations to be present at some of our Churches and
Sermons) that they are not Protestants, unless their hearts hold the
Protestant faith; that if they think Popery to be the true Religion, why do
they not openly profess it? (espetially seeing they are not troubled in
England for their Religion, but have indeed to much liberty, and use of it)
or if they do not; how can they hope in the day of judgment to look Christ in
the face with comfort? for he that is the Truth says, Mark. 8.38.
Whosoever shall be ashamed of me, and of my words, in this adulterous and
sinful generation, of him shall the Son of Man be ashamed, when he comes
in the glory of his Father. If these men were of the Truth, they would not
only be present at the preaching of it, but also hear and obey it, so as
truly to seek the Kingdom of God, yea and therewith all the promised and
commanded Ruin of Rome, Antichrist and their supporters, which hinder Christ's
reign, and not the things which are contrary: For he says, Every one that
is of the Truth hears my voice.

Thus then though there be many Religions in the world, opposing one another,
some in one thing, some in another; yet there is but one of them of the Truth,
namely that alone which in all matters of faith and salvation hears his
voice, who is the Truth. Lately in my hearing one iestingly asked a Popish
newes-monger, how it went with the Catholic Cause? He in some anger and more
pride answered, ye have many Religions, but I hope that now ye shall have but
one: It was asked him if he would be of that one; he replied, I that I will. It
was asked him what Religion that was? he answered, The book of common prayer
and the Articles. One answered him, we hold with the book of common prayer
and with the Articles, but not after the sense of the Arminians, proved to be
perverted, wrested and absurd, by Doctor Carlton late Bishop of Chichester in a
book, abouemencioned, dedicated to the Kings Majesty. And indeed whether all
things be in them in that perfection that should be, or not, both the one and
the other send us to the Truth of God revealed in scripture, and oblige us to
be of it. The book of common prayer says, that we assemble and meek
together to hear his most holy Word; and to ask thoose things etc. In the
Lords prayer, diverse times there used, we pray, Hallowed be thy Name, they
Kingdom come, they will be done; and so that his Word may be had in honor,
and his Kingdom come among us in the due preaching thereof, and into our
Souls to rule us in all things necessary to salvation: For his is the
Kingdom, the power and glory. The Psalm read says, to day if ye will hear
his voice, hearden not etc. The prayer for peace; In knowledge of whom
stands our eternal life: another Granting us in this world knowledge of they
truth: the letanie, That is would please him to illuminate all Bishops, Pastors
and Ministers of the Church with true knowledge and understanding of his Word,
and (what, to treasure and monopolize it up in themselves? noe, but) that by
their preaching and liueiug they may set it forth and show it accordingly: as
in a prayer at the communion, That they may, both by their life and doctrine,
set forth they true and lively Word: In another for all the congration; 2.
Sund. in Aduent, Blessed Lord which have caused, all holy Scripture to be
written for our learning, grant that we may in such wise hear them, read
etc. To pass by that on 5. Sund, after Epiph. which Against Pelagian pride
says, That they which do lean only on the hope of they heavenly grace, may
evermore etc. On good Friday is begd of him, That he would take from Jews,
Turks, Infidels and Heretics, ignorance, heardnesse of heart and contempt of
his Word; but not in desire to retain it in our selves. The book of Articles
says Art. 2. The Son is the Word of the Father, begotten etc. Art. 6. Holy
Scripture contains all things necessary to salvation: so that whatsoever is
not read therein, nor may be proved thereby, is not required of any man, that
it should be believed as an article of faith, or be thought requisite or
necessary to salvation. So also the Articles of Ireland. Art. 1. The ground
of our Religion, and the Rule of faith, and all saueing truth is the Word of
God, contained in holy Scripture. In both these books, by the name of holy
Scripture the Compilers understand all the canonical books of the old and new
Testament, in them recited. Now that which thus binds us to another Rule and
warrant, does not make it self the Rule and warrant, nor permit any Rule and
warrant in matters of faith and salvation, besides that to which it binds us:
but the book of the Articles does thus bind to another Rule and warrant:
ergo. For further proof whereof observe Art. 22. The Romish doctrine
concerning purgatory, etc. is a fond thing. Now this Article is not the Rule
and warrant why that doctrine must not be received, but the Word; for so it
follows, as being vainly invented, and grounded upon noe warranty of
Scripture, but rather repugnant to the Word of God. Art. 8. says, The three
creedes, ought thoroughly to be received and believed: but why? the article
sends to the warrant and rule, saying, For they may be proved by most certain
warrants of holy Scripture. Whereupon Ministers, Catechizing men in that called
the Apostles creed, do accordingly prove the matter by the Scriptures. Art.
18. counts them accursed, that presume to say that every man shall be saned
by the law or sect which he professes: where the Article is not the Rule or
warrant, but plainly tells you of another, saying; For holy Scripture does
set out unto us only the Name of Jesus Christ whereby men must be saved.

This man then that hoped that we should have noe other Religion then the
book of Articles and the common prayer, hoped it seems, that we should not
have them as they were at first intended, nor in that which they require and
bind men to. viz. in matter of faith and salvation to build only on the
Scripture, which ye see is plainly and evidently intended by the compilers of
the Articles. By this man one may gather the hopes of the Papists; for it was
Mr. Burgen their known Newes-monger, one that is frequent among them, and
hears their minds; that preaching to aedifie some and confute others by
Scripture; and writing to convince some and establish others, which have so
weakened and discoured them, would now be out of countenance and fashion: that
though we pray for these things, yet there should be nothing less minded and
practiced; that so they and the Arminians might prevail vnconfuted,
unreproved; (because these books, though agreeable to Scripture, are not, as
ye see, warrants and Rules of faith; they do not quote places of Scripture to
prove or confute, and so consume Antichrist and Heretics by the Spirit of
Christ's mouth, nor indeed recite all their errors) that yet these books
would come to be the Rule of faith (and so overthrow that which the 6. Article
says of the Scripture) that we should not so much as urge them in their
true and grammatical sense; that by this means Arminian prelates might hold
them to their sense; that if according to Trent practices, some more Arminians
and Popelings could be intruded into Bishops Sees and conuocations, then any
thing that they under the Name of the Church of England, should teach or
ordain, might also in time become rules and Articels of faith, and at last not
the Scripture, but their injunctions should be alleged to prove points of
faith, after the Manner of the Church of Rome, and the Scriptures pinned to
them, and in some points noe further admitted or taught then agreeable to them:
that insteade of the authoritey of Scripture, the authority, sense and
injunctions of the Church might be interposed, and he judged an Heretic that
should not receive them, what ever they be, without further dispute, and so
that we should shortly loose our Religion, and all be brought by degrees and
devises, as the Churches of Italy and others were of old, to the Popes tenets.
Whereas on the contrary the book of Articles says, Art. 19. The vissible
Church of Christ is a congregation of faithful men, in which the pure Word of
God is preached and the Sacraments be duly ministered according to Christ's
ordinance. Art. 20. The Church heath power to decree Rites or Ceremonies, and
authority in controversies of faith: And yet it is not lawful for the Church
to ordain any thing that is contrary to Gods Word written, neither may it
so expound one place of Scripture, that it be repugnant to another. Wherefore
although the Church be a witness and a keeper of holy writ: Yet as it ought not
to decree any thing against the same, so besides the same, ought it not to
enforce any thing to be believed for necessity of salvation. Art. 21. General
counsels may err, and sometime have erred. Much more particular.

Thus then the book of common prayer and the Articles bind Men to be of Gods
Truth: neither does any man rightly hold them, unless as they require, he in
matters of faith and salvation keep to the Scripture, and so be of the Truth.
Those men therefore that slight or neglect the due preaching of Gods Word, and
the conuincing of Heretics by it; and insteade thereof so propose and extol
the book of common prayer, and the Articles and constitutions of the Church of
England, that they seem to have little or not Religion besides; A new sort of
Scismaticks.
they are a new sort of Scismaticks, some of which will yet be counted Pastors
and Pillars, far more against the book of common prayer and the Articles then
any other: for as much as others are against the ceremonies, these against the
substance of Religion, which they require; others are against that form of
prayer, these against the things principally prayed for and enioined; Psalm. 2.
and so against the Truth sealed in Christ's blood: which they also tread under
foot, and count unholy, yea break his bands and cast his cords from them, by
the geering scoffs they use against preaching, and conuincing Heretics by
Scriptures, either in preaching or writing; by hindering them, and the slight
esteem they have of them. Yet like Hypocrites, as if they would have all as the
co^pilers of the common prayer book intended, and as it should be, 3. Sund.
after East. on Saint John's day.
in one Prayer they say, God which show to all men that be in error the
light of thy Truth, etc. in another, We beseech thee to cast thy bright beams
of light upon thy Church, that it being lightened by the doctrine of thy holy
Apostle and Evangelist John may attain to thy everlasting gifts: on the day of
Saint Paul, That we may follow and fulfill thy holy doctrine which he has
taught: of Saint Mathias, Grant that thy Church being always preserved from
false Apostles, may be ordered and guided by faithful and true Pastors: of
Simon and Jude, Grant us to be joined in unity of spirit by their doctrine:
of S. Andrew, Grant unto us all, that we being called by thy Holy Word, may
forthwith etc. Also in an exhortation before the Communion, they say, If any of
you be a blasphemer, a hindrer and slanderer of his word etc. come not to this
holy table: to the sureties of Children baptized, to call upon them to hear
Sermons etc. the Bishop at their confirmation prays, Let thy Holy Spirit be
ever with them, and so lead them in the knowledge of thy Holy Word, that in
the end etc. These Prayers and sayings will rise in judgment against many who
extol them, use them, prefer them, and yet mind nothing less them the things
prayed for, and desired in them; but are rather against them, and so against
Christ's Kingdom, against his reign who is the Word; and who says, Luke 19.27.
Those mine enemies that would not that I should reign over them, bring
hither etc. They therefore that scoff and geere at diligent preachers and
hearers, call them Puritans and despise them, let them know, Christ's Disciples
are commanded to teach all Nations, Mat. 28.
to observe all things whatsoever he commanded them; Ephesians. 4.14.
that we are not to be tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind
of doctrine, by the sleight of me, but following the Truth in love to grow up
into him in all things who is the Head: that the Scriptures make wise unto
salvation etc. that, He that turns away his ear from hearing the Law, Pro.
28.9.
even his prayer shall be abomination; If he will not hear, nor be willing
that others should hear, God in all matters of faith and salvation, God will
not hear him; that Christ says against such reuiling and self conceited
Pharisees, Every one that is of the Truth hears my voice; and by consequence
that such as they, who make noe more account of it, can not well be said to be
of the Truth.

These two last clauses of Christ's bearing witness to the Truth, and this
conclusion, of hearing his voice, which he makes thereupon, are a large field,
which for brevity, I have run over, only pointing at some of the good seed,
and some of the tares, Mar. 4.26. Mat. 13.24.
which enemies have sowed while men stepped; that so, those that have authority
may see what is amiss at home, and seek reformation. Which God knows I have
not attempted out of any forwardnes to be meddling in matters of this kind, but
only upon sight and sense of the wrong done to my Savior and his Kingdom, to
my Sovereign Lord the King, and to the Church and Country wherein I was
bred, by the Doctrines and palliated practices of close walking Popelings,
Arminians and their Supporters, many of them being disguised under the name
of conformable Protestants and Welwillers of the Church and State. Which drove
me in silent sorrow to meditate on these passages of holy Scripture.

Then finding that of our Lord to be true, Ioh. 15.5. 1. Cor. 12 3.
without me ye can do nothing. Noe man can say that Jesus is the Lord (much
less prove it) but by the Holy Ghost: and so, that I could never have drawn
so much honey out of these flowers, vules God has been with me; I thought I
must carry it to the hiue; though I knew that in this case, I was like to
find that true, Obsequium amicos veritas odium parit, yet I might not
adventure, the everlasting punishment of an unprofitable servant, Mat.
25.24.30.
by burying this one talent in a napkin; seeing it appeared to be Christ's;
whose Confession and Complaint is here exhibited, with proofs and consequences
so following from the same, that there needs noe further witness, noe
inquiry of the unworthy and isntrumental Exhibiter: for the conuincing
proofs are Christ's, the convinced and Delinquents well known by other
Complaints, that have been often made against them, if not to the King, yet at
least to the High Court of Parliament; wherein great things have been offered
to be proved: and if a free speaking and hearing be not there permitted; then
if any should under color of serving his King and Country, be as false to
both (and withal to Religion, at least for some secret love to Rome) as ever
that great favorite Duke Edrick was, Edrick Duke of Mercia, See Speedes Chron.
who sold both to the Danes; yet men that could discover them, fearing that
they should not be thoroughly heard, but rather imprisoned and crushed, would
perhaps hold their peace, till it were to late to help. Which has made men
say, the Kings ears are so guarded by whisperers, by preventing and
praeuaricating expositors of complaints, that truth may despair of an
effectual hearing. God Almighty give unto the Kings Majesty a heart to
hear, see, and reform what is most amiss, wheresoever, and in whomesoeuer
the fault be.

To conclude to be of Truth is to continue in the Word, and in all matters of
faith and salvation to cleave to it, professing and maintaining it in the whole
and in every part of it; which is to have Gods mark in the forehead; as on the
contrary to receive and maintain the Popish laws and doctrine, is to have
the mark of the Beast: for thus a Christian is not only distinguished from a
Jew, but also from a marked slave of Antichrist, as ye may see proved in that
little book, called The Character of a Christian page 206.282.296. Saint Paul
says well, Brethren mark them which cause divisions and offenses, Romans
16.17.18.
contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them. For they that
are such serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly, and by good
words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple. 2. Tim. 2.17.18.
For their word will eat as does a gangrene, who concerning the Truth have
erred. And therefore when Arminians, or other Heretics and profane persons
command and teach one thing, and Christ another; the Pope one thing, and
Christ another, the Church of Rome calls for all men's obedience to her, and
Christ to all to come out of Babell; Reu. 18.
Jesuits and Popish Preistes call to Princes and States to serve her; and
Christ to serve her as she has served them, to fill her double: Some follow
Seducers; but ye hear what the Savior of the World says, Every one that is
of the Truth hears my voice.

FINIS.
Faults escaped in the printing.
Page 1. for Evangelist read Evangelists.p.2.l.2. for mislender: read
misunderstood. and l.23. for cheifs chief.p.3.17. for fo read of.p.6.l.29.
for reckened, read reckoned.p.15.l.18. for tho read the.p.19.l.13. for deser at
read desert a.p.21.l.27. for abonte re. about.p.23.l.35. for rebellions re.
rebellious.p.32.l.19. for thas re.thus.l.23.re.seditious.p.33.l.8. for thousand
read a thousand thousand. p.34.l.13.for meant, re.mean. and l.35.for tough
read though.p.36. in marg.re. vniuersum. p.37.in mar. re. persuadere.
p.41.l.34.for reuelt revolt.p.47.l.2. for greah rea. great. p.52.l.11. for
Christ's re. Christ. l.22.re.committing.p.53.l.9. for ofter re.offer. l.3. for
five limen re.fine linen.p.55.l.17. for here rea. hear.p.61.l.4. for granted
granted. l.28.re.Armin: p.86.l.1. for honeur
re.honor.p.85.l.35.re.believe.p.88.l.5.rea.Christianity. Besides some letters
that did not print so well off in the first six sheets, as in the Proofs.


