THE SHEPHERD, OR A SERMON, PREACHED AT A SYNOD In Durisme Minster, upon
Tuesday, being the fifth of April. 1608.

By Thomas Oxley, Master of Arts, and Preacher of Gods word.

ROMANS 12.7. He that has an Office, let him wait on his Office.

Bernar. Sermon. 76. Super Cant. Attendite vobis quicunque opus Ministerij
sortiti estis, attendite inquam, vobis and pretioso deposito quod vobis
creditum est: Ciuitas est, vigilate ad custodiam, concordiamque: Sponsa est,
studete ornatui: Oues sunt, intendite pastui.

LONDON Printed for ELEAZAR EDGAR, and are to be sold at his Shop in Paul's
Churchyard, at the Sign of the Windmill. 1609.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, my very loving Patron, Master WILLIAM MORTON
Archdeacon of Durisme, Health and Happiness now, and ever.
BY your leave Sir, (Your ordinary extraordinary occasions have taught me so
much manners:) May it please you to be Godfather to the child, unto which your
self plaide the Grace-wife, by assigning your place to a person so unworthy.
At the Birth, you seemed to smile on it; Nay, I will not spare to speak, what
you did not spare to do, to commend it. It is now (as you see) learning to
go, and craves your hand, being otherwise weak of it self, to support it. If
it grieve not you to Patronise it; it cannot repent me to have begotten it. I
deny not, but that this air is an enemy dangerous and deadly; yet, I see not
why this may not live, if you mislike it not: For, as for the body, I am sure
it is strong and sound; The parts, if not well fashioned, yet not ill favored;
The complexion, if not such as may draw delight, yet such as cold Countries
commonly afford. There will not doubtless, want some to malign it, and to
call it foolish Bratte, envying my place in your affections, yet those some (I
think) of the ruder sort, who feeling themselves touched, will perhaps begin
to kick: Will you not give them leave to show what creatures they be, Quis
recalcitrabit asinum? I am already hardened against their censures. For the more
judicious, if they will not love the Father for the Child's sake, yet I hope
they will not hate the Child for the Godfathers sake. To whom, how much the
weal of our Northern Church does owe, who have known the North, and can be
ignorant, you having (though not altogether) for that is more to be wished
for, then hoped for, yet as much as in you did lie, freed it from the tyranny
of two, no little troublesome enemies, the precise Brownist, and the perverse
Papist, which work is so much the more worthy, by how much the Persons, with
whom you had to deal, were resolute, and mighty, that age being now called by
some, for the villainy executed then, THE MAN'S WORLD.

But what need I talk of that, which both that, and this world can tell off:
Go on still (good Sir) to oppose your self against the deprauers of the
truth, As you have been forward in the days of danger, so faint not now in
the time of Peace: you have at length with your lewd cries wakened Justice,
that for a long time had slept; suffer her not now again to slumber. Be still
a friend to those that favor, and follow learning; Believe me, it is no small
desert, to deserve well of such. To conclude, and say, as much as I can say, Be
your self still, I know your occasions, and I cease to be troublesome, wishing
to you and yours, your best wishes and daily furtherance in all spiritual
graces. From my Chamber in New Castle. This 10. of May. 1609.

Your Worships wholly devoted. THOMAS OXLEY.

THE SHEPHERD.
EZECHIEL. 34.2. Should not the Shepherds feed the Flocks?


YOur presence (Right Reverend Father, and beloved brethren) puts me in mind of
that censure sometimes past by Haniball of Phormio the Philosopher: The Story
is related by Plutarch. This Haniball, often happy in his victories against
the Romans, having at length found fortune less friendly then he was wont:
fled to Antiochus at Athens, where being brought by the Citizens to the
schools there, visendi gratia, that he might see them, one Phormio a
Philosopher, (inferior to none of that age) for his better welcome,
intertaines him with a Lecture full of warlicke discipline: This ended, every
one admiring the old man's dexterity in so strange a faculty, The Soldier was
demanded what he thought; who answered, Se multos quidem deliros senes
vidisse, neminem tamen PHORMIONE dementiorem: That he had surely seen many
doting old men, but more then Phormio, never any. Et merito sane (says Cicero)
and surely he spoke to good purpose, for what could be a matter of greater
folly, then to see a Philosopher, who had led his life in ease, and
tranquillity, who never yet did see a Camp, nor behold an enemy, before so
worthy a Captain as Haniball was, absolute in knowledge, and perfect by
experience, to discourse of things military, for the which we are more
beholding to use then meditation.

De meipso narratur fabula. Me thinks I am now in as bad case, or worse, then
the fond Philosopher was then: for if he was deservedly condemned by Haniball
for speaking of war, whereof he was altogether ignorant, before so wary and
expert a Captain, as himself was; what better measure can I expect from you?
who having not yet been inured, I cannot tell whether skillful enough to give
food to a flock of mine own, have nevertheless presumed at this time, (called
hither by him, to whom I owe my self) to describe a Shepherds office, and
that before you, approved pastors of precious flocks, and fathers of fair
families.

Especially, seeing this matter is nothing inferior unto that, wherein
Haniball did glory, but so much the more excellent, by how much the enemy with
whom we have to deal, is more dangerous, and deadly: neither is it to be
attained unto, but with as much, or more experience then the other. Both the
persons then before whom I am to speak, so grave and so learned; and the thing
whereof, so weighty, and worthy; might justly have enjoined me to silence, and
stayed me, so unskillful a Mariner from sailing in so vast an Ocean, where the
rocks are great, and the dangers many; had not S. Bernard like a good Captain
thus encouraged me; Epist. 20 1.
Officium tuum attend, pelle pudorem consideratione officii: Look to thy
tackling whereunto thou have taken thy self, and let the consideration of thy
office, bannish bashfulnesse. And goes yet further to comfort me, Non sum
(inquis) ad ista sufficiens, quasi vero deuotio accepta non sit, ex eo quod
habes, non ex eo quod non habes, Ibidem.
Thou say (says he) I am not sufficient to discharge this, as if thy
devotion be not accepted in regard of that which thou have, not of that which
thou have not: prepare thy self to make answer for the talent which thou have
received, and trouble thy self no further. Si multum accepisti, da multum, Si
modicum, and id tribue. If it be much, give much, if little, yet give that. In
that which I have then, I promise my self prodigal enough, vouchsafe your
acceptance, and I have an abundant recompense.

Nonne greges a pastoribus pascuntur? Should not the Shepherds feed their
Flocks?

Bucanus setting down the commodities which arise from such Synods as these,
makes them two, Institu. theolog. loco 42. de Sinodo.
and the first, this: Quia quod a multis quaeritur, Facilius inuenitur: Because
what is demanded of many, is more easily found out. Lo here a question
propounded to you all (beloved) not by any sophistical questionist, but by God
himself. And as the demand is not very obscure, so I hope the answer is not
hard; let it be my part to explain the former, yours to determine the latter.

Occasio.
This is the one and thirtieth Sermon which our Prophet has made against the
Shepherds of Israel, who have been the chief cause why the people have led
their lives so lasciuiously, and therefore are now worthily brought to this
misery: for if they had not been defective in their office, these had not been
so corrupt; The case being so, That such as the prince is, such is the people;
like shepherd, like flock; like master, like man.

Tempus.
As touching the time when it was uttered, it is not here expressed: some say it
was before the destruction of the city, when men were oppressed through the
tyranny of their rulers, and deluded by the lies of false Prophets. Saint
Hierom tells us, that those Sermons following which have no note of time, were
had betwixt the twelfth year, and the twenty five of Iechonias captivity:
but whether it was before or after, it was especially directed against the
magistrates, as well Ecclesiastical, as Politic, and in some sort also may
seem to concern the people themselves.

Parts.
The parts are five, first an accusation, wherein God

them with the extremity of his justice: as they have sown so shall they
reap, and no otherwise; for insomuch as they have contemned him, he will set
himself against them: because they have been careless in keeping his flock,
he will have a care to call them to an account; for that they have not waited
on their office, he will deprive them of their office, and because they have
only studied to feed themselves, they shall feed themselves no more: from the
seventh verse to the end of the tenth.

Thirdly, a consolation wherein God does comfort

Fourthly a reprehension, wherein he reprooues

And fifthly, and lastly, a comfortable promise, of

In the whole you may observe, first, the difference

And secondly, what the office of a painful Preacher conferring and comparing
of the duty of these Shepherds with their works, quite contrary in the four
verses following, propounded by an interrogation, to note their impudence, who
did peruerte and turn vp-side-downe the order of Nature: for Shepherds should
feed the flocks, not the flocks the Shepherds; whereas they fed on the
flocks, eating the fat, and clothing themselves with the woolle, unworthy
to bear the name, that were so far from the nature.

With both which, that we may be the better acquainted, may it please you to
observe in these few Pastores, Shepherds.

pascere, to feed.

non seipsos sed greges, not themselves but the flocks.

Nonne? Should not? Should not the Shepherds feed the Flocks? of these
four, the Title, the Duty, the Object, and the Neglect.

If we begin with the first: the first is the Title, Nomina sunt notaererum
(says the Logitian) names are the notes of things; Titulus.
and this name is not without some note: Gods Ministers are called Pastores,
Shepherds a pascendo, of feeding the Flock.

The name is common unto them with Kings, for Homer calls them (...) Pastors of
the people, which notes their excellency. The Notation is taken ab effectis,
from the effects; and since they are so called, the title tells us, that they,
who are rightly so entitled, must be Docti, diligentes, discreti: endowed
first, with a power to perform: secondly, with a will to do well: and thirdly
with discretion to discern; as if learning, love, and prudence were Parts
constitutiuae, the essential parts of a perfect Pastor. If he want the
first, Nihil dat quod non habet, woe to the flock; no man can give what he
has not: if he has the first and not the second, as good want both, since the
flock must want howsoever: if both the first, and not the last, as good lack
all, for they had better give nothing, then no good thing, or then some evil
thing.

He must have these three at least then, that would be, as many would be
thought to be, true shepherds of Christ's flock: they do well together, but
being separated, profit nothing. For to have the flock starve for food, and
the Shepherd not able to help them is a great misery; to be able and not
willing, is Immane cruelty; to be both able and willing, and yet want
discretion how, when, what, and to whom to give, is but a foolish, and
fruitless industry.

First then he must be (...) learned, for Shepherds Doctus.
Phil. 3.7. and (...) (says the Poet) they see twice as much as others who
are seen in learning. Menander.
This same (...), is (...), the staff of life, the shepherds staff, without
which he can neither support himself, nor rule others. In literis prudens
inuenerit, Jn Epistola quadam.
vnde sapientior fiat, ibi bellator reperit vnde animi virtute roboretur etc.
In learning (says Chrysologus) the wise man has found what has made him more
skillful: The Warrior how to confirm his mind against all dangers: The
Prince, how to govern his people with equality, Nec aliqua in mundo potest
esse fortuna, quam literarum non augeat gloriosa notitia. Nor can there be any
condition in the world, which the noble knowledge of learning does not make
more honorable. Wherefore Socrates the wisest Philosopher that ever was, being
demanded what creature was most excellent, made answer, Homo doctrina
ornatus: A man beautified with learning. If this be so necessary and
commendable in every calling, how much more in the Minister and Messenger of
God, who is the eye of the world, and as it were a Sun in the Firmament of
the Church, to disperse the clouds of ignorance, and give light unto such as
sit in darkness. And what marvel if we call such Suns, when our Savior
himself said unto such, Vos estis lux mundi, you are the light of the world,
Matthew. 5.14 For as God in the beginning of the world did set the Sun and
other lights in the heavens, to shine upon the earth; so in the firmament of
the Church he has placed Bishops as Suns (who only properly may be said to
be Suns, because while others are but (...). Seers, 1. Pet. 5.2. they are
(...). Overseers) and other teachers, as the rest of the lights and stars, to
enlighten the minds of men, and to impart to others, what they have received
from God themselves.

If therefore it belong to a Shepherd to teach his flock, how can he perform
this, if he has not learning? The Sun cannot give light if it be eclipsed,
no more can a Pastor perform his duty, who is drowned in the deepes of
dark ignorance. Where the case stands so, what can follow but that which our
Savior himself said? If the light which is in you be darkness, how great is
that darkness? Matthew. 6.23. What is there in the whole office of a Shepherd
that stands not in great need of the light of learning? for to judge of the
grounds of faith, to take away contentions in the Church, to decide
Controversies, to instruct the people, to discern the Leaper from him that is
clean; learning is so necessary, that without it, he can no more determine any
thing, then he that is blind can judge of colors. Wherefore the Lord
purposing to bestow a benefit upon his people, promises them Pastors
according to his own heart, who should feed them with knowledge, and
understanding. Ier. 3.15. Which benefit will appear the greater, if we
compare it with the contrary, for that must needs be a great good, the defect
whereof is so great an evil. And what an evil that is, the Prophet Isayah will
tell us, who reckoning up the miseries of the people, makes this one, that God
would take from them the Judge, and the Prophet, the prudent, and the aged, the
Counselor, and the eloquent man. Isa. 3.2. When the Apostle Peter was ready to
lay down his Tabernacle, he did appoint, that Clement an holy man, and very
learned, should be his successor, and gave commandment that the same Clement
should signify so much in his letters to James the brother of our Lord, then
Bishop at Jerusalem. And fear not (says he) least he be much sorrowful for
my death, seeing he cannot doubt but that I suffer for righteousness sake: Erit
autem ei grande solatium, si didicerit quod post me non imperitus aliquis,
Primo Tom. Council.
aut ignorans Diuini verbi misterium, and Ecclesiastici ordinis disciplinam,
vel doctrinae regulam nesciens, susceperit Cathedram meam. And it will be a
great comfort unto him to know, That no Illiterate Prelate, ignorant of Gods
word, and Church discipline, That no stranger to Learning, and good Arts shall
usurp my Chair: For he knows well that if some rude and unskillful Person
should take upon him the place of a Pastor, the flock wandering in the
Thickets of ignorance, must needs run headlong to destruction. Hitherto are
the words of Peter, as Clement himself relates them in his Epistle to James
at Jerusalem, how true, I cannot tell, yet profitable I am sure for our
instruction, Since it appears hereby, how necessary a thing Learning is in
the place of a Pastor. I will therefore pass from this to the next, with that
good saying of a godly man, Ridiculosa res est, vel potius periculosa, Gilbert.
speculator caecus, Doctor inscius, proecursor claudus, Praelatus negligens,
and praeco mutus. A blind Seer, a lame forerunner, a negligent Prelate, and a
dumb crier, is a thing ridiculous or rather dangerous.

Diligens.
the second willing: Though he speak with tongues of men, and Angels, yet if
he has not love, he is as sounding brass, or a tinkling Cymball. 1. Cor.
13.1. And this likewise arises out of the notation of the word. For it is
(...) quasi (...), of (...) which signifies a Sheep, and (...) to desire
earnestly, or to seek, for it has both. Which love how great it should be
who cannot conjecture by Christ's thrice iterated Question to Peter? Simon
Ioannes, diligis me plus his, etc. Iona, love thou me more then these? Feed
my sheep. Ioh. 21.15. As if he should have said, If thou love me truly, and
sincerely, if thou desire to glorify my Name, if thou love my Sheep, as it
seems thou do, whose safety is more regarded of me, then mine own life; if
for all the benefits thou have received, thou desire to gratify me in any
part, and with love to requite love, feed my Sheep which I have fed with my
dearest blood; for whilst thou feedest those, thou feedest me in them, thou
fats me, and do nourish me, and whatsoever thou bestows on them, thou
conferres on me; for I am he who have sometime spoken it, Mat. 25.40.
Whatsoever you have done to the least of these, ye have done it unto me.

This love then of the Shepherd to the Flock, proceeds from the love which
he bears unto Christ, for he does not say (which is worthy your
observation) If thou love my sheep, feed them, which should seem a good
consequent, Cum probatio dilectionis (as S. Gregory says) exhibitio est
operis: Greg. in Homil.
When the proof of love is the performance of the work. But he says, Si
diligis me, If thou love me feed my sheep. As if he should say, If thou love
me, thou ought likewise to love those things that are mine, and belong to
me, and there is nothing more mine, then my Sheep are, to whom I have given my
flesh for food, and my blood for drink, whom by my death, I have recald to
life: If therefore nothing be more dear to me the^ life, how much more dear
are those, for whom I have humbled my self to death. The sum then of this,
is, Those that love Christ, will love his Flock, and those that love it will
feed it. And for our encouragement herein, Super. Ezech.
Gregory tells us, Quod nullum potest esse Deo gratius sacrificium, quam Cura
animarum, That there can be no Sacrifice more acceptable unto God, then the
Cure of souls: And this Cure does God require at every man's hands, who has a
Cure. As he did of Moses, as Moses himself does witness; when he Complains
unto the Lord, saying, Have I conceived all this people, or have I begotten
them, that thou should say unto me, Carry them in thy bosom (as a Nurse
bears the sucking child,) etc. Numb. 1.12. In which kind how zealous S. Paul
was, himself can tell us, who thus much is bold to say of himself, and his
fellows to the Thessalonians, We have been gentle among you, even as a Nurse
cherishes her children: Thus being affectionate toward you, our goodwill was
to have dealt unto you, not the Gospel of God only, but also our own souls,
because ye were dear unto us. 1 Thessalonians. 2.8. What is it that a Nurse will
deny unto her child, and what will not Paul perform to this people? He was
ready to do any thing, because he was affectionate, his affection made him
ready.

Prudence, he must be (...), Prudens.
wise and discreet likewise, that must be a good Shepherd: For as those who
are skillful in Phisickes Art, do not minister all things to all men, nor at
all times, but to every one according to the quality of the disease, or the
complexion, and constitution of the body of the patient: So must he that is a
healthful feeder of Gods flock, be wise to consider the nature of each
sheep, and the strength of their stomachs, and to minister food there after,
to some milk, to some flesh: Some must have comminations, some consolations,
some must be gently entreated, others severely reprehended: Sometimes Wine will
be necessary, sometimes Oil, sometimes one thing, sometimes another.

This Prudence, Paul requires in a Pastor, 1. Tim. 3.2. And that good old Abbat
alluding to his own profession, Calls it Abbatissam virtutum, Bernard.
The Abbatisse, the Lady or chief of all virtues; which who so wants, may
rightly suspect himself, since nothing is more necessary by Gods own
testimony, Mat. 10.13.
Thus are Ministers called Pastors, feeders, to show that they must be like
Nurses in ability, in affection, and in discretion.

Now you that are Shepherds, who have taken upon you the feeding of Christ's
flock, which he with such care committed unto Peter, and consequently to you,
Examine your selves upon these three Articles, whether you be able, if able,
whether willing, if willing, whether wise enough to discharge so great a
charge, whilst I set this Shepherd, which I have brought into the field thus
furnished, to attend on his Office.

Next to the Title, followed the Duty, which Pascere, to feed: what is he,
Officium.
and what call you him, says one in the Dialogue, (...), Plato in Mino^.
who is excellent in feeding a flock of sheep? Answer is made (...), A
Shepherd, the name is taken from the office; he therefore that fulfilleth not
the one, cannot challenge the other: He must feed, that would be called a
Feeder; and the necessity of this Consequent, was to David an occasion of
great comfort, for calling God his Shepherd, he triumphs in it, and he gives
this reason, he can therefore want nothing, God will feed him in green
pastures. Psalm. 23.1.2.

This is a large field, and the further I walk in it, the more subject I am to
wander: I will therefore follow the path wherein Saint Bernard has trod, and
take him to be my guide, who upon those words of our Savior unto Peter, Sermon.
2. Resurr. domini.
pasce oues meas, Feed my Sheep, has these; pasce mente, pasce ore, pasce
opere, and then expounds himself, pasce animi oratione, verbi exhortatione,
exempli exhibitione. Feed with prayer, feed with preaching, feed with thy life,
and godly conversation. These as the three former, do well together, but being
a sunder profit little.

Pasce ore.
This is that which perishes not, but endures unto everlasting life. John.
6.27. And this is conferd upon the flock by the action of preaching: wherein
how industrious the Apostles were, none that are conversant in the Scriptures
can be ignorant: What was the great charge given by S. Paul to his Scholar
Timothy? was it not to preach the word, to be instant in season, and out of
season, to improve, rebuke, and to exhort with all long suffering and doctrine?
2. Tim. 4.2.

This he was to perform, as he would answer before the tribunal seat of God,
when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed. And this he confirms with
his own instance, when being to depart from Ephesus, he committed the keeping
of Gods flock unto the Elders of the Church with this memento, Remember that
by the space of three years, I ceased not to warn every one both night and
day with tears. Acts 20.31.

To whom was it said, but to Shepherds, Negotiamini, dum venio, Labor till I
come, Luke 19.13. Quod profecto negotium, tunc vere nos agimus, Libr. 2. Epist.
39.
Si viuendo and loquendo proximorum animas lucramur (says Saint Gregory)
which business we surely then perform, if by our preaching and living, we
gain the souls of men, if we rebuke and reprove such as are obstinate, if we
comfort the penitent, if we strengthen the weak, heal the infirm, bind up
the broken, seek what is lost, and bring again what was driven away, by the
example of the good Shepherd. Ezech. 34.16.

As they must preach, so must they pray, for when Mente.
preached it purely, exhorted gently, reproved sharply, and labored every way
sincerely, to what end will all this come: Paul may Plant, Apollo may Water,
but it is God that must give the increase, 1. Cor. 3.6.

As therefore Shepherds are the mouth of God to speak unto the people, so
must they be the peoples mouth to pray unto the Lord: And herein we have our
Savior himself for an example, who albeit he was very God, as well as man, and
had power of himself to sanctify the ears and hearts of his hearers, and to
make his preaching as profitable as himself listed; yet he prayed to his
Father both for himself, and them, John 17.9. Whose example the Apostles
followed: Paul did bend his knees for the Ephesians, (As himself professes)
unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that he would grant them accorcording
to the riches of his glory, that they might be strengthened by his spirit in
the inner man, Ephe. 3.14

And deeply protests to the Romans, calling God to witness, that without
ceasing, he made mention of them always in his prayers, Romans 1.9. And he
thanks God that without ceasing he had remembrance of his Scholar Timothy in
his prayers, night, and day. 2. Tim. 1.3.

sanctity of life, and no more can be required: Oper^.
be unto them that believe (says S. Paul to Timothy) an example in word, and
in conversation, 1. Tim. 4.12. For he that says, and does not, is like him who
having money, can put it to no other use but to tell it; Plutar. de profectu
morum.
which Anacharsis the Scythian sometimes spoke of the Grecians, who were great
Philosophers in words, but in life, and manners, most lewd, and light.

Jn Lacon.
Plutarch tells a Story to this purpose, of a certain old man, who having a
long time walked up and down amongst the Grecians at the games of Olimpus, and
finding no place to rest him in, at length he went among the Lacedaemonians,
where not only all the children did rise to give him place, but many of the
men likewise; which when the Grecians, as many of them as were present and did
observe, did with great applause approve of; The old man cries out, He^
misertam! Omnes graeci norini quid sit honestum, sed eo soli vtuntur
Lacedemonii. All the Grecians do know what is honest, but the Lacedaemonians
only practice it. I would not our Shepherds proved Grecians, and the flocks
Lacedaemonians, and then that follow, which the Lord spoke by his Prophet, They
that should minister the law, knew me not, and the Pastors also offended
against me. Iere. 2.8.

Gods ministers are called the salt of the earth; and if the salt be unsavory,
Mat. 5.13.
wherewith then can it season other things. Qui sibi nequam, Cui bonus! he
that cannot rule himself, is not fit to rule others. They are called lux
mundi, the light of the world, Mat. 5.14.
for the example of their virtues, If therefore that light be put under a
bushel, how can it enlighten others? It was a good saying, that of Senecaes,
Eum elige tibi doctorem, quem magis admireris, cum videris, quam cum audieris:
Epist. 34.
make choice of such a teacher, as thou may admire more having seen him,
then when thou heardst him. Whose life is more commendable then his learning.
And therefore Paul commands Titus, that above all things, he should show
himself an example of good works, Titus 2.7. For, plus mouent exempla quam
verba. Examples do move more then precepts, Gregory.
and a good life then a good lesson. Et facilius homines ad been faciendum
exemplis, quam verbis inuitantur: Origin.
and men are incited sooner by works then by words, and by lives then by laws
to do well.

And this manner of teaching is very admirable, and powerful to inflame the
minds of men with a desire to do well. A good soldier, Non sentit sua, cum
benigni ducis contuetur vulnera: Bernard.
feels not his own wounds, when he sees the soars of his kind Captain.

Julius Caesar, (as Tullie tells it) never said to his followers, Go, but Come:
for the labor seems always the less, when he that commands, cannot be
idle. Let Shepherds learn to instruct their flocks, as Abimilech did his
subjects, by making himself an example; who when he had cut down boughs, and
bare them on his shoulders, spoke to those that were with him, Quemadmodum
vidistis me facientem, ita and vos facite. As you have seen me do, so do
you, Judge. 9.48.

But as the godly life of good Shepherds is powerful to persuade the people
unto good, So the lewd life of bad Shepherds is of as much, or far greater
force, to draw them unto evil: since such is our nature, that we learn nothing
sooner then filthiness, and forget nothing more hardly. And therefore says
Saint Gregory, Greg. in past.
There is no man more dangerous in the Church, then he that lives wickedly
and carries a name, or degree of sanctity: whereupon says Saint Austen,
August. lib. de past.
Omnis qui male viuit in conspectu eorum, quibus praepositus est, quantum in
ipso est, occidit. He that lives badly in the sight of those over whom he is
placed, as much as in him is, is a murderer. Wherefore I will conclude this
point with that of Saint Bernard to Eugenius, Lib. 2. de considerat.
Monstrosa res est, gradus summus, and animus infimus, seeds prima, and
vitaima, Lingua magniloqua, and manus otiosa, sermo multus, and fructus nullus,
vultus grauis, and actus leuis, caput Canum* et cor vanum, facies rugosa, and
lingua nugosa, ingen authoritas, and nutans stabilitas. And thus much of the
Shepherds office.

Should not the Shepherds feed? But whom should they feed? Obiectum.
This is our third part, the object of the duty. Pasce gregem.
Non seipsos sed greges, Not themselves, but the flocks: Should not the
Shepherds feed the flocks? The Elders which are among you, I beseech (says
S. Peter) feed the flock of God, 1. Pet. 5.1.2. Be diligent (says Solomon)
to know the state of thy flock, and take heed to thy herds, Prou. 27.23. Two
things there are of special moment to persuade hereunto, The first whereof is
the price, the second the Praetium.
that we must regard what we hold dearest, we love most, and what is most
worth; And what I pray you, is more precious then the safety of souls, for
which the only begotten son of God did not stick to shed his blood, to lay
down his life, to humble himself to an opprobrious death?

If the second, what is subject to more apparent Periculum.
since our life is a warfare (as Job calls it) upon earth. In which we have to
deal with three cruel and bloody enemies, The world, the flesh, and the
devil. The first vain and curious, the second, frail and rebellious, the
third evil and malicious. Saint Austine compares our life unto a sea, and such
an one, Vbi and ventus est and procellae non desunt tentationum. Tract. 14. in
Joan.
Wherein there are both winds of adversity, and storms of temptations. And
Saint Chrysostom to the Aegean sea, where there are venti, angustiae,
Charibdis, stagna, syrtes, winds, waves, rocks, sands, very hard to be sailed.
In the Marsilian sea, (says Saint Bernard) ex december nauibus, vix vna aliqua
periclitatur, of ten ships scarce any one is endangered, but in the sea of this
world, often souls, scarce any one is saved. To be short (for I would not
likewise trouble you with tediousness) amongst all the dangers of this world,
tell me of any, either more imminent, or eminent then this of souls, and
amongst all those things that are had in price, what is more precious? what is
gold, what is riches, pearls, kingdoms, Empires, yea and whatsoever else is
contained within the circuit of this universal, if it be weighed with the
worth of one soul? The least of these then might be a sufficient motive to
stir up each Shepherd to respect this object, were there nothing else, but
there is something yet further, as namely the account which they are to yield,
for all must come to an account, and every one shall receive his wages,
according to his labors. 1. Cor. 3.8.
To him that has been faithful, God shall give an incorruptible crown of
glory, 1. Pet. 5.4. But to him that destroys, and scatters the flock, woe
shall be unto him (says the Lord) Ier. 23.1. Shepherds must feed the flocks
then, not feed on the flocks.

Now from hence may some covetous accursed caitiffe, spider like, suck poison,
and gather this conclusion. Since Shepherds must feed the flocks, the flocks
must not feed the Shepherds; the Shepherds must not at all feed on the
flocks.

There are too many, I know, that lay hold on such latchets: But this is not
our Prophets meaning, who albeit he condemn those, that make that their
greatest care, yet is he not so careless of them as altogther to restrain
them. For who planteth a vineyard, and eats not the fruit thereof? 1. Cor. 9.7.
or who feeds a flock, and eats not the milk of the flock? If we sow unto
you spiritual things, (says the Apostle) is it a great thing if we reap your
carnal things, Galat. 6.7.
1. Cor. 9.11. Be not you then deceived (beloved) for God is not mocked. As you
sow so shall you reap; you are called a flock, and compared unto sheep; then
which, no creature is more simple, whence came the Proverb (...), after the
manner of sheep. And as this ought to teach you vitae innocentia^ to be like
unto Sheep, sine fraud, doloque without guile, or deceit: patience to bear,
meekness to forbear; so likewise it preaches to you humility, to acknoledge
your weakness, and ignorance, and consequently obedience to your Pastors; with
a will to give what the Apostle commands: namely double honor to those that
rule well, especially to such as labor in the word, and doctrine. 1. Tim.
5.17. And thus much likewise of the Object of the duty.

These three thus curiously handled (for the matter better befits the Press
then the Pulpit) I have almost fulfild my promise, and undergone my task. Quod
reliquum est, vestrum est. It remains now for you that are Shepherds, to
resolve the question. And I pray you tell me, Should not the Shepherd feed
the flock? Doubtless the conclusion passes for current, your silence shall
assure me your consent. How comes it to pass then, that this duty is
neglected; and the flocks are vnfedde: to resolve this we must come to our
last part, the Neglect: lend me your ears a little, I will not long detain
you.

Nonne? Should not the Shepherds feed the flocks? Learning, Love, Neglect.
and Prudence. The want of these, or of some two, or one of these, is the
mother of this monster.

The first was Learning, And the want of this, is very Defect. doctr.
our Shepherds most of them being like unto those, whom the Prophet Esaias
describes in his 56. Chapter, 10. verse. They are blind, they have no
knowledge, they cannot understand, they are dumb dogs, they cannot bark, they
lie and sleep, and delight in sleeping. If ever Country was accursed in this
kind, it is this of ours, being placed in the midst of a famous Island, as the
object of disgrace, for both ends to point at, or rather the refuse of two
Realms, as if both disdained it, ashamed to challenge it. How many blind seers
may be seen here, foolish teachers, lame forerunners, negligent Pastors, and
dumb cryers: Shepherds indeed, but fitter to keep sheep, then to care for
souls. Bubulcos non pastores, Neatheards, not feeding Shepherds; As if those
over whom they are placed, were beasts, and not men, irrational animals, not
reasonable creatures. If you ask me then, how chance the flocks are no better
looked unto? I answer, because the Seers are blind: If you demand further,
why blind men are made seers; I must reply with Saint Bernard. The fault is in
the overseers, Epist. 152.
Dant Episcopi sanctum Canibus, and Margaritas porcis, Bishops give that which
is holy, (as orders, and Church livings) unto dogs, and pearls unto swine, Et
illi conuersi, conculcant eas! It wont to be a great question, betwixt the
Divines, and Lawyers, if a place were void, and two in election, and both
worthy, whither it was lawful that the election might be made of the less
worthy or not? This was long in deciding; The Lawyers held that it was
lawful: the Divines, especially such as embraced the doctrine of Aquinas, that
it was not: Till at length the Counsel of Trent did determine it, decreeing,
that they did sin mortally, Qui digniores, and Ecclesiae magis vtiles
pastores, praeficere non curauerint: who did not provide that the more worthy
and profitable Pastors, should be put in authority.

But it were to be wished in these times of ours, that election were made
only of worthy men, for there needs no contention, since the places are many,
and the number of those not great, yet sufficient: But this is more to be
wished for, then hoped for, since it may be our plaint now, that he complained
of in his time. Quid vsitatius nunc est, quam his confer Ecclesiae beneficia,
qui non quia virtute pollent, literisque sunt egregie instituti, Sed quia diu
famulati sunt, quia fideliter Episcoporu^ redditus procurarint, auxerint:
Siluest. de corrup.
quia gynaecia praelatorum art temperauerint, vel quia sint agnati, sieve
affines, sieve domestici lurcones, qui ad colendn^ Bacchum, and Cererem magis
idonei habeantur, quam ad Cultum diuinum, ad docendum populum, ad gubernationem
Ecclesiae. Ideo istis videatis Episcopos malle sacerdotia, quam piis erudisque
viris confer, ita vt vel nunc, vel nunqua^ accidit, quod rudis quidem sed
facetus tamen cecinit vates.

Mos est praelatis, prebendas non dare gratis,
Sed been nummatis, vel eorum sanguine natis.
A second cause of the neglect of this duty, is want Love; Defect. charit.
some there are who are able to feed the flock, but will not; because they
do not love, they cannot labor. Such love not Christ, for if they did, they
would feed his Sheep. Are such Shepherds? they are Wolves: Are such Hens?
they are Kites: do such feed the Sheep? they feed on the sheep: they eat
the fat, they cloth them with the wool, they kill those that are fed, and
they feed not the Sheep. The weak they strengthen not, the sick they heal
not, the broken they bind not up, they bring not again what was driven away,
they seek not what is lost, but with cruelty, and rigor do they rule. Ezech.
34.4.

And I would there were no such false Prophets amongst us, who love themselves,
and the world so much, as they can impart no part of it to others. Love seeks
not her own things (says the Apostle) 1. Cor. 13.5. And it was his pleasure
to please all men, in all things, not seeking his own profit, but the profit
of others, that they might be saved, 1. Cor. 10.33. But it is our pleasure to
take pains only to pleasure our selves, and to be so industrious in this
kind, as forgetting the dignity whereunto we are called, (though unworthy) to
betake our selves wholly to the plow, the spade, the rake, and the flaile, play
the merchant, solicit causes, supply the places of stewards, and such like
base offices, so common in our cold Country, that unless a man be thus
egregiously qualified, he can have no place in the affections of our frozen
patrons.

Are such Shepherds? take away the Metaphor, and make them (as indeed they
are) carnal shepherds, and I will bring no other but the very sheep
themselves to speak to them, yet in their own tongue, least they understand
not S. Bernards language. Bernard. Epist. 42.
And let the speech be thus. If you that are our Shepherds go crooked, like
us who are your sheep, carrying your countenance downward, still looking to
the earth; and to pamper the belly, ever seek for food; In quo distinguimur,
wherein do we differ? will you see how the silly beast, makes simple beasts on
them. Si venerit lupus, Quis praeuidebit, and occurret? If the Wolf shall
come, who shall foresee him and prevent him? Such sheep are in a bad case; yet
if they be slain, God has vowed to require their blood at such Shepherds
hands, Ezech. 3.20.

The third, and last cause of this neglect, is want of Prudence. Defect. pruden.
This may come through too much knowledge, Scientia inflat (says the Apostle)
knowledge puffs up, 1. Cor. 8.1. And of this even the greatest scholars many
times do labor, who upon a private conceit of their own worth, do often abuse
good things to the hurt of others. Those that are so wise are no company for
honest Athenians. Though this want of Prudence be monstrum, yet it is mirum:
though it be a monster in a minister, yet it is a marvel in many of ours, for
the greatest Clerks (they say) are not always the wisest men. Our Clerks may
be wise then, for I am sure, they are none of the greatest. But why should I
stand seeking these in every minister? Cum ex quouis stipite non fit mercurius,
Since every person will not make a Priest. The want of these three, you see
then, is the reason, why the flock do want: some want learning, therefore
they cannot Preach. Some want Love, therefore they cannot Pray. And some want
Prudence, and therefore they cannot Edify by their good example.

Thus some would, and cannot; some can, and will not; and many neither can, nor
would, nor do.

What remains now for me, but to draw to a conclusion. Vsus 1. ad Episc.
If first you (my honorable Lord) will give me leave to leave one use with you.
Attendito tibi, and vniuerso gregi, in quo spiritus sanctus te posuit
episcopum. Take heed to your self, and to all the flock, whereof the holy
Ghost has made you ouerseer. See then both to the Sheep, and Shepherds; and
those evils which you could not stop in the beginning, yet stay them in their
proceeding. See that Shepherds feed the flocks, and not altogether feed on
the flocks. But there is an other thing which craves your honors care; take
heed that the flocks feed not on the Shepherds. This was a thing our Prophet
never dreamed of. Such unnatural dealing never came within the compass of his
conceit, and yet such Wolves there are within your fields in sheep clothing,
who kill their Shepherds, wounding some in their good name, opprobriously;
some in their bodies, dangerously; some in their estate, injuriously; renting
both the persons, and their personages in pieces. Are such sheep? they are
better in the Shambles, then in the field. Are there such Shepherds, and in
your flock? Yes, They are sick, heal them: they are weak, strengthen them:
they are broken, bind them up: that when you shall come to give up your
account, you may be able to say, as the good Shepherd said, Those that thou
gave me, have I kept, and none of them is lost. Ioh. 17.1^.

You that are Shepherds (beloved) feed your flocks which depend upon you;
caring for them, not by constraint, but willingly, not for filthy lucre, but
of a ready mind; And when the chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive
an incorruptible crown of glory. 1. Pet. 5.4.

You that are sheep, love your Shepherds, and give to them that rule well
double honor, especially to such as labor in the word and doctrine. And as
you sow, so shall you reap.

Now he that has an office, let him look to his office. I must conclude:
Brethren, farewell, be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind, live in
peace, and the God of love and peace shall be with you. Now the very God of
peace sanctify you, throughout, and I pray God that your whole spirit, and
soul, and body, may be kept blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ. To whom with the Father, and the holy Ghost, three persons, and one
everliving God, we ascribe, As due, all honor, and glory, praise, power,
dignity, and dominion, now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

