TWO BRIEF TREATISES.

The one containing matter of Persuasion and Expostulation concerning
CATECHISM: With certain Positions of like consideration.

The other, touching Peace between the Minister and his People: As likewise
the lawfulness, and duty of the Ministers Presenting (if need require)
outward disobedience unto his Ministry.

LVKE 19.39, 40. And some of the Pharisees, which were of the company, said
unto him, Master, Rebuke thy Disciples: But he answering, said unto them, If
these hold their peace, the stones shall cry.

LONDON Printed by W. Stansby for William Butler, and are to be sold at his
shop in S. Dunstanes Churchyard in Fleetstreet. 1616.

TO MY GODLY AND REVEREND BRETHREN of the MINISTRY, Grace and Mercy from
GOD in CHRIST.
Having by special occasion, and for the use of mine own, labored this
little thing (supposing some other rural Congregations also might not be
unlike) and it coming to the sight of some of my friends, (of greater learning
and judgment by far then my self) and thought not unfit to go abroad, for
winning in people (if God so bless it) more willing obedience unto this
Exercise; yea, and some little incitation unto some of y^^, my Brethren (with
leave be it spoken) slumbering (I know not how, yes, by a sole estimation, as I
judge, of the marvelous, indeed, Divine, and most excellent Exercise of
public Preaching, the glory thereof, by much and often beholding, having
dazeled your eyes; for far be it from any, having the spirit of Christ, to
say, or think, this Chair is base, and below mine honor, where the chiefest
in the Church may sit with grace and gravity; this thing weak, and beneath my
strength, wherein the tallest and strongest may go deep unto his length) in
the neglect of this duty, divine also, and such, as making the beauty of
Preaching the more to shine, the profit of Preaching the more to spread, very
kindly and comely, as mother and daughter, or friend with friend, may go
together: I commend it to your godly consideration, and my self to your
charitable opinion; seeking herein nothing else but the best welfare of you,
and yours, and praying for the same unto Him, who having loved us so, as laying
down his life for our sakes, and looking for this very fruit of our love
toward him again, says unto every Peter, Feed, Feed, not my Sheep only,
but also my Lambs, even with this Milk at the first, as fittest for them.

Your willing, though weak fellow-laborer in the work of the Ministry, C. P.

Faults escaped.
PAge 2. in the margent add l. 2. Esai. 65. 1. l. 5. Prou. 1.24. l. 7. John
8.40. p. 7. l. 23. for, hardly known, read utterly unknown, p. 9. l. 9. in
the marg. add: Athanas. in Symbol. operum Tom. 2. p. 10. l, 16. for, If read
Of p. 15. l. 24, for, to a plentiful, read, to, a plentiful? p. 16. l. 1.
for, ble; read, ble? p. 20. l. 10. for Examinants, read, Example. p. 31. l.
4. for, be, read, be) p. 33. l. 6. for Ministers, read Ministers without
comma p. 34. l. 24. for, truth? read, truth. p. 35. l. 12, for one, read, one
without comma. l. 18. in marg. Ezech. 3.19. p. 36. l. 21. for, Ministry)
read, Ministry, p. l. 4. for, this read, thease l, 19. for, Church? read,
Church. p. 39. l. 4. for or, read by p. 42. l. 8. marg. for, 2. Cor. 2. read
2. Cor. 4.2. p. 43. l. 8. marg. for, Psalm. 100. read, Psalm. 110. p. 46. l. 22.
marg. for Iere. 24. read, Iere. 23. p. 49. l. 5. put out and. l. 22. for a,
read, and. p. 50. l. 1. read, even the soul p. 51. l. 23, for, 23.26. read,
20.26. in the margent.

A BRIEF TREATISE, CONTAINING matter of Persuasion and Expostulation
concerning CATECHISM: With certain Positions of like consideration.
THat the first sin, and unlawful desire of passing divine knowledge,
procured by the Devil, has brought into our nature (through Gods just
judgment in punishing by the contrary) not Ignorance alone, but the bondage
2. Cor. 3.17.
of ignorance, if we were ignorant, the wilful ignorance of many, in the
things of God especially, most lowdly proclaymeth it. And in this are three
degrees; first, an indisposition, or no inclination of our selves to seek the
truth: Secondly, a declination, to wind away from truth, when the same is
offered: and thirdly, an opposition and civil war against the truth. The
sin and shame hereof being so much the greater, as that we all must
confess, that the Vow of Baptism, to renounce the Devil, and his Kingdom of
ignorance, is to the contrary. For we here speak not of professed Infidels,
but of Christians, so called; and yet refusing instruction for Christian
knowledge.

Against whom (as a weak and unworthy Minister in this Church, yet willing,
by Gods grace, to instruct mine own, and here as speaking to mine own) I thus
reason first in the words of Christ; Which of you can rebuke me of sin? And
he here means it (as I also do, and must of necessity) of falsehood, which
is the sin of Doctrine. if I teach you the truth, why do ye not believe
Ioh. 8.46.
it, or at least embrace the knowledge of it?

But as the Jews, oppressed with the light and evidence of truth, and so urged
indeed to yield their subjection to Christ; and the Devil on the contrary,
to hold his own, pulling them back, and putting in their minds and mouths
to call for his authority, asked him, saying, By what authority do thou
these things, and who gave thee this authority Math. 21.23.
? As seeming, if this might appear, they would then give place (for truth
indeed, taught by authority, has great power to persuade, if grace be not
utterly banished out of the heart) so the people in this striving and struggling
against the obedience of public CATECHISM (the truth therein taught, having
vanquished their thoughts) seek here to break loose, speaking thus in effect,
and almost in very words, against their Teachers, What authority have they to
compel us to this? And why should they bring us under their girdle? To whom I
answer in manner almost as Christ there of John his Baptism, for defense of
himself. Authority.
The Authority of the Church, to command and compel her children (as in this
she does Can. 59.
) for the good of their souls, is it not from Heaven? Is it not from Christ,
Who has all power given him in Heaven and in Earth Math. ^8.18.
, saying unto Peter, and the rest of the Apostles, and in them to the whole
Church, and namely the Governors thereof, To thee will I give the keys of the
kingdom of Heaven, whatsoever thou shall bind on Earth, shall be bound in
Heaven; and whatsoever thou shall loose on Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven
Math. 16.19.
? And if this prevail not with them, I leave them to that number, which say in
the Psalm, Let us break their bonds asunder, Psalm. 2.3.
and cast away their cords from us.

But, alas, they will still hold of the profession of Christ. Equity.
And well may they hold it. And then I demand, Is any thing more just and
reasonable, then that they should learn and endeavor to know, and chiefly by
such order as the Church appoints the things which belong unto their
Christian profession? Shall any man, professing any Trade, Art, or Science, not
first be an apprentice to learn the skill of that Trade, Art, or Science? Or
having not bin taught, or truanted his time, and so remaining ignorant, not
able (as we say) so much as to bungle at the things belonging to such
profession, be yet so bold to make open profession of such Trade, Art, or
Science? It is absurd and ridiculous, as most unreasonable. And so for our
Christians, in a word, it is a shame and rebuke to be wholly ignorant of Christ
and Christian Religion, their proper profession; and on the other side, their
praise and honor before God and good men (at least in some good and sufficient
measure) to know and increase in the knowledge of that which belongs to their
Christian calling.

But I descend to another reason of greater importance, Necessity.
that is, Necessity: and this of two sorts; the one for progress and further
profiting in the School of Christ, to attain at the last unto perfection and
the full edification of the faithful; such, and so much, I mean, as is
granted in this life. But what building is reared without a foundation? What
knowledge to read attained, before letters and syllables be first taught, and
learned? Who reaches the knowledge of any Art, or Mystery, without learning
beforehand certain Maxims, and Principles, and general Rules, to the same
belonging? And even so for this matter of Christian knowledge, there are first
to be learned certain Principles of the Word of God; and, Heb. 5.12.
the beginning of Christ, as the Apostle calls it. Heb. 6.1.
Without which, as there can be neither middle, nor end; so indeed, the best
Sermons, chiefly doctrinall, are a book sealed, and very secrets, or as
things uttered in a strange language. And though we hear with our outward
ears, yet understand we nothing, or very little; the very names of GOD, and
CHRIST, so often repeated, so necessary to be known in the mystery of the
holy and undivided Trinity; as likewise of the Incarnation of our blessed
Savior, of thousands being (...) known, and all because we have not gotten,
or forgotten CATECHISM. And this reason to this very end is alleged in the
fifth to the Hebrews; Heb. 5.11.
Of whom (says he, speaking of Christ) we have many things to say, which are
hard to be uttered, because (as he adds) ye are dull of hearing. Not hereby
meaning, that they were deprived of the natural sense of hearing, but for that
when they heard, through want of first learning, or by forgetting and loosing
this very CATECHISM, of which we speak, that hurt and inconvenience
followed, touching which he has these words: For whereas, concerning the
time, ye ought to be Teachers, yet have ye need again that we teach you what
are the first Principles of the Word of God; and are become such as have need
of milk (that is, again to be taught CATECHISM) and not strong meat: Heb.
5.12.
which are the deeper discourses, and more exact handling in substance the same
very matters in the Word of God.

The second point of necessity is of danger. Wherein for brevity sake, and to
omit many, and manifold most mighty testimonies of holy Scripture, I will only
remember them of the words of that holy and learned Father, in the Preface of
his Explication of some parts of the Articles of our Faith, and pronounced to
good purpose in our public divine Service, by authority of our Church.
Whosoever, says he, will be saved, before all things it is necessary that he
hold the Catholic Faith. Which Faith, except every one keep holy and
undefiled, without doubt he shall perish everlastingly: and to this will I yet
add those words of Christ, This is life everlasting that they know thee to be
the only very God, and whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ, Ioh. 17. verse. 3. If
then this exercise of public Catechism (supposing other means may likewise
be profitable) be specially available to this end, even to bring us to the
knowledge of the Faith of Christ, without the which we cannot be saved, is it
not above all things to be embraced?

But here the Devil (whose special work it is to oppose this good thing, for
which we speak) lays stones in the way: at which, left any stumble, we will
likewise endeavor to take them away; and these are objections in general: some
arising from other respects; and some from the teaching of the Minister.

If the former is the allegation, or exception taken for defense and excuse of
such, as are of age, or elder years, namely children, and servants
Communicants (though generally, and without distinction by authority of the
Church, put under obedience of public Catechism) whom yet as little children
to catechize, and instruct by Question and Answer, say they, is not comely:
but, I answer, it is rather their special comeliness, to know, and make
known their Christian knowledge, and indeed, if we consider, it stands
them more upon, and upon the credit of their Christian calling, to know, and
make known (as before I said) being lawfully required, their Christian
knowledge: for, as in the things of this life it is a greater rebuke for one of
age to be ignorant, then for a child wanting wit, time, experience, and
teaching therein: so for due knowledge of Christian Religion, their very time
charge the elder sort with this special duty to abound in knowledge, and
always to be readier, and more prepared, then little children, to yield account
of their faith; yea, and as need requires, to instruct others, especially of
younger years; and it much becomes them: so the Apostle to the Hebrews; Of
whom (speaking of Christ, and sharply rebuking them for neglect, and
forgetfulness of Catechism before taught) we have (says he) many things to
speak, which are hard to be uttered, because ye are dull of hearing. For
whereas concerning the time ye ought to be teachers, yet have ye need again
that we teach you what are the first principles of the Word of God Heb. 5.12
. And in all this, and that which follows concerning this matter, he
speaks, no doubt, to persons of elder years, and writes not his Epistle so
specially to little children.

Again, who will not grant, that children and servants Communicants above the
age of sixteen years (as all other indeed besides, of what greater age, or
condition soever they be, if ignorant, though not strictly so bound, perhaps,
by this order of our Church to be taught by Catechism) have more need then
little children, to be taught and instructed in the grounds of faith, in
respect of the special and instant duty required of them for receiving the holy
Communion, which of right requires a due examination by each one of himself
1. Cor. 11.28.
; the worthy, or unworthy receiving of this holy Sacrament, very much
importing every one which comes thereto 1. Cor. 11.27.
; and this examination requiring knowledge sufficient for this occasion, and
instruction for knowledge in the ignorant.

Lastly, the former persons, I mean children and servants above the age of
sixteen years, ought therefore with their years to abound, and excel in
greater knowledge, as being near unto alteration of their state, and many by
GODS providence after no long time to be in case to have children and servants
of their own; whom not to be able to instruct, and bring up in Christian
knowledge: What a sin? What a shame unto themselves? What a wrong to their
children? and how shall they be able themselves being untaught? and even the
will likewise to teach them is much the less, and lies almost dead, when
themselves having all their time before bin utterly neglected, or neglecting
themselves, were never made acquainted with this duty of being Christianly
catechized, and of yielding submission unto this Exercise. And I speak the
more hereof in regard of mine own practice, faulted by some, in distinguishing
between children and servants, under and above the age required for receiving
the holy Communion, and beginning first with them, who have most need,
according to these reasons even now delivered.

A second objection respects Continuance. What? say they, every Sunday? Yea
verily; and if possible, every day: the excellency and exigencie of knowledge
in this kind especially (with the height, length, and depth considered; and
joining herewithall the dullness and untowardness of our nature in much time
to learn little, chiefly in this) being greater without comparison then of
any other. This building will not be reared without much time and labor. This
garment of knowledge will be long in spinning, long ere put on to keep us
warm, if once a year only a thread or two be drawn out by example of some,
not wholly indiligent in this duty, yet adiourning the same unto Lent-time
only: but alas for poor people, which know not GOD, if this teaching be made
Lenten-stuffe only; this feeding, fish only, and not flesh also for all the
year: for in deed I see nothing but assiduitie, which can attain to a
plentiful, most comfortable* nay, a sufficient measure of understanding, for
only maintaining the life of the soul, (at least touching many) in the
things of God. Yea, and the Church also in her wisdom, and care especially for
her younger children, and weak in knowledge, straightly commands Can. 59.
this thing to be done, and used every Sabbath, if not ofter, and yet who
shall tell her that she erres in this?

A third objection concerns Contempt. I would come, says one, say many; and
we are willing to learn, but loath to be laughed at. I cannot deny but I
have seen such a thing, not once but often, and have been grieved above
measure: and God grant mine eyes never again to see it. What? open scurrility
in the time and place of public teaching? Weigh the circumstances, the things
taught, holy; the Ministry, holy; the place holy; the assembly of God, holy;
yea, Gods own presence there, most holy: and then, and there to laugh, or
leere, What a sin is this? alas, yea, and thrice alas for our Churches and
Congregations, if these laughing devils be not cast out, I mean by them who
have power and authority (God grant care also) to cast them out, as they ought
to do: for so did Abraham, and Sara, yea God himself against Ismael mocking
Isaac Genesis 21.10.11.
. but indeed I see not in this great remissness of Church Discipline, and
seldom censuring such kind of faults: what else can ease this persecution (for
so Paul calls it Gal. 4.29
) but true Christian humility, lenity and patience. And let patience (as
James exhorts) have her perfect work Iam. 1.4^.
Let laughers laugh on, and fools have this game; at whom Wisdom shaking her
head, says, O ye foolish how long will ye love foolishness? and the
scornful take their pleasure in scorning, and the fools hate knowledge Pro.
1.22
? but let the children of wisdom delight in knowledge, and still learn
knowledge for all this. It is a simple and a sottish thing for any man (as we
say) to be laughed out of his coat, that is, as I take it, to lay aside his
coat, yea all to his shirt, and so go naked for laughing sake only, and to
avoid such laughing at: and it is a far more simple, yea a sinful thing,
and a shame to be ashamed of, to be a Christian, whose forehead should be
full of courage Neb. 10.35. Reu. 22.4.
, and yet so tender, so timorous, and yielding unto this, to be laughed (as I
may so speak) out of his profession, and thereby shun knowledge, the very
clothing of the soul, and so be left naked, and utterly bare unto the skin,
and his filthiness to lie open in the sight of God. But once again to return
to the mockers. They say, we laugh not at it. What then? in it, I am sure:
yea, but by occasion, say they. To laugh at it were heathenish, and a certain
sign of infidelity, and little less in a christian, having knowledge, then
the sin against the holy Ghost Heb. 6.6.
. To laugh in it by any whatsoever occasion, and much more at every the least
occasion, is immodesty, irreuerence, and unchristian leuity: sinful in it
self, shameful to the parties, scandalous in effect, discouraging the weak;
grievous to the godly present, more soberly governed; and no better then a
defiling of the Temple of God, which is holy, And if any man (says Paul in
matter not much greater then this) defile the Temple of God, him will God
destroy 1. Cor. 3.17.
. But this, I hope, is the fault of few Congregations. One cursed ground have I
known to bring out these briers: and God in his good time will change them, or
root them out; and cast his fear upon others; many of whom by his blessing
begin to be better, and in silence and reverence to learn knowledge, and
the great mercy of our God, and the light of his countenance be still upon them,
to increase their number, and bless their knowledge unto perfect comfort.

The fourth Objection touches Exam^^a^^. How many, say they, do so? I know not
how many. I wish there were many: but they mean few: the answer unto this
belongs to the governors of the Church: for if we in doing this do amiss,
let us be censured: and if others not doing this, do not amiss let them
continue without rebuke: but if my neighbors coat be too short to reach my
conscience, and keep it warm, not standing upon bare example, by Gods grace
and assistance, I will make mine larger, nor pinch my foot with his narrow
shoe.

A fifth objection, why they should not answer, is this, they know it well
enough, and then what need of answer? but how knows the Pastor the state of
his flock, as he ought to do Acts 20.28.
, if he know not their knowledge, and that by their answer? but they know, but
cannot utter. What, not at all? in no sort able to speak so, that another may
understand that they understand? it is a rule in the Law, and good in reason;
that Not to be, and not to appear, or made known to be, is all one. There is
weakness, I confess, in many touching this point, in their own words to
deliver that, which otherwise they conceive: and let these then especially
thank their mother, who respecting their infirmity teaches the^ to speak, and
gives very words (and the same very godly, wise, learned, and most material)
into their mouths, by answers appointed in public Catechism. And of this no
more, the thing is so plain: and of that nothing, as being nothing, which yet
I have heard, that they must do their fathers, their masters business; their
earthly fathers and masters they mean, though this business to know, and do
their fathers, their masters will which is in heaven, lie still as accounted no
business at all. But miserable servant is he, who knows no Master, but on
earth; and most unhappy child, whose father is not our Father in Heaven.
Whose will and pleasure is first to be known, and his service preferred before
all other.

The second sort of objections is against the kind, or manner of Catechizing
by the Minister, his teaching, say they, is dark. Be it so: for so is all
teaching of other things at first, and this especially, more different from our
nature, more hindered by Satan, by many esteemed much less necessary, then
worldly knowledge, and therefore is given the less attention for
understanding; and sooner a little learned, to help on further, is forgotten;
and every Teachers gift is not alike, and yet every lawful Teacher must be
heard: and many of better and quicker capacity find that very easy, which
others not having this gift of GOD (who is bound to none Matthew. 20.15.
) do think and report to be hard and dark.

Again, they object against the time, saying, He is too long: but half an
hour, or some what more, yea, sometimes an hour is not to long. If any
exceed, or fault much herein through indiscretion, let them mend their fault,
or bear the blame they have deserved.

But he teaches with austeritie; I like it not: but I allow that he teach as
with authority Tit. 2.15.
; and yet tenderly, as need requires, the poorest in the place, no less then
were he the Kings son.

But some worst of all, and by the very suggestion of the devil himself (in
this most occupied, effectually of none, if possible, as neither professedly,
or vocally of any, especially in the face of the Congregation, to be forsaken)
when all is well done in matter and manner without exception, accuse the mind,
and object ill meaning: and it is, say they, to show learning, and it is to be
singular, and it is to keep under, and I know not what. It was the secret
objection against Christ himself; whose works and actions being perfectly
good in the eyes of all men, and by the judgment of that sense, which could
not err, no man could possibly object against them. Neither were his words and
doctrine less holy and good, but here notwithstanding, because the tongue may
deceive, they ran to his conscience, accusing his inward, corrupt, and
guilefull meaning; which in my judgment causes the holy Ghost in the Prophet,
and other places expressly to add, Neither was there guile found in his mouth
Isa. 53.9.
: That is, what he always spoke most holily and well unto the ears of all
men, he meant it sincerely without any the least stain, or mixture of evil
thought or hypocrisy. And charity, which is not suspicious 1. Cor. 13.7.
when matter and form cannot be faulted, fears to accuse the inward
thoughts, and leaves that judgment, as of right belonging unto GOD alone.
According unto which I also conclude with the Apostles admonition; Judge
nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who will lighten things that are
hid in darkness, and make the counsels of the hearts manifest: And then shall
every man (both Minister and people, according as their thoughts, words, and
works are) have praise, or dispraise of GOD 1. Cor. 4.5.
To whom be praise and glory for ever. Amen.

CERTAIN POSITIONS OF LIKE CONSIDERATION with the former. Wherein sometimes
for more full explication, the same thing almost is set down in other words.
HE that is much unwilling to learn Christ, by the voice of his Mother, the
Church of Christ, is not yet come to be a true child of the Church, and
keeps his name and place in the Church only by some outward profession.

Knowledge of the Mystery of Christ in a sufficient measure, uttered
sufficiently in any manner, (when lawfully required) and joined with good life,
may commend a man for a sufficient Christian.

A willing mind to learn with dutiful endeavor, and able to utter, and
uttering (when need requires) with seemly reverence the words of knowledge,
with little or no knowledge as yet of the matter it self, gives hope of
being afterward a good Christian.

Refusal to learn either words, or matter; or compulsiue learning and
repeating with the least show of contempt, in place public, and before
authority, gives sign of a reprobate, and child of the Devil.

The bare knowledge of words, without knowledge or care of the matter, is
available so far only, that such one may be held a member of the visible
Church; and if he so continue, is assuredly no member of the true Church.

Utter disobedience unto public Catechism, especially joined with gross
ignorance, a true note, or trial who is not, and will not be a true Christian.

Outward obedience unto public Catechism, as likewise all other exercises of
true Religion, though joined with knowledge in great degree, no certain note
of a true Christian.

Gross ignorance, and utter obstinacy to learn (by the gentlest teaching) in
any child, or servant of age to receive the holy Communion, the most necessary
Principles of Christian Religion, and namely, that in public Catechism, which
belongs to the Lords Supper; most worthily deserves at least a stay by the
Minister, (reserving the matter unto further cognizance) from the holy
Communion: as being nothing else in effect, and for the time but a real
renouncing the faith of his Baptism.

He that is not a friend to Catechism, is not yet come to be a good Christian;
and he that is an enemy, is of the Devil.

Knowledge of God in Christ being absolutely, and equally necessary for all, of
what age, or condition soever they be, in the wisdom and care of the Church
for all her children, the public Exercise of Catechism ought to be general,
at least for such persons, which having not before yielded unto the Church an
account of their faith, may by good probability be deemed ignorant.

The Ministers labor with the peoples renitencie, and slumber of government in
the former considered, the reason is plain, why in the Church are many
Preachers, and few Catechists.

A BRIEF TREATISE, TOUCHING Peace between the Minister, and his people; as
likewise the lawfulnes and duty of the Ministers presenting (if need require)
outward disobedience unto his Ministry.
Sweet, says one, is the name of peace; and the thing it self, comfortable:
and we all say, Peace is precious. Most true: if in God. Such peace between
men is indeed precious, pleasant, beautiful, blessed. The Prophet in the
Psalm Psalm. 133.
celebrating this peace, so speaks of it: Behold how good and pleasant a
thing it is brethren to dwell together in unity. It is like the precious
ointment upon the head, that ran down unto the heard, even unto Aarons beard,
and went down to the skirts of his clothing Exodus 30.23.
: like as the dew of Hermon which fell upon the Hill of Sion. For there, Where?
even where is this unity, there the Lord promises his blessing, and life for
evermore. But peace or unity between men, and not in GOD, is nothing but a
conspiracy against GOD. This peace (if it continue) has no blessing but a
curse; no promise or assurance of life, but death, and that for evermore. Thus
then, the people of a parish lives in the ignorance of GOD. And the Minister
for peace sake leaves them so, and they are both agreed. What peace is this?
surely not of GOD; but of the enemy of men, yea of GOD, Who wills all men to
be saved, and come unto the knowledge of the truth? 1. Tim. 2.4.
Here then for Minister and people, if they will be blessed, this peace must
be broken. Here is a wonderful stir toward: for let the case be; The
Minister by the grace of GOD Ierem. 1.17. Amos 3.8.
, in the love of GOD Ioh. 21.15.16.17.
, of the peoples, and his own salvation 1. Tim. 4.16.
, desires, and endeuoreth to bring the people to the knowledge of GOD. The
people by persuasion of the flesh, the world, and the devil, will not be
brought, no, not to hear the word of salvation. Here one, against many, how
shall he prevail? I answer (presuming yet of outward hearing, though by
compulsion, of which afterward we speak) two ways: by Offer, and Operation.
By offer of the means: If thou warn the wicked (says GOD by the Prophet) and
he turn not from his wickedness, nor from his wicked way, he shall die in
his iniquity, but thou have delivered thy soul. By Operation, of the word,
and work of his Ministry: which is never frustrate. And of this rejoices
the Apostle: Now thanks be unto God (says he) which always makes us to
triumph in Christ, and makes manifest the savor of his knowledge by us in
every place. For we are unto God the sweet savor of Christ in them that are
saved, and in them that perish. To the one we are the savor of death unto
death, and unto the other the savor of life unto life 2. Cor. 2.14.15.16.
. If then in this battle he save himself, and of the people he save some,
appointed to life, and destroy other, appointed to perish, himself resting in
the favor of GOD Isa. 49.4.
, does he not prevail? no doubt he does, and that greatly.

But now further to behold this fight, and namely in the means of salvation
offered by the word, and work of the Ministry which is performed toward
all, publikly, toward some in special need privately: for the public
performance, it is in public place, by Prayer, Preaching, administration of
Sacraments and Catechism. The people fly from this means: the Minister
charged by GOD, pursues them at home with all instance: I charge thee (says
Paul to Timothy) before God, and before the Lord Jesus Christ, which shall
judge the quick and dead at his appearing, and in his Kingdom, preach the
Word; be instant in season and out of season; improve, rebuke, exhort with all
long suffering and doctrine 2. Tim. 4.2.
. And needing help, he runs to the rod of the Churches discipline: for
says Christ (in like case, but less matter then this in regard of
circumstance) If he hear not them, tell the Church Matthew. 18.17.
whose hand is, or ought to be ready, and held out for doing good herein.
Foolishness (says Solomon) is bound up in the heart of the child, but the
rod of discipline will drive it away from him Prou. 22.15.
. And here is no sparing of Agag 1. Sam. 15.23.
; no carnal respects must here prevail, but the great, and small are both
alike. I charge thee (says Paul to Timothy) before God, and before the Lord
Jesus Christ, and the elect Angels, that thou observe these things without
preferring one to another, and do nothing partially 1. Tim. 5.21.
. Here is the Ministers warrant for presentment in this kind, namely, touching
outward obedience to his Ministry; not only sealed, and confirmed by
authority of the Church Can. 1.13
, and positive Law of the Christian Magistrate Ann. Ias. 3. c. 4.
, but even singularly to be approved of in it self. First, for the proper
good of those, against whom (if need require) proceeds this information.
Secondly, for the good of others. And thirdly and lastly, for the glory of God.

And in the former branch, as also in the first setting down of this
Discourse, I purposely add this limitation, if need require: for I freely
confess that all must be assayed on the Ministers behalf by pains by
patience, by a discreet, and most meek manner of teaching, and humility in
the lowest degree to work obedience at home; and yet such humility, a being
mixed and tempered with grace and gravity, may be fit (...) uphold and
mainetaine the authority and reverence of his place and calling, as Paul
wills Titus to look to this: These things (says he) speak and exhort, and
convince with all authority. See that no man despise thee Tit. 2.15
. and yet also I say again, even such humility, as stoopeth to the lowest for
the good of others: such as not only Paul the Apostle submitted himself unto,
where he says, I am made all things to all men, that I might by all means
save some 1. Cor. 9.22.
: but also because it is exemplified unto us by a great King, may the better
be obeyed and yielded unto of all that are lesser then Kings: and it is King
David, whom of I speak; who being by his proud, profane, and most ungodly
wife derided for his zealous act of Religion before the Ark of God, thus
mildly answered; It was before the Lord, which chose me rather then thy Father,
and all his house, and commanded me to be Ruler over the people of the Lord,
even over Israel; and therefore will I play before the Lord: and will yet be
more vile then thus, and will he low in mine own eyes 2. Sam. 6.21.22.
. So let Gods Minister say, I this do, and suffer this, even slanders,
reproach, and open contempt sometimes to the face, for my love and
thankfulness sake to Christ, Who has made me strong 1. Tim. 1.4.
, being at first weak, yea weakness it self, and even dead to this work;
and afterward also most insufficient of my self, To think any thing for the
duties of my holy calling, as of myself, but my sufficiency is of God, who
has made me a meet minister of the New Testament 2. Cor. 3.5
: and counting me faithful, has put me in his service 1. Tim. 1.12.
; royal service, to help and rule his people, as one of those, of whom the
Prophet speaks, joining them with Christ the true David, and King of Israel,
Behold (says he) a King shall reign justly, and the Princes (what Princes?
poor Princes, his weak despised Ministers, according to men, yet armed and
adorned with the dignity, and authority of their high and holy calling) shall
bear rule rightfully Isa. 32.^.
, purely and sincerely, giving true name to every sin, and sinner, not
calling the niggard liberal Isa. 32.9.
, not flattering any, not fearing the faces of the mighty Ierem. 1.17.18.
Ezeck^. 2.^
, not seeking the vain praise Th^s. 2.6.
, and despising the disprayse of the world, not creeping to gain by colored
covetousness 1. These. 2.5
, but casting off the cloakes of shame, walk not in craftiness, neither handle
they the word of God deceitfully, but in declaration of the truth approve
themselves unto every man's conscience in the sight of God 2. Cor. 4.^.
; bearing rule, I say, thus rightfully; and therefore also thus mightily, to
kill and quicken 2. Cor. 2.16.17.
, to save and destroy; to give sight to them that see not, and make blind them
that see Joh. 9.39
; to bind and loose Math. 18.19.
; to subdue and lead captive, some to the obedience of Christ, though never so
strongly defending their forts to hold their own, never so highly exalted in
their thoughts against the knowledge and acknowledging of Christ; and having
ready vengeance against all others utterly 2. Cor. 10.4.5.6.
disobedient; even so in the Regeneration Math. 19 28.
, (when first their high Lord, and King being risen from the dead unto life
immortal; and even so newborn Act. 13.33
, according to that generation, which none can declare Isa. 53.8.
, as unable to reach the length of duration and eternity thereof, shall sit in
the throne of his glory Math. 19.28.
, and shall send forth, even by them, the rod or scepter of his power Psa.
100.2.
, the Gospel preached, the power of God, and his arm revealed unto salvation:
First, out of Sion, Jerusalem, the Church of the Jews into the Church
Universal, to call his Elect, to quicken them in Christ, the Resurrection and
the life Ioh 11.25
, to be new creatures, old things, being past, and all things being become new
2. Cor. 5.17.
) sitting on twelve thrones, with no less, or greater glory then the Kings of
the earth, making them also to tremble Act. 24.26.
, judging and ruling by their Word and Doctrine for the effectual work sake
of this regeneration also, and during the time and state of this regeneration,
the twelve Tribes of Israel, even the whole Church of God; till having at last
overcome al adversary power by the power of their head, even the Lord Christ
Jesus, they shall sit with him in his throne of glory; even as he overcame,
and sits with his father in his throne Reu. 3.21.
. Lo this is mine honor upon earth, and this my hope of honor in heaven, who
was nothing, yea less, and worse then nothing; and therefore in all things
will I show my self zealous before the Lord: and if for his sake, and service
more reproach and contempt must needs come on, I will be more vile, and will
be low still, yea, lower and lower in mine own eyes. And I speak the more,
and more willingly, for this part of duty to be embraced by the godly
Minister, because all other means failing for outward comfort, this alone in a
good conscience may lay a good foundation for his patience, and constancy in
the works of his calling. And this much being uttered by way of digression
upon this clause of limitation, if need require, let us now return to the
reasons for constraint and compulsiue obedience to the means of salvation. The
first whereof is properly the respect of his good, against whom proceeds this
information, tending wholly to this end, even his godly reformation: but will
some say, how can that well be, when he has no good will? I answer, that be
it so, that he have not; yet compelled to the means, I say he may have, yea,
and I also maintain not a possibility only, but a probability. First, from
the largeness and generality of vocation (I mean outward) extended, and
offered not only unto all of his goodness, Who wills all men to be saved,
and come unto thee knowledge of the truth 1. Tim. 2.4.
; whether Grecian or Jew; Circumcision or vncircomcision, Barbarian, Scythian,
Male, Female, Bond, Free Col. 3.11. Gal. 3.28.
; but likewise unto all times, and seasons by continuance 2. Tim. 2.25.
, and the length of time, even the last hour of life. For even then the thief
upon the Cross received the grace of conversion Luke 23.41.42.43.
. Secondly, from the power of the means ordained by God Luke 16.31.
: Whether we here speak of the preaching of the Word, or of the singular
majesty and reverence, even in the outward face of obedience in the public
Assembly and Congregation: for of the one, namely the sincere and reverend
preaching of the Word of GOD; What (says the Prophet, or rather the Lord
himself by the Prophet) is not my word even like fire, and like an hammer
which breaks the stone Ierem. 2^.29.
? and of the other S. Paul reports thus, If all, says he, prophecy (and he
speaks of public prophecy, interpretation, and preaching in the
Congregation) and there come in one that believes not, or one unlearned, (and
I add, an unwilling person, and compelled to be in place) he is rebuked of
all, by example of the willing obedience of all, and is judged of all, that is,
the more discerned how froward and stubberne he is; so that by the contrary
example, I say, himself may the sooner see it, and the sin of it, and be
ashamed, one being so censured of many. And so it may be that the secrets of
his heart (even his hidden grace, and repentance not appearing before) will be
made manifest, and so he will fall down on his face, and worship God, even
willingly, and say, that God is indeed in you 1. Cor. 14 24.25.
, both Preacher and people thus serving the Lord, and the Devil was in him, who
made him so unwilling before: and so awaked as it were out of his sleep, he
will afterward say (as Jacob of the place, where GOD showed him his special
presence by signs and promises) surely the Lord is in this place, but I was
not aware of it. And being stricken with fear with that holy Patriarch will
say, How terrible is this place? that is, how full of the power and majesty of
the Word of GOD, and working of his Spirit in the hearts of his people? Surely
this is none other then the House of God, this place is even the gate of Heaven
Genes. 28.16.17.
. And so then for our hearer, GOD affording him this love and care, (as at the
first to our first Parents, by reproouing them to move them to repentance) not
to leave him wholly to his ignorance (which is the case of those unwilling, who
being altogether left unto them selves, there is no hope, and ordinarily no
possibility of their salvation; for how (says the Apostle) shall they believe
except they hear Romans 10.14.
?) but rather then so, even to draw and compel him by men's authority to
outward instruction, and gives sign of his fatherly good will and meaning, of
unwilling afterward to make him willing, excluded or disaduantaged by no
circumstance of his person; limited to no one time or season alone, but having
the length of his life even to the last hour for time of his effectual
calling, and the mighty means of GODS own appointing, still working on him; so
as daily and howerly it may be hoped he will turn unto GOD.

The second reason for this forced and compulsiue obedience respects others.
And first the Magistrate, who by doing his part herein, declares his zeal
toward GOD, a true Religion; his charity toward men, in seeking the chief
good, and settle-health of his brethren; his love and reverence of the Laws,
and faithfulness in due execution thereof, and this especially concerning the
first Table. Secondly, such in private estate, as being godly, shall rejoice in
hope of good to be done on those, who (though unwillingly at first) are joined
(at least in public) to their godly society; and on the other side may take
occasion (the best being apt to fall) to be weakened in their love, and duty
toward the holy Assemblies, when others which owe the same obedience, are
pardoned their absence, or rather wholly left unto themselves: and the weaker
sort especially, otherwise resorting to the Congregation, are sooner drawn by
such example to embrace and entertain like carnal liberty, which by the
Magistrates conniuence seems to be denied to none: and so on the otherside
are better held in and retained in duty, if round justice be done on all for
repairing to the Congregation.

The third and last reason touches the glory of GOD, which the unwilling
commer, if turned, willingly and joyfully gives to GOD, and blesses the time
of such constraint: and if not turned, yet at last of necessity must yield
unto God. Ye shall not (says Christ even to such kind of persons) see me
henceforth, until ye say, Blessed is he that comes in the Name of the Lord
Luke 13.35.
; and cursed are we that could see it no sooner. And so Wisdom being
justified of her children Matthew. 11.19.
, that is, acknowledged, and openly, as it were by sentence given, pronounced
just, and free from the blood of them all Acts 23.26.
, as having by all means sought their good, and they remaining in their evil
Mat. 11.^^.17.^^.19.
, the blame of their overthrow must wholly be laid upon themselves, and upon
their heart of unbelief, and even the mouth of unbelief shall at last
confess it, That God may be justified in his sayings, and overcome when be
judges Romans 3.4.
.

FINIS.

