A SERMON PREACHED AT GOVLDSBROVGH in Yorke-shire, BEFORE THE RIGHT Worshipful
Sir Richard Hutton Knight, one of his Majesty's Justices of the Court of Common
Pleas.

LAMENT. 4.9. They that be slain with the sword, are better then they that be
slain with hunger: for these pine away, stricken through for want of the
fruits of the field.

LONDON, Printed by John Haviland for Richard Moore, and are to be sold at his
shop in Saint Dunstans Churchyard. 1622.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, Sir RICHARD HVTTON Knight, one of his Majesty's
Justices of the Court of Common Pleas.
Right Worshipful,
IT was the custom of the Persian Kings, when they saw their children
misdemeane themselves, at the first to spare them, and to punish their servants
in their sight, to try if that would terrify them from their sinister
courses: Thus has the King of Kings of late dealt with us, who as we hope are
his children; for noting our misbehauiour, he has spared us, and with
immoderate showers and ouer-swelling waters he has punished the earth that was
created to be serviceable to us. Many can familiarly discourse of this, but few
make any good use thereof: which I have seen and observed with sorrow. And
knowing it a duty incident to my calling, to put men in mind of Gods secret
admonishments, I applied my meditations to that purpose, which I also delivered
in your Worships presence, and have now (according to your request) sent you a
true copy of the same. The manifold undeserved kindnesses which I have
received from you, do bind me to make an unfeigned acknowledgement of my love
and duty to you, which I shall be ready upon every occasion to manifest, and
my prayers shall always attend you and your Family.

From Spoforth the 21. of October. Your Worships always at command, ROBERT
OXLEY.

A SERMON PREACHED AT GOVLDSBROVGH in Yorke-shire.
PSALM. 107.34. A fruitful land makes he barren, for the wickedness of them
that dwell therein.


AMongst the manifold grieuances which befell mankind, for the fall and
disobedience of man, it is not to be forgotten, that the Lord cursed the very
earth for his sake; adiudging it to bring forth thorns, and thistles, and to
become barren, according to this saying of the Psalmist, A fruitful land
makes he barren, for the wickedness of them that dwell therein. Barren (I
say) either bringing forth no fruits at all, or such as where Infelix lolium,
and steriles dominantur avenae, such as in the growth is ouer-growne with
darnell, smothered with choking thorns, and the purest grain spoiled with
wasting cockle. The wily Serpent in his hellish conference with our Grandame
Eve, Genesis 3.4.
promised length of days, a gift that Wisdom is said to bring in her right
hand, Pro. 3.16.
length of days is in her right hand, and in her left riches and glory: Genesis
3.5.
he promised dominion, Eritis sicut dij, ye shall be like Gods, but instantly
the earth, whose Lord whilome they was, denied to pay her tribute, but upon
condition, scil. that they should take pains to till her; whence it comes to
pass to be so with us now, that if we expect profit from the earth, then
(iuncto bove aratra trahuntur) we must rip up the bowels of the earth: and yet
this is not all, for whosoever it be that plants or waters, it is God only
that gives the increase; Except the Lord build the house, the worke-mans labor
is but in vain: Wherefore if we would have good success to follow our
enterprises, if we would have our pains and labors in our callings, to yield
fruits answerable to our expectation, then must we so compose our affections,
and dispose our affairs, that we may walk worthy in the sight of God: which
if we do, he will bless us, and that which we go about, he will prosper all
our proceedings: but if we mis-spend our time, and live impiously, wickedly,
we may purpose, but God will dispose, he will so disprosper our proceedings,
and frustrate us of our hope, that whatsoever we take in hand shall be vain
and fruitless: yea our native soil the ground that we tread upon, for our
sins shall be cursed, and despoyled of her glory, (i.) her fruitfulness, as
here testifies the Psalmist, A fruitful land makes he barren for the
wickedness of them that dwell therein.

The Prophet David that sweet singer of Israel, is the unquestioned author of
this Psalm: he composed it, partly to stir men up to gratefulness, in
regard of Gods gratiousnesse toward them; but more specially to discover the
error of those, which deny the universal and particular providence of God, in
ordering and disposing the things of this world; for as (in respect of God) his
creation was the mother that brought forth the world, with all things therein,
so his providence is the nurse that brings it up: as his creation gave it a
being, so his providence keeps it in that esse: as his creation erected the
whole fabric of the world, and composed and set in order all the parts
thereof, so his providence keeps it in repair, it governs and disposes
all the particulars therein: this he does convince, by many examples of things
done, both by sea and by land, which have so come to pass, that of necessity
we must grant their causes and effects to have been wholly governed by God;
but his special argument, tending to that purpose, and standing in nearest
reference to my text, is drawn from the consideration of those changes and
alterations, which ignorance commonly does ascribe to fate or fortune, as the
fruitfulness, and unfruitfulness of the earth: which proceeds from the
seasonablenes and the unseasonableness of the weather. These things come not
to pass as Epicures fondly dream, by chance; nor as the Peripateticks hold,
by a general providence; nor as the Stoics auerre, only by the operation of
second causes, but by Gods special providence, ordinance, and appointment,
whose actions are free, not bound to the observance of times, nor means, who
when it pleases him, can send the former and latter rain in due season, who
(as it is in the verse following my text) can make of a parched wilderness, a
standing water, and extract water springs out of a dry ground, so that the
hills shall flourish, and the valleys stand thick with grain, and grass: and
again when fullness brings forth forgetfulness, and men attribute that which
they have, to the goodness of their land, or greatness of their labor, and
do not acknowledge God to be the Author thereof, then (as it is in the verse
before my text) he turns the flood into a wilderness, and dries up their
water springs: Then, A fruitful land makes he barren, for the wickedness of
them that dwell therein.

In these words are two things obseruable.

1. A judgment. 2. The cause thereof.
In the judgment there is a metamorphosis, or change, of wealth into want,
plenty into poverty, fruitfulness into barrenness: A fruitful land makes he
barren.

The impulsive cause is, the wickedness of them that dwell therein. First for
the first, scil. the Judgment: wherein note, the Author of it, and the
judgment it self. The Author of the judgment is indefinitely expressed under
the Pronoune ille, makes he, that is, the Lord, by his power, makes the
wilderness a standing water, and water springs of a dry ground, and thereby
causes fruitfulness; and when he is thereunto provoked, by the inhabitants
sins, then he turns the flood into a wilderness, and makes the
fruitfullest countries become extreme barren. A fruitful land makes he
barren. So then it is the Lord that is the Author of fruitfulness and
barrenness, it is he that sends plenty or poverty. Whence two lessons may
be taken forth, seasonable for two sorts of people, scil.

1. The rich. 2. The poor.
For the rich: The king may not boast of his great Babel, nor the rich man of
his full barnes, but as having nothing save what they have received, they
should say, Not unto us Lord, not unto us, but to thy name be ascribed the
glory. For the poor, they should rest contented with their portion, and
legitimate Gods proceeding, for it is he, that either for trial of their
patience, or to reclaim them from their perverseness, has turned their
fruitfulness into barrenness: A fruitful land makes he barren. Thus much
for the Author. Now for the judgment it self: wherein observe the matter and
the manner. For the matter, it is a change of fruitfulness into barrenness.
What it is to be fruitful, and what it is to be barren, is well known; and
that such changes have chanced experience testifies: and therefore we pass by
the matter of the judgment, and come to the manner of it, scil. to show how
the Lord effects this change, how he makes a fruitful land to become
barren. The Lord makes a fruitful land barren, by one of these three means,
scil. either First, by his supernatural power, or Secondly, by natural
means, or Thirdly, by unnatural men.


First, by his supernatural power, whereby contrary Eliah, 1 Reg. 17.
when there fell no rain upon the face of the earth, for three years space,
which closed up their water springs, yea that drought caused such a dearth, and
that dearth was seconded with such a famine, as destroyed multitudes, both of
men and beasts.

of the husbandmans labor, for there is not any thing of that which is either
sown, or planted by the hand of the husbandman, but has some impediment and
hinderance from the earth or air to annoy it; and they are all just judgments
sent from God, whereby he makes a fruitful land barren, for the wickedness
of them that dwell therein.

Thirdly, the Lord makes a fruitful land barren by

1. Whereof one sort being forgetful of the saying, non nobis nati, we are not
borne for our selves only, but to do good to others, are therefore too
careful for their own, and too careless for others welfare: their care is to
do mischief to others, if themselves may gain thereby, for aiming at their
private gain, they ingrosse and hoord up the commodities and treasures of the
land, till they have caused a public dearth; these, I say, are Gods
instruments, though they intend it not, and effect that unwittingly, which he
wills; they are his rod wherewith he scourges his people for their sins.

2. Another sort careless both of themselves and heaven, by denying the former
and the latter rain: or dissolved the waterish clouds into immoderate showers;
Psalm. 78. verse. 47, 48.
or when by natural means, he gives your fruits to the Caterpillar, your
labors to the Grasshopper, and your Mulbery trees to the frost; or when by
unnatural men, through their unnatural practices, he has despoyled the earth
of her fruitfulness, and made the land barren) then I say, what follows, but
famine and pestilence; first steps in famine, then which there is no temporal
punishment more pinching and miserable, insomuch that the Prophet David, 2 Samuel
24. v. 14.
being put to his choice into which one of the three evils he would fall into,
rather chused the pestilence then it; for it is a lingering and long-lasting
torment, and has driven men to those extremities and enormities, that nothing
else could do: it has made mothers murderers, and turned the sanctuary of
life into the shambles of death; it has broken down the hedges both of
nurture and nature: for in ordinary course man is not meat for man, but manchet
for his maker, 2 Reg. 6. v. 28.
yet has famine made those wombes which gave children harbor before their
births, afterward become the place of their burial; it has made the
practices of men lamentable, and abominable, both to be pitied and abhorred.
It made one, as Josephus relates, De bello Iudaico.
to cut the throat of another, that he might get the morsel he had put in his
mouth, ere it was descended into his maw. When famine has played her part, then
comes pestilence, for they two attend the one upon the other, and this latter
finding such feeble and weak resistance, (the strength of nature by the former
being disabled) throws whole multitudes groue-long on the ground: and thus you
see that when men forget their maker, the senseless creatures, as if they were
sensible of wrongs done to their Creator, come shouldring, crowding, and
striving, which of them should first take revenge of us, in their masters
quarrel; the fire consumes our mansions, the air infects our breath, the
waters drown our fruits, the earth like an angry merchant, when it has
showed rich wares, shuts up the shop, and leaves us never the better for them;
and these are the judgments of God, sent to make a fruitful land barren for
the wickedness of them that dwell therein.

But quid hoc ad rombum? What is all this to the purpose? Peradventure the
Psalmist might have some cause to speak this to the people of the Jews, and
to the land of Israel; but what is this to us, and to the land of England? Yes
(beloved) the glass reflects to us: for, for the subject, scil. A fruitful
land; Such a one is this triangle Island wherein we live, and that which Moses
spoke of the fruitfulness of the land of Israel, may be affirmed of the land
of England; The Lord thy God, says Moses to Israel, Deuteronomy. 8.7.9.
brings thee into a good land, a land of brooks of water, of fountains, and
deepes that spring out of valleys and hills, a land of wheat and barley, a land
wherein thou shall eat bread without scarceness, thou shall not lack any
thing in it: a land whose stones are iron, and out of whose mountains thou
may dig brass. In all these respects England is fruitful as well as
Israel; it affords dishes dressed with dainties; Garners fraught with grain,
staules filled with fatlings, orchards full of fruits; gardens, and fields
aspersed and enamuled with variety of fragrant flowers, innumerable multitudes
of water-springs, whereof some show wonderful effects in curing diseases,
pleasant rivers, running Meander-like along their silver shores: a sweet and
wholesome air to breathe in; and what not? requisite either for the profit or
pleasure of man: so that our land is as it were, the treasury and storehouse
of Gods blessings: and we may affirm as truly as any other nation, that our
lot and portion is fallen us in a good land. But what then? is our gold become
dim? has God made our fruitful land barren? no, he has not, and therefore
here I must for application, make use of that, that the Psalmist makes the
burden or vnder-song of this Psalm, Ps. 15.21.31.
O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness, and declare the
wonders that he does for the children of men; that they would exalt him in the
congregation of the people, and praise him in the seat of the elders; and so
much the rather, because he has not only given us this good and fruitful
land, but withal sends us calm and peaceable times, to enjoy the fruits
thereof: we are not, nor we have not this long time (blessed be Gods name for
it) been scard with the barkings of uncouth Wolves, but so as every man might
quietly rest, and repose himself under his own vine and his own fig tree; we
have peace, the child of heaven; plenty, the child of peace; pleasure, the
child of plenty: We are raised up to our labors by the noise of the cock,
which chirping so merrily, can greet the morning, whereas others are raised up
to the battle, by the sound of the trumpet: so that in this respect also, God
has blessed us above other countries. Do but look about you, and whilst you
tremble at the plagues natural to your neighbors, bless God for your
safety. Behold the confines, Christendom; Polonia, and Hungary, 2 Reg. 18.
infested by the Turk, who like Senacherib, has sent his host to defy the
living Lord: Italy groaneth under the slavery of Antichrist; France sometimes
a flourishing kingdom, now made wretched through her own uncivil civil
wars; Germany for long time knew not what peace meant, and yet their war
is not ended, but for a time by truce suspended: Ireland has felt the fruits
of her rebellion: Bohemia is made the cockpit for all Christendom to fight
their battles in; only England remains like Gideons fleece, dry and secure,
when the rain of Gods judgment has wet in a manner the whole earth besides:
a peaceable Prince leads us, and the Prince of peace leads him: and therefore I
must needs once more say with the Psalmist, O that men would praise the Lord
for his goodness, and declare the wonders that he does for the children of
men. Well, but the Sun does not always shine, neither is there any time, or
day of iollitie without an evening of conclusion, if no cloud of disturbance
prevent it with ouercasting: and therefore though all things be well with us
now, and our land yet continues fruitful, yet it may be otherwise, and then,
considering that God is the author of all alterations, let us examine whether
we by our carriage and demeanor toward him, have not already deserved a
change or no: Let us after the example of the man going to war, Luke 14.31.
sit down, and take advice, whether we be able with ten thousand, to meet him
that comes against us with twenty thousand, or no: after this examination
held, doubtless we shall find that we have deserved that he should withdraw
his goodness from us, and that we have justly provoked him to send forth his
power against us, which if he do, we are not able to answer him one for a
thousand; the least and meanest of his creatures are too forcible for us, if he
set them to fight: an host of froggs, an army of grasshoppers, a swarm of
flies, dismayed King Pharao, and all his people; then si rem nostram sapimus, if
we be spiritually wise, whilst the enemy is a far off, ere Gods judgments
fall upon us, we will send forth our Ambassadors, our fervent prayers, and
serious repentance, to desire conditions of peace: and for our former misdeeds,
we should resolve, and promise amendment of life: and so much the rather should
we do this, because if we do duly observe it, he has already given us
fair warning to take heed. Does not the fire every year consume our mansions
in some part of our land? Hear we not of inundations of waters? with
unseasonable weather in the extremes? This may serve to testify that God is
angry, and to put us in mind of the deluge of our sins: the cry of them
reaches unto heaven, and there works our woe, by turning one year into
dryness, to make the land barren; and the next dissoluing into liquid tears,
and immoderate showers, dropping down for fatness, dearth and death. Quicquid
id est, timeo: howsoever the matter is, we may well fear that it is our
rebellion against God, that makes this commotion of the creatures against us:
has not the Lord of late time cast forth his ice like morsels? It will be
remembered whilst Chronicles can speak, that within these few years, the earth
was fast bound with a prodigious frost to Englands wonderment, when Thames was
paued for cart and carriage, on one day able to support a weight of wonder, and
on the next dissolved into liquid waters: at that time it pierced so deep into
the bowels of the earth, that the effects thereof as yet are sensible. Surely
this should warn us of our zeal to God-wards, more cold then isicles on a
winters day hanging at our doors: strange it is, that so many Sun-shines as
have been since, and showers of Gods mercies still powered upon us, should not
have thawed our frozen hearts, and bred an alteration of life in us. But not to
trouble you with recounting things past; observe but with me this judgment,
that even now hangs over you; now is your harvest come, at which time (as the
old saying is) God opens his barn doors, and inuites your labors to gather
your winter provision; but does not he himself use the blustering winds as his
flaile, to thresh the corn out of the ear, before you can get it from off the
earth?

Now has God spread his table, for so I may term the earth, and furnished it
with dainty cates and viands, with a rich store of corn and grass: but does
he not use immoderate showers, and unmerciful floods, as a voider to take all
away, before you have staid your stomachs? Think not that this comes by
chance, nor fix your eyes upon the arrow that wounds you, but upon the hand
that drew the bow; look higher then the clouds, and you shall see the finger
of God in the work, for the inter-course and change of weather is ordered by
his providence: Amos. 4.7.
I (says the Lord) have withheld the rain from you, when there was yet
three months to the harvest, I caused it to rain upon one city, and caused
it not to rain upon another city. And, Job 38.28.
Has the rain a Father? says Job, and who has begotten the drops of dew?
Ierem. 14.22.
And, Are there any among the vanities of the Gentiles that can cause rain?
says a Prophet, or can the heavens give showers? art not thou only he, o Lord
our God? This granted, scil. that the clouds are Gods bottles, and that he only
emptieth them when, where, and in what measure he will; it plainly appears,
that this unseasonable season, is his messenger, purposely sent, either 1. To
try our patience, or 2. To reclaim us from our sins.


1. If for the former end, we ought to be so far from grudging and murmuring at
it, that contrarily we should welcome it with a cheerful heart. When a man
would buy an earthen vessel, he will knock upon it with his hand, and judge
of the soundness of it by the sound: when God does knock upon us by any
cross, if we sound clearly and bear our selves cheerfully, it is a hopeful
sign, that we are meet for his acceptance; but if we return an hoarse noise
of murmuring and repining, it is a fearful token, that we shall be rejected.

2. But if this messenger be not sent so much to try our patience, as to
reclaim us from our sins, if these immoderate showers tell us that our
sins have kept no low water, the tide of them has ever been swelling, then
let us humble our selves before God by repentance, lest he humble us with
greater afflictions: and seeing that the waters of sin have descended down
into our souls, let us draw them up again with buckets of sighs, and pumpe
them out in rivers of tears: let our eyes gush forth with tears, in passion
for our selves, in compassion for others, because neither we nor they have so
kept the law of God as we ought: this if we perform, happily it may be a
means to prevent Gods further judgments, and to reconcile us again to his
favor: and every one of us ought to perform this, because that though this
judgment be not alike showed against our whole land, but some part, and
therein some persons do specially feel the smart of it; yet, tunc tua res
agitur, we should be so sensible one of another miseries, that we should take
these judgments that befall others, as warnings sent to admonish us. Those
upon whom the tower of Siloan fell, were they greater sinners then all the rest
in Jerusalem? I tell you no, says Christ, but except you repent, ye shall
likewise perish. In that any are spared, it is of his mercy: the Lord has
often heretofore, and even now has found us securely sleeping in our sins, as
David found Saul sleeping in a cave, cutting a piece of our garment, touching a
corner of our land with afflictions; and though we have all deserved to feel
the scourge of his judgment, yet of his mercy he leaves peace within our
Walls, plenty within our Palaces, making good the proverb concerning the
rainbow, scil. that Gods bow is without a bolt; he threatens much and warns
often, before he will suffer his whole displeasure to arise; what then, Shall
we continue in sin, that grace may abound? God forbid: nay, God has
forbidden it, for that will inhance his wrath, and improve his anger against
us; rather let us fear that the regions are not yet white for the harvest, the
sins of the land are not yet mellow for Gods judgments, but like a bottle
cast into the water, which whilst it is but partly full, leans to the one
side; but when it is filled to the brim, it sinketh directly to the bottom: so
we ought to fear, that though in respect of Gods judgments, our land yet
leans but to the one side; yet when those waters of Mara, those bitter waters
are brim full, when the sin of the land, the measure of iniquity is filled,
there is then nothing to be looked for, but an utter ruin and downe-fall. What
shall I say then? 1 Reg. 18.44.
Arise, quoth Elias to Ahab, I hear a sound of abundance of rain, prepare thy
Chariot, except thou pass quickly thou can not pass. Here the sound of the
rain prevented the danger that might have come by it: O that it would be so
with us, that being forewarned, we would be fore-armed, that the sound and
foretelling of the judgment, would be a means to prevent the execution
thereof: doubtless our sins have justly provoked Gods justice to proceed to
the chastisement of sinners, yet in his mercy he first puts the axe to the
root of the tree, to see if reformation of manners and amendment of life will
prevent the cutting down. Let us therefore make use of Gods admonitions, and
be schooled by them, lest if we continue in our sins, we force the Lord to
extend his wrath against us, and to turn our fruitful land into barrenness,
for the wickedness of us that dwell therein. Thus much shall serve for the
judgment, A fruitful land makes he barren.

II. Now we come to speak of the cause of the judgment, in these words, for
the wickedness of them that dwell therein. Although it be true that Almighty
God does visit some of his elect people, for no cause or crime by them
committed, as appears by the man that was blind from his birth: concerning
whom, John 9. verse. 1, 2, 3.
when the question was made to Christ, whether that judgment was befallen him
for his own sin, or for the sins of his parents, he answered, that it was
for neither, but that the works of God might be manifested in him: yet
notwithstanding this, I no where find it, that God ever bent his ire against a
whole kingdom, and made a fruitful land to become barren, till he was
thereunto urged by the sins of the people; but when men persist in sinning,
he then proceeds to punishing. There have been four flourishing Monarchies in
the world, and sin has let down the sinews of them all, and made them
barren: Lust dissolved the first Monarchy amongst the Assirians; Prodigality
supplanted the second of the Persians; Ambition dismembered the third of the
Grecians; hidden hatred and private malice wracked the fourth of the Romans.
Sin caused the flood that drowned the old world, brought the fire from heaven
that burnt Sodom and Gomorrah, opened the earth to swallow Corah, Dathan, and
Abiram: and how often did it provoke the Lord to punish his own people, even
his people Israel, which was dear unto him as the apple of his eye, and Signet
on his finger? So that this evil is the cause of all evils, it causes all
afflictions and calamities, all pain and penury, it depriueth us of all Gods
spiritual blessings and temporal benefits, and (still to put you in mind of
this present occasion) doubtless it is our sins that have caused these
immoderate showers and unseasonable weather, whereby the Lord makes our
fruitful land barren. This being thus, it should teach us, 1. To bewail our
sins past. 2. To beware of sins to come.


1. To bewail sins past: Shall the young Swallows, our unbridled youngsters
sing in the warm chimneyes; shall the lustful Sparrowes, noctiuagant
adulterers, sit chirping about our houses; shall the filching Iayes, secret
thieves, rob our Orchards, shall the Kite and Cormorant, devour and hoord our
fruits? And shall not the Doves mourn, and the voice of the Turtle be heard in
our land, for these enormities? Let not our hearts be so hid in the Maze of
vanities, that repentance cannot find them out; shall the heavens shed tears,
and the earth mourn for our sins, and shall not we be moved? Rather let us
have our eyes like the fish ponds of Hesbon standing full of water, that so we
may appear beautiful in the sight of our beloved Spouse: let us with David
put on sackcloth, and mourn with sorrow, that God may put it off and gird us
with gladness. And as we should bewail sins past, so

scil. 1. Improuidence, 2. Impertinent curiosity, 3. Inconsionableness in
the use of Gods creatures, 4. Unthankfulness; for these are special means
and motives, to cause the Lord to turn a fruitful land into barrenness.
First, we must not be improuident, but if we would have God to care for us, we
must care for our selves, and every one seek to live, either by the sweat of
his brain, or of his brow, painfully performing the duties of his calling. And
that done, for the event, and success of our labors, we must not be
impertinently curious, which is the second vice to be Haba. 1.16.
attributing their thriuing to their own industry, and for that cause slander
the frost and the hail, and murmur at whatsoever seems to cross their hope,
then they provoke God to take away the staff of their labors, I mean his
blessing from their labors, without which they are but vain and fruitless.
Therefore when we have prouidently done our best, we must patiently wait upon
the Lords pleasure for a blessing; and for the success, not be impertinently
curious, but freely refer that to Gods wise disposure. When God has blessed
our labors with increase, and we have the fruits thereof in our possession,
then we must not be unconscionable in the using, or rather abusing of his
Herodotus in Clio. Gindes is called Gihon, Genesis 2.
When the river Gindes had drowned one of Cyrus his white horses, the angry
King cut so many channels, into which the river was divided, that from
thenceforth it lost both depth, name, and glory. If those floods of abundance,
which through Gods blessing our land brings forth, drown not our white
horses, but our souls that should be white and spotless, then know that God
can divide those streams of plenty into many channels, he can draine and dry
them up, convey them into other men's hands, and dispossess us both of the name
and glory we had by them. When God gave his people corn, Ezech. 16.
and wine, and oil to use, and they abused them, he expostulated with them,
why they bestowed his gifts upon their Idols. When God bestows his blessings
upon us, he must needs be angry with us, if we spend them upon our vanity:
you are but stewards of that you have, dispose of it wisely, so as may be to
your comfort, and your masters glory, that he seeing your faithful usage,
may increase your store, waters from the sea, through the hollow cauernes of
the earth; at length they send their waters down into the sea again, in sign
of gratitude; the boughs, and branches of trees, when in the Spring time they
have received sap from the root, to make them bud and blossom, and flourish
with Summer fruit, at the fall of the leaf, they send it down again to the
root, to nourish it in the Winter season, and thereby testify their
thankfulness. Shall nature graft this affection in the senseless creatures,
and shall not reason guided by divine knowledge, lead men thereunto? Surely we
should glorify God for his benefits toward us, not only by word, but by
works also, all the actions of our life should be like so many several
voices, with a silver rhetoric sounding forth the praises of our God. Thus if
you do, not being wanting to your selves, through improuidence, living without
care, and without calling; nor (through too much depending upon your own
industry) impatiently murmuring at your crossed expectations; not being
unconscionable in the use of Gods creatures, nor unthankful to him for
benefits received; then doubtless the Lord (according to his promise) will
bless you, and yours: Deuteronomy. 7.13.
then you shall not plow the Land in vain, the Lord will say to the South,
give, and to the North, keep not back; then your land shall open her bosom
and bring forth her hidden treasure: and ye shall reap the fruits thereof in
due season; ye shall eat your fill and dwell therein in safety. To conclude,
remember this, that as you sow so must you reap. Hosea 8.7.
Sow not wind, says a Prophet, for fear you reap a whirlewinde for your
harvest: so say I to you, sow not wickedness, lest you reap barrenness; but
sow godliness, be provident, and take pains, be patient in waiting for
profit; having received, be conscionable in the using; and after use had,
forget not the giver, but be thankful to God for his blessings. Has God done
great things for us? then let us give great thanks unto the Lord: Does he
fundere beneficia? then let us fundere corda; ascendat gratia vt descendat
gratia: let our thankfulness duly ascend up to God, that his grace and
goodness may seasonably descend down to us, that so our land may flourish,
and the fruitfulness thereof not be turned into barrenness, for the
wickedness of us that dwell therein.

O Merciful God, we beseech thee to be unto our Nation according to thy name,
visit with favor the vine which thou have planted amongst us, and suffer not
the wild boar out of the wood to destroy it, nor the wild beast of the field
to eat it up; but spare us good Lord, spare thy people whom thou have redeemed;
pour thy wrath upon the heathen that have not known thee, and upon the people
that have not called upon thy name: but prosper them that seek the prosperity
of Sion; and be propitious to them that pray for the peace and plenty of
Jerusalem. Forgive the crying sins of this Land, and set a full period to thy
judgments that hang over it: and for the safeguard of our souls, we beseech
thee to walk in the midst of the golden Candlesticks, to sound forth the bells
of Aaron; to continue and enlarge the free passage of thy Gospel to us: and
for the preservation of our bodies, we pray thee, o Lord, to crown with thy
blessings of plenty and fruitfulness this our nation, make our land
seasonablie to yield forth her increase, that our threshing may reach unto the
vintage, Leuit. 26.5.
and the vintage unto the sowing time, that so thy glory may rest with us in
our land, till we come to rest with thee in thy land of glory. Grant this
merciful Father, we beseech thee for Christ Jesus thy Sons sake, to whom with
thee and the holy Ghost the blessed Trinity in unity, be ascribed honor,
glory, power, praise and dominion, now and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

