THE PRENTISES PRACTICE IN Godliness, and his true freedom. Divided into ten
Chapters. Written by B. P.

PROVERBS 17.2. A discreet Servant shall have more rule then the Sons that
have no wisdom, and shall have like heritage with the Brethren.

printer's device. Framed device of a fleur-de-lis with In Domino confido.
McKerrow number 269.

LONDON Printed by Nicholas Oaks, for John Bach, and are to be sold at his shop
in Popes head Palace. 1608.

TO THE RELIGIOVSly disposed and virtuous young men, the Apprentises of the City
of London, all happiness both in this life and in the life to come.
PYthagoras the Philosopher expressing the double course of man's life by the
letter Y, intimates that which our Savior Christ has more plainly set down
concerning the double way; whereof one has a strait passage and narrow gate at
the first, which few do embrace; but in the end thereof, there is great comfort
and rest, for it guides the passenger unto eternal happiness and salvation:
The other is wide and spacious at the beginning, whereby many travail, but in
the end they find great trouble and straitness, for it leads unto
everlasting woe and destruction. Both these ways are set before our eyes as
life and death; for we may not be idle, but of necessity must walk, seeing our
life is a pilgrimage, and choose either to travel the narrow way unto life, or
to run the broad way unto death. The way of life, is a religious profession,
a virtuous and conscionable carriage, when we give unto God, that which is
Gods; and to Caesar, our Magistrates and Masters, that which belongs unto
them. The gate of this way is narrow, and the passage strait: for the liberties
of flesh and blood must be restrained, our affections bridled, and the whole
man captiuated under the yoke of the obedience of Jesus Christ, as also such
whom we are to obey and serve under him. The way of death, is a sinful and
licentious life, when we serve sin and Satan, and make no conscience of
obedience neither toward god not man. The gate of this way in the beginning is
broad, and the passage easy, giving liberty and full head to our youthy
affections and lusts of the flesh, but the end is utter perdition and
straitnes. Wherefore let every young man, beholding these two ways, choose that
which leads unto eternal life in heaven, by a sanctified life for a time on
earth, walking sincerely with him who is the Way, the Truth and the Life. To
this end I have penned this ensuing. Tractate, which, well-beloved Brethren, I
have commended unto your favorable acceptance, that therein you might see which
is the narrow way, the way of life, and learn how to travel therein, neither
let that devilish proverb, a young Saint an old Devil, direct your course, but
endeavor being young to be Saints of God, and to dedicate your youth to him and
his service only, who undoubtedly will give you constancy to persevere, that
you may become Old Saints on earth, and at last a joyful end, that you may be
Blessed Saints in heaven, and live with him for evermore: to whose gracious and
merciful protection, in the mean time I commend you all. Amen.

Your ever loving Brother, B. P.

The Epistle to the Reader.
CHristian and Charitable Reader, many are the discourageme^ts that the
children of God receive at the hands of wicked men, in this iron and declining
age of the world, from the sincere embracing of the Gospel, or showing forth
the fruits of sanctification, in this crooked and sinful generation, but much
more from publishing any holy Treatise, tending to this purpose: to omit the
books that are written, not of virtue and verity, but of vileness and vanity,
which many offer now a days, as so many Sacrifices to the devil (by the which
as with so many cups of poiso^, he infecteth the hearts of millio^s of people)
what great delight the enemy of mankind takes herein, he that can see any
thing, may easily discern by the cursed instruments which he raises up from
time to time; as his children the Papists, whom we had thought (long again) had
been dead in their nests, yet now like serpents having cast their coats,
begin to lift up their heads out of their holes wi^th fresh and new colored
heresy, and with their poisoned pens (as a holy man of God says) have
defiled not ink and paper, but heaven and earth with their detestable and
satanicall wickedness. But to let them sink in their sin, til they come to
the bottom of hell, which is of old for the^ prepared; who sees not the whole
world is rocked asleep in the cradle of security, wallowing in their sins like
fishes in the sea? so that we may take up that complaint which the Lord
proclaimed from heaven in the days of Hosea, saying, The Lord has a
controversy with the world, because there is no truth, mercy, nor knowledge of
God, but by swearing, and lying, and stealing, and whoring they break out, and
blood touches blood: and being thus frozen in their dregs, having made a
league with death, and a covenant with hell it self, they are of the same
mind with these people of whom we spoke, saying, Yet let no man rebuke or
reprove another: for the people are as they that rebuke the Priest; not only
despising instruction, and refusing admonition, but they murmr at Moses and
Aron, and are ready to stone Caleb and Joshua, the two Captains of the Lords
host, and we are become their enemies for telling them the truth. Howbeit, when
the eyes of merciful men are set upon the^, and laboring to save their souls
from being condemned with the world, beseeching them to break up the fallow
ground of their hearts that the Lord might rain righteousness upon them, they
are ready to give them Steuens reward for his sweet Apology, Acts 7.
and though they have not the authority of the Magistrate, yet with the unruly
evil of the tongue, they assemble themselves (as the Prophet Jeremy speaks)
saying; Come, let us smite them: but how, with swords or staves? no surely, but
with the cursed weapon of the tongue, according to the custom of al wicked men
from time to time, with reprochings and reuilings, and with their venomous
arrows, as much as in them lies, to shut and pierce through the hearts of the
Saints of God, with that odious and damnable name of Hypocrite and dissembler,
so that we may say with the Prophet Jeremy: We are in derision daily, every one
mocketh us: and as he says else where; Woe is me that my mother has borne me
a contentious man, whomall the world hates. Yea surely so far may we be from
stirring one another up in this kind, that we may weep and sigh in secret, as
diverse of the Saints of God have done, and wish with this Prophet, Oh that my
head were full of water, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, Ier. 9.1.2.
that I might weep day and night for the slain of the daughters of my people!
Oh that I had in the wilderness a cottage of waifaring men! Yea surely if the
will of the Lord were, we could wish with the Prophet, that we had the wings of
a Dove, that we might fly to the uttermost parts of the earth, that we might
be out of the reach and rage of the wicked men; but such is the zeal of the
glory of God, wherewith his children are inflamed, and such is the nature of
faith, wherewith their hearts are touched, together with the large promises
wherewith they are allured, that in despite of devils or men, they have
always made conscience of this duty. Hence it is, that in the scriptures we
have so many examples of this kind. It was Peter's commission that when he was
converted, he must strengthen his brethren. The woman of Samaria, when Christ
came to her conscience she hides it not under a bushel, but runs into the
city with open proclamation, saying to her neighbors: Come, see a man that
told me all that ever I did. Yea we find that this has always been so
precisely observed that the children of God have never neglected it in the time
of greatest affliction that ever they did undergo; only two shall suffice in
stead of many: whereof the first is in the Lamentations, where the Church
speaks after this manner: Have you no regard all you that pass by this way,
Lament. 1 12.
to behold and see where there is any sorrow like unto my sorrow, which is done
unto me, wherewith the Lord has afflicted me in the day of his fierce wrath?
Wherein we see the perpetuity of the love of the children of God toward their
Brethren, that even when they were at deaths door they called upon their
neighbors to make use of the judgments of GOD. Answerable to this, is that
famous example of the Thief on the Cross, who notwithstanding the dolor and
pain wherein he languished, yet perceiving the desperate and fearful estate
of his fellow that he was in, sharply reproves him, and uses diverse
arguments and reasons to move him to lay hold of the Savior of the world as he
had done before he died. These examples no doubt together with the reasons
above specified, moved this new convert (being also unportuned by diverse of
his acquaintance) to publish this little Treatise, as a fruit of his
thankfulness, like David that would not offer a sacrifice of that which cost
him nothing; and yet has (as it seems to me) some blush or resemblance, with
that zeal wherewith the holy Prophet David was inflamed, when having received
special benefits from the Lord, he has these words: Psalm. 66.
Oh come hither all you that fear God, and I will tell you what the Lord has
done for my soul: making open proclamation as it were upon the Theater of the
world, or as he speaks, when having felt that sweetness, of the which this
author had a taste, he labors presently to impart it to others, saying, taste
and see how gracious the Lord is, Psalm. 34.
blessed is the man that trusts in him; ever using a borrowed speech familiar
to our senses, taken from the fashion of Merchants, who having brought some
rare and costly commodity from beyond the seas, are wont to permit a taste, and
give a sight, to the end the buyer may be the more induced to accept of the
same. And truly this is the practice of this new converted Prentise, who
having lien a long time sleeping in security, esteeming highly of the things of
this vain world, till it pleased the Lord in mercy to look upon him the
scales falling from his eyes, Cant. 2.8.
so that he perceived the Lord coming unto him, skipping over hills, and
leaping over mountains (meaning his sins, as may appear by that we read in
Rom 8. as one awaked out of a dream, he maruailed and reioiced greatly at his
wonderful deliverance, and being desirous to make many partakers of his
happiness, he takes his pen and writes this little Treatise and Labor of
love, consisting in (four) special heads, as appears in the first leaf of
this book, concerning the manner of it you are not to expect much painted
eloquence, filed phrases, figures, allusions, which have little use more then
to tickle the ears; but even with all humility and meeknes, out of his own
experience, wishes comfort by the comfort wherewith he was comforted, of God.
Here I remember part of a story in Samuel, where it is thus written: 1 Samuel
17.8
And Eliab his eldest brother heard when he spoke unto the^ and was very angry
with David, and said, why come thou down hither, and with who^ have thou
left the sheep? I know thy pride and the malice of thine heart., etc. Even so I
fear me, there be many Eliabs senior to the young servant of God David, that
will not only impute this work to pride of heart, but will ask, With whom
have thou left thy sheep? that is, how he has discharged his duty to his
master, judging it a matter unlawful for him to meddle withal, because he
shall offer injury to his master in the practice hereof. For answer whereunto,
we are to observe a difference according to the nature and quality of the place
and calling; Some service perhaps will warrant that, which others do utterly
deny them: for art thou an artificer and of an occupation? thou have not this
liberty without extraordinary allowance of thy master. On the contrary, is he
a trades man, and using traffic? then the most and chiefest of his business
is in receiving and delivering of commodities, in the which much vacant time is
idly spent: and happy are you, and blessed of God, that have such a servant; you
may be sure to be well and faithfully dealt withal in the charge committed unto
him, when others are wickedly abused. But if this suffice not, know you that
he had extraordinary allowance of his kind and favorable master. Moreover, I
am of that priuity and acquaintance with him, that I may protest in the sight
of God, and before men, that this virtuous Prentise, and sanctified young man,
has used of his own virtuous disposition, to rise two or three hours in the
morning, before he was employed in his masters affairs, which as it was a
thing commendable, proceeding from a good inclination: so surely now is it much
more praise worthy, being found in the way of righteousness, because the
teachers thereof are highly to be commended, so that we are not always to
reprove and contemn servants in this kind, lest in so doing we give a hard
censure of David himself, (of whom we spoke even now.) But happily you will
reply and say, that David came in zeal of Gods glory, to take the shame from
Israel, which was much dishonored by the uncircumcised Philistine, a fearful,
great and huge monster. In nature I answer that, Goliath never blasphemed the
Lord of hosts more then we, nor ever had more fingers and toes of deformity, I
mean Papists and Atheists, which are in indeed the weapons and natural lives
of our spiritual Goliath, so that the cause then of both being not much unlike,
the answer that follows shall not unfitly be applied, though not in the same
measure of grace, wisdom and modesty, yet in the same nature of zeal, truth
and sincerity: answer with him in the 29. verse: Grave Fathers, masters and
superiors, what have I done, is there not cause? But if this Apology seem
insufficient, observe with me breefly the benefit that comes hereby, and the
fault considered will easily be wiped away. In the first place then it brings
a comfort to the Church of God, when they shall see the prophesies fulfilled,
and those promises performed which long since was declared to fall out in the
latter age of the world, Esaias. 11.9.
that the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the Lord, Joel. 8.
as the sea is covered with with waters. Again, Your daughters shall
prophecy, your old me^ shall dream dreams and your young men shall see visio^s.
Psalm. 8.
And also upon the servants will I power out my spirit. Again, Out of the
mouth of Babes have thou ordained strength, because of their enemies.
Notwithstanding these prophesies, I grant, chiefly fulfilled at the coming of
Christ, yet in respect of the perpetuity of it, it is to remain until the
number of the elect be accomplished; yea, and we that are now living have
seen the extraordinary power and operation of it, if we consider since the
time of Luther, how the Angel flying from the midst of heaven, Revel. 14.6
having an everlasting Gospel in his mouth to preach to the nations that dwell
upon the earth, saying with a loud voice: Fear GOD, give glory to him: an
unspeakable and peculiar favor of GOD, as our Savior Christ says; Blessed
are the eyes that see those things which you see, and the ears that hear
those things which you hear; being the only means to bring us into the
favor of God and men, that it may be said of us, Cant. 6.9.
as it was of his own spouse: Who is this that loeketh forth as the morning,
fair as the Moon, pure as the Sun, terrible as an army with banners? Yea
then we shall be precious to the Lord, who so touches us, touches the apple
of his eye, and he will say to our enemies: Cant. 3.5
I charge you O you daughters of Jerusalem, by the Roe, and by the Hindes of
the field, that you stir not up nor waken my beloved until she please. Yea
then shall we be set as a seal upon his heart, and as a signet upon his arm:
for love is stronger then death: Ielosie is cruel as the grave, the coals
thereof are fiery coals, and a vehement flame: much water cannot quen^r love,
neither can the floods drown it. If a man would give all the substance of his
house for love the world would greatly contemn it. Cant. 8.1
Secondly, it much aduanceth, declares, and sets forth the power of the
Gospel; when men are made of Lions, Lambs, their natures being changed, that
they come willingly in the day of assembly, the love of God constraining them
and the blessing of God upon them, causing their sons to be as the plants
growing up in their youths, and their daughters as the corner stones graven
aft r the manner of Apelles, etc. So that other nations being our Judges are
forced to say of us: Psalm. 144.7
Happy are the people that are in such a case, yea blessed are the people whose
God is the Lord Iehoua. Thirdly, it is exceeding comfortable; and no less
honorable to the grave fathers, and faithful learned preachers of our age,
when they shall see the blessing of God upon their labors, and their children
which they have begotten into the faith by the word of truth: Psalm. 127
like arrows in the hand of the strong man, and are not ashamed to speak
before their enemies in the gate. So that they have no need of the approbation
of men, or letters of recommendations their Epistles being written not with
ink and paper, but in the hearts of their children, and shines in the world
to the praise and glory of God.

Lastly a notable motive and provocation to incite and stir up the minds of
those that are too slack and negligent in this kind, and may also be used as
a whetstone to sharpen and set an edge upon finer wits, that so all the members
of Christ both learned and unlearned, may meet and join foot to foot, and
shoulder to shoulder, opposing themselves against their great and common
adversary, and being directed by one spirit, may utter their voices both by
prayer and by preaching, that we may cause the kingdom of Antichrist to fall
down like the walls of Jericho; that so, if it be the Lords will, we that are
now living may see that with the eyes of our bodies, which Saint John saw so
long since with the eyes of his spirit, and so with holy rejoicing and
gladness of heart, we may say with blessed Saint John; It is fallen, it is
fallen, great Babylon, and is become a cage of unclean birds. Now if any shall
ask of me, who are you, and what is your name, whose judgment the reader
should so much reverence? In this behalf, I answer: If I were one of learning
and estimation, perhaps I might carry thee away not using any great reason or
demonstration. On the contrary, if of no note and quality, thou would hardly
be brought to embrace it, though I bring strong and forceable arguments and
reasons. I refer thee therefore to the book it self, which is able to commend
it self, to the conscience of any indifferent reader, whose ears being
sanctified tries words, as the mouth tastes meat. Only this I will say with
the Aapostle James; Job. 34.3.
Have not the faith in respect of persons: and then I dare assure my self the
Lord shall have glory, and his chi^ldren comfort. The which upon the knees of
my soul, I crave of his goodness, and that he will increase in the hearts of
his Saints saving faith, and with faith virtue, and with virtue, knowledge, and
with knowledge temperance, and with temperance patience, and with patience
godliness, and with godliness brotherly kindness, and with brotherly
kindness love, that you may make your calling and election sure, so that you
may never fall.

By him that prays daily for the peace of Sion, and longs to see Jerusalem
in her pefect beauty.

T. R.

The contents of the Chapters following in this Book.
CHAP. 1. Of Gods graces and benefits, in free mercy bestowed upon man, that
thereby he may be moved to serve his divine majesty. fol. 1. 2. 3. CHAP. 2. Of
the infinite and unspeakable benefit of Christ's death, and m^ns great
ingratitude notwithstanding, which all things whatsoever in their kind
condemn. fol. 4.5.6. CHAP. 3. Of the most miserable estate of the Reprobate
both in this world and in the world to come, as also of the most blessed and
happy condition, here and hence, of those who fear God. fol. 11. 12. CHAP. 4.
Of man's foolish and fearful delay of prayer and true repentance, till the
uncertain hour of death and sudden departure. fol. 19. 20. CHAP. 5. Of Gods
manifold and good means to bring us to repentance and reconciliation with him,
if we have any spark of grace in us, 28. CHAP. 6. Of three excellent means of
good government. fol. 38. 39. CHAP. 7. Of the good means to awake us out of
the sleep of sin, and to quicken us to a new conversation. fol. 47. 48. CHAP.
8. Of man's lamentable frailty and weakness ever to be suspected, and the
desire he should have to be reconciled with God in Christ. fol. 53. 54. CHAP.
9. Of true repentance and the notable benefit thereof fol. 59. 60. CHAP. 10. of
the excellent good, and profit of afflictions to Gods true children. fol. 67.
Lastly, two prayers annexed to be said in a private family both morning and
evening.
printer's device. Ornament of a lion's face over a shield and two owls.
McKerrow number 215.

The Prentises practice in godliness, and his true freedom.
CHAP. 1.
IT was a notable saying (my dear and well-beloved brethren in Christ) whosoever
was the Author, That there is nothing great on earth but Man, and nothing great
in man but his soul; and therefore as all creatures admire and serve, and
benifit man the wonder of the world; so should man himself also admire and
tender, and seek the behoof and advancement of his soul the wonder of
wonders: for this is our glory, our crown, our perfection, our very life; save
this and save all.

But I know not how it comes to pass: This which should be our chief and
only care, the most part of men cast behind their backs; and they that are
taken to husband other matters well and prudently, in this are so unthrifty and
ill husbands, that they set all at six and seven, and suffer that only
precious thing (which ouerballanceth the whole world) to go to irrecouerable
wrack and ruin.

So that the Lords prophets of our time, have even as just cause as ever
Jeremy had, to take up that sad complaint: Ier. 12.
The earth is fallen to utter desolation, for that there is no man that
considers in his heart, no man that pondereth aright his own estate: Iere.
12. But Atheism and prophanenes, and secure licentiousnes, have gotten such
sway, that scarce any man believes God to be God, scarce any man thinks he
has a soul to save, they laugh, they make merry, they feast, they frolic,
they sing care away all the day long, as if heaven were but a dream, hell but
a fable, the soul an idle title of a thing which is not, and themselves sent
hither to no other end but to sport and play, and follow the lusts and vanities
of their wicked hearts. The Lord has planted us in a good soil, he has put
fresh earth about us, he has prunde us, and set a ditch and a wall to incircle
and fence us, and now he longs for the first ripe fruits, and we are all
become like the summer gatherings, there is not a cluster to present unto him.
And therefore many a time ere this, but that some good vinedresser has
entreated we may stand yet one year longer, there had been set to us a
hatchet and a fire (an unquenchable fire) the just reward of such unprofitable
trees, as do but cumber the ground wherein they grow.

O my brethren, that we would be once but so wise as to see our folly, and the
fearful danger we stand in by means thereof. Has God created us in his
own Image, that we should thus vilely and continually deface his glorious
likeness? Has Christ redeemed us from the power of the Devil with no less
price the^ his own heart blood, that voluntarily we should cast our selves
into the bondage of Satan? Has he by offering up himself for us, purged us
from sin, that we should afresh run headlong to uncleanness? Has he therefore
made us heirs of heaven, that through our own default we should be firebrands
of hell? Has he therefore saved our souls, that we should negligently and
wilfully cast away souls and bodies for ever.

Where is our zeal to Godward? where is our reverent fear of his majesty?
where is our Christianity? where is our faith and godliness? where is our thanks
we give to the Lord for his so innumerable benefits? where is our service and
obedience we yield to our Lord Jesus Christ for his saving health? nay where is
our very reason wherein we differ from bruit beasts, who by nature are lead to
desire and follow things profitable to them, and to shun the hurtful: and yet
we having the direction of reason, and the illumination of grace besides, have
no desire of everlasting profit, nor fear of endless destruction?

What if God should instantly send forth the decree of his wrath upon us to
root us out of the Land of the living, and would receive no intercession or
atonement for us, as he threatened his own people when they had provoked him to
wrath, that though Noe, Job and Daniel should beg for them, yet he would not
hear them, nor should his affection be toward such a people?

Oh my brethren, if this should be to us, it had been good for us we had never
been borne, yea the unreasonable beasts and senseless creatures, the most
ugly things of nature were in happier case then we: for they have no reckoning
to make when their life is gone out of them, or their substance dissolved, but
then begins our woeful audit, then our debts and arrerages shall be produced
against us, then shall we hear that heavy sentence, Bind him hand and foot,
and cast him into utter darkness, whence he shall not come out till he have paid
the uttermost farthing. But the Lord in mercy has yet spared us (though it be
not long since that he made the grave to open his widest mouth upon us) it is
yet called to day, his eye is yet ready to pity us, and his ears are open to
hear us; let us not harden our hearts and provoke him as we have done with
our wickedness and impenitencie, but let us both soundly and suddenly convert to
him, and he will receive us and embrace us, and his fierce wrath shall be
turned from us. Oh how well it becomes a man (says the wise Hebrew) when he is
reproved, Eccles. 20 4.
to show repentance, for so shall he escape wilful sin. Consider what I
say, and the Lord give you and me understanding in all things.

And now let us enter into some larger discourse of this matter, that we may
the better see our vanity and folly in going on in our sins, and putting off
our repentance and conversion (as we do) from day to day, and from time to
time, to the high displeasure of almighty God, and the fearful hazarding of
our own salvation. And because I speak to such as are (many) of liberal
education, and (all) of good capacity, and apprehension, I will tie my self
to some order in the handling hereof, not that I would seem to take
scholarship upon me, which I do freely confess I have not, but for that I have
in other matters found the profit of order, both to the writer, and to him that
reads.

First therefore I beseech you, as you love and tender your own souls (which
I do now love also, ever since I began to love mine own) consider with me not
slightly, but even with a deep and earnest thought, the tremblable estate of a
man unconverted, and the dangerous inconveniences we run into, by our
impenitencie and obstinate persisting in our wicked ways. And I trust (by the
cooperation of Gods grace) though every inconvenience severally cannot move
us, yet all of them jointly together shall affect our hearts and stir us up to
some more care and conscience of being that which we would be called.

CHAP. 2.
Almighty GOD, in the creation assigned to every thing in the world some
particular end, and impressed in their nature, an appetite and desire to that
end continually, as to the very point and scope of their being: As we see birds
make their nests, and breed up their young: beasts skuffle for their fodder and
pastorage: Fishes flote up and down the rivers; Trees bear fruit; Flowers
send forth sweet odours, herbs their secret virtues; Fire aspires upward with
all his might; Earth has no rest till it come into his proper region: Waters
post upon the neck one of another, to the bosom of the maine; Air pusheth it
self into every open voidnes under heaven. This is clear in our own
observation, and experience: and shall we think that man (the most noble
creature) (for whose coming all this pomp and show was set in order, as for
their Lord and King) was made in vain, and had not his peculiar end appointed
him also proportionally to the noblenes of his quality and condition? Yes
doubtless, that God that ca^ never err nor ouersee in his works, allotted unto
man the worship and service of his maker in this world, and the enjoying of the
same his makers glory for ever in the world to come, as his maine object and
aiming point, whereto he ought to tend and refer himself all his days.

Now for man to swerve from this end, and to serve the Devil, the world and
his sensual lusts; and being made for heaven, to follow the direct line that
leads to hell, is to show himself more base and degenerate, then the most base
and brutish creatures in the world, and to be condemded and cried out upon by
them continually: for they keep to this day without digression, their proper
ends and assignements, enioined them by their maker in the creation: only man
is irregular, man alone powers out himself, into all kind of riot and
disorder.

Oh my brethren turn again, and consider sadly of this point; Shall the little
Be and the Emmet so carefully do Gods work, and fulfill the task which he
has set them? shall the senseless stone, being forced to mount upward against
his inclination, sink and descend again as fast, till it come to the center
which is his home and end? and shall man (the Image of God) run bias from his
end, and do every other thing more then the work prescribed unto him? shall
they (silly reaso^lesse things) keep a direct course without any voluntary
swaruing, and yet have no tutor or remembrancer? And shall we even wilfully
stray and vary, having our own hearts filled full of understanding and
judgment, and being so many ways called upon, and pulled by the sleeue, as it
were, beside? Gen 6.
Shall God take joy of all other creatures, and only repent that he made man?
what a shame of shames is this to us? we read in the prone and groueling faces
of beasts that they were made but for the earth upon which they pore: And do
we not likewise in our own erect and lofty countenances, that our end is
heaven, and heavenly things, as our upright shape, and high-raised looks tend
thitherward continually. But what shall I say? James 4.
to him that knows to do well, and does it not, to him it is sin, yea finne
with a witness.

Again, where as man having by his wilful fall and disobedience lost those
excellent powers and privileges, wherewith at the first he was endued; and
enthralled himself for ever to sin, death and hell; as it was forethreatned
he should, if he did taste of the forbidden tree: it pleased the Lord, out of
his unutterable love to his choicest piece of workmanship, to send his own
everlasting Son out of his bosom to pay down the inestimable ransom of his
innocent blood for him; and in stead of the earthly paradise which he had lost,
to give him heaven (the seat of his own Majesty, and the habitation of this
Angels and purest spirits) for his inheritance, conditionally, that for his
freedom and bounty he should serve the same his Lord in holiness and
righteousness before him all the days of his life.

And surely if any Alien being by endenization made a member of the same body
with the natural children and inheritable to the common liberties and
commodities, do willingly acknowledge himself bound and answerable to the
public laws of that country wherein he is denized; much more ought we that
are forrainers and slaves by birth, being infranchised and made free denizens
of heaven, and fellow citizens with the Saints of God; much more (I say) ought
we in lue of this so beneficial legitimation to conform our selves to the
obedience of the heavenly laws, and ready to execute the most just charges
which our God and king has imposed upon us. Ignorance of these laws, none of
us can pretend; both because they are so short, and compendious (for God
delivered them at first but in ten words, and our Savior has since abridged
those ten into two, comprising notwithstanding in that Epitome the very end of
all law and equity) and also because we of all places of the land are by Gods
ministers, the pastors of our souls, so plainly and carefully taught them
from time to time, as afterward shall be showed.

Now then for us (the premises waighed) to carry ourselves toward this most
gracious Lord in such a disloiall fashion, to shake off the yoke of his
precepts, and kick al his commandments aside one after onother, when they lie
in the way of our profit or our pleasure, and to go on with a bold face and a
high hand, multiplying sin upon sin, without any mind of turning to better
ways, til we be wrapped with age, or pined with sickness, or worn out with
sin, that even sin her self castes us off, as unserviceable: what rebellion
or ingratitude can there be co^parable to this? O my brethren, is this to serve
God in holiness and righteousness, not one, but all the days of our life,
from the first to the last? Is this the state of life we hope to go to heaven
in? have the unsanctified any title of the inheritance of the Saints? or the
children of the Devil, to the blessed freedom of the Sons of God? Is their
part in the salvation of Christ, that daily and hourly crucify him afresh,
and in a jolly scoffing bravery, deride his passion, as if his back were broad
enough to bear all their filth?

Do we look that the Lord should perform the grant when we fail in the
condition? is not our breach of covenant with him a frustrating of his
indentment with us? Believe it my brethren, believe it, whilst we remain in
our sins, the Lords grant remains void; we cannot claim the benefit of one
drop of Christ's blood, nor of the least part of his merits: the shaken sword of
the Cherubin hangs over us, we stand banished from the paradise of Gods
favor, and liable to the seuerest penalty of those his laws which we have
violated; only so long as that penalty is not inflicted, so long does the Lord
expect if at any time we will renew our covenant by repentance, and so escape
out of the snare of the Devil, of whom we are holden captive to do his
pleasure.

Moreover, when we were sprinkled in the holy Lauer of Baptism (which is as it
were the womb of the Church) where our regeneration or new birth was first set
a foot, we vowed a vow to God, which ought of all Christians to be most holily
observed; that we would perfect that new birth of ours every day more and
more by believing his word, obeying his commandments, mortifying our flesh,
co^pressing our lusts, resisting the devil, renou^cing the world and fighting
ma^fully under his ba^ner against all oppositio^, that finaly having finished
our course we might receive the crown of life, which he has promised to them
that continue faithful unto the death.

Now our impenitencie and weltring in sin, is not only a not fostring, but a
very killing of our spiritual nature in the first seed or kernel; a breaking
of our vow to God; nay a very denying of God and his word, an abject yielding
us to his and our enemies, a cowardly running away from the spiritual battle
at the first stroke striking; a wilful losing of our immortal garland, and an
occasion to make Christ (the great captain and finisher of our faith) utterly
to casheere us out of his band, as having in us no sparkle of that generosity
and braue-mindednes, which ought to be in such as wear his colors, and bear
arms under his standard.

The wisdom of the world is, to retain to the strongest part: and methinkes
we having been bred up under the worlds wing, should by this time have taken
out that point of wisdom, and retain to Gods side: for his is the strongest
and surest side. O my brethren, look back to your Baptism, and learn to
amend. Let not the royal Character which God has set upon us by the ministry
of his Church be any longer thus vilely blurd and defaced by our enormous
sins. Let us not break our vow to God, lest he bind fast his curse to us:
Leave not the Lord of hosts, to whom we have given our names, and those
powerful legions of his blessed Angels (our consederates and guarders in his
quarrel) to join with the Devil, whom we have defied, and with the world, and
sin and the flesh, (a sort of cowardly rebels) which will themselves cut our
throats when we least suspect them. But let us newdeep our selves in the water
of contrition, and that will fetch again the primitive color, which was put
upon us in the day of our Baptism.

Over and beside all this, whereas the patience and bountifulness, and long
suffering of our God, in sparing us so many years, and waiting for our
amendment (though in the mean time we force him to complain that he is
pressed under our sins as a cart is pressed under a hard load of sheues) I
say, whereas this gracious patience of his should lead us to repentance; we by
continuing in sin, do abuse his patience, and heap up greater wrath upon our
heads, against the day of wrath, and declaration of the just judgment of God,
which will suddenly overtake us. God is provoked (says the Psalmist) every
day: here is forbearance: but what follows? 2. if a man will not turn (after
all Gods waiting) the^ he will whet his sword, and be^d his bow, and make ready
his arrows against such prouokers.

When we see wrath in a man's face, it is an argument that he will strike, and
we are wont to shun and give back from him. Let us take heed, Gods face looks
very angerly, we have dared him so long, and put him so to it, that he cannot
hold his fingers, he must needs break out into blows: And the blows of his
anger are no light stripes, but even deaths wounds, as all the Land from Dan to
Beersheba, will bear witness.

O then my Brethren, if this Lion roar, who will not tremble and crouch before
him? if he knit his brows that measures heaven with his span and waigheth the
mountains in a balance, and cleaves the rocks with his voice, who dares
look him in the face, who shall be able to abide his frowns? were we as huge
and strong as Behemoth or Leuiathan, he will spurn us as a chip, and trample
us under his feet as the mire in the streets, if we incense his majesty, or
stir up his wrath and jealousy against us. Apoc.
The Kings, and great men, and stout Captains and Warriors, hide themselves
in caves, and in holes of the earth from the fear of the Lord when he rises
up to be avenged of sinners.

O what shall the shrub in the wilderness do, when the Oaks of Bashan, and the
Cedars of Libanus are thus shaken! how dare such silly worms and grasshoppers
as we, confront the almighty, and provoke him yearly and hourly with new and
new sins, (never once renewing our repentance) at the blasting of the breath
of whose displeasure the hills melt, and the foundations of the world shake
and are removed? Though he have worn one rod of pestilence to the stumps upon
us, and thrown it by, standing and looking at our behavior after it, he can
call for another and another if our great hearts be not come down, and
repentance and a change appearing in our lives; or he has famine swords wild
beasts, bedlem waters, treasures of snow and hail, lightnings, thunderbolts
etc. or he has fevers, palsies, gouts, choliks, ca^kers wolfes, tympanies,
etc. to scourge presumptuous sinners that will not be warned: his store house is
never unfurnished with rods, and scorpions too, if we put him to it. Surely my
Brethren we are transformed with Nebuchadnezar into beasts, and the hearts and
understandings of men taken from us, if this consideration move us not to
abominate our sins, and cease from our prouocations, wherewith we have provoked
this God of anger against us, especially when he has put up so many abuses and
villainies of ours all our life hitherto, we justly deserving every moment to
be rooted out, and he being able many thousand ways to have executed the
sentence of our destruction upon us.

CHAP. 3.
THat which has been said in the former chapter, might suffice to work in us
a mind of repentance, and a change of life, if we carried in every of our
breasts a meek and docible heart; but because the greater number (which far
exceedes the better) have their essential part of a harder kind of temper, we
must beat upon them with more strokes, and prosecute this matter with further
declaration.

As the weldoing of a man after he is reconciled to God, fills him full of
inward peace and comfort and makes him cheereful and confident in all the
cumbers and evils of life; so it is the property of sin to discomfort and
torment the sinner, to wound his conscience, to fill his soul full of terror
and perplexity, and to aggrauate every little outward adversity. Isay.
There is no peace says my God, to the wicked; but terror and trembling is in
all their life. They are possessed with a spirit of unrest, and held in in
bondage under every oppression of their own conceits. For as they that fear
God, need fear nothing so they that fear not him ca^ not choose but fear all
things.
* The ungodly fly (says Solomon) when none pursues him, but the righteous
is confident as a Lion. And Moses in Leuit. amongst other evils threatened to
the transgressors of Gods commandments alleges this: The wagging of a leaf
shall make them afraid, they shall flee as if a sword did chase them, and they
shall fall no man pursuing the^. And else where directing his speech to the
same men: The Lord (says he) shall give thee a trembling heart, and dazeling
eyes, and sorrow of mind; Thy life shall hang before thee, and thou shall fear
both night and day, and shall have none assurance of thy life: In the morning
thou shall say, would God it were evening, and at evening thou shall say, would
God it were morning: for the fear of thine heart which thou shall fear, and
for the sight of thine eyes, which thou shall see.

A miserable state of all those men of reprobate minds, which have sold
themselves to work wickedness upon the earth, and cast the fear of the Lord
behind them; they dread even the safest things, and the more they offend the
more they fear, their whole life is a butchery of themselves, and all their
days as the days of a prisoner that is condemned. They think every little
crack to be the voice of ruin, and every idle sound, the forerunner of
destruction. The beams of their chambers seem to deceive them, and the walls
and rafters to lay hold upon them, their own shadow is suspected to betray them
and the stones of the street to conspire against them; wheresoever they go they
think they are descried, and Gods executions are out to take the^, as a man
that is far in debt, thinks in every window stands a creditor to observe him,
and almost every one he meets to be a Sergeant to arrest him.

There lodges in the midst of them a domestical fury, which eftsoons
breaks off their beginning rest, and scourges them (as one speaks) with
silent lashes, which are not heard of the nearest about them. If they be not
yet punished, they look that they shall be. If they be, the present feeling
of evil induces still fear of worse, when one peril is past, they think
another is behind; and when that is escaped yet a greater is to come: so still
the first fear is inherited by the second, and the second by the third, and
one by another, that they cannot recover any sparkle of confidence, nor promise
themselves one minute of security.

What they deserve, that they expect ever, and to expect pain, is many times
more painful then to endure pain; every thing is against them, for they are
against themselves; whatsoever is spoken or read, they fear it is spoken and
read of them: when any thing is faulted, their own fault presently comes in
their way. Every nod and winck they imagine, notes something concerning them,
they are their own accuser, their own witness, their own judge, their own
hangman, they find no place to fly unto, for their conscience still pursues
the^, and themselves of themselves are wounded and thrust through. Ask of the
days of old, and they will speak it, and the years of passed generations,
and they will confirm it, that those terrors and disco^forts are the fruits of
sin: inquire of Caine, Baltazar, Saul, Judas, Nero, Julian, and they will all
cry with one voice, that the pangues, prickings, vnrests, and frights
appropriate to all wicked impenitent persons, are (as it were) certain flashes
of the flames of hell fire. But what need we raise up such a cloud of ancient
deceassed witnesses to confirm the point we have in hand? speak any wicked
man amongst us (and let his tongue be a true ambassador) whether he feel not
in himself some measure of this forlornnes, whether his heart be not often as
cold as a stone in his belly, and all his strength as water powered out upon
the earth. And though he strengthen himself and strive never so to expel from
his mind this vncheerefulnes and dastardly faintnes, borrowing many times of
the body the solace and delight of some counterfeit pleasures, whereby he may
seem to have some peace (like the sick man, who in his sleep feels not his
pain) yet after that short and sower mingled sweetness he returns to the
chain of his old bondage, and his wonted gripings seize afresh upon him.

O my brethren, this biting memory of sin, this worm of conscience which
will not be bribed, this pale hartlesnes that seazeth upon us when the offense
is committed, makes the most obdurate sinner sometimes to relent and condemn
his own doings; and to say to himself, Sure, to do well is far better.

This makes the most impudent adulterer to think sometimes the chaste married
bed to yield more contented rest, then the wanton couch of the strange woman.

This makes the dru^kard sometimes to think the moderate use of Gods creatures
with thanksgiving, to be much better both for body and soul, then his vain
and beastly excesses.

This makes the murderer and furious man sometimes to prefer peace and
gentleness before the bloody hand or the quarrelling tongue.

This makes the spiteful wretch, to think him that loves and benefiteth
another, to be more blessed and beloved of God, then he that with a lowering
brow plotteth and practices for his neighbors hurt.

This makes the deceitful tradesman to think sometimes one well gotten groat
in truth and conscience, to be greater riches then many pounds of wicked
thrift.

This makes the covetous oppressor to think sometimes the liberal Almoner and
good housekeeper to be more acceptable to God and makes then the greedy churl
that makes the poor offer to his box, and wrings pence out of the hirelings
wages.

O why should we delight in evil when the Authors themselves are displeased
at it, and assure us that upon the reckoning there is nothing but terror and
discomfort to be gained by it?

And why should we not love well doing, when the very enemies thereof commend it?
as being the ground of a quiet conscience, and that is like a continual feast,
where there is mirth and cheer all the day long. O my brethren, it is the
inward pureness of the heart that never makes us change color: it is innocence
that never galls the mind, never pricks the inward parts: it is seasonable
repentance that breeds that internal glee, which is a certain taste of the
future felicity, and a beginning of the joys of heaven in us, and that which
makes us feel incredible pleasures amidst the most grievous troubles and
miseries of this life.

Once (says a godly writer) man was in paradise: Now paradise is in man, and
that is the joy of a good conscience: which makes him confident and secure and
resolute at all times; so that though the heaven should melt, and the earth be
removed, yet he is unshaken, for he knows in whom he has believed, and if
the Lord be God, he shall not miscary.

Would thou have this security, this peace, this boldness? would thou live
this blessed life? would thou be without frights, without checks, without
prickings in thy heart? then fly from sin, abandon all that may offend the
Majesty of GOD, work out your salvation with fear and trembling, seek the
Lord, call upon him, trust in him, thank him, swear not by his sacred name;
profane not his sabbaths, kill not, quarrel not, hate not in thy heart, let not
the sun go down upon thy wrath; defile not thy body through lust; cosen not,
oppress not, slander not, covet not another man's, labor to say truly both
now and to your lives end, that thou may say with the blessed Apostle, Acts.
24.
I have endeavored to walk in all good conscience always, both toward God
and toward men; and that same peace of God which passes all understanding,
shall keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus.

But if you let go the raines to your old licentiousnes, and be more wicked to
day, then yesterday, and to morrow, then to day; if you say to the good motions
of Gods spirit, as the false friend in Solomon to his neighbor, Go, and come
again to morrow: or as Festus to Paul, when I have a convenient time, I will
hear further of you: and so pass along your days in all iollity and voidnes
of care (your things seeming to be in peace because the strong man has full
possession of all) yet when the lease of your life shall be expired, and the
parting hour is come upon you, then your sin which slept before the door,
shall start up and lie heavy upon your soul and conscience; and then howsoever
the Lord may have suffered you to thrive, and grow great in the world, yet you
shall find that it is not your soft beds, nor your precious waters, nor your
sweet music, nor your pleasant company, nor your sealed bags, nor your rich
purchases nor your statutes and evidences can ease your mind, or buy you this
peace, this blessing, this inestimable treasure, which a religious life might
have purchased before.

Beyond all this, whilst we remain impenitent, GOD hears not our prayers.
Psalm. 66.
If I incline my heart to any wickedness, the Lord will not hear me: Prou.
15.
the sacrifice of the wicked is abomination to the Lord, nay their very prayer
is turned into sin. And what comfort can we look for in the troubles and
dangers incide^t to our life, when that which should be our refuge and shelter
to resort to, increases our danger, and in stead of bearing of the storm,
falls down like a ruinous house upon our heads? we are besides out of the
compass of Christ's intercession, he excepts worldings and wicked ones by name
out or his prayers: And if he will not plead our cause, who dares speak for
us? if we be out of his protection, where is our assurance? any desperate
villainy, may strick his dagger to our heart: the Devil may tear us in
pieces, and carry us to hell, there is none to succor us.

Moreover whilst we take part with sin against God, all the creatures take
Gods part against us: the horse has his heels ready to strike out our breath,
the bull has his horns ready to goare us, the boar his tuskes to haunch us,
the dog his phangs to pull out our throats, the tiles over our heads are pressed
to brain us, the fly in our cup to choke us, our own knife is ready to
glance into our flesh, every thing else is ready to work mischief to us,
every little job under our feet to give us a brusing fall, and they do only
wait while the word be given them, and they will instantly accomplish their
charge.

Besides, so long as we continue to work evil in the sight of the Lord and
do not turn unto him with all our hearts, and think upon his commandments to
do them, nothing shall be succesfull unto us; Mal. 2.2.
God will curse our blessings, and our ways shall not prosper, we shall be
cursed in the city, and cursed in the field; cursed shall our basket be and
our dough; cursed shall be the fruit of our body, Deuteronomy. 28
and the fruit of our land; and the increase of our cattle; cursed shall we
be when we go our, and cursed also when we come in.

The Lord shall send upon us cursing, and trouble, and shame, in all that we
set our hand to do.

Mark yet further how particularly the Lord goes on with his threatenings.
Thou shall betroth a wife, and another man shall lie with her, thou shall build
a house, and shall not dwell therein, thou shall plant a vineyard, and shall
not eat the fruit thereof.

The stranger that is among you shall clime up above on high, and thou shall
come beneath allow, he shall be thy head, and thou shall be the tail. Thou
shall be contemned in thine own country.

Thou shall never but suffer wrong and violence always, so that thou shall be
even mad for the sight which thine eyes shall see: things shall go so cross
notwithstanding all thy providence and industry, that it shall make thee at
thy wits end to think of it.

O my Brethren who would continue in sin one hour longer, that sees
himself hemd in on every side with so many curses and judgments, as it were
so many armies of the Lord fighting directly against him? who would lay his
eyes together, before he had made his peace with God, and once for ever bid
defiance to his former sins? who would live this wretched life full of vexation
and terror, and cursing; forlorn of God and his creatures, and destitute of
all succors, without any care to redress it, till he be come to shake hands
with it, when he may presently redress it by present reconciliation with God;
when by casting off sin in this hour, he may in this hour cast off al these
curses and miseries accompanying sin, and so both live a blessed life all his
time, and close up his days with a blessed death, which shall be the beginning
of eternal life? what foolish body wouldly forty or fifty years mortally
languishing of some disease, refusing to be cured all his best time and seeking
help only in his last worst time, when the cure is doubt full, by reason
nature is decayed, or if he recover, yet he cannot enjoy his health above a day
or a week, or a month, and then give over life and all? But ten thousand times
worse infatuated are they that would lie the whole age of a man in a mortal
languishment of soul (as it were bedred by reason of sin) and never take the
physic of repentance, till they lie gasping for breath, when it is uncertain
whether they shall then have leisure to repent, or if they repent, whether it
will be of force and able to fetch life in the soul being so far gone in
that desperate consumption: or if they recover and live the true life, (which
rarely happens) they live in a sort too late both to themselves and others.

CHAP. 4.
THey have ever proved unprofitable in religion that have held too much of that
truantly rule the way to well doing is never too late. Eccles.
Therefore Solomon calls upon young men to remember their Creator in their young
days, as if well doing were never too soon. Heb. 3.13.
And the Apostle exhorts the Hebrews to call one upon another, to turn to
God. whilst it is called to day; not to make it a morrowes work: his reason
is Lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulnes of sin. See here then
one maine danger of dwelling in our sins, and putting off our amendment from
one day to another: the longer we continue in sin, the more we are hardened
in sin, so that at length we cannot repent, no though we seek it with
tears, as Esau did. It is as easy to temper the flint stone between our
fingers, and to make it soft and pliable for sealing; as to supple our stony
hearts, and fit the^ to receive the impression of grace: you think you can
repent when you will, and apprehend the mercies of God when your own leisure
serves you; but you are deceived, it is not in man to order his ways, nor to
return into the right path, being mislead. Sin is cunning and will make you
believe you may come and go without entanglement or restraint; especially
whilst you have day light enough before you. But trust not this fleering
Iahel, for if you use to turn in to sleep in her tent, and taste of her milk
and butter which she can set in a Lordly dish, she will (when you suspect least)
nail your head to the ground, that it shall be impossible to get loose from
her. Judge. 16.
This Dalila has a crew of Philistines ready in a corner, when she has shorn
the locks of your strength upon her lap, to come upon you and bind you with
fetters, and put out your eyes, that you shall neither have power to start, nor
yet see the means to make an escape.

In your youth she will teach you to excuse your mistreadings, with, It is the
time: and when that excuse is out of fashion by reason of more years pulled over
your heads, then she will reach you another Apology, It has been my custom,
and I cannot lean it: and then follows hardness of heart that you cannot
repent (the greatest judgment that God brings upon a man or woman in this
world) for then we are past hope, God has decreed our destruction, and all the
prayers and suffrages of the faithful (which are of great force) will do us
no good. God will answer as he did to Jeremy: Do not entreat noe for them,
Ier. 7.16. and 14.11.
make no intercession to do them good, for I will in no wise hear you, I have
thrust them out of my sight, and I have decreed to destroy them. Yet you may
prevent this judgment: yet your custom of evil is not so strong but you may
break it: yet you may cast off a little and a little by good custom, that
which you have got at times by evil custom: yet your hearts are tender and
flexible, defer not the new moulding of them, til they be grown perverse and
incorrigible; lay hold of offered grace, whilst the accepted time and the day
of salvation lasts Remember, he that promises mercy to the penitent, has not
promised repentance to the presumer upon mercy, nor one day of life to the
delayer of repentance.

But you are young and healthy: what then? therefore you are not like to die? do
not lambs skins come to be sold as well as sheep skins? Do we not see
and hear, where ever we go, that men and women die, that were neither sick
nor old? we may say we will go to morrow to such a place, to see such a
commodity, to receive such a sum of money, to make merry etc. and yet before
this next evening may hear that voice; Fool, to prevent thy bargainings, thy
talkings, thy merriments etc. this night before the morrow, thy soul shall be
taken from thee. Ask but that one street which leads from the City to the
common judgment hall, how many times her stones have been bestained with the
reeking gore of murdered men, since the beginning of this last term; and tell
me whether life be so sure a thing when so many sound bodies have groand their
last in a peaceable well governed City, within the compass of one term, and
the limits of one street: and how know thou whether thy time be not as short
as theirs seeing (as I said before) not only wicked men upon earth but all the
Devils in hell, and all the creatures in the world are armed against thee,
whilst thou remainest impenitent and weltrest in thy sins.

Thou know how short warning Esaias. 38.1.
Ezekias had: Put thy house in order, for thou shall die and not live. Numb.
20.25.
And Aron: Bring Aron and Eleazar his son up into mount Hor, and cause him to
put off his garments, and put them upon his son, and then he shall die
immediately upon the top of the mount. What if the like warning were given
thee? where is thy repentance then become? where are thy good purposes for
hereafter? Then thou will cry out; if I had known my time had been so short,
Ifs at deaths aproch vain and foolish.
I would long ere this have reformed my ways: If it were now to begin my life,
I would take another course. In what sanctimony and vprightnes would I walk
before God and man? O that the Lord would spare me a little before I go away
from hence, and be no more seen! O that he would allow me but one month or
one weeks respite to bewail my sins and sue for mercy! Would thou then be
a new man? be so now; Would thou then seek Gods favor? seek it now.
Would thou then amend all faults? amend them now. Why do thou not prevent
those ifs and conditions, which will then be but foolish thoughts? why do
thou not that this day, nay day by day all thy life long, which thou would
do at such an extremity seeing thou know not which will be thy last day?
why do thou not doubt al thy days and endeavor to be such a one al thy
life, as thou would be at the point of death?

But put case thou knew thy life would be lengthned out to some forty or
fifty years more, and that thou were assured not to die the utmost expiration
of those years: be like then thou would nothing but follow thy lusts the
while, and think the last year soon enough to reform thee. But blind fools
they are, that are thus conceited: if thou can not with the straining of all
thy sinews pull up a young tree of two or three years planting, how will thou
hope to pull it up, when the spurs of the roots are fastened deep on every
side, and the boughs are like to the covering of a tent over thy head? Assay
to root out but one vice now, whilst it is fresh and green and thou shall
find it a matter of some pains and difficulty: and will it be easier,
think thou, seven years hence, when the custom of it is grown to a habit
or as it were another nature, and the generation thereof multiplied to an
hundred and to a thousand?

Say a man were now to carry a basket of stones from London Bridge to
Islington, and setting forward about the stoopes with the basket on his
shoulder, feeling the weight thereof to pinch and wring him, should presently
(like a true lover of his ease) set it down again till another time, and
every day the while, come and put in more stones, till it were heap full and
running over; would you think the basket would be lighter at last for these
daily additions, or this man likelier to carry it through then, being grown
rustie with many years sloth, when it made him shrug to stand under it in the
beginning, while his strength was fresh? No, no my dear brethren) the longer
we continue in sin the fuller and heavier grows the basket, and the
vnweldier we grow that must be the porters.

Come, come, up with it, carry it you must, and it will never be lighter, nor
you better able to bear it, then you be at this present; strain your selves
for a furlong or two, though it sit uneasy at first, you shall find it
lighter after a little use. Better smart once, then ache ever; set about it and
despair not of the success, by consideration of the difficulty: pray God both
humbly and continually to impart unto you his holy spirit, and to shed it out
in your hearts, through Jesus Christ, that you may compresse your own
affections, and by his strength overcome all impediments, and walk more in all
holy obedience before him only be not your own foe, feed not that same humor
of lingering, let not loose the raines to your corrupt affections, which cry
still, a little more sleep, a little more slumber: For the holy Ghost does not
assist cowards and sluggards, and such as fit idly with their arms folded
together; but those that labor and endeavor earnestly to tame their natural
wickedness, and to cross the swing of their lusts, those he deemeth worthy his
aid, and they in him, shall be more then conquerors. Set your hand to Gods
hand, and the work will be nothing. The violent and resolute, that break
through all opposition, they and no other take heaven by maine force.

But say that the Black-moore could change his skin, and the Leopard his spots,
and that you having learned all days of your life to do evil, could at the
last repent and do well; yet what an unthankful and unbeseeming thing were it
to spend your youthful days in the pleasures of the world, and the service of
the Devil, and then to bring your crooked and worn days to offer to the
Lord? To call the Devil and the world to the feast and full dishes, and let
God stand at door waiting (among the beggars) for the reuersion and scraps? The
Lord himself is driven to complain of this base measure by his Prophet: When
ye bring the blind for sacrifices, you say it is not evil, and when ye bring
the lame and sick, ye say it is good enough for God. Offer it now to thy
Prince; will he be content with thee, or accept thy person, says the Lord of
hosts? Repent and be ashamed of this ingratitude, play not the harlots with
God: let none have the maidenhead of your youth, but your dear Lord and
husband: Let none enjoy the flower and beauty of your time, but he that bought
you with his precious blood; you are his, give him his own, let him have it
new and fair, not when it is mangled and misused that one cannot but blush in
the presenting of it. Cast your selves into his embracement in your youth and
health whilst you have something to commend you, and his arms are open to
receive you; stay not looking for a better match, this is the best that ever
you shall light on; take it whilst it is offered, you shall never repent you of
your early bestowing. Hereafter perhaps God will hold you unworthy of his
love, as hertofore you held him unworthy of yours; and scorn you in your old
age and sickness, as you set not by him in your health and youth. The five
virgins for lingering but one hour and that in their youth and prime, were shut
out of the marriage chamber, and had this answer to their knocking, I know you
not, you are no friends nor guests of mine. And shall we think the Lord will
open unto us, and give us a cheerful welcome, lingering not hours but years,
and prostituting our virginity and prime to the world and the Devil, Gods
sworn enemies? Yet the the door is open, you may fill your lamps with oil,
and be wise by their harms. But if you put it to hereafter, the gates will be
shut, and all your knocking will be but so many fruitles strokes, rebounding
upon your own hearts.

Lastly, whilst we lie soaking in sin and return every day to our old vomit;
we do pile up more and more wood for our own burning. I mean, we do increase
our accounts against that fiery day of wrath, which will come upon as a thief
in the night, in which the heavens shall pass away with a noise, and the
element shall melt with heat, and the earth with the works that are therein
shall be consumed; then shall all the thoughts of our hearts be discovered, and
an account required of every idle word that we have spoken; So strict shall
that judgment be. Where will the ungodly and sinner appear, when the righteous
shall scarce be saved? whither will they turn them when they shall see the
Lamb turned into a Lion, their Savior their Judge, and their Judge their
witness, against whose testimony, there is no excepting; they will wish
mountains lay on them to keep them from that meeting: what will these
differers of repentance being prevented and cast behind by their own
negligence, answer for themselves in that great appearance, before the awful
Majesty that sits upon the throne? with what confusion and shame shall they
stand, when he shall say unto them, I sent you into the world to do my will,
and you have done your own wills? I allowed you time and means to repent, you
despised both time and means and repented not: I gave you many good motions in
your hearts to make you return unto me: and you put me off still after so long
waiting, with, What we will amend; Did you think I would pardon you at last?
How could you then in common gratitude displease so gracious a Lord? Did you
think I would not pardon you? what madness besotted you that you durst offend
me without hope of pardon? I will now verefie my words which I spoke by my
messengers, which I sent unto you; Because you have hardened your hearts
against me, you shall not enter into my rest: Go ye cursed into everlasting
fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels.

O how shall these impenitent lingerers then take on, howling and rauing, and
cursing the day of their nativity, that the air shall be even crazed with their
hideous and ghastly clamours! And what a comfort will it be to the godly, both
young men and young maids that have have served God betimes, and takem pains to
mortify their lusts, to see the Lord at length proceed in justice against the
careless wicked ones, which have lived in all pleasures and ease in this life,
when they themselves have been afflicted and maligned and derided, for the
profession of the Gospel of Jesus Christ?

O my Brethren and Sisters, when the Lord in that day shall have done to you
all the good that he has promised, and shall have made you Kings and Queens to
reign with him and his royal Son for ever then it shall be no grief nor
offense of mind unto you, that you have not powered out your selves into all
excess of riot and committed sin with greediness, as the profane and
ungodly do. Then it shall not repent you that you have consecrated the flower
of your youth to GOD, who is so bountiful a rewarder of them that seek him.
What hurt shall it be then unto you that you have shu^ned this lust, and that
folly: this vice and that wantonness, which you might have committed, and
whereunto you have been tempted* what need you then stomach at it that you
have been termed modest fools and precisians, and such other names of
disgrace by the godless multitude, whom you see damned by a just sentence, and
haled away to endless torments before your face? where they shall beg that one
of you may be sent to dip but the tip of your finger in water, to cool their
tongue in the midst of the flames, and shall not obtain it; who would not
rather mourn for his sins now, and forsake them now, and change his course
now, though it be with some unease and wrestling at the first, then to wish he
had done so afterward when it is too late? and to lament and roar in that
remediless horror and despair for ever: bearing a part in that doleful
morning and evening music of the wicked in Hell, We have wearied our selves
in the ways of wickedness and destruction, Wisd. 5.
and we have gone through dangerous paths, but we have not known the way of
the Lord. What has pride profited us, or what benefit has the pomp of
riches brought us? All these things are passed away with a shadow, and as a
post that rides mainly by: we have had the righteous in derision, and in a
parable of reproach: We fools thought their life madness, and their end without
honor: But lo, they are counted among the children of GOD, and their portion
is among the Saints. So have we erred in our imaginations, and the sun of
understanding has not risen upon us. Now we know, when it hurts us to know;
now we understand, when ignorance were a blessing. To conclude this Chapterr
and this first part of my Treatise, whatsoever you have been in the years
past, be new men now, I will not give you respite till next year, nor next
month, nor next morrow, but even this day, this night, this hour in which
thou art admonished, amend: remember the name of the Lord is I AM for ever; and
he likes notthe^ that are always, I will be, repentance is never too soon, so
long as the sin is gone before.

Youth is the Spring, Age is the Harvest: in one we sow, in the other we
reap, if in our youth we sow the seed of virtue and obedience, we shall in
our age reap the fruits of joy, peace and perseverance to everlasting life, if
the tares of vice and licentiousnes, it will be hard if ever the harvest be
other the^ unprofitable bu^dles, which will but kindle the vnquenceable fire of
hell upon our heads. Let your creation, or your redemption or vow in Baptism,
or the power and patience of the Lord, or the terrors of conscience, or Gods
rejecting of our prayers, or Christ's denying you his intercession, or the
fighting of the creatures against you, or the Lords curse upon your blessings;
or the hardening of your hearts by custom of sin, or the uncertainty of your
death, or the difficulty of late repentance, or the base and unbeseeming
measure offered to God, or the increasing of your accounts, or the strictnes of
the last judgment, or hell fire it self, or all these together, rouse and
startle you from your bed of sloth, and cause you to reform your lives
renounce the world and worldly wickedness, and to honor the Lord your God, or
ever he take is light from you, and or ever your feet stumble in the dark
mountains, lest while you look for the light he turn it into the blacknes of
the shadow of death. But if you will not hear me that give you seasonable
warning, my very heart shall mourn in secret for your stubbornnes, and mine
eyes shall weep and rain down tears, because the Lords people are sold unto
sin, and the children of my mother are carried captive to destruction.

THE SECOND PART.
CHAP. 5.
HAVING spoken of the mischeefes and dangers which we stand liable to, so long
as we are unconverted; Consider with me next the means which the Lord has
ordained for our conversion; that if we have a mind of returning we may make
use of them and not negligently pass them over without any fruit, as our
fashion has been in former times. Almighty GOD has given us first our life
and being in this world, he has made us men, Gods benefits.
and breathed in us a reasonable soul, whereas when the clay was in his hand,
he might have molded us into any other shape; has given us our se^ses, and
distributed all our limbs, according to their proper and several functions:
he has put all the creatures in subjection under our feet: so that from the
glorious Sun in the firmament to the little Emmet that creeps upon the
dust, every thing does us service. He has preserved us hitherto all our life
long from innumerable dangers, whereinto others have fallen, and whereinto we
had fallen if his gracious hand had not vpholden us: And (which passes all
this) he has by the death and sufferings of his own Son redeemed us from the
mouth of hell, into which else we every mothers son of us irrecouerably were
fallen. Now says the Apostle, this bou^tifulnes of God leads us to
repentance. Therefore has he bestowed all these benefits upon us, and promised
many more, thereby to stir us up to abandon vicious life, and to betake our
selves to his holy and blessed service. Try me faith the Lord, Mal. 3.10.
whether I will not open the windows of heaven and power you out blessings
without measure if you will return unto me.

O my Brethren, if your hearts be not savage, how can it be but this kindness of
so great a Majesty, should bind us to him for ever? what beastly ingratitude
is it to turn so many comforts and good things, as he has given us (that we
might be the better able to serve him) to the dishonor and injury of so loving
a giver by using them to serve us in sin? our dogs are not so ungrateful to
their masters; the Lions and Bears have showed more courtesy and
thankfulness to their benefactors. That he has spread our table with full
dishes, and made our cup to ouerflow; that he has allowed us warm clothing by
day, and a well fethered nest to couch in at night, and bodily health to make
these things sweeter and better tasted to us, are bounties that we can never
deserve while we live with all the obedience we are able to perform. But that
GOD for man should become man, and that God for man should die in the flesh,
and sustain so many shameful indignities and intolerable pains in
accomplishing the work of our redemption; this only, this wholly and this
more then all things does challenge unto it even by special desert, all our
life, all our labor, all our service and al our love. That a man fra^kly
gives his goods to another, is a token of no small bounty; but to bestow his
own life for another, and that not for friends but for enemies, as the Son
of God did, when he died for us, it is an incomparable and an vnco^ceiueable
bounty, the Angels of heaven do wonder at it, and desire, (as Peter says)
contiually to behold and look into it: and surely if this bounty and
gratiousnes of our God, cannot win us to cleanse our ways and forsake our
sins, all the dewes of grace are quite and clean dried up in our hearts, and
there is no hope that any thing will win us. But it will fall out by us, as
Esdras in his second book and 9. chapter gravely denounces against some like
us. Such as in their life have received benefits from the Lord, and have not
regarded to know him; but have abhorred his law whilst they were yet in
liberty, and when they had yet leisure of amendment, and would not understand,
but despised it: they must be taught after death by pain what it is, to
recompense evil for good.

Another good means to bring us to repentance is, the consideration of Gods
judgments executed upon sinners in all ages, who^ God has made examples for
our admonition, on whom the ends of the world are come. The Angels for one
sin were thrown out of heaven. Adam for one sin cast out of Paradise, and
all his posterity after him condemned to perpetual misery. Lots wife for one
sin turned into a pillar of salt. Moses and Aaron for one sin debarred from
entering the Land of Canaan. Michel for one sin plagued with barrenness. The
whole tribe of Benjamin for one sin rooted out. Threescore and ten thousand
Israelites for one sin of David's, in three days consumed with pestilence.
Ananias and Sapphira for one struck dead in the place. And yet thou after many
thousand sins, criest still God is merciful, and presumest that thy part in
that mercy will be as great as the thiefes upon the Cross. God is merciful, I
deny it not: So the Physician is skillful, and yet gives over his patient
sometimes, because he sees him to be incurable. If thou be damned, it is not
because the Lord wants mercy, but because by deferring repentance thy heart is
deaded, and thou art past recovery. Tell me not of the thief upon the Cross,
for of two thieves one was damned. It was a miracle, and miracles were no
miracles if they were common. All the Scriptures through there is not one such
another example to be found: and therefore for thee presumptuously to go on in
thy sins upon this shadow of hope, is all one, as if some good fellow should
hope his horse would speak English, because once Balaams Ass uttered plainly
the language of Moab. Surely these be they that destroy themselves with the
works of their own hands (as Solomon says) calling iniquity unto them both
with hands and words, and when they think they have a friend of it, they come
to naught.

But what should I speak of ancient judgments, when those that have been
executed at our own doors, have not wrought upon our hearts? To omit all
other, what are we the better for that dreadful pestilence so lately amongst
us, when Death like a merciless tyrant thrust all out of doors both old and
young before him, as if he would take possession of our houses one after
another, till he had seized the whole City into his own use? O my brethren,
those that be not blind may see, there is not one sin less this year, then
was the last. In the Church there is as much carelessnesse and contempt of Gods
word: In the streets as much pride: In the shops as much lying and swearing:
In the Tauernes as much drunkenness and excess (notwithstanding his Majesty's
act of restraint) In other places as much filthiness, and as little conscience
and devotion as ever there was before, so that the Lord may complain of us as
he did of old: I have smitten them, and they have not sorrowed; I have
corrected them for amendment, and they are worse and worse. The Lord grant we
be not cast off (as a father casts off his unthrifty son, when no means will
reclaim him) and that the removing of his plague from us (seeing we are not
bettered by it) be not a kind of cruel pity: and a giving us up to our own
hearts lust till our iniquity be full, that we may then fall by an utter
destruction, chastening in the mean time the countries round about us, as
having some hope: of their turning and amendment.

Let us therefore with all speed humble our selves under Gods mighty hand, and
make a godly use of his judgments that every little chastisme^t of his may drive
us to a lothing and forsaking of our former evil ways; that we may stand in
awe and not sin: for our God is a jealous God, and a consuming fire, so shall
he smell a savor of rest, and receive an atonement for the land; so shall the
light of his countenance be lifted up upon us, and so shall it go well with us
and with our children after us in their generations.

The word preached Gods Ministers.
Another very direct means to this end, is the preaching of Gods word and the
voice of his Prophets and ministers, rising up early, and premonishing us of
our danger, and showing us the way wherein we should walk. Therefore the Lord
when he sent the Prophet Jeremy to the people of Israel and Judah, he bade him
proclaim a fast, and tell them what he had threatened against them: Ier. 36.
Because (says the Lord) it may be when they hear the evil that I purpose to
bring upon them, they will return from their wickedness, and so by that
means I may forgive them their sins, and receive them to favor. This is the
manna that came down from heaven, this is the immortal seed by which so many
are borne to God. How great cause have we to bless the Lord that it has
pleased him so to dispose of us, that we should be borne and bred in such a
time, and among such a people, as profess the faith of Jesus Christ, and are
daily taught and instructed both to believe and live accordingly? Our Fathers
longed to see these days, and could not see them; we fear no burning nor
imprisonment for professing the doctrine of Christ, we need not cross the
seas to seek instruction, we may in a blessed freedom of mind and body
approach to Gods altars, and sit at the feet of the Lords Prophets, and hear
those heavenly comforts and directions from their mouths. Never was London so
well supplied with godly reverend Ministers, since the first stone of her
walls was laid, then in this very day. The Lord Jesus continue and increase
the number.

But what account make we of these means? we can content our selves to sit an
hour in the Church to hear Gods word taught, not for conscience but for
fashion, as our deeds make plain. For where almost is he or she that has
left any one dear sin this seven years, though twice seven years they have
heard it condemned? nay, (which is strange) upon the monday we commit those
very sins which upon the Sabbath day before were to our faces most
particularly reproved, which were enough to discourage utterly those men of
God in the work of their ministry, they taking such pains, watching for us,
when we sleep, studying and spending their spirits to bring us to repentance,
and we (like wretches) making small account of it, and profiting little in
godliness by it: but that the Lord has said, his word shall never go forth in
vain; but either it shall lift us up higher to his courts in heaven, or sink
us down deeper into the pit of hell. And the labors of his Ministers shall be
as highly rewarded for leaving the graceless ones without excuse, as for
converting a weak soul from going astray.

A Servant when he is commanded to do any thing by his Master, will fear to
look his Master in the face, or to come in his way if he neglect it, and do
it not. How dare we then having sat in the Church, and there heard (out of
the Pulpit the seat of Gods Oracles) sin forbidden, repentance enjoined, our
negligence taxed, not once, but continually from time to time, with precept
upon precept, line upon line: I say, how dare we press so boldly without any
awe or reverence into the presence of God (the great Master of all Masters in
the world) Sabbath after Sabbath, and yet guilty to our selves in the mean
time of so great disobedience? unless we come thither in an insolent fashion
to stout and outface the Lord; or to laugh in our sleeves at his weakness
that will be borne in hand with a cunning semblance, and as well pleased as if
the deed were performed.

O my brethren, tremble to dally in this sort with the Almighty: if he speak,
let his servants hear: if he command, defer not to do it: receive it not
as the word of man, but as it is indeed the word of God. Pray aforehand that
you may feel the virtue and power of it in your heart, renewing and changing
your wills and affections: let the feet of them be beautiful that bring this
tidings of peace and good things unto you: They are the Ambassadors of the
everliving God, and disposers of his secrets: they are our Fathers in Christ,
by whom we are new begotten to eternal life. The Lord has given them power
out of his word to pronounce his sentence, so that what they bind on earth is
bound in heaven: and what they loose on earth is loosed in heaven. Let us have
them in singular love and reverence for their works sake. The contempt of their
persons is a notable policy of the devil, to make their teaching be contemned
also. Let us show our thankfulness to God for them, in obeying those things
which they command us in his name. They have called upon us long enough for
amendment; let them now have cause to commend us that we have amended. Let our
hearing be at length a joy to them, lest their sorrow be hereafter a witness
against us: One Jonah converted Nineveh, what a shame is it to us that so many
Ionahs should do no good in London?

Another means to set us forward in the way of repentance, Good books and
conference.
is the reading of good books, and mutual conference, and exhortation one of
another. These do both after one sort bob us continually on the elbowe, and
even importune us to well doing, and would work some good effect if we were
not negligent and careless in the using of them. But so it is, how much time
do we spend idly in doing nothing, or unthriftily in doing naught, never
taking a good book in our hands all the week long, though we have choice of
many, and our trades will bear it; or if we begin, it grows irksom straight
before we have turned one leaf over; or if we have the patience to go through
to the end (slightly enough;) we cast it in a corner to be molded and
moath-eaten, and are as much the better as he that has looked in a glass is,
after his back is turned: because we do not stir up and whet our
remembrance by a second more advised reading, esteeming our old books as old
friends, which must ever now and then be visited, that acquaintance may be
renewed and not lost.

So for our mutual exhorting one another, how unequally have we performed it?
sparing them too much with whom we are inward; and reproving them too tartly
who^ we like not so well: and perhaps thinking scorn to be admonished our
selves by any. How many times when we have met together for our comforts, and
to the edifying one of another in godliness, have we burst out into profane
and idle talk, letting our mouth loose to all vanity, that should have uttered
gracious words, giving proof of the inward sanctification of our hearts: so
sly is the devil (the perpetual enemy of all good things) when we go about
to diminish his kingdom; to rob us from our selves, and divert our best
thoughts another way. I speak this the rather, that all those that are the
professors of the Gospel, might use these means here after with more care and
conscience, lest they be ouer-reacht by this slight of Satan: and set a watch
before their mouth, and keep the door of their lips, that they give no
example of lightness or vanity to them that are new conuerts, nor unto any
other: but carrying themselves as paterns unto them, in word, in conversation,
in faith, in spirit, in love and in pureness, that even those that are
backwardest in religion, may be drawn by their integrity to repentance from
the corruptions of the world. For virtue shows so well in whomsoever it is,
that it stirs up a marvelous love and desire of it in them that behold it.

But if neither Gods benefits, nor his judgments, nor his word, nor godly
books, nor the good counsel and admonition and examples of our brethren (who
are more careful of our salvation then we our selves) will prevail with us,
let the shortness and uncertainty of our own life make us look about us. For
what is our life but a vapor, a flower, a flash, a shadow, a dream, vanity,
nothing? Have you ever observed the bubbles which boys blow up in a shell of
sope-water, how some being swollen to a determinate quantity, break immediately
in the shell? some the wind whisleth up aloft into the air, and are dissolved
there: some fly allow by ground, till at length they dash against the ground,
and come to nothing. Such things are men and women, when you see a thousand of
them walking the streets, imagine you see a thousand belles or bubbles of
water wandering up and down: some a high above all their fellows (as the gale
favors them) some in a lower region, and with a thought as high as the
highest: some beneath that lownes, and some as low as the pauement. Now stand
still a little and mark them, and you shall see some times one striking out
another, sometimes ten, or twenty, or thirty popping out of themselves, and
instantly so many more (some of the highest, some of the lowest, some of the
mean ones one amongst another) so that anon you cannot see one of the old men
or bubbles left, but all are new men or new bubbles (call them which you will,
for all is one) blown up in the places of the former.

If this be our best firmness, if our metal be thus full of flawes, if our
life be but a moment, and yet upon that moment depends eternity of weal or
woe in the life to come: who would not take opportunity by the foretop, and
make hay (as the saying is) while the sun shines? who would put off his
amendment till to morrow, when he knows not what a day may bring forth? Man
knows not his end (says the wisest among men) but even as the fishes be
taken with the hook, and the birds be suddenly intrapped with the snate, so
are the children of men prevented with the evil day when it comes upon them
suddenly.

When the tree falls, whether toward the North or South, there it lies: and
in the same state you die, you shall be judged. Learn therefore to number your
days, and consider seriously of your latter end, that you may repent betimes,
for that is wisdom; and depart from evil, for that is understanding. Or if
you scorn all other schoolmasters, learn of the devil one rule of policy;
He knowing his time to be short, will do what mischief he can, you knowing
your time to be short, do you what good you can.

CHAP. 6
THere remains yet three other means, which I cannot ouerpasse without making
mention of them.

The first is the care of masters, Godly careful Masters.
and the discipline of a well governed house, which may set straight the
ma^ners of a young man, and restrain him from those vices, whereto by reason of
his age, or the corruption of the place, he is inclined: For the proverb
holds for the most part true; LIKE MASTER, LIKE MAN. If Abraham fear God,
his servants and household will be religious. If Herod scorn Christ, his
captains and courtiers will deride him also. In the History of the Apostles
Acts, when any householder was converted to the faith of Christ, you shall find
it said; The man believed and all his household, showing, that as they were
swaied before of an Idolatrous master, to superstition: so now they are swaied
by a Christian master to the true worship and service of God.

Here therefore I think it not amiss to show the duty of a Master in some
measure as God shall enable me; not that I would take upon me to teach my elders
and betters (yet let none disdain to learn of young ones, seeing even our
cradle sometimes may teach us wisdom; for out of the mouths of babes and
sucklings has the Lord ordained strength) but to the end that we that are yet
servants and prentises may know how to carry and behave our selves, when it
shall please the Lord, to lay such a charge upon us.

First, (my Brethren) when the Lord shall call us to this weighty charge, that
we come to be rulers of families, and that we keep servants, it behooves us,
nay, we are bound in duty to God, to have as great a care of their salvation as
of our own, and to see they do their faithful service to God, as we will
look that they should faithfully serve us: For assuredly that servant that is
not faithful to GOD, can never be faithful to his master; but he that serves
GOD with a good conscience, will serve his master with a good conscience. The
awe and presence of his master to ouereie and chide him needs not, for his
own heart will check him, They do best serve their Masters, that have learned
first to serve God.
and the fear of God will keep him from vntrustines. You may find a kind of
pick-thanke officiousnes in servants of another making; but there is no service
like his that serves man for conscience toward God.

And beside our duty to God, and desire of faithful service to our selves, the
care we should have of our childrens godly education, that they be not
corrupted, should double our care to keep godly servants: for the liberal
disposition of a child is easily spilt with the leaud manners of a servant.
Hence it comes that almost their first words are ribauldrie and fearful
oaths, and that they learn to blaspheme God before they can plainly speak
GOD; yea sometime they prove twofold more the children of Satan then their
Tutors were: For a new vessel will keep the tatch of the first seasoning a
long time after.

Cause them therefore to frequent the holy exercise of religion, as Preaching,
Catechizing, Prayer, Sacraments etc. Bring them with you, where they may be
instructed in the ways of the Lord to do righteousness, especially on the
Sabbath day: because that is a day appointed and set apart of God himself for
his worship and service, wherein he will have our servant as free as our selves,
and to the end we may prepare them the better to the sanctifying of the Lords
day, we are to call them up betimes in the morning, to prayer, wherein first we
are to thank the Lord, for all his mercies to such unworthy wretches, and
namely for the rest and preservation the night past: Then to beseech his
Majesty that he would so prepare and fit our hearts to the profitable
retaining of his most holy and blessed word, and so direct the mouths of his
ministers that day in the uttering of it, that it may be a comfortable savor
of life and salvation to us, and not a savor of death unto destruction.

And having ended this duty by 7. in the morning, we may if we will directly
go where there shall be a Sermon until eight so coming home we are to go
to our own Parish Church, both in the forenoone, and in the afternoon; and
after that to some Lecture as there be diverse (blessed be GOD) in diverse parts
of the City. And having thus spent the day till six at night, we are not to
content our selves there, thinking we have done by this time a work of
supererogation; but to come directly from the Lecture to our houses, and call
our servants together, to prayers to almighty God, that it would please his
Majesty to give a blessing upon that which we have heard, that we may avoid
the sins, execute the good duties, fear the threatenings, and lay up the
comforts from the mouth of his ministers plainly showed and laid down unto us.
And having ended prayers for that instant, we are to examine every one of them
particularly what lessons they have learned at Church, and what uses they were
taught of those lessons: and having done that, to give them a general
exhortation, encouraging them to go forward in godliness, which has promises
of this life, and of that which is to come, and so to make an end for that
time, with singing a Psalm of thanksgiving.

NOW as we are to perform these duties on the Sabbath day, so we have our
duties to perform on the week days also: For it is not enough for any man to
give his family victuals, and provision one day in the week, and let them fast
all the rest of the week after, for so he should soon make a lean household;
but we must deal with our servants in Spiritual things, as we deal with them
in Corporal things; that is, as we allow them meat and drink sufficiently
all the week days, and on the Sabbath day they have extraordinary dishes: So
although we have been careful to pray and instruct them in religion on the
Sabbath day: yet we must look we do our duties in the week days also,
although not like unto the Sabbath: for the Lord does not require it at our
hands. This discipline and good order if we would carefully inure our
Prentises to, seven or eight years together till their first youth (the age
which is set upon the very pinnacle of temptations) be past over, methinkes it
were enough to kill all the weeds of vices in them, and to make even Atheists
religious, and grow into a habit of sanctimony and godliness.

Here I think it needful for every one of us, (as we are yet servants) to
know our duties also; that we may demean our selves, agreeably to our present
condition.

Servants duty.
First then we are to follow the counsel of the Apostle, to be obedient unto
our bodily masters with fear and trembling, because they be (in their places)
unto us as God, God has set the^ over us in his own stead; and therefore we
ought not only to carry a reverend estimation of them, counting them worthy of
all honor, but to perform our duty and service unto them, not to the eye as
men pleasers, but as the servants of Christ, doing the will of God himself
singlie and from the heart, laboring continually to please them, and
submitting our selves to the^ in all things, as the holy Ghost commands. But
this must not be understood absolutely, but with an exception; So they be
lawful things. For if a master command his servant to speak a lie, or to
swear his commodities cost so much, when they cost much less, or to break
the Lords Sabbath; in such a case we ought rather to obey God then man: but in
all just and lawful impositions (not crossing their royal commandment) we
are to conform our selves in all duty and obedience to them, yea not only to
the good and courteous, but even to the froward and sower. For this is
thankworthy, says Saint Peter, if a servant for conscience toward GOD endure
smart, suffering wrongfully. But it is a great fault in us that are servants,
that if correction be given us (though with justice and discretion) we will say
most commonly we deserve it not. This is not the saying of the holy Ghost: For
(says he) what praise is it for a servant to be buffeted for his faults? but
and if ye fault not, and yet suffer hard usage and take it patiently, then is
there thank with God. And herein what better satisfaction or quieting of our
minds can we desire, then the example of our Savior himself, who never
sinned, neither was there guile found in his mouth, yet he was reviled, and
reviled not again, he suffered beyond all degrees of patience, and opened not
his mouth; but committed revenge to him that judges righteously, even to God
his Father: So ought we (my Brethren) when our masters be out of reason, and
offer us extreme measure, to put it up and endure it patiently, knowing that
they also have a master in Heaven, who beholds with an equal eye both us and
them; and not to answer, Sir I deserve it not: For if correction should not be
given to the most of us till we confess we deserve it, it should never be
given us.

Here I cannot keep silence, but I must needs make known how good and
gracious the Lord has showed himself in this case to me his most unworthy
servant, and the rather to cause all other Prentises to think themselves not
miserable but most happy, when the Lord has set over them such matters, as
give them deserved correction with wisdom and discretion: For certainly (my
Brethren) had not I had such a master, (whose care and diligence has been so
great over me, in restraining me from that scope and liberty, which my
wretched and untamed nature did desire) it had been better a thousand times I
had never been borne: For my bringing up from my childhood, until the time I
came to my master, was most miserable and wretched, by reason of my sins and
the ignorance wherein I lived, as the case of too too many is in these days:
yea and since I came to be a Prentise (until of late time) my life was most
odious and abominable both in the sight of GOD and Man. But blessed be the
name of the Lord, who has given me a good master, to hold me back, that I
could not be so wicked as I would, and has now also in some measure opened
mine eyes, (which have been a long time kept shut) that I might see how to
wind my feet out of the snare of Satan.

Therefore my dear Brethren (unto all those I speak that desire to be
partakers of the heavenly joys in the life to come) show yourselues obedient
to your masters, and submit your selves under the yoke, yea although it be
irksome to the flesh: for you know nor the great profit and reward that
comes thereby.

Ungodliness of Prentises.
But certainly (in grief I speak it) Prentises for the most part were never so
leaudly and so wickedly given, never so vain and so licentious, never so full
of scoffing and derision, never so insolent and contemptuous of God and good
men, as they be in these days. For we are so apt to be corrupted, and (being
corrupted) to corrupt, partly by reason of our nature, and partly of the place,
that unless our Masters be the more circumspect in bringing of us up, the
souls of many thousand Prentises will be required at their hands; impunitie
boldening us in sin, and sin deceitfully hardening our hearts, that all
thought of repentance is put away from us; or if any shall friendly remember
us, his best thank is a mock for his labor. When inquisition shall be made
for blood of souls, I would every one could stand forth, and say, Not guilty,
but the Prentises themselves. But I fear greatly that the Masters will be to
blame in that day also, and be put to their shifts for a current answer, when
they shall find none.

For (without offense to any man, I will speak a little) where is that Master
almost that questions with his servants about any religion at all? It may be
sometimes he will send them to Church; but when they return, what does he ask
them of their learning or profiting there? unless perhaps once at the hundreds
end he vouchsafe to know the chapter and verse of the Text, which (between
the Church-doore and home) even a Parrot would be taught to pronounce. Let him
send any of his people of some worldly business, and he will be sure to ask
him how he sped, and nothing will he leave unasked to understand the effect of
the errand he sent him about: but for Gods business and soul matters be they
performed negligently, or not done at all, it mattereth not; he is sure no
account will be required of any such thing all the time of his prentiship. And
this is the reason that servants depart as ignorant after they have served
seven or eight years service, as they were when they came first (not of their
trades) I mean of that which is more worth then all the trades in the world.
For a man shall profit much to know God. The true knowledge of God will bring
more sound profit in one day to a man, then the best trade in London will do
in seven years. For godliness is profitable unto all things (says the
Apostle) as having the blessings of this life, and of that which is to come.

Howbeit, some there be in London that I know (and more I doubt not that I
know not) which use good orders in their houses, to the general good of their
families (and I desire the Lord to increase their number) But a hundred to one
never spent any time with their servants, in the exercises of religion, no not
so much as to call them to prayers either morning or evening once in a year,
whereas they are bound (in duty to God) to do it every morning and evening; and
although there were no commandment from God, nor president in this kind, yet
very necessity and the sloth of youth should co^straine us; and surely if
masters would care as they should, to train up their households in the fear of
god, and in the practice of good things it could not be that London should
harbor so many ungodly Pre^tises, or that diverse men should co^plain (as they
do) of servants leaudnes, that they cannot thrive in the world; for they have
good means of getting, but is spent they cannot tell how so soon as it is
gotten: Alas, how can it be any otherwise? if their servants be not taught the
fear of GOD, and to keep a good conscience, how is it possible that ever they
should have any true service at their hands?

But some will say again, this is not so: for by experience I can speak this
of a truth, that for mine own part I never instructed my folks in all my life
in any religion at all: No, I never heard them so much as to read a chapter,
and yet I thank God, he has blessed me with good servants. For I find my
riches to increase, and I thrive well, and therefore it is not the bringing of
them up in religion, that makes a man come forward in the world; but if his
fortune be good, wealth with come on.

Fortune? no, no, it is the great handy work of GOD in some men's servants, that
hunger and thirst after righteousness, and seek more for salvation then their
masters be aware of, (or else their poor souls might be cast away and perish
for ever) and then who knows not that such a man thriues for his servants
sake, as Laban did for Jacobs, and as Potiphar did for Joseph's? Or it may be,
GOD casts his blessings into thy lap (even against all means) to stir thee
up to greater thankfulness and care to serve him afterward, or else to leave
thee the more inexcusable in his great judgment for not performing such duty
and service.

And therefore let none cast surmises of excuse to color or shift out the
matter any longer, but wherein it appears to your own consciences, you have
been negligent, make amends with more care hereafter: ask not which of your
neighbors does thus and thus, and if they do it not, you mean not to begin.
But resolve you with Joshua, let others take what course they will, I and my
house will serve the Lord. Let your people see you going before them in the
practice of every good thing, and in the abhorring and avoiding of evil, so
shall they first fear to do that which you hate, and at length fall in love
with that which you practice. It shall get you more authority and respect with
them here, and increase the blessedness of your own souls another day, that
you have been the means (through the blessing of God) to save your poor
prentises souls also.

And here I shall desire my worshipful masters of this City (to whose sight
this little ha^dfull of papers may come) not to take offense at any thing I
have spoken out of zeal and hearty meaning, nor to impute it to arrogancy in
me, that I have intermedled in their offices (From which proud sin (I thank my
God) I am free) but if it be just that I have said, and agreeable to Gods
word, that they will not disdain to do it, it shall not only be no
disparagement, but praise and honor to them, comfort to other of Gods children,
and joy to the Angels, in heaven, that by their religious care, their servants
are made Gods servants with them, and there is such a towardly and hopeful
succession to stand up after them, that as the Thessalonians were examples of
godliness to those of Macedonia: so Londoners at length may be like examples of
piety and religiousnes to all the neighbor towns of Great Britain also.

CHAP. 7.
THe next good means to waken us out of the sleep of sin, and to quicken us
to a new conversation, is the sweet consolation and joy which God gives us in
our souls and consciences of his service, after we have once made our peace
with him by sound and seasonable repentance. This is the peace that passes all
understanding; this is the earnest of our inheritance; this is a present taste
or say of the joys of the life to come. I know my words seem to the carnal
and unregenerate a fained thing, as the women's report of Christ's resurrection
did at first to the Disciples; but if thou would do as they did, never leave
till in thine own person thou have tried out the truth of this matter, thou
should feel within thee such a paradise of sweetness, as thou thy self
were not able to utter. Thou should see with what comfortable cheer Christ
would offer himself unto thee; with what delicates he would refresh thy soul;
what secret affections he would inspire into thee; and with how pleasant a cup
of love he would make thee merry, if thou would follow his paths, forsaking
the bywayes of sin and worldly vanities. The least drop of this divine
sweetness, would utterly distaste unto thee all the pleasures of sin, that
even the remembrance of them would be irksome and unsavory.

For mine own part, I have had experience of this which I say. For (to my
shame I speak it) I have been as leaud and as wicked a fellow as ever thou
have been whosoever thou art: and one that has made as small conscience of
sinning against God as ever thou have done, either in swearing, or lying, or
profaning the Lords Sabbath, or in deriding the dear Saints and servants of
God. Nay, what vice would I have left unpracticed, if I might have come to the
knowledge of it? what pleasure, or vanity, or abomination can be named,
whereof I would not have had, not a dram or sip, but a drunken carouse, if the
Lord by good means had not restrained me from such effusion of beastliness?
It irketh me to think in what a fearful state I lived at that time: for had
not God been very merciful unto me, the earth might have opened, and
swallowed me up quick for rebelling against his great Majesty, being Lord of
heaven and earth: but such was his goodness to spare me, and such was his
patience, to wait for my repentance: for ever magnified be his holy name
therefore.

For this cause, when once it pleased his Majesty (in some measure) to give
me a sight and feeling of my sins, through the preaching of his word (which
I had a long time heard in vain before) as also by means of some of my
Brethren in Christ Jesus, stirring me up continually with such like
admonitions as I do now stir up thee, I consulted not with flesh and blood,
but presently set my self to resist my former evil inclinations, resolving
and endeavoring every day to change the tenor of my life, and to serve God in
better manner then ever I had done before, giving small regard what the
companions of my lewdness, and other of the profane multitude did say of me,
nor what deriding terms they bestowed upon men: for I saw no other way but
either I must be a hell-hound, or be called a Puritan. And therefore I chose
rather to suffer reproach with the children of God, and to abide the name of
hypocrite and dissembler, etc. then to be a varlet with every varlet, or
accounted an honest fellow amongst the profane. And so continuing in this
course, and framing my self to live more and more in the fear of God, shaking
off my old sins, I felt in my self in short time such a sweet and
comfortable change, and such internal heavenly joy of Gods service, that I
would not have exchanged it again for all the choicest delights of the world
heaped at once upon my heart. And surely, my Brother, if thou would once
enter into this resolution (as I have done) turning from dead works to serve
the living God; thou should see what a banquet of celestial delicates he
would set before thee, and how plentifully he would power forth the wine of
his consolations unto thee, that thou might say, as Judith did in another
case: I will drink now freely O my Lord; Judith 12.18.
because my heart is merry this day more then ever it was in all my life
before. Only for this shall thou feel sorrow, that thou had not sooner
embraced the means of thy conversion, that the sooner thou might have been
partaker of this divine joy, and these souls rauishing comforts.

The last means I will speak of, is, the consideration of the joys of
heaven, whereof the joy of Gods children here is but a little drop or spark:
that heaven the consummation, perfection, or everlasting wellhead of all
pleasures that can be seen, named or conceived: seen, named, or conceived,
said I? nay, no eye has seen, no ear has heard, no thought has ever
comprehended the joy, the pleasure the felicity, the glory which GOD has laid
up in the life eternal for them that serve him, with an upright heart in this
world. The Scriptures do sometimes resemble heaven to a Paradise or pleasant
field; sometimes they describe it by a goodly City; sometimes by a Kings
Court; but what are these but worldly descriptions of that which passes all
the world? Go out into the most delightful parts of the Country, view the
fair hills, the flowrie valleys, the crystal fountains, the clear rivers,
sweet woods goodly plains, variety of fruits, melody of birds etc. and all
this is nothing to it. Go into the City, suruay the stately gates, firm
walls, beautiful edifices, neat streets, rich household stuff, all the
desirable things in the warehouses and Chests of Merchants, Goldsmiths,
Iewellers. etc. and all these are nothing to it. Go into the Court, note the
multitude of suitors, train of attendants; magnificent feasts, pompous service,
musical Instruments fair Ladies, glistering Courtiers, maskes, revels all the
pleasures of a King; and all these are nothing to it. Let the best wit in the
world bestow his utmost skill to set out all the delights and pleasures of the
sons of men in their liueliest colors, yet all his expense of oratorie will
scarce give you a glimpse of this. Rack your own thoughts upon the tenters,
shape out in your conceit a thousand forms of pleasure, yet all these are
scarce a shadow of it. And think what a kind of bliss that is which passes
all companion, all utterance, all conceit of the wisest humane heart. Neither
is this for a day, or a month, or for term of years, but an everlasting
state of blessedness, vndeterminable so long as God is God, and that is world
without end; we want a word to express it. And shall we let slip such a
booty through our negligence, or wilfulness, or sloth, or inconsideratenes?

If we do carelessly ouergoe but a good bargain in our ordinary trades, which
might yield us a few crowns profit, how does it vex and chafe us afterward?
and do we think such a loss as this will be borne with ease if we once
ouergoe it, when it might erst have been had for so little timely pains?
Believe me, my Brother, the only loss of heaven to a soul able to apprehend
the loss, is a sufficient hell, if the Lord had appointed no other torment for
evil doers.

Come, come, stand no longer in thine own light, see thy good, and take it.
Why will thou let slip the opportunity which nothing in the world can purchase
thee again? Why should thou not even in this hour change thy life, and
make an end of wilful sinning against the Lord? Is it for that thou art loath
to forgo thy old delights, thy pleasant companions, and boon societies? alas,
what are those sliding base delights to the solid and noble delights I spoke
of even now? or thy earthly fellowships, to the society of Angels and heavenly
spirits? Is it for that the ways of godliness are hard and painful, and
laborious? Is not the enjoying of a Kingdom a good salve for that sore? surely
if all the pains and labors of all men in the world were laid upon thy
shoulders; if all thy life were nothing but weeping and lamentation like
Ezekiels book: nay, if thou should for a time endure hell fire it self,
that afterward when Christ comes in his glory, thou might be reckoned among
his Saints, and enjoy the heritage of his chosen children; yet were not all thy
pains and sufferings worthy to be balanced with the participation of such an
infinite and unspeakable weight of glory. But to the unwilling every thing is
an excuse. For the service of God is easy, and his yoke is sweet. I will run
the way of thy commandments (says the kingly Prophet) when thou shall enlarge
my heart. And again; My delight is in thy commandments: yea they are the joy
and rejoicing of my heart.

What do thou fear lest thou sholdst fall away again after thou have bin
once enlightened, that there can be no more renewing by repentance; and so thy
last end should be worse then thy beginning? care thou by making thine election
sure by good works, pray unto the Lord for his strength and assistance, and
fear not this fear, for it will be as impossible for thee (being once
regenerate and made the child of GOD) to fall finally away from godliness, as
it was for Jeremy to hold his peace (notwithstanding his resolution of silence)
when the word of the Lord was as fire or gunpowder in his heart.

Do thou doubt whether God will perform his promise? then never take upon
thee the name of a Christian, he renders vengeance to the ungodly, why should
we doubt whether he will recompense and reward weldoers? Thou shall hear
thousands complain of the falsehood and faithlesnesse of the world, whom thou
trustest; if any have complained of Gods slacknesse, God has driven him out of
his own proof anon after to recant, and to say with the Prophet, This is my
weakness.

Do thou fear the reproach of nicknames and ignominious terms, which the
new converted children of GOD do always light on? art thou so without heart,
and so very a coward, to be blown from thy profession with the breath of a
profane mouth? had thou rather keep credit with the world and the Devil
by weltring in sin, then serve GOD after the way which is counted
discreditfull by the godless of the world? A generous horse though twenty
curres come out barking and snarling at his heels, as he trotteth along the
street, keeps on his pace without so much as looking back at them. So when
these barkers of Gods servants, and deriders of religion and good things, step
forth against thee, to hinder thee in thy course of a new conversation; let the
height of thy mind disdain to regard them, or take notice of them; think they
are but the Devils ban dogs, hissed on by him to make thee break thy pace in
the ways of godliness; and therefore so much the more courageously go on,
that they may see how much they are despised.

If all this cannot move us, we have hard and foolish hearts; and I can say no
more but we may go forward in our sotted course, til we reap the fruit of our
over weening. But I hope better things of you (my brethren) and such things as
accompany the fear of God and salvation, though I thus speak: Suffer not (I
beseech you for Christ Jesus sake) my hope to be in vain.

THE THIRD PART.
CHAP. 8
HERE methinkes I hear some say, whose wills and affections the Lord has
begun to renew and change, whom yet Satan would wrap about with the cords of
their own frailty; I would feign repent, but I cannot: my faith is so weak,
and my heart so hard that I cannot be sorry for my sins as I would.

This is a sweet saying (my Brethren:) For what can a man have more then to
feel his wants? for otherwise how should we hunger and thirst after
righteousness: and undoubtedly, he that hungers thus shall be satisfied, for
the Lord that knows what we want better then we our selves, looks not so
much to the outward show of repentance, as to the inward affections of the
heart, which are as actions in his sight: and though our faith and repentance
be but weak, yet let us know this assuredly, that the Lord looks more on
the quality, then on the quantity. Is a weak faith no faith, is a weak
repentance no repentance? nay,

The desire of reconciliation with God in Christ (says a godly writer of our
time) is reconciliation it self: the desire to believe is faith indeed: and
the desire to repent (in a touched heart) is repentance it self, not in the
own nature, but in Gods acceptance: For if we being touched througly for our
sins, do desire to have them pardoned and to be at one with GOD; GOD accepts
us as reconciled. Only our desire of reco^ciliation must not be a flash but
constant and continued. Secondly, ernest and serious, though not always alike,
yet at sometimes so, that we may say with the Prophet David; My soul desires
thee, O Lord, as the thirsty land desires rain, or the chased Heart the rivers
of water. Thirdly, it must be in a touched heart: for when a man is touched in
conscience, the heart is cast down. (and as much as it can) it withdrawes it
self from GOD: For this cause if then there be any spiritual motions whereby
the heart is lift up unto GOD, they are without doubt from the spirit of GOD.
So then, though as yet thou want firm and lively grace, yet art thou not
altogether void of grace, if thou can vnsainedly desire it, thy desire is the
seed, conception or bud of that which thou want. Now is the spring time of
the ingrafted word, or the immortal seed cast into the furrows of thy heart;
wait but a while, using the good means to this end appointed, and thou shall
see the leaves, blossoms, and fruit will shortly follow after. Thus fare he.

As for that which the devil or thine own flesh shall suggest to move thee to
despair of Gods mercy, that GOD in justice cannot receive such a rebel
wretch as thou have bin, aggravating every of thy least sins, and telling
thee it is in vain to repent: thou may easily beat back that temptation.
It Is true, GOD is not so merciful, to use injustice, so he is not so just to
be unmerciful: He has suffered mighty and maruailous men to err, that we by
their example might have comfort, and not despair of grace and pardon. In holy
Scripture who is more commended then King David, who was both a King and a
Prophet, a man after Gods own heart, and of whose stock the Messiah came? But
into how many and grievous crimes sell so worthy a man? yet hearing Nathan
pronounce the fearful threatenings of God, cried out, I have sinned, and Nathan
said; But the Lord has put away thy sins, thou shall not die. Have thou sinned
with David? repent with David, and thou shall with David find mercy: What
should I tell thee of our first parents, of Manasses, of Zacheus, of Mary
Magdalen, of Peter, of Paul, of the Thief on the cross? all which had been
most grievous sinners upon earth; all which are now most glorious Saints in
heaven: For where sin abounds, there grace superaboundeth; and therefore let
not the multitude nor the magnitude of thy sins dismay thee, seeing the mercy
of that Lord to whom thou turnest, is above all: though thy sins were as red
as scarlet, yet he will make them as white as snow; and though they were of
purple hue, yet he will make them as white as the purest wool of the fleece.
There cannot be a deeper die then scarlet, it is a thing impossible with men to
bring a scarlet into whit; yet the Lord says, if we will but talk and come to
any reason with him, he will make our sins though never so deep ingraind in
any scarlet or bloody colur, to turn white and pure, as innocence it self.

Read the book of Jonah through, and there you shall see the propensity of Gods
nature to show mercy, lively set forth: And therefore a Father affirms the
offense of Judas to be greater in despairing of mercy, the^ in betraying the
Son of God, and Caine to have stirred God to anger, more through desperation
of pardon then by the murder of his brother Abel: many which nailed Christ to
the cross, being converted, and believing in him, obtained pardon and are made
examples to man, that he ought in no wise to distrust the remission of his
wickedness, seeing the murder of the Lord of glory is forgiven to the penitent.

Turn then unto him, and a present pardon is made ready, which shall be signed
the first hour of thy repentance. When therefore thou feel in thy heart a
sorrow for sin, and a fervent desire to serve God, cherish it, and take the
opportunity of the first motion: Enter presently into thy chamber, or into some
other secret place, and there falling on thy knees beseech the Lord, that as he
has given thee a detestation of sin, and a mind of godliness, so it may
please him to perfect the good begun by him: to accept thy will, and pardon thy
many wants and weakness, in and for the all-sufficient merits of Christ Jesus:
to give thee grace that thou may go on mourning continually for thy sins;
and yet withal to rejoice in his sweet mercies: to put his fear into thy
heart, that thou may never more depart from him: and so to enkindle thy
zeal, that the fire thereof may burn up and consume every day more and more
thy carnal desires and natural corruptions. Continue this course of praying,
both mornings and euenings at the least: but if thou can oftener, it is the
better: For, pray continually, says the Apostle: meaning thou should have
always good meditations in thy mind: and when thou go to pray, strive to
pray in the spirit, framing thy petitions according to the feeling of thine own
wants, or Gods mercies toward thee (not that I disallow of set prayers, for I
reverence the godly authors and users of them) but because he that has the
gift of extemporall praying, is not so easily carried away with vain
distractio^s which Satan prompts unto him, (his mind and understanding being
wholly bent to the matter in hand) as commonly they be that pray in the book
of another man's conceiving. And if thou feel thy self somewhat duller
sometimes, sound forth thy voice withal, it will help much to the awaking of
thy devotion, as by mine own experience I have many times found. But take heed
as near as thou can, that thy prayers be out of the hearing of others, lest
thou get the imputation of hypocrisy, and cause thy good to be evil spoken of.

And for the further increasing of thy knowledge, use every morning after
prayers to read a chapter of the old or new Testament, and another at night
likewise before prayers, and thou shall find it by the blessing of GOD in short
time to have cleared thine understanding very much, and dispelled the mistes of
thy former ignorance. Also let me wish thee to read sometimes carefully and
advisedly the 28 chapter of Deuteronomy, and the 26 of Leuiticus, because they
be parts of Scripture, which (if we mark them well) will help much to
contain us in the doing of our duties. When thou art tempted to any sin,
carry not in the place, but go do something else, till the temptation be
slackt. Undertake no weighty business of thine own or thy masters, but with
prayer before, that God would guide and and speed thee in it. Think not that
thy praying will lose thee thy opportunity: For time is never lost in praying
unto him that does command the time.

Whatsoever has been unto thee an occasion of sin, shun it as thou would
shun a most mortal danger. Think no place to be without a witness of thy
doings: for a great part of wickedness is left undone, if some body be by when
one is about to commit it. Frequent the company of the godly, and avoid the
conversation of the wicked and profane: for continual conversation is of
great force, not only to make us embrace the virtues, but oftentimes also, even
against our wills to imitate the vices of our companions. Hence it comes,
that we are always taken for such as those are, with whom we do ordinarily
converse, according to the proverb, His nature in his mate is showen,
Who cannot by himself be known.


Meditate often of death, of the miseries of this life, of the resurrection,
the judgment, and the joys of the life to come: rather suffer evil then do
evil to any; but neither speak evil, nor listen to evil speakers. Fall not
easily at ods with any, but continue at ods with none. Follow thy God and
Saviors example, in doing well unto all men, and endeavor to be like him in
loving thine enemies. Finally, whatsoever things be of good report, or honest
example, those things think on and do, and the God of peace shall be with
thee for ever.

These things howsoever they seem unpleasant, and abhorring from our nature,
especially in our young years; yet if the Lord once infuse his grace into our
hearts, and renew our affections by the working of his spirit, they will seem
sweet and easy, and delightful; and we shall take more pleasure in doing of
them, then in any worldly or bodily exercise whatsoever. All the matter is at
first, after a little use, all difficulty vanishes. At the first leaping into
the water, middle high, one feels intolerable cold, ready to take away the
breath, but by that time he has waded in further up to the neck, it seems to
be of a milder temper. So religion and Gods service seems harsh and tedious at
the first entry into it, but by that time we have been a while inured to the
practice of it, all other things are unsavory to us, and only in this there
is heavenly delectation. To conclude this chapter; remember that our feeling of
the want of grace, is a good step to the obtaining of grace: Our desire to
repent, is the seed or kernel of repentance; and being cherished, will at
length bear ripe fruits of a sanctified conversation. That, howsoever the
devil and our own flesh move us to doubting, yet God wills not the death
of a sinner, that does from the bottom of his heart turn unto him: nor shall
our repentance be in vain (so it be true) though our sins were as many (for
number) as the drops of rain, and as bloody (for their quality) as skarlet is
red. Gods mercy is a rich mercy, and his pardon is absolute, without limitation
or exception. Finally, that hearty and continual prayer, and such simple rules
and directions as I have set down out of mine own observation and experience,
will prove good helps to the new Proselytes, for the beginning and perfiting
of their repentance.

CHAP. 9.
IF any ask how he shall know whether his repentance be true or no; I answer,
by the change which eft-soones he shall feel wrought in his whole man; which
is in a word the forsaking his former sins wherein he delighted, and
delighting in those good things which before he despised. Without this change
there is no repentance. Well we may flatter our selves, and talk of
repentance; but we are yet in our sins, and the Lords decree is still in force
against us. Well then, will thou be, not almost a Christian as King Agrippa,
but a true Israelite indeed, like Nathaniel in whom was no guile? renounce all
thy old sins, and receive in their places the virtues opposite to them, and
this shall seal up to thy conscience that thy sins are forgiven for his
names sake.

Have thou been a swearer? from henceforth fear the glorious and fearful
name of the Lord, and think not of it but with singular reverence; because his
own mouth has said it, He will not hold him guiltless that takes his name in
vain.

Answer me not, as one did not long since being reproved for this sin, I am
no such great swearer, as you would make me; It is but seldom that I swear by
GOD, and by such and such great oaths: for commonly the greatest oaths that I
swear is but by my faith or troth, and that I make account to be no such great
matter, and I pray GOD you never do worse, and then you shall do well enough.

But make thou conscience of an oath as well little as great: for the Apostle
allows of no oath at al; Swear not all (says he) neither by heaven nor by
earth, nor any oath, lest you fall into condemnation. But (as our Savior says)
let your yea be yea, and your nay nay; for whatsoever is more is of the Devil

O but says one, the world is so full of unbelief, that except I swear, men
will not believe me, yea and nay is nothing now a days to sell my commodities
by, if I swear not I shall not sell.

Why is that, but because thou have never made conscience of a lie, but added
an oath, two or three sometimes to make a lie go current? and peradventure thy
customers sometimes knowing that thou swearest falsely, cannot believe thee
another time though thou swear truly. But if thou would sell thy wares,
take the counsel of the Apostle, who wills us to cast off lying, and every
one of us to speak truth to his neigbour, forasmuch as we are members one of
another: and so by using thy tongue to speak truth, thou shall be believed
sooner upon thy bare word, then upon thy many protestations and oaths. Carnal
men will sooner suspect thy swearing, then thy plain saying, because they
(though they be such as carry a form of civil honesty) will notwithstanding not
stick to swear a lie themselves to win some advantage by, and by their own
fashion they judge of thine. So then swearing is a sin clothed neither with
pleasure nor profit: for what pleasure is there in a profane frothy word,
spewed out of the wicked abundance of the heart? or what profit, when the
thundering out of six or seven oaths one after another will not sell a yeard of
stuff or a pound weight of thy commodities? so little account is made of them.
Besides, in much swearing is often forswearing, as it is seen too often in our
shops every day: For let a man come into some shops to cheapen a commodity and
they will swear that they cannot afford it at such a price, and that they will
keep it seven years before they will sell it so, and yet let their customers
back be no sooner turned to be gone, but presently he is called again, and his
money taken, which before was refused with so many oaths.

If Servants will thus burden their consciences for their masters profit, (and
many against their masters wills) what will they do for themselves? who shall
let them then to swear away all faith, truth and conscience for ever? to
swear their souls to the Devil, that they shall never repent; and to swear a
plague into their houses, which shall consume the very timber and stones of it?
O my Brethren tremble at this provoking sin: tremble to bring the great and
holy name of the Lord for a witness to your base twelve penny lies: tremble to
deal so saucily with the omnipotent Majesty that can send a deadly
thunderbolt to strike you presently through, in the place where you stand. Bear
with a vehement speech, when it proceeds out of a love more vehement: For your
precious souls sake, leave off this profitlesse and pleasurelesse sin: let
this be the first sin thou fightest against, and when thou have got the
victory of this, the rest of thy conquest will be the easier.

Have thou been a prophaner of the Sabbath, and one that has made no
conscience of going to Church longer then thy masters eye has been upon thee;
and when thou have been there, have made small account of that which has
been taught, but either have been talking, or sleeping, or idly, or wickedly
thinking? etc. Henceforth frequent more duly the the holy sanctuary and house
of prayer; prepare thy self aforehand that thou may reap profit of the
things which thou shall hear; intend more reverently and devoutly to Gods
worship: rob not the Lord of the day which he has consecrated to the glory of
his great name: he requires but the seventh, six are ours, and shall we not
afford him one?

If a Father having called his children together should tell them: It is so,
that I have cast up my accounts, and I find my estate to be worth seven
thousand pound, six of which seven thousand I am content presently to part with
among you, and the one thousand see you use as thriftily and carefully to my
behoof, as you would the six thousand to your own. What ingratitude and
irreverence were it to so bountiful a Father, for these children having gotten
the seven thousand pound into their hands, to turn all to their own use and
advantage, never respecting their kind Fathers good, nor his charge unto them,
or at the most so carelessly, that it may appear there is but little religion
of their vow in them? The Lord who is our heavenly Father has given us six
days to do our business and affairs in, and only one day he has reserved
to himself, appointing us to bestow it in his worship and service, because
that day is his delight, (as the Prophet says:) what negligence, what impiety,
what contempt can be greater, then for us to spend the whole week in following
our pleasures or our drudgeries, and when the holy Sabbath comes, to intrude
into our heavenly fathers right, and consume that also in the carnal works,
or covetous proiects, or ordinary exercises of the week before; what
intolerable avarice is it, or sacrilege rather, having so bountiful allowance
from our heavenly father, not to be content, unless we may seize his peculiar
reservation into our hands also? This is right to have thousands of sheep
pasturing upon our own downs, and yet to kill the poor man's only Lamb,
that slept in his bosom, for the provision of our house.

But here some will say, it is true, we must lay away all work on the Sabbath
day, but yet to sell and take money for wares in the shop before and after
service, is no great work, and therefore as good do that as stand idle.

No, I deny it: for as the proverb goes amongst us, Thou had better be
idle, then ill occupied; so they were better stand still then vent their
commodities: they be both sins, but selling of ware is the greater, how little
soever: for a man may as well take 40. pounds that day as one pe^ny: For Gods
commandment is broken in both. In the 16 of Exodus GOD condemns the
Israelits for purposing to gather Manna on the Sabbath day: what easier work
could there be then this? nay moreover it was to be done between five and six a
clock in the morning, when they might have served GOD all the day after: and
they needed not to have gone far for it neither, but only come forth of their
doors and stoop to take it up. But (mark) when they came forth they found
nothing.

Here is a good lesson for us to learn, that as they went out to gather Manna
on the Sabbath day, and found nothing: so the gains that is gotten by selling
wares on the Sabbath day is, just nothing, howsoever men are blinded and think
the contrary, for GODS curse eats it up, and more too.

I grant we are not tied to so strict an observation of the Sabbath in every
respect as the Jews were: yet thus far the moral part of the precept does
oblige us to the worlds end, namely, to do no works on that day, but works of
holiness, or of mere necessity: but men now a days make no bones to step over
any of Gods laws, when they be in the way of their profit: and yet they will
be good Christians too.

We remember that day to pamper our belies with good cheer and fine clothes,
and to take our pleasure, we remember to keep a right Epicures Sabbath: but to
hear Gods word taught, to lay our petitions in common together in our
Churches, and to call our families together when we come home, that we may be
the better for that we have heard, which is the right christians Sabbath; this
we remember, utterly to forget.

I am persuaded there is more wickedness committed both by Prentises and
others on the Lords day, then on any three days in the week beside, and the
reason is, because men for the most part will see that their servants shall
follow the business of their trades all the week, but upon Gods day they are
careless of them, and suffer them to do what they list themselves. That is the
day of their recreation: For as Solomon says, it is a pastime to a fool to
do evil.

When they should walk to the Lecture, for the recreation of their souls, the
masters are walked to their gardens or the fields for their bodily pleasure; and
the servants to the Tavern or to some place of greater corruption to the
enda^gering of their souls: so the word preached to them in the day time
before, is no better then the seed that fell upon stony ground, because for
want of due rehearsal afterward (which is as it were the depth of earth) it
withers away and comes to nothing, like seed cast away upon the rock where it
cannot take root.

And in this point the irreligiousnes of Prentises does far exceed the
negligence of masters: For it is too apparent that many servants would seldom
or never come to Church at all, if it were not more for displeasing their
masters on earth, then for displeasing their master in heaven: For let masters
upon occasion be from home a month or two, and all that time if his servants
come to Church in the forenoone only, they think they are meetly well in the
fashion: but commonly you shall not see them there either forenoone or
afternoon: and their reason is, their masters absence is the time of their
liberty, and they may not suffer such good days to slip away without fruit. If
you ask them how they will answer it to their masters at their coming home?
they will tell you, they hope their masters knowledge goes but by his eye. If
you ask the^ how they will answer it to GOD, that sees and judges the most
secret works? they make a pish at that, or give you some gross flout for
recompense. But let such know that poverty and shame belongs unto them for
refusing instruction, and they that think now the Lords day, (though it were a
month long to fly away as one minut in their pleasures, shall hereafter
think one minute too lag, and pass by as slowly as a whole year in their
pains.

But here some may reply, Will you not allow us to recreate our selves at any
time? If you say yes: then I pray what day have we that be prentises to take
our recreation in but the Sunday? For all the week we are kept so straight
that we cannot so much as get out to speak with any friend. And as for keeping
our Church duly, howsoever others be negligent, yet it is well known in our
parish that we never almost miss one Sunday in the year, but we are always
at Church with the first, and never go into the fields or to any merrime^t
until evening prayer be done, and then I hope the matter is not so heinous as
you make it.

Surely if you were such diligent goers to Church, as you say you are, it could
not be but you should hear at sometime or other that you ought not to profane
or mispend one hour of the Sabbath, where you make it lawful to spend half
the afternoon in merriment and pleasure. But it may be you are asleep when
you should hear that; or else you take it to be but the word of a mortal man,
and the authority thereof to vanish with the speaking. But a day will come when
you shall know it was the eternal truth of the GOD of heaven, which his
ministers delivered; and when it will cut your heart to remember that you did
hear such a Preacher in such a year, in such a month, in such a day* and in
such a Church, denounce the fearful judgments of God against such a sin
which you did use, and wherein (for a little pleasures sake) you did
obstinately continue to your own damnation.

To conclude, have thou been a drunkard? now learn sobriety: have thou been
intemperate? now embrace chastity: have thou been malicious? show charity:
proud? be humble. Finally, whatsoever vice thou have addicted thy self to,
recline now to the contrary side. That which thou do, do it with all thy
power in the present time, even in this day of salvation: For time being once
past, can never be recalled; and to trust upon time to come is as much as if we
should trust upon a broken staff, the splinters whereof will run into our hand;
or ve^ture to pass so dangerous a gulse as damnation, with a tottering planck
(delay I mean) which has tilted so many thousands into hell before us.

THE FOVRTH PART.
CHAP. 10.
HAVING showed the inestimable love and mercy of GOD to repentant sinners, that
do truly forsake their former wickedness, I think it necessary in the last
place (as the Lord will enable me) to show the good and profit of afflictions
to Gods children, to the end they may not be discomforted or shrink back at
the sight of them.

Eccles. 2.1.
My son, (says the Son of Syrach) if thou come into the service of GOD,
stand fast in righteousness and fear, and prepare thy soul to tentation, and
shrink not when thou art troubled, but wait patiently upon God. And it is a
sealed truth which the Apostle has delivered, All that will live godly in
Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution, in one kind or other, more or less. It
is their portion and ever has been; Christ Jesus himself the author of our
faith was not exempted, and the servant is not above his Lord.

If then afflictions must needs be undergone, let us labor to undergo them
willingly, which must be undergone of necessity. I know there is a certain
tenderness in our nature, which with reproaches and ill turns is so pressed and
wrung, that there is scarce any man to be found so wise or courageous, but when
he feels the pricks and stings thereof pearcing him, is oftentimes half in
the mind to give over his course of godliness, and turn from the way of
virtue. No affliction or vexation for the present seems ioious, but grievous,
says the Apostle, but afterward it brings forth the quiet fruits of
righteousness to them that are exercised thereby. Let us not dwell then upon the
present feeling, but look further into the sweet effects and end of our
troubles, and thence gather comfort and strength against them.

This made the Apostle break out, My Brethren, count it for an exceeding joy,
when ye fall into diverse tentations; because they are pledges of Gods love,
trials of our faith, and breeders of patience, experience and hope, which never
makes ashamed. Art thou entered into a course of religion and sanctification?
art thou jealous for the Lord of Hosts? and do thou meet with oppositions
and stumbling blocks in thy way? be not dismayed, was it not told thee before,
the way to heaven lay by the cross? It is a sure sign thou art in the path
that leads thither. Art thou skoffed at by worldlings and prophan people, Job.
21.14.
men or women? (for I know diverse such persons of both sexes, that being not
content to live in ignorance themselves, without any desire to know the way of
the Lord, do deride and point at those that seek instruction?) Let the
clearnes of thy conscience, and thy holy desire and endeavor to the best
things, be as a brazen wall, and a strong tower against these evils: let them
know that the Lord hates those that sit in the seat of the scorneful: Psalm. 1.
and though they please themselves well enough the while, yet it shall not be
well with them at the last day: Esaias. 3.10
For the reward of their own hands shall be given them.

Have thou a master that entreates thee hardly for thy well doing and thy
righteous professions sake? know that the Lord has set such a master over thee
for thine everlasting good, to try thy constancy, or to make thee more fervent
in thy prayers, or to diminish thy love of the world, or for an example of
patience, or an instance of comfort to others in like case. As many as I love,
I rebuke and chasten, says our Savior Christ. Apoc. 3.19.
Whosoever be the instrument, the chastening is Christ's; see that thou do thy
duty unto thy master, to the uttermost of thy power though he be never so
moody, even as if he were another Moses, the mildest man upon the earth; that
the name of God and his doctrine be not evil spoken of. Assure thy self he
shall be no harder to thee then the Lord shall see good and expedient for thee:
for we see some men want neither power nor will, who sometimes in their sudde^
anger would kill their servants; but the^ the Lord manifests his providence
toward his children, in restraining them from those outrages, which in that
madding passion, they are incited to. Pray unto the Lord, to turn thy masters
heart, that he may have a feeling of his sins, that so he may come to
repentance; and in the mean time, overcome thou his evil with goodness and the
Lord will either unexpectedly alter his will and affections, or allow thee such
other secret joys as shall ouerballance all thy griefs and discomforts.

If then thou will go to heaven thou see the journey thither lies not in
plain ways; thou must go through good report and bad, derisions and skornes,
and molestations: but the end of the journey is a sufficient recompense for all
cumbers and inconveniences of the way; the pains are light and momentany, the
weight of glory to which they bring us, is unspeakable and everlasting.

So long as thou wast of the world, the world loved her own; now that thou
have forsaken and bid defiance to her, she takes thee for an enemy, and loades
thee with hatred, disdain, infamy, slander and all manner of contempt. No
matter, all this (and worse) shall work to the best to them that love God,
when the softnes and delicacy and ease of worldlings, shall be their own
destruction.

All the holy men of old time, all the chief lights of the Church, all those
that now walk in long white robes with palms of victory in their hands, yea
he that Saint John saw in the midst of the seven golden candlestickes, whose
face did shine as the Sun in his strength, even he also has begun to us in
this bitter cup; and shall we shrink to pledge them, when there are but a few
small drops left for us to sip off?

If carnal men suffer so much to satisfy their lusts, to get riches or
dignities, to feed themselves with a little smoke of vain glory, or to taste
some slight pleasure which bringes repentance at her heels. If they fear not
the waves of the sea, nor the flames of fire, nor the crossings of men, to
attain these; shall we be so without all heart, or so nice that we will not
abide a scoff, or a reproachful word, to attain those solid, substantial and
eternal pleasures and good things; in comparion of which, all the honors,
riches, commodities, allurements and sweetness of the world, are to be esteemed
not only toys and trifles, but very dregs and dross and refuse, not worth
the taking up? No, no, when we have once resolutely vowed our selves to Gods
service, GOD puts another spirit into us, and a generous heart, (that though
we be sometimes moved with these oppositions) yet we are never so far
oppressed by them as to forsake our righteousness, or cast our lot in amongst
sinners; but in the midst of them our eye is so fixed upon the end of our
race, and the heavenly garland reserved for such as persevere and hold on, that
shrewd words serve as a good gale of wind, and shrewd deeds as a violent
stream to carry us the more swift toward the port where we would be.

Thus having finished this small Treatise, I would beseech you (as the Apostle
says) to suffer these few lines of exhortations, Ephesians. 6.
and that you faint not in your afflictions; but be strong in the Lord,
putting on the whole armor of GOD, that ye may be able to stand against all
the assaults of the Devil, having your loins girt about with verity, and
having on the breast plate of righteousness, and your feet shod with the
preparation of the Gospel of peace; and above all take the shield of faith,
wherewith ye may quench all the fiery darts of the wicked, and take the helmet
of salvation, and the sword of the spirit which is the word of GOD, that being
thus armed with these spiritual weapons, ye may be able to wrestle against
principalities and powers, and against our spiritual enemies the governors of
the darkness of this world.

Now the Lord from heaven rain down his grace into our hearts, and strengthen
us with might in the inner man, that we may stand fast, and encourage one
another against all the bents of worldly adversity, that being rooted and
grounded in love, we may be able to comprehend with all Saints what is the
breadth and length, depth, and height, and know the love of Christ, which
passes all knowledge, that we may be filled with all fulness of God. Unto him
therefore (that is able to do exceeding abundantly, above all that we can ask
or think) be all praise, glory, majesty, dominion and power, thorowout all
gerations both now and for evermore, Amen.

A Morning Prayer to be used in private families.
O LORD, our God, and heavenly Father, we thy unworthy children do here come
into thy most holy and heavenly presence, to give thee praise and glory, for
all thy great mercies and manifold blessings toward us: especially for that
thou have preserved us this night past from all the dangers and fears thereof,
have given us quiet rest to our bodies, and brought us now safely to the
beginning of this day, and do now a fresh renew all thy mercies upon us, as
the Eagle renueth her bill, giving us all things abundantly to enjoy; as food,
raiment, health, peace, liberty, and freedom from many miseries, diseases,
casualties, and calamities which we are subject unto in this life, every minute
of an hour: and not only so, but also for vouchsafing unto us many good
things, not only for necessity, but even for delight also. But above all
(dear Father) we praise thy name for the blessings of a better life, specially
for thy most holy word and sacraments, and all the good we enjoy thereby; for
the continuance of the Gospel amongst us; for the death of thy Son and all
that happiness which we have thereby; also because thou have chosen us to life
before we were, and that of thy mere godnes, and undeserved savor toward us,
and have called us in thine appointed time, justified us by thy grace,
sanctified us by thy Spirit, and adopted us to be thine own children, and heirs
apparent to the great crown. O Lord open our eyes every day more and more, to
see and consider of thy great and marvelous love to us in all these things;
that by the due consideration thereof, our hearts may be drawn yet nearer unto
thee, even more to love thee, fear thee, and obey thee: that as thou art
enlarged toward us in mercy, so we may be enlarged toward thee in
thanksgiving: and as thou do abound toward us in goodness so we may abound
toward thee in obedience and love. And since (dear Father) thou art never
weary of doing us good, notwithstanding al our unworthiness and naughtiness:
therefore let the consideration of thy great mercy and fatherly kindness
toward us even as it were force our hearts, and compel us to come into thy
most glorious presence with new songs of tha^kesgiuing in our mouths. We pray
thee (O most merciful God) to forgive us all our unthankfulness, unkindness,
profaneness, and great abusing of thy mercies, and specially our abuse and
contempt of thy Gospel, together with all other the sins of our life, which
we confess are innumerable, and more than can be reckoned up, both in omission
of good things and commission of evil. We most humbly entreat thee to set them
all over to the reckoning which thy son Christ has made up for the^ upon his
cross, and never to lay any of them to our charge, but freely forget all, and
forgive all; Nail down all our sins and iniquities to the Cross of Christ,
bury them in his death, bathe them in his blood, hide them in his wounds, let
them never rise up in judgment against us. Set us free of the miseries that
are upon us for sin, and keep back the judgments to come, both of soul,
body, goods, and good name. Be reconciled unto us in thy dear Son,
concerning all matters past, not once remembering or repeating unto us our old
and abominable iniquities; but accept us as righteous in him, imputing his
righteousness to us, and our sins to him. Let his righteousness satisfy
thy justice for all our unrighteousness, his obedience for our disobedience,
his perfection for our imperfection. Moreover, we humbly beseech thy good
majesty to give us the true sight and feeling of our manifold sins, that we
may not be blinded in them through delight, or hardened in the^ through custom
as the reprobates are: but that we may be even weary of them, and much grieved
for them laboring and striving by all possible means to get out of them. Good
Father touch our hearts with true repentance for all sin. Let us not take any
delight or pleasure in any sin: but howsoever we fall through frailty (as we
fall often) yet let us never fall finally, let us never lie down in sin, nor
continue in sin; but let us get upon our feet again, and turn to thee with
all our hearts, and seek thee whilst thou may be found, and whilst thou
do offer grace and mercy unto us. O Lord increase in us that true and lively
faith whereby we may lay sure hold on thy Son Christ, and rest upon his
merits altogether. Give us faith assuredly to believe all the great and
precious promises made in the Gospel, and strengthen us from above to walk
and abound in all true and sound fruits of faith. Let us walk not after the
flesh, but after the spirit. Let us feel the power of thy Sons death killing
sin in our mortal bodies, and the power of his resurrection, raising us up
to newness of life. Let us grow daily in the sanctification of the spirit, and
the mortification of the flesh. Let us live holily, justly, and soberly in this
present evil world, showing forth the virtues of thee in all our particular
actions; that we may adorn our most holy profession, and shine as lights in
the midst of a crooked and froward generation amongst whom we live, being
gainful to all by our lives and conuersations, and offensive to none. To this
end we pray thee fill us with thy spirit and al spiritual graces; as love,
wisdom, patience, contentment, meekness, humility, temperancy, chastity,
kindness and affability: and stir us up to use prayer and watchfulness,
reading and meditation in thy law, and all other good means whereby we may
grow and abound in all heavenly virtues. Bless us in the use of the means,
from day to day; make us such as thou would have us to be, and such as we
desire to be, working in us both will and deed, purpose and power. For thou O
Lord art all in all, thou will have mercy upon whom thou will have mercy, and
who^ thou will thou hardenest. Have mercy upon us therefore (dear Father) and
never leave us to our selves, nor to our own wills, lusts, and desires, but
assist us with thy good spirit, that we may continue to the end in a righteous
course; that so at length we may be received into glory, and be partatakers of
that immortal crown which thou have laid up for all that love thee and truly
call upon thee.

Further, we entreat thee, O heavenly father, to give us all things necessary
for this life: as food, raiment, health, peace, liberty, and such freedom from
those manifold miseries which we lie open unto every day, as thou see meet.
Bless unto us all the means which thou have put into our hands, for the
sustenance of this frail life. Bless our stock and store, corn, and
cattle, trades and occupations, and all the works of our hands: for thy
blessing only makes rich, and it brings no sorrows with it. Give us
therefore such a competency and sufficiency of these outward blessings as thou
in thy heavenly wisdom see most needful for us. Moreover, we humbly beseech
thee, (most loving Father) in great mercy to look down from heaven upon thy
whole Church, and every member of it. Be favorable unto Sten, and build up the
walls of Jerusalem. Behold with the eye of pity, the great ruins and
desolations of thy Church. Heal up the wounds, and make up the breaches
thereof in all Nations. Regard it as thine own flock, tender it as thine own
family, dress it as thine own vinyeard love it as thine own spouse. Think
thoughts of peace to it, and always look upon it in deep compassion. Bless
it with thy grace, guide it with thy spirit, and defend it always with thy
mighty power: scatter the devices, confound the counsels, and overthrow the
forces of all that fight against it. Specially we entreat thee, dear father,
to set thy self against that Antichrist of Rome, that man of perdition which
sets himself against thee, and against all thy people. In thine appointed
time we pray thee give him a deadly down fall. Beat down all his power and
authority daily more and more: give free passage to thy Gospel in all
kingdoms, that Babylon may fall and never rise up again. The more the
favorites and adherents of Rome labor to uphold their idolatrous kingdom,
the more let it fall down, even as Dagon before the presence of thine Ark.
Power down the vials of the fullness of thy wrath upon the kingdom of the
Beast, and let their riches, wealth, credit and authority, dry up every day
more and more, as the river Euphrates. Let it pity thee, O Father, to see thine
own spouse sit as a deformed and forlorn woman here below weeping and
mourning with hair about her neck, having lost all her beauty and comeliness:
cheer her up (dear Father) glad her with the joy of thy countenance, and so
deck her and trim her up that thou may delight in her, as a Bridegroom in
his Bride. Specially we in treat thee to have mercy upon the Church in this
land: intend good unto us and not evil: give us not over into the hands of the
cruel Spaniard, as our sins have deserved. Scatter we pray thee, O Lord, the
devices and break the plots of all such as have plotted the overthrow and
utter subversion of this Church and common wealth. Bless this Church more and
more, with the continuance of true Religion amongst us. For thy great names
sake and infinite mercies sake deal graciously and favorably with us and our
posterity. Turn from us that vengeance which is due to us for our sins. For
thou see how iniquity prevails and the wicked go away with the goal.
Atheism ouerspreadeth every where, and Popery seems to get a head again.
Now therefore (dear Father) we most humbly beseech thee to take order
speedily for the remedying and repressing of these manifold disorders, and
grievous enormities that are amongst us. Be entreated of thy poor children to
be good to this English nation. Hear the cries of thine elect: hear the
mourning of them that mourn in Sion. Let the cries of thy children cry down
all the cries of the sins of the land, and be reconciled unto us in the
multitude of thy compassions: that so thou may still continue a most
merciful protector of this thine English vineyard. We pray thee (good Father)
show special mercy to our most Noble and gracious K. James thine anointed
servant: bless him, and keep him in all his ways. Bless his government unto
us. Let thine Angels encamp about him, and let thy holy hand be always over
him, keep him from treasons, and deliver him from the treacheries of his
enemies: give him to see what belongs unto his peace, and give him a heart
earnestly bent to set upon the practice of the same: give him al graces
necessary for his peace, and necessary for his salvation: continue his
government peaceable and prosperous amongst us: and as thou have made him the
breath of our nostrils, and a gracious instrument for the saving of many
thousand souls, so let his own soul be saved in the day of thy Son Christ.
Bless his Majesty's most honorable privy Counselors, and give such good
success unto all their Counsels and policies in matters of state, that we may
lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. Bless all the
Nobility, work in them a care to glorify thy name in their places, make them
faithful to thee, and faithful to the Land. Direct with thy good spirit all
such as bear the sword of Justice, that they may draw it out to punish the
wicked, and to defend the godly, and that they may with all good care and
conscience discharge the duties of their places. Increase the number of
faithful and zealous Ministers in this Church. Send thy Gospel to those
places where it is not, and bless it where it is. Remember them in thy mercy,
O Lord, that are under any cross or affliction whatsoever: be comfortable
unto them heal up their wounds, bind up their sores, put all their tears
into thy bottle, and make their bed in all their sorrows, and put such a good
end to al their troubles that they may redound to thy glory, and the
furtherance of their own salvation. In the mean time give them patience and
constancy to bear whatsoever it shall please thy merciful hand to lay upon
them. Last of all, in a word we pray thee bless Magistracy, Ministry and
Co^monalty. Bless all thy people do good to all that are true and upright in
their hearts. And so (dear father) we do commit and commend our selves, our
souls and bodies, into thy hands, for this day and the rest of our life,
praying thee to take care and charge of us; keep us from all evil, watch over
us for our good, let thine Angels encamp about us, let thy holy hand be over
us, and keep us in all our ways, that we may live to thy praise and glory here
in earth, keeping faith and a good conscience in all our actions; that after
this life we may be crowned of thee for ever in thy kingdom. Grant these
things (good father) to us here present, and to all thine absent; praying thee
in special favor to remember our friends and kinsfolks in the flesh, all our
good neighbors and wel-willers, and all those for who^ we are bound to pray by
nature, by deserts, or any duty whatsoever, for Jesus Christ's sake our only
Mediator; to whom with thee and the holy Ghost, be given all praise and glory,
both now and for evermore. Amen.

An Evening prayer to be used in private families.
O Eternal GOD, and most loving and dear Father, we thy unworthy children, do
here fall down at the foot of thy great majesty, acknowledging from our
hearts, that we are altogether unworthy to come near thee or to look toward
thee: because thou art a God of infinite glory, and we are most vile, and
abominable sinners, such as were conceived and borne in sin and corruption,
such as have inherited our fathers corruptions, and also have actually
transgressed all thy holy statutes and laws, both in thought, words, and
deeds, before we knew thee: and since, secretly and openly, with our selves and
with others, our particular sins are more than can be numbered: for who knows
how often he offends? But this we must needs confess against our selves,
that our hearts are full of pride, covetousness, and the love of this world,
full of wrath, anger, and impatiencie, full of lying, dissembling, and
deceiving, full of vanity, hardness, and profaneness, full of infidelity,
distrust, and self-love, full of lust, uncleanness, and all abominable
desires: yea our hearts are the very sinkes of sin, and dunghils of all
filthiness. And besides all this, we do omit the good things we should do: for
there are in us great wants of faith, of love, of zeal, of patience, of
contentment, and of every good grace; so as thou have just cause to proceed to
sentence of judgment against us, as most damnable transgressors of all thy
holy commandments: yea such as are sunk in our rebellions, and have many
times and often committed high treason against thy majesty, and therefore thou
may justly cast us all down into hell fire, there to be tormented with
Satan, and his Angels for ever. And we have nothing to except against thy
majesty for so doing: since therein thou should deal with us but according to
equity, and our just deserts. Wherefore dear father we do appeal from thy
justice to thy mercy, most humbly entreating thee to have mercy upon us, and
freely to forgive us all our sins past whatsoever, both new and old, secret
and open, known and unknown, and that for Jesus Christ's sake, our only
Mediator. And we pray thee touch our hearts with true grief, and unfeigned
repentance for them, that they may be a matter of continual sorrow, and
heart-smart unto us, so as nothing may greiue us more then this, that we have
offended thee being our special friend and father. Give us therefore (dear
Father) every day more and more sight and feeling of our sins, with true
humiliation under the same. Give us also that true and lively faith, whereby we
may lay sure hold onthy Son Christ, and all his merits, aplying the same to our
own souls; so as we may stand fully persuaded that whatsoever he has done
upon the cross, he has done for us particularly as well as for others. Give
us faith (good Father) constantly to believe all the sweet promises of the
gospel, touching remission of sin, and eternal life, made in thy Son
Christ. O Lord increase our faith, that we may altogether rest upon thy
promises, which are all, yea, and Amen Yea, that we may settle our selves, and
all that we have wholly upon them: both our souls, bodies, goods, name, wives
children, and our whole estate, knowing that all things depend upon thy
promises, power, and providence, and that thy word does support and bear up
the whole order of nature. More over, we entreat thee, O Lord, to strengthen us
from above to walk in every good way, and to bring forth the fruits of true
faith in all our particular actions, studying to please thee in all things and
to be fruitful in good works, that we may show forth unto all men by our good
conversation whose children we are: and that we may adorn and beautify our
most holy profession by walking in a Christian course, and in all the sound
fruits and practice of godliness, and true religion. To this end we pray thee
sanctify our hearts by thy spirit yet more and more: sanctify our souls and
bodies, and all our corrupt natural faculties, as reason, understanding, will,
and affections, so as they may be fitted for thy worship and service, taking a
delight and pleasure therein. Stir us up to use prayer; watchfulness,
reading and meditation in thy law, and all other good means whereby we may
profit in grace and goodness from day to day. Bless us in the use of the
means, that we may daily die to sin, and live to righteousness: draw us yet
nearer unto thee: help us against our monifold wants. Amend our great
imperfections, renew us inwardly more and more, repair the ruins of our
hearts, aid us against the remnants of sin. Enlarge our hearts to run the
way of thy Commandments, direct all our steps in thy word, let none iniquity
have dominion over us. Assist us against our special infirmities, and master
sins, that we may get the victory over them all, to thy glory, and the great
peace and comfort of our own consciences. Strengthen us, good father, by thy
grace and holy spirit, against the common corruptions of the world, as pride,
whoredom, covetousness, contempt of thy Gospel, swearing, lying,
dissembling, and deceiving. O dear Father, let us not be over come of these
filthy vices, nor any other sinful pleasures, and fond delights, wherewith
thousands are carried headlong to destruction. Arm our souls against all the
temptations of this world, the flesh and the Devil: that we may overcome them
all through thy help, and keep on the right way to life, that we may live in
thy fear, and die in thy favor, that our last days may be our best days,
and that we may end in great peace of conscience. Furthermore, dear Father, we
entreat thee not only for ourselves, but for all our good brethren thy dear
children scattered over the face of the whole earth, most humbly beseeching
thee to bless them all, to cheer them up, and glad them with the joy of thy
countenance both now and always. Guide them all in thy fear, and keep them
from evil, that they may praise thy name. In these dangerous days, and
declining times, we pray thee, O Lord, raise up nursing fathers and nursing
mothers unto thy Church. Raise up also faithful Pastors, that thy cause may be
carried forward, truth may prevail, Religion may prosper, thy name only may be
set up in the earth, thy Sons kingdom advanced, and thy will accomplished.
Set thy self against all adversary power, especially that of Rome, Antichrist,
Idolatry, and Atheism: curse and cross all their counsels, frustrate their
devises, scatter their forces, overthrow their armies. When they are most wise,
let them be most foolish: when they are most strong, let them be most weak.
Let the^ know that there is no wisdom nor counsel, power nor policy against
thee the Lord of Hosts. Let the^ know that Israel has a God, and that thou
which art called Jehovah art the only ruler over all the world. Arise
therefore O most mighty God, and maintain thine own cause against all thine
enemies, smite through all their loins, and bow down their backs, yea let
them all be confounded, and turned backward that bear ill will unto Sion. Let
the patient abiding of the righteous be joy: and let the wicked be disappointed
of their hope. But of all favor, we entreat thee O Lord, to show special
mercy to thy Church in this Land wherein we live. Continue thy Gospel amongst
us yet with greater success, purge thy house daily more and more, take away
all things that offend. Let this Nation still be a place where thy name may
be called upon, and an harbor for thy Saints. Show mercy to our posterity,
dear Father, and have care of them, that thy Gospel may be left unto them as
a most holy inheritance. Defend us against forre^ inuasio^, keep out Idolatry
and Popery from amongst us. Turn from us those plagues which our sins cry for.
For the sins of this Land are exceeding great, horrible, and outrageous, and
give thee just cause to make us spectacles of thy vengeance to all Nations;
that by how much the more thou have lifted us up in great mercy, and long peace
by so much the more thou should press us down in great wrath and long war.
Therefore dear Father, we most humbly entreat thee, for thy great names sake,
and for thy infinite mercies sake, that thou would be reconciled to this
land, and discharge it of all the horrible sins thereof. Drown them O Lord in
thy infinite mercy through Christ, as it were in a bottomless gulf, that they
may never rise up in judgment against us. For although our sins be
exceeding many, and fearful, yet thy mercy is far greater. For thou art
infinite in mercy, but we cannot be infinite in sinning. Give us not over into
the hands of the Idolaters, lest they should blaspheme thy name, and say, Where
is their God in whom they trusted? But rather, dear father, take us into thine
own hands, and correct us according to thy wisdom: for with thee is mercy,
and deep compassion. Moreover, we most heartily beseech thy good Majesty to
bless our most gracious King James, and to show much mercy to him in all
things. Guide him in thy fear, and keep him in all his ways, working in his
soul unfeigned sorrow for sin, true faith in the promises, and a great care
to please thee in all things, and to discharge the duty of his high place, in
all zeal of thy glory, and faithfulness toward thy Majesty: that as thou
have crowned him here in earth, so he (spending his days, here below in thy
fear) may after this life be crowned of thee for ever in the Heavens. We
beseech thee also to bless his Majesty's most honorable privy Counselors.
Counsel them from above, let them take advice of thee in all things: that they
may both consult, and resolve of such courses as may be most for thy glory, the
good of the Church, and the peace of this our Commonwealth. Bless the
Nobility, and all the Magistrates in the Land, giving them all grace to execute
judgment and justice, and to maintain truth and equity. Bless all the
faithful Ministers of the Gospel, increase the number of them, inincrease thy
gifts in them: and so bless all their labors in their several places and
congregations, that they all may be instruments of thy hand to enlarge thy
Sons kingdom, and to win many unto thee. Comfort the comfortless with all
needful comforts. Forget none of thine that are in trouble: but as their
afflictions are, so let the joys and comforts of thy spirit be unto them: and
so sanctify unto all thine, their afflictions and troubles, that they may tend
to thy glory, and their own good. Give us thankful hearts for all thy
mercies, both spiritual and corporal: for thou art very merciful unto us in
the things of this life, and infinitely more merciful in the things of a
better life. Let us deeply ponder and weigh all thy particular favors toward
us: that by the due consideration thereof, our hearts may be gained yet nearer
unto thee, and that therefore we may both love and obey thee, because thou art
so kind and loving unto us: that even thy love toward us, may draw our love
toward thee, and that because mercy is with thee, thou may be feared.
Grant these things good Father, and all other needful graces for our souls or
bodies, or any of thine through out the whole world, for Jesus Christ's sake, in
whose name we further call upon thee as he has taught us in his Gospel,
saying; Our Father which art in Heaven. etc.

FINIS.

