ORDERS AND CONSTITVTIONS, PARTLY COLlected out of his Majesty's Letters
Patents; and partly by authority, and in virtue of the said Letters Patents:
Ordained upon mature deliberation, by the Governor and Company of the City of
LONDON, for the Plantation of the SumMER-ILANDS: for the better governing of
the actions and affairs of the said Company and Plantation. 6. Febr. 1621.

AT LONDON, Imprinted by FELIX KYNGSTON. 1622.

Bermuda coat of arms

Orders and Constitutions, partly collected out of his Majesty's Letters
Patents, and partly by authority, and in virtue of the said Letters Patents:
ordained upon mature deliberation, by the Governor and Company of the City of
London, for the Plantation of the Summer-Ilands: for the better governing of
the Actions and Affairs of the said Company and Plantation. 6. February. 1621.
THE FIRST PART.
The Company.
1. THe Company of Summer-Ilands consists shares, into which the eight Tribes
of the said Summer-Ilands are divided. Provided always, that the Owners by
Ioynt-tenancy, Coparcinary, or otherwise, as Tenants in common, if the number
of their persons exceed not the number of their Shares so held, may be admitted
into the said Company, and have each their several voices: but if the number
of their persons exceed, they shall, or may present one to have voice for them
all.

2. No man, though having right, shall presume to be present at the Assemblies
of the said Company, before he be solemnly admitted by the Governor or Deputy
of the said Company in a General Court: which admittance shall neither be
granted, where it is not due; nor denied, or delayed, where it is apparently
due.

3. No person, by reason of minority of years, (having otherwise right) shall
be excluded from being present at the General Assemblies of the said Company:
but yet shall not be admitted to have voice in any Election, or other business
whatsoever, till he have accomplished the full age of eighteen years.

Courts.
4. THere are four great General Courts, commonly Summer-Ilands, upon the
four last Wednesdayes of every Term; which only have, and shall have power
to choose Officers, as well for the Company here, as also for the Colony and
Planters in the Summer-Ilands; to make Laws and Ordinances; to distribute and
dispose of the Lands in the Summer-Ilands, as well for the public good of the
Company and Colony, as also agreeable to every man's particular right. And
lastly, to settle the matter of Trade, for behoof of the Company and Colony.

5. Every Friday before a Quarter Court, shall be held a Court to prepare all
kind of business reserved to the power of a Quarter Court to determine.

6. Every Wednesday fortnight, reckoning from the great Courts, shall also be
held an ordinary Court for this Company, for dispatch of ordinary and
extraordinary business. And it is not to be counted a perfect Court, unless
the Governor or Deputy be there, and seven of the Assistants.

7. It shall be in the power of the Governor or Deputy in his absence, upon
extraordinary cause, to call an extraordinary Court.

8. It shall not be in the power of any other then a Quarter Court to make any
contract, (save for the setting out of Ships) whereby either to charge the
Company, or otherwise to bind the Company for any continuance of time. In
which case it shall be proposed also in the Preparatiue Court next preceding.

9. Public business shall have precedence in the Courts before private,
unless there be extraordinary important cause to the contrary.

10. If any thing ordered in an ordinary or lesser Court, be afterward reuersed
in one of the four great and General Courts, it shall be from thence forward,
as though it had never been so ordered.

11. All Courts shall begin at two of the Clock in the afternoon, and
dissolve at the rising of the Governor, or of the Deputy in his absence.

12. Nothing shall be put to the question after six of the clock in the
afternoon: yet by order of the same Court to be made before six, the debating
and concluding of any particular businesses mentioned in the said Order, may
continue on longer, as the matters then in handling shall require.

13. If the business for the Quarter Courts grow very great; it shall be in
the power of the Governor or Deputy, with allowance of the Preparatiue Court
next preceding, to assemble the Quarter Courts both in the forenoones at eight
of the clock, and in the afternoones of the days appointed for them.
Nevertheless, in regard the meetings in the afternoones have been observed to
be always far greater then in the mornings: It shall be in the power of the
same Quarter Court, in the afternoon to disauow and reuerse any thing passed
in the morning; to which purpose the morning Court shall be first read.

14. The Company shall be summoned to the Quarter Courts, and Courts
extraordinary by the Officer, but of the ordinary Courts themselves shall take
notice. And the Secretary shall keep a Book of the proceedings of the Courts,
who with the husband, and other Officers shall at all Courts give diligent
attendance.

15. It shall be lawful at a General Court, and with consent thereof, to
dispense with all meetings in long vacations, or in such part of them as may
be spared, unless some extraordinary matter befall. In which case may be
called extraordinary Courts.

16. The Governor and Company being a Body and Communalty perpetual, shall
have one fair and common legal Seal, to be kept by the Governor, and not to
be affixed to any Grants or Instruments whatsoever, otherwhere then in public
Courts, or by express warrant from thence.

Elections.
17.

18. The Governor, soon after the beginning of the Court to be held in the
afternoon of that day, at the giving up of his Office, shall declare by word
or writing, the present estate of the Colony and Planters in the Summer-Ilands.
And the Treasurer at the same time shall deliver into the Court a Book of his
Accounts for the year then ended, examined and approved under the Auditors
hands: declaring withal the present estate of the Cash: which book shall lie
open in every Court to be viewed by all men till the next Quarter Court; and
shall then be laid up in the Chest of the Companies evidences.

19. This done, the Governor shall leave his place, and the Court without
intermixing of other business, shall proceed to Election of Officers for the
year ensuing; first of a Governor, then of a Deputy; afterward of the
Assistants; next of a Treasurer; after that, of the Auditors: and lastly of the
Secretary, Book-keeper, Husband, and Beadle.

20. At the choice of each Officer, the persons nominated to stand in Election,
shall withdraw themselves, till the party chosen be publicly so pronounced.
And generally, no man shall be present in the Court, whilst himself or his
matter passes the judgment of the Court.

21. In regard of the weighty business of this Company, which is also like to
increase: no man shall be chosen Governor of the Company of the Summer-Ilands,
who at the time of his Election is Governor of any other Company; except it
seem good for the behoof of both Companies, that the same man have the
government both of this Company, and of that for Virginia.

22. It is for weighty reasons thought very expedient, and so ordered, that no
man continue in the place of Governor, Deputy, or Treasurer of this Company,
above three years at once.

23. For the avoiding of diverse inconveniences; It is thought fit and so
ordered, that all elections of Principal Officers, in, or for the
Summer-Ilands, as also of the Governor and Deputy here, be performed by a
ballating box, as in some other Companies.

24. Every Officer as he is chosen, shall openly in Court take his Oath, or if
he be absent, at the next Court he comes to.

25. The Governor, Deputy and Treasurer, having no certain allowance for
their cares and labors: the rewarding of these former Officers according to
their deserts, is referred to the pleasure of the Court, wherein new Officers
are chosen.

Governor.
26. THe Governors duty is to keep the ordinary Summer-Ilands, and upon cause
extraordinary, to call Courts extraordinary: And in all Courts and other
meetings, he is to have a casting voice.

27. He is to moderate the Courts in quality of a President, and to cause
gravity, decency and good order to be observed: and for breach thereof, after a
grave admonition first given and prevailing, to proceed to reformation by the
judgment of the Court.

28. He is to propound and put all things to the question which the Court
requires, the same not being contrary to his Majesty's Letters Patents, or
Instructions, nor to the Standing Laws and Orders of the Company; under pain
of being immediately put from his office, if he refuse: in which case, the
Deputy shall do it under the like pain. And if he refuse, then any of the
assistants there present.

29. The Governor is to have care that the extraordinary Committies appointed
by the Courts to several business, do prosecute the same, and give
seasonable account of their doings to the Court.

30. He is also to have an especial care, that no Grant or Patent do pass
from the Company, but upon examination thereof by a select Committy; who are
exactly to observe the Orders made concerning them. And to this end, with
diverse others, he is to have a vigilant eye on the Companies Seal, which is
to be committed to his custody, that they be not wronged by abusing thereof.

31. The Governor, upon receipt of public Letters, from, or concerning the
Summer-Ilands, shall assemble at least four of the principal Assistants to
impart them to them, and by their assent shall cause them to be read in Court,
unless there be some cause of secrecy; in which case he shall communicate
them with the Assistants only. In like sort, the public Letters and
instructions to be sent to the Governor and people in the Summer-Ilands, or
otherwise concerning them, he shall cause to be publicly read, and approved
by the Court or Assistants as the case shall require. And neither he, nor any
other, shall of his own head or authority, write, or send any directions
swaruing from such as the Court or Assistants shall give, upon pain to be
suspended from the Court for ever.

32. The Governor shall assemble the Principal Assistants whom the Court
shall particularly assign to assist him, upon all weighty occasions requiring
serious deliberation: and shall have care with them, that the Lords of his
Majesty's Privy Council be acquainted with all matters of extraordinary and
greatest importance concerning the State.

33. He is to do his best, that fit men be chosen to the place of Assistants,
and being chosen, is to have care that they take their Oaths.

34. The Governor is to have care also that the general Assistants keep
their Courts with the Deputy, upon all occasions of business.

35. The Governor at his pleasure shall sit in any Assembly, either of the
Assistants, or other Committies ordinary, or extraordinary; unless the matter
happen to concern himself particularly.

Deputy.
36.

37. He shall ouersee the Secretary for entering the Orders of Court, and shall
give instructions for the writing of Letters as he shall be directed, and have
care that accordingly they be written.

38. The Deputy shall also keep the Courts of Assistants upon all occasions
requisite, and at his pleasure shall also sit in any Assembly of Committies
ordinary or extraordinary, unless the matter concern himself: and in all
these, in the Governors absence, he shall have a casting voice.

39. He shall suffer no warrant to be made and signed for issuing out of money,
but in the open Court of Assistants, after due examination of the Cause: unto
all which warrants his own hand shall be first set, and after it, other four
hands or more of the Assistants. And the Deputy and Assistants shall not
intermeddle with Disbursements for any other charges, then such as arise within
the compass of their own year.

40. When a Warrant is directed to the Treasurer to pay any gross Sum to the
Deputy, to be issued out by him and the Assistants for the use of the Company:
in that case it shall not be requisite, that the Deputies hand be to the
Warrant, so it be to the receipt.

41. Generally the Deputy shall ouer-see all inferior Officers, that they
perform their duties.

Assistants.
42. THe Assistants being to be four and twenty,

43. The Assistants Office is, together with the Deputy, to perform the orders
of Courts, for setting out Ships, and buying provisions for the Summer-Ilands;
wherein especial care is to be had, that neither the husband, nor any one man
alone be entrusted with the making of those provisions: but two at the least,
to be appointed thereunto by the Deputy and Assistants in their Court; who
shall also bring in their bills and accounts, to be examined and approved by
the Assistants. The like care shall they have at the return of Ships from the
Summer-Ilands, of the Goods belonging to the Company, to be safely kept and
sold to the best advantage, either in Court, or otherwise by the Courts
direction. The accounts of all which, shall be transmitted to the Auditors; and
the money remaining, returned to the Cash. The Deputy and Assistants shall also
have care, of the Invoyces to be made for the provisions sent to the
Summer-Ilands: and of the Certificates of the receipt to be thence returned: as
likewise of the Invoyces of the Goods sent from the Summer-Ilands. All which
shall be registered fairly in a Book.

44. The Assistants shall diligently keep their Courts, whenever occasion of
business shall require. They shall be summoned by order from the Governor or
Deputy: and it shall not be counted a Court of Assistants, unless the
Governor or Deputy with six Assistants be present. The Secretary of the
Company shall keep a Book also of their proceedings.

Principal Assistants.
45. AFter choice of the four and twenty Assistants, Summer-Ilands: and they
shall have the name of Principal Assistants; but their power shall be only to
deliberate and advise; but not to conclude, without the rest of the Assistants,
or the general Court, as the case shall require.

46. The Principal Assistants are to assemble upon all important occasions,
being requested by the Governor or the Deputy in his absence. And in defect of
both, being desired by the Court: and without favor or displeasure, private or
sinister respect, to give their faithful advice in all matters tending to the
advancement and benefit of the Plantation; and especially touching the making
of Orders and Constitutions for the better governing, as well of the Company
here, as also of the Colony planted in the Summer-Ilands, wherein the policy
and form of England is to be followed as near as may be.

47. The Principal Assistants, together with the Governor and Deputy, shall
have an especial regard, by pious Constitutions, and by other good politic
Laws and Orders, to hold the people there in the true Religion and service of
God; and in assured alleagiance to his Majesty and the Crown of England; in
due respect also to this Company for the Summer-Ilands; and in justice, peace,
uniformity, and amity, amongst themselves.

48. They shall also have care of the Instructions to be delivered, or sent
from time to time to the Governor, or other Principal Officers in the
Summer-Ilands: and shall have an eye upon the due observance of the same.

49. If any Principal Officer of the Company here, or Magistrate, great
Officer or Councellor in the Summer-Ilands, shall by the fame of his
mis-deserts, or particular occasion, merit to be called in question here of
being removed from his place, or otherwise reformed or censured: he shall be
first conuented and examined by the Governor, Deputy, and Principal
Assistants, before his cause be produced in public Court: and in his absence
the like course shall be held for his business.

50. The Principal Assistants, in consideration of this their greater
employment, shall not be tied to attendance at the Courts of the general
Assistants, other then at their own leisure and pleasure.

Treasurer.
51. THe Treasurer shall stand charged with the public

52. A lawful warrant for charges of the present year, is that which is
signed by the Deputy and four of the Assistants, unless the money be to be
paid to the Deputy himself; in which case the warrant shall be signed by six
of the Assistants: and for former charges and debts, that which is signed by
three of the Auditors, whereof one to be of the Quorum; and underneath, or upon
the back of every Warrant, an Acquittance shall be taken for the Receipt under
the parties hand.

53. The Treasurer is also to yield up a true and perfect account of the
general Cash at the end of his year, and to bring it in a fortnight before,
to the Auditors to be examined; and at all times, being requested by the
Auditors or Assistants, to show in what case the Cash does stand.

54. If any complaint or suspicion grow concerning the account, a reuiew shall
be made by twelve chosen by the Court, and the account being accepted and
approved by the Court, the Treasurer shall have his Quietus est, under the
Companies Seal at the Quarter Court in Trinity Term then next ensuing.

Auditors.
55. Quorum.

56. The Auditors shall have care of the general accounts, to examine the
Receipts and Disbursements according to the Orders of the Company: and in all
cases of difficulty, or of breach of these Orders, they shall acquaint the
Governor, and the general Court therewith; and from thence receive
resolution, and direction.

57. They shall also cause to be reduced into a several book, the whole
Receipts and Disbursements of that year; and the same under three of their
hands at the least, (whereof one to be of the Quorum) shall be presented by
the Treasurer at the Quarter Court in Easter Term, at the giving up of his and
their Office.

58. They shall sign no Warrants for the issuing of money, but only for old
charges or debts, that is to say, due before that year of their Office; and
that not otherwise, then after due examination of the matter had in their
appointed meetings. Unto which Warrant shall be first set the hand of one at
the least of the Quorum, and then of two other or more of the rest of the
Auditors.

59. The Auditors shall also employ their best industry and care, for the
recovery of the old Debts due to the Company, and their Receipts shall transmit
to the general Cash.

60. And touching the old accounts now depending in Audit, that is to say, from
the beginning of the Plantation, till the ninth day of May 1621. the Auditors
shall proceed in the examining and reducing them to order, and to the final
auditing of them, with what expedition they well can; and shall from time to
time acquaint the Governor, Deputy and Court, with such impediments and
difficulties as shall be incident.

61. The Auditors shall keep their meetings once at the least in a week in
Term time, or oftener, if need require; and once every month at least in the
vacation times, to ouersee the accounts, and to dispatch such other business
as shall be committed to them.

62. They shall also have the authority of the Court, to call before them such
persons as are indebted or accountable to the Company. To which end the Beadle
shall attend upon them: who shall be rewarded for his travel at the pleasure
of the Court.

Accounts.
63.

64. All Accountants whatsoever, and Auditors extraordinary, if the Court so
require, shall have an Oath ministered unto them in the face of the Court; the
one for true accounting, the other for true auditing.

65. No account shall be held cleared, nor Accountant discharged, till the
account being approved under the Auditors hands, be presented to the Court,
and there lie openly in Court two Court days, to be viewed by any that are so
disposed.

66. If exception be taken to any account whatsoever, the Court shall proceed
to reuiew, as in like case of the Treasurer. If no exception be taken in the
two Court days, or upon the reuiew returned, and the account approved; the
Governor then, or Deputy in his absence, shall sign the account in open
Court; whereby the Accountant shall be clearly discharged.

67. If any Officer, or other Accountant be slow in bringing in his accounts
to the Auditors ordinary or extraordinary; or within one month after his
account is perfect, do not pay the Cash the due Sum remaining, unless the
Court see cause to give longer time: the Auditors or Treasurer shall impart the
same to the Court, that order be thence given for redress thereof.

68. If any man be found indebted to the Company by any means whatsoever, and
being required, shall refuse or forbear to pay the said Debt: the same shall
be levied upon such profits and commodities, as he either has in the
Summer-Ilands, or shall be returned hither from thence; wherein he shall stand
to the judgment of the Court.

Secretary.
69.

70. He shall be bound by oath to keep secret all matters of secrecy; and not
to discover the proceedings of the Principal Assistants, and Committies
extraordinary, till such time as themselves shall publish the same.

71. The Secretary, upon reference of any business from the Court to a select
Committie, shall give a note to the Officer, containing the business, time,
and place.

72. His Office is also to be a Remembrancer to the general Courts, and to the
Courts of Assistants, for the prosecuting and performing of matters formerly
ordered; as also touching Motions formerly made, and referred to special
Committies, or other further consideration.

73. If at any time a general Court shall order any money to be issued out of
the Cash, the Secretary under his hand shall deliver a Copy thereof to the
Auditors, if it be of old Debts; and if otherwise, then to the Deputy and
Assistants, who respectively shall under that Order, make their warrant for
payment of that money, unless they find the Court, by wrong information, to
have been abused and deceived in that order; whereof at the next Court they
shall give aduertizement.

74. The Secretaries Office is to keep the Books of the Company, and fairly,
and orderly to enter in them the particulars heere-vnder expressed, and in such
manner as he shall be directed by the Governor, Deputy, or Auditors. First,
a Book containing the Copies of the Kings Letters Patents to the Company:
Likewise of all Grants from the Company for Virginia: Also of all Letters,
Orders, Directions, and other Writings from his Majesty, the Lords of the
Council, and other great Officers, concerning the Company and Affairs of the
Summer-Ilands; together with the answers made unto them.

75. A second Book shall be kept of all the Laws and Standing Orders
established henceforward in the Quarter Courts, and beginning with this day; as
well such as concern the Government of the Company and business here, as
also the Government of the Colony and Affairs in the Summer-Ilands.

76. In a third Book shall be registered all the Patents, Charters, and
Indentures of validity, heretofore granted, or that hereafter shall be granted
by the Governor and Company; all Instructions; all public Letters written to
the Summer-Ilands, or from thence returned.

77. A fourth Book shall be of the Acts of the general Courts, beginning
with a new Book at the Quarter Court in Easter Term last. In which Book,
upon any cause controuerted and debated, the Secretary shall have care to set
down exactly, the resolution and conclusion of the Court, together with the
principal reasons inducing thereunto: but shall not set down other passages
of speech, nor the parties names that were of other opinion.

78. A fifth Book shall be of the Acts of the Assistants, beginning from the
same Court. In which Book shall be registered all Invoyces of the provisions
sent to the Summer-Ilands, and the Certificats of the Receipts to be thence
returned: as likewise the Invoyces of the Goods sent from the Summer-Ilands,
with the Husbands Certificats of the receipt or defect.

79. In the sixth Book shall be registered the names of all the Adventurers and
Owners of Land in the Summer-Ilands, together with the number of Shares to each
person belonging, according to the several Tribes wherein they are placed.
Here shall also be entered the lawful transports of Shares. Both which shall
first be published and allowed in a general Court, and not registered in this
book, but by direction from thence.

80. The Secretary shall also keep safe in the Companies Chest of Evidences,
the Originals of all the Letters Patents, and other writings before mentioned:
all the books also aforesaid: all the Governors and Treasurers books of
their yearly accounts: the Husbands books of accounts of every voyage to the
Summer-Ilands: and all other accounts perfected and approved by the Auditors.
In the same Chest shall be kept all Charter-parties, as well cancelled, as
uncancelled: all bonds made to the Company, or for their use: and all bonds of
the Companies, discharged and cancelled: and all other writings and muniments
whatsoever belonging to the Company: and the Secretary shall deliver out none
of the Companies writings, but by direction from the Governor, Deputy, or
Court, taking a note of the parties hand for the true restoring of them: and in
convenient time he shall make Calenders of all the foresaid writings. The said
Chest of Evidences shall have two strong locks to it: the key of the one shall
be kept by the Governor or Deputy; and the key of the other by the Secretary.

81. The Secretaries Salary shall be for the present, ten pounds per annum; and
when the public Land shall be thoroughly planted, then twenty pounds; and of his
pains extraordinary, the Court shall take consideration.

Booke-Keeper.
82. THe Booke-keeper, at such time as he shall be

83. The Booke-keeper, upon conference with the Secretary and the Husband, and
they two in his defect, shall in every Quarter Court present openly to the
Governor, a true note of the Debts, both owing by the Company, and ought unto
them; together with the ground from whence they are risen; that the Court may
take order for the discharge of the one, and recovery of the other.

Husband.
84. THe Husband is to be ordered by the Governor, under their hands, and
then to be presented to the Auditors.

85. He shall at the end of every voyage set out by the Company, make a
several book of the charges of that voyage, to be presented by him to the
Auditors, and by them to the Court. His wages for the present shall be ten
pounds per annum; and twenty pounds, when the public Lands shall be thoroughly
planted.

Beadle.
86. per annum for the present, and twenty pounds when the public Lands shall
be thoroughly planted.

Generality.
87 THe particular Members of the Company, shall

88 Every man speaking in Court, shall address his speech to the Governor, or
Deputy in his absence, as representing the Court. And all private speech, or
directed to particular persons, shall be forborne.

89 No man in one Court shall speak above thrice to one matter: save the
Governor, and the Deputy being to moderate the business.

90 No man with his speech shall interrupt the speech of another, before he
have finished: except the Governor, or in his absence the Deputy, (with
approbation of the Court) see cause to put any to silence for impertinency, or
other unseemly speaking.

91 If any man be found by sinister course, to practice his own advantage, to
the damnifying of the public; or be found with the Companies money or goods in
his hands, and refuse to deliver the same being lawfully thereunto required: If
being summoned to the Court, he refuse to appear: or appearing, perform not
the order of the Court; he shall be both suspended from the Courts, and
farther poceeded against, as an unworthy member and wrong-doer to the Company.

92 If any man out of evil mind, practice to raise faction or dissension in
the Company: he shall for the first time be admonished by the Governor and the
Court; and at the second time be suspended from the Courts for three years.

93 Whosoever shall attempt by private solicitation to pack the Court to any
unjust or unlawful end: he shall upon complaint be conuented before the
Governor and Principal Assistants; And being convicted thereof by judgment
of the Court, he shall be suspended from the Courts for three years.

94 If any man be found through corrupt reward, to make a motion in the Court,
tending to the public hurt, or to the private wrong of another: he shall be
forthwith suspended from the Courts for ever.

95 No man shall presume to intercept letters, written by or to the Governor
or Company, or to spread false rumors upon sinister intent, to the wrong of
the Governor, Company or Colony. The offender shall be suspended from the
Courts for ever.

96 No man shall traduce any member of this Company in the Court of any other
Company, for any thing done or spoken in this Court. The offender for the first
time shall be admonished; for the second, suspended from the Court for one
year; and the third time, for more years, as the Court shall think meet.

97 To avoid the drawing of the Company into debt henceforward, It is ordered
that no man, other then the Governor or Deputy, by the advice and assent of
the Principal Assistants, make or propound any new project of charge to the
Company: but that he therewithal offer good means to defray that charge, and
uphold his project, in such sort that the Company be never drawn again into
any further Debt. And the breakers of this Order, shall be excluded from the
general Courts, and from having voice or bearing Office for one year after.

98 If any man move for any charge to the Company by way of gift in what sort
soever: It shall be first referred to a select Committie: And if the charge do
not exceed ten pounds, it may be ordered by the next Court: If above, it shall
be reserved to the Qarter Court ensuing.

99 It shall not be lawful for any Owner of Land, to sell or transport his
Shares to another, otherwise then in open Court: And not before it do appear
under three of the Auditors hands, that the party transporting his Shares
stand clear, and be not indebted to the Company; or the party to whom they
are passed, pay the said debt.

Laws.
100 shall be referred to the discussing of a Select Co^mittie: the Commities
shall present their labors to the view of the Assistants: The Court of
Assistants approving them, they shall be brought to the Court of Preparation
next before the Quarter Court, and there openly read: And lastly they shall
pass the Judgment of the Quarter Court.

101 The Laws and Orders thus made, shall be fairly registered by the
Secretary in a Parchment book: which he shall bring in every Court, and lay on
the Table, that all men may peruse them that are so disposed.

102 In the Quarter Court in Hillary Term, all Laws and Standing Orders
concerning the Company here, shall be publicly read in the beginning of the
Court, till such time as it shall seem fit to have them printed.

103 The abrogating of a Law or Order, shall proceed by the same degrees, by
which the making.

104 All Orders heretofore made repugnant or swaruing from these, shall be
henceforth void.

Orders and Constitutions for the Summer-Ilands, etc. presented to the Quarter
Court held the 6. of February, 1621. and finally enacted and established in the
Quarter Court held the 29. of May, 1622. THE SECOND PART.
Land in the Summer-Ilands.
105. Summer-Ilands, is partly public, partly private. The private Land is
divided into eight Tribes, lying from the common Land, in this order: Namely,
Harington and Hamiltons Tribe, Smythes Tribe, Devonshire Tribe, Pembroke Tribe,
Pagets Tribe, Warwick Tribe, Southhampton Tribe, and Sandys Tribe. Each of
these Tribes is subdivided into fifty shares belonging to particular owners:
save that two shares in Pembroke Tribe are appropriated for ever in quality of
Gleabe land to the Minister. To Southhampton Tribe there have been also
annexed five other Shares or parts out of an over plus of Land that fell out in
the Division, three whereof have been given by the Company to one of the
Governors in the said Summer-Ilands: And the other two are appropriated for
ever in quality of Gleabe Land to the Minister.

106 The little Islands and spots of Land scattered about these Tribes, and not
appropriated to any Tribe at the admeasurement of the Land as parcel of the
same, shall lie in common to the use of all the eight Tribes: But the spare Land
lying near the fresh water in every Tribe, shall be divided in proportion to
every share, and shall be orderly laid out for the building of houses, and for
gardens and other easements to be adjoined to them, that the people may live
more comfortably as in Towns together.

107 All the residue of the Land, with the little Islands and spots adjoining,
is and shall for ever continue public Land; that is to say, The Land of the
Governor and Company of the City of London for the Summer-Ilands: and shall
not be alienated from the Body of the said Company, or subdivided amongst the
said Company or any part thereof: Save that two hundred Acres of the Island,
called Dauies Island, shall be annexed to Harrington and Hamiltons Tribe, to
make recompense for the alleged sterility of the Land in that Tribe: and
excepting such other Lands, as have been already lawfully alienated or granted
by former Quarter Courts, if any such be.

108 Nevertheless, the public Land shall receive the division ensuing, for
public uses and services. Fifty acres next to Saint Georges Town, shall be
appropriated for ever in quality of Glebe Land to the Minister: and fifty other
acres next to Harington and Hamiltons Tribe, in like sort to another Minister.
The Governor of the Summer-Ilands there residing, shall have allotted to him
and his Successors, twelve shares of Land, containing three hundred acres:
which Land shall lie together in Saint Georges Island, and shall begin at the
point next Penistons Island at the East, and so shall take all the Land before
it from Sea to Sea; save that the fifty acres belonging to the Minister, shall
lie near to the Church and Parsonage house; and the Governor shall take
charge of the three Forts in his own Land. The Sheriff shall have also
allotted to him and his Successors there residing, four shares of Land,
containing one hundred acres, next adjoining to the Governors Land. And the
Secretary shall have two shares, containing fifty acres. There shall be also
allotted to the Captains of the other Forts, eight shares of Land, containing
in the whole, two hundred acres, viz. to the Captain of the two Forts in
Penistons Island, two shares: to the Captain of the Fort toward Saint David's
Island, two shares: to the Captain of the Fort on Coopers Island, with a
platform over against the Forts on Gurnards Head, two shares: and to the
Captain of the Forts at the Gurnards Head, two shares: which shares of Land
shall be laid out of good Land, and in places most convenient for the Officers
aforesaid: all the residue of the public Land, shall be occupied for the use
of the general Company; and to defray the public charges for the safeguard of
the said Summer-Ilands; and in works for the general good of the Inhabitants
thereof, according as the said Company shall appoint.

109. The Governors Land, at the charge of the Company, is to be furnished
with two Tenants to every share. In like sort the Lands of the Sheriff, and of
the Secretary, and the Glebe Lands of the four Ministers; the Lands also of
the four Captains of the Forts above specified. And it shall not be lawful
for the said Governor, Sheriff, Ministers, Secretary, Captains, or any of
them, to let out his or their Tenants to hire, or to employ them elsewhere, or
otherwise, then in occupying of the said Lands respectively, under a grievous
penalty to be inflicted upon the Offender by the judgment of a Quarter Court.
And the Governor, Sheriff, Ministers, Secretary, and Captains aforesaid, and
their Successors for ever, shall at the yielding up, or leaving of their
places, be it by death, or otherwise, leave the like number of Tenants to their
Successors, as shall be left unto them from their Predecessors, or as they shall
have received from the Company.

110. For the benefit and better encouragement of all Handicrafts men necessary
for the Summer-Ilands; it is granted and ordered, that every Shipwright,
Carpenter, Ioyner, Mason, Brick-maker, Brick-layer Smith, Cooper, Sawyer, and
all other of like necessary Handicrafts, that shall go to the Summer-Ilands to
inhabit upon the public Land, and there to exercise their Handicrafts, shall
have two acres of the said public Land set out unto each for an House and
Garden, paying the yearly rent of two shillings, at the feast of Saint Michael
the Archangell, to continue in like sort to them, their heirs and assigns;
upon condition that they continue also the exercise of some Handicraft
occupation, and wholly forbear the planting of Tobacco upon the same Lands,
and not otherwise.

111. If any Handicrafts men aforesaid, shall desire to be placed in any of the
Tribes, it shall be lawful for any Owner in every of the said Tribes, to
demise unto any of the said Handicrafts men, two acres of his Land, or a less
quantity, but not above, for such yearly Rent as they shall agree on; upon
condition that the said Handicrafts man continue the exercise of his said
Trade, and wholly forbear the planting of Tobacco upon the same Lands, and not
otherwise.

112. All the Lands in the Summer-Ilands, as well public, as private, shall
be occupied to half profits, between the Owners, and the Occupiers; except
the Lands granted or demised to the said Handycrafts men, and such Proprietors
as themselves shall inhabit upon their own Lands, and such other as shall be
here under excepted: And all other Contracts shall be void.

113. Yet no children, or young men, under the age of twenty and one years,
shall share by halues, in the profits as other men do; nor live upon shares by
themselves; but with Masters of families; there being found to them diet,
lodging, and apparel convenient, with some other yearly allowance of profit,
according to their abilities and deserts. And if any owner of Land shall
contract with his servant or Apprentice, to serve him at any other rates, and
not at the half profits, till the said servant or Apprentice shall have
accomplished the full age of twenty four years, the said Contract shall stand
in force and validity.

114. The Governor, and other Officers, shall take care for the preferuation
of the breed of Birds, by reserving to them those Islands whereunto they resort.
Also for preservation of the young Tortoyses, by such orders, and under such
penalties, as by the general Assembly hereafter to be spoken of shall be set
down.

115. They shall also have especial care of the preservation of Timber, that
no waste be made thereof. And in particular, that no man presume without the
Owners consent under his hand and seal, to cut down young Cedar trees, before
they be come to their growth, under a grievous penalty, to be assessed at the
discretion of the said Governor and Council. Neither shall they suffer any
Timber, Boords, or Plankes, to be transported out of the said Islands, without
especial warrant from the Governor, and Company here.

116. Care also shall be taken, that all sorts of Trees, which defend the
Islands from winds and tempests, be preserved and maintained: and where decay
has been, that young Plants be there set and cherished.

117. All Grants from the Company, of men's private Lands in the Summer-Ilands,
shall pass under the common Seal of the Company; which shall be sufficient
Evidence for their said Land: provided, that both the Grantees, and they from
whom they derive their estate, before the affixing of the said common Seal to
their Grants, stand clear from being any way indebted to the Company.

118. No man may be Owner of more then ten shares of Land in the Summer-Ilands;
except it shall please a Quarter Court, to grant liberty unto any man for five
shares more, or under, but not above: which Grant must be confirmed also by
the Quarter Court next ensuing. The Transgressor of this Law, either directly
or indirectly, shall forfait his shares exceeding the lawful number, to the
Company. But if they accrue unto any man by descent or Legacy; in those cases
there shall be granted unto him the liberty of twelve months, to alienate the
shares exceeding the lawful number.

119. All Grants of Land and Liberties in the Summer-Ilands, shall be passed by
Indenture; the counterpart whereof shall be sealed by the Grantees: and the
Secretary shall have the engrossing of all such Indentures.

120. No Patents, or Indentures of Grants of Lands in the Summer-Ilands, shall
be sealed with the Companies Seal, but being read and approved in a Quarter
Court: the same having been also first examined and allowed under the hands of
a select Committy for that purpose.

121. No liberty shall be granted, tending to the exempting of any man from the
authority of the Governor or Sheriff of the Summer-Ilands, or of the Council
or Courts to be there established, in any case of Treason, Rebellion, Sedition,
Heresy, or Schism; or upon any duty to be performed for the necessary defense
of the Country, or for the preservation of the public peace, and suppressing
tumults within the Land, or for Trials in matters of Justice, by lawful orders
to be from hence delivered; or in cases consented unto, as well by a General
Assembly of the Colony there, as by the Company here in a Quarter Court. And
all Grants swaruing from this Order, shall be deemed unlawful and
surreptitious.

122. In all Grants of Lands, a fifth of the Royal Mines of Gold and Silver
shall be reserved to the Company, as another fifth is already reserved to the
Crown.

123. There is also, and shall be for ever reserved to the Company, the Moity
of all lawful wrecks: and the other Moity shall be to the Recouerers. But if
the wrecke be driven within the bounds of any particular man's Land; the
Recouerers shall yield to the Owner of the said Land the one half of their
Moity.

124. There is likewise, and shall be for ever reserved to the Company, a
fifth part of all the Ambergreece that shall be found; and the rest shall be
divided equally between the finder, and the Owner of the Land where the same
is found; save that three shillings four pence upon every ounce of the said
Ambergreece, shall be allowed to the Governor of the said Islands. And
whosoever shall not discover to the said Governor and Sheriff, and some one
other of the Council, the true quantity of the Ambergreece so found, within
five days after the finding of the same, shall forfeit his own entire part to
the Company, and be subject to such other punishment as the general Court
shall award.

125. In all Patents or Indentures of Grants of Lands, the Grantees shall
covenant to employ their people in reasonable sort in Staple Commodities, and
not wholly or chiefly about Tobacco.

126. All Grants of Lands shall be made with equal favors, and Grants of like
liberties and immunities as near as may be; to the end that all complaint of
partiality or vnindifferency may be prevented.

Officers in the Summer-Jlands.
127. Summer-Ilands, and namely, the Governor, Sheriff and Secretary, shall
be chosen here by Ballating in a Quarter Court.

128. The Ministers, and the Council established in the Summer-Ilands, and all
other Officers there reserved to the choice of the Company here, shall be
chosen in a Quarter Court by only erection of hands; unless the Court desire
to have it pass by Ballating.

129. The Commissions to all Officers there, excepting Ministers, shall be
only for three years in certain, and afterward during the Companies
pleasure: only the Governor shall, upon no occasion, hold that place above
six years together.

130. The Company here shall not be charged with the maintenance of the
Officers there: But they shall be maintained there, out of the public Lands,
or by such other means as shall be hereafter set down.

Governor in the Summer-Ilands.
131. THe Governor to be sent to the Summer-Ilands, England, or in the said
Summer-Ilands, as the case shall require. Howbeit it is, and shall be lawful,
by a new and solemn Election in manner before set down, to continue the said
Governor in his place of Government for longer time, according to his deserts;
so as the same exceed not six years in the whole together. And if it happen
that the Commission to any such Governor, expire before the ariuall of his
lawful Successor: In that case he shall continue still in his place of
Government, till such time as his said Successor shall ariue there: Immediately
whereupon he shall yield up the Government to him.

132. The Governors duty is to have a vigilant eye upon the strength and
safeguard of the Islands, both from foreign Invasion, and intestine Mutinies. In
which case he has authority to exercise Martial Law, according to the manner
and form limited by his Majesty's Letters Patents.

133. It is also his duty to have an eye upon the Ministers; as well that the
people perform their duty toward them, and use them with all due respect and
reverence; as also that they perform the duty of their place, in duly
observing the solemn Divine service, and training up the People in the true
fear of God, and observance of his Commandments; In assured allegiance also
and duty to the King, his Heirs and Successors: In obedience also to all other
subordinate Governors and Government, placed over them by authority derived
from his Majesty: And lastly, in a fraternall love and unity among themselves.
In all which, the example of the Magistrates and Ministers, will be of more
force then any other persuasion whatsoever.

134 It is the Governors Office, to have care of the due administration of
Justice to all the People, as well in cases Criminal, as Civil: wherein the
equity of the Laws of England, and form of administration of Justice here
used, is to be followed as much as may be: Nevertheless the Governor of
himself alone shall not make any order in Causes litigious, without both
parties consent: but shall hear and determine Causes with the Councels
assistance and assent, in such manner as shall be hereafter set down.

135. In all Causes civil brought to the Governor and Council at the first
instance, they may proceed to hearing and determining thereof in their ordinary
sittings. But if it be brought to them by appeal from some other Inferior
Officers; Or if appeal be made from themselves; the Trial thereof shall be
reserved to the next General Sessions.

136. The Governor shall not proceed as of himself alone, to the Corporal
punishment of any man, other then three days imprisonment. If the crime
deserve higher punishment, he shall proceed by the advice and assent of the
Counsel. Provided always, that matters of Treason, Murder, and Felony; also
of Forgery, Perjury, Conspiracy, and such like, be reserved to be tried at the
next General Sessions, according to the Laws and forms of Trial used in
this Realm.

137. The Governor in the Summer-Ilands, has power granted by his Majesty, to
minister a formal Oath to any person there whosoever, for the examination,
testifying and clearing of the truth in any cause whatsoever, as well
concerning the Plantation, as any other particular business there arising for
the maintenance of Peace and Justice amongst the Inhabitants. Of which power
he shall make use there, in all such causes, and to all such persons, as the
like is done by the Judges and Justices of this Realm.

138. The Governor shall not suffer any man to depart from the Summer-Ilands,
against whom there is any cause or suit in Law depending; unless the Defendant
shall first substitute an Attorney sufficient to answer and undergo the Suit
in his place; and also enter into bond with two sufficient Sureties, to
perform whatsoever Sentence shall pass against him. And if the Governor and
Council see probable cause to conceive, that the Suit is set on foot upon
malice, and to stop the Defendant from his intended journey: in that case the
Plaintiff shall likewise give good security to pay to the Defendant double
costs and damages, if the Sentence pass not against him.

139. The Governor is to hold two general Sessions in every year, at times
to be appointed by the general Assembly hereafter mentioned: whereunto every
Tribe shall send six men chosen by themselves to serve for that Tribe, and the
common Land twelve: and all other having business, or summoned by the
Governor and Council, may, and shall repair thither, and make their
appearance. And no man shall depart till the Sessions be ended, without leave
of the Governor.

140. The Governor shall also, in every second year once, hold a general
Assembly, for the making of Laws and Orders for the particular necessities and
occasions of those Islands, and the Inhabitants thereof, and for the ordering of
other important business; which Laws and Orders shall no further forth be of
force and validity, if they receive not confirmation afterward in a Quarter
Court here. In this Assembly, the Governor shall sit as President, to
moderate the Assembly, and shall have a Negative voice. The Council shall sit
next to him, and each have his several voice: but if they all join in one
opinion, that also shall have the force of another Negative. And lastly, each
Tribe shall by Election send out four able persons, to represent that Tribe:
and the Occupiers of common Land, eight; who shall have likewise free voices in
that Assembly; where all things shall be established by plurality of voices,
the foresaid Negatiues reserved.

141. Lastly, it is the Governors duty, to ouersee all inferior Officers that
they perform their duties. To which end he shall minister a formal Oath to
all other Officers and inferior Ministers in the said Islands whatsoever, for
the just, true, and faithful discharge of their several places, duties and
services.

142. The Governor shall not impose any Fines or Amercements for his own
behoof: But all Fines, Amercements, Forfaitures, and Confiscations shall
accrue to the public service of the Plantation; or to such other uses as are
before, or shall be hereafter particularly expressed; to be levied and kept by
the Sheriff, and to be expended or paid over by direction of the Governor and
Council.

143. The Governor shall not lay any Taxes or Impositions upon the Lands in
the Summer-Ilands; or upon the People or Commodities, otherwise then by the
authority of the general assembly; to be levied and employed as the said
Assembly shall appoint.

144. The Governor shall not withdraw the Inhabitants from their private
labors, to any service of his own, upon any color whatsoever. And in case
the public necessity require employment of many hands, before the holding of a
general Assembly to give order for the same: In that case, the leuying of men
shall be done by order of the Governor and whole Body of the Council, and
that in such sort, as to be least burdensome to the people, and most free from
partiality.

145. The Governor shall not grant leave to, nor suffer the Tenant or servant
of any man to return into England, or otherwise to depart from the occupying
of his Landlords or Masters Land, before the time of his Covenant be fully
expired; except the Owner of the Land, under his hand and Seal give consent
thereto.

146. The Governor also, in quality of Captain General, shall have care that
the people be trained up to Military service: and shall from time to time give
seasonable aduertizme^t, for provision of Shot, Powder, and other Ammunition to
be made. He shall also have yearly a general Muster or view of Arms: And
shall yearly return to the Company a list of the names of all the trained
Bands, together with a Certificate of all defects whatsoever.

147. The Governor shall not forsake his charge, nor depart out of the
Summer-Ilands, during the time of his Commission, without especial License of
a Quarter Court here, under pain of being disfranchised for ever as an
unworthy person; and further censured and proceeded against, as by a general
Court shall be thought meet.

148. If it happen the Governor of the Summer-Ilands to dye, before the
expiration of his Commission, or arrival of his Successor; in that case the
whole body of the Council shall assemble together, and choose any of themselves
to succeed in that place of Government: unless, or till such time as the
Company take other order. The like course shall be held for all other
Principal Officers.

Sheriff.
149.

150. He shall also levy, or cause to be levied, all Fines, Amercements, and
other forfaitures whatsoever; and all Taxes and Impositions lawfully assessed.
And the same in quality of a Treasurer to the Colony, shall keep or convert to
the most profit for their use, and shall expend the same for no other then
public services; and that by direction from the Governor and Council; and
shall openly at every Sessions deliver up in writing, a true account of all
such his receipts and disbursements. The allowance for his charges, as well in
executing the foresaid Judgments, as also in leuying the said Fines,
Amercements, Forfaitures, Taxes and Impositions shall be such, as by the said
general Assembly shall be set down.

151. He shall also in quality of a Treasurer to the Company, carefully
collect and levy all such profits, as shall any way belong to the Company, by
reason of the Royalties and other Commodities to them reserved, or by reason of
any forfaitures due to the Company: and shall cause them to be yearly
transmitted to the Company, together with his account; for which he shall
receive from them an extraordinary reward. The like shall he do for the
forfaitures due to the particular Owners of Lands.

152. All Shot, Powder, Armor, and other Ammunition whatsoever, with all other
public provisions sent from the Company to the Summer-Ilands, shall be
consigned to the custody and charge of the Sheriff; who shall not deliver out
the same, or any part thereof, but by order, either from the Company here, or
from the Governor and Council there, whereof the said Sheriff shall yearly
give up a true and perfect Account in writing, as well to the Governor and
Council there, as also to the Governor and Company here. And if any Officer
or other person, by himself, his Servants or Agents, shall sell away any of
the public provision of Shot, Powder, Arms, or other Ammunition, to the wrong
of the Company, he shall make restitution to the double; and being an Officer,
make forfait also of his place.

153. Lastly, the Sheriffs duty is once at least every Quarter, and oftener if
there be cause, to visit the eight Tribes, as also the public Lands, and all
the several parts both of the one and other; and by diligent enquiry, to see
how as well these Orders of the Company, and all other instructions, as also
the contracts and agreements between the several members of the Company, and
their Tenants or servants, are observed: and with the advice and assistance of
the Overseers of the Tribes, and of the chief Masters of Families, shall
proceed to the reforming and rectifying of what is found amiss, according to
such Orders as shall be established. And if any man be found intractable or
incorrigible by the Sheriff, he shall be summoned by him to appear before
the Governor and Council, either at the general Sessions, or otherwise, as
the cause shall require.

Ministers.
Georges Town: and that Parish shall extend over all the public Land, save
that parcel which adioyneth to Harrington and Hamiltons Tribe on the Maine. The
second Church shall be on the said public Land fast adjoining to Harrington
and Hamiltons Tribe: and that Parish shall extend over that part of the public
Land, being as is said before, on the Maine; as also over all Harrington and
Hamiltons Tribe, and Smiths Tribe. The third Church shall be in Pembrooke
Tribe, upon the two shares there bought for Glebe Land to the Parsonage: and
that Parish shall extend over Pembroke Tribe, Devonshire Tribe, and Pagets
Tribe. The fourth Church shall be on the Confines of Southampton Tribe, and
Sandys Tribe: And this Parish shall extend over Southampton Tribe, Warwick
Tribe, and Sandys Tribe. Near adjoining to these Churches shall the Parsonage
houses be buile. And for the better yearly maintenance of the Ministers, over
and above their houses, Glebes, and Tenants as aforesaid: It is ordered, that
there shall be apportioned to them out of the fruits of the earth, and
Cattle, growing and renewing within their several Parishes, a certain
portion by way of charge upon every Share or Farm; so as to make up each
Ministers Intertainement in that kind, to the value of one hundred pounds a
year, or thereabout. Which value of one hundred pounds the year, shall
commence at the end of seven years after the making hereof. And in the mean
season, the proportion for their yearly maintenance, besides the said Glebe
Lands, shall be such as shall be agreed upon between the Company and the
several Ministers.

155. Whereas the Owners and Occupyers of the Land, have of their own
voluntary gift, offered the hundredth part yearly of all their Tobacco, toward
the building of the said Churches and Parsonage houses: it is ordered that the
Overseers of every Tribe, as also of the common Land, shall yearly collect the
same, and deliver it upon account to the Sheriff; who by advice and direction
from the Governor and Council, shall take order for the erecting of the said
Churches and houses; and faithfully expend that which shall arise by the said
Collections upon the uses aforesaid; and thereof deliver up a yearly account to
the said Governor and Council: who shall transmit the same, or a copy thereof
to the Governor and Company here. The works being finished, the Gift also
shall cease.

156. The Ministers shall diligently apply their vocation, and show themselves
Patterns of piety and virtue to the people. They shall by help of the
Overseers of the Tribes, and other chief men in their Parishes, endeavor to
reform all disorderly persons. If any appear incorrigible, he shall be
presented to the Governor and Council; who shall proceed to reformation by
exemplary punishment, according to the quality of the Offenders misdeserts.

157. For the avoiding of Sects and Factions in Religion, the Governor and
Council shall be careful to suppress by course of authority, all factious
and seditious Preaching, teaching, and disputing, as well in private, as
public.

Secretary in the Summer-Jlands.
158. THe Office of the Secretary, is to keep or cause

159. It is also the Secretaries Office, at the General Sessions, to perform,
or cause to be performed, the Office of Clarke of the Peace, and Clarke of the
Assizes: and to have care that all Trials do pass in due form of Law; and to
keep a Register Book of all the verdicts and Judgments: and to deliver to
the Sheriff a Copy under his hand, of such of them as are to be put in
execution.

160. The Secretary shall also in all the general Assemblies, hold the place
of Speaker; and have care that all things proceed and pass in due order: and
shall keep a Register Book of all the Acts there passed, being first signed
by the Governor and the Council present.

161. It is also ordered for the present time, till a more convenient course
may be taken, that the probate of Wills, committing of Administrations, and all
other Acts incident to Testamentary causes, shall be annexed to the Secretaries
Office: who shall likewise keep an exact Register of them. The Ministers also
in their several Parishes, shall deliver unto the Secretary at every general
Sessions, a true note of all the Christenings, Marriages, and Burials, which
have been in their Parishes from the general Sessions last before; which the
Secretary shall likewise enter in a Book, and shall send a Copy thereof
yearly to the Company.

162. The Secretary at the arrival of every Ship at the Summer-Ilands, shall
make a true list of the names of all the people the^ arriving with intent to
continue and inhabit in the said Summer-Ilands, of what sex, age, and Trade
they are, and upon whose account they are sent. And likewise at the departure
of every Ship shall make a like list of the names of all the Inhabitants that
depart therein, with their sex, age, and Trade, and whose Tenants or servants
they have formerly bin, together with the cause of their departure. Both which
he shall enter in a Book there to be kept, and a Copy thereof shall transmit
to the Company by the several Ships returning.

163. Lastly, it is the Secretaries duty, to be assisting to the Governor, as
well in dispatch of all Letters and other writings to the Company; as also in
publishing all Orders, Commissions, and other directions whatsoever, which the
Governor there shall receive from the Governor and Company here; and to have
care with the Governor, that the said Orders, Commissions and directions be
duly executed; and that thereof a seasonable account be given to the Governor
and Company here.

164. The Secretary, for his service at the general Sessions, and at the
general Assemblies, and for Testamentary causes, shall have such Fees as shall
be set down by the general Assembly.

Captains of Forts.
165. THe Captains of the Forts ought to be men of every Fort, to be trained
up to that Service, and to be always in readiness when occasion shall
require: which Tenants, in consideration of that attendance and service, shall
pay to the Company only a fourth part of their yearly profits. If any of the
Captains of the Forts die there, his place shall be supplied by appointment of
the Governor and Council there, till such time as the Company here proceed to
a new Election.

Overseers.
166.

167 The duty of these Overseers, is in their several charges, to divide with
an even and just hand between the owners and their Tenants, all the Tobacco and
other Commodities growing within their charge. And to the end that they may
better inform themselves what Crop is like to be received out of the whole
Tribe, they shall, about 14. days before the usual time of gathering their
Commodities, generally suruay all the Ground so planted throughout, and
diligently observe what quantity each Tenant or Servant has planted; and the
same register in a book; a Coppie whereof, as likewise of the Diuident, they
shall send under their hands unto the Company here. When the division is made
between the Owner of the Land and his Tenants or Servants, as justly both for
quantity and quality as they can: They shall cast Lots upon the Moities, and
take that part for the Owner which shall fall unto him by Lot. Which done, they
are likewise to have faithful care, that the Owners part of such Goods as are
fit, or shall be directed to be sent, be duly packt up sealed and conveyed
to the Ship, (unless the Owner under his hand and Seal give other direction,)
to be sent to the Company here, or as the Company shall direct. Other Goods
unfit to be sent by Sea, they shall dispose of as the Owners shall appoint.
Provided always, that the Tobacco to be divided, be cured and made up in best
manner, before the said Division be made. And concerning the Tobacco and other
Commodities of the growth of the Overseers themselves, the same course shall be
held, as well for division thereof between them and their Landlords; as also
for disposing of the Landlords Moity in manner aforesaid. Save that the division
of the Tobacco, and Commodities of the one Ouerseer, shall be performed and
perfited by the other reciprocally.

168. These Overseers also, in their several charges, shall diligently enquire
what Debts are owing by Tenants or Servants, to their Landlords. To which end
the Landlords shall acquaint the Overseers, with the several Contracts betwixt
them and their Tenants or Servants. All which hereafter, for the avoiding of
fraud or quarrel, shall pass by Indenture. And the said Overseers, after the
division once made, shall cause satisfaction of the Debts appearing to be due,
to be made to the Landlords, before they deliver the Moity due to the Tenants
or Servants: Provided that there be always means left of liuelihood and
subsistence, to the Occupiers of the Land.

169. And to prevent all wrongs on either side, between Landlords and Tenants
or Servants: It is ordered, that the Governor at every General Sessions, shall
charge the Grand Jury, to enquire by all lawful means of such defaults: and
especially to enquire if any fraud have been committed by the Tenants or
Servants, in concealing or secretly conueighing away any of the said profits to
be divided, before division of the same be made. And after presentment made,
and trial thereof had, the Governor there shall cause a true and perfect
Certificate thereof to be made unto this Company, under the Jurors hands. And
for the better discovery of all such misdemeanors, It is ordered that all the
Overseers in every Parish, shall once every Quarter meet together at their
Parish Church, and warn every Parishioner to be there: thereby to learn what
presentiments shall be made of the said misdemeanors, or any other of the like
nature; the better to prepare that general information. And in case any such
purloyning, imbezelling, deceit or fraud shall be proved, and the Tenant or
Servant thereof found guilty, the person so offending, either presently, or so
soon as he has wherewith to do it, besides restitution, shall be compelled
to pay one fourth part of all the Tobacco, or such like profits which he has
or shall have growing the same year; to be seized upon by the said Overseers in
their several charges: which fourth part being subdivided into three parts;
the one part shall be to the Landlord or Master of the said Tenant or Servant,
another part to the said Overseers, as an increase of their Salarie, and a
third part to the Informer or Informers. The like penalty shall be for any wrong
done by the Landlord or Master to his Tenant or Servant.

170. It is the duty also of the Overseers, to take up all petty
controversies, and to inform the Governor and Sheriff of all matters of
greater importance: To see the people diligently and discreetely to apply their
business: To acquaint the Sheriff from time to time, of the estate of each
Tribe; what persons there are on each Owners Land: what be their names, and
what their endeavors; and in what estate their Farms do lie, that the same
may be yearly certified by the Sheriff to the Company. They shall also have
care, that the several Lands or Farms be well used, and occupied in husbandly
manner by the several Tenants and Servants: That the houses be maintained and
kept in repair: And that the Timber be preserved, according to the Orders
concerning it.

171. The Overseers, in regard of their great care and pains, if they perform
their duty according to their Oath, shall have two in the Hundred weight of
all the Tobacco growing within their precincts, to be taken out of each Moitie
at the division made as aforesaid.

Council.
172. OVt of the Officers aforenamed, the Governor Summer-Ilands, and have
worthily for their times discharged their Offices, and not been censured for
misdemeanors, either by the Company here, or by such Commissioners as shall be
sent from hence with such authority. Lastly, it is in the power here of a
Quarter Court, to appoint any other particular person to be of the Council
there, whom they shall please to choose.

173. It shall not be counted an Assembly of the Council, unless that four
of them, or three at least be present, beside the Governor: and that without
practice or purpose to exclude the rest.

174. It is the duty of the Council there, to be assisting to the Governor
with their faithful and careful advice, both for the strength and safeguard of
the said Islands; and for the well Government of the people: as also for the
due administration of Justice in all causes brought before them: and for the
observance of all the Laws and Orders delivered unto them by authority from
hence, and such other particular Instructions as from time to time they shall
receive. To the performing of which duty, the Governor shall administer to
every of them, at his admittance to be of the said Council, a formal Oath.
And in all meetings of the said Council, Resolutions and Judgments shall
pass by plurality of voices: Only the Governor shall have both two voices,
and all so a casting voice in the said meetings.

175. The Governor, with the whole Council, shall sit as Judges or Justices
in the General Sessions. Wherein by agreement amongst themselves, they shall
publish to the people what times they will hold for their ordinary hearing of
causes and administration of Justice, in all such matters as shall come or be
brought before them: which times they shall not fail duly to observe.
Nevertheless, it shall be lawful for the party grieved, to appeal from any
sentence given by the said Governor and Council, to a more solemn trial at
the next General Sessions: Yet so, that he put in good security, to pay
double costs and charges to the party at variance with him, if the matter pass
against him at the said General Sessions, be it either by the verdit of Jury,
or by the judgment of the Governor, and whole body of the Council, as in
cases of equity, and not tryable by Jury. The same Law shall be for all other
appeals whatsoever.

176. The pleading of all causes both Civil and Criminal, shall be ore tenus,
and plain. The parties by themselves, or by their more able friends declaring
and alleging what they have to say each for themselves: And the Witnesses
shall be present, and heard viua voce, being first sworn. Only the sentence
shall be fully set down in writing, and registered in a Book to be kept for
that purpose.

Jnferiour Officers.
177. THe Governor and Council shall, at their meeting Summer-Ilands, whose
sees shall be such and no other, as shall be rated and set down by the General
assembly from time to time. Which General Assembly may also at their pleasure,
alter and reform the said Officers and Offices; with reference always to the
pleasure of the Company here, as is before expressed.

178. In like sort the Inhabitants of every particular Tribe, as also of the
public Land, being assembled by the Overseers respectively, shall have power
to choose such inferior Officers, for the behoof and service of the said
Tribes and public Lands respectively, as they shall find necessary, with
allowance of such Fees from the said Inhabitants, as they shall agree on: Which
shall be subject to the Confirmation or reformation of the said General
Assembly, in manner before delivered.

Commissioners.
179. Summer-Ilands; Men fearing God, Men of gravity, wisdom, courage and
integrity uncontrolled, to examine the actions, as well of the said Governor
and Council, as of all other Officers, or which in former times have borne
Office within the said Islands: Who shall also have power, according to the
tenor of their Commission, to proceed to the censuring and reforming of all
Delinquents: and the said Commissioners, during the time of their Commission,
shall be exempted from any Jurisdiction over them in the said Islands: and of
all their proceedings, they shall from thence, or at their return, make due
Certificate to the Governor and Company here.

Inhabitants.
180. THe Inhabitants of the Summer-Ilands, shall duly

181. They shall carry themselves loyally both in deeds and words toward the
King, his Heirs and Successors. They shall also behave themselves reverently
and dutifully, as well toward the Governor and Company here, as also toward
the Governor and Council there; under penalties to be set down by the
general Assembly. If any man suppose himself to have just cause of grieuance,
he shall not by mutinous speech raise discontent also in other man; but
exhibit his Petition or Complaint to the Governor and Council; who shall
transmit the same to the Governor and Company here, from whom he shall receive
right and justice without delay.

182. The Tenants or Servants shall not by vnreuerent speech or writing abuse
their Landlords or Masters, under a penalty to be inflicted upon them by a
great and general Court here. But he that has cause of complaint, shall
exhibit his Petition in manner aforesaid.

183. If any of the Company here, by any sinister means seek to oppress or
wrong any of the Inhabitants there; after complaint made and proved, either
before the Governor and Company here, or the Governor or Council there, and
certified hither, as the case shall require, besides the forfeiture above
mentioned in the said Summer-Ilands, whereof one third part shall be to the
party grieved; he shall be also severely proceeded against in a Quarter Court
here.

184. If any man be a Common Swearer, or profane abuser of the Name of God, if
after lawful admonition by the Magistrate or Minister, he do not reform
himself, besides other due punishment, he shall be declared infamous.

185. If any man of unquiet and contentious spirit, be a common raiser of
quarrels or brabbles amongst neighbors; besides other penalties to be
inflicted according to Law, he shall be condemned by the Governor and Council
to be a person infamous.

186. A person by lawful Sentence condemned and declared to be infamous,
shall, during the time he so continues, be incapable of any Office of dignity
or command: But in Offices ministerial, and of toil only and labor, he may,
and shall be employed. He shall not sit or stand in the Church with the rest of
the Congregation, but in a lower place apart by himself: and in all other
Assemblies, he shall always sit or stand in the meanest place. His testimony
shall not be received in any cause or business. If he commit any crime, or
break any Law or Order, his punishment shall be double to that of another man
in the like case. If he presume to do any thing contrary to this Order, he
shall endure six days strait imprisonment for the same. And every person
declared to be infamous, shall so continue, till he publicly declare his
repentance and reformation at a general Sessions; and thereupon be discharged
from his infamy.

187. If any man being of an idle and vain disposition, forsake his labor, or
other business, and thereby give example to other men to do the like: he
shall be admonished thereof by the Sheriff, or Ouerseer. If after admonition
he persist in his idle course of life, he shall be declared infamous. But if
the same person become also a wanderer or vagrant from the due place of his
service: he shall for the first time be only admonished; but for every
offense after, he shall by order of the Sheriff or Overseers, be scourged on
the naked back at the whipping post, as a Rogue; and the entertainers and
relieuers of every such wandering person, or of any Fugitive from the business
of his lawful Landlord or Master, shall for every time or day of such
entertainment, forfeit ten pounds of Tobacco, or to the value thereof: whereof
the one Moity shall be to the use of the Landlord or Master so wronged, and the
other Moity shall be to the use of the public works of the Plantation.

188. If any man be a Drunkard, or a common haunter of Tippling-houses; if
after admonition he do not reform himself, besides other due penalties, he
shall be declared infamous. And the Governor and Council shall in their
general Sessions, from time to time, take especial care for limiting the
number, and reforming the abuses of all Hosteries, Tauernes, or
Drinking-houses, of what kind soever.

189. If any man be a common spender of his time in dicing and carding, or
other vain or unlawful gaming; or use the same (...) times unseasonable; he
shall be declared infamous.

190. Whosoever shall in bravery of apparel exceed his degree; if after
admonition he do not reform the same, he shall in all public burdens bear
the double to any other.

191. The Sheriff and Overseers of Tribes, shall take diligent notice also of
such persons, as by their orderly and industrious course of life, give good
example unto those amongst whom they live: whereof, and of their other good
parts and abilities, they shall give information to the Governor and Council
from time to time, who upon that, and such other information as they shall
take, shall aduertize in like sort the Governor and Company here of the men
of best quality, good carriage and sufficiency in the said Summer-Ilands: that
the Company may accordingly prefer, or otherwise reward persons of good
sufficiency and well-deseruing.

192. No Tenant or Servant, set out and furnished by any Owner of Land
according to their mutual agreement, shall, during the term contracted for
between them, shift his Master or Landlord, or occupy any other man's Land, or
come away from the said Islands, without his Landlords or Masters consent in
writing under his hand and seal.

193. Whosoever shall by any persuasion whatsoever, entice or withdraw the
Tenants or Servants of any Owner of Land, to forsake the occupying of the said
Owners Land, shall forfeit the one Moity of all his part of Tobacco, or other
profits growing in that year; whereof two third parts shall be to the Owner of
the said Land, and a third to the Informer. But if any man shall seek to draw
away any of the Tenants of the public Lands; he shall forfeit the double of
the foresaid forfeiture, to be levied part in that year, part in the year
ensuing. Of which forfeitures, two thirds shall be to the use of the Company,
and one third to the Informer. And the Tenant or Servant so enticed or
withdrawn, or withdrawing himself, shall be immediately returned to the said
Owners or public Land, as the case shall require.

194. No Tenant or Servant shall alienate, lend, or let to hire any Apprentice
or Servant, provided, sent, or contracted for by the Landlord, or Master, to be
placed and employed upon his own Land, without leave first obtained from the
Owner of the said Land, in writing under his hand and Seal. The Offender shall
forfeit one hundred pound of Tobacco, and in want of Tobacco, other goods to
the like proportionable value, to be levied to the use of the said Owner or
Landlord: and the said alienation, hiring, or lending out, shall be utterly
void: and the said Apprentice or Servant shall be returned to his first place,
employment, and service.

195. If any Tenant or Servant, being sent over to the Summer-Ilands by his
Landlord or Master, to be employed upon his Land there, shall afterward betake
himself to some handicraft trade, or other course of life, and either in
whole, or in great part neglect the occupying of his said Landlord or Masters
Land: he shall pay unto his said Landlord or Master, during the time of the
Contract with him, the Moity as well of all the profits by his other earnings,
as of the profits of the said Land which he shall occupy, to be rated,
assessed, and levied by such ways and means as shall be set down in the
general Assembly.

196. If any man marry the Maid-seruant of any Owner of Land, or the Widow of
any of his Tenants or Servants sent over to inhabit upon his Land there; he
shall by the Governor and Council, pay to the said Owner, the ratable part of
furnishing out, and transporting the said Maid-seruant or Widow, consideration
being had to the time that she has served her Master, or the owner there.

197. It shall not be lawful for Tenants or Servants to abuse the Owners Land
on which they are placed: but they shall use it in an orderly and husbandly
manner, according to the Owners directions, or according to such directions as
they shall receive, either from the Governor and Council, or from the
Sheriff and Overseers in their several charges: who shall take the well-vsing
of the Lands in the Summer-Ilands into special consideration. The
Transgressor, after admonition and direction, shall forfeit the one Moity of
his profits for that year, to the use of the Owner of the Land abused.

198. The making and repairing of the Forts, also of Bridges, and Highwayes,
and the preserving of the bounds of every man's Land, shall be performed in such
sort, and by such means as the general Assembly shall appoint.

199. The Governor and Council shall take into consideration the building of
houses in the said Islands, and give order that they may be strongly and
durably built; and being built, that they be well maintained and kept in
repair. The execution of which order, and Survey of the said buildings, shall
be committed by them to the charge of the Sheriff and Overseers, or such other
as they shall think meet to appoint. The violater of this Order shall be
censured and punished at the discretion of the Governor and Council, at their
next general Sessions.

200. No kind of Timber-wood growing in the said Islands, shall be used for
firewood, under the penalty to be set down in the general Assembly, over and
above the double value thereof to be forfeited to the Owner of that Land.

201. No Tenant or Servant shall cut down any Timber trees, but upon a Survey
and setting out thereof by the Overseers respectively: which Timber so cut
down, shall be laid up and preserved for the building of houses, and other
necessary uses with the Owners consent. The transgressor of this Order shall be
amerced at the discretion of the Governor and Council; whereof the one Moity
shall be to the Owner of that Land, and the other to the public services of
the Plantation.

202. The Timber of the Land of one Owner, shall not be carried from thence to
the Land of any other, or to the use of any other person, without the Owners
consent under his hand and Seal, under pain of the double value, to be
forfeited to the Owner, and levied to his use. But if necessity require, that
the Timber growing upon any private man's Land, be taken for public use of the
Company and Colony; the Owner shall be paid for the same by the Company or
Colony, according to a true estimate by an indifferent Jury.

203. The Inhabitants shall not live too much scattered or single one from
another, but draw themselves to five in a Family at the least, where it may
conveniently be, so to eat, and work together.

204. Neither shall they wholly apply themselves to the planting of Tobacco;
but rather to other more stabile and solid Commodities, as the Governor and
Council by directions from hence, or as the general Assembly shall appoint.

205. All bad, rotten, and otherwise unwholesome or vnmarchantable Tobacco,
being tried by order inacted in their general Assembly, shall be publicly
burnt, under such penalties for concealing of the said bad Tobacco, or
neglecting to put the said Order in due execution, as by the said general
Assembly shall be set down. And if the badnesse of the said Tobacco, have
happened merely by the negligence or other default of the maker thereof: he
shall be bound to continue in occupying of the Land where the said Tobacco did
grow, one whole year longer then his contract with his Landlord; and so toties
quoties, in recompense of the said Landlords loss undeservedly sustained.

206. It is ordered that every Tribe, at the common charge thereof, shall build
a sufficient Storehouse with two rooms; the one for keeping Corn, the other
for their Arms: and that each man be provided of one Sword and Piece at the
least: and that all Pieces be of two sorts, Calliuers, and Muskets; and of one
kind of bore, to avoid confusion by diversity of moulds and bullets. And the
Inhabitants of every Tribe being assembled by the Overseers, shall agree
amongst themselves for the safe and clean keeping both of the said Corn and
Armor; that the one may be sweet, and the other bright and serviceable. In
defect whereof, the Governor and Council shall set down a certain Order for
the same; which the Sheriff shall see put in due execution.

207. It is likewise ordered, that for the preventing of dearth, each Family
sow or plant a convenient quantity of Corn, according to the proportion that
the general Assembly shall set down. Of which Corn, a certain quantity (to
be rated likewise by the said general Assembly) shall at every Harvest, being
well conditioned, be brought into the public Stores before mentioned: which
at the Harvest of the next year shall be faithfully delivered out to the true
Owners thereof, at their bringing in of new Corn of like quantity to the same.
Provided always, that in case of general scarcity, the Corn in the said
Storehouses may be delivered out to the Deliuerers in thereof, before the
time of Harvest; or to others that shall be pressed with greater need,
satisfying the Owners according to the true value thereof. The penalties for
neglect or breach of this order, are likewise referred to the general Assembly.

208. Whereas by reason of diverse uncertainties and difficulties, through the
great remoteness of the Summer-Ilands, the particularities of sundry matters
mentioned in these Laws, are referred to such further Orders, provisions and
penalties, as by the general assembly to be held in the said Islands, shall be
thought just and expedient: It is therefore ordered, that the Governor of the
Summer-Ilands which shall be sent thither next, do within one half year
after his arrival there, hold a general Assembly: and that therein, according
to the trust reposed in him and them, they do, with grave and mature
deliberation proceed to the setting down of the orders and penalties here
referred to them: and thereof, together with the rest of their proceedings,
make a full and authentical Certificate to the Company, to receive their
approbation, or reformation, as there shall cause appear.

Trade.
209. Summer-Ilands with the Colony there, by Commission from the Governor and
Company here; which shall be denied to no man: and according to such Orders as
the Company shall find expedient for behoof of the Colony. Provided
notwithstanding, that if any man be found by himself, his Factors or Agents,
to use any fraudulent or oppressiue course to the wrong either of the
Inhabitants there, or of the Owners of the Land: in that case the Company shall
inhibite the party so offending, whether by himself, or by his Factors, or
Agents, from trading to the said Islands, during the space of five years then
next ensuing; and under such penalty as shall be set down in a great and
general Court. And for the better discovery of all fraud and oppression, the
Cope-Marchant or Factor for every public ioynt-stocke or Magazine, shall keep
a true Book of the sale of all the Commodities then sent and transported to
the Summer-Ilands; expressing both to what persons, as also in what quantities,
and at what prices they shall have bin sold: which Book shall be presented to
the view and consideration of a general Court.

210. If in any ioynt-stocke for a Magazine to be hereafter erected, the
General Company, out of their common Cash bear part as an Aduenturer: they
shall ratably partake like profit, and undergo like loss, with other
Adventurers: and any Order to the contrary shall be void. In which case also
the Court shall appoint the meetings for the Magazine!

211. The Governor and Company here, as also the Governor and Council
residing in the Summer-Ilands, shall from time to time have especial care,
that as well the Passengers to and fro, as also the Inhabitants in the
Summer-Ilands maintain friendship and good correspondence with all other
Nations being in league or amity with his Majesty, and the Crown of England;
and that they forbear all hostile or injurious acts or attempts against them,
or any of them, in their persons, Possessions, Lands, Goods, or business, upon
penalty to be proceeded against as Malefactors in the highest nature, and
disturbers of the general peace established by his Majesty.

Land in Virginia.
212. Virginia, in consideration of the great defect of the quantity of Land in
the Summer-Ilands, conceived to have been at the time of the sale thereof to
this Company, and to make recompense for the same, have ordered in one of their
great and general Courts, that there shall be granted by them, and under
their Legal Seal, a large proportion of Land in Virginia, to be and continue
to the Company of the said Summer-Ilands, and the members thereof for ever, for
the better support of the said Company, and of the Inhabitants of the said
Islands: It is therefore ordered, that a select Committie be forthwith
appointed, as well to pursue the perfecting of the said Grant; as also to take
into careful consideration, how the planting and peopling of the said Land in
Virginia, may be proceeded with in most effectual sort, and without delay,
and as may be most for the support of the said Summer-Ilands: which Committy
shall from time to time reduce into writing, and present to the Courts, their
proceedings therein: so to receive resolution and further direction.

FINIS.

