A godly and zealous prayer, to be used of every Christian and duetifull
Subject, for the preservation of our most sovereign Lady Elizabeth, by the
grace of God, of England, France, and Irelande Queen: and in all causes as
well ecclesiastical as temporal, next under God of the Church of England and
Irelande supreme Gouernesse.
English royal blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

DIEV ET MON DROIT

O Most gracious God and loving father, we most wretched and miserable sinners
prostrate our selves before the throne of thy divine Majesty: earnestlye
beseeching thee from the bottom of our hearts, (not for any of our deserts) but
for thy son Jesus Christ his sake, to hearken unto our prayers and
supplications, which with groaning souls and mourning minds, we power forth
besore thee, which art the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. For we appeal
unto thee O heavenly Father, and unto none, but only unto thee, for comfort
in these dangerous days of iniquity: wherein sin abounds, and the godles
which have not thy fear before their eyes, labor without ceasing, to deface
thy eternal truth, to root up violently the precious plants of thy
vineyard, to hinder the building of Syon, and to tread down like blood
thirsty Tyrants and ravenous Wolves, thy chosen servant Elizabeth, our most
gracious Queen and Gouernes: under whom, through thy providence, we have to
our great joy, and her highness exceeding comfort, been most peaceably and
quietly governed.

Continue we beseech thee, (O most gracious Father and eternal God) this
thine inestimable love, and undeserved favor unto us although we have justly
by the means of our grievous contempt of thy graces, our innumerable
wickednesses and immeasurable ingratitude deserved the contrary: yet for thy
son Christ his sake, most gracious God and loving Father, lay not the
multitude of our sins to our charge, but be merciful unto us, that with
bitter tears sue unto thee for thy mercy, love, and fatherly favor.

Uphold we beseech thee amongst us, as graciously thou have done hitherto,
the sincere preaching of thy Gospel, (O most mighty Iehoua) and give us grace
without wavering, to hold fast the staff of thy blessed promises, and to
believe without faining the sacred testimonies contained in thy holy Law.
Keep us good Lord under the wings of thy defense from the sedicious and
damnable doctrine of Antichrist, that man of sin, which exalts himself
above God, robbing him of his glory and honor, in making our Savior Christ
Jesus, insufficient by his painful death and bloody passion, to purchase us
the price of our redemption, and thereby to ransom us from the infernal lake
of hell and damnation.

Pluck the seals of ignorance we most heartily beseech thee (O most loving
God and heavenly father) from the eyes of all Christian Princes, and at thy
good pleasure give unto them the good feeling of thy grace, that by the divine
w^rking of the same, they may perfectly understand, and faithfully believe thy
holy Gospel. Make them of persecuting Saules, to become converted Paul's, that
they with us, and we with them, may glory and triumph in the fall of Babylon,
and study in all their and our actions, as it becomes redeemed Christians to
advance and set forth the glory of thy holy name.

And cheefely and especially, (O gracious God and loving father) we commend
unto thee in these our prayers and supplications at this present, according to
our bounden duties, the estate of thy chosen servant, our sovereign Lady,
Queen Elizabeth. Be thou unto her as thou have from the beginning to her last
ending. O most heavenly father, a Bulwark of defense against all her and our
enemies. Weaken and make feeble sor thy son Christ his sake we beseech thee
the perrilous practi^es, and dangerous devises of all perverse and sedicious
Papists, which endeavor to withstand and resist thy truth, to persecute thee
afresh in thy members, and to overthrow thine anointed. Stretch forth thy
hand O heavenly Father, and ever defend thy handmayd from those devouring
Bulls of Basan, which have bent their horns against her, hardening their
hearts in their ungodliness, to work the confusion of so virtuous and godly a
Princess. Keep thou (O good Lord) her highness from the murmuring of Dathan,
Coran, and Abiram, which envy the godly estate of her government, and let
their reward be shame and confusion, which imagine to work her highness any
harm.

Defend thou (O heavenly Father) by the power of thy providence, our happy
Heaster, from the conspiracy of all hateful Hamons, that thirst after the
blood of the righteous, intendinge by treachery to work the spoil of thine
inheritance, yea let their deuillish devises be brought to naught, and let
them perish in their ungodliness, that heave up their hands against thine
anointed. Keep her far off good Lord we beseech thee, from all such
ambitious minded Absolons, as have determined to alter the estate of her most
gracious government, and let their hire be shame and confusion that have
conspired against her and thy people. Give her highness power and strength from
above, with victorious Judith, to draw the sword, and to cut of the heads of
all such drunken Holoferneses, as are become drunken with the deuillish dregs
of Antichrist, supersticious popery and treasonne: yea, let them be taken in
their own snares, and fall into the pytte which they have dug for the
destruction of the innocent. thus we thy poor people shall rejoice in thy
wondrous works and make our continual boastes of thy praises. Establishe we
beseech thee (O good Lord) the throne of her highness, make her an old and
aged mother in the house of Israel, to advance the truth of thy testament to
reedify Jerusalem, and to pluck up by the roots all such wicked weeds and
pestilent plants, as are not grafted by Jesus Christ, in the precious vineyard
of his eternal truth. Endue her with wisdom from above, garnish her with
the health of body and mind: and plant about her as thou have done from the
beginning, even to her last ending, wise and godly Counsaylers, that by their
foresight and her gracious government, sin may be suppressed, virtue
advanced, truth maintained, Idolatry defaced, and the horn of thine honor
for ever be continually exalted. Increase the number of godly Subjects, and
give us grace we beseech thee O eternal God, truly to serve and worship
thee, to hate sin, to fly far from the fellowship of the ungodly, and to
abound in all obedience, love and duty toward thee and her majesty. And then
thou like a loving father and most gracious God, wilt mercifully stretch forth
unto us the assured Scepter of thy everlasting favor: double the days of our
sovereign, to our exceeding joy and comfort. Multiply our peace, confound and
overthrow all her and our enemies, as well foreign as domestical, power
upon us plenti^lly inthis life, the everlasting dewes of thy mercy and grace,
and in the world to come, make us partakers of those celestial joys which
Christ Jesus has prepared for the number of his elect in his heavenly
kingdom: the which God for his son Christ his sake grant us. Amen.

I. P.

Viuat, Valeat, vincatque Regina Elizabetha.
Imprinted at London by Hugh Singleton, dwelling in Smithfielde, at the sign
of the Golden Tun, printer to the right honorable City of London.


