THE ANSWER OF THE VICECHANCELOVR, THE DOCTORS, both the Proctors, and other
the Heads of Houses in the University of Oxford:

(Agreeable, undoubtedly, to the joint and Uniform opinion, of all the Deanes
and Chapters, and all other the learned and obedient Clergy, in the Church of
England.)

To the humble Petition of the Ministers of the Church of England, desiring
Reformation of certain Ceremonies and Abuses of the Church.

Beware of the Concision. Philip. 3.2. Cum sub specie studij perfectionis,
imperfectionem nullam tolerare possumus, aut in Corpore, aut in membris
Ecclesiae: tunc Diabolum nos tumefacere superbia, and hypocrisi seducere,
moneamur. Calvin advers. Anabapt. Art. 2. AT OXFORD, Printed by Joseph Barnes,
and are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Crown by Simon
VVaterson. 1603.

TO THE MOST REVEREND, and Right Honorable the L. Archb. of Canterbury his
Grace, Primate and Metropolitan of all England: the L. Buchurst, L. High
Treasurer of England, and Chancelour of the University of Oxford: the L. Cecill
of Esingden, Principal Secretary to his Majesty, and Chancelour of the
University of Cambridge; Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Counsel.
MANY and excellent were the blessings, which it pleased Almighty God to
bestow upon this Nation, by the Ministry of his chosen servant our late
Sovereign; yet none of the^ were comparable unto these, the Purity of
Religion, perpetually supported by one Uniform most ancient kind of
commendable Church government; and the plenty of al manner of good learning,
abundantly derived from the two Welsprings thereof, into all the parts, both of
the Church and Commonwealth. For the continuance, both of them and the rest,
it was her wise and happy care, to select and take near unto her successively
Men of rare Endowme^ts and personal gifts, men of deep judgment, long
experience, great moderation, loving learning and fearing God. Whom therefore
she did place in chiefest authority under her, that under her they might be
the greater comfort to the Ministry, the better encouragement unto learning,
the more noble countenance to Religion, and as the Prophet speaks Psalm. 21.6.
set as blessings to the whole land.

In this honorable rank we cannot, (Most Reverend and Right Honorable)
without open wrong, but acknowledge your Lordships to be second unto none of
all your predecessors. The long experience that this kingdom has had, of
your honorable Employments for the maintenance of Religion and learning, as
your several places do specially require, would check our want of duty, if
we did dissemble it; and silence the detraction of any other, that should go
about to impeach it.

Which as we recount with singular comfort, for the days that are past; so
for the present, it is the very stay of our hearts, that the same ^od, of his
accustomed goodness, has given the same mind, unto our most gracious and dread
Sovereign, to preserve and propagate the same things in Church and
Commonwealth, by the Godly care and prudent counsel, of the very selfsame
Persons. For had we not under his Princely wisdom and clemency, such
immediate Patrones, (which now with long use, are grown into a very sympathy
of our estates;) to who^ we might resort in our needful times of trouble: it
would amate our minds, and utterly astonish us in our vnderstanddings, to see
the insolent endeavors and strange attempts, of sond Familists, absurd
Brownists, and perfidious Papists; all of them with importunity, and
selfe-conceited confidence, intending and expecting the innovation of Religion,
through the overthrow of the Clergy, and ruin of the Universities.

All which notwithstanding, had not opened the doors of our lips, nor made way
to this our just complaint; but that there came to our sight long since, An
humble petition of a Thousand Ministers at once: Which we may well resemble
unto still running streams, which are deepest there, where they seem to be
most calm. This we beheld with great sorrow of heart: considering how it is
repleate, with unthankfulness toward God for his mercies toward us; with
injury to Her gracious government, (whose Memory be precious unto all
posterity;) with reproach to their Fathers that begot them in the Gospel; with
prejudice to the Breasts, that (if they be any thing) did give them suck; with
contempt of their Brethren, and fellow Laborers (at the least) in the Lords
harvest. Howbeit as long as it passed in private, under the name of a
particular motion, made to his most excellent Majesty; we l^id our hands upon
our mouths, and with due reverence expected in silence, the wise resolution of
His religious heart.

But these men (as they are impatie^t of delay, or else to their cause, and
ensured the safe conduit of their weather beaten barge, to the haven of their
hope. Were there any such, we would request them to remember, that it is
neither manners nor discretion, to take upon them in a State, wherein (for
ought we know) they have nothing to do. It may suffice, that they are
partakers of the good things of the land; let them thank God and the King, and
be quiet. But we are verily persuaded, there are none such; that this, as all
the rest, is given out under hand among their credulous adherents, only ad
faciendum populum. A trick of theirs, with which we have bin long acquainted.

This course (Right Honorable) did make us think, that now they had altered
the nature of that foresaid Schedule; and of an Entitled Petition to his
Majesty. Had made it a covert kind of libell. Whereby (securely as they thought)
they might deprave and slander, not only the Communion book, but the whole
estate of the Church, as it stands reformed by our late Sovereign. Which
undue and dishonest practice, having so changed the quality of their Petition;
whether it has brought the Contrivers and Preferrers of it within the compass
of that statute. 1. Elizab; and made them liable to the Penalties of the same:
we take not upon us to determine. Howbeit hereof we could not but take notice;
that by their impunity, diverse other very lewdly affected, have in diverse
parts of the kingdom, presumed to trouble his Majesty, and tax the state,
with the like clamorous libelles, and defamatory supplications.

The consideration whereof began to admonish us, that now it sorted with our
duty, to show our selves, as truly zealous, and carefully religious in the
defense of the Church, for the quieting of men's minds, and settling of their
consciences, by some short animadversions upon their proceedings: as these
factious persons have been audatiously venterous, and praeposteriously heddy,
to manifest their malice; thereby to distract and draw the people, from their
love and liking of the present state. Whereunto we were the rather invited, by
the commendable example, of our Reverend brethren of the University of
Cambridge; who to make known their dislike of these and such like factious
Schismatikes, have passed a grace in their public Congregation to this effect.

Placet vobis, A grace passed in the University of Ca^bridge Iun. 4. 1603.
against factious Puritaines.
vt quicunque doctrinam vel disciplinam Ecclesiae Anglicanae, vel eius partem
aliquam, dictis aut scriptis, aut quocunque alio modo, in Academia
Cantabrigiensi public oppugnaverit: ab omni suscepto gradu suspendatur, and a
suscipiendo excludatur ipso facto.

By which their wise and necessary Decree, they have not only encouraged us,
unto this our Apology; but with all assured us, that both they themselves, and
(as we conceive) many thousands more, of the judicious and obedient Ministers of
this land: are ready to give us the righthand of fellowship in this work, and
willing to subscribe unto the same, if the cause did necessarily require it, or
the time would permit.

But your Lordships know right well, that Truth obtains no great authority,
by the many voices that acknowledge it at once. And for our parts we utterly
condemn the course, that these Schismatikes have therein taken. Who to bolster
out their stale objections and false calumniatio^s, have trudged up and down
diverse Shires, to get the consent, of they care not whom; so they may make up
the tale, and pretend a number. In which kind, that was a notable Stratageme
which (far besides the Authors purpose) we did light upon of late. May it
please your Lordships to have patience, while we propose it, and so leave it
to your Honorable censure.

H. I. a man that was of ordinary parts, and of as ordinary place, when he
lived among us; is now, it seems, become a principal Agent, and a special
Procurator of the public cause among the factious. He, (much mistaking in his
strong conceit, that to insinuate with a man of wisdom, would be
sufficient to fetch him over to that side.) Writes unto one of eminent sort
among us, after this fashion.

MOreover I am to let you understand, that many learned and godly Ministers,
Scilicet in June, when their Petition was Exhibited in April before
are about to exhibit to the Kings Majesty, a Petition for the Reformation of
things amiss in our Church; whereunto a consent of as many, as co^veniently we
can get, is very behooueful. My opinion and trust is concerning you, that you
will be, not only a partaker, but also a furtherer of this Christian duty. I
have sent you here enclosed the form to be subscribed, by all such, as have
good will to this purpose I pray you let me have an answer hereof from you, as
soon as you may; with so many of your well affected friends hands
thereunto, as shall be (thought) good. It is not intended that your names
shall be rashly showed, to any man's prejudice, but be reserved to a fit
opportunity; if we shall perceive, that they altogether being brought forth,
will further our desires and suite. Of the good success whereof, we conceave
good hope, thanks be to God. Thus beseeching God to keep and sanctify us for
his service, and to give us wisdom in all things: Ibid you heartily
farewell. VVoodstreete in London the XXX. of June. 1603.

Yours to his power H. I.
Post script. I could wish you to confer with D. A. about this matter.




Thus much of the Letter.

Now the Form to be subscribed unto, is this.

We whose names are under written do agree to make our humble Petition to the
Kings Majesty, that the present state of the Church, may be farther reformed
in all things needful; according to the rule of Gods holy word, and
agreeable to the example of other reformed Churches, which have restored both
the Doctrine and Discipline, as it was delivered by our Savior Christ, and his
holy Apostles.

Your Lordships see the manner of the men. This collusion and coven, were very
base between man and man. But for them, thus to use their Sovereign; first to
give him a Petition in the name of a Thousand, and then to scatter it abroad
with this gloss,, Of the good success of our suite, we do conceive good hope:
thanks be to God; Thereby ex post facto, to beg and steal as many hands to
it, as could be got: this is such stuff, as we will pass over with reference
to that of Tully unto Antonie; Philip. 2.
Tu autem eo liberior, etc. It is the advantage some Men have, that they dare
to do such things, as a modest Adversary cannot well reprove. But it is
suitable to the Imputations they have laid upon their late Princes
government. And now also, when his Majesty shall frustrate their vain
imaginations; they have left their old wont, if some of them do not verify
that of the Poet, -- Fermentum, and quae semelintus
Pers: Satyr. 1.
Innata est, rupto iecore, exibit Caprificus.
Howsoever; the Thing that we would specially observe out of this Script; is in
the manner of Subscriptio^. Where hence it does most plainly appear, that the
particulars specified in the Petition; are not the utmost End whereat they
aim; they have another mark.

"All things needful according to the rule of Gods Word and agreeable to the
example of other reformed Churches; is their Vp-shot. But is it so indeed?
Why, They of the Petition desire (only) Reformation of certain Ceremonies and
Abuses: They neither as factious men, affect a Popular Paritie in the Church,
nor as Schismatickes, aim at the dissolution of the State Ecclesiastical:
their humble suite is, that the offenses follovving may be removed, amended,
qualified: They (good men) desire That which shall be prejudicial unto none,
but etc. It is true; The voice of the Petition, might seem to be the voice of
Jacob, though the hands of the Subscription appear plainly to be the hands of
Esau; were it not that there is also a Clause in their Petition. (Now that we
have their own exposition of it, we can observe it; and, that it is repeated
thrice for failing, viz. These and some other used; These and other such like;
These with other such Abuses;) which houldeth very good corresponde^cy with
the form of Subscription. Heretofore, we could not tell what to make of those
words, and therefore made them no answer. They seemed unto us a very Nemo
Scit; a Mathematike Line, diuisibilis in semper devisibilia: but now upon this
new Advertisement, having compared the^, we find them Paralele, to those All
things needful etc. in the Subscriptio^: Which tell us plainly, They will never
have an end, till either they have set up the Presbitery, Or else be cut of by
Authority.

The third and last remarkable matter, which we humbly Papists and the
Puritants. We will use their own style, and come as near as we can, to their
very words.

1 They Both entitle themselves the Kings afflicted subjects, and above all
other, his devoted servants.

2 They Both pretend an enforcement of a speedy recourse to his Majesty, for a
present Redress and Reformation.

3 They Both complain, of being overwhelmed with enduring persecution through
loss of Living and Liberty.

4 They Both ground their Doctrine and Discipline upon the sacred text of Gods
word and Gospel.

5 They Both condemn the obedience of Protestants to the Laws Established,
to be, not for Conscience and zeal: but for Moral honesty, and fear of
temporal punishment, says the Papist; For their own quiet, credit, and
profit in the world, says the Puritaine.

6 They Both renounce a public alteration, and dissolutio^ of the State
Ecclesiast. but the one pleads for a private Toleration, the other (forsooth)
for a Godly Reformation.

7 They Both deny that they exhibit their Petitio^s, with a tumultuous spirit,
or with a disloyal and Schismatical mind. Of which their Semblable
Assertions, in arguments so opposite, we might say in a word, as the Orator
does of contrary Opinions; It cannot be that more then one of them should
possibly be true, but it is very possible, that both may be false. Yet we
rather take up that in the Book of Iud. 15.4.
Judges, and say of them and their designs:

Verily these men are like Samsons Foxes. They have their heads severed
indeed; the One sort looking to the Papacy, the Other to the Presbiterie. But
they are tied together by the tails, with fire brandes betvveene them. Which
if they be not quenched in time, are able to set the whole Land in a
Combustion and Uproar.

IF in any of these, or in them all, there do appear unto your Lordships such
matter of moment, as might move men of care, and some discretion to write in
defense of themselves, and the present State; if in our manner of writing, we
have held that hand, (not by way of large discourse, but as the brevity of
Notes will suffer,) which does beseem a modest and ingenuous answer; if in
neither of them there be any thing so offensive, or defective, or impertinent,
but that, under the wings of your Honorable Patronage it may pass into the
Presence of his Excellent Majesty, and there attend his most judicious and
learned Censure, yet so attempered with his rare and singular mildnes, as in it
he is wont to accept the duty and service of his meaner Subjects: then (and not
otherwise) we beseech your Lordships that of your wonted favor, you will
accompany it with your graceful Presence, and as the Argument of our religious
Affections in all humility present it to his Highness: then we entreat, that in
the Honorable regard you have of those Noble parts of this Church, which God
has specially betaken into your Protection; in the loyal remembrance you
retain of Her Majesty that late was, and her happy Government; in the
bounden duty you owe to his Majesty that now is, and the Well doing of his
whole Kingdom; in the Piety and zeal which you bear to God, his Church, and
to his sacred truth: you will take occasion hereby, All as one man, jointly to
employ that great Grace, and high Favor, which God has given you in the eyes
of your Sovereign; to the present supporte of Religion, maintenance of
Learning, defense of the Church, strengthening the State, settling the minds of
the People, establishing peace and tranquillity in the Land: by taking the
Foxes, the little Foxes, which mar our Vines, that they bear small Grapes;
and by chasing away the wild Boar of the Wood, and the Beasts of the
Forest; that otherwise would eat them up, and utterly destroy them. So God
shall take Pleasure in your Care and Conscience; the King in your faithful
Service; his Subjects shall dwell safe, under the shadow of his Wings; and we
your Clients shall send this testimony after you: Many Patrones of the Clergy,
many Chauncelours of the Universities, have done virtuously, but These
surmou^ted them all.

Now the God that gives both Glory, and Grace, give your Lordships all manner
of Graces fit for your High Callings in this World; and That far most
excellent and eternal weight of Glory, in the World to come.

Your Lordships in all duty, The Vicechancelour, the Doctors, the Proctors,
and other the Heads of Houses in the University of Oxford.

To the Reader.
IMmediately after the Printing of our answer to the Petition, there came unto
us, a very kind and wel-penned Letter, concerning this matter. Which we might
not suppress, (though it be but rudely here inserted) without great injury,
to that whole University; and no less detriment unto the cause it self.

JNDORSED To the Vicechancelour, and others of the University of Oxford.
CVm nuperrime, and quidem sero admodum, ad aures nostras pervenisset fama de
libello Regiae Maiestati pro reformanda (scilicet) Ecclesia a Ministris mill,
vt perhibentur, exhibito: et si nihil in eo novi reperiretur, cui non plus
millies antehac responsum sit, tamen quoniam numerum iactant, vt intelligerent
Millenarij isti, Si Saulo mill adstent, Davidi in hac causa decies mill
nunquam de futuros; nihil prius habuimus, aut antiquius, quam vt Operi omni
responsione indignissimo, aliquod tamen responsum pararemus. Quod dum
meditamur, defertur ad nos Academiae Oxoniensis Apologia certe disertissima,
quae rationum momentis brevissime refutaret, quicquid ab Istis tanto antea
labor confectum esset, aut confictum. Qua conspecta, nihil nobis reliqui
videbatur, quos ita anteverterat Fratru^ nostrorum in causa optima zelus and
industria prompta satis and parata ad hominum levissimorum ictus omnes vel ex
tempore refellendos: quam cum illi pondere certassent argumentorum, nos numero,
quo Isti maxim gloriantur, pugnaremus. Quod and antea, quasi divinantes and
praevidimus, and providimus. Cum enim defuncta Elizabetha Regina optima, and in
causa optima, (quod in muliere prope singular est, and inauditum) semper
constantissima, semper eadem, non tam Principis Religiosissimae interitum, and
religionis si non intereuntis, at sum certe periclitantis casum deplorare,
quam in adventum Regis novi novas res meditari Isti caepissent and in dies
moliri: peropportune succurrendum censuit Academia, and convocato senatu
frequenti admodum, and celebri decernendum; vt Quicunque Ecclesiae Anglicanae
doctrinam, vel Disciplinam, vel ejus partem aliquam legibus publicis
stabilitam, scriptis, vel dictis, vel quocunque modo, in Academia
Cantabrigiensi public oppugnaverit, ab omni gradu suscipiendo excludatur, and
a suscepto suspendatur ipso facto. Quod quidem Decretum concensu prope vnanimi
comprobatum, and tabulis publicis Iunij Our private instruction was, as if it
had bin decreed the 4. of June.
9. 1603. consignatum, nunc demum testatum cupimus vniversis, vt intelligant
omnes de Disciplina nostra, non imposita, sed suscepta libere and retenta quid
existiment, non in angulis Opiniastri nonnulli, sed in aperto Senatu
Cantabrigienses prope vniversi. Quorum consensus, cum tam fraterne concinat and
conspiret cum Apologia Oxoniensi, cum Scripturis, Patribus, Concilijs,
Principum nostrorum Decretis, Legibus, Parliamentis; eant nunc mill Isti, and
libris nostris fere mill in hunc finem editis and conscriptis cum erit otium
and facultas, respondeant prius, quam Cramben toties decoctam Regitam prudenti,
tam literato, tam impudenter obtrudant. Aut si numerari malint quam ponderari
suffragia, cogitent homunciones miseri, ab Academijs Musisque relicti, quam
nullius numeri sint, quam plane nihili. Valete fratres in Christo Charissimi,
and nos nostramque Academiam summa vobis and studiorum and morum similitudine
coniunctissima^, vt facitis, amate. Cantab. October. 7. 1603.

SVBSCRIBED By the Vice chancelour, and others the Heads of the University of
Cambridge.


THE HVMBLE PETITION OF THE MJNJSTERS OF THE Church of England, desiring
Reformation of certain Ceremonies and abuses of the Church.
To the most Christian and excellent PRINCE, our Gracious and dread Sovereign,
JAMES by the grace of God etc. We the Ministers of the Church of England that
desire Reformation; vvish a long prosperous and happy Reign over us, in this
life, and in the next everlasting salvation.
MOST gracious and dread Sovereign, seeing it has pleased the devine
Majesty, to the great comfort of all good Christians, to advaunce your
Highness, according to your just title, to the peaceable government of this
Church and Common wealth of England: we the Ministers of the Gospel in this
land, neither as factious men, affecting a popular Paritie in the Church, nor
as Schismatikes aiming at the dissolution of the state Ecclesiastical: but as
the faithful servants of Christ, and loyal subjects to your Majesty,
desiring and longing for the redress of diverse abuses of the Church; could
do no less, in our obedience to God, service to your Majesty, love to his
Church: then acquainte your Princely Majesty, with our particular griefs.
For as your Princely pen writes, The King as a good Physician, must first
know what peccant humors his pacient naturally is most subject unto, before he
can begin his cure: And although diverse of us that sue for Reformation, have
formerly in respect of the times subscribed to the book, some upon
Protestation* some upon expositions given them, some with condition, rather
then the Church should have been deprived of theie labor and Ministry: yet
now we, to the number of more then a thousand, of your Majesty's subjects and
Ministers, all groaning as under a common burden of humane Rites and
Ceremonies, do with one joint consent humble our selves at your Majesty's
feet, to be cased and relieved in this behalf. Our humble suite then unto
your Majesty is, that these offenses, following, some may be removed, some
amended, some qualified.

1 In the Church service. That the Cross in Baptism, interrogatories
ministered to Infants, Confirmation, as superfluous may be taken away Baptism
not to be ministered by Women, and so explaned. The Cap and Surplice not
urged. That examination may go before the Communion. That it be ministered
with a Sermon. That diverse terms of Priests, and Absolution, and some other
used, with the Ring in marriage, and other such like in the book, may be
corrected. The long somenes of service abridged. Church songs and Music
moderated to better edification. That the Lords day be not profaned. The rest
upon Holydaies not so strictly urged. That there may be an uniformity of
doctrine prescribed. No popish opinion to be any more taught or defended. No
Ministers Charged to teach their people to bow at the name of Jesus. That the
Canonical Scriptures only be read in the Church.

2 Concerning Church Ministers. That none hereafter be admitted into the
Ministry, but able and sufficient men, and those, to preach diligently; and
especially upon the Lords day. That such as be already entered and cannot
preach, may either be removed, and some charitable course taken with them for
their relief: or else to be forced according to the value of their livings, to
mainetaine preachers. That Non-residencie be not permitted. That King Edwards
statute for the lawfulnes of Ministers marriage, be revived. That Ministers be
not urged to subscribe, but, according to the Law, to the Articles of Religion,
and the Kings supremacy only.

3 For Church livings and maintenance. That Bishops leave their Co^mendams:
some holding Prebends, some Parsonages, some Vicarages with their Bishoprics.
That double beneficed men, be not suffered to hold, some two, some three
benefices with cure and some two three, or four dignities besides. That
Impropriatio^s annexed to Bishoprics and Colleges, be demised only to the
Preachers Incumbe^ts, for the old Rent. That the Impropriations of Lay men's
fee, may be charged with a sixth, or seventh part of the worth, to the
maintenance of the preaching Minister.

4 For Church Discipline. That the Discipline, and Excommunication may be
administered according to Christ's own institution. Or at the least, that
enormities may be redressed. As namely, That Excommunication come not forth
under the name of Lay persons, Chauncellours, Officials etc. That men be not
excommunicated for trifles and twelue-penny matters. That none be
excommunicated without consent of his Pastor. That the officers be not suffered
to extort unreasonable fees. That none having jurisdiction or Register places,
put out the same to farm. That diverse Popish Canons, (as for restraint of
marriage at certain times) be reversed. That the Long-somnes of suites in
Ecclesiastical courts, (which hang sometime two, three, four, five, six or
seven years) may be restrained. That the Oath ex officio, whereby men are
forced to accuse themselves be more sparingly used. That Licenses for marriage
without Banes asked, be more cautiously granted.

These with such other Abuses yet remaining and practiced in the Church of
England, we are able to show, not to be agreeable to the Scriptures, if it
shall please your Highness farther to hear us, or more at large by writing to
be informed, or by conference among the learned to be resolved. And yet we
doubt not, but that without any farther process, your Majesty (of whose
Christian judgment we have received so good a taste already) is able of your
self, to judge of the equity of this cause. God we trust has appointed your
Highness our Physician, to heal these diseases. And we say with Mordecai to
Hester, who knows; whether you are come to the kingdom for such a time? Thus
your Majesty shall do that, which we are persuaded, shall be acceptable to God,
honorable to your Majesty in all succeeding ages, profitable to his Church
which shall be thereby increased, comfortable to your Ministers, which shall be
no more suspended, silenced, disgraced, imprisoned for men's Traditions: and
prejudicial to none, but to those that seek their own quiet, credit, and
profit in the world. Thus with all dutiful submission, referring our selves
to your Majesty's pleasure, for your gracious answer, as God shall direct you:
we most humbly recommend your Highness to the divine Majesty; whom we beseech
for Christ his sake to dispose your royal heart to do herein, what shall be
to his glory, the good of his Church, and your endless comfort.

Your Majesty's most humble Subjects, The Ministers of the Gospel, that desire
not a disorderly innovation, but a due and godly Reformation.

THE ANSWER OF THE VICE-CHAVNCELOVR, THE DOCtors, both the Proctors, and other
the Heads of Houses in the University of Oxford, To the Petition of the
Ministers of the Church of England desiring Reformation.
In their Petition, there are three principal parts.
1 A Preface. 2 A Conplaint consisting of four special points; In every of
them the desire that certain Ceremonies and Abuses, may be some of them
removed, some amended, some qualified. 3 A Conclusion.
FOR ANSWER WHEREUNTO: 1 In General.
WE most humbly beseech his most excellent Majesty, that it may be
considered, how inconvenient and insufferable it is in Christian policy, to
permit a long and well settled state of government, to be so much as questioned;
much more to be Ipsa mutatio consuetudinis etiam quae adiuvat vtilitate,
novitate perturbat August ad Ianuar. Ep. 118 cap. 5.
altered, for a few of his Subjects: especially considering the matter,
pretended to be the cause of these men's grief, and of their desired
Reformation, unjustly so called. For it is either the Ceremonies of the Church,
or Abuses in the Church, as they allege. Wherein we humbly recommende to his
Princely remembrance.

First concerning Ceremonies, that they are either superstitious; and the^ no
ways to be admitted. Of which sort it should seem by the Petitioners, (and we
are ready to prove) that the Ceremonies of our Church are not. Because these
men confess, that in respect of the times they did subscribe unto them: or if
they were such, with what conscience did they subscribe, in respect of the
times?

Or else, things in themselves indifferent. And then the supreme Christian
Magistrate, has lawful Melan. in 13. ad Romans Peccatu^ mortale est violate
edicta Magistrate. etc. Heming. in Syntag ca de Adiaph Qui vi olat
Ecclesiasticam politia^ peccat multis modis, etc. Bez. Epist 24. ad artic. 7.
authority to forbid, and we must forbear: to command, and we must obey;
not only for fear, but for conscience sake. Of which kind if these Ceremonies
be (as we will justify, and they cannot deny) where is then their pretended
obedience? Where is their applause of his Majesty's peaceable government? Why
do they trouble both Church and Common wealth, in respect of matters which in
duty and conscience they may well, and ought willingly, to submit themselves
unto?

Secondly concerning Abuses, be it considered: first of what quality they are;
secondly of what degree.

1 Touching the nature or quality of them, whether they are in the very
Constitutions of our Church, or rather in the Execution of the said
Constitutions. If not in the Constitutions themselves, (as when we descend to
the particulars it will appear:) there is no cause why the government should be
changed; or these men suffered, thus to calumniate the State, wherein there is
nothing Positive, that is worthy of blame. If in the Execution; (which as we
will not absolutely deny, so these men cannot easily prove,) that may be
remedied by amending or removing of some certain offenders, without alteration
of the state.

2 Touching the degree or grievousnes of these abuses, (whether in the
Constitution, as they suppose, and we deny; or in the Execution, which simply
and in every particular, Calv. adv. Aab. art. a. V^ique (sc. Ca^ari and
Donastae) in eode^ rrore fueru^t, Quo isti somiatores; Ec^lesia^ quaere^^s in
qua ni^il posset desi^rari, etc.
no Church in Christendom is able to justify, and yet none, so much as this
of ours:) we undertake to prove against the Thousand, that mask unknown under
that generality, that they are not such, nor so heinous, as deserve this their
bitter reprehension: much less such an alteration, in the Church and
Commonwealth, as would ensue; if these Petitioners might have their desire.

2. In Particular. Concerning the Preface. We do but note.
1 WHAT reckoning (in truth) these men do make, of just titles unto kingdoms,
who favor them De lur. reg apud Scot. De lur Magist in subd: Vind cont tyr.
Hotto. Fra^cog.
to much, that were wont to subject all kings titles unto popular election and
approbation.

2 What comfort (in deed) the Petitioners take in the peace of his Majesty's
government; who in the very entrance thereof, by seeking this and the like
dangerous alterations, do disquiet and disturb the same. Were other men as
little inured to peace and subjection, it might occasion some inconvenience.

3 Howsoever in words they decline the imputation of factious men affecting
popular parity in the Church, and, of Schismatikes aiming at the dissolution of
the State Ecclesiastical: yet it is to well known in this kingdom, and by
experience it has bin felt in that of (...). page 39, 40, 41, etc.
Scotland, what manner of men they be: as also, what have bin the lamentable
effects of their reformations there, and would have bin likewise here, had not
the prudent foresight, and constant resolution of our late gracious
Sovereign, continually repressed their attemptes.

4 These men might have performed better, Their obedience to God, their service
to his Majesty, their love to his Church: (as in the particulars will appear)
if they had forborne to trouble his Majesty, the church of God, and this
commonwealth, with these their causeles griefs and discontentments. They have
thereby made such a breach as will not easily (without much wisdom and
patience) be cured. For what are these men, that they should assume so much
for what are the whole Clergy of England besides, that they should be so
abased and contemned?

5 That which they allege out of his Highness (...), is a childish fallacy;
absurdly taking that for granted, which is the maine question. They must prove
(and not assume,) that these are the peccant humors of this Church, which in
truth is the Iuel. Apo. 170. Accessimus quantu^ maxim potuimus ad Ecclesia^
Apost etc. Et 46. Ea omnia quae aut luperst^^ola etc. Aut cum lacris literis
pugna^tia aut etiam sobrijs hominibu^ indigna etc. prorsus sine vl la
exceptione repudia^imus.
least peccant of any in the world, and would be much less peccant, if it were
clean purged, of these unquiet and malecontented humors.

6 That diverse of them have formerly subscribed to the book, (as skornfully
they term it) does manifestly evince, that either our Leiturgy is
justifiable, themselves being Judges; or else that they did liberally dispense
with their own consciences, which is not the part of honest men. To do that
in respect of the times, which in it self is not lawful, proves little less
then hypocrisy: to allege unknown Protestations, Expositions, and
Conditions in their subscription, does argue no sincerity; and upon due
examination, will fall out to be nothing, but mere falsitie.

7 As for their labors in the Ministry be they such as they are. This Church
of England had been happy if it had not been troubled, with their factions
sermons and Mart. Mar. P. Miles monop. Hay any work and the rest of that spirit.
scurrile Pamphlets: which have given the Adversary, much matter of advantage,
distracted the minds of many weak ones, and quite turned some other from the
love of the Truth.

8 The number of more then a Thousand, is but a vizard, which we humbly
entreat, may be pul^ed from their faces, that we may see and know the men, that
thus groan under the yoke of a Christian and commendable government; which
(maliciously and injuriously) they would have reputed, a most heavy burden of
humane Rites and Ceremonies. The vanity of which their complaint, comes now
more particularly to be discussed.

Concerning the matters of their Complaint: 1. Of Church service.
1 IN the Church service, we are ready to mainetaine, (but they must object
first and prove the contrary.) That the Cross in Baptism, Interrogatories
ministered to Infants, and Confirmation, are most ancient, justifiable, and
convenient Ceremonies, and therefore to be continued.

2 That the Church of England, nor the book of Common prayer does not
prescribe, that Baptism should be administered by women. Though we deny it not,
to be Chytrae. de Bap. and in Lev. Sneph. de Bap. Zuingl de Bap. Hierbr. in
Comp. Theol.
Baptism, if perchance de facto, it be by them administered. Fieri non debuit,
factum valuit.

3 That the Cap and Surplice be not urged, it is an absurd speech and implies
confusion. For so every man should be suffered in that behalf to do what him
likes. Again, do not their own words import, that they may well be used? but
they must not be urged. Why? what is there in a Cap or in a Surplice, that
should Buc. de re vest page 707. Pet Mart. Ep. ad Hop. Aug. Ep. 154. Calv. in
Ex. 23
offend any man of judgment?

4 That Examination where need is, should go before the Communion, who
disliketh? Or that it be ministered with a sermon? But that it should not be
ministered without a sermon, is absurd; and has bred in many a vain and false
opinion, as if, not the word of Christ's Institution, but rather the word of a
Ministers exposition, were a T. C. lib. 1. page 158.
necessarily and an essential part of the Communion. Besides he that reads
our Communion book, shall see that therein the whole manner, end, and use of
that holy institution, is so excellently described, as may be insteede of many
sermons. Also that none should be admitted to that blessed Sacrament, (of what
age, state, or condition so ever) except they were first examined after the
Consistorian fashion, were insolent, injurious, and in many respects most
inconvenient.

5 The terms of Isai 66 21. Where the Geneva note does show, that the
Ministers of the new testament are to be termed Priests.
Priests and Absolution: the Bucer in Ce^. sur. cap. 10.
Ring in Marriage and such other, which they have heretofore traduced in their
unlearned discourses; are by diverse of our learned Devines, and shall be
justified. As contrariwise by the Petitioners they will never be evicted worthy
to be abolished.

6 Their desire to have the long-somnes of service abridged, does well befit
their great Devotion. Who notwithstanding are wont to spend an hour sometimes
or little less, in extemporarie, inconsequent, and senseless prayers conceived
rashly by themselves. From hence, their dislike of set and stinted forms of
prayer, it does proceed, that some of them omit, some refuse to repeat, some
condemn the use of the Lords prayer; from hence has Barrow and Green wood
taken their beginning, and fetched the premises of their pestilent and
blasphemous Conclusions.

7 Church Just Mart in quaest ad Or^h q. 107. Aug Conf. li. 10. cap 33.
songs and Music, are much beholden to these men now: in as much as they can
be content to digest them, so they be moderated to better edification. The
time was when we have heard them speak in this point, after another sort.
Meretricious Church-Musicke, Tossing of tennis bals, and such like; were there
phrases of Gods devine service. But thanked be God, that his Majesty's devout
affection in this kind, has forced from them this moderation.

8 That the Lords day be not profaned, he is very profane that desires not
from his heart. But what manner of lawgivers are they, that lay down their
constitutions in such Negatiues, in such Comparatiues? For who can devine what
they would have, when they desire that the Rest upon Pet Martyr. Epist. ad
Hopperum.
Holy days be not so strictly urged? Would they have men upon such days go
to plough and carte, as some of their humor have caused their servants to do,
on the very feast of Christ's Nativity? Or do they mean, that we should take to
our selves such liberty therein, as certain Persons lately have done; who
being commanded by lawful auctority to celebrate the fifte of August, with joy
and thanksgiving for his Majesty's most strange and wonderful deliverance, upon
the said day now three years past; did notwithstanding spend the same (as we
are credibly informed) in fasting and mourning and such like works of their
obedience? Nay these and the like experiments do cause us, humbly and
instantly to desire, that both Sundaies and Holydaies may be religiously
observed; and the intolerable profanation of them, which is the rather
brought in, by these men's preachings and examples may be very severely punished.

9 That there may be an Uniformity of Doctrine prescribed. That no Popish
opinions may be any more taught or defended? What imputations are these? how
prejudicial? How injurious? Not only unto the Church government, but unto the
Christian faith established in this Realm? What advantage do these men in
these shameless suggestions reach unto the Papists? As if there were no We
refer to the Articles of Religion agreed upon and established in Convocation.
Anno 1562.
uniformity, no consent of doctrine among us? (so ye except the^.) As if there
were some Popish opinions taught and defended in our Leiturgy? (as they deem
who are ready to make every thing Zanch. conf. cap 24 de Ec^l. Milit. Aph. 19.
Popery which they do not fancy) These are the weapons with which Bellarmine
and that brood, are wont to wound, or rather falsely to reproach our faith
and profession. Good had it been that these men had never been able to write,
rather then to write thus, to the scandal of Gods Church, and his sacred truth.

10 Reverence done at the name of Jesus, is no superstition, but an outward
sign of our inward subjection to his devine Majesty, and an apparent token of
our devotion. Why do they not likewise find fault with kneeling, sighing,
weeping, lifting up of eyes, knocking of breasts, holding up of hands unto
heaven? All which good men may use in Gods service with great piety, though
Hypocrites do otherwise.

11 They are grosely ignorant if they know it not, or wilfully malicious and
turbulent, if knowing it to be lawful, they yet oppugn the reading of the
Apocriphall scriptures or writings in the Church. Non ad confirmationem fidei,
sed ad reformationem or institutionem morum, as the Ancient Hiero. praef. in
Pro. Cypr. in Simb. Pellic. praef in Apocr. Hyper. Metho. Theol l 1. c. 6.
fathers speak and approve. As also the Articles of Convocation, and the
Prefaces before the Apocriphal books in the English Bibles, do directly show:
adding that they give light, to the devine story.

2. Concerning Church-Ministers.
1 WE heartily desire that able and sufficient men be admitted into the
Ministry. That they preach diligently, and that on the Sunday especially. But
who shall judge of their sufficiency? Or does not the sufficie^cy of Ministers
Suscipere magis and minus? Were the Ministers of the Primitive Church, al of
them able to preach? Did not some of them preach the Gospel, Chrysostom. in 1.
Cor. 1. Pet. Martyr. in 1. Cor. 1 Gualt. in 1. Cor. 1. Call. in 1. Cor. 1.
Bucer. in Ephesians. 4.
and other some read the Scriptures, and administer the Sacraments? Or has
not the urging of that strange doctrine, viz. That he is no Minister that
cannot preach, first forced men to take upon them to expound Gods word, that
thereby have brought the word of God, and the sacred exercise of preaching into
lamentable contempt, through their absurd, senseless, and irreligious gl^sses
and paraphrases, and discourses: whiles they have chosen rather so to do, then
to be accounted, Idol^ sheaph^rds, Dumb dogs, No Ministers, and such like?
Secondly has it not made the Brownists confidently to reproach us, that our
Barrowes books etc Perpetual government of the Church. page 339.
Church is no Church, our Sacraments no Sacraments, our Prince and people
Infidels, as not being baptized at all, our Christian Congregations profane
multitudes, etc. only because some in the Ministry could not or did not
preach? But in this point it would be considered especia ly, first that it is
not possible to have all Ministers men of worth, til al Church Livings be very
sufficient to maintain men of worth. Secondly that the way to invite men of
best parts to take upon them the Ministry, is not to expose and subject that
calling, to want and beggary, which in the third part of this their complaint,
these men do principally intend. And lastly that howsoever these men do
please themselves in their extemporary gift; yet many of them, though in show
very audacious, do notwithstanding deserve for their gross ignorance, to be
blotted out of the number of preachers, truly so called.

2 How charitable these men are, that would have men Har conf. ex Helu Post.
De Minist ca. 18 Agnoscimus etc. Vnde ne h^d^e quide^ reijcimus simplicitate^
quoru^da^ proba^ etc.
removed out of the Ministry, because they cannot preach; (whereas some of
them were entreated to take that function upon them, when men more able could
not be gotten; and others in their younger years, have been of more
sufficiency, then now their age, sickness, or other infirmity, will permit them
to be:) And how indicious, that would have them to mainetaine preachers, who
(for the most part) have not wherewith for to mainetaine themselves, we leave
to the consideration of the wise. How much better has our Church devised, to
supply the defects of some men, in some places, of mean value, by other means?
As namely by the frequent reading of the Scriptures: A matter more Zanc. Conf.
obs. in cap. 15. Aph. 10.11.
availeable unto faith and godliness, then the Petitioners do imagine; and
would be much more, if it were not brought into contempt, by their
suggestions. 2 By a most religious and excellent B. Ridley to M^. Grindall then
beyond the seas. Alas that brother Knox, could not bear with our book of
common prayer, etc The reasons he makes against the Letany, etc. I do marvel
how he can or dare a vouch the^, etc.
form of Common prayer. 3 By Sermons and Homilies printed and appointed to be
read, both for the confirmation of the faith, and for reformation of manners.
All which in a Church not new to be planted, but now settled and well grounded
in the profession of the truth; are ordinary effectual means, to continue and
increase the^, in the true faith and fear of God. Hereunto may be added the
manifold provisions in our Church, for sermons quarterly, or more often, in
those Cures, where the Incumbents cannot preach.

3 That Non-residency be not permitted. It is a matter of wise and sound
deliberation: first, The bounds of Parishes are not de iure divino.
what Non-residencie is; for many men in our Church, have two parishes
committed to their chardge, which both will not make one living. Again, many
have but one parish under them, which yet would require more then two, or ten
men to speak at once to all the Congregation. Secondly it is, and long has
been permitted, by wise and godly Magistrates, that have given way to it, by
their positive prudent laws, as necessary, in some Cases, in a few men, and
them (generally and by intendment) of the best deserts. Thirdly that it is
absolutely unlawful, and in no The answer to the 2. treatise of the Abstract.
sort to be suffered, neither has been proved, nor ever will, by all the
Puritanes in the Land. Fourthly, in what Congruity may he be counted an idle
Non-resident, that is always present and takes pains, in some part; and
often in every part of his charge? Fiftlie, there are not more intolerable
Non-residents in England, then some of those, that are either included in the
Thousand before mentioned, or that favor this their attempt: Especially if they
shall be measured, by those places of Scripture, which they are wont to
allege against Non-residents, after the Texts be well examined. Lastly, it is
not possible, (as Church livings are now To alter the precincts of parishes, is
a matter of greater consequence, the^ the Abstractor or many more such shallow
heads can possibly co^ceave.
allotted) that simply no Non-residency should be permitted, and yet withal,
a learned Ministry mainetained, Princes and Peers of the Land attended,
Colleges and Cathedral Churches continued, the Universities present, and hope
of succession in them for hereafter, preserved, propagated, and supported.

4 The Marriage of Ministers we do not dislike, but maintain the lawfulnes
thereof against the Church of Rome: and humbly desire (if there be need,) that
the supreme Magistrate, will add thereunto, by his royal authority and the law
of the land, such farther strength and confirmation, as shall seem fit to his
high wisdom.

5 We know of no Subscription that is urged, which is not agreeable to law,
required by the orders of our University, necessary in a Christian
Commonwealth, profitable for the Church of God, approueable by all judicious
learned men, and disliked of none, but a few folk, that are overmuch addicted
to their own opinions. Who notwithstanding where The laws and statuts of Genesis
In the form of Oath, which the Ministers receive, Sect 2 Beza in vita Call page
910.
they bear the sway, it is worth the Consideration, how strictly they tie all
them that will live among them, to the observation of their Church government.
And in truth, (so the things in themselves be not intolerable) better so,
then that which is here proposed. For the not urging of a co^formity in Church
discipline, is to set open the high way to all disorder and Confusion.

3. Concerning Church mainetenance.
1 THat Bishops leave their Co^me^dams. In case some of the ancient revenew
might be restored to their Bishoprics, he were utterly unworthy to be a
Bishop, that would desire a Commendam. But, as now the most of them are
impaired, to take away from all Bishops al manner of Commendams, is (in truth)
to tie the Kings hands, that he shall not be able, though he would, (and where
he will not, no Commendam can be given;) to make his most faithful servants,
or other men of best desert in the Ministry, able to mainetaine their places
and callings, by his Majesty's favor, and gracious dispensation; when
otherwise their Bishoprics are not sufficient so to do. So as if it be well
wayed, they do not so much intend in this particular to impoverish some few
Bishops, as indeed utterly to overthrow them, and generally to restrain the
Kings prerogative.

2 Of the same nature is that which follows. For no man except he be the
Kings Chaplain may hold Three benefices with Cure; and those of his Highness
own gift. So that here also they desire to limit the Kings favor. Again it
is not known, that there be five in all this land, that hold three such
benefices. And then what good dealing is this in the Petitioners, to make the
world believe, that it is a common fault, which is scarce to be found in a few?

3 Their disposing of Impropriations, does notably bewray their lack of The
Ecclesiastical discipl. page 114.
Conscience; their little love to learning and religion; their temporizing and
fitting their motions to the Laities good liking. For who sees not that it
would be the certain overthrow and utter ruin of Bishoprics, Colleges,
and Cathedral Churches; if their Impropriations should be demised to the
Vicars or Curates the Incumbents at the old rent, without fine, without
improuement? Again who be they, and how many, that by this means would be
provided for? A few, and those the meanest of the Clergy. But the
inconveniences that would hereof ensue, are very many, and intolerable.
Therefore we reserve that discourse, to a fit opportunity. On the otherside, who
does not know, that for a Layman to hold an Impropriation (which is a Tith) is
originallie unlawful, and clean contrary to their first institution? Yet these
men in all their purity, zeal, and conscience, can content themselves, and
their preaching Incumbents, with the seventh part only of an Impropriation,
in a Laymans fee.

4 Are these al, or the best means, that a Thousand me^, such as they would
be reputed, can propose to his Highness for the bettering of the Church
maintenance? If we might know that it would stand with his Majesty's good
liking, and should not be imputed unto us as a breach of duty; It were very
possible, that the men whom they so much contemn, would be able to propose
some other course for the bettring of the Church maintenance, with out the
alteration or injury of any other state.

4 Concerning Church Discipline.
1 Under the name of their Discipline, we have bin heretofore taught by these
men to understand, The kingdom of Christ upon earth: A thing of no less
importance then the Eccles Disci- page 13 T C Epist to the Church of England.
Gospel of Christ Jesus; An essential part of the Gospel: A matter of faith
to be received upon pain of damnation; An essential mark of the true Church:
without the which our Church was no Church our faith no faith, our Gospel no
Gospel, etc. And it is now come to be so indifferent, as that it may be
administered accordingly; Or else at the least, that these enormities may be
redressed? Will it now suffer such an Or else, at the least?

Were we persuaded, that their Discipline, their Presbytery, the life and being
of their Discipline, were indeed of Christ's institution; were we persuaded it
were a part of Gods word, an essential part of his word; could we be
contented to be without it? Could we content our selves to live any where, but
under it? Would we not redeem it with much peril and pain? With certain
loss? And that willingly?

But the experience that his most excellent Majesty has had, of the manifold
mischiefs and miseries, that attend their pretended Discipline, does make them
not dare to speak plainly for it. They therefore faulter in seeking to obtain
that, which yet in heart they do affect, and specially desire.

But to these Enormities; these heinous Enormities. Is it not well, that now
at length, these quick-sighted men, can epsy no fowler enormities in our
Church government?

Enormities.
1 THAT Excommunication come not forth under the name of Lay persons. First, it
may truly be said, that though it did come forth under the name of a
Chauncelour, or a Comissarie; yet came it not forth under the name of
Lay-persons. For a Chauncelour or a Comissary, is not a Layman in this case:
The ordinary and he are but Vnus iudex. Or rather, whatsoever the Chauncelour
does in this behalf, he does it in the auctority of the Ordinary, according
to the power that is committed unto him. A thing not unusual in the Civil
state: wherein the Lord-Chauncelour does dispose of many things, which are
Originally in the Crown; and again, writes Test meipso unto many
particulars, that never pass by bill assigned.

Secondly, no Lay-Chauncelour or Comissary whatsoever does at any time
excommunicate any man; or sende^h out in his own name any excommunication. But
this is the practice of the Church of England. In Constable. Ecc^ 1597 cap d^
Excest circ. Excom. ref^
the ce^suring of notorious and more grievous crimes, the Arch bishop, the
Bishop, the Deane, the Archdeacon, or a Probendary that i^ a Priest,
pronounces the sentence of Excommunication in his own person. And in matters
of less offense, as contumacy in not appearing and the like, the Vicar
general, Official, or Comissary, that is not in holy orders, houldeth this
course. First upon knowledge and examination of the cause, he adiudgeth the
party worthy to be excommunicate; then the Minister (associated unto him by
express authority from the Ordinary) does pronounce the sentence of
excommunication against him; Lastly the Chancelour sends to the Pastor of the
parish, where that party dwells, requiring him publikly to declare the said
party to be a person excommunicated by the sentence of the Minister his
associate. And all this, according to the form of the Articles set forth by
her Majesty's authority Ann. 1597.

Thirdly, are not these excellent Enormity makers, that can find such an
Enormitie in the Name of a Layman, (in whose name notwithstanding the
excommunication never comes forth,) when yet if it did come forth in his
name, the nature of the thing it self is such, as justly cannot be reproved?
They are not ignorant, that excommunication does proceed as is aforesaid; if
not in the name, yet in the Authority and Jurisdiction of the Bishop, or some
other chief Clergyman, to whom the power of the Keys does belong, and unto
whom the Church of England has assigned the execution of that part of our
Discipline. Who if they use the advice and Ministry of a wise and religious
Civilian, in decreeing who is to be excommunicate; (Whereupon those Perpetual
govern of the ^hu. page 320.
ontward penalties do ensue, which attend the auctority, and follow the
sentence of excommunication in this Church and Common wealth:) how does that in
any wise violate Christ's Institution as touching excommunication?

Lastly, if the Discipline they long for, were once on foot among us, we
should then hear tell of certain Lay-parsons that ought to have a principal
hand in their Excommunications. Thus as they are weak in Judgment for matter
of Learning in this point, not being able to resolve of any thing in certain;
so are they as partial in prescribing their plottes for matter of practice;
whiles they reprove that in others, which in themselves they do allow. Except
peradventure they will tell us, (and we must needs believe them) that their
Lay Elders become Clergy me^ ipso facto; because they are of their Co^sistory;
and have voices (according to their learning) in these Ecclesiastical censures.

2 That none be excommunicated for The order of Excom. etc in the Chur. of
Scot. Print. June 1571. Cap 4. Thus any small offense, may justly deserve
Excommunication, by reason of the contempt and disobedience of the offender.
trifles and twelve penny matters. They are not. Contempt is then the
greater, when the matter wherein they show their contempt, is of lesser value:
As contrariwise, obedience is then more commendable, when it is seen in a
matter of greater difficulty. But these men are so accustomed to disobedience,
that they account it but a trifle; And therefore calumniate us and our
discipline, as if with us men were excommunicated so trifles, when (in truth)
they are censured for their contempt.

3 That none be excommunicated without consent of his Pastor. Without consent,
is a captious term. For in our understanding, the Minister of the parish does
give his consent, when he publishes the excommunication; as also when he does
certify what he has done in denouncing of the same. And this manner of
consent, we take to be sufficient, and as much as is requisite in a private
Pastor that has no Jurisdiction.

But what is it that these men do mean? Would they (think you) that every
Pastor should have a Negative in the excommunicating of his parishioners?
Undoubtedly they would. Thereby intending the utter overthrow of the present
Church government, and in steed thereof the setting up of a Presbitery in every
parish. Or rather, that which is worse (if worse may be) the enabling of every
particular Pastor to excommunicate by himself Perpetual government of the
Church page 321.
alone.

Except peradventure they will say, that the particular Pastor ought to be
joined in commission with the Chancelour. And then behold what would ensue. On
the Minister, a world of troubles: he must be sent for as often as any of his
parish is presented, he must attend the hearing and debating of the whole
cause; he must be present as often as the Chauncelour sits, as long as the
matter depends: to his great travail and pains, his excessive charge, and
the causlesse neglecte of his calling. On the otherside, if this Minister will
be wilful, and in fine dissent from the Chauncelour in opinion; then is all the
labor lost; the Judge has spent his skill and care in vain, and the Bishops
Consistory must down to the ground: either Pastor must prevail, or nothing
must be done; To the intolerable hinderance of Justice, and excessive
detriment of the plaintiff. These and the like, are the well advised
Propositions, whereof there is store in their Discipline. By which it does
sufficiently appear, that as yet it is not thoroughly refined.

4 Extorting of unreasonable fees, who approves? Who disliketh not? Who would
not have it redressed, in any that offend? Besides there are very Constit.
Eccl. 1597. cap. de Foedis quae off. Eccles.
severe laws already made in that behalf.

5 Farming out of Jurisdictions and Registers places, though we commend it
not, nor greatly like of it; yet it is of it self a matter indifferent;
neither good nor ill, but as it is used.

6 The restraint of Marriage at certain times (falsely called a Popish Canon)
was Co^sil. Laodi. Can. 2.
auncientlie used in the Church of God; and being rightly understood, is now
commendable in this of ours.

7 The Long-somnes of Suits in Ecclesiastical Courts, is a matter of fact, not
of Constitution; nor is the fault of the Court, nor of the Judge necessarily
(as these men would seem to imply,) but sometime error in pleading, sometime
the intricatenes of the cause, sometime the perverseness of the Clyent,
sometime the cunning of the Proctors, are the occasion that suites depend long.
And when al is said, that they can say, this is none other fault, then is
incident to the course of Justice at the Common Law; and might befall their
Consistory, or a better and more equal kind of trial.

8 The Oath ex officio, is used as it ought, by men of place, of wisdom, and
experience; by men of religion, learning, and conscience. Unto whom the
authority to administer it as occasion is offered does justly belong, not by
special Commission only, but by the laws of this land, by the two Laws Canon
and Civil; and by the warrant of sundry Examples of the word of God: as that
worthy and learned Deane of the Arches (the ornament and honor of his
profession in his time) in his judicious The Apolog. 2 part Cha. 9. and so
forth to the end of the same.
Apology of certain proceedings in Courts Ecclesiastical, does prove at large.

9 Licenses for Marriage without Banes, are most cautiously granted; and that
upon Constable. Eccl. 1597 cap. de mother. Indulg
severe punishmente to ensue, if so be the Constitution be violated. But what
will satisfy these men, who thus intimate unto his Highness, that there is
rigor in the former point, and negligence in this, when as al moderation and
carefulnes is used in them both?

And are not these heinous enormities?

Their Conclusion.
THe idle vaunt that the Petitioners make of being able to show that these and
other such abuses (as they call them) remaining and practiced in the Church of
England, are not agreeable to the Scriptures, does appear to be the more
ridiculous; because they have passed over in deep silence many learned The
perpet. gover. of Chri. Chur. A survey of the pret. holy disc. The answer to
the Abstract. The Apol. of certain proceed in Cour. Eccle. A treatise of
Eccles. Discip De Presbyt eiusque nova. etc. De div. Minist. Evan. grad. etc
The Remonstrance. Querimonia Ecclesiae. The 5. books of the laws of Eccles.
polit.
Tracts published long since, wherein their vain fancies, and illiterate
objections are refuted at large. If notwithstanding they will yet venture to
write, it vvil be answered; If they will needs argue and dispute, there are
ready that will either satisfy them, or by argument silence them. And were it
not in regard that we would not seem as undutiful in accepting, as they have
been in the offering of this Challendge: it is the thing we would urge, and
instantly entreat, that these matters might be debated between us in writing.
But in the mean time, what motions are these for the Reformers to make unto a
most prudent Prince in his settled and peaceable government; who for many years,
has had trial in that his other kingdom, of their pretended reformation; and
in this also has seen the gracious effects under her Majesty's late happy
Reign, of that Church discipline, which they would ruinate and overthrow.

God has appointed his Majesty unto this kingdom. It is true; and we
magnify the goodness of God for it, and congratulate his Highness in the
prosperous possession of it, from the ground of our hearts. But that God has
appointed him to this kingdom for such a purpose as they conceit; what spirit
of divination is in them, that they should forespeake it? Nay rather, seeing
almighty God has ordained him as the great Physician (next and immediately
under himself,) to take care of the body politic both of this Church and
Commonwealth; he will surely cure such diseases, as these men are sick of.
(For turbulent and discontented humors, whether in Papist, or in Puritan are
like to breed very dangerous diseases in a civil State:) And not be
persuaded (as they fondly imagine) by such suggestions as these, to alter that
state of the Church, which is acceptable to God, honorable to his Highness,
comfortable to many thousand Ministers, the Nurse of good learning, admirable
to strangers, approved by our The letters that Mr Beza has written to the
ArchB. of C: that now is:
Opposites, envied of our enemies, distasteful unto none, but such as know
neither how to rule, nor how to obey.

The very names of Punishments are unpleasant indeed; but the things
themselves are necessary sometimes, and their effects good and profitable for
preservation of the whole; howsoever the enduring of the^, may be grievous in
the particular. And he that will indifferently consider the true causes of the
correctio^s here mentioned; shall have just cause to approve the Justice,
Conspiracy for pretended Reformation.
and comme^d the mildnes, that has bin used toward this sort of men.

As for that clause of Men's traditions, it is too too odious; and would imply
superstition or popery to be in some of them. But how vainly, and how
iniuriousty; has in some sort bin heretofore declared.

That other of being prejudicial to note but those that seek their own etc.
is as injurious to all the rest of the Ministers of this land. Be we the men
that are so addicted to our own Quiet, Credit, and Commodity in the world?
Where then be the fruits of our covetousnes, the effects of our ambition, the
marks of our idleness? We be the men, that in the testimony of a good
Conscience, for the repelling of such a malicious contumely, and slanderous
reproach, may truly say: We put not out our money to Usury; we detest al filthy
lucre; we co^taine our selves within our Vocations; we forsake not our holy
callings; we omit not to labor in our several chardges; we sustain the
places of great labor travail and expense, we neglect not in public, in
private, in word, in writing, at home and abroad, to put to silence, and stop
the mouth of the common Adversary, which these men have enlarged against us,
and our most holy faith.

To conclude, the thing they seek is so prejudicial, both to the Civil state
in general, and in particular, to so many of the very best of the Ministry;
that if it should take effect, (but God of his mercy, and the Kings most
excellent Majesty in his Christian wisdom, will not suffer it) it would
breed a strange alteration in the One; and in the Other it would for the
present, not only impoverish us, and our Universities, but make both them and
us, and the whole Clergy very base and contemtible in the eyes of our own
people, as also a Byword and a skorne to our neighbor Nations; And for
succeeding ages, it would cut off all hope of a learned Ministry, and of that
grounded learning, which as yet is, and heretofore has been, the glory and
honor of this kingdom.

For manifestation of this point, look upon the face of all the reformed
Churches in the world; and wheresoever the desire of these Petitioners does
take place, be it duly considered; First, how well their proceedings do suite
with the state of a Monarchy; And then, how poverty on the one side, and lack
of learning on the other, does creep upon the whole Clergy in those Dominions.

As to the first: would it not beseem the supereminent auctority and Regal
person of a King, to be himself confined within the limits of some particular
parish; and then to subject his sovereign power, to the pure Apostolical
simplicity, of an over-swaying and al-commaunding Presbitery? Would it not do
him much good, in a time of need, that his people should be rooted and
grounded in this truth, viz. That his meek and humble Clergy, have power to
bind their King in chains, and their Prince in lincks of iro^? That is, (in
their learning) to censure him, to enioine him penance, to excommunicate him?
yea (in case they see cause) to proceed against him, as a Tyrant?

We speak not here of other points, as namely, that all appeals in causes
Ecclesiastical, (and what do they not make Ecclesiastical?) must finally
lie, not unto the Prince, but unto the Assembly Provincial; That they allow
the supreme Magistrate, not potestatem iuris, but only facti; while they make
him, the maintainer of their proceedings, but no commander in them. These and
the like, are but petty Abridgments of the Praerogatiue Royal, while yet the
King T.C. l. 1. page 180.
submits his scepter unto the scepter of Christ, and lickes the dust of the
Churches feet.

Neither may it be truly said, that these are only Speculations. There are
some of High place yet alive, and other some are dead, that have felt the
smarte hereof in their own experience, and have seen the worst of all this
put in woeful execution.

As to the second. Do we not see it at this day verified among them, which has
been so often truly said, and as often unadvisedly denied, that Hones alit
arts; and contrariwise, where due reward of learning and liberal maintenance
of the Ministry, is fraudulently impaired, or injuriously taken away,
Ecclesias. discipl. page 114.
there Religion and learning come to decay? There Atheism and Barbarism and
Confusion must needs ensue? It is to apparent, that as the revenewes of those
Churches have bin embeazeled by men of corrupt minds, which said in their
hearts, as it is in the Psalm, Psalm. 83.11.
Let us take to our selves the houses of God in possession: so the remainder of
that grounded learning, which was bredde up in former times, is now through
succession of time, almost clean morn out: Nec bonatam sequitur, quam bona
prima fuit. Insomuch, that there is neither sufficient maintenance in those
parts for any store of excellent learned men, nor yet many men brought up among
the^ in this last reforming age, worthy of that wonted honorable maintenance.

God knows we speak not this with a detracting spirit, but with grief of
heart: to see the ruins of the Ministry in particular, and generally of al
profound learning in other reformed Churches. As likewise to stir up this
whole Nation, to a thankful acknowledgement of that singular blessing in this
behalf, which God of his goodness has long, and yet does continue, unto us
of this Realm. And with all, to put to silence the malicious ingratitude of
those evil men, which looking upon us and this Church, through the colored
glass of their praeiudicate opinions; can see nothing among us, but defects
and deformities, and abuses, and Enormities, and the like. And therefore in
their high discretion, would have us reduced and made conformable, to the
calamities of other places.

Whereas (in truth, if we shall bring back the eyes of our minds from foreign
parts, and indifferently (without either detractio^ or flattery) take notice of
the present state of this Church and Co^mo^-wealth; we shall easily discern,
that it were an incomparable happiness for them, if all that profess the truth
as it is in Christ Jesus, were in our co^ditio^.

We shall see, how that our Church government, is duly subordinat unto the
supreme civil state, and withal does mightily support the same. That our
Reverend Prelates (me^ of singular worth, not to be matched in any one
ki^gdome) though preferred unto highes rooms; do yet co^taine themselves
within such bounds, as preserve that estate, from creeping to any Papal
corruptions. That our inferior Clergy, by their godly and painful labors in
their Vocation, have bin, and are the most effectual means, to settle the
tranquillity of this land; by inducing men's minds unto piety toward God,
Loyalty to their King, and Civil honesty among themselves. That our people
generally, (excepting some few Maleco^tents of al sorts, who^ we leave to the
mercy of the Magistrate) are invred unto peace, accustomed to subjection,
detest disloyalty, and with all alacrity yield their obedience unto their
Sovereign.

That the Colleges, the Cathedral Churches, the Bishops, and other Ministers
of this Land, have yet remaining unto the^, (yet, after the many and great
spoils of this Church; which notwithstanding, Saravia de sacrilegijs, ca 9.
never prospered with the^ that got the^; but were as Rust to the rest of
their silver and their gold, or as a Ca^ker, that fretted out themselves, their
posterity, or their possessions:) that yet there is remaining unto the^, more
competent, and sufficient maintenance; more comfortable and honorable
encourageme^ts: the^ there are, unto all other the reformed churches in
Christe^do^e.

That answerable thereunto, (to stop that mouth of Iniquity, which is wont to
traduce us, for a dumb, unlearned, Idol Ministry) there are at this day, more
learned men in this Land, in this one Kingdom; then are to be found among all the Ministers of the Religion, in France, Flaunders, Germany, Poleland,
Denmark, Geneva, Scotland; or (to speak in a word) in all Europe besides.

Which yet, may not justly be imputed unto us for vanity. The Apostle that knew
how to be abased, 1. Cor. 9. 2 Cor. 12.
and to make himself of no reputation; yet when the impeaching of his
personal gifts, was abused to the disgrace of his calling: did without either
arroga^cy or folly, give his Detractors plainly and roundly to understand, that
he was not inferior to the chief Apostles; nay that he labored more the^ they
al; and so by his own just defense and commendation, did free himself, his
worth, and his Vocation, from their base and odious imputations. In a like case
(we doubt not) a truth may be averred of our selves, even by our selves,
without any ostentation at all; when it is so injuriously impeached and trodden
under foot, to the high dishonor of God, the disgrace of his Gospel, and to
the slander of this most Christian Commonwealth. Yea the rich mercies, that
God has continued unto us, now these five and forty years, ought to replenish
our hearts with joy; so that our lips should break forth with thankfulness and
sing, Psalm. 47.20.
Non fecit taliter omni nationi; neither have the Regions round about us, been
made partakers of the like blessings.

Now the Father of Mercies, and God of al Consolation, enlarge the wise and
understanding heart, of our thrice noble King, noble in birth, noble in
wisdom, noble in all manner of good learning; assist him ever with his holy
spirit, the spirit of Counsel, of sanctification, and of truth: make him
admirable in the swaying of this Scepter as was Solomon in all the world, as
long as he walked in the first ways of his father David: That so he may
long wear this mortal Crown, in all abundaunce of Piety, Peace, and
Prosperity; and hereafter obtain that immortal Crown, that Christ has
purchased for them, which by continuance in well doing, seek glory and honor
and immortality.

FINIS.

