THE TRVE REPORT OF THE LAMENTABLE DEATH, OF WILLIAM of Nassawe Prince of
Orange: who was trayterouslie slain with a Dagge in his own Court, by
Balthazar Serack a Burgunian, the first of July 1584.

Herein is expressed the Murderers confession, and in what manner he was
executed, upon the tenth of the same month. Whose death was not of sufficient
sharpnes for such a caytife, and yet too sour for any Christian.

Printed at Middleborowgh, by Derick van Respeawe* Anno. 1584.

G. P. His Proheme to the inhabitaunts of Flaunders.
WHo so considers the state of Princes (although they are as Gods upon earth,
being anointed of God, having their authority from God, and sitting in Gods
seat to rule the sword with the Law, may perceive that they live in more care
and greater danger, then the simplest subject. Lamentable therefore is their
late example of the Prince of Orange, slain (by a treacherous villain) in his
own Court: his death and the manner thereof, may forewarne other Princes to
be careful, whom they retain into the presence of their person. Great is thy
loss, and greater will be thy mysery (O Flaunders,) for the want of thy Prince,
who did guide thee and governed thy people, with wisdom, love, policy and
continual care for thy quietness: he was thy comfort and the stay of thy state
in all extremities.

The cheifest states of thy Country shall miss him: the widdowe, the sucking
Babe and the fatherless child shall have cause to bewail his death. Yea rich
and poor, altogether may lament his mishap, and cry woe upon that man that
bereaved him of life, whose nobleness deserved fame, and whose worthy acts
and enterprises, being honorable, are meet to be registered among the most
lawdable reports of learned Historiographers. If the Romans did bemone the
death of Caesar, the Troyans the loss of Hector and the Lacedaemonians the want
of Alexander, then have thou (O Flaunders) more cause to lament the loss of
thy good Prince, who with wisdom, force, and great care, (aided by the power
and providence of God himself) did keep thy country, from the hands of him
that would make a Monarchy of Realms in his ownehandes: to the utter spoil
of thee and thine, and to draw other Realms under his subjection. O most
accursed wretch that he was, so subject to the subtilties of satan, to work
the vntimelye death of so gracious a Prince, that hither to has defended your
liberties, and maintained your right these many years, to the great glory of
God, the advancement of your wealth, and the mayntenaunce of true Religion. It
were too tedious to set down in what subjection all the Low Countries of
Flaunders, has been many years yoked in by their enemies: the effect whereof
is so notorious and apparent to all the world and the same so truly laid open
by many, that it is here needelesse to touch it: as also to handle the great
care of this Prince from time to time, who continually sought to maintain your
liberties and to defend your Country from extreme misery: which doubtless has
sharply pinched you: and now having lost him who was the principal prop of the
Low countries, it is like to fall out to the utter overthrow, ruin, and
destruction of that poor cominaltye, (a matter most lamentable) except God
(the only defender of those that trust in him) do speedely procure and
stir up, a careful and godly Prince to be the defendor of that people and
Country, that there by the Towns and Villages there about may become populous
and thoroughly replenished (now grievously impouerished through civil
discention) to the quietness, wealth, and peace of the same.

And considering it is most necessary to publish a true discourse of this late
lamentable mishappe, I have thought it good breefely and plainly to set down
the true circumstaunce thereof: and that for one special cause, which is, that
considering the untrue imaginations and feigned reports, of this Princes death,
now blased a broad, as well to his friends as to his enemies* the truth
being laid open, and made manifest to all men, that then those reports may be
accounted fryuolus and to be trodden under foot. I therefore admonish you, O
ye people of Flaunders, that having lost the stay and staff of your country,
that you yet vouchsafe with patience to remain content with GODS works, who
provides wonderfully for you. It is your sins that is the cause of al your
care: wherefore call upon God in this your time of affliction: and with prayer
and hearty repentance, to turn unto the Lord, who no doubt will deliver you
from danger: as he did the children of Israel, and assure your selves, that he
will so establish your country in short time, pouring thereon peace and
plenty, that the remembrance of your great extremety now fallen upon you,
shall in short time grow out of memory and be made a flourishing common wealth
which God the father withal speed grant to confirm. Amen.

The dyscourse of the Treason wrought against William of Nassawe, Prince of
Orange, by Balthazar Serack, a base borne Gent. of Burguni, of the age of 25.
years.
Upon the 12. day of June last past 1584. there came to the Prince of Orange) a
base borne Gent. of Burguni, who brought certain Letters from the States of
France, conserning matters of news, touching the death of the French kings
brother, who died a little before: which Letters, the Prince in most thankful
manner did receive, and gave the messenger such freendly entertainment in his
own Court, as became a Prince in such causes. The Prince liking well of this
messenger, would sundry times use conference with him, touching the garrison of
the Prince of Parma; whose soldiers greatly impouerished the countries round
about. This messenger (in whom there remained nothing but subtilty and secret
mischief) did show unto the Prince, how he could at any time bring him or
his souldrers into the Prince of Parmaes garrison, whereby he might take the
advantage of the Prince of Parmaes power, for that this messenger being a
cunning pen man, could finely counterfeit the Prince of Parmaes own hand, so
near that the one should not be known from the other. The Prince
notwithstanding would not so deal by his devise, but yet he would enquire of
him how al things stood, as well in the Prince of Parmaes garrison, as of the
Princes pretense toward the Low countries, who continually certefied unto the
Prince of Orang the truth, which caused the Prince to repose a greater trust
and confidence in him, so that he remaind in the court without suspision of any
treachery. But behold what followed, on the 1. day of July last past, which by
the new computation of the Romish Church, was the tenth day of the same
month, this Traytot thus harbored and lodged in the Court of this good
Prince, seeing a small Pistol or Dag in the hands of one of the Princes
servant, did demand what it might cost him, saying: I have occasion to ride
a journey shortly, and that dagge would be a good defense for me upon the high
way side, wherefore he requested the Princes servant that he might bye it of
him, who thinki^g nothing of that which happened afterward, did sell it to him for
the some of 10. shillings of English money. The Prince then being in his Court
at Delph, (a town of great strength, where the cheifest States do inhabit,)
who being gone to dinner, and the Guard atendant about his person, this Traitor
seeing it a meet time to compass his pretended mischief (which was, to
bereave the Prince of his life, as he did) went into his Chamber, and charged
the Pystol with powder, and put three bullets in the same: that done he placed
it priuelye in his pocket, and went down to dinner: who after he had dyned,
hearing that the Prince would anon go up into his privy chamber, devised in
his mind where he might best plant himself, for the finishing of his wicked
intent, who finding a privy corner upon the stayres, where he might be shadowed
and not be seen, placed himself until the Princes coming.

The Prince, so soon as he had dyned, (which was between one and two of the
clock in the afternoon) came forth of the great chamber, with his Lady and
Gentlewomen attendaunt, his Lady purposing to walk abroad, took her leave of
the Prince, who going toward the stayres which did lead to the privy
chamber, and seeing an Italian named Ma. Carinson, who had stayed to speak
with the Prince, to whom the Prince very freendly spoke, saying: Carinson
welcome, and took him by the hand, willing this Italian that he should go up
with him into his privy chamber, purposing there to use some conference with
the Italian Gentleman: and before the Prince entered the stayres, there came an
English Captain, called Captain Williams, who doing reverence unto the
Prince, was entertained in most freendly manner, laying his hand upon
Captain Williams head, wyllyng him also to come up with him.

The Guard then attendant upon the Prince: Master Carinson and Captain
Williams followed: But the Prince going up the stayres, not thinking of any
such matter as happened, no sooner came directly against this villenous
traitor, but he presently discharged his Pistol, (wherein as before mentioned)
he having put 3. bullets, two of those bullets went through the Princes body,
and the third remained in his belly, through which wicked stroke, the Prince
fell down suddenly, crying out, saying* Lord have mercy upon me, and remember
thy little flock.

Wherewith he changed this life, to the great grief of his Lady, who greatly
lamented his death, as also to the great sorrow of the whole country. The
Guard pursued the murderer and sought to slaye him, but he ouerscaped the
first Guard, and was stayed by the second watch Guard, which was within the
Princes court.

When he was taken, they demanded of him what he had done, who very
obstinatly answered, that he had done that thing, which he would willingly
do if it were to do again. Then they demanded of him for what cause he did
it, he answered, for the cause of his Prince and country: more confession at
that time they could not get of him. Forthwith they committed him to prison,
where he remained alive to the pleasure of the Estates of the country, who
shortly after devised a torment (by death) for this murderer, which was
reasonable sharp, yet not so terrible as he deserved.

Grievous was the cry of the people that came flocking to the Princes gates, to
hear the report and truth of what had happened, which known, every household
was filled with sorrow, who povvred forth their plaintes, and did shed tears,
for the loss of so good a Christian, and so careful a Prince.

The murderer while he remained in prison, was sundry times examined by the
chief Estates of the country, up whose procurement he committed the said fact,
who answered: at the Prince of Parmaes request, and other Princes, at whose
hands he should receive for doing the same 25000. Crowns.

The order of the torment, and death of the murderer, was as follows, which
was four days. He had the 1. day the Strappado, openly in the Market. The
second day whipped and salted, and his right hand cut off. The third day, his
breasts cut out and salt thrown in, and then his left hand cut off. The last
day of his torment, which was the 10. of July, he was bound to 2. stakes,
standing upright, in such order that he could not shrink down nor stir any
way. Thus standing naked, there was a great fire placed some small distaunce
from him, wherein was heated pincers of Iron, with which pincers, two men
appointed for the same, did pinch and put his flesh in small pieces from his
bones, throughout most parts of his body. Then was he unbound from the
stakes, and laid upon the earth, and again fastened to four posts, namely
by his feet and arms: then they ripped up his belly at which time he had life
and perfect memory, he had his bowels burned before his face, and his body
cut in four several quarters. During the whole time of his execution, he
remained impenitent and obstinate, rejoicing that he had slain the Prince.

Upon the 16. day of July, the Prince was very royally buried, in the new
Church at Delph, being lapped in sear cloth and Lead, according to the manner
of other Princes in time past.

The Cittizenes of Antwerp, are many times driven to shut up their gates, by
reason of their enemies, who would gladly take the City at some advantage: The
enemy has built a Forte upon the Bank, between Antwarp and Lullo, so that
they do what they may to stop the passage of the River from them.

There is not as yet any Governor chosen for the Low countries: but they are
in hope that some order will be taken for them very shortly.

God for his mercy sake send quietness in those parts, that the people may
enjoy their own, to the health, wealth, and comfort of them all now
distressed. Amen.


