THE LOST LADY A Tragy COMEDY.

Imprinted at LONDON by Jo. Oaks, for John Colby, and are to be sold at his
Shop, at the Sign of the Holy Lamb on Ludgate hill. 1638.

THE LOST LADY A Tragy-Comedy.
Enter AGENOR. PHYSICIAN. AGENOR. SIr, I hope Lord LYSICLES is not yet retired.

PH. No Sir, he commanded immediate notice
Should be given of your coming.

AG. I fear my stay at the Castlle, has made my
Duty seem unmannerly, but till this minute I had not
My dispatches from the Governor.

PH. Let it not trouble you, he never shuts his eyes
Till all this other World opens theirs, nor does he
Sleep then, but with distracted thoughts
Labors his fancy, to present him objects that may
Advance his grief.

AG. What may the monstrous cause be?

PH. 'T was monstrous indeed, he lost his Mistress,
Barbarously murdered by her perfidious Uncle:
Her Urne is in CIRRHA, which my Lord nightly
Visits and presents it, all his contracted
Sighs of the fled day; but at his parting
Reassumeth more, by thinking she is not: to
Whose dear memory his tears and griefs are
Offered, he is now alone, and the religious awe
Which makes our Priests retire, before they
Do adore the incensed powers, is seen in him,
Who never dares approach her honored tomb,
Till a just contemplation of his loss, has
Enter. LYSICLES, Made his sorrow eloquent.
See he comes, if when he parts your have will
License you, I will relate the story of his
Unequaled sufferings.

LYS. Do you depart to night?

AG. This hour my Lord.

LYS. I will not wrong you to entreat your care in suddenly
Delivering these small packets, but least you
Should believe they are merely ceremonious,
And so bear any date, I now inform you,
I am concerned in nothing nearer, my griefs excepted.

AG. I wish your Lordships happiness.

LY. First, wish me a captivity, for as I am
Ith'instant, if heaven should power his blessings
On me, their quality would alter. Sir, good night.

PH. Sir, you are sad.

AG. He has no heart to joy that can be otherwise,
That sees this glorious youth greane under his harsh fate.

PH. What a sad accent had each word he uttred?

AG. I could not mark them much, but his whole
Frame is of such making, as if despair had bin the Architect,
We may wish, not hope a long life in him.

PH. Sir, will you now take horse?

AG. I should, had you not promised the original of
This misfortune, and trust me it is a bold
Curiosity, that makes me search into it, for if
The silent presentation has struck amazement
In me, how shall I guard my heart, when sad
Disasters violence my passions.

PH. Thus then in short,
These noble Kingdoms THESSALY and SPARTA,
Have from the time, two Kings commanded all,
Under both Titles, still bin emulous,
And jealous of th'advantages which each,
Suspected might be in the adverse party:
This caused a lasting war, but the fierce storm
Threatened not till the reign of these two Kings,
Both crowned young, both of an equal age,
Both having all the passions of their subjects,
Their fears excepted: the Ambassadors
That should congratulate the new made Kings,
As if one spirit had inspired both,
Came with this message little varied,
That each were joy'd in such an enemy:
No more the fearful wisdom of old men
Should rust their swords, that fate had given to one
Command of all. In short, their forces met,
And in ten bloody days none could decide
Which had the better cause:
The virtues of each Prince so prevalent.
Fortune was but spectator, to conclude,
Urgent affairs at home compelled each King
To leave their Armies, ours committed his
To STRIMON father of Prince LYSICLES.
The Duke of ARGOS did command the SPARTANA,
Who swollen with the great name of General.
Before his King had hardly left the sight
Of his great Army, draws his forces out.
And faced us in our Trenches: it is not yet
Unquestioned, whether fear or policy
Made STRIMON keep in his: but certainly this,
That Virtue sharpn'd by necessity,
Procured our Triumph: here LYSICLES
Anticipated years unto his fame,
And on the wounds of his brave Enemy,
Did write his Story, which our Virgins sing.
But from this conquest did begin the cause of all his misery.

AG. How from this? unless the King should judge
It, too dangerous an honor to be given to one.

PH. He Is Lord of so much Virtue,
He cannot fear it in a Subject.

AG. And as the common voice reached him in ATHOS,
There Is none he looks on with greater
Demonstration of his love.

PH. I know not that, but this I am persit in,
His judgment is directed by the Kings so powerfully,
He cannot think his virtues injured,
Though many should be nearer in his graces,
It would inflict him strangely if any should be thought,
To love his Prince better than he.

AG. Pardon my interruption, pray proceed.

PH. The Duke defeated, posts unto the Court,
Where he designed, unto his dire revenge,
Th'obscurest path that ever time revealed
Since her first glass: procures his King to throw
Neglects upon him, and to seem in doubt
Of his obliged faith: a severe search
Made on his papers, his treasure vallued
By the public Officer, and is himself,
Twice deprehended in a seeming flight,
Calumniated, libeld, and disgraced,
By his own seeking, and belief of others,
Who judging him to be their honors ruin.
First raze his house, and then demand his life
As sacrifice, unto their brothers, sons,
Nephews, and public loss: sedition
Had now the face of piety, which once
Received as just, can hardly be repel'd.
The King with difficulty does assure his life,
With promise of his banishment.
This he foresaw and sought, and did disguise
Himself, in fear of the incensed people:
Parts in the night, and partner of his fate
Has his fair Niece, who is so innocent,
She cannot think there is a greater crime,
Practiced by men than error, which does make
Us seem more vicious, than in act we are.

AG. I want a perspective for this dark Mystery;
And but your knowledge does dissolve my doubts;
T would seem a Riddle, that a Gentleman
Of his known valor, reputation,
Should strive to lose both for some secret end,
I cannot yet arrive too.

PH. Sir, you know
Revenge does master all our passions,
That are not servants to her rage.

AG. But how unfriended, banished the reproach
Of Traitor fixed upon him, he could find
The way unto't more easy, I am ignorant.

PH. This story will resolve you, to this Court he comes,
Is brought to The King, then with a modest freedom
Relates his sufferings, hopes that same has taught
His story ere his coming, else he should
Continue miserable, as believed,
Both by his friends and enemies a Traitor:
Delivers that he sought protection
From him, because none else could vindicate
His innocence, which many mothers here
Says, he has wept that day when fortune
Consulted Eat, who should be Conqueror:
You brave Lords (says he) that were present, did my sword
Parley? did you receive wounds on condition?
Were these by compact? all my blood is lost
Since it is discredited, what before was spent,
Ran in my name and made that live: but now
Great King, you only repeal my honors fall,
By giving death unto your enemy.
Our Prince resents his fate, confirms him his
By a large pension, and too soon intrusts
With all his secrets, gives him means to view
His forts, which he designs, and learnes the strength
Of each particular province, and informed
Of all, makes his escape, and is received.
Of the SPARTANA King with all remonstrances
Of love, and confessed service; but before
He parted, did that horrid act which
LYSICLES must dye for.

AG. Indeed this story does not much concern
Him, if I mistake not.

PH. At his arrival here, he left his Niece
With this design, that when his plots were ripe,
Without suspect he might come to the borders:
Hither he comes, and at his entrance, is
By a base traiterous Servant certified,
Of the great love 'twixt her and LYSICLES,
The compact of their vows, with diverse Letters
The Lovers had exchanged: he storms and cries,
If thou do love young LYSICLES, my hate
Shall strike thee dead, thy hand plucked back my honor
When it was mounting, be constant, and this hand
Shall by her death give thee a lingering one,
And my revenge in thy own house begin.
Then with a barbarous unheard of cruelty
Murders his Niece, and the same instant flies:
Fame had the next Sun blown this through the City,
His house was searched, the trunk of the dead Lady
Found in the Hall, the head he carried with him,
In honor of his cruelty.

AG. Sure he was mad.

PH. I would say so too, but that I would not make
Him less guilty of this inhumanity.

AG. What furies govern man? we hazard all
Our lives and fortunes to gain hated memories:
And in the search of virtue, tremble at shadows.
But how are you ascertained that he did
This horrid act?

PH. He sent the bitter summons of her death,
By her that had betrayed her; the report
Did make her spirits throng unto her heart,
And sure had killed it, had not Heaven decreed
His hand should be as black as his intent.
She begged sometime for prayer, and retired:
In her own blood did write her Tragedy,
And parting, wishes to her dear bethroth'd.
Now hear the strangest mistook piety,
That ever entered in a Virgins breast:
She so much loved this barbarous Homicide,
She would not have him guilty of her death,
And therefore with her own hand wounds her self,
And as she bled, she writ unto her Lord:
At last concludes.
They will not let me make them innocent:
I Am called unto my death, and I repent
My wound, because I would not hurt
That which I hope you loved: this bloody note
Was found the next day in her pocket.

AG. And came it to the Lord LYSICLES?

PH. It did, and if you e're had seen
A hundred parents at one time deplore
The unexpected deaths of their lost Children:
The fathers sorrow, and the mothers tears,
Would Emblemize, but not express his grief.
Sometimes he shreekt, as if h'ad sent his soul
Out in his voice: sometimes stood fixed, and gazed
As if he had no sense of what he saw:
Sometime he would sound, and if the memory
Of his dear Mistress, even ith'gates of Death
Had not pursued him, he had certain dyed:
Torment did now give life, at last he drew
His sword, and ere he could be staid, did fall
Upon the point. This I think did preserve him,
For not being mortal, and he fainting with
The loss of blood, had not then strength enough
To end himself; until he was persuaded
To live, to celebrate her memory,
Which nightly he does do upon her Tomb,
Whither he now is gone.

AG. I have not heard of such a love as this!

PH. Nor never shall of such a beauty as did cause it.
It Is late, and I Will not trouble you with her story:
When you are at Court, all tongues will speak
Her merit to your wonder. I Will bring you to your horse.
Exit.
The Tomb discovered. Enter LYSICLES, and a Page, with a Torch. Enter ERGASTO,
and CLEON. CL. And will you marry now?

ER. Indeed will I.

CL. And what shall be done with all those locks of hair
You have?

ER. Why I Will make buttons of them, and had they half
The value that I swore they had, when I did beg'em,
Rich orient Diamonds could not equal them:
Some came easily, and some I was forced to dig for in the Mine

CL. And your prized liberty, what shall become of that?
You swore you would not marry till there were
A Law established, that married men
Might be redeemed as Slaves are.

ER. I was an Ass when I talked so:
Those damb'd books of Chastity I read
In my minority corrupted me; but since
I Am practiced in the World, I find there are
No greater Libertines than married men.
It Is true 'twas dangerous, this knot in the
First Age, when it was a crime to break vows:
But thanks to VENUS, the Scaene is altered,
And we act other parts. I Will tell thee,
The privileges we enjoy when we are married.
First, our secrecy is held Authentic,
Which is assurance will take up any woman at
Interest, that is not peevish, then the acquaintance
Which our wives bring us, to whom at times I carry
My wives commendations, and if their husbands be
Not at home, I do commend my self.

CL. For what I prithee?

ER. For a good Dancer,
A good Rider, a good -- any thing
That I think will please 'em.

CL. Thou Wilt have a damnable conceit of thy wife
By thy knowledge and opinion of all other
Women, unless you think her a Phoenix.

ER. 'Twill be my best resolution. But hark in thy
Ear Rogue, I could be content to think, and
Wish mine and all -- for the public good,
And wear my horns with as much confidence,
As the best velvet head of them all, and paint
Them in my Crest, with this Inscription;
These he deserved for his love to the Commonwealth.

CL. A rare fame you would purchase.

ER. A more lasting one than any Monument you can
Repeat the Epitaph of, and would it not be
Glorious to be commemorated as the first founder
Of the Commonalty of undisparag'd Cuckolds?

CL. Yes, and prayed for by bastards that got better
Fathers than they were destined to by their mothers marriages.

ER. And cursed by Surgeons that were undone by
Honest women's practices.

CL. And this done voluntarily, which you will
Hardly avoid, though you have a thousand
Guards to prevent it. I that, have been your
Play-fellow, shall be first suspected,
And first banished.

ER. By JVPITER never; no, though it would preserve
A thousand smooth foreheads: if she be honest
Your Arts cannot alter her, and if otherwise,
Had I not rather adopt a son of thine
Than a strangers: and confess truly CLEON,
Would not you for this public benefit be
Content to sacrifice a Sister, that we might
Love no longer by obligations, but affection; and
Seeing, liking, and enjoying, finished in a meeting.

CL. Unless I had means to appropriate one, you
Cannot suspect but I should wish a title unto all:
But what hopes have you of your Mistress?

ER. No airy ones of liking and affection, but mine
Are built on terrafirma already, which her father
Looks on greedily, and proportions
This to that grandchild, to the second this.

CL. Is he not somewhat startled at the report of
Thy debauchery? for though your thick set woods,
And spreading Vineyards make excellent shades
To keep away the Sun, I mean the piercing eye
Of censure; yet some suspicious common fame will raise.

ER. Indeed it was my enemy whilst my elder brother lived.

CL. But since his death you are altered I must
Confess it, for then the slenderness of your
Annuity allowed you but the election of some
One sin: I mean a cherisht sin, whilst
The others repined that thought themselves
Of equal dignity, in time they had their turns,
Yet singly still; but since your brothers Death
You have shown your self a grateful
Gentleman, and recompensed those that have
Suffered for you to the full.

ER. A pretty Satyr this, to whip boys of nine:
Yet still I tell thee, I am another in the opinion of the world.

CL. Another Heliogabalus thou would be,
Had thou his power; but by what conjuration can
You bring me to think it?

ER. By reason, which is a spirit will hardly be
Raised in you, but thus it is: whilst my brother
Lived, my wildness was observed by --

CL. But now you walk in shades, recluse, and shut
Up in your Coach, your painted Liveries
Supposed Faries, and she that you were wont to
Visit by the name of Madam Ruffiana, is now
Your Aunt, all this I am perfect in; yet cannot
Reach the mystery of your supposed disguise,
You say does Masque you.

ER. Hear me and be converted; I say I was
Observed by those that were nearest in blood to me,
And with fear too, least the ruin of my
Fortune might force them to supply my wants.
This caused the Ague,; this the admonitions, and
Frequent counsels; sometimes severe reproves,
Every one curling himself from any hopes of mine,
They would assist me, and those gave largest counsels,
That would give nothing else.

CL. Of this I am yet a sad party, and a witness too.

ER. Since n y brothers death, the names of things
Are changed, my ryots are the bounties of my nature,
Carelessness the freedom of my soul,
My prodigality an easenesse of mind proportioned
To my fortune: believe me CLEON, this proverty
Is that which puts a multiplying-glasse upon our
Faults, and makes'em swell, and fill the eye;
Our crimes cry highest then, when they have brought us low.

CL. I have not known any condemned for playing,
But for loosing.

ER. True, and let it be thy rule for all things else.

CL. It this be certain, 'twill be long ere I be reputed virtuous.

ER. Thou Wilt never be, unless it be this way.
I prophecy, good CLEON.

CL. 'T is a sad story, pray let us leave it. Have you no Rivals?

ER. None present that I can fear, having her
Fathers firm consent

CL. EVGENIO, your Rival still continues banished.

ER. And I hope will, till I am full possessed of HERMIONE.

CL. Did you give him cause to draw upon you in th'garison?

ER. Nor knew then any of offense, or his pretenses,
Which his folly looked I should devine; he met me on the guard,
And drew upon me; we had a lettle scuffle,
Were parted, and he banished for the insolence.

CL. Prince LYSICLES labors to recall him.

ER. By all means, he was by in the noised battle, saw the
Prince cleave this man to the twist, divide a second, overthrow
A third, he is his Trumpet.

CL. His actions need none.

ER. Will thou be happy CLEON, believe not Fame
So far, as to make thy self less than another man,
There were thousands that served for six Sestersce,
That did more than both; yet sleep forgotten: It Is
Now time to meet the Ladies on the walk.
Exeunt.
Enter LYSICLES, kneeles to the Tomb, and then speaks. LY. I do profane
this place, for were my griefs
As great as I would boast'em, I could not live
To tell them to the World:
Or is the passage which my soul should make
Shut up with sorrow? It Is so, and a joy,
A hopeful joy, to meet her must give freedom
To my sad prisoner, when my hand shall lead
This dagger to his heart, that parred ours.
And Heaven that hears this vow, power on my head
Dire thunder, if I shrink in what I promise:
And sacred'st Saint, if from thy place ofrest,
Thou turn'st thy eyes upon thy holy Relickes,
Accept my vows, and pardon me the life
Of the cursed Homicide, a full revenge
Of thy Death, and my lives misery,
Shall make him pay the time he has outlived
My happiness; and when he is fallen,
Present thy self in all thy glories to me,
That my freed soul may owe her liberty
To no force but impatient longing
Of re-injoying thee; and holy Tomb,
The Altar where my heart is nightly offered,
Let my winged love have passage through thy marble,
And fan the sacred ashes, knowing no heat,
But what he takes from them; so peace and rest
Dwell ever with thee.
Exit.
Enter HERMIONE, IRENE, PHILLIDA, all veiled. IR. Dear HERMIONE, pinch me or I
shall sink with laughter.

HER. What said the stranger? PHILLIDA, I did not hear it?

PHI. Nothing madam.

HER. Then he did talk by signs, he was long about it:
What was it, IRENE?

IR. He long importuned her to show her face, which
After many urgings she consented to; and he in
Recompense made a low Revernce to her, and
Then thanks her for the great favor, and
Concludes he never did receive so great a one
From any woman, since all else have done with them
A reference to themselves: but hers was merely
Goodness, for before he saw her be might
Have suspected her face handsomely hid, for a
Piece of beanty, if her virtue would have
Suffered him to be longer in that error.

PHI. I would I were a man for his sake.

IR. So you told him, and he still courteous for
All your anger, promised to give you what you
Wanted of a Man, or teach you how to make one.

HER. Thou will never be old wench, if thou still
Keep'st this humor.
Enter ERGASTO and CLEON.
IR. Not a sigh older these seven years if it
Please Sir CUPID, for he blows our bellows.
But look, yonder is your servant, there is no
Starting now; you must stand to it, but before
He comes to interrupt us, observe with me,
How in that deep band, short cloak, and his
Great boots, he looks three stories high, and
His head is the garret, where he keeps nothing but lists of
Horse matches, and some designs for his next clothes.

PHI. Where is his cellarage?

IR. He Will show it thee himself dear PHILLIDA, and
Thine too, if thou will have him: but they make to us.

ER. Madam will you honor me, and this Gentleman,
With a sight of that which does enrich the World?

HER. You will not take our excuses, if we should say
You find us now with more advantage to our beauties.

ER. So breaks the morning forth, but the Suns
Rays, are not so quick and piercing as your eyes,
For they descend even to our hearts.

IR. Heaven defend: my heart would tremble if they should.

ER. Why Madame?

IR: See such impieties as are lodged there in a
Man, and not be stuck with horror, it is impossible.

ER. Your wit does make you cruel: but Madam, I
Have something to deliver unto you, which your
Father commanded no ear should hear but yours.

IR. What have you there CLEON?

CL. Verses Madam.

IR. Whose?

CL. Of Lord ERGASTO'S,
Written in celebration of the fair HERMIONE.

IR. Did he buy them, or found them without a father,
And has adopted them for his own?

CL. They are his own.

IR. Here.

CL. I pray read them.

IR. What have I deserved of you good CLEON, that
You should make me read his Verses in his own presence?
If you think I have not already as an ill opinion
Of him, as I can have, you lose your labor.

CL. Read them, and I Will assure you you will find things
Well said and seriously, and you will alter your opinion of him.

Ir. Pray give them me, I long to be working wonders.
Rubies -- Peases -- Roses -- Heaven.
She reads single words. Do you not think he has done my Cozen a
Simple favor comparing of her voice to that of Heaven?

CL. It Is his love makes him do it, not finding any
Thing on Earth fit to express her, he
Searches Heaven for a similitude.

IR. Alas good Gentleman, it is the first time he
Ever thought on it; what frequent thunders
Should I hear, if'twere as he would have it?
Let me counsel you, lay them aside till
They have contracted an inch of dust, then with
Your finger write their Epitaph, expressing
The mutual quiet they gave men, and received
From them; or as all poisons serve for some use,
Give them your Physician, and let him
Apply them to his Patient for a Vomit,
This way they may be useful.

CL. How ever you esteem them, such an Elogy
Would make you think your glass had not yet flattered you.

IR. It cannot, I prevent it, and accuse it, for
Not showing the Hills of Snow, the Rubies
And the Roses, they say, have being from me:
But stay, Heaven opens, and I see a Tempest coming,
Your Poet is a Prophet.

HER: I Will call an oath to be my witness.

ER. Madam?

HER. My own fears light upon me, if the might that
Eve's the day of Marriage does not shut me from the World.

ER. Why Madam, this intemperance?

HER. It Is a just anger.

ER. If you are augry Madam with all that love you,
There lives none that has more enemies,
Every eye that looks upon you, you must hate.

Ir. Sir CLEON, our friends are engaged, pray let
Us be of the party: what has called up this
Choler in my sweet Cozen? My Lord you have
Been begging favors.

ER. Yes of Heaven, that it would furnish me
With merits fit to deserve your Cozen.

IR. When it has granted you, return to her, and
Renew your suite; but if you stay till then,
You must get spectacles to see her beauty with.

HER. Why should you hinder you repose and mine?
You know I never loved you.

IR. Then he has no reason to accuse you of inconstancy.

ER. Why are you fair? or why has my scars
Enforced me to love nothing else?

IR. If your love were considerable, what an
Obligation had my Cozen to your Stars?
Then these remonstrances of yours are
Impulsive, and not voluntary.

IR. I cannot tell, but when I seriously direct them to you,
I Will swear I am bewitched.

CL. Madam, this is repugnant to your other virtues,
That you should hate a man for loving you,
Before he did profess himself your servant.
I know you did receive him with indifferency
At least: whence then proceeds your hate?

HER. From his expression of his love.

CL. A cruel Son sprung from so mild a Father, if he did
Urge you to any thing might blast your honor.

IR. She would not hear him, and as it is, how
Much does he obliege her, he is now her servant,
And would entreat her to let him be her Master,
A request strangely modest.

CL. If I were he, I Would take an honorable composition,
Let her choose whom she pleased for husband,
And continue her secret servant still.

HER. You are uncivil.
Enter PINDARVS.
CL. Pardon me Madam, this mirth's a liberty:
Your cozen does allow me -- Here comes your father.

PINDARYS whispers with ERGASTO, he speaks to HERMIONE. PIN. How long is it you
have undertaken to be your
Own disposer?

HER. Sir.

PIN. After my cares had sought you out a man that brings
All blessings that the world calls happy; you must refuse him.

HER. Sir, I have taken an oath.

PIN. I know the priest that gave it. Do you not blush,
Being so young, to know how to distinguish the difference
Of desires, and this so wildly? that you will put off your
Obedience rather than loose one that you dare not say
Has interest in you; but by my hopes of rest,
Enter LYSICLES. I Will use the power custom and nature gives me,
To force you to your happiness.

LYSICLES. How now my Lord? what miracle can raise a
Tempest here, where so much beauty reigns?

Pin. My Lord, you are not practiced in the cares of
Fathers. I thought to have seen this Gentleman
My son to morrow; and she does not refuse him: but --

LYS. It must not be, pardon me virtue, that I begin
An act, will set a stain upon my blushing brow:
Yet I must thorough. Lord PINDARVS, my
Fortunes carry a pardon with them, when
They make me err in acts of ceremonial
Decencies, they have bin so heavy and so mighty,
They have bent me so low to the earth,
I could not cast my face upwards to hope a blessing,
The cause you are perfect in.

PIN. It Is a noble sorrow, but your deep Melancholy
Gives it too large a growth.

LYS. Thus all do press it; yet had my grief relation
Only to my self, I would not part them from
My heart and memory they justly do possess:
But my father has no more issue save my self,
For to couferre his name and fortunes on.

PIN. Our Greece would mourn if such a glorious
Stock should end in the most flourishing branch.

LYS. If you do wish it a continuance, it is in your
Power to make it lasting to ages. Since my
MILESIA'S death, I have not loved a Lady equal
With your HERMIONE, in her I hope to lose
My swollen misfortunes, and find out a joy
That may extinguish them: it is now no time
To tell her how much I am her servant: for
This Lord here that does pretend to her fair
Graces, before I had declared my self his
Rival, perchance you would believe me, if
I had said, he no way does deserve her.

PIN. Where you pretend who can, but Heaven
That designed a blessing to my child, it had
Been pride to hope for, has made her still
Averse to his pretenses; but giving her the
Liberty of refusing, I know he is removed.

LYS. Thus then to morrow I Will wait on yon,
Ladies I am your servant.
Exit.
PIN. My Lord ERGASTO, you see with how much candor
I have embraced your love, yet though I do
Put on a fathers strictness in my daughters presence,
I cannot force her to an act whereon
For ever will depend her happiness.
My house shall still be open to you as my heart.
My business calls me, get you home, your servant.

CL. ERGASTO my Lord ERGASTO, what have you left
Your tongue with your heart?

ER. Is she not strangely fair?

CL. You Will not believe me, if I should say the contrary.

ER. Do You think that there are such faces in Elysium?

CL. I Am sure many better go the other way, if they
Be not marred in the Voyage; but do you
Remember where you are to meet with PHORMIO?

ER. Nor any thing else, her beauty makes me forget
All things that has no Reference to it.

CL. Hey day, if within these two hours, if you do
Not forget the cause of this forgetfulness, I Will
Be an Eunuch, what if the Prince should be your
Rival? I cannot tell, but my Lord PINDARVS on a
Sudden fell from his anger, to his daughter, to a
Ceremony, to you might be suspected.

ER. It Is a fear that makes me tremble.

CL. Courage man, if you have not lost your
Memory, your remedy is certain: there
Are more handsome faces will recompense this loss.
Let us meet PHORMIO.
Exeunt.
ACT. 2. SCAE. 1.
Enter HERMIONE, IRENE, and PHILLIDA. IRENE. HAve you sent for the Egyptian
Lady?

HER. I have, and she will be here within this half hour.

IR. She speaks our Language.

HER. Her father was of Greece, a wealthy Merchant,
And his business enforcing him to leave his
Country, he married a Lady of that place where he lived,
Who excellent in the Mystery of devination,
Has left that knowledge to her daughter,
Enricht with thousand other modest virtues,
As is delivered to me by those are frequent with her.

IR. Do you believe what PHILLIDA says,
Is the voice of all your friends?

HER. What is it?

IR. That you shall marry with Prince LYSICLES.

PHI. I heard your Uncle say, the Governor did
Receive it with all appearances of joy, in hope
This match will free him from this deep Melancholy:
And'tis determined the next feast joins your hands.

HER. The Grave must be my bed then:
With what harsh fate does Heaven afflict me,
That all those blessings which make others happy,
Must be my ruin? but if this Ladies knowledge
Shall inform me, that I shall nee're enjoy EVGENIO,
Darkness shall ceaze me 're Tapers light,
My blushes to the fore-swome HYMEN'S rights.

IR. Why should you labor your disquiet Cozen?
Anticipating thus your knowledge, you will make
Your future sufferings present, and so call
A lasting grief upon you, which your hopes
Might dissipate till Heaven had made your mind
Strong enough to encounter them.

HER. Dear IRENE, our Stars, whose influence does govern us,
Are not malignant to us, but whilst we
Remain in this false earth: he that has courage
To divest himself of that, removes with it
Their powers to hurt him; and injured love
Who sees that Fortune would usurp his power,
I know will not be wanting.
Enter ACANTHE the Moore. See, the Lady comes.
Madam, the excuse that justifies sick men that
Send for their Physician, must beg my pardon,
That did not visit you to have this honor. Here you see
A Virgin, that has long stood the mark of Fortune,
And now is so full of misery, that though the gods
Resented what I suffer, yet I fear
That they have plunged me to extremes exceed
Their own assistance.

MO. Fear not their power.

HER. I do not, but their will to help me I must doubt,
For those that know no reason of their hate,
Must fear it is perpetual.
And let the Ensigns of their wrath fall on me,
If ere by any willing act I have
Provoked their justice: to you now, in whom
It Is said, as in their Oracle they speak. I come to
Know what mighty growth of dangers are decreed me.

MO. First, dearest Lady, do not think my power
Greater as my will to serve you, it is so weak
That if you should reley on it, I shall seem
Cold in your service, when it does not answer
What is expected from it, all I know,
Is but conjectured, for our Stars incline,
Not force us in our actions. Let me observe your face.

HER. Do, and if yet you are not perfect in your Mysteries,
Observe mine well, and when you meet a face
Branded with such a line, conclude it miserable:
When an eye that does resemble this,
Teach it to weep betimes, that so being lost,
It may not see those miseries must be his only object.
The Moore starts. Are my misfortunes of that horrid shape,
That the mere speculation does affright
Those whose compassion only it concerns?
I that must stand the strokes then, what defense
Shall I prepare against them? yet a hope
That they be ripened now to fall on me,
Lightens a desperate joy to my dark soul.
For the last dart shall be embraced
As remedy, to cure my former wounds.

MO. It Is not that, I was surpised in considering I must
Partake of all your fortunes, for our ascendants
Threaten like danger to us both.

HER. Are then my miseries grown infections too,
Must that be added? pardon me gentle Lady this sad crime.
I must account amongst my secret faults:
I me ant no more but to communicate,
Not part my sorrows with you.

MO. Would you could, with what great willingness
Should I embrace a share of what afflicts you.
I Would have to meet and ease you of your fears.
Now if to one whose interest do force her
To advance your hopes, you dare deliver
The cause of your disquiet, you shall find
A closet, if not a fort, to vindicate your fears.

HER. You shall know all. I have exchanged my heart
With a young Gentleman's now banished
His Country and my hopes, his rival labors
To make me his, my Father resolute,
I should consent, till Fortune changed, but
Lessened not my sufferings; for our Prince
LYSICLES ruins me with the honor of his search.

MO. Does EVGENIO know you love him?

HER. No.

MO. Why does he doubt it?

HER. A womanish scorn to have my love revealed,
Made me receive his declaration of it,
As an affront unto my honor.
And when he came to take his leave,
I left him in the opinion I would obey my Father.

MO. I Have heard as much; but contradictions
In the Princes actions do amaze me:
They say he loves your friend, and labors now
For to recall him, and that every Night
He courts his former flame, hid in the ashes
Of his lost Mistress.

HER. By this judge how miserable I am?
That my malignant Stars force them to change
Nature and Virtue too, that else would shine,
Unmoved like the Star, that does direct
The wandering Seamen: must then Nature change,
And will not Fortune cease to persecute?
Good gods; I will submit to all but breach of faith.

MO. They will not hear us Madam, unless we
Contribute to their aid our best endeavors.
I have thought a way may for a time secure you;
You must dissemble with the Prince, and seem
To love ERGASTO.
It Is not impossible, but he seeing you
Prefer one so beneath him, may provoke
A just neglect from him; then for ERGASTO,
Besides the time you gain, there may succeed
A thousand ways to hinder his pretense.

HER. Can my heart e're consent my tongue should say,
I am to any other but EVGENIO?
No my dear Love, though cruel Fate has severed
My vowed embraces, yet has Death Ice enough
To fright all others from them.

MO. I see Love is a Child still, what a trifle
Does now disturb him: You will not get your health
O'th price of saying you are sick; I know
There is another remedy more proportioned for your disease,
Butnot for you that suffer, which is this:
Tell the Prince that you're engaged, but he
That broke with vows and friendship, for your love,
Will not desist for such supposed slight lets,
And then your Father will force you to his will.

HER. If the Prince leave me, it is most certain
He Will use his power to make me take ERGASTO.

MO. Those that in dangers that do press them nearely,
Will not resolve,
Upon some hazard, and give leave to chance
To govern what our knowledge cannot hinder,
Must sit still, and wait their preservation from a miracle.

HER. I am determined; for knives, fire, and Seas shall lose
Their qualities, 'ere Fate shall make me his:
And if Death cannot be shunned, I Will meet it boldly.

Enter IRENE. IR. Cozen, the Prince is come to see you.

MO. Good Madam use some means that I may speak
With him before he goes; my heart does promise
I shall do something in your service, and
Be sure when he first speaks of love, seem not
To understand him.
Exit.
Enter LYSICLES. LY. Madam, I have begged leave of your Noble Father,
To offer up my self a servant to your virtues.

HER. It is a grace our family must boast of,
That you descend to visit those that style
Themselves your creatures, made such by your goodness,
Which we can only pay by frequent prayers,
That your Line may last, as glorious to
Posterity, as your now living fame is.

LY. Madam, you were not wont, by a feigned praise,
To scorn those that admire you; or would you thus
Insinuate what I should be, by telling
Me I am, what I must ever aim at.

HER. Were there proportion 'twixt our births my Lord,
'I would ill become a Virgins mouth to utter
How much you do deserve, that will excuse,
When I shall say, our Greece never saw your equal.

LY. I did not think I ever could be moved
With my own praise, but now my happiness
So much depends, that you shall truly think
What now you utter of me; that I glory
My actions are thus favored by your judgment.

HER. We must forget our safeties, and the gods,
Whose Instrument you were of our deliverance,
When we are silent of the mighty Debt
This Kingdom owes your courage.

LY. This declaration of your favoring me, will plead
My pardon, if I do omit the Ceremonial circumstance,
Which usually makes way for this great truth
I now must utter. Madam, I do love
Your virtues with that adoration,
That the all-seeing Sun does not behold
A Lady that I love with equal ardour.
Our friends have most power over us, both
Do second my desires of joining us
In the sacred tie of Marriage.

HER. My Lord, I thought at first how ill my words
Became a Virgins but give'em the right sense
They were designed, which was to speak you truly,
Not with a flattering ambition:
They might engage you to the love of one
So far unequal, if I have ever gained
Any thing on your goodness, I Will not lose it
By foolishly aspiring to that height,
You must in honor dispossess me of
When I was seated: Marry you my Lord!
The King, our neighbor Princes, all good men
Must curse me as a stain to those great virtues
You're the single Lord of; if you speak this to try
What easy conquest you can make of all,
You faintly but pretend to, I Will confess
The weakness of our Sex, who would be prouder
Only to have the shows of your affection,
Than real loves of any they can hope
With Justice to attain to.

LY. What ever I deserve,
The gods have largely recompensed my intent
Of doing virtuously, if it has gained so much
Upon your goodness, as to make a way for my affection.

HER. My Lord, I do not understand you.

LY. Pardon me dearest Lady, if my words
Too boldly do deliver what my actions
And frequent services should first have smoothed
The way they are to take, my Happiness
So nearely is concerned, you shall approve
Me for your Servant, that I trembling have,
To know what rigours or what joys expect me.
But ere you do begin to speak my Fate,
Know whom you do condemn, or whom make happy:
One, that when misery had made so wretched,
That it ravished his desires to change,
Whose eyes were turned inward on his grief,
Pleased with no object but what caused their tears,
Your beauty only raised from his dark seat
Of circling sorrows, lighting me a hope
By you I might receive all happiness,
The gods have made my heart capacious of.

HER. Good my Lord, give me leave again to say,
I dare not understand you, you are too noble
To glory in the conquest of a heart
That ever has admired you, and to think
You can so far forget your Birth and Virtue,
As to believe me fit to be your Wife,
Were a presumption, that swelling pride
Must be the father of, which never yet
My heart could be allied to: continue Prince,
Be the example of a constant love,
And let not your MILESIA'S ashes shrink
With a new piercing cold, which they will feel
In The 'instant, that your heart shall be consenting
To any new affection, and give me leave to say,
Your mind can never admit a noble Love,
If it has banished hers your memory.

LY. Must that be argument of cruelty,
Which should be cause of pity? And will you
Assume the Patronage of envious Fortune
By adding torments unto her affliction?
Must I be miserable in loosing you,
Because the gods thought me unworthy her?
Did I so easily digest her death,
That I want pity, and am thought unworthy
Of all succeeding love?
Witness my loss of joys, if sorrow could
Have killed me, I had not lived to show you mercy.

HER. Protect me Virtue,
Pardon me my Lord, I know your griefs
How great and just they are, and only meant
By mentioning MILESIA, to confess
How much unworthy I am to succeed her
In your affection, which though you bent
As low as I durst raise my self to reach,
'T were now impiety for me to graspe,
I being no more my own disposer.

LY. Ha, what Fate has taken you from your self:

HER. The Lord ERGASTO'S importunity,
Whom though at first no inclination
Of mine made me affect his vows,
Has vanished my determination,
I finding nothing in my self deserving
The constancy of his affection to me,
Besides my Fathers often urging me
To make my choice obeying his commands,
And threatening misery, if I declined the least,
Knowing his violent nature, I consented
To a contract 'twixt me and the Lord ENGASTO.

LY. Oh the prophesies of my unjust fears how true
My heart foretold you!
Madam, it cannot be you should affect
One that has no desert, but what you give,
By making him a part of you, my hopes
Though always blasted, could not apprehend
A fear from him: I should be happy yet,
If any worthy love shadowed my shame
Of being refused by you.

HER. Give not my want of power to serve your Grace,
The cruel Title of refusing you.
Your merits are so great, you may affire
Your self of all you can desire that is possible
To grant, whom thousand worthier than my self
Would kneelc to.
By my life, if my Faith were not given, I would
Here offer up my self to be disposed by you.
Though no ambitious pride could flatter me,
You could descend to raise me to your height.

LY. Must this be added to my former griefs?
That in the instant you profess to pity
What I must suffer in your loss; your virtue,
For which I admire you, must exclude
My hopes of ever changing your r solves:
Yet let my vows gain thus much of you,
That for a Month you will not marry him;
I know your Father will not force you to it,
For he not knowing what has passed between you,
Consented to this visit.

HER. By all things holy this I swear to do,
Though violent Diseases should enclose me
Till the Priest joined our hands; yet if you please
Let not my Father know, but he is the cause,
I dare not look upon the mighty blessing
Your love does promise.

LY. May I not know the reason?

HER. That he may know, that this unquestioned power
Has forced me to that error, which himself,
And I, must ever mourn unpittied.

LY. Now you throw Oil upon the wound you make:
I may be ignorant of all things else,
But of my want of merit to deserve
I am most perfect in: be happy Lady,
He that enjoyes you shall not need that prayer:
My Fathers business calls me.

HER. Let me entreat you, that you will see a Lady,
Whose virtues do deserve the honor of our knowledge.

LY. What is she?

HER. An Egyptian Lady, lately come to Cirrha.

LY. I have heard of her; they say she knows our
Actions past, and future.

HER. When you know her, you will believe me,
That virtue chose that dark inhabitation,
To hide her Treasure from the envious world.
I Will call her to your Grace.
Enter ACANTHE.
HER. Madam, this is the Prince.
He salutes her.
MO. You need not tell me it, though this be the first
Time that I saw him since I came to Cirrha,
His Fame does make him known to all that are
Remotest from him.

LY. My miseries indeed have made it great;
For all things else I should be more
Beholding unto silence, than the voice
Of my most partial friends: Why do you gaze upon me so?

MO. Have you not lately lost a Lady that did love you dearly?

LY. If you do measure time by what I suffer,
My undiminish'd grief tells me but now:
But now I lost her, if the sad Minutes,
That have oppressd me since the fatal stroke,
It is an age eternity of torments I have felt.

MO. Good Sir, withdraw a little, I shall deliver
They whisper. What you believe, none know besides my self.

LY. Most true it is, what god that heard our
Vows has told it you?
But if your eyes pierce farther in their secrets
Than our weak fancies can give credit to,
Tell me if where she is, she can discern and know my actions?

MO. Most perfectly she does, and mournes your loss of faith,
That now begin after so many vows,
So many oaths you would be only hers,
To think of a new choice.

LY. This may be conspiracy. I Will try it further.

MO. Had you been snacht from her, and for her sake
Murdered, as she for you, your Urnes cold ashes
Should have hid her fire of faithful love.
Pardon me my Lord.
Her injured spirit inspires me with this boldness.

LY. I am certain, this is no inspiration of the gods,
It cannot be she should consent, my faith
Should be the ruin of my name and memory,
Which necessarily must follow, if virtuous love
Did not continue it to future ages.

MO. Fame of a constant lover will eternize it
More than a numerous issue; would you hear
Her self express her sorrow?

LY. If I should desire it, it were impossible.

MO. You conclude too fast: if this night you will come
Unto her Tomb, you there shall see her.

LY. Though she bring Thunder in her hand, I will not fail to come.
And though I cannot credit that your power can procure it,
My hope's it should be so, will overcome my reason.
Ladies, I am your servant.
Exit.
MO. Madam, I cannot stay to know particulars,
Of what has passed betwixt you and the Prince:
Only tell me how he relisht your saying, you
Were promised to ERGASTO?

HER. Respects to one I seemed to have made choice of,
Made him forbear his Character:
But shall not I be punished seeming to prefer,
One so unworthy both to EVGENIO, and this noble Prince?

MO. The gods give us permission to be false,
When they exclude us from all other ways,
Which may preserve our faith.
Longer I dare not stay, I am your servant.
Exeunt.
Enter ERGASTO, CLEON, FORMIO. ER. Now we are met, what shall we do to keep us
together?

PH. Let Us take some argument may last an hour of mirth.

CL. If you will have ERGASTO be of the parley, it must
Be of the Ladies, for he is desperately in love.

PH. If the disease grow old in him, I Will pay the physician;
But be it so, and let it be lawful to change as often as we will.

ER. What the Ladies?

PH. The discourse of them, and themselves too, if we
Could arrive to it: but what is she you love?

ER. One that I would sacrifice half my life,
To have but a weeks enjoying of.

PH. At thesegames of love we set all; but the best is,
We cannot stake, and there is no loss of credit in the breaking.
CLEON, have thou seen him with his Mistress?

CL. Yes; and he stands gazing on her, as if he were begging
Of an Alms.

PH. It Is not ill done; but does he not speak to her?

CL. Never, but in Hyperbolies; tells her, her eyes are Stars,
Which Astronomers should only study to know our Fate by.

PH. It Is not amiss, if she have neither of the extremes.

CL. What do you intend?

PH. I mean, neither so ill favored, as to have
No ground for what we say, for their belief
Will hardly enter; nor so handsome, as to have
It often spoken to her: For your indifferent beauties
Are those whom slattery surpriseth, there being
So natural a love and opinion of our selves,
That we are adapted to believe that men are rather
Deceived in us, than abuse us.

ER. Your limitation takes away much of my answer:
But grant all that you say, I have no hope of
Obtaining my Mistress.

PH. Then thou have yet a year of happiness:
But why I prithee?

ER. She is so deserving, she thinks none worthy
Ofher affections, and so can love none.

PH. You have more cause to doubt, that she will never
Affect you, than that already she is not in love:
What a young handsome Lady, that carries the flame of her heart in her cheeks,
not have yet seen any one to desire? it is impossible.

ER. I was of your mind, till I had experience
Of the contrary.

PH. Conceits of your self, makes you of the opinion
I mentioned: You think it is impossible for all men,
What you cannot attain to; what Arts
Have you used to gain her?

CL. He knows none but distilling sighs
At the Altar of her beauty.

PH. Ifhe be subject to that frenzy, I will
Counsel him to take any Trade upon him
Rather than that of Love.

ER. And do you think there is any thing fitter
To call down affection than submission?

PH. Nothing more opposite for languishing transports;
Whinings and Melancholy makes us more laughed at,
Than beloved of our Mistresses; and with reason:
For why should we hope to deserve their favors,
When we confess we merit not a lawful esteem of our selves?

CL. I have known some their Mistresses have forsaken,
Only because they were certain the world took notice
They were deeply in love with them.

PH. And they did wisely; for the victory being got,
They were to prepare for a new Triumph, and
Not like your City Officers, ride still with the
Same Liveries. Some I confess, have miscarried
In it, but 'twas because their provision of
Beauty was spent before they came to composition.

ER. Thou were an excellent fool in a chamber, if you
Continue, you will be so in a Comedy: Do believe
Thau can swagger them out of their loves?

PH. Sooner than soften their hearts by my tears,
And though a River should run through me,
I would seal up my eyes, before a drop should
Come that way: for our unmanly submissions
Raise them to that height, that they think
We are largely favored, if they hearken to us with contempt.

ER. It Is safer they should do so, than hate us for our insole^ce.

PH. If thou have ever been used to talk sense,
I should wonder at thee now: why I should
Sooner hope to gain a Lady after the Murder
Ofher family, than after she had an opinion
I deserved to be slighted by her.

CL. Before VENUS he talks with Authority: I know
Not well what he has said, but methinkes
There is something in it: prothee let us hearken to him.

PH. Do; and if I do not dispossess you of all your
Opinions, let me be --

ER. You must deal by enchantment then; for I am
Resolved to stick to my conclusions.

PH. It Is the best hold-fast your foolish Devil has,
But strong reasons shall be your Exorcisme.
Tell me first what is she you love?

ER. Would I could.

PH. Then for all thy jesting, there is some hope
Thou art yet in thy wits.

ER. You mistake me; I mean I could not tell, because
No Tongue can speak her to her merit.

PH. Heyda, if the Ballad of the Rose and the Honey-combe
Do not do it more than she deserves, or almost any woman,
Let me be condemned to sing the funerals of Parrats.

CL. Would the Ladies heard you.

PH. They would believe me, though they would be
Sorry your Honors should: but what, this love
Has it transformed us all? CLEON, you can tell
Who it is he thus admires?

CL. Yes, and will; it is HERMIONE, PINDARVS his heir.
PH, What EPICTETVS in a petti-coate? she that disputes love into nothing, or
what is worse, a friendship with a woman?

CL. The same, and I know you will confess she is deserving

PH. Yes, but the mischief is, she will never think so
Of him: If POLYGAMY were in fashion, I would
Persuade him to marry her, to be Governesse to the rest,
But not till then, would thou be content
To lie with a Statue, that will never confess more of love,
Than suffering the effects of thine?

CL. And have his liberties in the discourse of her friends,
That her retiredness may be more magnified.

PH. Believe me ERGASTO, these severe beauties, that
Are to be looked on with the eyes of respect,
Are not for us: we must have them that love to
Be praised more for fair Ladies, than judicious.

ER. You mistake me gentlemen, I choose for my self, not for you.

PH. Faith for that, who ever marries, must sacrifice
To Fortune, and she, whose wisdom makes her
Snow to you, may be Fire to another: Some odd
Wrinkled fellow, that conquers her with wit,
May throw her on her back with reason. Take
This from the Oracle, that for the general
Calamity of Husbands, all women are reputed
Vicious, and for the quiet of particulars,
Every one thinks his wife the Phoenix.

ER. You have met with rare Fortunes.

PH. Calumny is so general, that Truth has lost
Her credit: But to th'purpose, what Rivalls? what hopes?

CL. A potent Rival takes away all; LYSICLES does woe her.

PH. Good night, I will dispute it no more, whether thou
Should have her, or no; for now I conclude, it is impossible.

ER. I had her Fathers firm consent before he declared himself.

PH. Though thou had hers too, be wise, and despair
Betimes: In this point Women are Commonwealths,
And are obliged to their faiths no farther
Than the safety and honor of the State is
Concerned: If thou were the first example, I
Would excuse thee for being the first cozened.
But stay, who is here?

Enter PHILLIDA veiled, beckons to ERGASTO. Of My conscience, an Embassage from
some of
Your kind Mistresses, that would feign take their
Leaves before you go to captivity.

ER. Is It possible?

PHI. She desires you to see her, and believe that ambition
Cannot gain more upon her than your affection.

ER. Take this Ring, and this.

PHIL. I dare not Sir.

ER. Tle pay thy Dowry then within this half hour;
I Will wait on her.
Exit PHILLIDA.
CL. From what part of the Town came this fair day
In a Cloud, that makes you look so cheerfully?

ER. A las Gentlemen, I was borne to know nothing
Of love, but sighs and despaires.
I can be servant to none that have the election of two.

CL. Unriddle, unriddle.

HER. 'T was the servant of HERMIONE that came to
Have nie wait upon her Lady.

CL. PHORMIO, what do you think of this?

PH. I wo'not think at all, for fear I judge amiss.
The Mazes of a woman are so intricate, no
Precept can secure us: yet this I am resolved on,
She will not love you.

CL. Why sent she for him then?

PH. The Devil that advised her can tell you, they
Will not lose a servant whilst he lives,
Though they command him to be murdered: it is the
Woman Art, if they perceive a lover to desist
Through fear, distrust, or harsher usage, they
Open him the Heaven of their beauty, in smiles,
And yielding looks, and with their eyes do melt
The ice of doubts their fears contracted: perhaps
Prince LYSICLES spurs coldly, whilst he rides
Alone, and you must strain to make him go
The faster: EVGENIO too was servant to your
Mistress, and LYSICLES and he parted good friends.
Should I think all the ways they have to cozen
Us, 'twere endless: but I Will along with you,
And guess at more.
Exeunt.
ACT. 3. SCAE. 1.
Enter HERMIONE, IRENE, PINDARVS following. PIN. Tell my Lord LYSICLES, I will
attend him in the walks.
Where Is this ungrateful child, whom the just gods
Have cursed so much, they will not let her take
The blessings they do offer?

HER. Here Sir, on her knees, begging your pardon, or your pity.

PIN. Can thou hope either from my injured patience,
Vexed by thy folly into rage and madness,
What color now to cover disobedience?
Is LYSICLES unworthy? or your knowledge,
Does it pierce farther than the eyes of all
Into EVGENIO'S virtues? I tremble
When I think thou may have cause
To know him to thy shame: do not confess it,
By the just gods if I do come to know it,
I Will sacrisice thee on thy Mothers Tomb.

HER. What secret sin calls down this punishment?
That I should be accused of a fault
I dare not hear the sound of. Add not Sir
Suspicions of new crimes unto your rage;
The faults I have committed are enough to arm
Your Justice; bring me to the Tomb,
And kill me there, my Mothers Ghost will smile
To see my blood shed to preserve my faith.

PIN. Your faith?

HER. Yes Sir:
Nor is my disobedience so swollen,
As you endeare it by your passion:
I now obey your general commands,
Of doing vertuonsly in loving him
You did applaud, whilst my poor brother lived.

PIN. But you are not the same, 'twas never meant
He should enjoy you if your brother died.

HER. I was not made acquainted with so much,
But strengthened by your approbation,
Gave up my will to his, and vows to heaven
Toknow no other man for husband.

PIN. Nor I no child, if you continue thus:
Nor will I argue more to make you doubt,
I am not resolute in my intents:
A live or dead I Will give thee in the hands of LYSICLES.

HER. Good gods, if you are moved with tears, grant
This a trial only of the weak proportion
Of virtue you have lent me, not the overthrow.

IR. How is it dearest Cozen?

HER. As with a Martyr, almost as much pleased with
Knowledge what I dare to suffer for EVGENIO,
As grieved with my affliction: Fortune in her
Malice has given me yet a field to exercise
My faith and love to him I do adore.

IR. Whilst you believe you have such cause to grieve,
All comforts seem importunate; but yet Prince LYSICLES --

HER. But what? Forbear, I fear thy thoughts
Are poisoned, which thou would feign infuse
To wound my constancy.

IR. Sure there is Magic in that mysticke name,
It could not else divide us from our reason:
What Law, what faith can bind us to remove
Love of our selves, and reverence to our parents?
You must forgive this; your EVGENIO,
If he were here, must speak as J do now,
Granting his love be great as his profession,
For that must have reflection on your peace,
Not bargaining for his own happiness
With the price of the entire destruction
Of yours: what is it you fear report?
It will reproach your being obstinate,
Or breach of faith: Do You fear?
The gods for you have made it not a fault,
Proposing such an object as Prince LYSICLES.

HER. Who ever had a misery like mine?
All that are grieved have yet the liberty
And ease of their complaints, or pitying friends,
J am excluded both; for my misfortune
Is masqu'd with happiness, and if I grieve
Such comforts as we give to those complain
Of being too rich, have I smiles of contempt.

JR. If it be thus, retire into your reason,
And for a time forget your passion.
D'ec think that all the names of virtue shrink
Into the sound of constancy? Must this
Make you forget the debt that you do owe
Unto your Father, friends, and to your self;
Their houses honor, and your happiness,
Is LYSICLES less worthy than his Rival?

HER. No more, their virtues that exceedes all other men's,
In them are equal.

IR. But yet their fortune is not.

HER. It Is confessed: nor never any man had juster claim
Than he against her; rich in all virtues,
That make men desired: her narrow hand
Excludes him, unwonted to bestow
Her treasure there where an excess of merit
Would make her gifts but seem the pay of virtue,
Not favors of her partial love.
Enter ACANTHE (the Moore. Oh you are welcome. Here behold a Rock
That stands the shame of the impetuous winds,
And the swollen Seas.

MO. Has there been any new storms since I went?

HER. O yes, and more endangering songs of Sirens:
A flourishing Land proposed, on which I might
Have shipwrackt with delight.

MO. I think I understand you.

HER. You must needs:
It was Prince LYSICLES presented in his luster,
Against whom I armed the virtues of my friend,
And my own faith irresolute to whom
The victory should yield: at last I left
My heart, the prize, to both divided.

MO. To both divided?

HER. Yes, the Prince has the adoration of my heart,
EVGENIO the love.

MO. What Fires, what Seas must your EVGENIO pass,
To make him worthy you? me thinks I feel
His soul sigh for a trial of his faith.

HER. We both have had satiety of that:
But can you bring no comfort? have the gods
Shut up their Oracles, as well as mercy?
Though they will give no ease, they might advise,
That we may put off misery by death.

MO. They seldom let us know what is to come,
That we may still implore their aid to help us:
Yet something I can tell, if hope or force
Shall make you deviate from your resolve,
You are the subject of their hate: or if
You measure your or their affection
By merit, or advantages of fortune,
You are the mark of all disasters.

HER. I have complained unjustly of the gods,
They favor me so much, they do applaud
My resolution for EVGENIO.
Merits in others, I will close my eyes
From the blessed Sun, before they shall take in
An object that may startle my firm faith.

MO. Be constant, and be happy, when you meet
With opposition that may shake your judgment.
Remember what affliction it is to weep
A fault irrepairable, and think not
Reason can pacify your fathers rage:
You must oppose your passion unto his,
And love will be victorious, being the noblest:
To morrow I will bring more certain council.
Exit.
HER. Where cannot virtue dwell? what a still shade
Has she found out to live securely in
From the attempts of men? Come my IRENE,
Though thou have spoken treason against my love,
'Cause thine did produce it, I must thank thee.
Let Us in, and fortify our selves with some sad tale
Ofthose, whose perjured loves have made them live
Hated, and dye most miserable.

Enter IRENE and PHILLIDA. PH. If J should weep as my Lady does, for all the
Servants I have lost?

IR. Thou would weep in thy grave PHILLIDA: yet the
Worst is, thou will lose more within this seven
Years, than thou have got in ten: for men are
Changeable sweet PHILLIDA.

PH. And our faces were not 'twere no matter,
They should make haste, or we she should overtake them,
Or prevent them; a commodity of beauty that
Would last forty years would bear a good price Madam.

IR. By Venus would it PHILLIDA, as high as that of honor.

PH. But is not my Lady a strange woman to weep
Thus for one servant, when she has another in
His place? for my part, I could never find such
Differences in men to be sad when I had any.

IR. And thy word may be taken as soon as any wenches
In Greece, or there be slanderers in the world:
But she affects constancy.

PH. Some ill-favored woman, that meant to preserve
Her last purchase which her want of beauty
Forfeited, invented that name.

IR. Thou Art in the right PHILLIDA, this inconstancy is
A Monster without teeth, for it devoures none,
Make no Son wear happy mourning, nor
Mother childlesse: and for my part, I am of
Opinion that the gods give a blessing to it, for
None live happier, than those that have greatest
Abundance of it.

PH. What is got by this whining constancy, but the loss
Of that beauty for one servant, which would procure us
The Vows, Sacrifice, and service of a thousand?

IR. Enough of this; were thou with Ergasto?

PH. Yes, and told him that my Lady sent for him:
But to what intent did you make me lie?

IR. Thou art so good natured, that thou will pardon
Such a trifle for one Reason, but I have two:
The first is, I would feign speak with him,
The other knowing my Cozen to be in an ill humor,
If he press to see her, I hope she will give him such an answer,
That he shall never dare to speak to her more.

PH. These men have less reason than Mice, they would
Know else how to shift places, and shelter themselves
From a storm. If I were a man, and lost the happiness
Of seeing my Mistress two days, I should
Lose the desire the third: Do you sigh
Madam? you are in love too?

IR. As far as goes to sighing, but no dying for their breeches.

PH. I Will be your Compurgator for the handle of a Fan:
I know many love has brought into the world,
But let out none: has he pierced you, ha?

IR. Oh no, my skin was always proof against his Dart;
But he once found me laughing, and so thrust it
Down to my heart.

PH. Look to it, though it is but a little weapon, but
I have known it make greater swellings than
The sting of a Be. Do you long for a man?

IR. Yes, a Husbandman, and let the gods after take care
For my children.

PH. You Will find enough to do it: is the Moore still with
My Lady?

IR. I left her with her.

PH. It Is a shame such people should be suffered
Near the Court.

IR. Why prithee?

PH. As it is, there be so many inquisitive Rascals,
That we have much ado to keep matters secret;
But if in dispite of our care they be devulg'd,
We shall be defamed on the exchanges.

IR. Thou have reason, but she is secret as the night she resembles.

PH. Is she? I would feign ask her one question:
But, it is no matter, it is but taking Physic at the worst.

IR. If thou talk a little longer, I shall guess as much
As she knows: but who is here?

Ergasto, Formio, Cleon, talking at the door. PHO. Never fright me with the
lightning of her eyes:
On me she may open or shut her eyes as she please,
But my happiness is not at her disposing.

CL. If thou prov'st a Lover, my next Song is begun.

PHO. I will not deny but I may love her if she please:
But if she be not pleased with my love, if it continue
Two Hours, I Will give her leave to tie me to her Monkey.

CL. Look, Ergasto has found two of the Ladies,
And has set his face to begin to them.

PHO. In Verse, or prose?

CL. We shall hear, if we draw nearer: a good evening Ladies.

IR. We thank you my Lords, but if we were superstitious,
Your company were no good Omen.

PH. Why I beseech you?

ER. Nay, I am no Expositer; you come my Lord,
To see my Cozen Hermione?

ER. I do Madam,
And should be proud to hear I live in her memory.

IR. Can you doubt it? I Will assure you, you do, she is
Never troubled with any thing, but you presently
Are called into the comparison with it; her Teeth
Cannot ache, but she swears it is almost as great a vexation
As your love: if any dye out of her pity to save the tears
Of a few mourners, she wishes it were you.

ER. If I heard her desire it, she should quickly have her wish.

IR. She would be glad on it of my conscience, though
The scruple of having you do any thing for her sake
Would trouble her a little, yet I can teach you
To make advantage of all this.

PH. What advantage my delicate sweet Lady?

IR. A very great one Six: For first believe
He desires nothing more, than to be assured
She esteems him for her Servant.

PH. Right; but does this usage show it?

IR. Most evidently: for being thus severe to none else,
It Is manifest she confesses a power over him, and paies
His Services with this coin of scorn and contempt,
And having her stamp upon it, he is bound to accept it.

CL. What think you of this Phormio?

PHO. A most excellent Girl, would she were poor.

CL. Why poor?

PHO. She would live rarely by her --

CL, What?

PH. Wit, I would be a good customer.

IR. 'T would please you to hear with what Arguments
She justifies this cruelty, and swears it is not
Revenge enough for spoiling her good nature.

ER. I, her good nature.

PHO. Nay, let her go on, I Will hearken an Age.

IR. Yes, you, by suthing her undeserved scorn, have bred
Such a delight and habit of it in her, that she
Can hardly forbear it, when she strives to be
Complaisant to her best friends; and to say truth,
We are all endangered by such as you, when we see
That frowns procure us knees, and kind usage
Scarce gets us two good morrows.

PHO. If ever there were a Sibyll at sixteen, this Lady is one
By this day you have a high place in my heart.

IR. In your heart?

PHO. Nay, despise it not, you will find good company there.

IR. But I love to be alone.

PHO. And I would saine meet you when you are so.
Will you give me leave to speak with your Scholar?
Hermione and Acanthe above.
IR. If you be his friend, teach him to be wife.

PHO. For your sake I will do all I can: ERGASTO,
Will thou be happy? Marry this Lady: Will thou be
Revenged on thy proud Mistrosse? marry her:
Will thou be sure to Father, wife, children do as I bid thee.

ER. I will deal truly with thee; she has taken
My heart out of HERMIONES keeping.

PH. Be thankful, and bestow it upon her in recompense:
She will accept it, doubt not; she has taken such pains
To redeem it: look how she casts her eyes upon thee:
She Is thine own for ever, and has been long.

ER. I am desperately in love.

PH. Marry, and get out of it; there may be some little straining
At the first offer of the present, but if she send not for it
Before you get home, I Will never trust my eyes more.
PHILLIDA steals away, CLEON follows.
ER. I Will attempt it, let what will follow.

PH. Be confident, and prosper.

ER. Madam, what would you expect from him
You had redeemed from captivity?

IR. The disposing of his liberty.

ER. It Is just, but this may be no great favor to the slave,
If his misery be only altered, not lessened.

PH. You are little curious; why do you ask who
This concerns? well, I Will tell you, you have redeemed
ERGASTO, and he kneeles to know your commands.
Whilst he kneeles, Hermione and the Moore look down from the window.

MO. You may believe her Madam, she loves him,
Now you may revenge her, persuading you to leave
EVGENIO, by smiling on Ergasto; 'twill advance
Your Cozens ends too, if you do as I le advise you, whilst we descend.

IR. It Is festival to day my Lords, and so I admit
This mirth: but to morrow I will tell you; I am no more
Inclined to love than my Cozen Hermione.

ER. But you can suffer your self to be beloved?

IR. I think I can.

PH. He Will ask no more,
But leave the rest to his respects and services.

IR. But you consider not whom you may offend in this mirth.

ER. I Will ne re consider whom I offend in loving you:
I wish her beauty centupled, that my first Obligation
To you might be, leaving her: by this fair hand
I Will never name any but you for Mistress.

IR. I may believe you, when Time and your actions
Shall tell it me as well as your words.

PHO. You wrong your beauty, to expect an assurance
From time, ordinary faces require it, to perfect
The Impressions they make: yours strikes like lightning,
In an instant; if he did not adore you till now,
You must attribute it to some fascination:
But his judgment cleared, he will be forced
To continue the adoration he has begun.

Enter HERMIONE, MOORE, PHILLIDA, CLEON, they find ERGASTO kneeling. PHO. Who Is
that?

ER. The Moore you heard of.

PHO. I have a strange Capriccio of love entered me:
I must Court that shade.

HER. How now my Lord,
Courting another Mistress? I see I must lock up my winds,
Or you will seek the nearest harbor.

ER. Excluded by your rigor, Madam, I was entreating
Your foire Cozen to present my vows.

HER. Was it no more?

ER. No more, you cannot doubt it Madam, turn in
Your eyes upon your beauties and perfections, and they
Will tell you, how impossible it is to lose the Empire
They have gained upon our hearts and wills:
Fortune and want of merit may make me lose
The hope of your fair graces, but nover so much Traitor,
As to pay homage to any other beauty, or change
The resolution I have fixed to be your servant only.

HER. I thank you Sir: my Sex will be my pardon
If I return not equal thanks; we think if any
Manumit before we license them to part,
They do usurp a power is ours by nature: the posture
I found you in, was more than ordinary courtship gives.

ER. You might condemn it, had not you been the
Cause on it: I never think your Name, but with
A Reverence great as I pay the gods; and they
Allow us bending to their Images when we
Transfer our vows: The fair Irene is worthy all,
Have not the hope of you, but whilst you give me leave
To cherish that ambition; I must not own
So great an injury, as to admit the profer'd love of those
Who are so distant from your merit.

HER. 'T was unkindly done to undermine me.

ER. In her presence I will confirm this to you.

HER. You shall oblige me since she has wronged me:
Irene hark you.

They talk in private. After a long whisper, the Moore strives to go from
Phormio, he holds her. PHO. In the name of darkness, do you think I am not
In earnest, that you coy it thus?

MO. Forbear uncivil Lord.

She goes from him. CL. Do thou not see that all the fire is out of the
coal?
If thou would have it burn, lay thy lips
To the spark that is left, and blow it into flame.

PH. What would thou have me do?

CL. Kiss her.

PH. Not for five hundred Crowns.

CL. Would lie with her, and not kiss her?

PH. Yes, and can give reasons for it besides experience,
And when this act is known, this resolute
Encounter, rich widows of threescore will
Not doubt my prowess.

Hermione, Irene, Ergasto break off their private talk IR. As I live he swore
all this to me.

HE. Hide thee inconstant man, thou art so false
Thy oaths do serve thee for no other use
But to condemn thee, not to get belief:
Be gone, and leave to love, till thou have found
The way to truth, and let not vanity cozen you
To believe that I am moved, because you change.
A thousand other imperfections
Have made me hate thee: yet I chose this way
To let thee know it, that deprehended with the
Black mark upon thee, thou may not dare
To trouble me again.

ER. Madam.

HE. There may be some, that for their secret sins
The gods will punish making them love you,
Choose amongst them, Irene, I will hope, though she
Be credulous, will learn by this, how far'tis safe to trust you.

MO. This was well managed.

PH. What Mountain
Have you pierced, that has sent forth this wind since I left you?

ER. I have undone my self for ever.

PH. As how?

ER. I told Hermione I never loved Irene.

CL. Did she hear it?

ER. Oh yes, it might have been for sworn else.

CL. The Devil thou have?

ER. Ask him, he made me do it.

CL. What course will you take to redeem your fault?

ER. A precipice, as being ashamed to live any longer.

PH, A halter you shall as soon: come, come, I Will intercede
And be your surety: Look, she stays to pardon
You; down on your knees.

She goes away, Phormio pulls her back, Ergasto kneeles, holds up his hands,
his cloak over his face. PH. Oh my sweet Lady, be merciful like the gods you
resemble; they have as often pardon in their hands as Thunder: And the truth
is, if they will not forgive this fault of inconstancy, they must live alone,
or atleast without men. This was the last gasp of his dying friendship to her,
And now he is entirely yours.


IR. He has not wronged me.

PH. Fie, say not so, that is as great an injury as not
Pardoning him: he has, and shall come naked
To receive his punishment. See he dares not look
For comfort, let him take it in at his ears.

IR. Pray content your self with the time you have
Made me lose, and let me go.

PH. Never till you pardon him.

IR. I will do any thing for my release, if he has
Offended me, let him learn hereafter to
Speak truer than he swears; and in time
He may get credit.

PH. It Is enough.

ER. Is she gone?

PH. Yes.

ER. How did she look?

PH. Faith ashamed, she loved you so well, and sorry she
Had no reason to love you better.

PH. It Is an excellent Lady.

PH. If I could make Joynters, I would not take this
Pains for your honor. Cleon whither slip you?

CL. After Phillida.

PH. And what success?

CL. POX on it, these waiting women will not deal unless
They have earnest in their hands, and I was unprovided.

PH. Away unthrift.
Exeunt.
Act. 4 SCAE. 1.
Enter LYSICLES. LY. This is the hour powerful Acanthe promised,
I should once more behold my lost Milesia.
Pardon me reason, that my withered hopes
Rebel against thy force, a happiness
So mighty is opposed unto thy doubts,
That I Will divest my self for ever of thee,
Rather than not believe impossibles,
That bring such comforts to my languisht soul.
Hail holy Treasurer of all the wealth
Nature e're lent the world, be still the envy
Of the proud Monuments that do enclose
The glorious Titles of great Conquerors.
Let no profane air pierce thee but my sighs,
MILESIA rises like a ghost. Let them have entrance whilst my tears do warm
Thy colder Marble. -- Ha, what Miracle,
Are the gods pleased to work to ease affliction?
The Phoenix is created from her ashes,
Pure as the flames that made'em: still the same,
The same Milesia! Heaven does confess in this,
That she can only add unto thy beauty,
By making it immortal.
Let it be lawful for thy Lysicles,
To touch thy sacred hand, and with it guide
My wandering soul unto that part of Heaven,
Thy beauty does enlighten.

GHO, Forbear, and hear me: if you approach, I vanish,
Impious inconstant Lysicles, cannot
This miracle of my reassuming
A mortal shape, persuade thee there are gods
To punish falsehood, that thou still persists
In thy dissembling: do not I know
Thy heart is swollen with vows thou have laid up
For thy Hermione, whom thou would persuade,
Thy narrow heart is capable of love
By mocking of my ashes, and erecting Tombs to me, which are
Indeed but Trophies of thy dead conquered love and virtue.

LY. No more blessed shape:
I shall not think that thou descend'st from Heaven,
If thou continuest thus in doubt of me;
Nor can there be a Hell where such forms are.
The knowledge how thou come here, does disturb me;
Yet such a reverence I do owe thy image,
That I will lay before thee all my thoughts
Spotless as Truth, then thou shall tell the shades,
How Fortune, though it made my love unhappy,
Could not diminish it, nor press it one degree
From the proud height it was arrived to:
How I did nightly pray to this sad Tomb,
Bringing and taking fire of constant love
From the cold ashes, how when incompast
With thousand horrors Death had been a rest,
I did prefer a loathed life to revenge my self,
And her upon the murderer.

GHO. I shall desire to live if this be true;
Nothing can add a comfort where I am,
But the assurance of your love: I know
Faith is not tied to pass the confines
Of this life, yet Hermione's happiness
Does trouble me: You Will think I loved
Youliving, when dead, I am jealous of you.

LY. Milesia, again blessed Saint, now I am sure thou art
What thou resemblest, and do know my secret'st thought.
But as the gods, of which thou art a part,
Art not content with our hearts sacrifice,
Unless our words confess it: hear me then,
If my thoughts e're consented to replant
My love, may your dire Thunder light
Upon my head, and sink it down so low,
I may not see thy glories: I confess
My words have sacrificed to Deities,
I never adored those stains of love,
My tears and friendship to the best of men,
I hope I have cancelled for my Eugenio:
I did pretend a love unto Hermione,
Who else had sold her self unto the rage
Of her offended Father; had you lived,
You would have pardoned, when infidelity
But personated did preserve a faith
So holy as theirs was, this is my fault.

GHO. My glory and my happiness.

LY. Yet this as often I wept as I was forced
(For his dear cause) to injure sacred love,
Yet durst not but decline his severe Laws,
When my friends life excused the pious error.

GHO. Did you suspect her, that you concealed this from her?

LY. There is but one MILESIA, besides,
Iftrue, I meant her fears should aid
My false disguise, which her quick-sighted Father
Would else have pierced, who hates EVGENIO,
And loves no virtue but what shines through wealth.

LY. My best, best LYSICLES, I am again in love,
Thy holy flame does lend me light to see
My closed fires; why did not Fate give me
So large a field to exercise my Faith?
I envy thee this trial, and would be
Exposed to dangers, that have yet no name,
That I might meet thy love with equal merit.

LY. The cause takes all away, and want of power
Excuses what I cannot yet express too much of me,
But how our loves came to sosad a period,
As yet in clouds I have only seen,

GHO. My Uncles cruelty and hate of you procured our separation.

LY. But how knew he our loves? though torment since
Have wrung it from me, my joys ever flowed silent and calm.

GHO. I know it, but we were betrayed
By one that served me, and the doubts confirmed
By the Moore youspake with yesterday.

LY. Ha? How came she to know it, she was not here.

GHO. All that I ever did she is conscious of,
And jealous of your love unto HERMIONE,
Did place me here, to search into your thoughts,
And now is prouder of this discovery,
Thanifa Crown were added to her.

LY. To what strange Laws does Heaven confine it self,
That it will suffer them that dare be damned
To have power over those it has selected,
My tears and sacrifice could never gain
So much upon its mercy, as to lend
Thy happy sight for one faint minutes comfort:
Yet those that sell themselves to Hell, can force
Thy quiet rest for inquisition on innocence,
And to what purpose serves faith and religious secrecy
When Magic mocks and frustrates all our vows?
This Moore then was confederate with your Uncles passion.

GMO. She is the cause that I do walk in shades.

LY. And I will be, that she shall walk in Hell:
With her I will begin, then seek revenge
Under the ruins of thy Uncles house:
All men that dare to name him, and not curse
His memory, shall feel the power
Ofmy despised hate and friendship.

GHO. My dearest Lysicles, promise to be
But temperate in your anger, and I will
Discover more than you yet hoped to know.
Enter Pindarus and servants.
LY. As justice that is concerned to punish crimes,
I will.

GHO. Then know I was betrayed.
Oh love, here is company, I must retire.

PIN. Talking to graves at night, and making love in the day:
My Lord, I, nor my daughter have deserved this.

LY. Pardon me Sir, I could do no less,
Being to take an everlasting farewell, but give this
Visit to her memory: reserve your censure
Till ten days be over, and if I do not
Satisfy you, condemn me.
Exeunt.
Enter HERMIONE and PHILLIDA. HER, Philly, take thy Lute, and sing the song Was
given thee last. Exeunt. SONG.
VV Here did you borrow that last sigh, and that relenting groan?
For those that sigh, and not for love,
Usurp what is not their own.
Loves arrows sooner armor pierce,
Than your soft snowy skin,
Y our eyes can only teach us love,
But cannot take it in.
Another sigh then I may hope
The Song being ended,
Enter PHILLIDA.
PH. Oh Madam, call all your sorrows to you, you are
Not sad enough to hear the news I bring.

HER. Would it were killing, that my death might end
My fears, as my life has my hopes.

PH. You mistake me Madam, Eugenio is returned.

HE. Eugenio returned? thou have reason, Phillida, I
Should be dead with sorrow: It Is not fit we hear his name
Without a miracle: where is he? send to bring him hither.

PH. He waits on your commands without.

HER. Bring him in.
Good gods, if you can suffer me one minutes joy,
Give it me now, and let excess ofhappinesse
Finish what sorrow cannot. But where is this happiness
I feign would dream of? Eugenio is returned,
That I may look on him, and not be his,
And call our faiths in vain to aid our loves.

Enter EVGENIO and PHILLIDA.
EV. May the gods give you, Madam, a content
As high, as you have power to bestow
On those you favor, and then your happiness
Will be as great as is your beauty.

HE. Oh my best Lord, you now behold a face
Too much acquainted with my sad hearts grief,
Not to be stained with it: sure you cannot know it.
I pray say you do not, you will wrong
Two things I am most proud of, my just grief,
And your young love, which could not grow,
Nourish't with such poor heat as now it gives.
I have a story that will break your heart
When you have heard it, and mine ere I
Deliver it. Prince Lysicks to morrow marries me,
Or I must leave my duty, or my life:
Forgive me that I dare to utter this.

Eu. Madam, forbear your tears, they are a ransom
Too mighty to redeem the greatest faith
The gods were ever witness to. I know
Whereto you tend, you woudl have me untye
The knot that bound our loves, and I will do it,
Though it be fastened to my strings of life:
Be happy in your choice, give to his merit,
What once you promised to my perfect love,
By which I only did pretend my claim:
I do release you, as I know heaven has;
Who in his justice cannot have consented
To a longer faith in you; you must not be
The conquest of a miserable man,
Over whom their cruelst influences reign.

HE. Some saving power close up my drowned eyes,
Which death had long since shut, had not the love
And hope of seeing you preserved them open.
Have I been false for this to all my friends,
That you should think I can be so to you?
Add not by your suspicions a crime to our misfortune.

Eu. Of you I can have none, but what excuse you:
You had made me miserable, had not your faith
Yielded to those assaults; as worth and greatness
Titles your fathers rage, and your own judgment
Did shake and raze it, with what disturbed mind
Should I have looked on you my heart adored,
And love made miserable? still you weep,
But these are tears your fortune did lay up
To ease your misery: had you continned mine,
And your Suns cleared from their last clouds,
They will more freely shine upon your Lysicles:
For my self, my love in his last act shall recompense
The injuries 't as done to your repose
By killing me, then must injustice fly,
And hale inconstancy along with her,
From your fair conquered soul they now possess.

HE. Oh my griefs!
Now I perceive the gods decreed you endless,
Since they have made him add unto my torment,
Whose memory before did make the sharpest, glorious:
Tears, and sighs, and groans farewell:
They never were spent but when I feared for you;
And you being lost I have no use of them.
Here, take this paper, it is the last Legacy
My love shall ever give you: 'twas defign'd
When I conceived you worthy.
If you believe her words, whose faith was never lost,
Though you ungratefully have flung it off,
If so, you be not that you accuse me for, you there shall find
A story that will punish your suspicion.

He reads, and then kweeles, and she turns from him. Eu. You that by
powerful prayers have diverted
An imminent ruin, inspire me with fit words
To appease my injured Mistress; hear me, do not kneel for mercy, but to
beg
Your leave to dye: I must not live
When pardons make my oftence most horrible,
And hell is here without them; take a middle way
If you incline to mercy, and forget me.

HER. Rise, this is worse than your doubts were.
Turn not your face away; would you revenge,
Then let my eyes dwell on it: what punishment
Can there be greater, than for me to see the beauty I have lost
By my own fault? look then upon me.

HER. No, I must yet keep my anger to preserve my honor,
And I dare not trust that, and my eyes at once,
If they behold you.

Eu. Then hear a wretched man, that has outlived
So much his hopes, he knows not what to wish,
Whether to live or die; yet life for this
I only seek, that you may find I shrink not
To punish him your Justice has condemned.

HER. Rise, I can hold out no longer, the bare sounds
Of your death dissolve my resolutions:
Forget my anger, as I will the cause.

Eu. Never, it shall live here to honor me,
Since pirty of my love made you decline it:
But must -- --

HER. Yes, the virtuous Lysicles, for his respects to me,
How'ere unhappy, challenged that name,
In your absence labors to marry me: yet death --

Eu. Wretched Eugenio, did thy coward Fate
Not dare to strike thee, till thou turn'dst thy back:
Must I return from banishment to find
My hopes are banished? Did I for this love Virtue,
Purtued her rugged paths, when danger made
Her horrid to the valiant, to be ruined
By him that is most virtuous? Ye gods,
Was envy, malice, Fortune impotent
To injure me, but you must raise up Virtue
To suppress me -- If I suffer it, I shall deserve it.

HER. Oh my Eugenio, we are miserable,
Yet must not quarrel love, to take or give
A seeming comfort: go try all your power
Of hate or friendship to undo this match,
I Will give you leave to die first: any thing,
But let not me have so much leave to change,
As to believe you think it possible.
Exeunt.
Enter LYSICLES and Servant. SER. The Physician you sent for waits without.

LY. Bring him in, and stay in the next room.
Enter Physician. You are welcome: I must employ your trust and
Secrecy in something that concerns me. You must
Procure me instantly a powerful poison.

PH. My Lord!

LY. Nay, no ceremonies of denial. I give you
My Intents, not to be disputed, but obeyed. I know
You walk not frequently in these rongh ways;
But it is not want of knowledge, but your will,
Makes you decline them.

PH. My Lord, I have observed you long, and see you
Wear your life like something you would feign
Put off. I will not undertake to counsel you, in
That your nearest friends have often attempted,
Without success: yet if my life should issue
With the words I now will utter, I Will boldly tell
Your Grace, I will not be a means to cut your
Days off, to make mine happy ever.

LY. I did expect this from you; and to inform you
Briefly, know, though I do loath my life, I will
Not part with it willingly, till it does serve
Me to revenge my wrongs: and to'assure you more,
I will not use your Art against my self: Let
Your composition procure the greatest torture
Poison can force, for I must use it upon one
Our Laws cannot condemn; because the circumstance
That makes him guilty cannot be produced, but
With expense of time, and my revenge will not admit it.
By my honor this is the cause.

PH. If I were sure your enemies should only try
The effects of what I can do in your service,
The horrid'st tortures Treason e're justified,
Should not exceed the sufferings of those
Should take the poison I can bring you.

LY. Bring it me instantly; and if the pains of Hell
Can be felt here, let your ingredients call them up.
If his life were only my aim and end, whilst
I do wear this, I Would not implore your aid;
But I must set him on the rack, that there he
May confess my inquisition justice.

PH. An hour returns me with your commands
Performed -- yet I Will observe you farther.

LY. So, this is the first degree to my revenge,
Which I will prosecute till I have made
All that were guilty of my loss of peace,
Wash their impiety in their guilty blood.
All places where I meet them shall be Altars,
On which I Will sacrifice the Murderers,
To appease the spirit of my injured Mistress:
And the last Victime I will fall my self
Upon her sacred Tomb, to expiate
The crimes I have committed in deferring
Justice thus long. This cursed Magitian
Shall be the first, she did reveal our loves;
MILESIA said she did; and if it were
Her blessed spirit, nothing but truth dwells in it.
Iftwere a fantosme raised by her foul spells;
She paies the fault of her abusing me,
Insidiating with my MILESIA'S form,
To search, and then betray my resolution
Enter Servant. Of serving my best friend: how now?

SER. Sir, Lord PINDAR us would speak with you.

LY. Where is he?
Exeunt.
ACT. 5. SCAE. 1.
Enter SERVANT, and LYSICLES. SER. Sir, I have waited as you commanded,
Near the house of the Egyptian Lady:
Something is done, that disturbs them all,
Diverse run in and out, Physicians are sent for:
At last, I went in my self, and entered her
Chamber, found her on her bed almost distract
With torture, cries she is poisoned, curses her
Jealousy and curiosity, calls upon your name,
Desires, and then forbids you should be sent for.

LY. But I will come to her confession: courage my soul,
Let no faint pity hinder thee the joys
Thou art receiving, triumph in their sufferings
That have attempted thine: Look down MILESIA,
Applaud my piety, that snatched the sword
From sleeping Justice, to revenge thy death.
Exit.
SER. What means my Lord to be pleased with this
Sad news? how can this stranger have offended him?
I Will follow, learn the issue, and the cause.
Exit.
Enter the MOORE on her bed, HERMIONE, PHILLIDA, and IRENE. The bed thrust out.
MOO. Oh, oh, oh, gods! if I have merited your hate,
You might have laid it on until my name
Had been a word to express full misery,
And I had thanked you, if you had forborne
To make his innocence the instrument
Of your dire wrath. HERMIONE, IRENE,
I have conjured my servants not to tell you
When I am dead, who I was: but if
Their weakness shall discover't, let it be hid
From the best Lysicles: I burn, I burn,
And death dares not to ceaze me, frighted
With the furies that torment me.

HER. Mysterious powers! instruct us in the way
You would be served, for we are ignorant;
Your Thunder else would not be aimed at those
That follow virtue, as it is prescribed,
Whilst thousand others escape unpunished,
Enter LYSICLES. That violate the Laws we are taught to keep.

LY. What mean these sad expressions of sorrow?

HER. Oh my Lord, Nature had not made our hearts
Capable of pity, if we forbear it here:
The virtuous Acanthe has been tormented
With pains, nothing is able to express
But her own groans: she fears she is poisoned,
Talks of you, of Tombs, and of Milesia,
And in the midst of all her torture
Says, her distrust and jealousy deserves a greater punishment.

LY. And I beleev't, nor should you pity her:
Those that do trace forbidden paths of knowledge
The gods reserve unto themselves, do never do it,
But with intent to ruin the believers,
And venterers on their Art: Something I know
O'th'curs'd effects of her commanding Magic,
And she (no doubt) is conscious to her self
Of infinite more mischiefs than are yet revealed.
I am confident she is fled her Country
For the ills she has done there, and now
The punishment has overta'ne her here:
And for her shows of Virtue, they are Masks
To hide the rottenness that lies within,
And gain her credit with some dissembled acts
Of piety, which levells her a passage
To those important mischiefs, Hell
Has employed her here to execute.

MOO. Oh gods, deny me not a death, since you
Have given me the tortures that devance it:
If I deserve this, your inflicting hands
Do reach unto the shades, lay it on there,
Hermioue, Jrene, is Eysicles yet come?

LY. Yes, to counsel you to pacify
The gods you have offended by your cursed Arts:
The blessed Ghost you sent me too, has told me
Some sad effects on it, and in her name,
And cause, have the gods hurled this punishment
On thy foul soul, and made my grief enraged
To madness, the blessed instrument of thy destruction,
Which does but here begin.

MO. You then did send the poison, with the Present I received?

LY. Yes, I did; and wonder you durst tempt
My just revenge, unless you did believe
You could confine the Revelations
Of the best spirits, your cursed Charms
Betrayed first, and then enforced to leave
Their happy seats, to perfect the designs
Your malice labored in.

MOO. What unknown ways have the gods invented
To punish me! I feel a torment
No tyranny e'reparalell'd, yet must confess
An obligation to him that imposed it.
Good gods! if I do bow under your wills,
Without repining at your sad decrees,
Grant this to recompense my Martyrdom,
That he that is the Author of my sufferings,
May never learn his error.
Sir, if torments e're could expiate the crimes
We have committed, mine might challenge your pardon
And your pity: I feel Death entering me;
Love the memory of your Mylesia, and forgive --

IR. Help, help, she dies.

LY. If it be possible, call life into her for some minutes,
Her full confession will obsolve my Justice.

IR. Bring some water here, she does but swoone:
So chafe her Temples, -- Oh Heavens! what prodigy
Is here! her blackness falls away: My Lord, look on
This Miracle, does not Heaven instruct us in pity
Ofher wrongs, that the opinions which prejudice
Her virtue, should thus be washed away with the
Black clouds that hide her purer form?

HER. Heaven has some further ends in this
Than we can pierce: More water, she returns to life,
And all the blackness of her face is gone.

IR. PALLAS, APOLLO, what may this portend? My Lord,
Have you not seen a face like this?

LY. Yes, and horror ceazeth me: It Is the Idea
Of my Milesia. Impenetrable powers,
Deliver us in Thunder your intents,
And exposition of this Metamorphosis.

HER. She stirs.

LY. Hold her up gently -- He kneeles.

MOO. Oh, oh; why do you kneel to me:

LY, Are not you MILESIA?

MOO. Why do you ask?

LY. Oh then you are.

MOO. My Lysicles, I am by miracle preserved,
Though since the gods repent them of their succors.
Knowing me unworthy of thy firm constant love:
I never thought that death could be a terror
Too long acquainted with the miseries
Pursue our lives, but now the apprehension
My grave should swallow thee, makes me to welcome it
With a heaviness that sinkes dispairing sinners.

LY. Power down your Thunder gods, upon this head,
And try if that can make me yet more wretched:
Was not her death affliction enough,
But you must make me be the murderer?
Is this a punishment for adoring her
Equal with you, you made so equail to ye?
Pardon the fault you forced me to commit:
So visible a Divinity could not be loo'd on
With less adoration.

MOO. If e're I did expect a happier death,
May I dye loathed: what Funeral pomp
Can there be greater, than for me to hear
Whilst I yet live, my dying Obsequies
With so much zeal pronounced by him I love?
Tortures again do seize me.

LY. Eyes, are you dry where such an object calls
Your tears forth -- My blood shall supply your place.

MO. For heavens sake hold his hands: O my best Lysicles,
Do not destroy the comforts of my soul;
What a division do I feel within me!
I am but half tormented, my soul in spite
O'th'tortures of my body, do feel a joy
That meets departed spirits in the blessed shades --

LY. What unexpected mischiefs circle me,
What Arts has malice, armed with Fortune, found
To make me wretched? could I e're have thought
A Miracle could have restored thee to my eyes,
But they should see the joys of Heaven in thee?
Yet now the height of my affliction is,
That they behold thee guilty of the close
Of thine for ever: see HERMIONE,
The countenance Death should put on, when Death
Would have us throng unto her Palaces,
And court her frozen Sepulchers.

IR. Sure she is dead: how pale she is!

LY. No: she is white as Lillies, as the Snow
That falls upon PARNASSVS; if the Red were here,
As I have seene't enthroned, the rising day
Would get new excellence by being compared to her:
ARGOS, nor CYPRVS, EGYPT never saw
A beauty like to this; let it be lawful for me to usurp
So much on Deaths right, as to take a kiss
From thy cold Virgin-lips, where she and Love
Yet strive for Empire: the flames that rise from hence,
Are not less violent, though less pleasing now,
Than when she did consent I should receive
What now I ravish.

MO. Dares not Death shut those eyes where love
Has entered once, or am I in the shades
Assisted with the Ghost of my dear Lysicles?

LY. She speaks again: good Heaven, she speaks again!

HE. You are yet living.

MO. And therefore dying, but before I go
Let me obtain your pardon for the wrongs
My jealousy has thrown upon your innocence.
'T was my too perfect knowledge of my want
Of merits to deserve, made me doubt yours:
I mean your constant love, which I will teach
Below, and make them learn again to love,
Who have dyed for it.

LY. Do not abuse your mercy and my grief,
By asking pardon of your murderer,
But curse your sufferings off, on this devoted head,
To save the beauty of the world in you.

MO. Why should your grief make me repent the joys
I ever begged of heaven? the knowledge
Of your love, could there be added more
Unto my happiness, than to be confirmed
By my own sufferings how much you did love me,
And prosecuted those that desired my ruin?
Like Semele I dye, who could not take
The full god in her arms.
I have but one wish more, that I may bear
Unto the shades the glorious title of your wife:
If I may live so long to hear but this
Pronounced by Lysicles, I dye in peace.

LY. Hear it with my vows, not to behold
The Sun rise after you are gone.

MO. O say not so, live, I command you live;
Let your obedience unto this command,
Show you have lost a Mistress.

LY. Can I hear this, and live?

IR. My Lord, our cares will be employed better,
In seeking to avert this Ladies death,
Than in deploring it.

LY. You advise well: run all to the Physician:
I Will my self to Arnaldo, who gave
This poison to me. Let me have word sent to the
Cypress grove, the minute she is dead.
Exeunt. Draw in the bed.
Enter Lysicles meditating. LY. If Life be given as a blessing to us,
What Law compels us to preserve it longer,
Than we can see a possibility
Of being happy by it? But we must expect
Till the same power that placed us here, commands
A restitution of his gift: This is indeed a rule
To make us live, but not live happily.
It Is true, the slave that frees himself by death
Does wrong his Master: but yet the gods are not
Necessitous of us, but we of them.
Who then is injured if I kill my self?
And if I durst to hear their voice, they call
Men to some other place, when they remove
The gust, and taste of this, we should adore thee death,
If constant virtue, not inforcement built
Thy spacious Temples.
Enter EVGENIO. Welcome Eugenio, welcome worthy friend,
How long are you arrivd?

Eu. Time enough to revenge, though not prevent
The injuries you have done me.

LY. What means my friend?

Eu. I must not hear that name now, you have lost
The effects and virtue of it: I come to punish
Your breach of faith.

LY. Is Hell affeard my constancy should conquer
The mischiefs that are raised to swallow me,
That it invents new plagues to batter me?
By all that is holy, I never did offend my friend,
Not in a thought.

Eu. Those that by breach of vows provoke their justice,
Do seldom fear profaning of their names,
To hide their perjuries will put it on them.
You have attempted my Hermione,
And forced her father to compel her voice
Unto your Marriage.

LY. All this I do confess; but 'twas for both your goods,
As I will now inform you.

Eu. Hell and furies: because your specious titles,
Your spreading Vineyards, and your gilded house
Do shine upon our Cottage, must our faiths,
Which Heaven did seal, be cancelled; 'twas my virtue
VVonne her fair graces, which still outshine
Your flames of vice.

LY. It has not light enough to let you see your friend.
Gods! Could that man have lived, that dared to say,
Eugenio did suspect his Lysicles?
And now in pity you do show him me,
That I may fly the world without regreet,
Not leaving one of worth behind me in it.
Begone, and learn your errors.

Eu. I have don't already: they were trusting you
With my life's happiness: draw, and restore the vows
You made Hermione, or I will leave you dead,
And tear them from your heart.

LY. Fond man, thou do not know how much it is in
My power to make thee miserable:
I could now force thee execute my wish
In killing me; and thou would fly the light,
When it had showed thee whom thy rage offended:
But till I fall by my own hand, my life
Is chained unto my honor, which I will wear
Upon my Sepulcher: nor must I die,
Being guilty of Milesia's murder,
For any cause but hers, else were my breast,
Since you have wronged me, open to your point.

Eu. Can you deny but that you have attempted
The faith of my Hermione?

LY. I can, with so strong circumstance of truth
Would make you blush for have doubted mine;
But he that was my friend, and suspects me,
Must attend less satisfaction than a stranger.
Proceed, and let your case be both your judge and guide.

Eu. What should I do? I dare not trust my sense,
If he should tell me that it does deceive me:
Virtue it self would lose her quality
E're he forsook her, and his words do fall
Distorted from him; his soul does labor
Under some heavy burden, which my passion
Did hinder me from seeing. Sir forgive,
Or take your full revenge; let your own griefs
Teach you to pity those are distract with it:
I will not rise until you pardon me.

LY. Oh my Eugenio, thy kindness has undone me,
My rage did choke my grief, which now did spread
It self over my soul and body: up, and help
To bear me till I fall eternally.

Eu. Who can hear this, and not be turned to Marble?
Good Sir impart your sorrows, I may bring comfort.

LY. Whilst they were capable thou did, but now
They are too great and swollen to let it in.
Milesia, Whom you and J supposed dead,
By me to day is poisoned, and lies dying in her torment;
Is not this strange?

Eu. What have you said that is not?
But heaven avert this last.

LY. It is too late now; let me beg thy kindness
Would do that for me, J forbad thy passion.

Eu. What is it?

LY. Kill me.

Eu. You cannot wish me such an hated office:
Call up your reasons and your courage to you,
Which was not given you only for the wars,
But to resist the batteries of Fortune.
People will say, that Lysicles did want
Part of that courage Fame did speak him Lord of,
When they shall hear him sunk below her succor.

LY. You will not kill me then?

Eu. When I believe there is no other means to ease you,
I will do it.

LY. All but death are fled.

Eu. Then draw your sword, and as J lift my arm
To sheath this in your breast, let yours pierce me,
On this condition J may do your will.

LY. J may not for the world: why should you die?

Eu. See how your passions blind you; is Death
An ease or torment? if it be a joy,
Why should you envy it your dearest friend?

LY. Our causes are not equal.

Eu. They will be when you are dead: How you mistake
The Laws of Friendship and commit those faults
You did accuse me of! J would not live so long
To think you can survive your dying friend.

LY. Eugenio I am conquered, yet I hoep thy kindness
Will do that for me, which thy sword refuses:
Love thy Hermione, she deserves it friend:
Leave me alone a while.

Eu. Your griefe's too great for me to trust your life with it:
I dare not venture you beyond my help.
Within. Where Is Prince Lysicles? where is Prince Lysicles?

LY. Hark, I am called, the fatal news is come.
Draws.
Eu. Fie; how unmanly's this? Can sounds affright you,
Which yet you know not whether they do bring
Or joys, or sorrows? when remedies are despaired of,
You have still leave to dye; perhaps she lives,
And you will exhale her soul into your wounds,
And be the death of her you mourn for living.
Within. Where Is Prince Lysicles? where is Prince Lysicles?

Eu. It is the voice of comfort, none would strive
To be a sad relator; I Will call him, holla, here he is.

Enter a Servant. SER. The strange Lady kisses your hands, my Lord: Arnaldo
Has restored her; she bad me say, your sight can only
Give perfection to what he has begun.

Eu. Will you dye now?

LY. Softly, good friend, gently let it slide
Into my breast; my hearts too narrow yet
To take so full a joy in: You're sure this news is true?

SER. On my Life.

Eu. Why should you doubt it?

LY. My comforts ever were like Winter Suns,
That rise late, and set betimes, set with thick Clouds
That hide their light at noone: but be this true,
And I have life enough to let me see it:
I shall be ever happy.

Eu. So, it is well, at length his hope has taught despair to fear.
Exeunt.
Enter Milesia, Hermione, Irene, Physician. PHY. Madam, my innocence will plead
my pardon; I could
Not guess for whom my Lord intended it; the truth is,
I feared, considering his deep melancholy, he
Intended to use it on himself, and therefore meant to
Make him out of love with death, by suffering the pains
Our souls do feel when they are violenc'd from us.
I had provided Antidotes, but could not, till this hour,
Learn on whom it was employed: sure I was, it could
Be death to none, though full of torment.

MI. Till I have farther means, thank you; receive this ring.

HE. But Madam, what did your poor Hermione deserve,
That you should hide your self from her?
Or are you the Milesia that were pleased
To call me friend? or is she buried
By Pallas Temple? truly belief and memory
Opposing sense, makes doubt which to credit:
I wept you dead, the Virgins did intombe you:
Were we then or no deceived?

MI. My fair dear friend, you shall know all my story.
It Is true, my Uncle did design my death
For loving Lysicles, for at his coming hither
He charged me by all ties that were between us,
To hate him as the ruin of his honor,
And yet for some dark ends I understood not,
Resolved to leave me here. I swore obedience,
But knew not what offense it was to keep
An oath so made, till I had seen the Lysicles,
Which at your house I did; when he came wounded
From hunting of the Boar, all but his name
Appeared most god-like to me; you all did run
To stop his wounds, and I thought I might see
My enemies blood; yet soon did pity ceaze me
To see him bleed: thus, love taking the shape
Of pity, glided unseene of me into my heart,
And whilst I thought my self but charitable,
I nursed my infant love with milk of pity
Till he grew strong enough to take me prisoner.
I found his eyes on mine, and ere I could
Remove them, heard him say, he'de thank his fortune
For this last wound: if'twere the cause
Of seeing me; then took his leave,
But left me speechless that I could not say,
My heart farewell: after this visit our loves
Grew to that height that you have heard of.

HER. The Groves, and Temples, and dark shade have heard
Them mourned, and celebrated by your friend.

MI. I had a servant unsuspected of me,
For none I trusted that observed our meetings,
And ghessing by my sighs that love had made them,
Betrayed them to my Uncle; on PALLAS Eve
He rusht into my Chamber, his sword drawn,
And snacht me by the arm: I fell down,
But knowing yet no fault, could beg no pardon.
A while our eyes did only speak our thoughts;
At length out of his bosom he pulled out
A paper, 'twas the contract 'twixt my Lord and me:
And ask't me if I would avow the hand.
Heaven said I, has approved it, and the gods
Have chose this way to reunite our houses;
Stain of thy kindreds honor, he exclaimes:
Was there no other man to ease your lust
But he that was our greatest enemy.
Resolve to dye, thy blood shall hide the stains
Of our dishonor.

HER. He could not be so cruel to intend it.

MI. He was: for leaving me oppressed with sighs
And tears; yet not of sorrow and repentance,
But fear that I should lose my dearest servant,
Commands his cruel slaves to murder me
As I descended: and least pity should
Create remorse in their obdurate hearts,
The lights were all put out: then hastily
My name was heard; I then entreated her
That betrayed me, tell them I was coming,
And took this time to write unto my Lord:
She went, but by the way was ceaz'd,
And strangled by those murderers
That expected me. My Uncle heard
Her latest groans; and now the act was past,
His power to help, he wished it were undone:
Brings lights to see the body, and perceived
The strange mistake: by signs and lifted eyes
Confessed Heavens hand was in it; yet would not leave
His revenge here, commands his slaves to change
My clothes with hers was slain; then takes the head off,
And on the Trunk did leave a note, which told
My death for loving LYSICLES, in hope my ruin:
Knowing his noble nature would be his.
At midnight quits this Town, leaving none behind
Were conscious of the fact, immures me in his house
Till I escapt in that disguise I wore,
When I first came to you.

IR. Why did you not declare your self when you came hither?

MI. You were the cause on it: at my arrival here,
I heard my LYSICLES should marry you,
And therefore kept the habit I was in,
To search unknown the truth of this report,
And practiced in the private actions of some near friends,
Got an opinion I could presage
The future: thus was I sought by you,
Thus found the faith of my dear LYSICLES,
When at the Tomb I did appear his ghost,
And had revealed my self, had not the shame
Of doubting such a faith, kept my desires in.

HER. Then he dissembled when he made love to me?

MI. He did: forgive it him, 'twas for his friend.

HER. I am sorry for it.

MI. How my dear friend?

HER. Nay, it is true,
Enter LYSICLES. and EVGENIO.
EVGENIO and he are of such equal tempers,
I shall suspect he has dissembled too.
MI. Oh you are pleasant;
Here comes my Lord.

LY. Is there a wish beyond this happiness,
When I embrace thee thus? I will not ask
Thy Story now, it is enough to know
That you are living.

MI. The gods have made this trial in my sufferings,
If I deserved so great a blessing:
I have but one grief left.

LY. Is that word yet notearth?

MI. Yes, but it springs from an excessive joy
Of finding such admired worth in you.
What I hereafter shall do in your service,
Must wear the name of Gratitude, not Love.

LY. No my MILESIA,
Mine was the first engagement, and the gods
Made thee so excellent to keep on earth
Love that was flying hence, finding no object
Worthy to fix him here.

HER. No more EVGENIO, if your words could add
Expressions to your love, you had not had
So much of mine; and after I have tried
Your faith so many ways, it would appear
Ingratitude not modesty to show a Mistress coldness.

EU. May I believe, all advantageous words,
Or may I doubt them, seeing they come from you
Who are all truth? I will not speak
How undeserving I am of these favors,
Because I will not wrong the Election
Your gracious pity forces on your Judgment.

LY. Our joys do multiply; but my dear friend,
I have yet something that will add to yours:
My Father's called to Court, and you are left
Governor in his place; this (I know) will make
Lord PINDARVS consent to both your wishes,
Your pardon Madam, and when you lie embraced
With your EVGENIO, tell him, if my faith
Had not the double tie of Friend and Mistress.
A single one had yielded to the hopes
Enter Of the enjoying you: Here comes my Lord -- PINDARVS.
Oh my good Lord, I must entreat your pardon
For a fault my love unto my friend engaged me in:
Let your consent complete the happiness
Of these two perfect Lovers; I am confident
You ever did approve his virtue: his fortune now
Can be no hinderance, since our gracious King
In contemplation of his merits,
Has made him Governor in my Fathers place.

PIND. Most willingly I give it, since I have lost
The hopes of being allied to you,
Heaven bless you both.
Sir, your own love of my HERMIONE,
And yours now, will teach you to admit
An easy satisfaction for the troubles
My love unto my Child has thrown upon you.

EU. You are all goodness, and my services
Ever directed by your will, shall show,
Though I can never merit this great honor,
I will do nothing shall deprive me of
The honor of your love and favor.

PIND. Your virtue promises more than I may hear
From you: once more Heaven bless you.
If my Lord ERGASTO now were satisfied,
I shall be at peace; for having promised
My Daughter to him, I would not have him
Think that by me he is injured.

HER. It Is in your power Sir, to satisfy him.

PIND. I would do any thing.

HER. Persuade my Cozen to confess she loves him,
Which I do know she does, and he already
Has made profession of his, unto my prejudice:
Nay blush not Cozen, since you would not allow me
This secret as a friend, you may excuse
The inquifitivenesse of a rival.

MI. This is all truth my Lord, I can assure you.

PIND. Is It possible, IRENE, do you love ERGASTO?

IR. Me thinks your experience, Uncle, should teach you,
That such a question was not to be ask't:
Well, if I did love him, 'twas because I thought
That he loved me; but if he does not, I pardon him:
For I am certain he once believed it himself.

PIND. If ever love make any deep impression
In you, I am deceived.

IR. His Dart may strike as far into me
As into another for ought you know Uncle.

PIND. You have ill luck else Niece.

Enter PHORMIO, ERGASTO, CLEON. PHO. Nay, it is most certain the Town is full
of it:
MILESIA, I know not how, is alive again:
EVGENIO is made Governor; though you were constant,
You can have no longer hopes of HERMIONE:
Therefore let me advise you, make that seem
Your own Election, which will else be Inforcement:
Quit your Interest in HERMIONE, and renew
Your suite to IRENE.

ER. Observe me.

PIND. Welcome my Lords, do you know this Lady?

ER. Most perfectly, and came to congratulate
With the Prince, for her double recovery.

LY. I thank you my Lord, and when my friend and you
Are reconciled, you may assure your self
I am your servant.

ER. What Is in my power to give him satisfaction:
He may command.

Eu. Your friendship does it.

PIN. my Lord, this reconcilement will make way unto my
Pardon, I have not been wanting in my promise
To you; but my daughter thinks she has chosen
So well, that without any leave, she has made her
Self, her own disposer.

ER. Ages of happiness attend them: If I may hope to
Gain the graces of the fair IRENE, I shall be happy too.

PIN. If I have any power, she shall be yours.

LY. Let me beg the honor of interceding: your fortunes
And condition are so equal, it were a sin to part you.

PH. Pray Sir, let him do it himself: the task is not
So hard, to require a Mediator.

IR. Have you such skill in perspective?

PH. As good as any Chyromancer's in Egypt Madam.

ER. He has reason, for I have opened my breast to him,
And he has seen my heart, and you enthroned in it.

PH. He tells you true Lady.

IR. Indeed Sir: and pray what did it look like?

PH. Faith to deal truly, much like the wheel of Fortune,
Which turning round, puts the same persons
Sometimes at top, sometimes at bottom: but at last
Love shot his dart thorough the Axel-tree,
And fixed you Regent.

IR. Well, I have considered, and my Cozens
Example shall teach me.

ER. What in the name of doubt?

IR. To avoid the infinite troubles you procured her by your
Fruitless solicitations: do you think your tears shall cost
Me so many tears, as they have done her?

PIN. You may excuse them by consenting
To your friends desires.

MI. Sweet Madam, let me obtain this for him:
He dies if you deny him.

HER. Dear IRENE, perfect the happiness of this day.

IR. You have great reason to persuade me
To take him you abhorred.

HER. I was engaged.

IR. Well, if any here will pass their words
He can continue constant a week, I will
Be disposed by you.

OMNES. We all will be engaged for him.

IR. On this condition I admit him to a Months service,
And my self to a perpetual servitude.

ER. I ever shall be yours.

IR. My father said so, till my mother wept.

Eu. A notable woing this.

LY. And as notably finished.
Let Us now unto my father,
Who expects you to deliver his Commission to you.
Come my MILESIA, tell my wounded heart
No more, her sighs shall wander through the air
Not knowing where to find thee: nor no more
Shall the mistaken Tomb of false ONONE
Be moistened with my tears; yet since she dyed
To save thy life, her ghost could not expect
A cheaper sacrifice: this I Will only add
In memory of us, All Lovers shall
Repute this day, as their great Feastivall.

FINIS.

