A TRVE AND BRIEF RELATION OF The Bloody Battle fought four days, and four
nights together: Between Duke BERNARD van VVimeren, Victour: And JOHN de
Weerdt, With the Duke of Savelli, both Imperial Generals, Who were utterly
overthrown and beaten. Translated out of Authentic Letters, as well out of the
Duke of Wimeren his own Letter, as another written to a great Lord from Basil.

LONDON, Printed by E. G. for Henry Overton: And are to be sold at his shop in
Pope's Head Alley, near Lumbard-street. 1638.

The Translation. BERNARD, by the Grace of God Duke of Saxony.
WE doubt not but your Excellency is informed, how that the Enemy, on Sunday
last being the 18. of February old Style, marched with his whole power four
days, and four nights one after another, and came with a great fury, and
noise falling upon us, when we had not all our Troops together, with a
resolution to relieve Rhyns-field, and to raise our siege.

Nevertheless we found our selves in such a state, that we durst make head
against him, and attend his coming, and fought hard all that day, not knowing
who should have the better of it; notwithstanding this long dispute, the enemy
lost many more men than we did, and because the enemy drew on, and the night
overtooke us, both sides held the field; but we marched the same night up
toward Loopenburch, to join with our Regiments, which lay on the other side
of the Rhine. And on Tuesday after (in the name of God) we marched again
directly upon the Enemy, and gave him a brave charge.

And so upon Wednesday between Bucken and Rhyns-field, the Enemy drawing into
battle, we fell upon them so hotly, breaking their Battalions, that it
pleased the Almighty God to cast his gracious eye upon us, and to give us a
brave Victory over our Enemies. In which battle we took not only both the
Generals of the Emperors Army, namely, the Duke de Savelli, and John de
Weerdt, and likewise two Sergeant Major Generals of the Army, to wit,
Erckefort, Speerruyter, but also all the Colonells and Lieutenant Colonells
with other Officers, yea all (saving those that were slain) most of them
Horsemen; and all their Foot are taken Prisoners: yea so many that there
escaped none, but Lieutenant Colonel Lamboy; besides a great number of
Standards, Colors and Cornets, given into our hands, with others brought unto
us every day.

This blessing over our Arms, which it has pleased the Almighty God
graciously to give us, we hope by his help it may tend to the deliverance of
many poor afflicted and distressed people, but especially for the good and the
strengthening of the Arms of the Kingdom of Sweden, and for the succouring of
many others, which serve under the Command of the Lord Marshall Bannier, as
likewise for the good of our dear Country, and to the comfort of the
oppressed Churches in it, that profess the Gospel, which we hope may tend to
the restoration thereof again.

We have therefore cause from the bottom of our hearts, to render thanks,
glory and praise unto Almighty God for this great and extraordinary benefit,
that it will please him to continue his fatherly help and assistance more and
more unto us, and to bless, govern, and direct by his good providence our
designs, that they may all tend to the glory of his holy Name, for the good of
the Kingdom of Swethland and the State of the Evangelicall League, that at
last we may obtain that long desired peace.

Given at Bucken Febr. 23. Stilo Antiquo. 1638. BERNARD.

A LIST of the Emperors Officers, Men, Colors, Standards, which Duke BERNARDS
men took from them in the Battle by Rhyne-field, Feb. 21. 1638. Stilo Antiquo.
THe General the Duke de Savelli. The General John de Weerdt. Sergeant Major
General Erkefort. Serjant Major General Speerruyter. The Earl of
Furstenberg. Colonel Nieuwenich. Colonel Goldt. Colonel Hendricksheyne.
Lieutenant Colonel de Colli. Lieutenant Colonel Sennaff. Lieutenant Colonel
Belle. Sergeant Major Kiannus. The chief Sergeant Major Anthony de Weerdt. 9
Horse Captains. 12 Lieutenants. 12 Foot Captains. 10 Cornets. 14 Ensign
bearers. 2 Adjcutants. 2 Quartermasters. 21 Corporalls. 42 Standards or
Cornets. 22 Foot Colors. 3 Regiment Speeces. 800 Horsemen. 1200 Foot all taken
prisoners.
They had no baggage nor Ordinance with them.

Upon the Emperors side were slain these Chiefes Officers and Soldiers
following.
The Commander Wolligh. The Commander Stovenfoole. The Commander Gerthansen. 3
Sergeant Majors. 7 Horse Captains. 9 Foot Captains. 12 Lieutenants. 9
Ensigns. 500 Private Soldiers.
On the Swedes side were slain.
John Philips Rhyne-Grave. The Horse Captain Bansted, and 150 private
Soldiers. Hurt. The Duke of Rohan. The Commander Lellerton. Prisoners. The
Commander Erlach. The Commissary General Scavilliski, and Lieutenant Colonel
Pennenergh.
Yesterday the 25. of February Old Style, Duke Bernard strongly besieged
Rhynefield again on both sides. The Governor of Rhinefield will listen to no
composition; It will go hard with him. The Duke has sent the Duke of Savelli,
and John de Weerdt in his coach to Lauffenburg, and the two Sergeant Major
Generals rode on horseback. Lieftenant Colonel Wyndenhem is sent from the
Duke to the King of France, with Standards, Colors, and Cornets.

The Confirmation of the abovesaid Letter written out of Basil. the 23 of Feb.
1638. truly translated out of High dutch.
I Cannot omit to give your Lordship to understand by these, the great Victory,
which Duke Bernard Wymer has got over the Imperiallists. Last Sunday about two
of the Clock in the afternoon John de Weerdt, the Duke de Savelli, the Earl
of Furstenbergh, and Speerruyter came with nine Regiments of Horse, two
Regiments of Dragoones, two Companies of Crabats, and two thousand Foot (among
which there were many Swartwaldish Pesants) through the Swartwalde to Bucken by
Rhynefield, with intent to fall upon the Duke of Wymer in Bucken unawares. But
the Duke having got intelligence of their coming, rose with six Regiments of
horse, and six hundred Musketeers, to meet the Enemy, and fought with them
till evening, many men falling on both sides, but the most on the Dukes side,
in regard he was much weaker than the Enemy; for a great many of his men being
sent abroad to get intelligence of the Enemy. Whereupon he presently quitted
the siege of Rhynefield, and gathered all his men and Ordinance together, to
make a head against the Enemy, which were quartered upon the hills, having but
little forage and victuals with them, because of the mountains; so that in
regard of the shortness of the time, they could not bring much along with
them. About the midst of the last week, at the break of the day, John de
Weerdt brake up again, and for want of forage was driven to march toward
Friburgh, whereupon Duke Barent took some Ordinance along with him, and went
to encounter the Enemy, and met with him not far from Rhynefield at Overwylen,
and fell upon them with such a fury, routed and beat them so, that it is
thought there is not above four hundred men left of them escaped, taking all
their Standards, Cornets, Horse and foot Colors; so that every one of the
Dukes soldiers got two three or four prisoners: Also all their Chiefes and
Officers, as John de Weerdt, the Duke of Savelli, Furstenbergh, Speerruyter,
Sergeant Major General Erkefort, all taken prisoners; so that the Wimerish
account this a greater Victory than the Battle of Nordelingen. For verily it
is a great and a brave Victory, that three Generals of the Emperors at a
time, and in one Battle should be overthrown and taken prisoners. There were
slain dead upon the place 2500 men, besides many that were cut in pieces by
the Turn pikes.

The number of prisoners taken on the Emperors side are accounted to be above
two thousand, but there are not many lost on the Dukes side; among the which
there was the Rhyne-grave John Philips, the Commander Bredendorf, Scavilliski,
and the Chiefetaine Erlach carried prisoners into Rhyne-field, which by taking
in of the town will be all set at liberty: For Duke Bernard has besieged the
Town again with all earnestness, and hopes in a short time to become master
of it. The Imperiallists were two to one, which is accounted a brave business
among the Wimerish to beat their enemies so all to pieces.

These were those of the Emrours side, Nine Regiments of Horse, to wit.
LAmboyes Curassiers. Walloes Harquebusiers. Gelins Curassiers. Horst. Harqueb.
Nyenech Harq. Metternicks Harquebusiers. John de Weerdts own Regim. Harq.
Belle Curassiers. Wolf Dragoniers.
The four Foot Regiments were these.
The Regiment of Waal. Gold. Papenheym, and Hendrickeson.

The two Regiments of the Crabats betook them to their heels, because they
feared they should have no quarter.


