AN ADMONITION TO the Town of Callays.
When as I call to remembrance how many ways God has sought, England
straieth from the gospel, and Callays folloueth the same.
to induce the to repe^ta^ce (O Callays, thou town of mine educatio^) and on
the other side thine indurate rebellion, and hypocritical dissimulation in
folowinge the footsteppes of thy mother England, I cannot but with tears
lament thine emyne^t destruction, Lam. 1.
as the Prophet Jeremy bewailed the subuersio^ of his Cite Jerusalem. God has
fought almeants to call Callays to repentance.
For what thing has god done in times paste to other cou^ntries and towns to
call the^ to repentance, that he has nor performed the like unto the, and to
thy murmuringe mother, with a great deal more? Mat. II.
Has he not (as the proverb pronou^ceth) piped unto the pleasant so^ges, and
yet thou haste not rejoiced? Luc. 7.
Has he not also played unto the morninge notes, and yet thou have not
lamented? O what a melodious harmony was the swear so^ge of his holy gospel in
thine ears, coupled with the sice re ministratio^ of his holy Sacraments, and
that under the autorite of a most tuouse and innocent king? Hon Callais has
rejoiced at the prechige of the gospel.
But how dideste thou rejoice thereat? For sothe in the liberty of the flesh e
and nor in the fredome of the spirit. For under the title of that spiritual
melody, the carnal man reioiced in his carnalite: the couitouse, in his
couitousnes: the Extorsioner, in his extorsio^: The vviced make the gospel a
clock for their vvichednes
the a^bitious, in his a^bitio^: the dro^kard, in his dro^kenes: the Proud, in
his Pride: the Adulterer, in his Adultery, in maki^ge the same a cloak for
their impiety. Where as they should have reioiced in a spiritual joy
laudi^ge the lord that so lovingly in the mids of darcknes and ignora^cie
had visited the^ with the light of his gospel. But when as God save that this
his benignite did no thing move thy mother, nor yet the, to rejoice in the
praise of his name, God for in: gratitude takes a way his gospel and sends
papistry.
and in the amendme^t of thy life. Then thought he it high time to take from
you the pipe of mirth and co^solatio^, and to send the morni^ge song of
sorrow and lame^tatio^. For instead of his gospel he has sent you papistrie:
instead of his holy Sacraments, the blasphemus mass, For a christian Kige,
god gives an Idolatrous Queen. 3. Reg. 18.
and unsay sacrefice of the bredde^ god: and instead of a most christian
king, a most wicked and idolatrous Queen. A very Iezabel, that is, a frinde
to Baal and his pristes, and an utter enemy to god and his people. Yea a
another Athalia, that is, an utter distroier of her own kinerede, 4. reg. 11.
kingdom and country, a hater of her own subjects, a lo of strangers, and
an unnatural stepdame both unto the and to thy mother England. This is the
morninge song that the lord now sings unto the, O thou unkind Callais. But
how do thou morn there at? Forsooth eve^ as before thou did rejoice. For
as before thou did conuarte thy joy from a spiritual into a carnal
reioicinge, eue^ so now where as thou should mourn in sprite, in bewailinge
thy sins, ingratitude and infidelite, in repe^tinge and tourni^ge unto the
lord, who seeks al means to reclaim the. Thou mournest in the flesh with
the Gergesites rather for the loss of thy hogs, Mat. 8. Mar. 5. Luc. 8.
thine earthly co^modites, which Satan in his tyra^nous instruments has, and
his like to take a way from the, the^ for the departure of Christ, his word
and sacraments. Callais morneth for fere of temporal plages and not for her
sines as did king Achab for the death of Naboth, Luc. 19. Esa. 5.
Thou mournest rather for the temporal plages which presently thou felest, and
greater forscest to follow, the^ for any desire thou have of the kingdom of
god, and the florishi^ge prosperity of the same, which now is taken away for
thine ingratitude, and for not knowinge the time of thy visitatio^. And
therefore most justly has the lord broken down the hedge of the English
church and made it a pray to the Romish bore, and his sweinishe papistical
pigges, which now unmercifully wroteth up the roots and branches thereof, in
defili^ge it with the stinki^ge dou^ge of dissaiuable doctrine, and instead of
sweet smelli^ge flowers does pla^te therein the odiouse wedes of idolatry and
hypocrisy. The which so ple^tifully spri^geth up at this present, that or it
be long, it will be through ripe for the sickle of the lords indignation. Apoc.
14.
For the tares of satan with i^ these and. years sowe^ i^ the and thy mother,
Mat. 13.
has brought forth more plenty of increse, the^ did the good seade of the
gospel in 7. years before. O lamentable alteration. Who ever would have
supposed (O Callais) that thou being so perfitly planted in the ple^tiful
knowledge of the itie, Callais instead of grapes brings forth thorns. Math.
21. Esa. 5.
and so se^siblie hedged about with the sin cere understanding of the gospel,
as a profitable vine to ylde plenty of good fruit, that thou would have
brought forth such thorns and breers as appears in the at this present? Who
ever would have thought that Callays co^taini^ge so many erneste gospellers in
outward appare^ce, The doings of idolaters and hypocrites.
that there should have bi^ seen in it, such gaddi^ge to the mass, such
mu^bli^ge in the prystes ear, such gapinge after a strange god, such gaddi^ge
a processio^, such hau^tinge of papistrie such dissimulatio^ in Idolatry, such
regestringe of names in the book of the Beast to the open renou^cinge of
Christ, as is and has byne used in the of late, to the great dishonor of god,
the grievous sorrow of thy frindes, and to the no litel reioisinge of thine
enemies. But it stands with equite that such as have no pleasure to walk in
the shini^ge light of the gospel, that they do stu^ble and fall into the
palpable darkness of error and ignora^tie. For how ca^ it otherwise be chosse^,
vvho^ Christ forsakes, Satan fourth uvith pocesseth. 1. Pet. 5. Mat. 12.
but that if the light do leave us, darkness must needs ouerwhelme us: and if
verite ons forsake us, error must needs possess us: that is, if Christ do
reli^quishe us, then must Satan needs ceaso^ upon us. For he is that toring
lio^ that seeks continually to devour. Who, if he ons find the house of our
hearts clean swept and e^pty of godliness, the^ retourneth he with 7. deuels
worsse the^ himself, and so shall our e^de be worse the^ the begini^ge, the
which thing is al ready ified in a great many, 1. Pet. 4.
who being ons cle^ced, do with the sow, wallawe themselves in the stinkinge
puddell of papistrie again.

Wherefor (my derely beloved) I beseech the in the bowels of Jesus Christ
(whose wealth I wyshe for as mine own) that thou do not ressayue the grace of
god in vain, neither yet be ashamed of his gospel, where of in his mercy he
has made the a partaker, from the which thou semeste now to slide a side by
dissimulatio^, by plainge cole under ca^delstick (as the proverb goes) by
ro^ninge with the hare and holdige with the hou^de, The great dissimulatio^ of
Callais,
by goinge unto god in thine heart and unto the deuel in thy body, by sainge
one thing with thy mouth and thy king the contrary with thy mi^de, much like
unto the Israelites in the time of Iesabels reign, who couitinge to halt o^
both sides, with their hearts to serve God, 3. Reg. 18.
and with their bodis to serve Baal, according to the Queen's procedinge. They
straied from the narowe path of gods savor, i^to the broad way of his
despleasure, Mat. 7.
prouokinge him thereby to plage the land with sterilite and barrynes so that
he kept rain and dew from the earth for space of in. 3. reg. 17.
years and vi. mounthes.

Compare that story with thy time, and state of thy mother England, and thou
shall find the^ disagreable in no thing but only in this, that gods plages
are not yet so fully performed upon the and her, as fell upon the^, but do now
first of al begine to appear and most certai^ly will follow, al though not in
the same form, yet to the like e^de, if she and thou co^tineue and persevere
in the like iniquite as you have begone. A comparison betvvixte Israel and
England.. reg. 18.. Reg. 21.
For as in the time of Iezabels reign the prophets of the lord were slain
in Israel, so are they now in England: The^ just Naboth lost her viniarde by
oppression, so does many rightous me^ now in England their lands and
pocessio^: The people of god the^ in Israel were forced to flee into strange
countries,. Reg. 19
so are they now in England, Other were imprisoned and most cruelly entreated,
so are they now in England.. Reg. 18.
Other some were feign to crepe into holes and caves, ro^ni^ge from post to
pillar, living in most painful penury, glad to have bread and water, how
many in England at this present are compelled to do the like, experience
teaceth in all parts of the land. The Rulers, the Maiestrates and multitude
disse^bled both with God and the Queen, eue^ so do they now in England. The
lord the^ resarued so me of the nobilite in Israel, as Obadia and other, who
showed themselves y favorable unto his servants, so has god likewise reserved
some of the nobilite of thy mother England (altho^ught they be but few in
number) as wilds to preserve his people from the tyranny of Antichrist in his
blouddy members (as thou Callais can sufficiently witness the same). No thing
doubtige but that they shall find favor with Obadia in the sight of Elias and
Iehu, 3. Reg. 18.4. Reg. 9.10.
when as the lord shall stire the^ up to overthrow the Auters of Baal, and to
distroie his idolatrous Prestes, with their Princesse-Iezabel.

As Israel and England agrees in sins so are they like to agree in
ponishment.
This far agrees England with Israel, and as they agree i^ grauite of sins,
so (I fere me) they are like to agree in grauite of ponishme^t. For the lord
is the same aeternal, immutable God, that he was then, favorable in mercy unto
the penitent and just in judgment vnto^ the wicked.

The plages af Israel in the days of Iezabell were these, derth, famine, 2.
Reg. 17 18.20.22.
and mortalite of man and beast, war, battle, and invasion of the enemy,
to the great spoil of the land, and slaughter of the people, the king slain,
4. Reg. 10.
the Queen distroied, and al their posterite consumed from the earth.

Prayer very needful for England.
This was the Viale of the Lords indignation in those days powered forth upon
Israel for the sins of the same. Let us pray that the like or rather greater
do not happen unto England, whose sins waied in the balance of Gods
justice, are no doubt found a great deal heuier.

And thou (Callays) let the state of Samaria in those days be an admonition to
move the to repentance: 4. Reg. 6 Let Samaria be a vuarninge to Callais.
which for the sins before expressed, was not only besegede with the power of
a most puisant prince, but also so extremely oppressed with famine, that the
people therein were compelled, to eat their own dou^ge, and the filthe and
dou^ge af their beasts and birds: yea, the mothers were compelled to eat
their own children, such was the wooful wrath of god upon the^ for their
sinful dissimulatio^ and declininge from god to Idolatry, as witnesses the
holy scriptures. 4. Reg. 6
Let that example (I say) O Callays move the to throw down and humble thy
self under the mighty hand of god in co^fessinge thy sins, and bewailige
thy weakness, that so sone haste bin oblowe^ with so litel a blaste of
te^pratio^: Callais is gone back from the gospel unto papistry.
That so sone haste go ne back from the known truth and pure religion of
god, unto that polluted puddel of papistry by dissimulatio^, where as thy duty
had bin be sore many other (considering thine ancient gospelick profession
universally known) to have stand steadfast in the truth, hauiuge for thy
manifest co^firmatio^ therein, the most certain word of god, the testimony
of thine own conscience, the example of a great number of co^sta^t marters, and
the continual admonition of many godly me^, now flede into strange lands, to
save their life's for a pray until the determinate time, and in the mean
ceason to be profitable unto you at home.

Wherefore as thine unfeigned frinde and lo ^eue^ such a one as for thy
preservation could be co^te^ted to taste much misery) do ernestly exhort the
to fle unto repentance, The oneli remedi to preserve Calais from distrucnion,
is repentance.
the only insallible remedy, able not only to restore thy health, but also
to preserve the from destruction which is emine^t over thy beade.

Nota.
For what kingdom or country, City or town, man or woman was there e that
being infected with the like sickness of sin, Genesis 7.8.19. 4. reg. 17. Dan.
5. With Saxons. Danes. Brito^s, and nou with Spaniardes.
did not perish therein, if this resaiued remedy did not prevent the same.
For want of this remedy, was not the first world drowned? Samaria distroyed?
Babelo^ in one night subverted? And thy mother England thrice with strangers
infected, and now the fourth time like to be desolated? If this remedy of
repe^ta^ce do not spedely prevent it? On the other side where as this remedy
has bin in time resaiued, the danger being ne so great, yet has it al ways
delivered from distructio^. As the examples of lerusale^, Berulia, Niniue and
many other do evidently declare, which only by this means, as testifies the
scriptures, removed the plages presently purposed against the^. O that thou
hadeste the like grace to fle unto this remedy in this thine approchinge
peril: which although thou (blinded with the love of thy self, carnal
securite, Other presaiue that Callaies sees not.
and co^fide^ce in thine own stre^ght) do not now presaiue, yet thy
fri^des, who with a more vigila^t eye watch over thy wealth do evidently
behold spedely to approach. Wherefor (I say) in time rise up from thy sin.
Cease from thine idolatry. Throw away the ma^tel of thine hypocrisy. Wash
thy hands in innocence, and be contented rather to suffer affliction with the
saints of god, the^ with ease to e^ioye the pleasure of sin for a ceason,
the end where of will be thy utter subversion. For truly thou that haste
refused to drike of the lords cup of tribulation with his holions, thou
shall most certainly taste of the dregs of destruction with the wicked:
where of thy mother England is like shortly to be a partaker. For there is no
token that is the foregoer of destruction, All tokens which are the foregoers
of destruction fulfilled in england
but it is apparent in her. For if the subuersio^ of gods pure religion the^
crectinge up of idolatry and superstition, the raginge reign of traitorous
tyra^tes, the daily decay of the prudent and honorable, the tyra^nous crualtie
of the clargie, Esa. 3.
the dissembling impiety of the laiety, the abonda^t shedinge of innocent
blood, the cruel imprisoninge, banishinge and persecutinge of the servants of
God. If these signs (I say) have al ways bin the forgoers of rewyne and
destruction, as the stories of the holy scriptures does evidently witness,
then let not thine vnsaightful mother think to escape the same, in whom at
this present al these tokens are evident. And especially the universal
she^dinge of the innocent blood of the constant witnesses of Jesus Christ now
flowinge through out every Shire, Cyty and Town cryinge for spedy vengance:
The which with out al doubt is cominge, even as it were with in a kenninge.
when England is plaged let not Callais thine to escape free.
And do thou think (O Callais) thou that art the daughter of so wicked a
mother (if thou be found partaker of her impiety, that thou shalt not taste
of her plages? Yeas truly: And that paraduenture with the first.

For commonly when as God purposes to ponyshe the parent, he begins with
the child. And therefore thy lot is so much the nerer, for that thou do not
only lie in the way of the enemy as a butte against his arrowe, Callais is
couited of mani.
but also forthy strenght, beawty and commodite thou art desired of many. And
that thing (as says the proverb) with much a do is preserved, that is of
diverse couited and desired, Callais is in the custody of a vvoma^.
especially when as the custody thereof is in the hands of a woman, who with
great difficultye ca^ restrain any Jewel that she has from him, whom she
loves, he crauinge the same.

Nota. Why the hinge loves the Queen.
And do thou thynck that he will not crave, who loves her only for her
treasure and Jewels, and not for her person?

And supposeste show that he will not ask the (the next Jewel unto the best,
Callais the next ieuell unto the best.
and lyinge so much for his commodyte) that has all ready attempted to have all
together? Yeas be thou sure of it.

The braggi^ge boste of the Spaniardes.
The Spaniardes ca^ boste and make their auasite that if their king had the, he
would both brydel France and rule England at his pleasure. And therefore he
seeks but oportunite, to optaine, that which his heart so much desires. The
french King watches but for oportunite to recover Callais.
On the other side the French ki^ that which his ancesters of long time have
lost. And when for that purpose was there ever better occasion ministered the^
at this present? For thy mother the staff of thy defense, England at this
present sca^^t able to help callais
is now so debilitated and weakened as well in worthy Captains and valia^te
Soldiers, as in money, monitions and victail, that she is scant able to
defend, and releue her self: much les then to succor the in thy necessite.
Thus art chow environed with enemies on every side, Callais vanting friends, is
environed with enemy.
without having any assured frinde to lean unto. Wherefor I admonish the to
consider thy present state, before it be to late, and in to what eminent danger
thy sin has brought the. But whether now wilt thou turn the for they
preservation? psalm. 137. The stre^ght of Callais is to vveahe for her defense,
if the lord do not pro teete thesa. me.
Unto thine own stre^ght? Alas in vein. For in vain does the watchma^ watch
the Cite, if the lord do not keep the same. And how shall he keep the, thou
that have made no conscience to forsake him the wholesome water of life, in
digginge up again the filthy Cestoms of papistrie and Idolatry. wilt thou
turn the for help unto thy worthy Governor and prudent cou^sailourst In
vain also. callais is lilie to lose her frindes.
For they shall be taken away from the. Wilt thou require aid of some of the no
bilite that seem to favor the. Eue^ they paradue^ture shall betraie the. For
how should they love the, that pass not of thy mother, but seek al possible
means to alie nate her from her lawful enhe ritors unto forriners and
strangers. Finally will thou seek for succor of thy ancient Soldiers and
worthy warriors, of thy louinge commons and wealthy marcha^tes? That is also
in vain. For with what hearts shall they desende the (their town, the staff
of their earthly co^modites) that have showed themselves so faint hearted in
sta^dinge to the ire of gods word, the shoranker of their aeternal
salvation. As easily will their suffer them selfs to be thretened and psuaded
to resign the o, as they have al ready co^ceaded without any apparent danger,
to relinquishe the pure religion of god, and the fredome of the gospel, to be
come the bond slaves of Antichriste the Pope. For truly such as have showed
themselves fait hearted in the one, cannot be valiant in the other: except such
as have settled their sovereign felicite on earthly things, whose atte^pptes
commonly the lord does not prosper. For such as for the safeguard of their
life's do deny him, and yet for the preservation of temporal things do
hassarde the same, they do thereby plainly declare; how litel they regard
heaven and how much they are addicte unto the earth. Who commonly (such is the
just judgment of God) in sekinge to save their goods, do lose their liffes,
in that they have no thing esteemed the lyffe of the Soul in respect of the
earthly pleasures here. But whether now (O Callays) wylt thou turn the in this
thy ne extreme necessite? Even unto the Lord God thine only sovereign
remedy: Who only in ryme of need is able to preserve and deliver the: and now
only able, but also most willing, so thou turn the unto him. For he has
promised by his prophets, that if we turn unto him, Zach. 1. ler. 3. Joel. 2.
Hou Callais ought to turn unto the Lord, Esa. 1.
he will turn unto us, to show mercy upon us. Wherefor O thou backslydinge
Town turn unto the Lord thy God with all thy heart, from thy wicked ways,
forsake thy sins, cast away thine abominations, and then shall thou live,
and the wrath of God shall be turned into mercy. Turn unto the lord thy God (I
say) in repentance, Mat. 3.
in fayght, in hattred of thy sins, in confessinge of thine offenses, and in
the amendment of thy lyffe. Turn unto the Lord thy God with the Cytes of
Niniue and Betulia, Jonas. 3. Judith. 8.
and then will the Lord behold the with mercy, and cover the under the
whynges of his defense.

He will be thy Buckler, thy spear and shilde. He will be thy fortress, thy wall
and bulwark. Al thine enemies shall not prevail against the. They may besege
the, they may subtelly conspire to betraye the, but all in vain. psalm. 31.91.
For the Lord will be thy watchman. Yea, he himself will ringe the Alarom,
Sound the trompet, Stryke up the drome, and auance thy Sta^dart against thine
adversaries, in mouinge thine heart into thine own defense, and assiste the in
the same, as a thing lawful both by the laws of God, Nota
the laws of the Land, and instincte of nature. For thou art not so far
sworn to obaie, as by obedience to show thy self a Traytresse to thine own
country: hovu far Callais is subject to the Queen.
Neither art thou so subject to ths Queen, as for her sake, to with draw for
ever thy subjection from the crown of England, and the ryghtful enhaeritours
of the same. Wherefore take heed: and make the Lord of hosts be times thy
frynde, and then thou nedeste not to pass who is thine enemy. god vvil be
vvraie the attemptes of traitors.
For he will bewraye the dissemblinge deuyces of thy feigned fryndes (but secret
enemies) as he did the trayterouse counsel of Achitophel, against his servant
David. 2 Reg. 17


For it is he that turns the deuyces of the ungodly into their own
destruction. Wherefore get the be times under his defense, and thou shall not
need to fere the power of al thy adversaries.

But if thou dispice this frindly admonition, Callais is sie he, but she feleth
it not.
persuadinge thy self that thou art in a better case, then in deed thou art,
as the most part of wordly persons do, even in the extremite of death persuade
unto the^selfeslo^ge life: Thou shall surely perish in thy sins. Believe not
those flattringe Pharisees that cry out in every pulpet, The plages of England
vuil come over to Callais as did the svveti^gsiones,
peace, peace, plenty, plentye, when as famine and destruction is at hand.
Which now begins to appear in thy mother England and will shortly approach
unto the, al though thou canneste not foresee the means, how, nor the time,
when. For of this be thou sure that God does never leave such impiete. as is
in the, long u^ponished. The way to avoid it I have showed the, if now
through thy negligence thou perish, If callais nou perish, it is not for vant
of vvarni^ge
thy blood be upon thine own head. For I am free from the same. Say not but
that thou art warned.

From Exile the.12. of April. 1557. R. P.

Wicked people brings a City into decaie: but wysse me^ set it up again.

Proverb. 29.

