The compass of a Christian, directing them that be tossed in the waves of
this world unto Christ Jesus.

Matthew xj. Chap. 28. v. Come unto me all ye that travail and are heavy
laden, and I well refresh you. etc. printer's device(?), fleur-de-lis

LONDON Imprinted by John Wolf, for John Harison the younger; dwelling in Pater
noster row, at the sign of the golden Anc^r^.

1. CAP. A description of the natural corruption wherewith mankind is
infected by the contagion of sin. 2. CAP. By what means maens corruption is
made known unto him: and of the ends of the Law. 3. CAP. Man knowinge his
corruption by the Law, is thereby humbled and drawn to repentance, and
prepared to recei^^ the promises of the Gospel. 4. CAP. Of faith and the
nature and effects t(...) of, offered in the Gospel.
To the right worshipful and his singular good benefactour M. William Web,
Alderman and Shriue of London. A. P. wishes al joy and peace both of body and
soul, with happiness in the Lords everlasting.
AFter I had called into my remembrance your worships great liberality and
bountifulnes toward me at sondrie times; and on the other side my own
ingratitude and unthankfulness for the same: I began to think with my self
that there was some christian duty neglected of me, which ought of necessity
to have been performed. The consideration whereof has moved me to put my
pen unto paper, and to write as follows, hoping thereby (although not fully
to recompense your goodness toward me, which I am never able:) yet to
discharge some part of christian duty by showing my self thankful unto you
again for the same. Not by prese^ting any ^arthlie gift which I am not able;
neither (sure I am) do you look for any such thing at my hand, but rather by
bestowing upon your worship a little handful of spiritual and heavenly
crommes, which I, (who am a poor wretch) have through earnest prayer found and
gathered up underneath the table of the Lord. And therefore, although they be
but few and very small, yet be cause they are such as were only taken from
his Table: I do not doubt but that you will accept of them. Crommes also I call
them, because they are nourishing, and such as do feed, although not the body
to a temporal life; yet both soul and body unto a spiritual and heavenly
life; which is not for a time but everlasting, if they be eaten with the teeth
of a true faith which works by love, and disgested in the stomach by the
heat of perfect patience, and constant perseverance therein unto the end. And
thus being received, it is no matter how small the quantity be which we
receive of it. Know you not what is written, a little Leaven leaueneth the
whole Math. ^^
lump of down? What is smaler in the whole world the^ a little grain of
mustard seed? and yet if the same be sown in fruitful ground, the increase
is wonderful: for it groeth up to a great tree, that the fowl^ of heaven may
make their nestes in the branches thereof. To these and such like similitudes
is the word of God compared, which shows unto us the efficacy and strength
thereof. For the seed of the word of god is so precious and of such power,
that if never so small a grain thereof do fall on the ground of an humble
heart, it brings forth fruit very plentiful 30. 40. 60. 100. fold. etc.
according to the wisdom of the sower, and the goodness of the ground which it
is sowed upon. For let us hold this always as a certain rule, that there is
never any fault to be found in the sower, nor in the precious seed of the
word which is sown: but the fault (if there be any) must needs be found
out in the ground which receives it, which if there be path ways it lies
Luke. ^.
a loft and can not enter, but the fowls of heaven take it away: or if it be
stony ground which receives the same, it has a little e^trance, but lacks
root, and therefore as soon as the sun of persecution comes upon it, the
same withers also, and can not prosper: or else if the ground be thornie, the
thorns grow up with the seed and choke the same, so that it can not bring
forth fruit accordingly. By the path ways is meant, either those Papists
whose hearts are so hard trodden with the feet of men's traditions, and are so
far overtaken with the credit of man his vain imaginations, that the word
can take no place in the^: or else those Atheistes, which are of no religion and
therefore come to the service of God rather of custom then of conscience to
profit thereby. By the stony ground is meant, those mouth gospellers which
seem in the time of peace to be very religiouse, but when ani^ trouble or
danger comes, then they fall away and do not continue, because it was only
in their mouths and not in their hearts; which is the rooting place and
where it ought chiefly to have been. And by the thornie ground we understand
those covetous men of the world, which have a greater care to become rich then
righteous: and therefore oftentimes prefer the Luke 5. ve^
trieing of their Oxen before the Lords table; yea and they desire Christ to
depart out of their coasts before they would bear the loss Mark. 5. ver.
of their swine. Well, then these things being well weighed and considered
upon, may be a good mean to procure us with more circumspection to look
into our selves and search out the ground of our own hearts, before we come
to the reading and hearing of the word preached, lest we being any of these
unfruitful grounds should return without profitte, nay that which is more,
even worse then when we came unto it* for it is impossible that the word(...)
light for us to examine ou^ affections by, from the which every work does
proceed: and so we findinge the Lord to be the head Spring from whom flows
all the good which we do: may in every of our works, confess our own
unprofitableness, and so bring unto him in all and every of our works that
acceptable Sacrifice of a contrite and broken heart which he will never
despise etc. (...) ^1. 1^


The Lord (who is rich in mercy and great in glory,) heap upon your
worship the riches of his grace, bless and sanctify you both in body and
soul, and happily finish that which he has in you so graciously begone, to
the glory of his name, and your own comfort in Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
London. 1582. May. 26. Your worshipes most humble. (...) commandment. A. P.

A Description of the natural corruption wherewith mankind is infected by the
contagion of sin.
IT is a very lamentable thing to behold^ that bottomless sink^ of corruption
and sin which lies h^d in ma^^ nature: and yet far more lamentable to behold
his gross^ and monstrous blindness, which is so palpable, y^ although there be
no sparkell of goodness in him: nay, although he be so defiled with sin, that
he i^ become as black as ever was the black horse, which is spoken of in the
revelation; So that from the cro(...) Revel. 6. 5.
of the head to the s^^le of the foot, there Esa. 1. 6.
be nothing but wounds, sores, and swellings full of corruption; Yea, although
his veri^ righteousness he as a Esa. 64. 6^
very clo^t defiled with corrupt (...), and his wisdom tending altogether
unto death and destruction: For this is the state of every natural man, until
such time as he be borne again: yet notwithstanding I say his blindness is
such: that in no wise he can be brought to have any distrust or misliking of
himself, but rather is carried away with a vain perswation of that which ought
to be in him, and is not in truth: having his heart lifted up in pride;
because he has an outward^* knowledge of some thing that appertains unto
religion and christian conversation: thinking it a sufficient perfe^tion, to be
able how to define Repentance, although he never feel the effect thereof in
him self. For his own sins which are so monstrous and wherein he has every
way so grievously offended God, a most dangerous disease and incurable, not
because there is no remedy soon to heal it: but rather because the
sens^esnesse of our nature is such y^ in no wise we can be brought to any
feeling of our disease, yea, and the more daungerously we are infe(...)
therewith, the less willing are we to yield unto our sins; nay that which
is worst, the more perfect we think our selves to be. And therefore these
things considered: how or which way should we be brought to recey^^ any
medicine for the curing thereof. For the patient must first of necessit^^ be
brought to feel his disease and know the danger thereof, before he can or
will have any desire of the Physician. In this sense spoke our savior Christ
when he used these words. The whole Mat. 9. ^^. Mark. 2. ^^. Luke. ^. ^^.
need no Physician, but those that are sick. Not that there were or are at
any tune any so perfect which need not Christ, who is the heavenly Physician
of our souls: but rather showing thereby how little Christ our savior shall
profit those which persw^d^ themselves to be whole without him by his
ministry, not for that he can not as I have before showed, but rather because
they will not: in so much as they feel not their own disease, nor know the
danger thereof. How truly therefore does the Prophet use these words. Oh,
Israel thy damnation is of thy self. The Lord offreth us mercy, but we refuse
it; he ^raueth, but we will not hear; he knocks, but we will not open; and
why, because we persuade our selves that we have no need of his help: not y^
there is any so rude as to utter the same in words. But the foolish man Psalm.
14. 1. and 53. 1.
has said in his heart there is no God. Sure, our great and pensive care y^ we
have in laboring by right and wrong to become rich in those things that shall
perish; And on the other side our wonderful carelessness in seeking those
heavenly riches which will never decay, and whereby we are made righteous: If
there were no other thing, this is sufficient to lay open our shame even unto
the whole world, not as in a glass or dark speaking, but face to face,
whereby it may plainly be seen that they trust more in the creature, Then in
God, Romans 1. 5.
which is the Creator, who be blessed for ever and ever. Amen.

Truly the Lord has not deserved to be thus recompe^sed at our hands, his
mercies do require better merits then these are: for what could he have done
more for his vinyard Israel, then ^sa. 5. 4.
he has done unto England. And how comes it then that our fruit is nothing
but wild grayes. We al confess that the night is past long since, and why do
we not begin to cast off the works of darkness. Well, if God spared not the
natural branches for this and such like corruptions: how shall he spare us
which are the wild olives? if our sins be no less, the judgments and
threatenings of God in his word are plentifully thundered out against us: but
alas, we do not beleu^ them; and as for his mercies we make them a bulwark
unto our sins. As for example, admonish any man at any time of his sins,
this will be his answer accustomably. Tush God is merciful, lo, thus we
imagine of his mercies that we utterly overthrow and contemn his justice. But
in the end we shall know and well understand, that as mercy flows from him
toward the penitent believer: so judgment with severity in no less measure
comes from him upon the obstinate and disobedient sinners. But how should we
be brought to believe these things? our hearts are so choked with infidelity
that we will give credit to nothing before we feel or s^^ it put before our
eyes. Suerely our security is such, y^ we may be very well compared unto an Ox
which is driven to the Butchers stall; or a fool led to the stocks: for the
property of an Ox is when he is driven to the Butchers stall to go joyfully,
because his hope is that he shall be driven to some better pasture, and never
fears until the are be ready to be laid upon his head. So likewise a fool
when he is led to the stocks, goes wilfully and never fears until his feet
be fast snared therein. A comparison very fit for the security of this age,
who in like manner goes forwards weltering in the broad way without remorse
of conscience, persuading them selves that that is the perf^ct way, because
the greatest number do walk therein, and never perceive their own folly,
until they be snared in the trappes of destruction. In the mean time, if ani^
man seeing them in this case, do pity their misery, and seek by the
authority of the word to reclaim them and set them in the right way; who is
so deadly a for unto (...) as such an on^ s(...)eth to be. For they can in no
wis^ digest his counsel, and therefore it comes to pass oftentimes, that
in stead^ of profitting, they purchase unto them selves some blemish, as it is
witt^n in the proverbs. He that reproves Proverb.
a scorner gets a blot; That is, some reproachful word or prinie blemish
otherwise by sclaunder or so forth. Not that they are made worst thereby before
the Lord, but rather better, yet men do so accounte of it: and therefore great
cause have Gods children to proceed without discouraging in exhortation,
admonition, and reproof also, seeing God does so w^ll allow of it, when
occasion is offr^^, although it come so to pass oftentimes, that they cast
pearls before swine Mat. 7. 6.
and give that which is holy unto dogs: He that observes the Prouer.
wind shall never sow. So likewise they which have an eye always unto
th(...)mons of men and will know (...)hat ^^tertainment thri^e admonitions and
reproof^ shall have before they (...) bestow the(...), can n^uer pro^fit^^
thereby: for that in so doing they see^^ rather to please men and seed their^
humors, then that god should have his glory increased thereby. Know you not
what is written. He that will be a man pleaser, cannot be the servant ^lat. 4.
10.
of God. A most dangerous evil to g^ about to please those who will not be
pleased without the displeasing of the Lord: For men commonly are best pleased
with those which be as themselves are; and will justify none, but such as
flatter the^ in their sins, and sow pillowes under their^ elboes. Truly it
is even a world it see ou^ blindness; how wise we are to deceive our selves in
such matters as these are: for ^^ are ready to bestow great cost, yea and
burden our selves very largely without grudging, so that we may procure the
acquaintance and familiarity of those which will flatter us, and feed our
affections at the full, especially if they be such as go under the name of
prophets or righteous men: that thereby we may cloak our corruptions, and
seem to be that which we are not* by shrouding our selves under their
profession. And alas, what is thi^ any better then to buyld upon the^ land,
which is an unstable foundation; nay it is no other then that which Esaias
speaks of, Even to take falsehoode for our refuge, and cover our selves under
vanity. Surely a very thi^^e garment, and such as will not defend us from the
cold in winter, nor yet from the heat of summer; nay it were well if it would
c^uer our filthy nakedness: but alas the thinness of it is such that the same
is not able so to do. For what gross blindness is it in us? to think our
selves well satisfied when we are praised of a few miserable men, which
possibly (...) as bli^^^ as we our selves be: for that is all the gain we
(...) (...)chase by it. Nay let me go forth(...) can it pr(...) us to have
the acqu^^^tance and pra^^e of all the learned and godly in the world: If our
own conscience do acc^^e us before the Lord, who is far greater, then the
same, to condemn us. For as we are before the Lord, so we are ^^ (...), and not
as men do ac(...) of us: who oftentimes do take the garments of Gods dear
saints, and give them unto strangers, and therefore it behooves us to seek for
a better garm^nt then the praises of men only to cover our selves withal;
least that when we think our selves to be in best case, then our nakedness
should be discovered and laid open, not only to our own consciences, but
also to the whole world, who will then laugh at our shame.

Well therefore to the end yt we may avoid these inconveniences, and remain^ no
longer so blind as to become deceivers of our selves, by so much respecting of
men's praises, and in the mean (...)eese the pra^se of God (...) is the true
praise in deed: To the end^ I say that we may avoid this, it is needeful for
us to have an eye alwai^ unto our affections in all our acti^^s and enterprises
whatsoever, and (...) whether God his glory, the strengthening of our own
faith; and profiting of our brethren be sought only ^^ d^ing of them.
Otherwise let our (...) be never so many, and see^e as glorious as they will;
In so much that every man's mouth is filled with praising of us: yet it is to no
purpose, if our consciences do not witness with us that these things before
repeated, are the things which we in every of our deeds have ever theefest
respect unto. True it is that Scripture does greatly commen^ the receiving of
Prophets and righteous men into our houses; Yea and God has bound himself,
by promise thereunto also, that those that do it shall be greatly rewarded: but
the question is then, how we ought to receive the^, he (says the holy Ghost,
Which receives a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall receive a Prophets
revvard. And again. He that receives a righteous man, in the name of a
righteous man, shall receive a righteous man's revvard.

So here our Savior Christ describes ^^ plain words, how we ought ^^
receive them: that is, as a Prophet, or righteous man, as one that ^^ of the
Lords Household, and sent unto us by him; ^o the end that we should entertain
him as one of (...) best (...) and minister unto him such necessaries, as he
comes unto us for, because we have hope also to receive of him in like manner
such spiritual treasures as y^ Lord has endued him withal, to the end^ (I
say) that we might profit their bodies unto a temporal life, and they our
souls and bodies both unto a spiritual and eternal life. With this mind we
ought to receive them, and not for fashions sake; neither yet to ^^ede our
humors: or else it can not be said that we do receive them as Prophets, or
righteous men, but rather as Hipocrites and dissemblers: for (...) are none
that will give their consent to do so, unless they be such. And therefore
it behooves us, to take heed how we do abuse the Prophets, and Saints of God,
by thinking that they are so vain as to be drawn away from the truth, to
seed our corrupt affections. Nay if they be the true Prophets and Saints of
God, rather then they will so do, they will utterly forsake our houses, be the
plenty thereof never so great: yea, (and that which is more) they will shake
off the (...) of our streets from their feet, as a witness against us:
because we would not obey their counsel, or rather the Lords, which is
uttered by them. Know you not what is written. He that receives you,
receives me, and he that receives me, receives him that sent me. So then
heareby you see plainly, what it is to receive: ^ Prophet or a righteous man:
it is not to receive him alone, but God the Father and Jesus Christ also, which
(...) accompany* them; and therefore how well welcome should such ge^tes he
unto us; not as though we would so much pleasure them, but they altogether
pro^^t us; neither yet may we by our own wisdom measure out unto them, a way
and mean whereby we think they may pleasure us best: for that were to set the
Lord who does ab^se him self to be their companion, as it has been before
proved, to school: but rather it behooves us to bring our own wisdom into
captivity, and content our selves with that mean^ and order, which the holy
Ghost does (...) th^^ to use for our profiting* whether it be sower, or sweet,
sharp, or ple^sant, judgment, o^ mercy, threatening, ^ or promises, seeing the
Lord is the di^poser (...) ^.
of it, Who works all things for* the best unto us. Receive y^ same with
patience and thankfulness, and not g^ut^h or murmr for any thing whatsoever
comes unto us from them; humbly acknowledginge our own ignorance and
blindness, in chosinge unto our selves, any way or mean that may profit us unto
eternal life: and thus having our hearts prepared, we should bec^^e fit
ground to receive the seed of God^ wo^^ (...) to our endless comfort. For sure
it is, that before the Lord can sow any (...) seed in ye furrows of our hard
hearts* he must first of necessity break ^^* ^ mo^^fy the same with the
pl(...) ^^ his law, and tear in s^^der ye hard (...) of vices and sins, with the
sharp harrow of his judgments: y^ so the weeds which our own flesh do
naturally yield forth, may be plucked up by y^ roots, and scatered* upon the
upper (...) of the earth, that is, laid plai^^ ^ open before our eyes, whereby
our (...) may be made manifest unto us, and we by that means dr^en forward
more earnestly, to seek for our Physitio^ Christ Jesus, and more willingly
take ye purgations which he by his servants shall minister unto us, how sharp
so ever it be for curing thereof. Dasig^rous diseases require sharp and bitter
medicines, to purge out the corruption which is the cause of the same; yea and
the more dangerous the d^sease is, the more sharp medicine it requires* Well
the^, if it be so, as it is most true, as by a (...) example it may be made
more plain; yt french pockes is a f^r more dangerous disease, then the
messels, and therefore requires a more bitter purgation for y^ curing thereof,
then the other does. But our diseas which naturally we are infected (...) is
far more per^^o^s the^ either yt messels or fre^^he pockes: for it is no better
then a most loathsome lepry, which does not only (...) or foot, but the whole
body (...) every member thereof, within and without, so that there is no place
fr^^; which disease although it be not bodily (...) king out into scur^^
(...) in the open face of the world, which may make us loathsome unto the ^y^^
o^ men, and hasten our natural death: yet it is spiritual, and breaks out
into blasphemous swearinge, lying, deceauing, cursed speaking, flaunder,
murder, drunckenesse, and such like, which makes us loathsome in the eyes* of
the eternal God; and brings speedely upon us, though not bodily death, yet
that spiritual and eternal death of both body and soul in hell fire, which
is endless, endless, and hopeless, from which y^ Lord for his Christ his
sake deliver us all. Amen.

CAP. II. By what means man's corruption i^ made known unto him: and of the
ends of the Law.
MOst true it is, that we are all by nature infected with this spiritual
leprosy of sin and corruption, which makes us loathsome in the eyes of the
almighty as it has been already some what touched, and yet not so
sufficiently as the necessity of the matter requires. For although the
Disease ^^ both grievous and general, yet the knowledge and feeling thereof is
very sparing; and although that all be infected with the same, yet not one
amongst a thousand, will in truth confess him self so to be; such is the
blindness of our stubborn and crooked nature, as for example: ask a natural
man, which has his life as void of the fear of God, as it may be, whether he
be proud, (covetous, deceiptfull, ^ blasphemer of the name of God) or how much
his nature is enclyned thereunto, he will straight ways answers with a show of
thankfulness unto God, affirming that his nature both is and has been always
from his youth, free from any such things, wondering even with cursed speeches,
how, why, or for what cause, any man should conceiu^ so evil an opinion of him.
A maru^lous blindness, and yet commonly this will be their answer, although
there appear no better fruit in all the actions of their life: and thus Satan
pulls us forward from evil to worse, in adding unto our blindness, wilful
stubbernes, and therefore one degree farther off from being cured: for ^ it were
so that we were simply blind, there were some hope that we would receive
light when occasion is offered, to discern some part of our disease with desire
to be cured, because of the danger* which otherwise through the long
continuance of it. might ensue upon us. But seeing* ^^ ^s far otherwise, that
we are not (...) blind, but also through the va^^e wisdom of our own
conceits, c^rryed away in a false persuasion of our selves, that we do both
know and very well perceive, our own estate to be good, yea and so perfect,
that the same can by no means be bettered. Seeing it is so I say, how, or
which way is it possible for a^^e man to work for ou^ health, when we our
selves, be ^o (...) off from any dread (...) of being sick. What the^* shall we
leave it thus ruinous as we find it ^ God forbid* for y^ which is impossible
to men, is possible to God. And although the plater b^ nothing Corin. 3. 6.
and the vvat^rer as little vvorth, except the Lord give increase: yet ^^ is
sin, in the planter not to plant, and no better in the waterer not to water*
how ^^de and unfruitful soever y^ barre^ ground of men's heart seem to be unto
them; and why, because we know not what the Lord will bring to pass by their
labors, who by the ministry of his word, does not only cleanse the lepers,
and gave sight unto the blind, but also brings far more mighty things to
pass; as in turninge raueninge wolfes into meek lambs; and cruel Leopards
into gentle Kids; and devouring Lions into t^me Calves; yea and the venomous
Aspes or Cockatrices into the nature of innocent and delightful children; not
that beasts are thus changed, but the holy Ghost means the wild and savage
affections of men, who although they be as ravening, devouring, cruel and
venomous, as any of these wild beasts, yet the power and force of the word
and gospel of Jesus Christ is such y^ it will make the^ as tame, meek, gentle
and delightful as Lambs, Kids, Calves, or little children: and not so only,
but much more: for y^ excellency of it is such, that it will raise by those y^
be dead, eue^ to life again, and therefore great cause have y^ ministers and
saints of God, eue^ with bouldnes and exceeding hope, to take this spiritual
weapon, both in heart and hand, (...) a sufficient armoure, to stand and
prevail, against all the engines and f^ery darres of y^ wicked, how 1. Cor. 10.
5. luke 10. 17. 18.
great and cruel soever they seem to be. For it is the word of God only,
which casts down strong holds, and every thing which exalts it self,
against the knowledge of God; yea and brings into captivity every affection
unto the obedience of Christ: which word, as it is a sufficient defense
against all dangers; a perfect purgation to cleanse us from all ill humors; yea
a most pre^^ous salve to heal al diseases or wounds whatsoever: so also it is
a most clear and bright candle to lighten our blind eyes, whereby we may
perfectly behold, not only y^ grienousnesss of our dise^se, but also the great
danger thereof; a point very needful and chiefly to be observed, as the first
step which belongs to true and unfeigned christianity. For before (...) do
know our disease which is sin, how shall we understand the danger and
inconvenience that it subiecteth us unto, which is the wrath and everlasting
curse of God; and having our eyes once shut up from beholding the danger and
discommoditie of sin, which way is it possible for us to be brought to fear
and tremblinge at the judgments and heavy threatenings of God in his words,
seting we have no credit therein: and then having our hearts thus hardened,
how far ^ff are we from Romans 3. 2^* Ga^. ^. 16. 2^ Heb^ 11* 6.
repentance, but much farther off from faith, whereby alone we are justified
before the Lord, and without the which it is impossible to please him. Well
then, to the end that w^e may avoid these great inconuenie^ces, and be
unfeignedly brought unto the hope of Christ his kingdom: order requires that
we begin to enlarge upon this first point or step thereunto, which is to prove
and make known unto us, by the word of God, our disease, that we are all
infected, with this spiritual leprosy of sin: concerning which matter the
Scriptures are very plentiful. Psalm. 5^. 5,
David in the Psalm uses these ^ob. 25. 4.
words: We are borne in iniquity, and in sin has our mother conceived us.
Job considering this, makes it an impossible thing for us to be void of
sin: how says he may a man be clear in thy sight, or how may ^say. 11. 7.
^.
he which is borne of a woman be righteous? Like begets and brings
forth his like; men gather not figs of thorns, nor grapes of thistles; It is
contrary to the nature of a crabtree to bring forth any other fruit the^
crabbes: So likewise man and woman all generally being sinners, can beget and
bring forth no better then themselves. Think this therefore with thy self,
that if thou be begotten of a man and borne of a woman, thou must needs be a
sinner. Can the black Moore change his skin? o^ the Cat of Mount her Spots?
So impossible a thing it is for thee to change thy condition and estate that
thou wast^ borne in, bridle it how thou w^lt, and pretend as much as thou
can; yet when thou have done thy best thou art a sinner, not in part, but
wholly, even from the soole of the foot, to the Esai. 1 6
crown of the head, as Esaie says, in his first chapter: not in work only,
but also in word, and not in words and works alone, but also in thoughts,
as it appears by that which is written Genesis 6. 5. (...). ^ Mat, 15. 19
in Genesis. All the thoughts and imaginations of man's heart are evil
continually. And yet because we may be more drawn out of our selves; and not
deceived with a show of good things, which may seem to rest in our nature:
the holy Ehost tells us, that Esai. 64. 6 Romans 8. 6.
The very righteousness of man, is as a defiled cloth, and his wisdom tends
wholy unto death, wherein he overthrows even* the best things of our nature
For what should we judge the righteousness and wisdom of man, which the holy
ghost speaks of here, to be, but this: his prayer, fasting, and almse deeds,
his frequenting of common prayer, Sermons and Sacraments, his gay and glorious
speeches, fran^ed out of the word of God, which has in them great show of
religion and piety: but to conclude, whatsoever it be ^or how glorious a show
so ever it has in the eyes of men, yet if it proceed^ from no other affection,
then that which we have received from our natural parents, it is no better
accounted off before the Lord then a defiled cloth, and the wages that we shall
receive for the same, no better the^ death: herein then you may see the truth
of that scripture fulfilled, which tells us, that to the unclean, nothing
is clean: well therefore, Let us not deceive 1. John. 1. 8.
our selves, by saying that we have no sin, or by supposinge our selves to be
in good case, because our sins are more tolerable then other men's bet. For
the least sin in us, although it be but in thought, if there be no stryuinge
against the same, or mislyking of it, the weight thereof, is no less, nor no
easier then the everlasting torment of hell fire. But here some man may obiecte
and say, that all these words are to no purpose: for who is he that confesses
not himself, to be a sinner? True it is that all men in a general speech do
confess them selves so to be, yea and perticularly also from the lips
forwards: but the unfeigned acknowledgement of our sins perceth far deeper, and
comes more nearer unto y^ quick. For it does not stir up bare words in us
alone, but other things also, which are of far more sense and feeling; as a
troubled soul^; a pensive and sorrowful spirit, for our sins committed against
God: because our own conscience does tell us, that therein we have greatly
offended him, and provoked his everlasting curse to be powered upon us, which as
yet we^ see not which way, or how to avoid: the consideration whereof,
stirs up in us great care; much and earnest prayer, even with gr^ning
sobbes, and bitter tears; fear also with desire, zeal and punishment, that by
this iudginge of our selves, we might prevent y^ judgments of God, which
otherwise we know and do very well perceive are to be executed upon us. But
this may be made more plain unto us by a familiar example and such a one as we
are very well acquainted with, and experienced in: y^ thief or wicke^ person,
which has committed some notorious crime, of theft, murder, or both so long as
his fact is unknown, he makes no conscien^^ of it* but eats and drinks
with the drunkard, and proceeds forwards in like wickedness; tell such a one
in general speech, that he is ^ sinner, and there is no doubt^, but that he
will willingly yield unto it; but come more nearer unto him, and tell him that
he is a thief or murderer, and if he be sure that thou can bring forth no
sufficient proo^e of the same, he will not fall but make thee smart for it,
as far forth as the Laws of the Realm will give him leave. Now^ this fellow
which stands so ^^outlis all this while upon his pantos^^es, as t^ough he had
received great wrong, his fact beeinge once known, and brought to right, and
he him self laid hold upon, to appear before a judge, where he must
receive the sentence of death for his wicked deed, which he has committed,
and sees no way now to avoid the sa^e: mark then his tou^^enance and see
how all the powers of his body are changed, unto tremblinge and fear; his
^n^es which before were so stiff, now do willingly yield them selves unto
the ground, with weeping and wringing o^ hands, to cra^^e pardon, labouringe
by all means and ways that he can devise or procure, even with great
importunacie, that he (...) obtain the same, willingly yeeldinge him self
unto the prison, to the ^etters, and to the hot iron, so that he may escape
with life, he weighs not these other punishments, yea, and the more terible
the sentence of death is, which the judge does pronounce against him, the more
is his fear and labor to aauoyde the same. Hereby you see then, as in a
clear glass, what it is in truth to confess our sins, and by what means
we are brought thereunto. For as the thief or wicked person, can not be
brought vnfay^edly to confess his fact, before it he made known, and he
himself attached to appear before a judge, to be condemned for the same: so
likewise the case stands with every one of us* who by nature are no better
then thieves and murderers before the Lord, that we can by no means be
brought in truth to yield unto the same, before the monstrousness and ugly
shape of these our sins, with the pain and penalty due thereunto, be set
before our own consciences, and we as it were summoned before Gods judgment
seat, to be condemned for the same: you see also the fruit and effects, which
follow the true acknowledgment of our sins, which is fear, trembling,
weeping, wringing of hands, and importunate suit, every kind of way for
pardon, and the reason is very good: for if the face of an earthly Judge which
can but kill the body, be so terible unto that party, which is brought before
him for his fact: what shall we think then, or how terrible is the face and
sentence of that eternal and heavenly Judge of Judges; who after he has
killed, Ap^^. 20. 11.
can cast both body and soul into hell fire, and from whose countenance
flies away both the heavens and the earth. Well then? these comparisons being
well thought upon, and we so perfectly experienced in the lesser which is
before man, will willingly I doubt not yield unto the truth of the greater,
which is, when any man's conscience for sin, does sommon h^^ before the Lord.

Let us not therefore hereafter, be any more so blind and ignorant, as to
think that we are come to great perfection in Christianity before we are
entered into the first step that appertains unto the truth thereof, which
is the unfeigned acknowledginge of our sins: unfeigned I call it, when these
passions of the mind before repeated, are stirred up in us, through the sight
thereof, otherwise it is feigned and to noe purpose. For if we call to mind
the testimony of holy scripture to prou^ and confirm the same, we shall see
it and as in a glass behold it very plentifully proved, and sufficiently
every way warranted unto us, how that this has always been the Lords
purpose and intent, dealinge with all his children and elect, in the beginning
of their calling, even so to humble their souls, with the sight of their
sins, that they were almost fettered in the chames of desperation, as we may
see it in the poor Publican, who seemed Luke. 18. 13
so vile in his own eyes, That he durst not lift them up to heaven. So
likewise the people of the Jews, Act. 2. 37.
which were converted at the preaching of Peter, and the rest of the Apostles,
were in such distress and trouble of mind for their sins, that they could
not tell which way to wind out of it, But being pricked in their hearts, cried
out unto the Apostles and said, men and brethren, what shall we do? Which does
importe a marvelous distress that they were in. A notable example of this
also we have in the sixtenth of the Acts, in the Act. 16. 3^.
conversion of the keeper of the prison, who when he saw the great power of
God in shaking the foundation thereof for the delyuerance of his Saints, came
tremblinge and quakinge, in marvelous fear, saying, What shall I do, that I
may be saved? Which request does give us to understand, that he judged him
self to be no better the^ a condemned wretch. In like manner the Prophet Abacuk
speaking of the beginning of his calling, says thus of it When I heard, my
belly tre^bled, my lips shook at the voice: rottenness Abacuk. 1. 1^
entered into my bones, and I trembled in my self, that I might be spared in
the day of the Lord. See, here the Prophet takes these troubles and
anguishes of mind, which he was brought into by the hearing of the word, as a
warrante unto his own soul, that the Lord would spare him in the day of
evil. A very apt proof we have of this also in the book of kings, where it
was said unto Josias the king, that because his heart 2. King. ^^. 19. 20.
did melt, when he heard the book of the Law read, and those judgments
pronounced, which the lord pretended to bring upon Jerusalem and the temple for
the sins of Manasses: because (I say) his heart did melt, and he rent his
clothes, and wept at the hearing thereof, therefore the Lord told him, that
these miseries should not be in his days, but that he should be gathered to
his fathers in peace and not see them. And what should I say of David the
king. who being a man after Gods own heart, yea and also a figure of Christ,
what wonderful distresses and anguishes of mind and soul was he in, not
only, in ye beginning of his calling, but also throughout his whole life, as it
appears very plentifully in the Psalms, where he utters these voices. Many
say unto my soul there Psalm. 3. 2.
is no help for him in his God, and again: I fainte in my mourning Psalm. 6. 6.
and cause my bed every night to swim with my tears: and aga^^e. how long
will thou forget me O Psalm. 13 1. 2.
Lord for ever? how long will thou hide thy face from me, how long shall I
take counsel with my self, having daily wearines in my heart: and again,
there is nothing sound Psalm. 38. 3.
in my flesh because of thy displeasure, there is no rest in my bones, because
of my sins, and again my heart trembles within me, the Psalm. 55. 4. 5.
sorrows of death are fallen upon me, fear and trembling is come upon me,
and an horrible fear has covered me, yea his troubles Psalm. 42. 7.
were such, and his temptations came so thick one in the ne^ke of another,
that his soul refused comfort, and Psalm. 77. 2.
it seemed unto him that the Lord had utterly rejected his soul, * read the
88. Psalm. Thus you see it plainly proved out of the word of God, how the
Lord has always dealte with his children, in calling them unto the hope of
his kingdom, that they might be pricked forewardes to bring unto him that
acceptable sacrifice of a sorrowful spirit, and broken heart, Psalm. 51. 17.
which he at no time will despise, but has bound him self by promise, that
at what time soever any do come unto him, which are over burdened Mat. 11 28.
with the sight of their sins, they shall find refreshing: here you see also
the truth of this doctrine verified: that the Lord does first wound, before
he makes whole; he first Osce. 61.
humbles, before he does exaulte; be brings down to Hell, before 1 Samuel 2. 6.
he raises up to Heaven, And to conclude, he makes us to see our misery,
before he will bestow upon us his mercy: for to whom is meat most sauery, but
to hun that is most hungry; to whom is liberty most delightful, but to him
which is in ye most miserablest bondage; and to whom is life most sweet, but
to him that is in the greatest danger of death. For offer liberty to such a one
as is fre^ from bondage, or life to him that is in no danger of death, and they
will laugh thee to scorn: but go to some prison, and offer liberty to him
that has hen long in chains, and life unto him that is already judged to die,
and thou shall see how tha^kfully he will receive thy proffer, and how
mindful he will be of the same. A similitude very fit to teach us, for what
cause the Lord does thus deal with his children in humbling of them, to the
end that they may praise him in truth for delivering them out of such
wonderful misery, and never be unmindful of so great a benefitte. In this
sense it was said of Marye Magdale^, that she loved much, because many sins
were forgiven her. For who amongst the children of women, was there ever
found^, to be a more greuouser sinner then she, which was Make 16. ^ Luke. 8. 2.
a common harlot, and had ^^ue^ devils rast out of her, that is to say, a
great many, we know not the number, and who again was there ever found, to
show foo^th y^ like affection of love unto our lauiour Christ as she did, after
she perceived that these great sins were forgiven her, and she redeemed
John. 12. ^.
from the danger thereof: for she washed his fee^e with her tears, and wyped
them with the heir of her head. In this sense also it is sa^d of the Apostle
saint Paul, that he labored more abundantly then all the rest of the
Apostles, and what moved him so to do, even this, because he perceived that
many and grievous sins were forgiven him. What the^^ shall we sin much, that
we may love and labor much? God forbid. The holy Ghost has no such
meaning, neither is it said that they loved and labored much, because they
had sinned much; but because many sins were so given them. There is none of
us all but do commit many and grievous sins, and the more we do commit the
worse we are to be liked, for the less do we love, and the less also is our
labor in the ways of Godliness: but if we were come unto this step, that
we did clearelie see these sins, and were perfectly humbled and wearied
with the burden of them, hungring and thirsting for easement, there is no
doubt, but yt we should quickly perceive and feel, the great love of God
toward us, in pardoning and forgiving all these our sins which we have
committed against him, and so by that means we also might be drawn with
Mary and Paul, to love and labor much, because many sins are forgiven us. But
before we can have faith to believe, and strength to feel that many sins
are forgiven us, we must first learn to know and feel both that we have
committed many sins, ye^a that we do nothing else but sin, and to the end
that we may unfeignedly be brought unto the knowledge thereof, the best mean or
way that we can use, is this, eue^ so set the pureness and severity of the law,
as it is in it self without Christ, against our own affectons, until such
time as we be even plunged into nothing, and perfectly humbled thereby: for this
is the office of it, and to this end it was ordained. The use of the Law.
First to reveal unto us our sins, as it is very plainly declared in y^
e^^stle to y^ Romans, where it is written, by y^ law shall no flesh be
justified in Romans 3. 20.
his fight: for by it comes the knowledge of sin, and again: the law
causes Romans 4. 15.
wrath, for where no law is, there is no tra^sgressio^, that is to say,
there is no tra^sgressio^ known, according to y^ which y^ Apostle speaks in
another place, where he uses these words. I had not knovve^ sin, but by Romans
7. ^.
the law: for I had not knovve^ that lust had been sin, except the law had
said thou shall not lust, so th^n, hereby you may eastly perceive, y^ the first
office of the law, is to reveal or make known unto us our sins.

Secondly it goes forwards and makes us to be out of measure sinful.
For to this end the law Romans 5. 20.
entered, that sin might abound. And after this sort the Apostle reasons
in another place, where he has these words: Sin took occasion Romans 7. 13.
by the commandment and deceived me, and thereby slew me, wherefore the law is
holy, and the commandment is holy, and just, and good. Was that the^ which
is good made death unto me, God forbid, but sin, that it might appear sin,
wrought death in me by that which is good, that sin might be out of measure
sinful, by the commandment. And thus you see how the Law does proceed,
not only in reueiling unto us our sins, but also in making us out of measure
sinful: not only in be wraying the corruptions of our works, but also of
our words: and not of our words and works alone, but also of our thoughts not
in condemning some, and iustifyinge the rest, but in utterly rejecting of all.
If there have been but one thought in all our life time out of square, and
admit it to be so, that we were free from sin, both in word, work, and
thought: yet the s^ueritie of the Law is such, that it wholly depriueth us of
all hope of life, because we were borne in sin, and having thus bewrayed in
us such a huge heap of corruptions, whereby we perceive our selves to be above
measure sinful, yea nothing else but a mass and lump of sin, does it leave
us so? noe, but then it proceeds in setting before our eyes, the judgments
of God for the same, threatening, condemning, and cursing us, for not
fulfillinge that in every point, which we are not able to perform in one of
the least points thereof: Deuteronomy. 28. 16. 1: 13 etc.
pronouncing us To be cursed in the field, cursed in the town, cursed in our
basket, and store, cursed in our houses, and in the fruit of our ^wne bodies,
cursed in all y^ we take in hand* yea and that which is worst of all cursed in
our selves with an everlasting curse, from the presence of God: who is become
unto us a terible and st^rce judge, from whose face we shall destrethe hills and
mountains to fall upon us* and hide us, thundering out heavy, and fearful
threatenings against us. That Osee. ^3. 7. 8
he will be unto every sinner, as a very lion, and as a leoparde in the way
of as^hur, he will meet the^ as a she bear that is robbed of her whelps, and
will break the very gall of their hearts, he Iere. ^. 14. Psalm. 11. 9.
will be unto the^ as a devouring flame, and will rain snares upon their heads,
fire, brimstone, and stormy te^mpest, this shall be the portion of their cup.
For every Psalm. 9. 17.
sinner must be cast into hell, and all nations that forget God, head and tail,
root and bra^ch, not one exe^pted: for ye reward of sin, is death, and we are
al sinners: therefore, by y^ law we are al condemned, we are all under y^ curse,
the bo^dstaues of satan, and fire brands of hell. Thus y^ law proceeds in
plunging us, deeper and deeper, into y^ pit of sorrow, where we can find no
g^^ud: for when it has showed unto us our sins; and y^ vnmeasurablenes of y^
same, with the m^gme^ts and heavenly plagues of God, to be executed upon the^,
then e^tereth y^ fourth (...) 4. office of the Law.
of y^ law, which is horror, fear, (...), weeping, wringing of ha^d^, etc. as
it has been before made plain unto us, by a similitude, and very ple^tifully
proved also out of y^ scriptures, y^ the children of God, (...) been subject
unto these passions of y^ mind and body, before they could come unto the hope
of his kingdom, and therefore less may 5. Office of the Law.
be spoken of it now, will the^ the last office of the law, is, that it se^d^th
us unto christ, as y^ Apostle witnesses: Christ is the end Romans 10.
of the Law for righteousness, unto all that believe, and again, The law is
our Calat. 3. ^
schole master, to bring us unto Christ, that we may be made righteous by
faith. So the^ hereby it is plain, that y^ last office of y^ law, is to send
us unto Christ, and mark it for a special point, y^ it is the last office
thereof, and not y^ first: for the ^aw must of necessity proceed upon us, by
these steps before repeated, y^ we may be as it were killed in our selves, from
all hope of fleshly righteousness before we can be prepared, to receive y^ life
which is by Christ. So the^ hereby you see y^ the lord in co^uerting of a
soul, does eue^ work a miracle, ^ raise them which are dead to life again,
and therefore they do abuse y^ gospel, which will presume, upon y^ co^forts
thereof, before such time, as y^ law has thus humbled the^* for most certain
it is, that they which so deal, do deceive the^ selves, to y^ e^crease of
pride and security. For as the law without the gospel, drives to despair, so in
like manner y^ gospel without the law, makes us to presinne, and therefore of
necessity both work together, but y^ law has the first place: for until such
time as y^ law has done ^is office, in hu^bling of us, y^ gospel ca^ not
profit neither yet does the same appertain unto us, no more then a plaster,
or pleasant healing salve, does belong unto that wound which is full of
corruption, and rottenness, even to the bone: for you know that unto such a
wou^d, there belongs first knyues and laun^ors, to open the same, and then
sharp and bitter salve to draw out the corruption, and eat out the dead
flesh thereof, before there come any healing plaster near it: the nature
whereof is to close up and skin the upper part of the wound, and cleanse all
the corruption and dead flesh within, which afterward breed to great
inconvenience, and make the wound far more dangerous.

Eue^ so it fares with all those which are wounded with the venomous dart of
self love: which wound being choked with the corruption, and dead flesh of
covetousness and pride, and yet, will use no other medicine for the curing
thereof, then that pleasante healinge salve of the Gospel, which if they knew
in truth how little the same did pro^^^te them, before such time as the sharp
launcinge knife of Gods Law had opened the wound, and the bitter salues of
his judgments, and sharp threatninges eaten out the rottenness thereof,
they would go an other way to work, and use a more sounder diet, for the
obtayninge of health, although it be very tedious and sharp at the first.
Surely it is very lamentable to behold the gross blindness and security of
our age: for the most part of us, nay almost every one, do think that
christianity, does wholly rest in an outward show of words: and therefore if
we can come to the understanding of some places of the scripture, whereby
we may be able to define and prove, what faith is, and the obiecte, upon
whom the same takes hold: we think it to be such a perfection, as we need
go no further, and that there can be no better Christians in the world, then
we our selu^s are, although there be no more remorse of conscience for sin in
us, then there is in a blind beast. But alas let us think or know as much
as we will or can, in this sort, and let other men which be as blind as we
our selves are, praise us for our knowledge, as much as they list, yet all this
will stand for no payment before the Lord, nor bring one sparkell of warrant
unto our souls, whereby we may assure our selves to be in his favor; who
only looks upon a troubled soul, which is humbled with the sight of his
sins, and Psalm 51. Esai. ^6. 2
has promised to power his Spirit upon those that tremble at his word.
Therefore if thou will make a true examination of thine estate between God and
thee, whether thy faith toward him be vntayned or not, prove not the
foundation thereof, by thy knowledge, how much or whom thou do know, but
rather by the fear, how much or whom thou do fear. For in truth there
is neither knowledge nor faith, except the beginning thereof be fear, as it
is manifest in diverse places of the proverbs. The fear of the Lord is the
beginning of wisdom. By wisdom in that place is meante all things that
belon^e unto the knowledge and salvation of a Christian man* and yet here you
see, that y^ holy Ghost shows in plain words, that the fear of the Lord is
the beginning of ^t: and who knows not that faith is the chiefest and only
thing which belongs unto every Christian, for the attayning of salvation:
therefore the beginning of faith is fear, which fear is stirred up in us,
through remorse and conscience for sin, which sin also is revealed unto us
by the Law: and therefore if fear be not the beginning and first fruit of thy
faith, thou have good cause to doubt of it, and to think with thy self, that
thou art come unto Christ before the Father draws, and our savior Christ
tells us plainly, that no man can John. 6. 44
come unto him, except the Father do first dravve him, which word dravving,
does importe in us, a marueylouse vnwilling^esse, because the way seems very
tedious and vnpleasante unto us, until such time, as we come unto Christ,
that is, until we have a iustifyinge faith to believe in him. And therefore
that rash and forged faith which men do draw unto them selves without the
Lord, that is without remorse and conscience for sin, may very fitly be
compared, unto the faith of him, which is spoken off in the Gospel after saint
Matthew, who came to our Savior Christ, and said unto him, Master I will
follow M^^. 8. 19. 20.
thee whither so ever thou go. But what was the entertainment, that our
Savior Christ gave him, he tells him that y^ Foxes have heales, and the
fowls of the air have nestes, but the Son of man has not where to lay his
head: meaning that whereas unto an earthly man for a while it may seem an
excellent and sweet^ thing to follow, that is to profess Christ: yet when he
must come to the denying of him self, and to renounce the love of eternal
things, it will be veri^ bitter and unpleasant unto him. Hereby you see the
entertainment and welcome of those which are so hasty to come before they be
called, that is, in the pride of their hearts, without any consideration of
their own misery, and need they have of him; nay rather, as though he had
need of them: for certain it is, that there are a great many; which when
they have done any small thing, that belongs unto the duty of a Christian;
do think in that point that the Lord had need of them, and therefore is
become their debtor for doing it. But alack, it is not so, the good or evil
which we do, shall profit or hurt our selves; we cannot enrich^ the Lord with
any thing that we are able to do, who draws both y^ sinners, and the devils
to set forth his glory, and therefore can as well be glorified in our
condemnation, as in our salvation. But to leave this, and come to our former
matter: these ready fellows which are so soon ripe, will be as quickly
rotten; those y^ are so hasty to follow Christ unto the breaking of bread,
that they may fill their bellies, if they shall but hear this voice from him;
Sell all you have and give it to the poor: although he promise them never so
great treasure in heaven, yet they will forsake him, if it be to the utter
destruction and ^amishing both of body and soul everlastingly. Take me not
here, that I go about to condemn our (...) and speed in turning unto Christ
if it be in truth; neither is it my purpose to withdraw any man from reading
and meditating upon the sweet promises of the Gospel: for the Lord has many
ways to convert us by, and this may very well be one, even the consideration of
his great mercies offered unto us in Christ, which may be a good mean to bring
us to the consideration of our own unworthiness and unthankfulness for the same,
and of our great miseries without it, and so be unfeignedly brought unto Christ:
But rather my purpose is to bea^e down our (...) boastinge of faith, when it
is with so little fruit, as though it were possible Genesis 28. 12.
for us to be upon the top of Jacobs ladder, before we come near the foot
thereof, and our heedeles presumings upon Christ, without any remorse or
conscience for sin, as though the Lord did justify and appoint those unto
eternal salvation who^ he would never sanctify unto holiness of life: these
sinners are they, against whom chiefly he^herto I have proceeded, to the end y^
they may (if it be possible) be pulled away from y^ gross absurdity of
putting religion in bare names, titles, and figures, as though it were a matter
of indifferency, whether they which call upon the name of the lord did depart
from ^^quity or not: to ye end, I say, y^ we may put no more such confidence in
daine shadows, which are without all truth of substance, and be constantly
persuaded in our selves y^ before we can live unto righteousness, we must ^y
unto sin: and before we can be unseperably joined unto Christ, we must vt^erly
be rent away from our selves, and see our misery without him, who from
everlasting is appointed of God his father, to be a Phisitio^ only unto those
which are sick, and not unto those which persuade themselves that they are
whose; and has bound himself also by promise to satisfy the hungry, and not
those which are full; to give sight unto the blind, and not unto those which
suppose them selves to see well mou^ already, that God may be all in all, and
Christ have the whole glory of our sauinge health. As he who has trodden the
winepresse of Gods wrath alone for us, without any to help him, and to the end
alss that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world be found culpable
before the Lord, who has shut up all under sin, that he may have mercy on
all, not all that are sinners, but every one that confesses him self so to
be, which he grant for his mercies sake, Amen.

CHAP. III. The corruption of man, known by the Law, is thereby humbled, and
he drawn to repentance, and prepared to receive the promises of the Gospel.
Having before showed the corruptions of our nature, and by what means y^
same is made known unto us, even by the law, which must of necessity pass
upon us by these rules before repeated, that we may be humbled in the sight of
our sins, and weryed with the burden of them, before we can be prepared to
come unto Christ. And how that they do marueilously abuse the Gospel, which
will presume upon the sweets promyses thereof, before the Law has thus
humbled the^. In so much that Christ is the end of the Law, and not the
beginning.

Now it follows that we speak somewhat of those that abuse the law, and of
the means how to shun and avoid the abusing of it. Those which Two abuser^
of the Law 1. In presum^ non. 2. In despair
do abuse the Law, are of two sorts: the one are they that will be justified
for doing those things therein commanded: the other are those which despair
because they are not able to do them. Concerning the first, that is, those
which will be justified by the Law, let them know that the Law was not given
unto us to that end, as the Apostle witnesses to the Rem^nes* By the Law
shall no flesh be justified in the sight of God. Furthermore Deuteronomy. 28. 26 Gal.
3. 10. lam 2.
the Law does justify none but those which are the fulfillers of it, and none
can fulfill the same, but those which are free from sin, both in birth,
thought, and action: but we are polluted in all these, as it has been before
declared.

Christ alone is he, in whom this perfection and cleannes is to be found, he
only has fulfilled it for us, and is justified by the same before his father,
and has also borne the punishmente due unto us, for breakinge of it, that we
which believe might be made just in his justice, and not in the justice of ye
law, which is so far from justifying of us, that if but the least title
thereof should be laid upon our consciences without Christ, it would eue^
condemn us down to the bottom of hell, and therefore it must needs be, that
they do marvelously abuse the Law, and Christ Jesus in like sort, which will
be justified by it: they abuse the Law in presuminge to be justified by that
which is appointed to humble them; and Christ Jesus also, in taking upon them
his pureness and persection, in so much as he alone was appointed of his Fath^^
to be the fulfiller of it. They abuse him also, in making his death and
suffringes to be of none effect, but cast them in the duste as things
needelesse: for so reasons the Apostle to the Galathians, If righteousness
be of the law, then Christ Gal. 2. 21.
dyed without a cause. And again in another place, If they which are Romans 4.
14*
of the law, be heirs, faith is made void, and the promise of none effect.

Here you see then what a grievous absurdity they fall into, that do seek
justification in the Law, which was only given forth to reueyle unto us the
perfection and holiness of God, and our own imperfection and vileness, that
he alone might be found true, and we liars; he just, and we unjust: and
yet contrary^ to this office, which the Lord has appointed it unto, and
contrary unto the Law of our own members, which we s^^ to be rebellious,
and against the Law of God, will presume upon the pureness and perfection
thereof. as if the strength of it did rest within the compass of our filthy
bowels, and so make our selves equal unto God, a marvelous pride, and does
very well declare unto us, who it is that is Antichrist. And thus much for the
first abusers of the Law.

Secondly, the other sort which do 2. Law abused by dispa^^.
abuse it, are those that do despair, because they see themselves not able to
do the same: it has been sufficiently declared already, that y^ Law was not
given forth to the end that we should do it, but rather to show what we are
not able to do, that thereby we might be driven from our selves and from the
Law also, to seek for help elsewhere. For sure it is, that if we do rest in
our selves, or in any Righteousness active is to look to be justified by doing
of good deeds and by the ments of man. 2 Cor. 3. 6. 7 Acts 15. 10.
active righteousness of the Law, the end thereof must needs be desperation,
and for this cause the Law without Christ is called in the Scripture, A
minister of death; the killing letter; ay ^^ke that neither we nor our fathers
were ever able to bear, and let it be so; or let it be that debt of ten
thousand talentes which we are never able to pay: nay, and our estate on the
other side, so poor and needy as we are not able to discharge the least mite
thereof, (as in truth we are not;) yet let us know, that the same is limited,
and has no further an^ hor^tie, then to humble us, and therefore they which
do let it pass any further upon them, do not rightly use the Law, but rather
greatly abuse the same, to the depriuinge of them selves; from all hope of
salvation* i^ they return not in time, and come unto Christ, who the^, and at
that time, does chiefly and only call them, as it is in the 11 of Matthew.
Come unto Mat. 11. ^8.
me all ye that are vvearie and laden, and I will ease you, take my yoke upon
you and learn of me that I am meek and lovvlie in heart, and ye shall find
rest unto your souls, for my yoke is easy and my burden is light: here you
see then, how greatly they ouershoote them selves, which do charge the Lord with
impossible things, as if he did require such a duty at their hands, and lay
such a heavy and intolerable burden, upon their n^ckes, as it is impossible
for the^ to bear: for this place does plainly confute them, and make their
camllation to be of none effect, which tells us that the Lords burden is
light, and his yoke easy, and therefore if any man's conscience be so
ouerburdened with the sight of his sins that be falls into desperation, let
him not think that it is the Lord which has laid this burden upon him, but
rather that he himself has drawn it upon his own neck, by abusing the Laws
through infidelity, because he comes not unto Christ: for y^ end of the Law
is faith in Christ, and not desperation. True it is, y^ every one sees ^^t
this, and therefore when the stinge of death at any time is awaked up in their
consciences, and they looking no other way for ^asment, but into the active
righteousness of the Law, which the more the^ look into, the further they
are from help, and the deeper they plunge the^ selves into sorrow, so that in
the end, it must needs come to pass, y^ they fall into wonderful diseases
and anguishes, both of mind and soul as if they were in y^ present torments
of ^el fire. Hence it is also y^ those woeful and heavy outcryes do arise: I am
damned, I have sinned against the holy ghost, my sins are so great y^ God will
never forgive (...) and therefore wish that they had never been borne, or y^
their lives were c^t short, by some unlawful means: as hanging, drowning,
cutting, sticking, with their own hands, are ready often times to execute, upon
the^ selves But to leave there which are so far gone, standing or fallnig to
their own (...) and come unto those who in their distresses and troubles of
mind and body have some sparkle of the seed of God in them. For sure it is
that the dear children of God ^st times are very far gone this way, and
brought as it were even to y^ lowest pit of fort^w, where they can hardly
perceive any comfort at al^nay rather do show some toke^ of reprobatio^ in
their anguishes. As it may seem, unto him, who is not well experienced, in y^
afflictions which are common unto Gods child, en (...) cause of which great
breach y^ the enemy has made into them, may very well dee in their own
selves, which through ignorance do suffer the law to take such hold, and
enter so far into their consciences, where it has nothing to do. For the
conscience of a spiritual man is the state of Christ, where there should be
nothing else but toy, peace, comfort and consolation in the holy Ghost. And
therefore the law which brings horror and sear has nothing to do with it,
but upon the flesh and old man, which is corrupted with pride and many other
deceyuable lusts, and therefore requires a burden to be laid upon the same,
that it may be kept under, and not triumph ever the spirit ^ inward man, which
should always be at liberty, in the ^^ye of heavenly things. Yet I say,
when contrary to the office which it is appointed unto, they will place the
^^a^ghtnesse and severity thereof upon their consciences, it must needs be
great cause of disquyetnesse and fear diverse ways: for it urges upon
impossible duties, it checketh for neglecting the same, it threateneth and
curses them for doing those things which it has forbidden. And thus y^ poor
conscience being so much over charged with Righteousness active in the Law,
palsiue in the Gospel.
sorrow and fear, because it tooketh only upon y^ Active righteousness of
the Law, what he has done and what he has lest undone, and altogether
forgets that Passive rigteousnes as t^ believe and ^ he saved by that which
Christ has suffered for v^
Passive righteousness of faith, which is begotten in them by the seed of God
through the bowels of Jesus Christ, whereunto they ought to have their chief
and only respect, to strengthen themselves within tune of trouble. And it may
be, that by reason of the great afflictions which the mind is ouerpressed
with, the seed of God be so darkened in them, that they are in doubt whether
it be of his seed or not, And therefore to speak somewhat for the comforting
of those which are so low brought, admitie that in thine own judgment thy
faith is utterly darkened and rased out, so that thou can not perceive any
one sparkle of it in thee, to refresh and ease thy sorrowful mind withal:
yet think with thy self, that y^ which has once been truly and unfeignedly
in thee, the same must needs be in thee still. For Rom 3. 1
it is impossible that our unbelief, should make the faith of God to be of
none effect: for he is always one Mal. 3. 6.
and vnchau^gable, howsoever we do seem to be unto our selves. His gifts
^om. 11. 29.
and callings, are without repentance, how so ever he deals with us by
affl^ctions in this life. Notable instruction to this purpose we have in the
89. ^salm. 89. 30. 34
Psalm, where y^ holy Ghost uses these words: ^f my children forsake my ^aw,
and walk not in my judgment, in they break my statutes, and keep not my
commandments, then will I visit their transgressions with the rod and their
iniquitic with strokes. But my louinge kindness will I not utterly take from
them, nor falsify my truth, my covenant will I not break, nor chauge that
which has gone out of my lips. ^ere you see then by plain testimonies, that
the most dear children of God, when so ever they do offend him, must look for
some punishment at his hand for the same: though not such as they will appoint
unto the^ selves, but rather such as he in his wisdom shall see to be
co^uement and profitable for the bettering of their manners, and furtherance of
their salvation. Yea and it may be, y^ he will e^^rcise or punish them with this
cross, even by darkninge their faith, to make them see their misery without
him, tha^ afterward when strength shall come again, they may learn to: live
more warely, and become more tha^kful unto God for his mercies toward them:
But in conclusion how strau^gty to ever he does punish them which are his, we
have the warrant from his own mouth, who can not lie, that he will not take
his mercy from them, nor fa(...)ye his truth. Yea and for more assurance he
h^th sworn the performance thereof by an oath, saying. As I have sworn that
the waters of Noah shall no more go over the earth, so have I sworn that I will
no more be angry with thee nor reprove Esai. 54. 9. 10.
thee, the moutaines shall remove and the hills shall fall down, but my
there^e shall not depart from thee, nor the covenant of my peace fall a^aie.
And what though we at sometime be blind, shall we think therefore that the
Lords sight is demined also; and what though now and their we be weak and
feeble, that we think or imagine therefore that the Lords strength is decayed
in lik^ sort? far be it from us so to do^* for that were to imagine of the
Lord, as of a mortal man, who judges always according to the present estate*
and from whose eyes a thin s^umme of dross will hide great^ and pretious^
matter, who thinks also that when things are hid and darkened for a time,
that they are lost and gone for ever, specially if they be such as are dear
and precious unto them. But there i^ no such matter in the Lord, who does not
only see the bottom and ground of all things, but also is the beginner and
ender of euerything y^ is done. Who at some time is provoked through our
security and coldness in prayer, to cast a thin scumine of infidelity upon
our faith, and darken it withal, to wake us up to more watchfulness, and
earnest calling upon him: But we (alas) such is our weakness, do think by
and by that all is gone and lost and we utterly forsaken, then we begin to
groan and cry, then we sigh and sobbe, then we sorrow and lamerite, then we
begin to call to mind our unthankfulness for his former merci^s bestowed upon
us. And this is y^ fruit which y^ Lord does seck at our hands, by thus
afflicting of us. who is so far from taking away his seed of faith from us,
that after our earnest prayer and true acknowledgement of our selves, does
both kindle and increase the same, to a far greater measure then ^uer it was
before.

These things being well thought upon, may be a good mean to make us more wise
and valiant in this spiritual warfare, then we have been heretofore: For as
the ashes cast upon the fire, put it not out, but is a means to preseru^ the
same in the night againsts morninge, which otherwise would he consumed. And as
the barrennes of the trees in w^nt ^, are a means to* preserve the root^
against summer, which then will ascend up his juice into the body and branthes
thereof, whereby they are greatly enlarged, and made far more fruitful then
ever then were before: even so are afflictions unto y^ children of God, which
do not only keep them from the barrennes of sin, but also increase and (...)
them in the (...) ^ fruit(...)nes of Gods holy spirit, ^^ the Apostle
witnesses unto the ^^manes: Tribulation bridgeth patience, patience ^om. 5. ^.
4.
experience, experience hope, and hope makes not ashamed. How ^e it there is no
cross pleasant for the present time but very (...) and bitter, as it appears
very (...) in the book of Job, and in the (...) where there is set down unto
us* (...) a platform of the estate of the Church being under the cross, who
pour ou^ ^eaute and grievous complaints, in ^ursing the day and hour o^
birthe* ^^ accusing the Lord of (...)stice, and ^^ Job. 3. ^.
calling into doubt whether he would any more mercy or not. Whereby we Psalm.
77. 7. 8.
may euidentlye perceive* ^^w but de^^ous afflictions are unto us whilst they
are present, specially if they (...) such crosses as these ^olye men were
exercis^* with many (...) which very often had all spiritual strength and
(...) so dark^ned i^ them, y^ they could not perceive (...) spark remaining to
re^^eue themselves with all; ^^t were feign to ^^ye unto y^ former mercies of
God, which they were woonte to find at his hand, or unto his goodness showed
unto their fathers: Because their tentations were such, as did make them
obtimons of his former mercies toward themselves* being surely persuaded*
that as they being in like distresses; called upon him and were dely^ered, so
in like ma^ter he would be no less merciful unto them, although their hope
were even against hope.

But in conclusion how bitte^ so ever their* or our afflictions were, or are,
for the present time, yet the end thereof always brings with it, an (...)
wayght of glory, as we Job. 4^.
cle^relye see, by the end which the Lord made with Job. Which ^. Iam. 5. ^^.
I^mes (exhortinge unto patience) wills v^ to consider of.

And ^^ the testimonye of David also, w^^ after his afflictions now
ouerpassed, and he (...)linge the commodity which they brought unto him,
bursteth out into these words* Before I was afflicted I went astray, ^. 119.
67. 68.
but now I keep thy word. And again, It is good for me that I have been
afflicted, that I might learn thy statutes* So then here you see that the
Prophet confesses that affliction was the mean where by he was not only
procured to know the word, but also to keep it. The wise man in like sort
considering the great commodity which affliction brings unto the church of
God, tells us plainly, that his strength is small which (...)teth in the pay
of adversity. But yet for all that set the commodity thereof he as great as
it shall it behooves us not to use any means whereby to multiply and increase
the same upon our selves, but rather all lawful and godly means that we can
to preuente it. And amongst al y^ rest this may be one, and the chiefest, what
afflictions soever we suffer in body or otherwise* to bear them with pati^nce*
and no^ permit the law for any thing* after it has beaten down the pride of
our flesh, to take hold upon our consciences. For this is the chiefest matter
that my purpose was in this place to handle, how be it I have taken occasion by
y^ way, to speak somewhat for the comfort and instruction of those weak
ones, who (although they have the seed of God in them) do ofte^^nes so far
over shoot them selves this way* by lettinge the Law to take such deep hold
upon their consciences, that all hope of comfort does seem ^o be perished in
them. And as for the rest which are without, I leave them as those to whom
these comfortes do not yet belong, until such time as the law has thus
humbled them also. And thus much for the second abusers of the Law, namelye
for those that do despair.

It remains now that I speak somewhat of the means, whereby we may avoid
these abuses, which is to come unto Christ, and that, as I have before showed,
is the last offi^e of the Law. For the Law having passed upon us, by these
rules before repeated, it is now appointed for us to come unto Christ* and not
presume in the pride of our hearts against the Law^ of our own members to the
fulfilling of it: neither yet faint by the way, because we are not able to do
y^ same, but come unto Christ who is the fulfiller thereof for us. And y^ steps
whereby we come unto him are these: Faith and Repentance. For in the framing
^ith and re^ntance, steps ^ Christ.
of a Christian man, says has the first place, as it is manifest in the
Epistle to the Romans: How shall they call upon him in whom they have not
Romans 10.
believed.

But because I have spoken somewhat already of the root and foundation of
faith* I will now begin at repentance, and so proceed more clearly unto y^
iustifyinge faith which brings with it the peace of conscience for true
repentance stretches further the^ a hatred of sin and fear of Gods
judgments, (which has been somewhat touched already.) For there is
contained in it also the love of virtue, with a hope of his mercies. For so
much does the Prophet* Ezechiel comprehend in describing of y^ same, where he
has these words: If a wicked Ezech 1^. 21 (...). 14 1
man will return from all his sins that he has committed, and keep Os^^ 6.
^. Esaias ^5. 6. Io^l. 2 1^.
all my starutes, and do that which is lawful and right, he shall surely
live and not die*

This is the general description, which the Scripture very plentifully gives
soorth of ^epentance, namely^: A turninge from our own ways which is sin,
into the ways of God, which the prophet calls his statute^: for they alone
are lawful and right in his sight, and to those only which walk therein* he
has joined this promise of life. Hereby you see then how needful a thing
this doctrine is unto every Christian man, for we^ can have no assurance of
life from the Lord, unto our own consciences, except we do warrante it unto
our selves also, by this careful practice and endeavor to strive and ^^ght
continuallye against our own ways, that thereby we may become more
tractable every day then other in the ways of God.

And as for the rest, which have ^^ care this way, but rather have their
delights and actions carried away headl^g unto al fleshly pleasures. Let them
pretend what they can, and brag so much of their knowledge as they list,
yet for all that, they stand in the state of death, and can have no hope of
life in them, before such time as they make this careful indenture unto
godliness, by ^inge of their own corruptions, to be the fruit of it. For
what other thing then this does the holy Ghost means when he wills us to
make our election or calling by good works. Not as if ye 2. Pe^ ^. 10.
assurance thereof lay in our selves, neither yet that we should think yt Lord
to be subject unto change: but rather that we may know this to be the will
of God, even our sanctification 1. These. 4. 3.
that we should abstain from fornication, and that every man might know
how to possess his vessel in holiness, and not in the lusts of
concupiscence and sin as those Gentiles which know not God. For to this
end does the Lord bestow his graces upon us, that we might learn to deny
ungodliness and worldly lusts; and become Ti^. ^. 11. 1^
holy as he him self is holy. Yea and the scripture does bind a marueielous
necessity unto the same, where the holy Ghost has these words. If ye be
risen with Christ, seek those things which are above Col. 3. 1. ^*
where Christ sits at the right hand of God. And set not your affections on
earth lie things. And again, If we call him Father, who 1. Pet. 1. 17.
without respect of persons iudgeeth every man's work, let us spend y^ time
of our being here in fear. And Philip. 2. 1^.
again, work out your salvation with tr^mbling and fear; so that hereby it
is plain that we are not come to the end of our race, when we have gotten a
little understanding and knowledge of the scriptures and how to apply the same:
for that is but to know what weapons we must use in this spiritual warfars,
and how to handle y^ same for our own defenc^; neither when we are come to the
sight and mistyking^ of our sins and corruptions wherein we do displease y^
Lord: for y^ is no other also then to be brought out into y^ field in the
sight of our enemies, y^ devil, y^ world, and the flesh, against whom we must
fight and use these weapons for y^ overthrow of the^, lest they prevail,
against us, and make us more secure in sin then ever we were before. So that
the greatest ^ most daungerouse part of our spiritual warfare is as yet
unaccomplished: that is the subduing and overthrow of these enemies. The first
and thie^est of them which we must set upon, and seek to subdue, is our own
flesh, which if that be once mastered the other two are but scarre crows, and
can never be able to do us any great harm. Know you not that one secret and
unknown enemy in a besieged city is more hurtful then a hundred known
enemies without the same? But if this secret enem^s which is within be once
known and subdued (nay although their be many of them) yet as long as they
be kept under bo^ds they can not be hurtful at al, and their hope also
greatly deca^ed which are without. The devil, the world, are enemies without, and
can not possibly prevail any whit with us, until such time as they get some
lyking and ^ntertaineme^t of our affections, which if they do: certainly there
is like to be a great spoil and the whole man to be^ brought into utter
ruin* unless there be a short return, and these affections of ours quickly
called home again under subjection of ye spirit. Surely a matter wherein the
dear children of God o^tetimes do very far forget and ouershoot themselves.
And therefore this is good counsel unto those which have strigth to receive it,
y^ as often as our affections do begin to stray o^t after y^ desire and love
of worldly things or fleshly co^cucupisce^ces any kind of way: so often to
suspect our selves of some danger toward, and esteem of the^, as of our home
enemies, which now begin to come in league with those which are without,
namely the world and the devil, thereby to work some treason against us. And
therefore to make all possible speed that we can to cut thort and restrain
them, lest in the end through their sugared entycementes, they beget both the
will and mind to consent also. This is y^ cause why the scripture is so
plentiful and earnest in commending unto us the doctrine of mortification as a
chief fruit of our repentance and tells us plainly, y^ if we will be
Christ's, we must crucify the flesh with the affections and lusts thereof,
that is, we must daily and continually strive and fight against our hands, and
heart, word, and thought, that they may be crucified and killed from all
unrighteousness: As pride, covetousness, deceit, blasphemy, or any other
ungodliness; that the contrary virtues, as hu(...)itie, liberallity,
innocence, or whatsoever is of piety, may live and grow in us. For before we
have some striving in our selves to slay those vices, it is impossible that we^
should have any feeling of these other virtues: for as we do conceive a
mislyking of the one, so we shall receive a love and lyking toward the other:
they can not both live together in us. This much does the Apostle give us to
understand where he has these words: Know you not that to vvho^ so ever you
give your selves as servants Romans 6. 16. 20.
to obeie, his servants you are to whom you obeie, whether it be of sin
unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness. So that whilst we are the
servants of sin, we have no part nor portion in righteousness, no more then
death has with life, or hell with heaven. Well then, seeing y^ case stands so,
let us bewise in choosing unto our selves y^ better part, which is obedience
unto righteousness, that we may become the servants and sons of God. And
although it be a crown which can not be had without great and tedious
stryuing, yet let us know that it is worthy of all the labor that we shall
or can bestow upon it: the end will bring recompense ten thousand fold, as
the Apostle witnesses. The afflictions of this life are Romans 8 18.
not vvorthie of the glory that shall be shevved unto us. And therefore let us
play the valiant soldiers, fight, strive, kill, crucify, and condemn,
whatsoever in us may be ame hinderance thereunto, yea although it be as dear
unto us as our eye or hand, yet Mat. 5. 9
we must pull it out and cast it off, for better it is to go into life hault,
maiemed, or blind, then into eternal fire having al our members. In which
words our Savior Christ teaches us to use vyolence even against our own
nature: for the kingdom of Gods sake. Not in cuttnig of the members of our
bodies, but in rooting out the affections of the mind, how dear so ever they
are unto us, upon whom these affections do rest. Whether it be Father, or
Mother, wife, or children, yet if the love of them be any let unto us in the
way^ of life, pull them cut, cut them off, and cast them away, so that if it
stand us upon to cast away those affections out of our hearts, which have so
great show of good in them, and are both commanded and commended in
scripture, for the love of Gods kingdom: How much more then behooves it be,
to root out those private affections, which are not only free from any show
of good: but also bring great ^^^lis and were, dible inco^ueniences with them,
and are straightly forbidden in the word of God. As aduiterie, fornication,
uncleanness, ^llo. 31.
unnatural lusts, evil concupiscence, covetousness, deceipte, lieing,
swearing, cursed speaking, and such like. For if those former good affections,
may at some time, be a hunderance unto us in the way of life: much more these
^^illes at all times, and therefore not to be suffered at any time, nor in any
person, if they will norish any hope of salvation in them selves. For they are
no other, the^ the very whelps of Babylon, which Psalm. 137. 3.
we are charged to destroy and breaks their bones in pieces while they are
young, lest through their long contiduance, they grow to such strength, and
take so sure hold upon us, y^ we become slaves unto them. Let us look unto
it, therefore, and root them out, as soon as any m^tion thereof does appear
in us. Good admonition to this purpose we have in the Epistle to the Ep^e. 4.
26.
Ephesians. Be angry and sin not, let not the Sun go down upon your
wrath. And again in y^ 4 Psalm: Tremble and sin not, examine thine own
heart upon thy bed and be still. That is, we should strive with our hearts
even in our secret chambers upon our bed against sin y^ it sleep not, nor
have any continuance with us, for fear of the discommoditie that may come
thereby. True it is, that sin will be in us so long as we do remain in
this body: but let us Romans 6. 12
take heed that it do not reign and bear rule in us, otherwise then a
condemned wretch, which has already Romans ^. 3.
received the sentence of death. And let us give it such welcome, as the seed
Genesis 3. 15
of the serpent with whom we must be at continual enmity and striffe. And all
be it the case stand so with us, that we are not only guilty in the affection,
but also drowned in the action of every sin that can be named: yet let us
know for our comfort, that true repentance is of strength to purge them all
away and make us pure in the sight of God. As it is witnessed in the fourth of
Esaias, where the Lord makes this promise unto the people upon the condition of
repentance: Though your sins were as crimson, they shall be made white as
snow, and though they were red as scarlate, they shall be made like vvolle.
And therefore if the Lord at any time in mercy, shall reueile or make known
unto any man, all the sins that he has committed, throughout his whole
life: yet there is no cause why we should despair, how great and grievous so
ever they be. For the Lord in opening of them has no such meaning in him, but
rather thereby does dra^^e us to a consideration of our inordinate steps, how
far we have strayed aside from him, and does move us also by that mean to
look into the word of God, which is a lantern unto Psalm. 119. 109.
our feet, and a light unto our paths: that thereby we may see how to turn
again into the right way, and what duties there are required of us, for the
purginge and cleansinge away of these great sins. There may the thief which
has stoalne, learn to Ephesians. 4. 28.
steal no more, but labor truly ^ith his own hands in some lawful
vocation, that he may be able to minister unto the necessity of others. There
may the deceitful per^ured person, learn to restore home his evil gotten
gooddes, and take ^ more righteous course afterward. There may the
fornicators, and adulterers, 1. Cor. 7. 2.
learn to leave off their vnclea^nesse, and content them selves every man
with his own wife, and every woman with her own husband. Leuit 24. 15 16.
1. Tim 6. 7. 8
There may the blasphemous swearer learn to fear an oath, and tremble at the
majesty of God; and the greedye covetous person, to content himself with
food and raiment, because he ^en 3 19.
brought nothing into this world, and shall carry as little out. There may
the proud person learn to be^ humble, because he is made of duste, and to
dust shall return.

And to conclude, there may every Psalm 119 9.
sinner, learn to redress his mordinate Phil. 3. 8.
ways, and to esteem of all the pleasures and profits of this life as
do^gue, in respect of Christ. For this is the fruit which the Lord by
reueylinge our sins, does look for at our hands, and this change is
required in every one of us, before we can truly be turned unto John. 3 3.
him, in so much as it is the fruit of our second birth, without the which no
man can see the kingdom of God. Therefore it stands us upon, so much the more
earnestly to practice this change in our selves, that we may every day be
re^ued into a more perfitte shape then other: For true and unfeigned repentance
is nothing else, then a continual striving to better our manners. And to this
end are all those spiritual exercises appointed by the holy Ghost in the
church of Christ, as prayer, preaching, praises, sacraments, with such like.
If therefore our minds in frequentinge of them, be not to profit this way: I
see not how we shall profit our selves at all, yea although we frequent them
very often.

May we not read for warrant hereof, very plentifully in the old Testament,
how that the Lord did even loath their Sacrifices, and other spiritual
exercyses commanded in the Law for the service of God: when men are holden in
them, without any conscience of sin, or careful practice unto newenes of
life, whereunto chiefly they were ordained, as says the Lord by his Prophet.
Bring no more oblations in vain* ^ay. 1. 11.
Incense is abomination unto me, I cannot suffer your nevve moons nor
Sabbath days, it is iniquity: nor solemn assemblies, my soul hates your
nevve moons, and your appointed feasts, they are a burden unto me, I am
vvearie to bear the^; When you stretch forth your hands I vvil hide mine eyes
from you, and though you make many prayers, I will not hear you. And again
in another place: Take away from me Amo^ 5. 23.
the multitude of your songs, I can not abide the melody of the vials. And
again. He that kills a Bullock, Esaias. 56. 3.
is as he that slevve a man, and he that sacrifices a sheep, is as if he cut
off a dogs neck, he that offreth an oblation, as if he offered svvines
blood, and he that remembers incense, as if he sanctified an Idol.

And why does the Lord thus abhor those things, which otherwise he has
commanded? The causes are set down also, which be these: the neglects of
judgment, want of mercy toward their brethren, for so says the holy Ghost:
Their hands are full of Esaias. ^
blood; and the preferring of their own ways, which is sin, wherein they
did set their whole delight, before the ways of God. They thought that the
bare use of these outward ceremonies or shadows, was so much as y^ Lord did
require, or look for at their hands, supposing him to be affectionated like
unto a common strumpet, who always looks unto the gift, and never
respects the mind or qualities of the giver. They had forgotten that the
Lord will have mercy and not sacrifice: Os^. 6. 6.
and therefore made no conscience in falsifying their weight, and making their
measure small, and price Amos. 8. 5. 6.
great, that they might bie the pore for silver, and the needy for shows.
Yea and in the time of their new moons, and sabaothes also, they thought
every day to be ten, till these feasts were ouerpassed, that they might be^ at
whom again, to utter their refus^ corn: thinking all y^ time lost which was
spent in the service of God, preferring eue^ the basest of their odd
reckoninges, that made any thing for their private profit, before it. And this
was the cause why the Lord did abhor their sacrifices, which otherwise he
both commanded and commended. But we may speak much more profitablie of this
in applyinge the same unto our time: sor were not their sacrifices in that time
of the law, as precious in the sight of God, as our sacraments are now under
the Gospel? And are not our sins also of this age, as monstrous as ever
were theirs? And what is behind t^^^, that those our seals of Baptism and
the Lords Supper, which we make so much accounte of, and so smoothelye
shrowde our selves under, should not be as loathsome in the eyes of God* as
ever were theirs at that time? Surely I can perceive no reason to the contrary,
so long as we are holden in them, without remorse of sin, or care unto
newness of life, whereunto they were appointed. For these outward seals are
so far forth profitable unto us, as we are partakers of those spiritual
graces which are figured under them in Baptism. Therefore we have to consider
our ^ree forgiveness of sins, washed away in the blood of Christ, that as
Christ died and was buried for our sins, Rom
so we also should die unto sin, that it have no more rule in our mortal
bodies. And as Christ is risen again from the dead, death having no more
dominion over him: so we should after live in newness of life, offering up
unto God our bodies and souls which he has purchased and redeemed unto him
self. The Lords Supper also is a mean to refresh and renew our dull memories
in these so great mercyes and benefits bestowed upon us in Christ, that
every day we may become more thankful then other for the same. These
considerations or profitinges in the observation of the Sacraments beeinge
laid aside, there remains not one spark of Religion or holiness in them,
as the holy Prophet David most plainelye proves unto us out of the fi^tie
Psalm, where he says: I will not reprove thee for thy sacrifices Psalm. 50.
8.
and burnt offerings which have not been continued before me, says the Lord.
I will not take a bullock out of thy house, or goats out of thy fold, the
whole world is mine and all that therein is. But what follows? Offer to
god praise and pay thy vows unto the most 14
highest. Lo these are the duties which the Lord does chiefly lo^ke for at
our hands: for by offering of praise is meant no other thing then a continual
thankful remembrance of the great benefits bestowed upon us in Christ, which
the Lords supper does The Lords Supper.
lively represent unto us, as I have before showed, by paying or performing
our vows.

We are taught also manfullye to fight under y^ banner of Christ, against
Baptism
the devil, the world, and our own flesh, whereunto we have bound our
selves under the seal of baptism, as by a solemn oath made in our behalf by
two or three witnesses. These I say are the things which we must have our
chief respect unto, in the partaking of those outward elements, or else they
can bring no profit unto us, there is no religion in them, and therefore so
loathsome unto the Lord that in no wise he can digest the same, but is ready
even to belche against it: yea and it shall be said unto those in the end^ which
do frequent them in this sort, Who has required these things at Esa. 1^^.
your hands?

Surely the knowledge of this, can not but be very profitable for our time, if
we would let it take some root in our hearts. For who sees not that the
most part of men are carried away with a blind persuasion of religion and
holiness, which they themselves do think to be truly in them, because they
do resort unto the outward ceremonies commanded in the word, and although
all those duties, wherefore these spiritual exercises are ordained, be clean
shut out of their lives they make no conscience of it at all, but without
blushing will set an impudent face upon it y^ they are as good christians as
any can be, although their lives do testify unto the whole world that there
is not one spark of true and unfeigned christianity in them. Well, I can
think more of this, then now ray leisure will serve to condemn at large. Yet
thus much may I say, that Christ can have no entrance into us, nor we any way
unto him, except the path be first prepared by repentance, by an unfeigned
acknowledginge of our sins, with earnes^ stryuinge to better our
conversation. Shut up thy heart from these things, and thou do so much as in
thee lies, to wall thy self about with brass, that Christ by his spirit may
have no entrance into thee, and prouokest him in like sort, so to hedge up his
mercies and graces from thy soul, that thou shall never have any part in
them. How miserable then will thy case be, for having once shut out thy self
from Christ, the way to heaven also, is shut up from thee, hell gapeth with
open mouth, ready to receive thee, and y^ deuiles wait with great diligence to
carry thy soul into ye everlasting torments thereof. Look unto it
therefore, and let us be wise: for if the entertainment of Christ, will be a
mean to set us free from all these miseries: what great diligence ought we to
use in preparinge a way for him, that he may have free passage unto us.
Certain it is that before he can come, the way must be prepared, and there is
no^ other mean to prepare the same, but by repentance. For our barraine
hearts are that very desert which y^ Prophet Esaias speaks of, where the
Lords Esai. 40. 3. 4.
way must be prepared before his coming, by filling up every low valley, and
daungerouse hoale, which is our ignorance and infidelity, that must be filled
up with the true knowledge of God: by beating down every high mountain, that
is our pride and arrogancy, which must be beaten upon with the mattocke of
Gods judgments, till such time as we be humbled and brought low in our own
eyes: by making every crooked path straight, which is the crooked inventions of
man's brain, contrary to the will of God, which must be made straight and
plain by y^ light of his word: and the rough ways plain, by rough ways is
meant, not only stubbornness and obstinacy, but also all other sins and
vices whatsoever. Which may be very well compared unto stones and stumbling
blocks, which are as hindrances in the Lords way, that he can not have free
passage unto us, until such time, as the delight and will unto them, be clean
pared and swept away out of our hearts. The forerunner, which was sent to
prepare this way, was John Baptist, and the only mean which he used to
prepare the same, was by preachinge repentance, Repent for the kingdom of Mat.
3. ^. 3.
God is at hand This was the general doctrine which he preached for the
accomplishing of this work, not unto one sort of people, but unto all that
ever came unto him. And in token of the necessity thereof, he would receive
none unto his baptism, before they had made open confession of all their Mar.
1. ^
sins, ensign that as a chief mean whereby their own consciences might
witness unto them selves, how needfully it was required in every one to
repent, seeinge their own mouths did confess such matter to be in them, as
is worthy of repentance. Furthermore when any came unto him, whom he perceived
by some inward mo^^^, or outward token, not to have their hearts aright as
the malicious Pharisees, and Saduces, he manessed them sharply with the
judgments of God, calling them a Generation of vipers. M^t. 3. 7. 8.
Charginge them straightly to bring forth the fruit worthy of amendment of
life, before they could be fit to receive that seal of the new covenant.
And after John was beheaded, our Savior Christ also continued this doctrine of
repentance unto the Jews, saying. Amend your lives for the M^^ 4 17.
kingdom of God is at hand. And again, The time is fulfilled, the M^r. 1. 15.
kingdom of God is at hand, repent and believe the Gospel. For this cause he
came into ye world not to call righteous, M^^. 9. 13.
but sinners to repentance: which precept belongs not only unto the Jews,
but we Gentiles also are under y^ same condition in like sort, as it is
witnessed in y^ Acts. God has given Act. 11. 18.
unto the Gentiles, repentance unto life also. True it is, that it had his
beginning at the Jews, and so from the^ unto us Gentiles: for to this end
Christ dyed, was buried and rose again: that repentance and remission of
sins, ^uke 21. 46. ^. verses.
might be preached unto all nations, beginning at Jerusalem. So then hereby it
is plain, that as there is noe other mean to prepare y^ Lords way but by
repentance: so in like sort this office of preparing, belongs not unto John
and our savior Christ alone, but unto all the Apostles and ministers of God,
even to the worlds and. Neither is it a duty y^ is simply requy^ed of the
Jews thus to be prepared: but we Gentiles also (as many as will give any
entertaineme^t unto y^ Lord) must put our necks under y^ yoke, and submit our
selves unto the same order of discipline in the bettering of our manners,
before our earthly tabernacles can fitly be prepared, to receive him. Saint
Paul who was appointed of y^ Lord as a chief minister for y^ conversion of y^
Gentiles, who also was so careful in his office, that he labored ^. 20. 20.
21. ^erses.
night and day even with tears, for the conversion of the^, teaching openly
and in euey house, the repentance toward God, and the faith toward our Lord
Jesus Christ. The sa^e S. Paul (I say) tells us plainly Titus. 3. 8 9.
y^ they which have believed God, must be careful to show forth good works,
charging Titus his Son as Titus. 14.
touching the new birth, who was the^ minister of Creta, y^ he should earnestly
exhort his auditory unto y^ same, for this says he is good and profitable unto
all men, high and low, rich and poor, bond and free, every one that believes
in Christ this must be y^ s^^nt of it: a care to show forth good works,
circu^spection of life toward them y^ do not yet believe, and a sham(...)nes
for our former negli^e^ce. S. James compares y^ says James. 2. 2^
which is without these effects, unto a body without a spirit: which in y^ eyes
of man is not only dead, but also very loathsome and noisome. Eue^ so is our
faith y^ is void of good works in y^ eyes of God, as our savior Christ makes
it Mar^. 11. 14
plain to us by cursing y^ ^ig tree because it was fruitless. By casting y^
wicked guest into utter darkness, because he Mat. 22. 12.
presumed unto the marriage without a wedding garment. And by reiectinge Mat.
25. 3. 12.
those foolish virgins, because they had no oil in their lamps. Which
examples, do very well show unto us, that faith and works must go together,
how be it not in the matter of justification before God, yet in our
conversation before men, or else neither of both can be accepted. For as these
foolish virgins could not be received for their empty Lamps, nor the
fruitless tree, spared for his leaves, nor yet the wicked guest accounted of,
for his resorting unto the heavenly banquet, seeing he wanted his marriage
garment: even so we in like sort shall be as little accounted of, for our outward
knowledge and profession, so long as the san^e is without those effects and
fruits, that belong unto true repentance. For whilst our religion or
christianity stands in a bare profession, what are we any better then
empty Lamps without oil, trees bearinge leaves, but noe fruit, wicked
guestes which eythor ^or custom or company resort often unto the Lords
table, but never put on the wedding garment. And therefore when the Lord shall
come to us his guestes, Mat. 22. ^1.
alas what shall then become of us but cursednes and reiection into utter
darcknesse, where is weeping and gnashing of teeth. I will not say but that now
for a time we may have a name that we live, but then it shall be found out
that we are dead: it may seem now unto me^ that we have some what, but then
shall be taken from us, even that which in truth, we never had. Know you not
what is written, There is no Luke. 12 ^.
thing covered that shall not be reueiled, neither hid that shall not be made
known. Let us not therefore any longer, so securelye satisfy our selves in
the shadow of Christianity, when the true substance is away, for if a bare
outward profession may stand for payment before the Lord, why the^ should not
the devils be justified as well as we, for they profess openly that Jesus is
the Son of God: Nay saint James says more, that the devils James. 2. 1^.
do believe and tremble. But there are a great many of us which do make much
boast of our faith, and yet never tremble, neither at our own sins, nor at
the judgments of God: and therefore if the devils were not already condemned, it
might well be said of them, that they are nearer unto salvation then a great
many of our mouth Gospellers in these days. Surely it is strange, that the
Gospel (being of such excellency and power as it is, and we pretending so
great knowledge of the lame as we do) should gain so little fruit at our
hands. We may see by plentiful testimony of Scripture, how wo^der^^llie the
knowledge thereof has wrought in the hearts of Gods children heretofore, and
what great duties it has persuaded them to 2* Cor. 6. 6.
pass over, in hunger and thirst, in cold ^ Cor. 11. 24. 25. Hebr. 1^. 37. 38.
and nakedness, in watchings and fastinges, in great weakness, long^
prayer, and tedious travels and persecutions diverse ways: Some wandering up and
down in wilderness, clothed in Sheep skins, and Goats skins, having
their abode in de^mes and caves of the earth, to declare that the Lord was
their portion, Psalm. 119. 57.
and that they had no kingdom in this life, and therefore bade the world adu^,
which was not worthy of them. Others also of Gods children, whom he preferred
to great r^ches ^ honor. lived in the possession thereof, as if nothing of the
same belonged privately unto themselves. And therefore oftetunes Gen 13. 9.
resigned over even their own right to buy peace: using this world as though
they had h^^ ^^ inheritance therein, confessing their estate here to be no
other but as p^igrunes and strangers, and therefore esteemed all things Gen 47.
9.
in this world as dongue, in respect of that heavenly comfort which was laid
Phil. ^. ^.
up for them in Christ Jesus. All these things we know, and can talk very
ple^ti^ullie of them when we come in company of those that d^e favor
religion. We ca^ tell of Joseph how he preferred Genesis ^9. 20.
y^ dungeo^ and Irons which did pear^e his soul, before the liberty and glory
of Po^^phers house: and of Moses, how he He^ 11. 24. 25. 26.
forsook to be called y^ son of Phara^s daughter, and chase rather to suffer
afflictions with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a
season. We can tell also of David how he made his choys^, rather to be made
a door keeper in the Lords house, then ^sal 84. 10.
to be head ruler in the gilded (...)aces of wicked Princes. And of the
Apostles in (...)e sort, how the^re chie^est glory in this ^^e, was to suffer
afflictions for the name of Christ, all this is Act. 5 40. 41.
most ^^ue and these great effects and fruit ^ath says gained at their hands
as the holy Ghost witnesses unto the Hebrews. And how shall we think H^br.
11.
then that we have the same says* when we are not only void of these virtues
but also have placed in the room of every of them, a vice repugnant thereunto.
Well I must conclude that our faith is feigned, and we greatly blinded to think
that the holy Ghost is become so careless of his own glory now in these last
days, and especially where the Gospel is so plentifully preached. Nay look
further and we shall find out a more grosser blindness then all this: for are
we not oftentimes forced to pronounce sentence of condemnation upon our own
souls, and we perceive it not? D^e we not say daily that the Lord will not
hold him guiltless Exodus 2^ ^^
that takes his name in vain, and yet without any remorse, we toss the same
in our mouths, like a tennisse ball, about every trifling toye, beside also
our vain abusing of his word, and neglecte of duty therein, which often in
the Scripture is taken for his name. Again, are we not ready always Leuit.
22. 31. 3^
with the congregation, to beg forgiveness conditionally of the Lord, as we
forgive others? Yet we will Mat. 6. 12.
forgive none, but are moved with every fleabyting, to seek revenge to the
uttermost, and therefore do no other then crave that the judgments and
vengeance of God may seuerelye be executed upon us. But we see not this, and
therefore proc^ede on forwards in our sins, as the horse rusheth unto the
battle, and never respects the Ierem 8. 6.
great dangers that are before his eyes.

Furthermore do we not all willingly yeald unto this, that these are y^ last
days, and that there is no sign unaccomplished, which our Savior Christ has
foreshewed to be before his coming, so that now not only the bodies, but
also the very fruit it self does appear to declare that summer is already
come, that the regions John 4 35. Revel. 14. 18. 19.
are even now white unto harvest, yea and that the sickle is already thrust into
the earth, as we may clearly ^ee by the general ^h^king thereof, so that
there is nothing else to be looked for, but the appearing of the son of man in
the Mat. 2^. 30. 31.
clouds, the voice of the Archangell, and the sound of the trumpe of God,
arise you dead and come to judgment, All these things I say, we do with an
outward willingness yeald unto, because the truth thereof is so manifest, that
it can by no means be denied: and what is the cause then, that all these
evident tokens of the final judgment which is so near at hand, will not awake
us out of our deep sleep in sin, unto repentance and newness of life, that
we may be readily prepared for the Bridegroom. Surely an evil Mat 25. 6.
H(...). 3, 12. Luke. 12. ^5.
heart has deceived us: for we say in our selves, that the Lord will defer
his coming, and therefore take boldness to deal more roughly with our fellow
servants. But alas, this blind persuasion of le^gthning ye days cannot stand:
for the holy ghost says expreslye, that for the electes sake those days shall
Mat. 24. 22,
be shortened, which is an item that might strike a great fear into our Esaias.
29. 10. Esaias. 6. 9. 10.
hearts, if a spirit of slumber had not overwhelmed us: but I see no other
then yt the saying of the Prophet Esaias is fulfilled upon our english nation, by
seeing they shall see and not perceive, and hearing they shall hear and not
understand, lest they should convert and I should heal them. For if it were
not so, how were it possible for us to condemn and cast behind our heels so
many loving admonitions, so many beseechings and prayings, even by the Romans 12
1. 2. Cor. 5. 20.
mercifulnes of God, and in Christ's behalf, that we will be reconcyled unto
him? So many fatherly warnings which the holy Ghost does use in persuading us
unto watchfulness, that we may be saved, sometime by y^ certainty of the day,
that it shall come, and the terriblenesse thereof when it comes, as Saint
Luke paynteth it out.

There shall be trouble and perplexity Luke. 21. 25. 2^
amongst nations, the s^^ and the waters shall rore, and men's hearts shall
fail them for fear, and for looking after those things that shall come upon
Mat. 24. 27.
the earth, sometime by the suddenesse of it, even as the lightning shines out
of the East, and goes unto the West, so shall the coming of the Son of man
be. And sometime by the uncertainty Mark. 13. 3^.
of the hour, whether at evening, or at midnight, at the cock crowing, or in
the dawning, least if he come suddenly, should find you sleepinge. Sometime
also by the vigilantnesse and cruelty of our enemy the devil, who goes
about like a devouring and roaring Lion, continually seeking whom 1. Pet. 5. 8.
he may devour. But how little account we make of all these fatherlye
warnings and admonitions, all those which have eyes to see, may see it, and let
all them that have hearts of flesh Eze. 36. 26. and 9. 4.
lament and mourn for the same, that they may be spared from the evil day,
and not perish with the careless world, but especially with our own Land,
with whom it cannot be, but that the Lord has a great controversy, unless we
should think that the most high^st does speak words in vain: nay Esai. 45.
19.
he says not in vain unto the seed of Jacob, seek ye me, it is not for
naught that the Lord has continued y^ preachinge of his word amongst our
nation this many years, rysinge up early, and late, to send Prophets,
Preachers, Iere. 7. 13.
and wise men unto us, who have pyped very sweetly, and mourned very
lamentably unto us. And Mat. 11 17.
therefore if we will not dance at their (...)th, nor weep at their
mourning: that is, if we will not rejoice at y^ great mercies and sweet
promises of God, which he offers unto us by them, nor tremble and fear at
the mournful long of his heavy plagues and judgments which he thundereth out
aginst us by their mouths; In like sort if we will needs harden our hearts
like an Adamant stone, and stop our ears Zic. 7. 11. 12.
to shut out the graces of God from our souls which he so plentifully offers
unto us* yet let us know, that a Pr^phet has been amongst us, and y^ grace
and mercy by the preaching of y^ Gospel has been generally proferred unto our
Land that thereby we may be^ clean without excuse, and our blood^ justly upon
our own heads. For if they be worthy of stripes for their ignorance which
never saw any light of knowledge: how much more worthy are they of punishment,
who through long continuance of the true light shyninge amongst them, have
almost forgotten what darkness means, if they take not the benefit of it,
but remain still unfruitful, and unthankful for the same. Surely this is the
estate of our nation at this day: for have we not had the Gospel so long time
amongst us, that the most of us, either never saw, or have almost clean
forgotten what poper^^ means. Well look unto it therefore, and let us not
think our selves to be happier then other Lands, because we have the
Gospel, unless we bring forth such fruits of repentance, and newenesse of
life, as the same does require at our hands. For to that end has he sent it
amongst us, and therefore if it take not his effect wherefore it was sent* yet
let us be sure that the Lord will be known to be King at the Last, and it
shall be said unto us as the holy Ghost does testify in a certain place:
Prou. 1. 24 30.
because I have called and ye refused, I have stretched out my hand, and none
would regard, but ye have despised my counsel and would none of my
correction, therefore I will also laugh at your destruction, and will mock
when your fear comes like sudden desolation, and your destruction as a
whi^le wind, when affliction and anguish shall come upon you, then shall they
call but I will not answer, they shall seek me early, and shall not find
me, and why: the reason is added, because they refused knowledge, and did not
choose the fear of the Lord, they would none of my counsel, but despised my
corrections.

And what other thing is if, but a castinge away of the L^des counsel, when
we will not give such entertainment unto his word as the same requires at
out hands; or how much better is it the^ a despysing of his corrections, when
we will not be warned by so many spectacles of his anger* applying them rather
unto second causes, and so take occasion thereby unto greater security. This
sin of casting away or despysing the Lords counsel, how greatly it does
displease him, our Savior Christ, does make known unto us, by pronou^cing of
so grievous woes, against those cities of Judah, ^at. 11. 2^.
wherein he had preached most, and done most of his great works, because they
repented not, affirming that it should be easier for Sodom and Gomorrham y^
judgment day then for them. For says he, if the great works which are done
amongst you, had been done in the^, they had repented long ago in sackcloth
and ashes: and may it not as well be said of England, in this respect also,
that it shall be easier for France, Flastder^, Spain, and for Rome in the
judgment day then for them? For who knows how wonderful their^ repentance
should have been ear^ this time, if they had the Gospel preached amongst
them, so long as we have had the same. And besides that, their want of it
has made them to commit many sins, through Ignorance, because they knew no
better: but our having of it has left us clean without excuse, so that now
we have no cloak for our sins, John. 15. 22
and therefore in conclusion, our condemnation must needs, be far more just
and greater then theires, except we repent in time. Thus much have I thought
good to speak unto y^ careless which are so soundly lulled asleep in
Iezabells bed, a bed of security: that if it be possible some of them may
be awaked whylest the Ebr. 3. 8.
day is present and prepare them selves to come unto Christ. For admit it be
so that many have gotten great and excellent knowledge by the preachinge of
the Gospel: yet what is this knowledge without repentance? surely even dead.
For who knows not that practice is it which gives life thereunto, as the
Apostle witnesses in a certain place, where he^ has these words: though I
had all knowledge and knew all secrets, ^ea, if I had faith that I could
remove 1. Cor. 1^. ^.
move mountains, and had no love, it could profit me nothing. And as
repentance or newness of conuesation is that which gives life unto our
knowledge, so also it abandoneth from us all unlawful pleasures, and not so
only but does moderate and bring us unto the true use of those that be
lawful: as eating, drinking, sleeping, appar^ling our selves, and is forth, in
every of which necessity, satan has put marvelous snayres, and occasions of
fallings. If temperance and sobriety, which are special fruits belonging
thereunto do not somewhat bear rule over our affections, as those which are
spiritually minded, do very well understand: unto whom I will now turn my
self, a little, by the way of admonition, and so proceed unto the justifying
faith, which I before have promised to speak of, and which only does belong
unto them. For those are they which in great humility do judge and condemn
them selves, that they may not be condemned of the Lord. Those are they which
are at contin^all warfare not only against all their outward senses and
actions of the body that they behold not with pausing, nor consent with delight
unto every vanity, but also against the very motions aid thoughts of the mind
to restrain aid kill them when soever they begin t^ move the affections to
stray out aft^r the desire of unlawful things, neyher are they grieved at
these inward ^^rruptions only, but also it p^^cheth them ^uen to the very
heart, that any auour thereof should be found about them: for they hate the
very coat y^ ^s bespotted with the flesh, as Saint Jude witnesses. And
therefore use a narueylouse straightness eue^ against heir own nature, in
abridginge the (...) from y^ plenty of those pleasures, and profittes which
before tune they ^aue delighted in. Stryuinge also, truth great violence to
bring their ^n^ndes in such subjection unto y^ spirit, that neither
prosperity nor aduersi^ie, shall much move their minds ^yther to joy or
sorrow, to be lifted ^p, or cast down: And having ^^ce thus mastered
themselves in ^arninge perfectly to be full, to be^ empty, to abound, and to
have nothing, contentinge them selves in every estate, whether it be pouerte,
or riches, sickness, health, or what soever: attributinge no happiness unto
the one, nor unhappiness unto the other, (because that by these outward
things no man knows whether he be worthy of love or hate) but rather
receive every thing as from the Lords hand, to whom they live ^om. ^. 28.
who also is become their Father in Jesus Christ, and therefore works all
for the best unto them. This is a perfect estate, and certain it is that
there must be no end of our repentance, before we have thus far prevailed
and gotten the vi^tory over our rebellious nature, and yet is there no such
stayednesse in it, neither that after we have once thus fa^ maistered our own
wills, that ther^ we should become secure and careless as if we were now at our
journeys en^ and need go no further. Nay but the blessed man Job teaches us
another lesson, that our life here on earth is (...) continual warfare, not
only against flesh and blood, but also against spiritual wickedness in
heavenly things, against every thing that is exalted against the knowledge of
God, and must have no stay until every affection in us be brought wholly and
for ever under the obedience of Christ, which can not be in this life, but in
that which is to come: and therefore our striuinge must be with perseverance,
and let our perseverance us also with courage: for the crown which we labor
for, is worthy of running. But if our running do fail before we come to the
third hour, let us not fainte, but rather learn to go: and if it be so
that our goinge begin to wax tedious before the fixte hour be over past, yet
let us not turn back again for any thing, but rather he down and creep, so
that it be forwards, and all is well; yea if all natural strength do fail
Mat. 20.
before the nienth hour be over paste, yet let our minds and desires go
forwards still in earnest prayer, and calling upon the Lord for strength, in
heavy sighs and gromings, under the but then of our corruptions, which we hate
even as hell, because they hinder our going forwards unto goodness, and can by
no means avoid them: and let that inward part of us never saint, but go
forwards still, until the twei^t and last hour be past, in which we shall
receive our wages. For the very grace and pride of our Christian race is to
persevere in the fruits and effects of repentance, as our Savior Christ
witnesses: he that endures to the end shall be safe.

CHAP. IIII. Of Faith, and the nature and effects thereof, offered in the
Gospel.
Having showed before, that the beginning of our faith (if it be unfeigned) is
fear, which fear does engender in us a godly sorrow, out of which sorrow
also ryseth such a repentance, as is never to be repented off, and having
spoken also of y^ fruits and effects which belong thereunto, and of the
necessity of it, that without the same, all other exercises of Religion are to
no purpose, and by what means also we are brought thereunto, namely by the
Law, which is our schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ: Now it remains
that I proceed unto the justifying faith, which makes all sure, and the hope
whereof also is it which ministers comfort and incourageme^t unto us in all
those former tedious travels. Yea and the possession thereof after the heat of
these conflictes is over passed, brings so great peace of conscience unto us,
as all the wisdom of flesh and blood shall never be able to attayn, as the
holy Ghost does witness the same, in calling it a peace that passes all
understanding. For when the troubled conscience has whollye and for ever
settled himself in the bowels of Jesus Christ, not only in full persuasion of
the free remission of all his sins, but also with stable purpose manfully to
fight under his banner, yea, if it be to the renouncing of his own life: then
may it be at peace, and boldly say with the Apostle in a holy boasting: I Rom 8.
am persuaded, that neither height, nor depthe, nor angels, nor principalities,
nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, neither life nor death,
nor any thing, shall be able to separate me from the love of God in Christ
Jesus. For this is the fruit that follows our justifying faith, of which I
have rather chosen to write, the^ of the bare description of faith it self:
yea and to say the truth, there is no way so profitable to describe it, as in
declaring the fruit and comfort which it brings unto us, which is to be
assured that now there is no wrath of God to come against E^^y 40.
us, but altogether grace and mercy for Christ's sake. And therefore to y^
end that Jerusalem may be comforted at the heart, to the end that the church
may be thoroughly persuaded that her travel is at an end, and all her
iniquities pardoned, so that now she shall never receive damage, nor come into
any danger of losinge Gods favor for the same any more: It shall be good for us
to proceed unto the certainty and vnmoueablenes of our estate and condition,
after that we b^ once thus called unto the hope of gods kingdom. For as it is
an (...) which cannot be warranted unto us, by any fleshly righteousness that
we can do; so in like sort, the certainty thereof cannot be decayed by any
sin which we at any time through infirmity shall commit or fall into: no
more then the weakness of man is able to ouermatch the strength of God, or our
infidelity to make his faith to be of none effect. And therefore these things
considered, the sins of Gods children are no cause why their faith should be
darkened, or their hope decayed, but rather there is great cause in them why
their humility should be increased, and they more freely driven out of
themselves into the strength of Christ: for our salvation does not rest in our
selves, but in the Lord, who has decreed from everlasting ^^ save some, and
therefore as impossible as it is for his decree to be altered, so impossible it
is for that number which he has thereunto appointed, to be damned. Heaven and
earth shall pass away like a scrowle but, no one jot or title of the words
shall pass till all things ^e accomplished. All flesh is Esaias. 40.
grass, and the glory thereof as the flower of the grass, but the word of
the Lord endures for ever. His gifts and callings are without repentance, he
Rom 11. 2^. Pro. 16. ^.
has created all things for himself, even the wicked for the day of evil. And
so it may be said on the contrary side, that he has created his children for
the day of salvation and glory, and to y^ end y^ the heirs of promise may yet
Heb. 6. 17.
be more strengthened in this, he has bound himself unto the^ by two immuble
things, to the end that we may hold fast the hope that is set before us,
which we have as an ancore of y^ soul^ both ste^fast and sure: which two
immutable things are these: his word, and an oath. His word, in that it is
impossible that God should lie. As the prophet Samuel does testify the same:
The strength of Israel will not Sam. 15. 29.
lie nor repent him, for he is not a man that should repent. And again, Romans
23. 19.
that wicked Balaam could say thus much also: God is not a man that he should
lie, nor the son of a man, that he should repeat him, has he said, and shall
he not do? has he spoken, and shall he not accomplish? He has said that
the righteous shall Psalm. 112. 6.
never be moved, but be had in everlasting remembrance. He has said that
Israel shall be saved in the Lord: they Esaias 45. 17.
shall not be ashamed nor consounded world without ^^d. He has said that he
will be merciful to our transgressions, and will remember our sins and
iniquities no more. Let us never Ierem. 31. 34.
think that the most highest does at any time speak words in vayn. Surely
Esaias. 45. 18. 19. 20. 21.
as he has created the earth not in vain, but to be inhabited, so he has
not said in vain to the seed of Jacob, seek ye me: Nay I the Lord speak
righteousness, and do righteous things, as he testifies by the Prophet
Esaias. Yea he has sworn the same also. And that is the second thing whereby he
has bound himself unto us, namely his oath: I have sworn by my name, says
he, the word is gone forth of my mouth in righteousness, and shall not return
again: y^ every knee shall bow unto me, and all tongues shall swear by my name.
By bowing of the knee, and swearing by the name of God, is meant y^ whole
service of God, wherein he will be served and worshipped of his Church. And
mark the emphasis of the word, for it is a word of drawing: he has sworn
that they shall do it, will they, ^ill they: If they be Gods children, he will
draw them, to glorify him here in this life, and will also glorify them in
the life to come. Therefore y^ faithful cannot pearish. And beside this,
consider his oathe that he has sworn, which is very plentiful in the
Scriptures, as in y^ Psalms: I have sworn by my holiness that I will not
fail David. But in Esaias it is notably described, where he has these words:
As I have sworn that the waters of Noah shall no more go over the earth, so
have I sworn that I will no more be angry with thee, nor reprove thee: the
mountains shall remove, and the hills shall fall down, but my mercy shall
not depart from thee, nor the covenant of my peace fall away. So that hereby
it is plain that the estate of Gods children is more surer then the mountains
and hills. Fitly therefore is the Church of Christ, compared unto the Mat. 7. 26.
house that is builded upon a rock, which although the rain fall, y^ wind
blow, the floods come and beat upon it, yet they shall never be able to
disturb the same. And why, because it is builded upon a rock, not a rock of
stone: for all such shall come to naught, but Christ Jesus, upon whom, all the
faithful are builded: for there is so near a conjunction between the^, that
Christ is theires, and they are his, God does behold all the righteousness of
Christ in them, and has punished, all their sins in him: and therefore as
impossible as it is for God to be angry with Christ, so impossible it is for
him to be angry with us, which belong unto him. Fear not therefore little
Luke. 12 32.
^^ocke: it is your heavenly Fathers pleasure to give you a kingdom, nay he
has given it unto us already: for does not the scripture say, that as he is,
(meaning Christ) even so are we 1. Ioh. 4. 1^
in this life, what is Christ? Christ is freed from condemnation already, even
so are we, although we be in this life: Christ is the heir of heaven, and has
the same already in possession: in the same estate are we, how be it, not so
fully, yet in as great assurance, although we be in this life: and therefore
mark it for a special point, that the Romans 8.
promises of eternal life, of salvation, and of being the sons of God, are
Ioh. 3.
still spoken of in the present tence, that they are the sons of God, and not
y^ Ioh. 6.
they shall be; that they have eternal life already as it were, and not that
they shall have it. And in Saint John's Gospel it is very plentiful: Verily
verily Ioh. 5. 24.
I say unto you (says Christ) he that hears my word and believes in him
that sent me, has eternal life, and shall not come into condemnation, but has
passed from death to life already, as though it were a thing done and past,
never to be called back again, as most certain it is net, no more then the
Father is to be called back again from the work of creation, or the Son
from the work of redemption, or the holy Ghost from the office of
sanctification. A notable testimony of this immovable estate of the Church we
have in the Psalms, where the holy Ghost uses these words. If my children
Psalm 49. 30
forsake my laws and walk not in my judgment, if they break my statutes and
keep not my commandments: then will I visit their transgressions with the
rod, and their iniquity with strokes, but my loving kindness willl I not take
from them, nor falsify my truth, my covenant will I not break, nor change
that which has gone out of my lips, according to that which is written in
Malachie. I am thy Lord, Ma^^ ^. ^.
I change not, and the Sons of Jacob are not consumed. And therefore when the
Lord does correct us, it is not to the end that we should be consumed, but
rather to put us in mind that we have sinned against Psalm. 94 12.
him, and that we may be spared in 1. Cor. 11. 32.
the evil day: and not condemned with the world, but more of this in his due
place. Hereby you see then, that in the work of our salvation, the Lord has
no respect either to our sins, or virtues, but unto his own vnchau^gable
purpose, unto his everlasting decree and covenant which can not be altered.
Therefore in Deuteronemie, it is thus written: The Lord Deuteronomy. 4 31.
thy God is a merciful God, he will not despise thee, nor forsake thee,
neither forget the covenant which he swear, unto thy fathers, Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob. Saint Paul says, That if it be but a man's covenant Gal. 3.
when it is finished, no man does abrogat, or add any thing thereunto: Much
less in the covenant of God, which is written, not in paper or parchment, but
in his everlasting decree and counsel, which is sealed also, not with a signet
in ware, but with the very finger and power of God, in the bloodshedding and
death of his Son Jesus Christ, and in raising him again from y^ same. Neither
has he left it thus, but has sealed the assurance thereof unto our hearts
also by his spirit, which does testify unto our conscience, that we Romans 8.
16.
are those to whom this new covenant does belong, y^ God is our Father, and we
his children: and therefore are imboldened ^ Cor. 2. 16.
through ye mind of Christ to fly unto him, in all our troubles, as our stay and
refuge to cast our whole care upon him, because yt we are fully persuaded, that
it is he alone which cares 1 Pet. 5. ^.
for us. So yt now even amongst a multitude of cares which ye world is over
whelined in, we are become careless, not after the manner of a desperate
person, which conte^neth means: but rather by ye prerogative of a free mind,
which we have, and do obtain, both after, and in the midst, of all christian
and lawful means, that are to be used, caring only for heavenly things. True
it is, that unto the sight and judgment of ye world, there are none so
miserable as they which are thus minded, and why: because a few outward
things do satisfy them; because they seek not there own, but are more ready
to take wrong, the^ do any; they look still unto those spiritual good things,
which ye Lord has provided for the^, and not man; (...). 12. 1^
they make long strydes unto that, and strive to forget more and more this
trash and pelf, yt is behind the^. And as it is with John 10. 5
the^, in life, so also it is in religion: they will hear no voice, but the
voice of Christ in his wor^e, all other soundes are strange unto them* and
therefore will not hear their voices. No though Gal. 1. ^.
it be an Angel from heaven, they will not have their ^aith to hang upon men,
but (...) ^arnestly to get settled judgment in them selves, that although the
whole world be overwhelmed with e^^ours, s^ as there be not a man left to
instruct the^: yet they will not be offended at the matter, but have sufficient
in their own ^^somes to keep them in the truth: as ^lya^, who although al
Israeli run a whoring after Ball, 1. King. 19. 1^
yet he will constantly follow the living God; and as Micheas, who although al
Balls Priests flatter y^ king of Israel, ^. King. 22. 14.
and speak pleasant things unto him, yet he will speak nothing but y^ which y^
Lord has put in his mouth; and with y^ Apostls also, who although many of the
Disciples forsake Christ, yet they (...) 6. ^8
know not whither to go but unto him. Where y^ dead carkas is, thither (...)
2^. 28
will the Eagles resort, where Ies^s Christ is, there will y^ faithful be. They
will follow y^ La^be whither so ever he (...) 14. 4.
goes not only to y^ breaking of bread, which Hipecrites will do, but also unto
y^ very death, when y^ trial shall be made: for death is unto them life, and
therefore they long for it, as y^ scripture does very plentifully witness y^
same, and Christ is all the gain y^ they seek for. From whence I pray you
comes all these things, or what should move the^ thus to despise this life
and the things thereof? is it not the assurance which they have of y^ heavenly
life that is laid up for the^ in christ? this is some parts of the fruit of our
justifying faith, and yet not all: for look further and we shall see more and
greater testimonies of the same then al these. For what is the cause why a
great many are so valiant that their fear is past, and they care not what man
can do unto them: yea they receive every bondage, as a liberty, and every
death, as a life, they take greatest occasion of ^oy in y^ midst of those
torments, whereby their enemies, go about to make them most so^owfull, yea
their tormentors often times are more vexed and wea^ed in tormentinge, then
they them selves are in bearing the torments, and why: because the Lord is
with them, in every place to comfort them as he Esai. ^^. 2.
has promised by Esai the Prophet, saying, when thou walk through y^
waters, I will be with thee, and through the floudes y^ they shall not
ouerflowe thee, when thou go through the fire, it shall not burn thee, nor
the flames kindle upon thee: the holy ghost means not here, that the wicked,
by their ^gins y^ they use against Gods children, shall not be able to take
away their natural life, but their spiritual and heavenly life which
afflictions, are means, to confirm and make more sure unto them, yea and in
far greater glory also, which they themselves are well experienced in, and
therefore some of the^, al, though their torments were to be stoned, racked, and
torn in sonder of wild beasts, yet would not be delivered, for the hope
which they had of a better resurrection, as it is manifested in y^ Hebrews:
other when y^ stones were clattering Heb. 11. 3^.
about their ^ares, prayed for Act. 7. 59.
their enemies, as Steven: but look unto all the Apostles, and you shall see,
that the greater their afflictious were, the greater occasion they took Act.
5. 4.
to rejoice, because they were counted worthy to suffer for y^ name of Christ.
And I might come to the martyrs of our time, who did not only rejoice in
imprisonmente, but also in the very hot fire: yea they even laughed at
destuction and death, as the book of Monumentes does very well th^we: Job. 5.
22.
and as Job also does testify that the faithful shall do. These testimonies
may suffice to teach, that the peace of John. 14. 27. and 16. 2^.
Gods children is such as the world cannot give, and their joy such as no man
may take from them. O you foolish tormenters, know you not those engines which
you use against Gods children to murder them withal, are his own creatures,
which he has promised shall be at league with them, Job. 5. 2^.
as it is written: The stones of y^ field shall be at peace with thee, and y^
beasts of the field shall be at league with thee. Well therefore you may break
their hearts, but you shall never break their faithfulness: (manger your
herds) that shall be increased through your cruelty. Know ye not what is
written? Tribulation works patie^ce^ Romans 5. 3.
patience experience; expertence hope; and hope makes not ashamed.

See here what a heap of benefits affl^ctions bring unto Gods children: your
purpose is altogether set upon evil, but behold a wonderful good: for by it
our patience is approved, both unto our selves, and also unto y^ world. As for
example, does not the patience ^am. 5. 11.
of Job which sprange out of his afflictions, speak unto us at this day: and
again, out of it sloweth experience, another benefit which is as a scale unto
our consciences of the fear of God toward us: that he will be our ready help
in all d^stresses and dangers whatsoever: which is a chief mean to procure us
more earnestly to call upon him in our troubles, and also to praise him in
truth for deliverance.

The third is hope, a benefit which rests in the will, and makes al sure:
for whosoever has it shall never be ashamed nor co^fou^ded: but it lifts him
up unto an unspeakable reioycinge and comfort, which all the afflictions of
this world are not able to quench: and why? because the love of God is shed
abroad in our hearts by the holy ghost, which is given unto us. Well then,
these things considered, what hurt or damage comes unto Gods children by
afflictions? Nay what good is there, that their minds are not chiesly
garnished with in time of trouble? See here then how the expectations of our
enemies are deceived: for when they think that we are most overcome and
destroyed, then is our strength greatly renewed, and our conquest most
victorious, as it is written: Though Romans 36. 37
we be killed all the day long, and counted as sheep for the slaughter, yet are
we more then conquerours through him that loves us. But if they will needs
strive against the stream (as Pharao did in the red Sea) til they be
overwhelmed therewith, let them do it rather by fair promises, the^ by cruel
threatenings, and sooner they shall prevail. I speak now after y^ manner of
men: for in truth they can never prevail, but they them selves must needs
have y^ foil, which way so ever they do strive. Well, by this means they may
sooner draw Gods children somewhat more to pause upon their fai(...)d
prosperities, as did David, til such time as his foot had w^lnere slipped. But to
draw them clean away from y^ path of life, that can they never do: for
sentence is gone out from everlasting to the contrary, the church is builded
upon a foundation which the Lord has laid, and not man, and therefore must
needs stand sure, as it is written: the foundation of God stands sure, and
^ Tim. 2. 16
has this seal, the Lord knows who are his, and of those he will not lose
one as it is in the 6. of John: All that the father gives me, shall come to me,
and ^ohn. 6. 37.
him that comes to me, I cast not away: for I came down from heaven,
^ohn. 6. 39.
not to do my own will, but the will of him that sent me: and this is the
will of the father which has sent me, that of al which he has given me, I
should lose nothing, but should rail it up again at the last day: nay
rather then he will leese one, ^ee will leave nientie and nine in the
wilderness, ^uk. 1 4. 5. 5
and will shearth sorrowinge till he has found it, and when he finds the
same, he takes it up with joy, lays it upon his shoulders, brings it home,
causes his neighbors and friends to rejoice with him, for that one sheep that
was lost, and now is found again. And what do all these things signify
unto us? surely even the great care, and tender affection, which the Lord has
over his: not that his eyes can be darkened through any impediment, whereby he
should be be subject unto losses: but this is rather an aba^ing of the
Scriptures to our capacities, because such things are done amongst men,
whereby is more lively and clearly set forth unto us, how far Gods
children are from perishing, as these Scriptures do testify the same also: He
keeps us as the apple Psalm. 17. 8.
of his eye, and hydeth us under the shadow of his wings: He has numbered
Luke. 12. 7. Psalm. 34. 7.
our heirs, and put our tears into a bottle: He will give his Angels charge
over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways, that thou hurt not thy foot
against a stone. All which promises of comfort, are not as bare sou^ds in the
ears of Gods children, but rather as seals unto their consciences, which they
are well experienced in: for how could it be else that they should have such
boldness, and be so greatly comforted in their distresses and afflictions,
even beyond all reason or human wisdom whatsoever, as the Psalms do yeald
unto us very plentiful testimony of the same.

I will not be afraid (says the Prophet David) though ten thousand beset me
round about. And again: though I walk through the vale of the shadow Psalm. 3.
6. Psalm. 23. 4.
of death, yet will I fear none ill: for thou art with me: thy rod and thy
staff they do comfort me. And in another place: The lord is my hope and help
in trouble, ready to be fou^dt Psalm. 46. 2. 3.
therefore will I not fear, though the earth be moved: though the mountains
do fall into the midst of the Sea: and though the waters do rage and be
troubled, so that the Mountains do shake at the sourges thereof, yet there is
a river whose streams shall make glad the city of our God, even the
Sanctuary of the Tabernacle of the most highest.

And what is this River which the Prophet by the spirit of prophecy speaks
off here: even Jesus Christ, who by the will of his heavenly Father, is made
unto us the fountain and head spring of all goodness: By the streams which
flow from him, we understand the most comfortable consolations of the Spirit
of God, which does testify unto our spirits, that we are the children of
God: and not children only, but also heirs, even Romans 8. 17.
heirs of God, and heirs annexed with Christ. A wonderful exaltation: and
behold we have two witnesses of the same: that is, the Spirit of God, and our
own spirits: the Spirit of God, in that it pricketh us forwards unto
prayer, not only in public places, but also in private corners, where none
sees but the Lord: even with unspeakable groaninges, which can not otherwise
be expressed. In that also ^t stirs us v^ unto other exercises of Religion:
as the work of mortification, dyinge unto sin, living unto righteousness,
yea, and to suffer persecution when occasion is offered, because that by the
same spirit we know that our labor shall not be in vain: our own spirits
also, in that we do not stubbor^ely resist these good motions of Gods
spirit, but strive rather by all possible means to make our selves tractable
thereunto, being vexed even with great sorrow at our unwillingness, and
rejoicing with all exceeding joy when we have gotten any strength against the
same. And thus you see what a wonderful privilege al those have, which do
unfeignedly come unto Christ: for they shall never pearish, neither shall any
take them out of his hand. Well then, these things considered, what great
injury do they John. 20 28.
unto their own souls, which deny this doctrine of predestination, or
foreknowledge: do they any other then deny the very strength and pride of
the Gospel: for what better Gospel can we have, then to hear that ye
children of God can never pearish: that nether their sins, nor the devils,
shall ever be able to pull them out of his hand: and that the Lord in Christ
has decreed the same from everlasting, what a miserable case I say are they
in which be ignorant of this, nay, which stubburnly resist it, and will not be
instructed therein. How is it possibl^ for such to pray with any hope to
receyu^, when it is done with so little credit; which way is it possible for
them to receive any comfort whose faith is incombred with so many doubts;
how irreverently do they think of God who do imagine of him, as of a mortal
man, which is ignorant in the beginning of those things, that he will do
afterward, and whose affection is changed to day, from that that he purposed
yesterdaye. Surely these are the dangers, which they do daily fall into, that
either are ignorant, or have no credit in this point of doctrine, which is the
strength and foundation of all other points of our christian knowledge, and
without the which (let our knowledge be never so much otherwise) yet we are
no better then those which Saint James speaks of: waueringe minded and Iam.
28
therefore vnco^stante in all our ways, but to leave these unto him, who is
both able and also will teach them better, in his good time, if they belong
unto his holy election, and to turn to our former byase; which is the
immovable estate and condition of Gods Children; the ground and pillar of out
says; the strength whereby we stand^ and the chiefest thing wherein we have
to rejoice as our Savior Christ witnesses, in the admonition that he gives
unto his Apostles: where h^^ wills them, that they should not rejoice in
this that the devils or wicked spirits were subject unto Luke. 10. 20.
them, but rather in this, that their^ names were written in heaven, which is a
thing not done in tune, but beyond all times, even before the Lord was. A
merueylouse benefitte, and unspeakable ^ I call it unspeakable, because it ca^
not be attained unto, by any fleshly wisdom, which is altogether beastly in
this behalf: for it is a secret, which is wo^e hid from y^ natural man, then
the judgment day. F^^ y^ remembrance of y^ great judgment does at some time
make the^ tremble, when their guyltie consciences, do begin to accuse them,
and when they see, and hear that those fig lea^es, ^o begin, Mat 24. 32.
yea and are already (...) ^^th, which our Samour Christ spoke of, to declare
that summer is near: but tell the^ of the assurance which Gods children have
in them selves, of their salvation in Christ; and how the same has b^^ne
from everlasting: and thou shall set how far off they will be, from giving
any credit; nay, they will even laugh thee to scorn, and think, that if there
be any fool in the world thou ^^t he, as we see diverse examples of it in
scripture. The wicked Jews, thought that the Apostles, had been drunken, when
they spoke the great (...) of God, with new tongues, Act. 2. 13 and 26. 24.
as the spirit gave them utterance. Festus likewise judged Paul to be beside
him self, and mad, when he began to speak once of the resurrection from
death. And no marvel though y^ wicked are so far of from receiving this
heavenly treasure, because it is a new Revel. 2. 17.
name y^ no man knows, save he y^ receives it; it is a secret which only
belongs unto Gods children, as it is written in y^ Psalms: ^he secrets of
y^ Lord, are reueyled unto them that fear him, and his covenant to give them
understanding. Well then it remains that we be thankful unto God, who has
vouchsafed us from everlasting, this privilege, to be his Sons, yea, and
has warranted if Romans 8. 16.
by so sure a seal as can not be altered, even the earnest of his own spirit.
The Apostles are very plentiful, in yealdinge of thanks unto God for this
benefit, as the chiefest of all other. Blessed be God says Saint Paull Ephe.
1. 5. ^.
even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which has blessed us with all
spiritual blessings, in heavenly things, in Christ, and aledginge this as the
chiefest: for he has chosen us in him, before y^ foundation of the world, y^
we should be holy, and without blame before him in love. And again in an other
place, we ought to be thankful ^. These. 2. 13.
always unto God for you brethren, because he has from the beginnings chosen
you unto salvation, through the sanctification of the spirit and the faith of
truth. These and such like places, are very plentifully found in scripture,
which to repeat I should be tediouse, therefore letting them pass, and to
speak more plainly unto our capacity of the matter: Gods children which are
effectually called, and do feel the assurance of this inheritance in them
selves, are thankful, yea, and so thankful as y^ same does carry substance
with it, even to the bewraing of them, unto the world, so that y^ wicked men de
behold the image of God in them, and do reverence them greatly for their
virtues, although their gifts otherwise be but slender, yea, and are more
afraied often times to commit sins in their sight, then in the presence of
God, who sees all things, and from whose eyes, nothing Ebr. 4. 13.
can be hid. Yet such is their blindness, and such is the strength of grace
in the other, as for example: did Man. 6. 20.
not Herod that cruel King who had no fear of God at all before his eyes,
yet fear and reverence John Baptist? because (says the text,) that he knew
him to be a just, and a holy man, yea and did many things after his counsel:
so likewise Felix who although he were wholly given over to seek bribes, yet
trembled, at the preaching Act. 24. 26.
of Paul, when he spoke of ye judgment to come. Herein the^ we may perceive
the truth of that saying, which the holy Ghost uses in the Psalms: the Lord
is greatly to be feared, in the assembly of his Saints: as the same also may
appear in ye strength of their prayers, how mightily they do prevail with
God, not only for the attayninge of spiritual and inward comfortes, but also
of outward deliverances, as the scripture for warrant of the same is very
plentiful: which we may see in the deuyding of the red sea; the overthrow of
the enemies in the wilderness; the down fall of the walls of Ieryco; and the
staying of the course of the Sun: all which things were procured through
faith, and prayer of the Saints, tendinge still to the delyuerance of Gods
children, and overthrow of his enemies. Other examples there are also, which
to repeat I should be tedious, and therefore will satisfy my self, in
noting the places. 2. Kings. 6. 16. 17. Danyel. 6. 22. and 3. 25. 26. 27.
wherein likewise we may behold, the great love and care which the Lord has
ever his church, and how impossible it is for those to quail, who have the
ears of the almighty continually so open unto their cries, and his helping
hand so attentive for their delyuerance, either in judgment toward the
wicked, or in mercy toward them: and as he is attentive unto them, so
likewise they are importunate in their prayers with him, as our Savior Christ
does witness in Luke: that his children do ^^^e Luk^. 18. 1.
day and night unto him, and therefore can not but be aduenged of the^e
wro^ges, and this is a special (...) of faith, a sure token of great trust
and confidence, y^ benefit whereof we all do both feel and find unto this
day: for how many treaso^s, and trecheries have been wrought against our
gracious Prince, from time to time, by y^ man of sin and his impes, both by
purpose of murder, and other means also: to put out the candell of Good word
which so clearly does shine amongst us, and which he has used here, as a
chief^ mean to uphold and maintain amongst us, yet none of them could^
prevail, but are taken at half turn, and fast snared in the ginne that they
laid for others: as upon London bridge and other parts of the city, we have
a plentiful spectacle of the same, Which thing being brought to pass, let us
not impute it, unto our own cunninge or policy, but unto the great mercy of
God, who is the watchman of Israel, that never sleeps nor slombereth, and
has been procured thereunto, by the importunate outcryes of his Saints: For
otherwise, ear this time we should have had, a black and glow my day. Well y^
Lord he blessed, for all his mercies toward our land, and let us love his
children, for whose sakes (no doubt of it) we do enjoy this so great peace and
plenty. Know you not y^ the Lord would not bring confusion, upon y^ old world
so long as Noah, and his family were amongst them, but ^en. 7. 16.
as soon as they were once closed up in y^ arc, the^ im nediatly came
destruction upon y^ rest, and they were euerwhelmed with waters: be not
forgetful likewise how that the Angels which were appointed of God, to execute
his vengeance upon Sodom and Gomortha* could do nothing until Lot and his
Genesis 12. (...)
two daughters were gone out: and then straight ways came fire and brimstone
upon the rest. Phinees in like manner, Romans 25. 1^
through his zeal, turned away the wrath of God from all Israel. And Romans 16.
17
Moses likewise (through importunate begging) stayed the plague.

Thus you see how that peace and prosperity is continued amongst the wicked,
not for themselves, but for the great regard and care that God has of his
church, which is amongst them: yea and whole Cities or Countries often times are
preserved from plagues, for some one of them, as the same is notably descrybed
in the talk which the Lord had with Abraham, upon the plain of Mamre: who
would have spared those five great cities for y^ sakes Genesis 18. 32.
of ten righteous men, if they could have been found amongst them. Here
you see then further, that this great love, and assurance of salvation, which
God does bestow upon his children, is no mean to make them secure or careless,
as some blasphemers do often times obiecte, but rather more fearful, more
duetifull, and more earnest in prayer: because that when they behold such a
wonderful mercy of God toward them, they think (as the truth is in deed)
that they can never be thankful enough unto him. Then they begin to give
duties both to God and men: then they walk lawfully in lawful vocation: then
the husbandman, or handicraftes man, does seek the kingdom of God as (...)
^. 3^.
well in the fields or town, as in the Church; as well in walking in their
vocation, as by frequentinge of Sermons: Take me not gresly, I mean they put
in practice that abroad, which they learn in the Church. Their yea is yea, and
their nay is nay: and therefore ^at. 5.
to conclude, we can never do any duty in truth, before the assurance of
Gods kingdom do send us thereunto: for Gods children only are careful, and
all the world besides careless.

THus you have heard (although rudely yet I hope truly) descrybed unto you, a
pathway unto Christ The first step thereunto is a true sight Cap. 1.
of our sins, with godly sorrow, because we are subject thereunto. The Cap.
2.
second is vnsayned repentance for the same, with newnes of life and
conversation, without the which all outward exercises of Religion are to no
purpose. The third and last is faith in Christ. Cap. 3.
Jesus, which then is truly in us, when repentance and godly sorrow go before
it: for otherwise it is presumption, as repentance* without it is desperation.
The fruit which follows is Ioh. 16. 26.
peace of conscience, that passes all understanding, and such a ^^y as no man
shall ^uer be able to take from us: for we can never pearish, but all things
shall be for the best unto us.

Me thinks Saint Paul to the Romans is very plain in this matter, where he
has these words: Moreover whom he predestinate, them also he called; whom he
called, them also he justified; and whom he justified, them also he glorified.
Calling here has the ^^rst place, (...), which callings (...) in it (...) Then
follows (...) in the se^ place, which (...) consci^ (...) follows our (...)
unto our (...), and (...) is (...) the Law, the (...) earnest (...) perfection,
(...) by the sweet pr^ of the Gospel.


