CERTAIN brief and necessary rules of Geographie, serving for the
understanding of Chartes and Mappes.

Collected by D. P.

Rogatu honoratiss. viri D. H. S. W. P.

Imprinted at London, by Henry Binneman. ANNO. 1573.

Certain rules of Geographie, for the understanding of Mappes and Chartes.
THe perfect understanding of Mappes and the use of the same does consiste in
the knowledge of these four points.

1 The necessary circles described in Mappes.

2 The longitude and latitude of places.

3 The Clymats and Paraleles.

4 The measure of distaunce of one place from another.

1 Of the Circles.
The circles expressed in Mappes are five, the Equinoctial, the 2. Tropikes,
and the two Polare circles.

The Equinoctial or Equator, is a circle imagined just in the midst between
the two Poles, compassing the whole earth about.

1 This circle deuideth the world into two equal parts, that is so say, the
North and the South.

2 It serves also to know the Longitude of places, which is measured upon it,
and the Latitude which is measured from it, either Northwarde or Southwarde.

3 When the Sun is in it, the day is equal with the night throughout all
the world.

4 When the Sun is furthest from it, the day is either shortest or longest.

The Tropikes are those circles which the Sun makes about the world, when
it is furthest from the Equinoctial either Northwarde or Southwarde.

If it be Northwarde it is called the Tropike of Cancer, because the Sun then
returning backwardes enters into that sign.

If it be Southwarde it is called the Tropike of Capricorn, because then the
Sun enters into the sign of Capricorn.

These circles do divide the temperate Zones from the burnt Zone.

The Polare circles are those which the Poles of the Zodiake do make about
the Poles of the world, in the space of 24. hours.

They divide the temperate Zones from the cold Zones: and are so far distant
from their Poles (that is, the Arctike from the North, and the Antartike from
the South Pole) as the Tropikes are from the Equinoctial.

The two Tropikes and the two Polare circles do divide the whole earth into
five parts, which are called Zones. Whereof that which lies under the
Equinoctial between the two Tropikes, is called the burnte Zone: the other
two betwixt either of the Tropikes and the Polare circles are called Temperate
Zones: and the other two under either Pole are called cold Zones.

geographical zones MERIDIES. A ZONA FRIGIDA. B ZONA TEMPERATAAVS. C
ZONATORRIDA. D ZONA TEMPERATA BOR. E ZONA FRIGIDA. E SEPTENTRIO



2 Of the Longitude and Latitude.
In reckning ye Longitude of ye world, the ancient Geographers took their
beginning at a right line imagined to be drawn from the one Pole to the other,
by the Islands called the Canaries, beyond Hercules pillars (which line for
this purpose I call the Western line) so that the Longitude of any place is
the distaunce of the same from that line Eastwarde, and so round about unto
the same line again.

Some late writers do recke^ the Longitude from the Western line Eastward
180. degrees, and also from the same westward. 180. degrees, which being added
together do make. 360. describing it in the midst between the two Poles, and
dividing the world into. 2. equal parts, whereof the Western they call the
Ponent, and the Eastern the Levant.

The latitude is the distaunce af any place from the Equinoctial circle
toward either of the Poles.

Where so ever you are, imagine a point or prick directly over your head,
which is called Zenith, the distance whereof from the Western line is the
longitude, and from the Equinoctial the latitude. And for this purpose in the
universal Chartes, you have lines (called Meridians) drawn in length from
Pole to Pole, distant one from another 10. degrees, beginning at the Western
line, and so Eastwarde, which do evidently show the Longitude of any place.

There are also drawn certain Paraleles from the Equinoctial toward either
of the Poles, differing one from an other. 10. degrees, declaring the Latitude.

Note that the latitude or distance from the Equinoctial line, and the
elevation of the Pole in any place are equal.

3 Of Climates and Paraleles.
The Climates and Paraleles serve both for one purpose, that is, the difference
of the longest days, which do increase within certain spaces from the
Equinoctial toward either of the Poles.

A Climate is a space of distance from the Equinoctial line, where the longest
day makes difference of half an hour.

The old writers do make but seven Climates, and do name them of some notable
and famous place.

1 The first they name of Meroe a city in Afrike, under the burnte Zone, this
co^teineth in brodnesse. 7. degrees. 40. mi. It begins at 12. degrees. 45. mi.

2 The second of Syena, a city in the confines of Ethiopia, under the Tropike
of Cancer, co^teining in brodnesse. 7. degr.

3 The third is named of Alexandria, a famous City in Egypt, containing in
brodnesse. 6. g. 10. min.

4 The fourth has his denomination of that noble Island of Rhodes in Asia the
less, whose brodnesse is. 5. g. 20. m.

5 The fifte climate has his name of the city of Rome, which contains in
brodnesse. 4. g. 30. m. beg. 39. g. 40. m.dies lo. 14. h. 45. m

6 The sixte of the sea Euxine called Pontus, which is 3. g. 45. m. broad.

7 The seventh is named of Boristhenis a great river in Scythia, whose
brodnesse is. 3. g. 15. m.

Some do add the eight Climat by the South parts of England, and the ninth by
the river Tanais.

The Southern Climats, have ye same names, putting only this Greek
proposition, Anti, before them.

A Paralele is just half a Climate, so that one Climate conteyneth two
Paraleles.

4 The measure of distance of one place from another.
Diverse nations do diversely measure the distance of places.

The Egyptians by signs or marks.

The Persians by their Parasangas.

The Greeks by furlonges.

The Latins by miles, and sometimes by stones or marks.

The Spaniards and Frenchmen by legues.

The Germans and diverse other nations by miles, and those of diverse length.
Those which do write of these matters, do all in a manner agree in this, that
four graynes of barley do make a finger.

Four fingers a hand.

Four hands a foot.

Four foot a Geometrical pase, which is two simple pases.

125. Geometrical pases a furlong.

8. Furlonges one mile.

16. Furlongs a French league, which is two Italian miles.

3. Miles a great league.

30. Furlongs one Parasanga, which the Persians at this day call Farasanga.

40. Furlongs one German mile.

To apply your degrees to the finding out of the distance of one place from an
other, by the number of miles (as they are commonly taken amongst us in
England) you must understand that every degree contains. 60. miles on
earth, so that if you multiply. 360. degrees, which is the compass of the
Equinoctial, by. 60. you shall find the world to contain about the whole
circumference of the earth and water. 21600. miles.

If you take your measure of distance from the Equinoctial line directly
either Northwarde or Southward, or else upon the Equinoctial line Eastwarde
or Westwarde, you need no more but count your degrees, and for every degree
count. 60. miles: or if your Chart be true in proportion, open your compass as
wide as those two places are asunder, whose distance you would know, and
apply the same to the Equinoctial line, and multiplye your degrees as before,
and so you shall have your purpose.

In particular and Chorographical Chartes you may find the true distance of
any place from another, either by the numbers of longitude and latitude
described in the margin of your Chart, or by the Scale which is most commonly
made for that purpose. And if you want both these helps, take any two places
whereof you know or may learn the true distance, and measure that, and
according to that proportion you may find out any distaunce in the Chart. ()


