AN Epitaph of the virtuous life and death of the right worshipful Lady, Dame
Helen Branch of London widow, late the wife of sir John Branch Knight, sometime
the Right honorable Lord Mayor of London, and daughter to M. William Nicolson
sometime of London Draper:

Which said Lady, deceased on Wednesday the 10. of April last past: and
lies interred in the parish Church of S. Mary Abchurch in London, the 29. of
the same month. 1594.

VERITAS VIRESSIT VULNERE

T C

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON Printed by Thomas Creed. 1594.

blazon or coat of arms

An Epitaph of the virtuous life and death of the Right worshipful Lady, Dame
Helen Branch of London widow, late the wife of Sir John Branch Knight, sometime
the right honorable Lord Mayor of London, and daughter of M. William Nicolson
sometime of London Draper: Which said Lady deceased on Wednesday the 10. of
April last past: And lies interred in the parish Church of S. Mary Abchurch
in London, the 29. of the same month. 1594.
SInce that all living things we see, on earth that draws breath,
Do at the last return to dust, and yield themselves to death:
So death unto the godly ones, is happy end of woe,
For then does come the end of cares, that toss us too and fro.
This world is full of snares and trappes, temptations unto sin,
As well in generations past, as this that we live in.
Compare our selves unto a tree, which springs up with sap,
And brings forth branches goodly ones, which taste of Adams hap.
And as this tree does grow to strength, the owner of the wood,
May lop away the branches fair, as them which are not good.
So has he lopt away from us a Lady Branch of price,
That lived here right worshipful, disdaining every vice:
Whose lack her friends do much bewail, but specially the poor,
Whom she continually did feed, abroad, and at her door.
Right beautiful, and fane was she, in feature and in face,
A modest and a virtuous Dame, endued with great grace:
Daughter to master Nicolson, a Draper wise and sage,
A man well given to honor God, as well in youth as age.
She from her infancy in youth, did lead a virtuous life,
To Master Mynors sage and grave, she first became a wife.
She issue had by him, one son, and daughters also three,
Which all departed very young, as Destinies decree.
When Master Mynors yielded life to God that gave the same,
To sir John Branch, then late Lord Mayor, she was the spoused Dame.
Right godly and right virtuously, they lived long in joy,
With deeds of hospitality, whereas they saw annoy.
Unto the Drapers Hall also, she in her life time free,
Gave fifty pounds to young men's use, of that good company:
From four years unto four years, still remaining without charge,
Which was a deed of charity, and bounty passing large.
In Abchurch parish where she dwelt, the poor she always fed,
With money, meat, with coals for fire, sometimes with drink and bread.
To the Lunatickes of Bethelem, she gave right needful things,
And not one prison she forgate, from faith such fruit often springs.
To Maids to help their marriages, (I mean the poorer sort,)
She left relief as bountiful, unto their great comfort.
To Oxford, and to Cambridge both, from whence good learning flows,
She has them given liberally, as sequel plainly shows.
To the Hospitals of London too, she gave a great reward,
And to the poor good store of gowns, she took so good regard.
And as she lived a virtuous life, so godly was her end,
The which in letters all of gold, deserves well to be pend.
And now mee-thinkes I see and view, the holy Lamb to greet her,
The Angels and Archangels too, and all the Saints to meet her.
Mee-thinkes I see old Abraham, vnbracing of his breast:
Saving blessed Branch come here and sleep, and take thy quiet rest.
The Lamb shall wipe away thy tears, his blood has washed away,
All worldly cares and blemishes, and here is perfect day.
Enjoy the sweet melodious tunes, with husbands both rejoice:
Sing Hims and Psalms before the throne, with sweet and pleasant voice.
For thou have clothed the naked ones, the hungry thou have fed:
Thou have been mild and merciful, relieuing members dead.
Thou have not hid my Talents, nor my blessings in the ground:
Thou have not been a wavering reed, but faithful, strong, and sound.
Be thou example to the rest, like goodness to ensue:
That they may joy where thou art blessed, thus Lady good Adue.
FINIS.
S. P.


