The Virtue and Operation of this Balsame.
THat this Balsame may be used to the health and profit of the buyers, it must
be always kept close, and the vessel wherein it is must be very well stopped,
or else it will consume and waste away.

Any person which has his sigh beginning to fail him let him continually
smell unto this Balsame, and he shall be helped, and his sight shall be
preserved.

Make this Balsame warm, and rub therewith the Nose within and without, of all
those that have a moist and cold brain, so shall they be preserved in great
health thereby.

And whosoever has a cold Rheum: descending from the brain, let them rub
their Nostrils with this Balsam three times a day, morning, no one, and night,
and it helps them.

Such as are heavy headed, dull witt^d, or forgetful, let all those use to
anoint the hinder part of their head with this Balsame, and it comsorteth the
wit, and refreshes a man exceedingly well.

Give six drops of this Balsam in a spoonefull of wine, beer, or ale fasting,
to all these that have no appetite, and it helps: also th^se that use to
drink of it, are long preserved in young liking.

If any person have a flegmey stomach, let them use every morning fasting, to
take six drops of this Balsam in wine, beer, or ale, and it expels the
phlegm, and comfort the stomach: also whosoever has abundance of
corruption in their stomach, which is the cause of great feebleness, let them
use it as aforesaid, and every twelfth, or fourteenth day purge themselves, so
may they shortly be helped, which might their lifetime live and suffer great
pains.

Being taken every morning six drops in a spoonefull of wine, beer, or ale,
it preserves one from poison all the day a ter: also it preserves a man from
all corrupt and poisoning air, and specially good to be used in time of
pestilence.

Such as are poisoned, let them instantly take six drops of this Balsam in a
spoonefull of water, and so continue in taing of it twelve hours after, that
is, every hour six drops, so shall they be helped.

Any person which by chance falls, and is bruised on any part of his body,
let him straightway anoint the same place therewith, and it swageth the
swelling, and puts away the blackenesse of the sore: also when a man has a
stitch in the side, anoint it therewith, and it helps.

Neither any old or young folk that have a stinking breath, so that the
stink come from the stomach, but it helps, if it be received every morning
fasting, six drops with a spoonefull of wine the space of fourteen days, and
fast two hours after they have taken it.

Six drops of this Balsame put into a Fistel every day the space of twenty
days, heals and stops the Fistel: also it heals all wounds old or new,
laid unto them twice a day according to the quantity of the wound.

Six drops of this Balsam put into a broad Pustell, which comes of cold and
gross humors, in the space of twelve days it will be made whole.

Many which are sick by occasion of cold and dry humors which causes
consumption, may drink every morning and evening six drops of this Balsam with
wine, and they shall recover their health again.

Any body which has a Postumation, which comes of wind and moisture that
would settle it self in any place of the body, anoint the same place with this
Balsam three times a day, and in the space of eight days it shall be healed.

Readily does this Balsam heal all sores which chance in hands, legs, or
arms, or any part of the body, if it be anointed with it three times a day.

Peaceably and very quickly this Balsam swageth swellings, which is not of the
Dropsy, if the swelling be anointed three times a day with it, and linen
clothes laid upon them were with the said Balsam.

Every person that is taken with the palsy, let them morning and evening
drink six drops of this Balsam in a spoonful of wine, and also anoint the
party which is taken with the said palsy twice a day, and they shall be
healed, and it comfort all the parts of the body marueilously.

This Balsam heals all pains in the joints, so that you wash the joints
therewith; and also plaster the said joints with linen cloth wet in the said
Balsam: this must be done twice a day.

He, or they which have their sinews drawn together, let them wash them with
this Balsam, and they shall be restored to their former health and strength.

Also it helps the Hemerods when they are very grievous: also it is good for
sickness, which chances in the hinder part which is named Tenasmos, if a
linen cloth wet with the said Balsam be put therein. Also this Balsam being
mixed with sweet Ciuet, and laid upon a little black wool, and put into the
ears, restores hearing.

This Balsam, made by N. P. Master of Arts, and Minister of Gods Word, is to be
sold in Maiden Lane, at the sign of the Crown over against Goldsmiths Hall,
where it has been sold, and the premises approved these fourscore years.
Viuat Rex.


