A LETTER written by a French Gentleman to a friend of his at Rome: Containing
A true report of the late treaty between the Queen Mother of France and the
King of Navarre.

Faithfully translated out of French.



Imprinted: 1587.

A Letter written by a French Gentleman unto a friend of his at Rome,
containing a true discourse of the late voyage made by the Queen the Kings
Mother into Poictow.
YOU have sondrie times requested me to impart unto you that hope which I had
conceived of the Queen Mother our Misterisses late journey. All your letters
do object unto me too much brevity in this argument: Now therefore must I
satisfy you, which I would sooner have done if I could have satisfied my self:
But to tell you the truth, I always had small hope of this treaty. I doubted
to send you my advice least you should have dislyked it, neither could I allow
of yours in respect of sondrie great reasons which I gathered therein,
considering they have holden out against your authority. Believe me my Lord, in
a place of quiet you cannot judge of our disquiet: At Rome it is not possible
for you well to consider of such controversies as are in France: you would be
of another opinion, if in liewe of tryumphant Porches you should make your
walks through a wasted Country: In stead of polished Marble you should under
your feet see the bodies of your friends and fellow Citizens: and in place of
fair Fountaynes the streams of blud should run round about you. If with
your own eyes you should behold our mischiefs they would seem greater unto
you then either the paper can conteyne or your ears admit, which finding to
be so, you would perceive the remedy to be the more difficult.

I remember when the Queen began her voyadge you thought nothing impossible
that she took in hand, and did account the peace fully concluded if she were
but willing to speak of it: and for my own part, my self did believe that
if she failed, it was not for any other to take it in hand. I was ever of that
opinion, that her person was cu^ningly chosen, nevertheless in that commodity
I found diverse discommodities, and in that which seemed most perfect sondrie
defaults: I was not ignorant that the Guyzes she had made greatly beholding
unto her, and so consequently might do much with them: but withal she had
highly provoked the house of Bourbon, who might justly burden her with their
last war, as well as the others held the last peace of her. I perceived that
she chose such Counsailors as were meet to suppress whatsoever ielozie the
League might conceive in her actions: but withal fit to cause those of the
Religion to repose no confidence in her: Neither was this al: for as I thought
some of them very unfit for this treaty, so likewise was the time in my
opinion well worse chosen. At one instant I saw the Queens provision made
ready, and at the same time three or four Armies leuyed: I thought it a hard
matter to bring those whom they made resolute to the war, of themselves to
be well disposed to peace: and in deed the Queen somewhat deceived my
expectation, for she departed sooner than I could see any reason for her so to
do. Now shall you have the whole discourse of our voyadge, the perticularities
whereof I have diligently noted, as well to satisfy your curiosity, as also to
answer your opinion conceived of my diligence: and I would to God we could as
easily refourme such ouersights as our great Counsailors have committed, as
your self can readily espy them out.

You know that at one and the same time she gave notice to the King of Navarre
of her setting forward, and to the Lords of Montpensier and Montmorency of her
purpose, requesting them both to work the King of Navarre to the peace. This
first action did diverse men diversely conster: some said that too evidently she
confessed to the King of Navarre that she had offended him, in that she (being
his Mother) did procure sollicitours to move him. Those of the League feared
this beginning, and those of the Religion had it in suspect. Some doubted the
Duke of Montpensiers authority, others his facility. Those of the League
said that the Queen set him at one with the chief of his famelie: Those of
the Religion, that the Queens counsel tended to make him a solliciter of
peace to the King of Navarre, thereby to turn him from being his companyo^ in
the war. Thus you see both parts grow into mistrust, and resolve the one to
defend, and the other the more fiercely to offend: and in deed so fast as the
Queen hasted forward, the Duke of Maine hasted to come to Paris, and so sone
as the treaty of peace began, the purposes of the League proceeded. The Abbot
of Gadaigne being the first time sent to the King of Navarre was very well
enterteyned, whereupon every one assured himself of the wished benefit: but
this hope vanished like a flash of lightning: for even at his second voyage
which he made while the Queen was at Cheno^^eau we smelt out that bitterness
which the courtesies and first offers of service had before cloked and
sweetened. Gadaignes passage by Brouage the Rochellers did suspect, and the
reuictualing of Brouage did they account to be a storehouse against their
Town. Nevertheless, the Queen Mother came forward to hasten the enteruiewe:
The King of Navarre would come with safety and credit. The Queen willed him
wholly to repose himself upon her: The King would that she should trust him.
She alleged her goodwill: and he made account of his fidelity and
innocence. She objected to him that he was the only hinderer of the
enteruiewe: he replied that she was the only let, that France was not at
quiet: also that he was ready to see her, so that it might be in a safe place
and the way free. And for the place, he offered to come to Champigny, in case
the Marshall of Birons troops might depart and go over the River of Loyre:
this he seemed to request as well for his own safety, as also to put in hope
his partakers, of whom some persuaded him to succor Castillon: others not to
trust to words, but rather hereafter to look for like enterteynment as he had
had before time. I must not lie. The King of Navarre for his part, showed
himself greatly affected to the weal and benefit of this Realm, and in case
the Queen deceived me in going to him, he did farther fail my expectation in
tarying for her. But see: even as they were determining upon the place and
manner of the enteruiew there appeared an Army upon the Sea before Rochelb.
Consider I pray you whether those that misliked and withstood this meeting, had
a large argument to declayme upon: All was at the point to break of. The King
of Navarre could not persuade himself that they which so pursued him both by
Sea and by land, had any desire or meaning to do him good. The Queen was
cou^sailed to weary him with wars thereby to obtain the better peace, and
yet perceived not that these counsaylors did use her favor to the end to
drive the King of Navarre into despair; who therevppon complained to the King
by the Lord of Reaux, and besought their Majesty's to call back the said
Army, declaring that he could not leave a Town of so great importance as
Rochell in that estate: and judging without parcialitie, I find that he had
reason: how beit the Navy stirred not away so long as it had victuals,
notwithstanding whatsoever the king of Nauarres petitions, but famine hoysed
the sails thereof, and not the Kings commandment: For to the contrary, even
the same day that it wayed ancre, Captain Harman was taken with the Queen
Mothers letters to the Commander of Chatte, enioyning him not to depart, or at
the least not to go far away. These letters fell into the King of Nauarres
hands, yet he, neglecting whatsoever imaginations he might justly conceive, did
nevertheless offer to see the Queen upon the conditions aforesaid,
requiring that in the mean time al hostility might cease: The Queen desired
the publicatio^ of a truce, whereto he said he could not agree, because he
had before been driven to promise his partakers that he would not agree upon
any peace or truce without their advice and consent. This answer she found very
strange and had a better taste thereof then when it was foretold her by the
Lords of Lenoncourt and Poigny. Which puts me in mind of the Carthagenians,
who wept and howled when they should pay their tribute to the Romans, but were
nothing moved when they became their tributaries. When the King of Navarre told
these our Masters that he would yet six months attend the Kings succor
before he would employ his friends, and that he would be denied of peace before
he would resolve upon war, they did but laugh at his patience: but now that
we see he has given his word, we weep, and truly for no other cause but for
that we wept not when we enfringed the Edicts, when we accounted the innocent
guilty, the obedient subjects Rebels, and just men offenders. Well, after
many difficulties and diverse iourneys too and fro the Queen sent sundry
Passeports which the King of Navarre had demanded to the end to advertise his
friends, and presently therewith published a Truce, which was like to have mard
all again: for the King of Navarre suspected that they would take advantage of
the publication thereof against a leauie of Reysters that he the^ made in
Germany, and therefore declared to her Majesty that in as much as this act had
relation to a common assurance, it ought also to have been concluded by a
common consent: whereupon this publication was made void. Afterward treating
upon the solemn reiterating of the same, certain troops of the regiment of
Neufuy were assaulted, which wonderfully displeased the King of Navarre. The
want of discretion in our Capteynes made men to ween that we had great
stomachs. In the end little Roche so trotted to and fro, that the enteruiewe
was concluded and the truce published. The King of Navarre came the eleventh
day of December to Iarnac, and the thirtenth of the same month, being very
well accompanied, saluted her Majesty at S. Bris. Here do I leave to your
imagination the manifold complaynts on either part.

The Queen charged him with disobedience, and ouerslipping all former actions
stayed chiefly upon the present calamities* she gave him to understand that the
king, for saving his own estate, was forced to make peace with the League:
that without that shift all had bin lost: that for the ceasing of the wars in
the Realm, he must of necessity habandon all pretense of Religion.

On the other side the King of Navarre complained that all the domages that he
had sustained, had grown to him only for his obedience to their Majesty's:
That the League was waxen strong, only because he had remained weak: That
he had put his life in hazard by keeping his faith: Further, reducing the
present mischiefs to their first original, he referred the misery of this
Realm to the peace concluded with the League: he affirmed that the King had
been evil counsayled rather then compelled: That the preservation of the
estate depended upon the mainteining of his Edicts: That such were in deed his
edicts as he had of his own accord sworn unto: That the edicts of peace were
those which banished wars, but not those which for the contenting of a few
sedicious persons, start up in one Province, replenished the whole Realm with
vprores. Madame, said he, you cannot accuse me but of over much fidelity: I
blame not your faith, but your age, which doing injury to your memory,
causes you sone to forget your promise unto me. This was the end of that
meeting, and almost the very last words. Men began to hope for much courtesy
at the next, because the bitter taunts seemed to be washed away in the former.

The Vicount of Touraine came to Cognac to conclude upon some perticularities
concerning the truce, where the Queen gave him to understand that for the
perfect obteyning of a peace the king of Navarre must needs become a
Catholic, and put down all exercise of any other Religion throughout all
those Towns which were in his possession: she farther gave him particular
charge to certefie the said King that such was the Kings pleasure and hers. As
I heard, whiles the king of Navarre was on his way to come and see the Queen,
the Vicount of Touraine aforesaid, met with him, and at large delivered him his
charge: whereupon he was about to have returned back again. Nevertheless,
imagining with himself that the Queen, for the feeding of her Counsels
humors, had propounded those speeches, he determined to go forward, as well
for the satisfying of his own mind, as also to the end to give her Majesty an
answer: howbeit even as soon as he with a sad and heavy countenance had
kissed her Majesty's hands, she asked him whether the Vicount of Touraine had
yet spoken with him, assuring him that that message was the Kings resolute
determination: whereto he answered her, that he greatly marueiled her
Majesty would take upon her so great a travail, only to tell him of a
matter, with the hearing whereof his ears were already even benumbed: That he
wondered that she being a woman of so great judgment would thus linger in
seeking to dissolve a difficulty by the very difficulty it self: That she
now propounded unto him a matter which he could by no means perform without
offense to both his Conscience and honor, yea such a one as she could not
request without doing great injury to the Kings service. Concerning the
offense against his own Conscience only GOD and his Conscience were the judges
thereof* and for his honor he besought her to consider what injury he should
offer thereto, if he should in any respect yield more to his enemies weapons,
then unto his Kings commandments: That in case he should so far ouershoot
and forget him self, yet lay it not in him thereby to repoke all the rest that
professed the same Religion: That thereby the pretense of the house of Guyze
should augment so much the more, by how much their hope should fail them of
being any way able to debar him of all such right as unto him may appertain:
That in the augme^tation of their pretense co^sisted the force of their
weapons, and in the force of their weapons the destruction of this estate: This
only Madame, said he, should I do to my own contentation. viz. Being a
Catholic and winning to my self the favor and goodwill of my Lord the King,
I might, in approaching nerer about him. enjoy the honor and benefit to yield
unto him my bounden service: but withal I should do more for my enemies, in
this, that remaining alone I might minister unto them sit opportunity to take
from you the most faithfullest servant that ever you shall have: neither will
they suffer any such about you, fearing least themselves might so grow
miserable and wretched, you better served, and all your good subjects more
happy. Hereto the Queen made no answer, (for in deed it had bin a hard
matter to make any good) but stood upon the laying before him al such
disco^modities as by continuance of war he did sustain: I do, said he, most
patiently bear them, because that you, to the end to disburthen your self,
have wholly laid them upon me. In this discourse she proceeded so far that
at length she objected unto him that in Rochell he could not do whatsoever he
listed: Pardon me Madame, said he, for I will or list to do nothing but what
I ought. Then the Lord of Neuers interrupting her, told him that it lay not in
him there to leauy an impost: True, said he, neither have we any Italians among
us. Soon after the Queen motioned for a general truce to be taken for one
whole year, upon condition that during the same all exercise of the Religion
might cease throughout ye whole Realm, and in the mean time the general
estates to be holden: To this he answered that in case those of the Religion
should so easily habandon and give over their holds and places of retreat, the
league would thereby grow the stronger, and so consequently, the estates the
weaker: That he supposed it impossible to surcease and extinguish the exercise
of the Religion in France by any other means then by a good Council: also
that the King remaining as yet the weaker, he accounted the assembly of the
estates to be in vain and to no purpose: That the examples of the estates
holden at Bloys did verefie the one, and the vain endeavors of the Kings
predecessors the other. Then as he was taking his leave of her, the Queen did
many times repeat unto him the same discourse which as is aforesaid she had
before holde^ with the Vicount of Touraine, charging him to impart the same to
the rest of the Nobility that followed him, which eue^ the next morning he
did, and that, as since I have been certefied, with very great grief, fearing
least it might work some alteration in every man's general desire of peace:
besides that he chose the most peaceable minded persons in his troop, namely,
the Lords of Monguion and Force, as well to testify to her Majesty that great
grief which every man had conceived in seeing themselves reduced to so extreme
a necessity through this her extreme resolution, as also to enquire whether
there were no more to be expected of that authority which the King had unto
her given. The Queen hereupon seeing her self at the point either wholly to
break, or at the least wise to morgage her promise, told them that she would
send the Lord of Rambouillet to desire the kings Majesty of his final
determination, which (I wot not to what purpose) she thought good to make
uncertain, as it appeared as well by this, as also by her speeches to ye Duke
of Montpenfier, whom she told that all that which she had said to the Vicount of
Touraine was by way of discourse only, but she showed him not that in express
terms she had delivered it to the King of Navarre, whom as she said she was
very desirous again to see, and therefore expressly charged him to motion the
prolonging of the truce, which he did, being on his way to bid him farewell.

Among so many contrarieties no man wist what to say, or my self to write unto
you. Some supposed that to the end to content and satisfy the League she
would not open any means to peace, except in showing her self to be thereto
forced by necessity. Others were of opinion that her Council still fed her
with some new hope conceived and grounded upon the weak estate of the
affairs of those of the Religion, and so promising her to procure the
obteyning of some such peace as should be greatly to the kings liking, they did
under hand lead her into such a war as might redound to the benefit of the
League. After that the Lord of Rambouillet was returned and had made his
report, viz. That the King had sworn by all the sole^nities of the order of
the holy Ghost, that he would never in any wise consent to permit any exercise
of the Religion: the Queen procured the King of Navarre to be earnestly
moved to an other enteruiewe, cunningly causing him to be persuaded that he
would very well like of the Lord of Rambouillets return, whereto nevertheless
it was very hard to make him to condescend, in that his hope which before he
had reposed in the seeing of the Queen, was now, if not quite quayled and
lost, yet at the least very far strayed away. His partakers earnestly
diswaded him therefro, as mistrusting that her only purpose tended to continue
the parley that she had before entered: himself douted the often renewing of
the truce, and the rather for that he was given to understand that the
publication of the first was undoubtedly put in print and transported both into
Suitzerland and Germany. Some said that she still lingered him on with a
treaty of peace, to the end to attend fit opportunity and convenient time to
make war upon him: Others, that she propounded unto him most grievous and
intolerable conditions, thereby to force him first to refuse, and so to become
most odious in the sight of all the French nation. Yea, some gave him warning
that she labored the towns round about to put in practice the execution of
the last Edict, also that fayning to seek the general benefit of the whole
estate, she wrought perticulerly much mischief against the Town of Rochell.
This persuasion bare some show of reason, especially after that the Catholics
had surprised and seized upon Vouans and Fay-moniau: for notwithstanding they
were things of small or no importance, yet happening during the time of the
treaty, it bred a further suspicion of other practizes: and withal the King of
Navarre himself began to think that he could not hope to obtain any great
matters at their hands, who took so much pains to take such small trifles
from him: How beit the Queen so whotly followed this matter and lay so sore
upon him, that finally he agreed to yield to a second enteruiewe, either to the
end to give to all men to understand that he was not in fault that they
treated not upon any means for peace, either else persuading himself that the
Queen would never take so much pains to the end twice to impart unto him one
bad tale. Upon her coming therefore to Fontenaye he came to Marans: and as
their desires to see each other, increased, so did mistrust also spring up
among their cou^sailes. The Queen, or rather some of hers, doubted to come to
any place where the Rochellers were the stronger, and by reason there was a
speech given out that the Coronell Ensign of Rochell kept the passage of
Veluire they made a difficulty to come over: The King of Navarre feared the
crookes and bywayes of these Fennes, and in deed the nature of the place is
such, that even one man alone may work a great feate there without any
danger. In the mean time the Queen was warned that the League grew into
mistrust of her actions: also that she encroched too much upon the Kings
authority, and that her presence were requisite at Paris. Upon this she sent
to the King of Navarre, willing him to send unto her the Vicount of Touraine,
with whom she offered to speak in all liberty, whereto he easily consented.
This was the very knot of all the last treaty. The Queen gave out that being
informed of his discretion and wisdom she would treat with him: The King of
Navarre being assured of his fidelity did consent thereto: every man
generally, knowing him to be a lover of his Country, and such a one as sought
the wealth and peace of this Estate, did wish for him. And my self was
certefied by such others as did more perticulerly know him, that he was a most
fit instrument, in case at the hands of the Queens Council he had been so
entreated as he ought. Well, he came to Fontenaye, where he gave the Queen to
understand of his coming, and that he there stayed to atte^d her Majesty's
commandments: She propounded unto him that it was expedient to agree upon a
general truce, for that the affairs were such, as it was no time as yet to
speak of a final peace: hereto he answered, that the King of Navarre would
sone condescend to the same, and could be content still to allow of the name of
a truce, in case it might bring ye fruits of a peace: but that as yet they had
so stopped their ears against his requests, that, to the end to procure
audience, he was forced to employe his friends, without whose advice and
consent it now lay not in him to treat or conclude upon either peace or a
general truce: That he was chosen protector of the one part, which the King
had forsaken, consisting of sondrie particular persons, who all had
perticulerly been iniuryed, and therefore could not be satisfied unless their
complaints might be heard: That if it might please her Majesty to grant such
Passeports as were requisite, with time convenient to call them together, they
would use al diligence: Further, that for the speedyer prosecuting of this
matter, it were not amiss, in his opinion, to conclude upon a particular truce
thorowout that Province for two months, during the which the King of Navarre
might come to see her, and with her to consult upon some means for peace, for
the concluding whereof the Deputies of the Provinces might make their repair
thither: This truce the Queen misliking, she commanded her Council to declare
her reasons: whereupon one of them showed it to be preiuditiall to the King:
for that, said he, during the same, the King of Navarre might have fit
opportunity to bring in strangers: The Catholics waxing idle should give
themselves to rest: Those of the League would take this truce to be a shadow
of peace, for fear of the body whereof they might raise a second Commotio^.
To all this the Vicount answered, that the place whereby the strangers might
enter had no correspondence with either the high or low Poictow: also that the
treaty of either peace or truce did rather hinder, the^ advance the leauie of
them: That the second reason was common to both parts, and that those of ye
Religion did more abuse their rest then the Catholics, as having been less
accustomed thereunto: As for the risings of the League he knew no remedy for
them, as not having as yet tasted the inconveniences of the same: That the Duke
of Guyze was but meanly accompanied: That the Duke of Main had undone his
own band, and that of small ruynes men never used to raise any great
buyldings. But because hitherto the said Vicount had spoken without commission,
as one that came only to hear, the Queen was of opinion that he should
return to the King of Navarre, to the end by himself to be more perticulerly
enstructed of his mind, which he did: and finding the king fully certefied of
the leauie of his Reysters, by a messenger that came to him the same day, he
speedily returned to the Queen, whom he found at Nyort resolved upon her
return to Paris. There had he audience, and did at large before her Majesty
discourse upon the happy estate of the King of Nauarres affairs: viz. That
he had borne the burden of five Armies, which had served to no other purpose
but to show what he was in respect of his enemies power: That contrariwise
they were wasted as well in power as credit: That they had recourse to the
conspiraties and seditions of a town, as not able to prosecute the wars in
the field: That they were to expect no further succor from the Spanyard, who
now was so busied in his own defense, that he had not so much leisure as to
dream of ayding them with means to assail: That notwithstanding the King of
Navarre has lost some few sco^ces or rather Douecotes, yet has he fortefied
fifty Houlds, and that albeit hitherto he stood upon his own defense, yet
was it at his discretion to make his enemies take his part: That he has in
readiness a great and strong forrayne aid which no necessity of his affairs
did ever force him to call in, which also he was not purposed to have used for
war, but to the end to conclude the better peace: That although he had been
diversely and highly iniuryed, yet it never sancke into his mind to seek any
revenge against those whom he knew to be servants to this Crown. The Lord of
Neuers asked him whether he had not bound himself to any to the prejudice of
the estate: But he, prosecuting his discourse, most humbly besought the Queen
to judge of himself that he was neither rash, neither a liar, also yt he would
not once set forth a foot to report any thing that he were not well assured
of, and that knowing the truth, he would not cloak it: which was, That the
King of Navarre had made no other contract with strangers then tended to the
wealth and peace of the estate, and to the restoring of the King and his
faithful servants unto their due authority. And to the end Madame, said he,
that you may the better judge of his intent, I do here protest unto you that
whenever it may please your Majesty's to use his power and forces, he will
evermore most readily turn his face to what part soever that the benefit of
this Realm, together with your commandments shall call him. The King of Navarre
has always been of that opinion, that in as much as the king entered into this
war because he was the weaker, it was not possible for him to make any peace
unless he could grow the stronger, which in truth he shall do when the Princes
of his blood shall have in their hands sufficient power wherewith to procure the
yielding of that obedience which unto him is due. This Madame is the last
remedy, and I would to God we could eschew it, and perticulerly I do declare
it unto you as your Majesty's servant, not as a professor of the Religion: That
peradventure it will be more safety for us to attend an Army then a Parley,
and a battle then an edict. Think not Madame, that the estate shall feel
the discommoditie of her friends. It is unto you both profit and honor
willingly to consent to a peace, and in time rather in your own good affection
to choose the means, the^ when necessity shall compel you, to accept at al
adventures of such as force shall prescribe. Then the Queen said that it were
meet to stay the foreign power, and a while stood upon the form of the
Pasports, whereupon the Vicount said: If Madame you do stand in doubt to give
us good words, we are not belike yet nere the point to look for any good
effects, which we should longer delay if we should stay that power that may
move you thereto. It is no time for us Madame, any longer to assure our selves
upon a bare promise, since even the most solemn edicts do fail us.

The Queen gave so good ear to these reasons, that her heart seemed to be by
them the more bent to consider of such aduertisements as were daily on every
side brought unto her. They set before her the appearance of a mighty sedition:
The King but badly accompanied: The Duke of Main in Paris: The Duke of Guyze
also ready to enter in. They showed her what occasions the Capteynes of the
League now had to shoot of the last shot of their despair, as that their hope
to enjoy England was now dead with the Scottish Queen: That our Cleargymens
devotion deminished as fast as their ambition increased: That four Armies had
been spoiled for default of means: That those of the Religion waxed stronger
and stronger, and therefore that there was no further appearance that these our
masters can buyld any more upon their ruynes. All these things which we most
feared so suncke into her imagination that she returns in haste, to stop,
as it is likely, these sedicious persons, who have no more left to enterprise
or execute but finally upon the Kings person. Thus may you see the effect of
our treaty, and so the end of my letter which would have wearyed me to write,
had I not forgot the labor of my hand through that pleasure which I conceive
in enterteyning of you.

I do most humbly kiss your hands, and remain your most faithful servant.
S. C. P.


