THE SINNERS Sanctuary.

ISA. 7.55. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his
thoughts; and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him;
and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon. HIERON. The Lord does neither
perform the good things which he promised to the Saints, if they return to
iniquities; nor the evils which he threatened to sinners, if they return unto
salvation. By THOMAS PACKER, his Majesty's Servant.

LONDON, Printed by John Haviland, for Edward Blackmore, and are to be sold at
his shop in S. Paul's Church yard at the sign of the Angel, 1638.

TO THE CHILDREN of Men.
ROMANS 3.23. For all have sinned and come short of the glory of God.
COme now, Isa. 1.18.
and let us reason together, says the Lord; though your sins be as scarlet,
they shall be as white as snow; though they be red like crymsin, they shall be
as wool.

Have I any pleasure at Ezec. 18.23
all, that the wicked should die, says the Lord God? and not that he should
return from his ways, and live?

31.
Cast away from you all your transgressions, whereby ye have transgressed, and
make you a new heart, and a new spirit: for why will ye die, O house of Israel?

1 Sa. 12.23.
I will teach you the good and the right way.

24.
Only fear the Lord, and serve him in truth, with all your heart: for consider
how great things he has done for you.

We must serve the Lord, our God, Deu. 28.47
with joifulnesse and with gladness of heart, for the abundance of all things.

Trust in the Lord with all thine heart, Pro. 35.
and lean not unto thine own understanding.

In all thy ways acknowledge him, 6.
and he shall direct thy paths.

Blessed is that man that makes the Lord his trust. Psalm. 40.4.


And be not conformed to this world; Romans 12.2
but be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is
that good, that acceptable, and perfect will of God.

Augustine.
Do not understand that thou may believe, but believe that thou may
understand; understanding is the reward of Faith.

John. 11.40
Jesus says unto Martha, Said I not unto thee, that if thou would believe,
thou should see the glory of God?

Act. 18.27.
When Apollos came into Achaia, he helped them much, who had believed through
grace.

Isa. 7.9.
If ye will not believe, surely ye shall not be established.

We beeleve, and know, Ioh. 6.69.
that thou art Christ, that Son of the living God.

Teach me good judgment and knowledge, Psalm. 119.66.
O Lord; for I have believed thy Commandments.

It belongs to every private man to judge of the doctrine of religion,
Brentius.
[for satisfaction of his own conscience] and to discern the truth from
falsehood.

That Religion which Lipsius.
is sincerely taken out of the holy Scriptures, is the true, and Christian
Religion.

Andrad.
For they contain the most ample Canon, that is, the rule, and square of Piety,
Faith, and Religion.

August.
They have delivered unto us, that there is but one God, and one Christ; one
Hope, and one Faith; one Church, and one Baptism.

Ferus.
They are the sole rule of verity; and whatsoever differs, or contradicts the
same, it is error, and cockle, with what show soever it comes forth.

They are all plain to him that understands, Pro. 3.5.
and right to them that find knowledge.

All those things which appertain to faith, Aug.
and direction of life, are laid down plainly in the holy Scriptures.

They are manifest to them, Epiphan.
who repair unto them, with a religious heart.

Let not our Religion therefore consist in our fantasies; for any truth, Aug.
whatsoever it be, is better than any thing, that can of our own head be
devised.

Aug.
Godly humility does more easily find out the Maker of the stars, than proud
curiosity the order of the stars.

Book of nature into the book of Grace.
The depth of Predestination, and the manner of Regeneration are difficult
points of divine mysteries, which a studious Divine, an illuminated spirit
cannot find out.

Ibidem.
Let us religiously adore these things by faith, and not curiously search into
them by reason, further than Gods Word does allow.

This is the perfection of the regenerate; August.
If they acknowledge themselves to be imperfect.

The doctrine of the holy Ghost does not encourage curiosity, Bernard.
but inflameth charity.

When the soul is overcome by the fever, Chrysostom.
or fiery heat of imaginations, then it questioneth; but when it is sound, and
in good temper, it reasons not, but faithfully believes.

As zeal must erect our discretion, Bernard.
that we run not too slowly; So discretion must direct our zeal, that we run
not too fast.

Aug.
God will reveal wisdom only to such as walk continually in the way of
peace; not in the way of preciseness.

Harsnet.
Tell me, what is not contained in the ten Commandments, which of a Christian
is to be performed?

Lactant.
When God opened his truth unto us, he would have us know those things only
which it behooved man to know for obtaining life: But of those things, which
appertained to curious, and profane desires, he spoke not, that they might be
hidden. Why then do thou seek those things which thou can not know?
neither art thou more blessed, if thou know them?

Grace teaches a man to put his knowledge in practice. Harsnet.


He desires to be taught, Idem.
that he may walk; not that he may talk, as too many do.

Add to your faith virtue, 2 Pet. 1.5.
and to virtue knowledge;

6.
And to knowledge temperance; and to temperance patience; and to patience
godliness:

7.
And to godliness brotherly kindness; and to brotherly kindness charity.

8.
For if these things be in you, and abound, they make you, that you shall
neither be barren, nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Luther in Luke 6.
Let us first repose Faith in God alone; and then let us direct our works to the
benefit of our neighbor.

As many as will not follow God, Idem in Ephesians. 5.
and walk in love, and I show forth their faith by their works, are neither
the sons of God, nor heirs of his kingdom.

What does it profit, Ia. 2.14.
my brethren, though a man say he has faith? can faith save him?

The end of the Commandment is Charity, 1 Timothy 1.5.
out of a pure heart, and of a good conscience, and of faith unfeined.

By faith which is conceived Haymo.
in the heart, professed with the mouth, and adorned with good works, the just
man lives eternally.

Cyprian.
Life is here lost, or won; everlasting salvation is here provided for, by the
due worshipping of God, and the fruits of faith.

Epiphan.
For in the age to come, after a man's death, there is no more help by fasting,
no more calling to penance, no more exhibition of Alms.

Epiphan.
It is as the corn, that swells not, after it is reaped, neither can be
spoiled with the wind.

The garners are sealed up, the time is past, Idem.
the combat is finished, the lists are voided, and the garlands are given. Aug.


Let us therefore be at one with the word of God, while we are in this life,
for when we are gone out of this world, there shall be no more compunction, or
satisfaction; there remains no more, but the Judge, the Gaolour, and the
Prison.

When we were enemies, Romans 5.10.
we were reconciled unto God, by the death of his Son.

Heb. 9.26.
Once in the end of the world has he appeared to put away sin, by the sacrifice
of himself.

Acts 10.43.
To him give all the Prophets witness, that, through his name, whosoever
believes in him, shall receive remission of sins.

Bellar.
We confess, that Christ has truly, yea most fully satisfied God the Father
for us, and for the whole world.

Aug.
JESUS CHRIST taking upon him the punishment but not the fault, has thereby
blotted out both the fault, and the punishment.

Let us hold fast the profession of our faith, Heb. 10.
without wavering, for he is faithful that promised.

The rule of Catholic faith is certain and known. Bellar.


There is nothing more known, Idem.
nothing more certain, than the holy Scriptures, which are contained in the
writings of the Prophets and Apostles.

They are Catholics, Aug.
which be of sound Faith, and good life.

Idem.
Heretics do violate faith by believing false things of God.

Tertul.
Whatsoever favors against the truth, is an heresy, be it never so ancienta
custom.

Aug.
And schismatiks (though they believe the same things with us, yet) do fly from
brotherly Charity, by their wicked divisions.

Idem.
Wherefore neither does the Heretic belong to the Catholic Church, because he
loves not God:

Nor the Schismatike, Idem.
because he loves not his neighbor.

Pure Religion, Ja. 1.27.
and undefiled before GOD, and the Father, is this, To visit the fatherless,
and the widows in their affliction; and to keep himself unspotted from the
world.

If true charity, Casarius.
and humility be wanting, we ought not to presume, and trust to the habit only
of Religion.

Let us search, Lam. 3.40.
and try our ways, and turn again unto the Lord.

25.
The Lord is good to them that wait for him; to the soul that seeks him.

30.
For he does not afflict willingly; nor grieve the Children of Men.

1 PET. 2.17. Fear God. Honor the King.
The contents are these, viz.
THe Sinners conversion. Pa. 1 His godly desire. 4 His coming unto God. 7 His
Repentance. 10 His Confession. 15 His Absolution. 19 His amendment of life. 23
His assurance of Salvation. 30 Gods mercy. 34 Death. 40 The last Judgment. 44
4. Helps to the amendment of life. 1. Prayer. 51 2. Reading the Scriptures. 55
3. Hearing the Word preached. 59 4. Sacraments. 62 The holy Eucharist, or
Sacrament of the Body and Blood of our Lord. 64 A remembrance of the death, and
passion of our Savior Christ. 68 Worthy Receivers. 70 Unworthy Receivers. 74
Transubstantiation. 76 To be received in both kinds. 80 The Prayer before
receiving the Communion. 83 The Prayer after receiving the Communion. 85 A
Prayer before reading the holy Scriptures. 87 A Prayer for faith. 88 For
Repentance. 89 A short and effectual Prayer. 90 The general Confession. 91 A
Prayer for the Morning. 93 A Prayer for all times. 95 A Prayer before going to
bed 96 A Psalm of contrition, and confession. 98 A Psalm for remission. 100 A
Psalm for mercy, and direction. 102 A Psalm of confidence in Gods mercy. 104
A Psalm of praise. 106
THE SINNERS Conversion.
O Israel, Hos. 14.1.
return unto the Lord thy God; for thou have fallen by thine iniquity.

Return unto me, Malac. 3.7
and I will return unto you, says the Lord of Hosts.

Our conversion will always find him prepared. August.


Humble your selves therefore under the mighty hand of God, Iam. 4.10.
that he may exalt you in due time.

Lyra in Ephesians.
Humility is the foundation of the spiritual building.

Iam. 4.8.
Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to you.

Greg. Naz.
O the readiness of Gods gracious love! O the easiness of his exorable
reconcilement!

Perkins.
A man beginning to be converted, is at that instant the child of God.

Idem.
Inward motions, and inclinations of Gods Spirit, are the material beginning of
a Sinners conversion.

Phil. 3.13.
For it is God that works in you, both to will, and to do, of his good
pleasure.

Luke 15.
The prodigal son, when he came to himself, said: I will arise, and go to my
father, and will say unto him; Father, I have sinned against Heaven, and before
thee;

And am no more worthy to be called thy son, Ibidem.
make me as one of thy hired servants.

And he arose, Ibidem.
and came to his father. But when he was yet a great way off, his father saw
him, and had compassion, and ran, and fell on his neck, and kissed him.

Though a man come to the height of vice, Chrysostom.
and yet be willing to return into the way of virtue, God receives, and
embraces him willingly.

None ought therefore to despair of pardon, Greg.
if about the end of their life they turn to repentance.

And although our conversion be good in our last sickness; yet is that better,
Idem.
which is performed long before our death; that we may with more security
pass out of this world.

Hieron.
God grant the sinner may be as soon turned to repentance, as the Lord is ready
to change his determined judgment.

Ezech. 33.
Turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways; for why will ye dye, O house of
Israel?

Lam. 15.
Turn thou us unto thee, O Lord, and we shall be turned.

His godly desire.
Psalm. 42.
AS the Heart pants after the water brooks, so pants my soul after thee, O
God.

84.
My soul longs; yea, even faints for the Courts of the Lord: My heart, and
my flesh cries out for the living God.

The more earnestly God is desired of us, Gregor.
the more sweetly is he delighted in us.

Our desires do sound more powerfully in the secretest ears of God, Idem.
than our words.

He that searches the heart, Romans 8.
knows what is the mind of the spirit; because he makes intercession for the
Saints, according to the will of God.

God has annexed a promise of blessedness, Perkins.
and life everlasting to the desire of grace.

Blessed are they which do hunger, Mat 5.
and thirst after righteousness; for they shall be filled.

August.
The whole life of a good Christian is an holy will and desire.

Bradford.
God has given thee a penitent, and believing heart, that is, an heart which
desires to repent, and believe; for such an one is taken of him for a penitent
and believing heart, he accepting the will for the deed.

2 Cor. 8.
For if there be first a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man
has, and not according to that a man has not.

K^mnit.
When I have a good desire (though it does scarcely show it self in some little,
and slender sigh) I must be assured that the Spirit of God is present, and
works his good work.

He will fulfill the desire of them that fear him, Psalm. 145.
he will also hear their cry, and save them.

His coming unto God.
He that comes unto God, Hebr. 11.
must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently
seek him.

Let us draw near with a true heart, 10.
in full assurance of faith.

In Christ we have boldness, Ephesians. 3.
and access, with confidence by the faith of him.

The first coming to God, Hom. de fi^
is through faith, whereby we be justified before him.

For the faith of the Catholic Religion, Chrysostom.
is the light of the soul; the door of life; the foundation of eternal
salvation.

Aug.
Without it, no man can come near the number of the sons of God; without it,
all the endeavor of man is void.

Gal. 3.
For ye are all the children of God by Faith in Christ Jesus.

Beda.
It comes not from the wisdom of eloquent words; but from the gift of the
heavenly calling.

Phil. 1.
For unto you it is given, in the behalf of CHRIST, not only to believe on
him; but also to suffer for his sake.

Mark. 1^.
When the Scribe said, that to love GOD with all the heart, and with all the
understanding, and with all the soul, and with all the strength; And to love
his neighbor as himself, is more than all whole burnt offerings and
sacrifices:

Jesus said unto him, Ibid.
thou art not far from the Kingdom of heaven.

If thy heart can only sobbe unto GOD, despair not, Knox.
thou art not destitute of Faith; for that only sobbe is an acceptable
Sacrifice unto GOD.

The Faith which the Scripture commendss is nothing else, but, Ferus.
To trust in the free mercy of GOD.

Come unto me all ye that labor, Mat. 11.
and are heavy laden; and I will give you rest.

Incline your ear, Isa. 55.
and come unto me; hear, and your soul shall live: and I will make an
everlasting covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David.

His Repentance.
2 Pet. 3.
THe Lord is long suffering to us ward, not willing that any should perish; but
that all should come to repentance.

Act. 3.
Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out.

Glos. ord.
Repentance is a bewayling of our former sins, and a care not to commit the like
again.

Chrysostom.
God never despises repentance, if it be offered unto him entirely and simply.

Hieron.
For the Lord respects not the length of time; but considers the upright
affection of him that repents.

When we feel the burden of our sins, Vdall.
and be grieved in heart for them, it is the work of the holy Ghost, and in
time will bring forth fruit worthy of repentance.

There are four parts of true repentance. Hom. de poenit.


Contrition, which is an unfeigned

Confession, which is an

Faith whereby we steadfastly

Amendment of life, which and to bring forth fruits worthy of repentance.

Aug.
Neither is it sufficient to repentance, to change our manners into better, and
to depart from our evil ways; unless GOD be satisfied for our sins past, by
the sorrow of repentance, by the groan of humility, by the sacrifice of a
contrite heart, Alms deeds accompanying.

Chrysostom.
Not to be grieved for thy sins, does more displease God, and provoke his
anger, than the sin which before thou did commit.

Joel 2.
Therefore now also says the Lord; Turn ye even to me, with all your heart, and
with fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning.

Ibidem.
And rent your heart, and not your garments, and turn unto the LORD your GOD;
for he is gracious, and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness.

When thou so repentest, Aug.
that thy soul has a bitter taste of that, which before was pleasant in thy
life; and what before was delightful to the body, the same tormenteth thee in
thine heart, even now do thou lament, and mourn before GOD.

If a man be never so great a sinner, Latimer.
yet if he have true repentance, with faith, and hope in GODS mercy, he shall
be forgiven.

GODS mercy has no limits at all; Chrysostom.
if any do call for help, there is one that will hear readily; If any do
repent, there is one that will show mercy.

Lyra moral.
As the Palm tree, which is rugged in the stock; and has pleasant fruit in
the top; even so a righteous man begins in the roughness of repentance, and
ends in the sweetness of heavenly comfort.

Hom de poenit.
Let us therefore repent for straying from so good a Lord; let us confess our
unworthiness before him; but yet let us trust in Gods free mercy, for Christ
Jesus sake, for the pardon of our sins.

Gregor.
For Gods mercy does help those who repent in this world; but in that which is
to come, we do not repent, but give account of our works.

Romans 2.
Despisest thou the riches of his goodness, and forbearance, and long
suffering, not knowing that the goodness of God leads thee to repentance?

His Confession.
HE that covers his sins, Prove. 28.
shall not prosper, but who so confesses, and forsakes them shall have mercy.

Confess thy sins before God, Chrysostom.
and declare thine offenses with prayer to the true Judge; not with thy tongue,
but with remembrance of thy conscience.

That confession delivers from death, Ambr.
which is made by repentance.

David said unto the Lord, 2 Samuel 24.
I have sinned greatly in that I have done: And now I beseech thee, O Lord,
take away the iniquity of thy servant, for I have done foolishly.

Basil.
I do not confess with my lips, that I may manifest my self to many; but
inwardly in my very heart, shutting mine eyes, to thee alone, that see the
things that are in secret, do I show my groans, roaring within my self: for
the groans of mine heart, and the lamentations sent to thee, my God, from the
depth of my soul, suffice for a confession.

Hom. de poenit.
This is the chiefest, and most principal Confession, that in the Scriptures,
and Word of God, we are bidden to make; and without the which, we shall never
obtain pardon, and forgiveness of our sins.

Bernard.
Without this Confession, the righteous man is judged unthankful, and the
sinner reputed a dead man Ther^f^re Conf ssion is the way of the sinner, and
nevertheless becomes the righteous.

Lord be merciful unto me, Psalm. 41.
heal my soul, for I have sinned against thee.

If any say, I have sinned, Job 33.
and perverted that which was right, and it profited me not;

He will deliver his soul from going into the pit, Ibidem.
and his life shall see the light.

If we will with a sorrowful, Hom. de poenit.
and contrite heart, make an unfeined confession of our sins unto God, he will
freely forgive them, and put all our wickedness out of his remembrance.

Ibid.
I do not say, but that if any do find themselves troubled in conscience, they
may repair to their learned Curat, or Pastor, or to some other godly learned
man, and show the trouble, and doubt of their conscience to him, that they may
receive at his hand the comfortable salve of Gods word.

Hom. de poenit.
But it is against the true Christian liberty, that any man should be bound to
the numbering of his sins, as has been used heretofore, in the time of
blindness, and ignorance.

Bellar.
Calvin admits of private confession unto the Pastor, when any is afflicted
in his conscience, and shall need another help: Yet with this moderation,
that this confession be free, and not exacted; and not injoyning a rehearsal
of all particular sins.

Let us with a true and contrite heart, Hom de ^oenit.
use that kind of confession, which God has commanded in his word.

If we confess our sins, 1 Ioh. 1.
he is faithful, and just, to forgive us our sins; and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness.

His Absolution.
WHo can forgive sins, Mark. 2.7.
but God only?

The Son of Man has power upon earth to forgive sins. 10.


He will purge your conscience from dead works, Heb. 9.14.
to serve the living God.

For this is not an humane Ambros.
work, neither is the holy Ghost given by man; but being called upon by the
Priest, is bestowed by God; wherein the gift is Gods, the ministry is the
Priests.

Pet. Lumb.
God only does remit, and retain sins; and yet he has given unto the Church
power of binding, and loosing. But God binds, and loses otherwise than the
Church does: for he by himself only remitteth sins, because he purges the
soul inwardly from the spot of sin, and freeth it from the depth of eternal
death; which the Church cannot do, but has power of binding, and loosing, that
is, of declaring what sinners are either loosed, or bound.

Chemnit.
In absolution God himself, by the ministry of the Gospel, does remit sins
unto all believers.

The virtue and effect of remission is not in the Disciples, Cajetan.
but in God, who pardons.

We account of them, Ambros.
as the Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the Mysteries.

Sins are not loosed or retained at the pleasure of men; Aug.
but according to the will of God, and prayers of the Church.

To the Lord our God belong mercies, Daniel 9.9
and forgivenesses, though we have rebelled against him.

Delivering fom sin, Chrysostom.
he ingrafteth righteousness; yea he extinguisheth sin, and suffers it not to
be.

O Lord God Almighty, Ordo Romans antiq. de Offic divin. page 18. edi. Romans 1591.
be merciful to me a sinner, that I may worthily give thanks unto thee, who
have made me an unworthy one, for thy mercies sake, a Minister of the Priestly
Office; and have appointed me a poor, and humble Mediator, to pray, and make
intercession unto our Lord Jesus Christ for sinners, that return unto
repentance: And therefore, O Lord, the Ruler, who would have all men to be
saved, and to come to the knowledge of the truth; who do not desire the death
of a sinner, but that he may be reconciled, and live; Receive my prayer, which
I power forth before the face of thy mercy, for thy servants, and handmaids,
who have fled to repentance, and thy mercy.

Nehemiah 9.17.
Thou art a God, ready to pardon, gracious, and merciful, slow to anger, and of
great kindness.

Behold, Ambros.
that by the holy Ghost sins are forgiven; but men, to the remission of sins,
bring their Ministry: They exercise not the authority of any power.

Therefore in all the servants, there is no dominion, Optat.
but a Ministry.

Almighty God give unto thee absolution, Tho. Aquin.
and remission.

His amendment of life.
YOu were sometimes darkness: Ephesians. 5.
but now are ye light in the Lord; walk as children of light.

Set your affection on Colos. 3.
things above; not on things on the earth.

Ephesians. 4.
Put ye off concerning the former conversation, the old man, which is corrupt
after the deceitful lusts.

Ibidem.
And put ye on the new man, which after GOD, is created in righteousness, and
true holiness.

Playfer.
That which is borne of the old man, which is the flesh, must daily decrease in
us, and grow downwards.

Idem.
But that which is borne of the new man, which is the Spirit, must daily
increase in us, and grow upward.

Latymer.
Repentance and amendment of life, are a sure remedy, that our sins shall not
be our shame and confusion.

Vdall.
Be careful to live in godliness, reforming your affection inwardly; and your
conversation outwardly, according to the prescript rule of God word.

They that from the bottom of their heart do acknowledge their sins, Hom. de
^oenit.
and are unfeinedly sorry for their offenses, will cast off all hypocrisy, and
put on true humility, and lowliness of heart.

And as they did before give themselves to uncleannes of life, Ibidem.
so will they henceforth with all diligence, give themselves to innocence,
pureness of life, and true godliness.

The graces of God, Oecumen.
as the flowers of a garden, must not only be kept, but also dressed; that they
may have not only a being, but also an abounding.

Coloss. 3.
Put ye on therefore, as the elect of GOD (holy and beloved) bowels of mercies,
kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long suffering.

Forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, 4
if any have a quarrel against any; even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye.

Ibidem.
And above all things put on Charity, which is the bond of perfectness.

Raban.
Mercy consists in giving alms cheerfully, in suffering wrong patiently, in
reforming the rude lovingly.

Chrysostom.
It is the safety of salvation, the ornam^nt of faith, and propitiation for sins.

Lyra.
Let Christ's humility also be inwardly in your hearts, and not outwardly, as it
is with hypocrites.

For unless we be beaten down in humility, ^^all.
we are no vessels for Christ to dwell in.

Humility is a sign of worth; but pride, Bernard.
of emptiness, and vanity.

If the mind be constantly directed to GOD, Greg moral.
whatsoever in this life is bitter unto us, through patience, we account it
pleasant.

Let a man look into his heart, Aug.
and see if he have Charity; and then let him say, I am borne of GOD.

Charity is a desire of the mind to love GOD for himself; Idem.
and to love our neighbor for GOD.

It is the stay of wisdom, Idem.
the fruit of Faith, the riches of the poor, and the life of them that are
dying.

Luther.
A Christian life consists in this; that we deal with faith, and with the
heart in things apperteyning to GOD; but use our life, and works toward our
neighbor.

Ephesians. 2.
For we are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good works; which God
has before ordained, that we should walk in them.

Hom. de fid. and oper.
There is one work, in which be all good works, that is; faith which works by
charity. If thou have it, thou have the ground of all good works.

Luther.
GOD will have works done freely, not that we may merit any thing thereby; but
that we may do them to the profit of our neighbors, and witness our sincere
faith by them.

Aug.
No man does good works to receive grace by them; but because he has first
received grace, therefore consequently he does good works.

Behold, John 5.
thou art made whole; sin no more, lest a worse thing happen unto thee.

Which penance we shall never be able to fulfill, Hom. de poenit.
without the special grace of him, that says, Ioh. 15.5.
without me ye can do nothing.

It is therefore our parts, Hom de poenit.
if at least we be desirous of the health and salvation of our own souls,
most earnestly to pray to our heavenly father, to assist us with his holy
spirit, that we may be able to hearken to the voice of the true Shepherd, and
with due obedience to follow the same.

Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter, Eccl. 12.
fear God, and keep his commandments; for this is the whole duty of man.

His assurance of Salvation.
John 3.
HE that believes on the Son has everlasting life.

1 Pet. 1.
Whom having not seen, ye love; in whom, though now ye see him not, yet
believing ye rejoice with joy unspeakable, and full of glory.

Ibidem.
Receiving the end of your Faith, even the salvation of your souls.

Bish. Fisher.
If we will enter into heaven, we must not come with a double heart, or
wavering faith; but with that which is altogether without doubting, and most
certain.

Hillar.
The LORD will have us hope for the Kingdom of Heaven without any doubting, for
otherwise there is no justification of faith, if faith be uncertain.

The just living by faith, Fulgent.
says confidently, I believe to see the goodness of the LORD in the land of
the living.

We have hope, Heb. 6.
as an Anchor of the soul, both sure, and steadfast, and which enters into
that which is within the Veil.

Because ye are sons, Gal. 4.
GOD has sent forth the spirit of his son into your hearts, crying Abba father.

Wherefore thou art no more a servant, but a son, Ibidem.
and if a son, then an heir of God through Christ.

We leave not a sinner in Stapleton.
the midst of wavering doubtfulnesse, but we place him in good, and firm
hope; when once his conscience witnesses with him, that he has truly
repented.

Aug.
There is a kind of glorying in thy conscience, when thou know thy faith is
sincere, thy hope certain, thy love without dissembling.

Altisiodor.
We may discern we are in grace, by our good desire, comfort of mind, and
good works.

Bernard.
The spirit by faith reveals to a man the eternal purpose of God, concerning
his future salvation; which revelation is nothing else, but the infusion of
spiritual grace, whereby the deeds of the flesh are mortified, and the man
prepared to the kingdom of heaven.

Gods truth, and his power, Vdall.
is the cause of our assurance of salvation; his truth, because we do not
doubt but he will keep his promise; his power because all things are possible
to him.

Herein we look not upon our own worthiness, Idem.
(for then we must needs doubt) but upon him that promised, who will faithfully
perform.

God has promised to thee, Aug.
O man that thou shall live for ever; do thou not believe it? Believe it,
believe it; for that which he has already done for thee, is a greater matter
than that which he has promised.

These things have I writ^en unto you that believe on the name of the Son of
God, 1 Ioh. 5.
that ye may know that ye have eternal life; and that ye may believe on the
name of the Son of GOD.

Romans 15
Now the GOD of hope fill you with all joy, and hope in believing, that ye may
abound in hope, through the power of the holy Ghost.

Gods mercy.
Lam. 3.
IT is the LORDS mercy that we are not consumed, because his compassions fail
not.

Psalm. 103.
He has not dealt with us after our sins, nor rewarded us according to our
iniquities.

Lam. 3.
But though he send affliction, yet will he have compassion, according to the
multitude of his mercies.

Psalm. 103.
For as the heaven is high above the earth, so great is his mercy toward them
that fear him.

This is the glory of man, Hieron.
that he may know, and understand, that GOD is the LORD, who gives mercy,
and justice upon the earth.

The omnipotency of God excels two ways; Hieron.
in granting mercy to the penitent, and punishing such as continue in sin,
according to their desert.

He rejoices not of his own gain, Chrysostom.
but of our salvation; he is not grieved for his own displeasure, but for our
destruction.

When he punishes, Idem.
and takes vengeance; he does it not with passionate anger but with all
unspeakable clemency; with the affection of an healer, not of a destroyer.

How rich art thou, O Lord GOD, in mercy? how great in justice? how bountiful
in grace?

Bernard.
Thou beholdest the humbie with favor; the Innocent thou judge righteously;
and savest sinners mercifully.

Kempis dial. inter Deum and peccator. de imitat. Christi, si. 4. cap. 18.
Although a sinner do abide still in the flesh; yet do I receive him into my
favor, so that he is not to fear the utter confusion for his sins committed;
but rather to thank and praise God, that old things be passed away, and that
all things are become new.

Ibid.
So gracious and merciful am I, that always I am more ready to forgive, than
thou art to beg forgiveness at my hands; more ready to give, than thou art
to ask.

To hope well of my goodness, Ibidem.
is a very token of true humility, and of great faith.

What? Ibid.
look you to be all worthy, before you make access unto me? And of your
self, when will you be so?

If only such as are good, Ibid.
and worthy, and great, and perfect, should approach unto me, to whom should
sinners and publicans approach?

So then, Luke 15.
what says the Gospel? Then drew near unto him all the publicans and sinners
for to hear him.

Therefore let the unworthy approach, Kempis.
that they may become worthy; let the wicked approach, that they may be made
good; let the weak, and unperfect approach, that they may prove strong, and
perfect; yea let all, and every one approach, that they may receive from the
abundant streams of the well of life.

John. 7.
He which is a thirst, let him come to me and drink. Isay 55.
And he which has nothing, let him come and buy without silver, and without
money.

Mat 9.
He that is sick, let him come to be healed.

Mark. 9.
He that is neither hot, nor cold, let him come to be inflamed.

Kempis.
He that is fearful, let him come to be encouraged.

He that is sorrowful let him come to be comforted. Idem.


He that is wearied with cares, Idem.
let him come to be refreshed with joy.

Lo, my delight is, Idem.
to be with the children of men.

And therefore be ever mindful both of your frail condition, Idem.
and of my glorious Majesty, and so with humble reverence approach boldly into
my presence.

For I am he that puts away thine iniquities, Isa. 43.
and will not remember thy sins:

It is I that justify the ungodly; Romans 4.
and this I do for my holy Name sake: yea, and I am still ready to minister
greater gifts of mercy unto thee.

Because I do ever choose Kempis.
to show favor, rather than displeasure, as one who had rather spare, than
punish.

2 Cor. 1.
Blessed be God, even the Father of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, the Father of
mercies, and GOD of all comfort.

Death.
Heb. 13.14.
HEre have we no continuing City; but we seek one to come.

Luke 12.4.
Be ye prepared; for the Son of man will come at an hour that ye think not.

Aug.
All men know that the day of death will come; yet all, or almost all do
notwithstanding labor to put it off; yea even those, who believe, that after
death, they shall live more blessedly: So great power has the sweet fellowship
of the flesh, and soul.

Take heed, watch, and pray; Mar. 13 33.
for ye know not when the time is.

The last day of our life is unknown, August.
that all days may be observed; the remedies are too late provided, when the
dangers of death approach.

Plato his opinion is, Hieron.
that the whole life of wise men is the meditation of death. We ought
therefore to premeditate what we shall be hereafter; and that whether we will,
or not, death cannot be longer from us.

He which is assured he shall dye, Gregor.
opposes himself against all the desires of this life. For the perfect life
is a meditation of death; which while just men do perform, they escape the
snares of sin.

Aug.
That death is not accounted evil, which a good life has gone before.

Colos. 3.2.
Set your affection on things above; not on things of the earth.

Gregor.
If we consider what, and how great things are promised to us in heaven; all
things in earth will be vile, and base in our estimation: For earthly substance
compared to the heavenly felicity, is but an heavy burden, not an help and
succor. This temporal life compared to the eternal, is rather to be
accounted a death than a life.

Eccl. 12.7.
Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was; and the spirit shall
return unto God, who gave it.

They which desire to be dissolved, Aug.
and to be with Christ, do live patiently, and die cheerfully.

They are not lost, Ambros.
but sent before, whom eternity has received.

All the days of my appointed time, will I wait, Job 14.14.
till my change come.

For to me, to live, is Christ; Phil. 1.21.
and to die, is gain.

When Christ, Colos. 3.3.
who is our life, shall appear; then shall ye also appear with him in glory.

The last Judgment.
Heb. 9.
IT is appointed unto men once to dye; but after this, the Judgment.

Romans 14.
We shall all stand before the Judgment Seat of Christ.

Eccles. 12.
For GOD shall bring every work to judgment, with every secret thing, whether
it be good, or whether it be evil.

Hieron.
It is not in us to know the day of Judgment; but being always uncertain of
the coming of the Judge, let us so live, as if we were, to be judged the next
day.

Idem.
If there be any joy in this present life; let it be so used, that the
bitterness of the Judgment to come do not at any time depart out of our
memory.

Nothing does more set forward an honest life, Ambros.
than to believe he shall be judged; whom hidden things do not deceive: evil
things do offend; and good things do delight.

That judge is not prevented by favor, Aug.
nor led now by mercy, nor corrupted with money, nor appeased by satisfaction,
or repentance; let the soul while it has time here, labor for it self by
repentance, so long, as here is place for mercy; because there is the place of
Justice.

God does so behold our ways, and number our steps, Greg. moral
that, eve^ our smalest thoughts, and least words remain not unexamined in his
Judgeme^t.

Psalm. 37.
The Lord knows the days of the upright, and their inheritance shall be for
ever.

Ibid.
But the wicked shall perish, and the enemies of the Lord shall be as the fat of
Lambs; they shall consume, into smoke shall they consume away.

Chrysostom.
In that day we have nothing to answer for our selves, where Heaven, and Earth,
the Air, and Water, and the whole world shall witness our sins against us.
And if all else do hold their peace, our thoughts themselves, and our works
especially shall stand before our eyes, accusing us before God.

Bernard.
That day will come, in which upright hearts shall more prevail, than eloquent
words; a good Conscience more, than a full purse; because that Judge will not
be deceived by words, nor turned by gifts.

On the right hand, Anselm.
will be our sins accusing us; on the left hand, innumerable Devils;
underneath us, the terrible deepnesse and darkness of Hell; above, the Judge
offended; without, the world burning; within, the conscience tormenting: there
shall the just scarce be saved. Alas miserable sinner, being thus taken
unawares, whither will thou fly? for to hide thy self, is impossible, and to
appear, is intolerable.

The rich man also died, Luke 16.22
and was buried;

And in hell he lift up his 23.
eyes, being in torments; and sees Abraham a far off, and Lazarus in his
bosom.

24.
And he cried, and said; Father Abraham, have mercy on me, and send Lazarus,
that he may dip the tip of his finger in water, and cool my tongue; for I am
tormented in this flame.

25.
But Abraham said; Son, remember that thou in thy life time receivedst thy
good things; and likewise Lazarus evil things, but now he is comforted, and
thou art tormented.

Gregor.
At the recompense of the last Judgment, the wicked do see the upright in
peace, that perceiving them in joy, they may not only be tormented with their
own punishment, but also with the others prosperity. But the righteous do
always see the wicked in torments, that from hence their joy may increase;
because they see the pain, which, by GODS mercy, they have escaped; and do
give the greater thanks unto their Maker, when they behold that in others,
which they might have suffered, had they been forsaken.

When the Son of Man shall come in his glory, Mat. 25.
and all the holy Angels with him; then shall he sit upon the throne of his
glory;

And before him shall be gathered all Nations, Ibid.
and he shall separate them one from another, as a shepherd divides his Sheep
from the Goats.

And he shall set the sheep Mat. 25.
on his right hand; but the Goats on the left.

Ibidem.
Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand; Come ye blessed of my
father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, from the foundation of the world.

Ibid.
Then shall he say unto them on the left hand, Depart from me, ye cursed, into
everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil, and his Angels.

Jude 24.
Now, unto him that is able to keep you from falling, and to present you
faultlesse, before the presence of his glory, with exceeding joy;

25.
To the only wise GOD, our Savior, be Glory, and Majesty, Dominion, and
power, now, and ever, Amen.

FOUR HELPS to the amendment of Life.
1. Prayer. 2. Reading the holy Scriptures. 3. Hearing Gods Word preached. 4.
Worthy receiving the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of our Lord.
1 Prayer.
O LORD, I know, Ier. 10.23.
that the way of man is not in himself: it is not in man that walks to
direct his steps.

It is written in the Prophets; Ioh. 6.45.
And they shall be all taught of GOD; Every man therefore that has heard, and
has learned of the father, comes unto me.

John 15.5.
I am the vine, ye are the branches; he that abides in me, and I in him, the
same brings forth much fruit: For without me, ye can do nothing.

1 Timothy 2.8.
I will therefore, that men pray every where, lifting up holy hands, without
wrath, or doubting.

Jude 20.
Building up your selves on your most holy faith, praying in the holy Ghost.

Mat 6.7.
But when ye pray, use not vain repetitions, as the Heathen do, for they
think, that they shall be heard, for their much speaking.

8.
Be not ye therefore like unto them; for your heavenly father knows, what
things ye have need of, before ye ask him.

What things soever ye desire, when ye pray, Mar. 11.24.
believe that ye receive them, and ye shall have them.

Let us lift up our heart, Lam 3.41.
with our hands, unto God in the heavens.

It is not in man to direct his own ways; Vdall.
and therefore we must pray to God continually, to guide us for his glory, and
our souls comfort.

Prayer is a thing most necessary for all men, at all times, Hom. de orat.
and in all places.

It is the first thing wherewith a righteous life begins, Hooker.
and the last with which it does end.

It is the turning of a godly and humble mind to God, Hugo.
supported by Faith, Hope, and Charity.

Isidor.
Neither is it a work of the lips, but of the heart. GOD intends not the
words, but beholds the heart of him that prays. It is better to pray with
the heart, in silence, without the sound of the voice, than in words alone,
without the affection of the mind.

Just. Mart.
We sacrifice unto GOD, without ceasing, the sacrifice of praise, sincere
prayer, and the sweet savor of good works.

Perkins.
Our prayers are our sacrifices, and Christ alone is the Altar, whereon we must
offer them to GOD the Father.

Aug.
Faith is the fountain of prayer, neither can the stream run, if the head of
the Spring be dried up.

When prayer is faithful, Bernard.
humble, and fervent, doubtless it enters into Heaven; from whence it cannot
return empty.

2. Reading the Scrip^^^^^.
EZra the Priest read in the Book of the Law, Nehemiah 8.3.
from the morning, until the mid day, before the men, and the women, and those
that could understand; and the ears of all the people were attentive unto the
Book of the Law.

The children of Israel read in the Book of the Law, 9.3.
of the LORD their GOD, one fourth part of the day; and another fourth part
they confessed, and worshipped the Lord their God.

Acts 13.15.
After the reading of the Law, and the Prophets, the Rulers of the Synagogue
sent to Paul, and Barnabas, saying; Ye men, and brethren, if ye have any word
of exhortation for the people; say on.

Chrysostom.
The reading of the Scriptures is a great defense against sin.

Hom. de legen. Scrip.
Whosoever is diligent to read this word, and in his heart to print that he
reads, shall find his affection diminished toward this world; and his
desire of heavenly things increased.

Ibidem.
There is nothing that so much strengthens our faith; that so much keeps up
the innocence, and pureness of heart, and of outward godliness, and
conversation, as continual reading, and recording of Gods word.

Many times, Kempis
through our own curiosity, we profit little in reading, while we stand to
discuss things, which ought simply to be believed.

If thou desire to reap commodity, Idem.
read with all humility, simplicity, and zeal; and never covet to be
accounted learned.

Read it therefore with an humble, and lowly heart, Hom. de legen. Scrip
to the end you may glorify GOD, and not your self, with the knowledge of it.
Pray daily to GOD, that he would direct your reading to good effect.

Hom. exhort. to read and know Script.
Unto a Christian man nothing can be more necessary, or profitable, than the
knowledge of holy Scripture: In which is contained GODS true Word, setting
forth his glory and man's duty.

Socrat.
It was the custom of Theodosius the Emperor, that together with his household,
he spent much time in reading the Scriptures, and singing of Psalms.

Hom. de leg. Scriptur.
Wherefore as you have any zeal to the pure honoring of GOD, and regard to
your own souls, and the life that is to come; apply your selves, chiefly
above all things, to read, and hear GODS Word; Mark diligently therein, what
his will is you shall do, and withal endeavor, apply your selves to follow
the same.

Blessed is he that reads, Revel. 1.3.
and they that hear the words of this Prophecy, and keep those things which
are written therein.

3. Hearing the Word preached.
EArly in the morning Jesus came into the Temple, Ioh. 8.2.
and all the people came unto him, and he sat down, and taught them.

In the day time Jesus was teaching in the Temple, Luke 21.37
and at night he went out, and abode in the Mount, that is called the Mount of
Olives.

38.
And all the people came early in the morning to him in the Temple, to hear him.

Acts 13.44
The next Sabbath day came almost the whole City of Antiochia together, to hear
the word of God preached by Paul and B^rnabas.

Acts 8.5.
Then came Philip into the City of Samaria, and preached Christ unto them.

6.
And the people gave heed unto those things, which Philip spoke, with one accord.

Acts 17.11.
The Jews of Berea were more noble than those in Thessalonica, in that they
received the Word with all readiness of mind; and searched the Scriptures
daily, whether those things were so.

Wickliff.
That the hearing of the Word, and Law of GOD, is commmanded to the people, it
is evident, both by the old, and new Law.

Take opportunity to hear preaching; and to prove, Grashop.
by the Scriptures, that which is taught.

The first, Bayne.
and principal means to uphold a Christian life in godliness, is, the Word
of GOD, read, preached, and heard, as the Lord prescribes.

Where there is a good order of teaching, Idem.
with diligence, skill, love, and plainness, we must be attentive, and
reverent in hearing.

As drink is pleasant to them that be dry, Hom. de leg. Scriptur.
and meat to them that be hungry; so is the reading, hearing searching, and
studying of the holy Scriptures, to them that be desirous to know God, or
themselves, and to do his will.

Bayne.
The ordinary preaching of the Word, is a singular means provided for the
perfecting of GODS elect, and for their growing in a Christian life.

4. Sacraments.
Eccles. Ang.
CHrist has ordained in his Church two Sacraments only, as generally necessary
to Salvation; that is to say, Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord.

Cosler.
A Sacrament is an outward, and visible sign, of a divine, invisible grace,
instituted by Christ, by virtue whereof, the receiver obtains grace and
sanctification.

In Sacraments, Bellar.
both the matter, and words must be instituted by GOD; and are not alterable
by man, either by addition, or diminution.

They are therefore called Sacraments, August.
because one thing is seen in them, and another thing understood. That which
is seen, has a bodily kind, form, and show; but that which is understood,
has spiritual fruit.

We must not consider, Idem.
what they be, but what they signify.

It is a dangerous matter, Idem.
to take the sign in stead of the thing that is signified.

The holy Eucharist, or Sacrament of the Body and Blood of our Lord.
Mat. 26.
AS they were eating, Jesus took bread, and blessed it, and brake it, and gave
it to his disciples, and said; Take, eat, this is my body.

Ibidem.
And he took the cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying; Drink ye
all of it.

Ibid.
For this is my Blood of the new Testament, which is shed for many, for the
remission of sins.

In stead of the Flesh, Beda.
and Blood of the Lamb, Christ has ordained the Sacrament of his Body and
Blood, in the figure of bread and wine.

Neither do we receive them, as common bread, Just. Mart.
nor as common drink.

The bread which is of the earth, Iren.
receiving the invocation of God, is not now common bread, but the Eucharist,
consisting of two things; earthly, and heavenly.

Christ taking bread, Tertul.
and distributing it to his disciples, made it his body, saying, this is my
Body, that is to say, this is a figure of my body.

It is evident, Bertram.
that the bread and wine, are figuratively the body and blood of Christ.

By the commandment and Isidor.
authority of Christ, we call it the Body and Blood of Christ; because that,
though it be made of the fruits of the earth, it is yet notwithstanding
sanctified, and so become a Sacrament, GODS Spirit working invisibly therein.

Bertram.
That body wherein Christ suffered, was his proper, and true body; having no
mystical, or figurative matter in it. But this latter, is a mystical body;
showing one thing outwardly in figure, and inwardly representing another thing,
through the understanding, and apprehension of faith.

Eccle. Angl.
The body of Christ is given, taken, and eaten in the Supper only, after an
heavenly manner. And the mean, whereby the body of Christ is received in the
Supper, is Faith.

To believe in Christ, Aug.
is the eating of the Bread of Life; prepare not your mouths; prepare your
hearts.

This is to eat that living bread, to believe in Christ; Clem. Alex.
that is to say, with love to cleave fast unto him.

This is to drink the blood of Jesus; Idem.
to be made partaker of his immortality.

This is therefore, Aug.
to eat that meat, and drink that drink; To dwell in Christ, and to have
Christ dwelling in us.

A remembrance of the death, and passion of our Savior Christ.
1 Cor. 11.
THe LORD JESUS, the same night, in which he was betrayed, took bread;

Ibid.
And when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said; Take, eat, this is my
body, which is broken for you; this do in remembrance of me.

Ibid.
After the same manner also he took the cup, when he had supped, saying; This
cup is the new Testament in my blood; this do, as often as ye drink it, in
remembrance of me.

1 Cor. 11.
For as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do show the Lords
death till he come.

The Sacrament of the Lords Supper was ordained for the continual remembrance
of the sacrifice of the death of Christ, Eccles. Ang.
and the benefits which we receive thereby.

This bread, and this cup, Bertram.
which is called the body, and blood of CHRIST, do lively represent, or set
out the remembrance of the Lords passion, or death; even as himself has said
in the Gospel; Luke 22.
Do this in remembrance of me: which the Apostle Paul expounds, saying, 1
Cor. 11.
As often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup ye show the Lords death till
he come.

Our Lord gave unto his disciples, Walfrid. Strab.
the Sacrament of his body and Blood, in the substance of bread, and wine; and
therein taught them, to celebrate the memory of his most blessed Passion.

Ammon.
Having taken the bread, then afterward the cup of wine, and testified it, to
be his Body and Blood; he commanded them, to eat, and drink thereof;
forasmuch as it was the memorial of his future passion and death.

Worthy Receivers.
1 Cor. 11.
BUt let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that Bread, and drink of
that Cup.

Ibid.
For he that eats, and drinks unworthily, eats, and drinks damnation to
himself; not discerning the LORDS body.

They which are of a clean conscience, upright in heart, Chrysostom. moral.
and of an unreprovable life, may always come to this Table; but they, which
are not so, may not once approach unto it.

S. Augustine thus speaks; Alcinnus.
I like well of your humility, that you presume not to approach to the Body,
and Blood of Christ; But it were better you would depart from your iniquities;
and being made clean by repentance, would take the Body, and Blood of Christ.

He is a worthy receiver, Cyprian.
that, remembering the benefit of Christ his passion, lifts up his heart unto
the living God with his heart unto the living God with comfort, abhors all
bitter drinks of sin, and all savor of carnal pleasures is to him, as
sharp, and sour vinegar. And the sinner being converted, receiving the holy
mysteries of the Lords Supper, gives thanks unto GOD, and boweth down his
head, knowing that his sins be forgiven, and that he is made clean, and
perfect; and his soul (which GOD has sanctified) he renders to God again,
as a faithful pledge; and glories with S. Paul, saying; Now is it not I, that
live; but it is Christ, that lives in me.

Cyprian.
The worthy eating, is our dwelling in him, and our drinking is, as it were, our
incorporating in him; being subject to him, in obedience; joined to him, in our
wills; and united, in our affections.

Four things most requisite, Eccle. Angl.
to make us meet partakers of the holy mysteries.

To repent us truly for our

To have a lively, and steadfast

To amend our lives, and be

To give most humble, and

Unworthy Receivers.
Eccl. Ang.
THe wicked, and such as be void of a lively faith, although they do carnally,
and visibly press with their teeth (as S. Augustine says) the Sacrament of
the body, and blood of Christ; yet, in no wise, are they partakers of Christ,
but rather, to their condemnation, do eat, and drink the sign, or Sacrament
of so great a thing.

Aug.
Outwardly, they have the Sacrament of Christ's body; but the thing it self,
inwardly in their hearts, they have not; And therefore they eat, and drink
their own judgment.

Idem.
Neither Heretic, nor such as profess a true faith in their mouths, and in
their living show the contrary, are to be accounted among the members of
Christ. Therefore it may not be said, that any of them, do eat the body of
Christ.

As corporal meat, Chrysostom.
finding the belly possessed with evil humors, does more offend, and hurt,
and help nothing at all: So also this spiritual food, finding a man polluted
with sin, will rather destroy him; not by its own nature; but by the
Receivers corruption.

For he that has yet a will to sin, August.
I account him rather more burdened, by receiving the Eucharist, than
cleansed: Therefore, albeit a man do moderate sin, purposing not to sin
hereafter, yet let him make satisfaction by tears, and prayers, when he
intends to communicate, trusting in the mercy of God; who upon godly
confession of his iniquity, uses to pardon: Then let him approach unto the
Eucharist safely and without fear.

Transubstantiation.
Eccl. Ang.
TRansubstantiation, or the change of the substance of bread, and wine, in the
Supper of the Lord, cannot be proved by holy writ: but it is repugnant to the
plain words of Scripture, overthrows the nature of a Sacrament, and has
given occasion to many superstitions.

The mystical signs, Theodoret.
after consecration, depart not from their own nature; for they abide still in
their former substance, figure, and form; and may be seen, and touched, as
before.

Touching the substance of the creatures, Bertram.
they abide the same, after consecration, as they were before.

Before the bread be sanctified, we call it bread; Chrysostom.
but when GODS grace has sanctified it, by means of the Priest, it is
delivered from the name of bread, and is reputed worthy the name of the LORDS
body, although the nature of bread remain still.

He honored the visible Theodoret.
signs with the name of his body and blood; not changing the nature; but
adding grace, to nature.

Idem.
For he would have the partakers of the divine mysteries, not to respect the
nature of those things, which are seen; but to believe the change which is
done by grace.

Scot.
We cannot be brought to determine transubstantiation, either by any plain
place of Scripture, or sentence of Ancient father.

Cyril.
For like as when he was conversant here in earth, as man; yet then he filled
heaven, and did not leave the company of Angels: Even so being now in heaven
with his flesh; yet he fills the earth, and is in them that love him, by the
power of his divinity.

Although Christ be corporally in heaven; Gre. Valen. Ies.
yet he is received of the faithful communicants, in this Sacrament, truly;
both spiritually, by the mouth of the mind; through a most near conjunction of
Christ, with the soul of the Receiver, by faith: And also sacramentally, with
the bodily mouth; receiving not Christ (according to his local presence) but
bread, and wine, as seals, and signs of the promise of redemption in his body
and blood.

According to his body, Greg. Naz.
he is within the limitation of place; according to his Spirit, and Godhead,
he is without the limitation of any place.

To be received in both kinds.
Eccl. Ang.
THe cup of the Lord is not to be denied to the lay people; for both the parts
of the Lords Sacrament, by Christ's ordinance, and commandment, ought to be
administered to all Christian men alike.

Vasques Ies.
Each kind in this Sacrament, (as it is a part of the Sacrament) has a diverse
signification by it self: And each kind in this Sacrament, does work its own
effect, by it self.

Durand.
The bread signifies the body, and not the blood; and the wine signifies the
blood, and not the body.

Alex. Hales.
Whole Christ is not contained under each kind, by way of Sacrament; but the
flesh only, under the form of bread; and the blood, under the form of wine.

In the Primitive Church, Durand.
all present at the Communion, did participate of the cup; because all the
Apostles did so, our Lord saying unto them; Drink ye all of this.

We have understood, Gelas. Pap.
that some, having only received a portion of Christ's body, do abstain from
the cup of his sacred blood; But since they are moved, by a fond superstition
(which I know not) thus to abstain; either let them receive the whole
Sacrament, or be put from all together; for there can be no division of this
Sacrament, and high mystery, without great sacrilege.

Ignat.
I exhort you to embrace one faith, one manner of preaching, and use of the
Sacrament, of the LORDS Supper; for the flesh of the LORD JESUS, is one, and
his blood, one, that was shed for us: There is one bread also, broken for all;
and one cup, distributed unto all.

The Prayer before receiving the Communion.
ALmighty GOD, Eccle. Angl.
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Maker of of all things, Judge of all men, we
acknowledge, and bewail our manifold sins and wickedness, which we, from
time to time, most grievously have committed, by thought, word, and deed,
against thy divine Majesty; provoking, most justly, thy wrath, and indignation
against us; We do earnestly repent, and be heartily sorry, for these our
misdoings; the remembrance of them, is grievous unto us, the burden of them is
intolerable; Have mercy upon us, have mercy upon us, most merciful Father, for
thy Son, our Lord Jesus Christ's sake, forgive us all that is past: And grant,
that we may ever hereafter serve, and please thee, in newness of life, to the
honor and glory of thy holy name, through Jesus Christ our Lord; Amen.

The Prayer after receiving the Communion.
O Lord, Eccl. Angl.
our heavenly father, we, thy humble servants, entirely desire thy fatherly
goodness, mercifully to accept this our sacrifice, of praise, and
thanksgiving, most humbly beseeching thee, to grant, that by the merits, and
death of thy Son Jesus Christ, and through faith in his blood, we, and all thy
whole Church, may obtain remission of our sins, and all other benefits of
his passion. And here we offer, and present unto thee, O Lord, our selves, our
souls, and bodies, to be a reasonable, holy, and lively sacrifice, unto thee;
Humbly beseeching thee, that all we, which be partakers of this holy
Communion, may be fulfilled with thy grace, and heavenly benediction. And
although we be unworthy through our manifold sins, to offer unto thee, any
sacrifice; yet we beseech thee, to accept this, our bounden duty, and service;
not weighing our merits, but pardoning our offenses, through Jesus Christ, our
Lord; by whom, and with whom, in the unity of the holy Ghost, all honor, and
glory be unto thee, O father Almighty, world without end. Amen.

A Prayer before reading the holy Scriptures.
O Gracious GOD, Grashop.
and most merciful father, which have vouchsafed us, the rich and precious
jewel, of thy holy word: Assist us, with thy spirit, that it may be written in
our hearts, to our everlasting comfort; to reform us, to renew us, according
to thine own image, to build us up, and edify us, into the perfect building,
of thy son Christ Jesus; sanctifying, and increasing in us, all heavenly
virtues. Grant this, O heavenly Father, for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

A Prayer for faith.
MOst merciful, and loving Father, I beseech thee, for Christ Jesus sake, to
strengthen, and increase my faith, that I may go forward in all godliness.
And grant, O Lord, that my faith may be builded upon the rock, Christ Jesus;
that I be not carried away with every blast of vain doctrine, but, through
faith in thee, I may be, as an invincible fortress, to my enemy, the Devil,
so that he may never prevail against me. Also Lord, I pray thee, let not my
faith be an idle faith, but a working faith; that daily proceeds, from one
good work, to another, and in the end, to life everlasting, there to reign
with thee, world without end. Amen.

For Repentance.
MAke clean my heart, O most gracious God, with the water of thy heavenly
grace, from all the stains, and corruptions of sin; whereby it appears most
vile and loathsome in thy sight. Sprinkle it with the hysop of unfeigned
repentance, and compunction; that being washed in the most clear fountain of
thy grace, I may become whiter than snow; and evermore serve thee, in
holiness, and pureness of life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A short and effectual Prayer.
I Most humbly beseech thee, O most gracious God, and loving Father; to take
from me, the sway of mine own affections: Incline mine heart wholly, to the
obedience of thy heavenly will: Suppress, and quench in me, all desires
whatsoever, that may alienate, and withdraw me to wander, from the way of thy
testimonies: Grant unto me evermore, the assistance of thy holy Spirit, to
conduct, and bring me, to the inheritance of thy everlasting kingdom; for the
love of thy only Son, our Savior Jesus CHRIST, Amen.

The general Confession.
ALmighty, Eccl. Angl. in liturg.
and most merciful Father, I have erred, and strayed from thy ways, like a
lost sheep; I have followed too much, the devices, and desires of my own
heart; I have offended against thy holy Laws; I have left undone, those
things, which I ought to have done; and have done, those things, which I ought
not to have done: And there is no health in me; but thou, O LORD, have mercy
upon me, miserable offender; Spare thou me, O GOD, which confess my faults;
restore thou me, that am penitent, according to thy promises, declared unto
mankind, in Christ Jesu our Lord; And grant, O most merciful father, for his
sake, that I may hereafter live a godly, righteous, and a sober life, to the
glory of thy holy name. Amen.

A Prayer for the Morning.
O Lord, Eccles. Ang. in Liturg.
our heavenly father, Almighty, and everlasting GOD; I most humbly thank thee,
for thy great mercy, and goodness, in keeping, and preserving me from all
perils, and dangers this night past, and bringing me safely to the beginning of
this day: Defend me, O Lord, in the same, with thy mighty power; And grant,
that this day I fall into no sin, neither run into any kind of danger, but
that all my doings, may be ordered by thy governance; to do always that,
which is righteous in thy sight, through Jesus Christ, our Lord. Amen.

Our father which art in heaven, hallowed, etc.

A Prayer for all times.
O Almighty Lord, Eccles. Ang. Ibid.
and everliving God, vouchsafe, I beseech thee, to direct, sanctify, and
govern, both my heart, and body, in the ways of thy Laws, and in the works of
thy commandments; That through thy most mighty protection, both here and ever,
I may be preserved, in body, and soul, through our LORD, and Savior Jesus
Christ. Amen.

A Prayer before going to bed.
O Eternal, and ever-living GOD, I render unto thy divine Majesty, most
humble, and hearty thanks, for thy merciful preservation of me this day,
from the hands of mine enemies; Beseeching thee, of thy fatherly goodness, and
mercy, to remit and pardon all mine offenses, which in thought, word, and deed,
I have committed against thy holy Laws and Commandments: Furthermore, I humbly
beseech thee, that, by thy most gracious protection, I may be defended, and
preserved this night, from all perils, and dangers, both of body, and soul;
that mine eyes may sleep quietly, my body rest securely, and my soul ever
watch unto thee constantly; so that I never consent to the temptations, and
allurements of Satan; but by the continual direction, and assistance of thy
heavenly grace, I may come to thine eternal glory, through Jesus Christ, our
Lord. Amen.

Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed, etc.

A Psalm of contrition, and confession.
Psalm. 38.
O Lord, rebuke me not in thy wrath: neither chasten me in thy hot displeasure.

Ibidem.
I am troubled, I am bowed down greatly; I go mourning all the day long.

22.
I am powered out like water, and all my bones are out of joint, my heart is like
wax, it is melted in the midst of my bowels.

31.
I am forgotten, as a dead man out of mind; I am like a broken vessel.

41.
Lord be merciful unto me; heal my soul, for I have sinned against thee.

38.
All my desire is before thee; and my groaning is not hid from thee.

For I will declare mine iniquity; Ibid.
I will be sorry for my sin.

The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit; a broken, 51.
and a contrite heart, O Lord, thou will not despise.

O GOD, 69.
thou know my foolishness; and my sins are not hid from thee.

I have gone astray, 119.
like a lost sheep; seek thy servant, for I do not forget thy commandments.

I acknowledge my transgressions; 51.
and my sin is ever before me.

Against thee, Ibidem.
thee only have I sinned; and done this evil in thy sight.

There is no soundness in my flesh, 38.
because of thine anger, neither is there any rest in my bones, because of my
sin.

Ibidem.
For mine iniquities are gone over my head; as an heavy burden, they are too
heavy for me.

Ibidem.
My wounds stink, and are corrupt, because of my foolishness.

40.
Innumerable evils have compassed me about, mine iniquities have taken hold upon
me, so that I am not able to look up; they are more than the hairs of mine
head, therefore may heart fails me.

A Psalm for remission.
Psalm. 51.
HAve mercy upon me, O God, according to thy loving kindness; according to the
multitude of thy tender mercies, blot out my transgressions.

Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity; Ibid.
and cleanse me from my sin.

Purge me with hysop, Ibid.
and I shall be clean; wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow.

For thy name sake, O Lord, 25.
pardon mine iniquity; for it is great.

Remember not the sins of my youth, Ibid.
nor my transgressions; according to thy mercy remember thou me, for thy
goodness sake, O Lord.

Turn thee unto me, Ibid.
and have mercy upon me; for I am desolate, and afflicted.

Look upon mine affliction, and my pain; Ibid.
and forgive all my sins.

O keep my soul, Ibidem.
and deliver me; let me not be ashamed, for I put my trust in thee.

39.
Deliver me from all my transgressions; make me not the reproach of the foolish.

31.
Make thy face to shine upon thy servant; save me, for thy mercy sake.

51.
Hide thy face from my sins; and blot out all mine iniquities.

Ibid.
Create in me a clean heart, and renew a right spirit within me.

Ibid.
Cast me not away from thy presence; and take not thy holy spirit from me.

141.
Mine eyes are unto thee, O Lord God, in thee is my trust; leave not my soul
destitute.

A Psalm for mercy, and direction.
Psalm. 69.
Hear me, O Lord, for thy loving kindness is good; turn unto me, according
to the multitude of thy tender mercies.

Remember, O Lord, 25.
thy tender mercies, and thy loving kindness; for they have been ever of old.

Be merciful unto me, 86.
O Lord; for I cry unto thee daily.

Show me thy ways, 25.
O Lord; teach me thy paths.

Lead me in thy truth, Ibid.
and teach me, for thou art the God of my salvation; on thee do I wait all the
day.

O send out thy light, 43.
and thy truth, let them lead me; let them bring me to thy holy hill, and to
thy tabernacles.

Cause me to hear thy loving kindness in the morning; 143.
for in thee do I trust; cause me to know the way wherein I should walk; for I
lift up my soul unto thee.

Ibid.
Teach me to do thy will, for thou art my God, thy spirit is good; lead me into
the land of uprightness.

40.
Withold not thou thy tender mercies from me, O Lord; let thy loving
kindness, and thy truth, continually preserve me.

119.
Order my steps in thy word, and let not any iniquity have dominion over me.

86.
Teach me thy way, O Lord, I will walk in thy truth; unite my heart to fear thy
name.

39.
Lord, make me to know mine end, and the measure of my days, what it is; that
I may know how frail I am.

A Psalm of confidence in Gods mercy.
Psalm. 23.
THe Lord is my shepherd; I shall not want.

He makes me to lie down in green pastures; Ibidem.
he leads me beside the still waters.

He restores my soul; Ibidem.
he leads me in the paths of righteousness, for his Names sake.

Yea though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear none
evil; Ibidem.
for thou art with me, thy rod, and thy staff, they comfort me.

I will abide in thy Tabernacle for ever, 61.
I will trust in the covert of thy wings.

Because thou have been my help; 63.
therefore in the shadow of thy wings will I rejoice.

For thou have been a shelter for me; 61.
and a strong tower from mine enemies.

I will come into thy house, 5.
in the multitude of thy mercy: and in thy fear, will I worship toward thine
holy Temple.

62.
My soul, wait thou only upon God; for my expectation is from him.

Ibid.
He only is my rock, and my salvation; he is my defense, I shall not be moved.

40.
Blessed is that man, that makes the Lord his trust.

A Psalm of praise.
Psalm. 104.
I Will sing unto the Lord, as long as I live; I will sing praise unto my God,
whiles I have my being.

7.
I will praise the Lord, according to his righteousness, I will sing praise
unto the name of the Lord, most high.

8.
O Lord, our God, how excellent is thy name in all the earth; who have set thy
glory above the Heavens.

I will give thee thanks in the congregation: 35.
I will prais thee, among much people.

I will worship toward thy holy Temple, 138.
and praise thy name, for thy loving kindness, and for thy truth: for thou
have magnified thy word above all thy name.

I will extol thee, my God, 145.
O King, and I will bless thy name, for ever and ever.

Every day will I bless thee; Ibid.
and I will praise thy name, for ever and ever.

My mouth shall speak the praise of the Lord; Ibid.
and let all flesh bless his holy name, for ever and ever.

The Lord lives, 18.
and blessed be my rock; and let the God of my salvation be exalted.

28.
Blessed be the Lord, because he has heard the voice of my supplications.

41.
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, from everlasting to everlasting: Amen, Amen.

ECCLES. 12.12.
OF making many books there is no end, and much study is a weariness of the
flesh.

13.
Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter: fear GOD, and keep his
Commandments, for this is the whole duty of man.

Collectanea T. P.

FINIS.
Imprimatur,

SA. BAKER.
Iunii 30. 1637.

