THE LAST SVMMONS, OR AN ORATION SENT to the Inhabitants of the Town of
Rochell, To move them to yield the Town unto his Majesty, and to obey his
Commandments.

Written by Monsieur le Marquis de Berguille.

1621.

THE LAST SVMMONS OR an Oration sent to the Inhabitants of the Town of Rochell.
MOnsieur. You that make profession to understand, and to know the Scriptures
well; if it be true, I wonder how you persevere in your rebellion and
disobedience, seeing that therein, it is expressly said, he that disobeyeth the
commandments of Kings, holy contradicts the commandment of God, whose
lively Images they are; know for certain, that the Sovereign Majesty of God,
does so much abhor all those that revolt and rebel against their Sovereign
Princes; that if his mercy, did not hinder the force and effects of his
Justice, he would suddenly discharge the arrows of his wrath, to exturpe and
destroy all those, that are the perturbators of the will and pleasure of there
Sovereign Kings.

Cast your eyes upon him, against whom you are disobedient, (it is nothing but
shame that withholds you from it) I beseech you, to the end that you may put
away from you, all those that love the trumpet of Rebellion and were into your
ears, and thereby to divert you from so dangerous an enterprise, consider,
with whom you have to do.

It is your King, Louis the Just; Son to Henry the Great, who already in his
young age, is as great as his father, great in power, great in courage, great
in counsel, great in friends, and specially in these affairs, and most great
in Justice, the point, which thereby is to be decided consists herein, to
know whether he ought to be obayed of his subjects: or not, in a thing whereas
he uses no violence whatsoever.

Then it is to this great King that you are disobedient and rebellious, against
his Majesty's commandments, who in this great and puissant Realm, is beloved,
feared, and obayed of all men, unless it be of a handful of men, who being
provoked and incited by diverse interests and pretenses, under a false pretense
Religion seek to molest and disturb the state of the land.

Think not to oppose your arms against his, your forces against his, and your
Soldiers against his: In what places can you maintain your selves against
him, but that the same places will put you in mind of your faults? will you
always be those only that resist and opugne his Majesty in his Realm? will
you always in some of his Provinces war against your Prince, his Towns, and
his name of a King: cannot be think you, cause your arms to fall over off
your hands, and dompt the courage of your heart? For my part, I am not of
opinion, neither can I be persuaded, that any of you once so much as imagine,
that you are able to raise a sufficient army, to withstand that which his
Majesty in a months time is able to bring into the field. Remember I pray
you, what past and fell out the last year, in those commotions, that seemed to
spread and extend themselves over the whole Realm, which was a strong and
puissant complet as it then fell out.

The King issued out of Parris, accompanied only with two thousand men, but
his Princely presence, that was worth a hundred thousand, in such manner in all
places drew the courages and hands of every man, unto him that in less then a
months time, having pacified the whole Realm of France, he had so great a
force about him, that if then he would have set upon your Town of Rochell, and
other places of refuge which you hold by his favor, to execute that, which now
you feign to fear, he should not have found any one that once durst to have
conceived so much as a thought to shut their gates against him.

When Kings march through their Realms; they are like hail stones, lying upon
the tops of hills and mountains, which the further you go from them, still
wax thick and fearful unto those, upon whom they fall.

But if he had no other power, then his guards of Frenchmen Switzers and Scots,
and his four regiments of Soldiers, continually entertained, that have no
other occupation, then the skill how to beat and kill their enemies. It were
sufficient against you.

Remember also that when this great Monarch would raise new troops, when he
would make new regiments, he can and is able to do it with such facility and
promptnes, that you shall sooner see the ensigns displayed in the air, sooner
hear the drumes beat in the fields, sooner hear the horses neighy: The
cannons roar, and the soldiers ready to assail you, then you could imagine
or once conceit that any army were raised against you.

I would for your sakes that your Town of Rochell were an impregnable Rock,
and Saint John Dangely so strong as that the Angels were not able to overcome
it. I would for your sakes that all the places wherein you enclose yourselues,
were not able to be undermined, not able to be scaled, not to be battered, and
to conclude, invincible, wherein I grant you more then you your selves
demand, and much more then is true: The strongest of them being no other, but
such as ten thousand men, within the space of 6. weeks would force you to
yield.

It is not as it was in times past, the manner of besieging of times at this
present is brought to such a fashion and perfection, that there is not any one,
which is impregnable, and may not be woone. If you had seen how men use to
raise Trenches, how they make mounts of earth; how they fill up deep ditches,
how they draw rivers dry, and stop channels of water. And to conclude, if you
had seen how men enclose and press upon Towns that are besieged, you would
never say nor report that yours are impregnable: They are of to good metal to
be such; the fields, the vignes which enuiron them, always give means to those
that besiege them to berry them therein.

There is nothing impossible to our victorious Monarch Louis the thirteenth
within this Realm, where all men, employ all their forces to execute his will,
for I can assuredly tell you, that if you enter not into that obedience, which
you owe unto his Majesty, and give him not free entrance into his Town of
Rochell, that you will thereby give his Majesty cause; in short time to raise
up and erect a great number of forces about your Towns of refuge, according to
military Art, furnished with men, Artillery, and all manner of provisions,
that shall so straightly on all sides enclose you about, that you must either
burst or yield.

In the mean time you shall want victuals, you shall consume your powder and
bullets, you shall try the insolence of soldiers, the brauadoes of Captains,
the mutenies and murmorings of the poor people, less furnished with provision
for the mouth, then with riches.

What will you expect after all this, but only, that having abused and refused
the Kings mercy, you shall try and feel his Justice: It makes me quake and
tremble for you, when I call to mind, the speedy execution of the most
culpable, and those that were the raisers and seducers of such rebellion and
disobedience, which will then be done.

But I assured my self, and am verily persuaded, that when you shall once
behold your King, as just, as martial, and armed magnanimity, run from
rank to rank, as a forerunner of the victory, to annimate his troops to
fight, what countenances you will show, and what will be your behauiours; but
only that of a miserable company of sheep appointed to a bloody slaughter,
altogether trembling, all bleating, all desirous to run away, but by means of
your fearefulnes, having not the hardines to do it, so that we cannot be
persuaded, that if you did but once call to mind and think upon all these
things together, you could be so hardy as to withstand this funeral blow: the
best that you could do is, to shut your selves up, like fearful sheep,
within 3. or 4. of your strongest Towns; and there, being obstinately bent,
seek to save your unfortunate lives, behind the ramparts and walls of the
same.

But good Lord, what remedy is this, to have all the rest of your faction,
enclosed with you in Rochell, Saint John Dangely, Montauban, Nismes, and in
such Towns as you have made choice of, leaving and abandoning the others, as
less strong, or to many in number, to be kept by so small a number of mutuous
persons, leaving within them all the nest of the reformed Sext, who wiser then
you, and it may be more affected to their Religion, will content themselves,
(obaying the King) to deplore and lament your near approaching unfortunate
state. But do I say shut up in those places, what think you thereby to do?
O, it is possible you persuade your selves to weary the army Royal, by the
tongues of a siege which you pretend to endure.

Do you set before your eyes the happy deliueranc, that you have tried in like
distresses in the former wars? You say and blase it abroad, that Rochell is
as strong as ever it was, that Saint John Dangely is able to defend it self,
that all your Towns are in better state, to resist and withstand the forces of
a puissant army, then ever they were, that it is which you say, and the same
wherewith you nourish the stubbornnes of these among you, that have least
insight in these matters: Whose eyes, if they be capable to conceive it, I must
open, and cause them to see, that they are lulled a sleep with deceitful
words, which wholly lead them unto the path of their most certain and assured
destruction.

Open your eyes then (I pray you) but you specially, that are engaged in this
dangerous enterprice; call your duties to remembrance, and show forth that
obedience which lawfully you owe to our King, you are his Subjects, he is your
Prince, ordained here on earth to govern and rule over you. There is nothing
in his Kingdom, whereof he is not to have the full and free possession. The
Town wherein you are enclosed is as much his as all the rest: Therefore it
makes me wonder, to see that you are so much blinded, as to be rebellious
against, and obstinate to execute his Royal commandments.

I summon and inuit you once again, to know your selves, and to yield that
unto him and into his hands, which belongs unto him; not that his Majesty
will in any sort takeaway your notable and ancient privileges, but rather to
the contrary, if he sees you become Loyal and obedient Subjects, he will give
you many others.

Send an honorable number of Deputies to his Majesty, humbly to crave pardon
of him for all the rebellions, that you have made; and I am assured, that his
clemency is such and so great, that he will accept of your submission, pardon
your offenses, and forget all your fault. If you will do it speedily, and in
the mean time, I beseech God to give you the grace, to humble your selves, and
to obey the King.

1621.


