Nine Sermons upon sun^^^^ Texts of Scripture: First, The Allegiance of the
Clergy. The Supper of the Lord. Secondly, The Cape of good Hope: Delivered in
five Sermons, for the use and b^^^fite of Merchants and Mariners. Thirdly, The
Remedy of Drought. A Thanksgiving for Rain.
By SAMVEL PAGE, Doctor in Diuin^^^

LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Ok^s for Si^^^ ^^^^rson, (...) Churchyard, at the
Sign of the Crown.

THE ALLEGIANCE OF THE CLERGY. A Sermon preached, at the meeting of the whole
Clergy of the Dyocesse of Rochester, to take the Oath of Allegiance to his
most excellent Majesty, at Greenewich, Nouem. 2 1610. By SAMVEL PAGE, Doctor
in Divinity.

LONDON Printed by Nicholas Oaks for Simon Waterson, dwelling in Paul's
Churchyard, at the sign of the Crown. 1616.

TO THE MOST Reverend Father in God, my most Honorable good Lord, the Lord
Bishop of London.
MOst reverend, and my honorable good Lord, in these fruitful times wherein so
many painful in Gods husbandry, do make daily Presents to the Church, of
their profitable Labors: I thought my self behinde-hand too much, to sit out
so long, without giving some testimony of my equal desire, to advance so good
a Work. I am too co^scious of my insufficiencies, to press in with the first,
and I fear to do nothing. These days afford plenty of readers, if plenty of
writers ouer-charge* variety may delight. These my meditations have hope of
welcome from the Argument, which is our own loiall Allegiance to his Majesty,
who are the Preachers of Loyalty to our People: and from your Honorable
protection and countenance, to whom the Church of God here owes many
acknowledgements of honorable service by you performed to her, and to whom I
best know how much my self in particulars do stand obliged. I pray God for
the increase of his best blessings on you and yours, and rest wishing your
Lordsh:

S. P.

THE ALLEGIANCE OF THE CLERGY.
The first Sermon.
ROMANS 13. 2. And they that resist, shall receive to themselves Judgment.
GOD is a God of Order, against the Anabaptisticall doctrine of Anarchie; and
confusion: he has made men on earth, as he has distinguished the stars in
the firmament, one star differing from another in glory: he has taken the
advancement of men into his own hands: his wisdom says, By me Princes
reign, Pro. 8. 15. and David says, Preferment comes not from the Est, etc.
he confesses that Gods hand is in that work, as Paul in this chap. says, the
powers that be, are ordained of God. The Relative to these Powers, is
Submission; the Extent of this Submission, omnis anima, every Soul. I think
Saint Paul preuentingly, and by prophetical spirit, provided in this caution
against all Aequiuocators and Mentalists, who are ready to tender their
Sovereigns some outward and formal Submission, without the Soul, and inward
affection, therefore he says, Let every soul submit.

The foundation of this Law of Loyalty, is laid in the conscience of a
Christian man, not because of wrath only, but for conscience sake. The
illation following on the premises, is my Text. The proposition whereof is
indefinite, and equivalent to an universal; They that resist, all they shall
receive judgment. If any ask, what is the Extent of this power, which God
gives to his anointed servants the Kings and Princes of the earth; let them
learn of Israel, who tendered this Allegiance to Joshua: All that thou have
commanded us, we will do, and whither-soeuer thou sendest us, we will go: as
we obeyed Moses in all things, so will we obey thee: only the Lord thy God be
with thee, as he was with Moses, Josh. 1. 16. 17. So far then, as GOD is with
our Princes, and that their commands, be no prejudice to the superior
ordinances of God: every soul does owe them submission, and must swear them
their obedience: for whatsoever the person of the Prince is, the power is of
God: even Pilates power is of God, though he armed it against Christ, by our
Saviors own testimony, John 19. 11. saying, Thou could have no power
against me, except it were given thee from above: therefore Christ submitted
himself to that power* even he that could say, To me is given all power in
heaven and in earth, Matt. 28. 18.

Our gracious sovereign King, reading in the bloody practices of his
rebel-Popish-subiects, the danger of his own royal person, and of his
hopeful posterity, has with the most honorable Parliament devised a
Shiboleth, even this oath of Allegiance (which is now tendered to us of his
Clergy of this Diocese) to distinguish betwixt his Israelites and his
Ephraimites, between his faithful, loving, and peaceable Protestants, and the
tumultuous, factious, and Popish Incendiaries, who desire to see our Jerusalem
turned to dust and ashes. This Oath will show him who has most disciples in his
kingdom: this Paul our Apostle that taught the Romans, omnis anima, let every
soul submit; or Paul the fifth that now teaches the Romans, and all his Romish
Catholics, the Contradictorie to his doctrine. Non omnis anima, let not every
soul be so obliged. I wonder at Burgese of Rome, that being so opposite to
Saint Paul, he would usurp his name, at his investiture in the Papacy, except
he meant to set Paul against Palu, Romans against Romans, his Breues against
Saint Paul's Epistles; our Apostle cast off a name upon his conversion, that
would become his Holiness of Rome much better.

But concerning the power of Secular Princes, by this Paul the fifth, and his
usurping Predecessors strangely restrained to make their peace with S. Paul,
they do thus understand my Text; They that resist; that is, They of the Laity
that resist: for says their Gloss, Ecclesiastical persons, and
Ecclesiastical causes are exempt.

The quarrel is well known between the Pope, and the State of Venice, for
their judicial process pursued to the execution, and death of a foul
malefactor of their Clergy, and the Pope (if he had been strong enough to
revenge such a quarrel) would have made it known much better. Therefore it
concerns his most excellent Majesty, to understand how his Clergy affect
his government, and what subjection and Allegiance they will perform to him:
which shall discover, whether we follow the example of the old Romans, who in
their purer, and Primitive times gave unto Caesar that which was Caesar's, or
whether we resist with the late Roman Catholics, turning Caesar all into
Name, and diuesting him of all his Roialties.

Saint Bernard epist. 42. to the Archbishop of Senona urges that place of
Saint Paul, omnis anima, Let every soul be subject: thus, Si omnis, and
vestra, quis vos excipit ab vniuersitate? Si quis tent at excipere, conatur
decipere. If every soul must be subject, then yours, that is, those persons
who are Ecclesiastical: who excepteth you when he names All? he that
assayes to except you (of the Church) goes about to deceive you.

Therefore to sort this Preface to the occasion, and to the present hearing
more properly, I learn of S. Bernard thus to limit to my self; they of the
Clergy, Ecclesiastical persons, that resist, shall receive to themselves
damnation. And herein we have our high Priest for an example, of whom S.
Bernard says, Conditor Caesaris non cunctatus est reddere censum Caesari,
exemplum enim dedit vobis, vt and vos ita faciatis. He that made Caesar, paid
tribute to Caesar, for therein he gave ensample to you, (to you of the
Clergy) that you should also do the like: thus did Saint Bernard teach, who
flourished eleauen hundred years after Christ.

Origin interpreting this Epistle of Saint Paul to the Romans, upon this
Chapter lib. 9. gives a reason, why the Apostle in an Epistle to the Brethren
in Antiochia, Syria, and Cilicia, Acts 15. 29. does only admonish them to
abstain from things sacrificed to Idols, from the strangled, and from blood,
not adding any prohibition of adultery, murder, theft, etc. Superfluum
videbatur, ea diuina lege prohibere, quae sufficienter humana lege plectuntur:
It seemed to him more then needed by divine decrees to inhibite those things
which humane laws did sufficiently punish. His collection from hence is very
notable, and sorteth with my present Argument: Ex quo apparet, iudices mundi
parte^ maxima^ Dei legis implere, omnia enim crimina quae vindicari vult Deus,
non per antistites, and principes Ecclesiarum, sed per mundi iudices voluit
vindicari. Hence it appears, that the Secular Judges do fulfill the greatest
part of the Law of GOD; for all crimes which GOD will have punished, he
refers to the vindication of these, and not of the Prelates, and chief
Priests in his Church. And herein he has met with the Church of Rome, in an
evasion learnd of the Donatists, and detected, and despised by Saint Augustine,
contra Parmenianum Donatistam Episcopum. libr. 1. saying; Nisi forte
(quemadmodum nonnulli eorum sane imperitissimi intelligere solent) de honoribus
Ecclesiasticis dictum esse velint, vt gladius intelligatur vindicta
spiritualis: cum prouidentissimus Apostolus satis aperiat, quid loquatur,
dicens, propter hoc tributa praestatis. Unless perchance (as some most
foolishly are wont to interpret these words) they would understand Saint Paul,
as speaking of Ecclesiastical powers, that by the Sword is meant
Excommunication: whereas the Apostle wisely provided, to prevent any such
interpretation, and expresses himself plainly, when he says, For this
cause pay you tribute, and Tribute is not due but to Secular powers.

And Saint Ambrose makes good this interpretation Tom. 5. upon this place,
saying; Principes hos reges dicit, qui propter corrigendam vitam, and
prohibenda aduersa creantur, Dei habentes imaginem, vt sub vno sint caeteri.
The Apostle Paul in this place means Kings, who are created for the
correction of men's lives, and the defending of them from adversity, bearing
the Image of God, that one should sit above the rest.

And Theophilact (as for the most part he does) follows Saint Chrysostom, in
the interpretation of this Text, saying; Vniuersos erudit, sieve Sacerdos sit
ille, sine Monachus, sieve Apostolus, vt se principibus subdant.

He teaches all sorts of men, whether he be Priest, Monk, or Apostle, he
must submit himself to his Sovereign Prince. And the holy Apostle Saint
Peter whom the Roman Usurpers boast to succeed, taught the same general
doctrine, 1. Pet. 2. 13. etc. Submit yourselues to all manner ordinance of man,
for the Lords sake, whether to the King as superior, or unto governors as
sent of him, etc. for so is the will of God.

Saint Gregory the great who sat Bishop of Rome six hundred years after our
Lord and Savior Christ, knew no other, nor taught none other doctrine: for
hereof, his Epistles give good witness.

Mauritius the Emperor had made a Decree, That no old Soldiers should be
admitted or received into any of the Monasteries, because he perceived that
many of them used this as a shift to shun and escape from going to the
wars, and he was thereby likely to be the worse served: such power had that
Christian Emperor to decree in matters concerning the Church, and Gregory
then Bishop of Rome, grieved at this constitution of the Emperor, did not
convent the Emperor to his Consistory, drew not out against him the sword of
Excommunication, did not menace him with interdiction, deprivation, or any
other show of Papal jurisdiction, but as an humble and duetifull* subject,
addressed to him his earnest petition, by an Epistle, wherein he pleads for
the Church, and as if it became him ill to contest with his Sovereign, he
brings in Christ Jesus, thus expostulating with him. Ego te de notario
comitem excubitorum, de comite Caesarem de Caesare imperatorem, and patrem
imperatorum feci: In a word, I have advanced thee from low to high degree;
Sacerdotes meos tuae manui commisi. I have given thee charge and government of
my Priests, Registr. lib. 3. epist. 61.

And to make his suite more possible, he wrote an earnest Letter to Theodorus
the Emperors Physician, to entreat him, who might best choose an opportune
time, to solicit this request, in which he complayneth, saying; Epist. 64.
Valde mihi durum videtur, vt ab eius seruitio milites prohibeat, qui dominari
illum, non solum militibus, sed etiam Sacerdotibus concessit. It seems hard
to me, that he whom God has made to rule, not only Soldiers, but Priests
also, should restrain Soldiers from doing service to that GOD: So making
Theodorus his competitor to the Emperor, for repeal of that Law.

But this Gregory the first of that name, was so far from the present
Antichristian pride of his successor, as that he would not suffer the Title of
Oecumenicall Bishop to be put upon him; herein following Pelagius his most
worthy predecessor. He writ an angry reprehension to Eulogius, Patriarch of
Alexandria, for stiling him Universal Bishop, in an Epistle sent to him: And
when John Patriarch of Constantinople, had usurped that title, he wrote to him
to rebuke him for it. And to Mauritius the Emperor, whose love to him and the
Church could have affoorded him so honorable a title, he said, whosoever
assumeth to himself, or admits of any such title, Elatione sua Antichristum
praecurrit, he does fore-runne Antichrist in his pride. He calls that title,
Nefandum, stultum, superbum vocabulum, a wicked, foolish, and proud title. He
says that the counsel of Calcedon offered it to his predecessors, to be so
styled, sed tamen nullus sibi hoc temerarium nomen arripuit: none of them took
this rash and in considerate name upon him.

He would have staid the pride of that Roman See at the first: for when in
respect of the Empire seated at Rome, the chamber of that great Monarchy,
there was given the first place in Councels to the Bishop of Rome: the next
ambition was to be chief Bishop: and then to be universal over all the
Church, as Heart says, the Pope cannot be non resident, for all the world is
his Diocese* and what was then left, but to intrude upon the rights of
temporal Princes, as in succeeding times they did, and at this day do? But we
hear God promising, Kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and Queens thy
nurces; not Bishops, not Popes, and Prelates, Esaias 49. 23. Two proofs let me
but name, because we have them fully pressed by most learned and judicious
Divines, which express the power of Princes over the Church.

First, their invention of general Counsels, so Pighius himself confesses,
Constantinus primus auth^r fuit conuocandi generalia consilia: Constantine was
the first who devised to assemble general Counsels, but the power hereof was
by GOD himself given to Moses, to whom he committed the making and using of
the two silver Trumpets, and from him derived to all Princes and States
imperial. And the Church story since Christ makes it plain, how Emperors
and Kings in their several dominions, have both called Counsels, and sat
Presidents, to order the meeting, to censure and punish offenders, to keep
them to the point that would digress, and in their absence to depute secular
Judges in their places, and at last to dissolve their meeting at their
pleasure. Yea sometimes the great Bishop of Rome has made request to the
Emperor, as Leo for example, for the calling a Counsel in Italy, and
prevailed not. And lastly, the Canons of Counsels were by the imperial power
ratified, and without that sovereign approbation had no strength.

Secondly, for Appeals, the Princes have bin in the Church, the end of them
all, even in causes Ecclesiastical. More, Socrates reports libr. 5. cap. 10.
That many Bishops differing in judgment, concerning the Doctrine of the
Trinity, Theodosius the Emperor conuented them before himself, he took the
several Coppies of their Doctrines; and praying first to God to assist him, in
that holy business, that he might choose and maintain his truth against all
heretical opinions: after mature advice, he resolved upon the truth of
Doctrine, and in the presence of all the Assembly, he tore in pieces all the
rest: and this truth he did not measure by the depth of his own judgment, but
by comparison with that Canon of Faith, which both holy Scriptures, and former
Counsels had sufficiently maintained. And this was in a matter merely
Ecclesiastical. And for Ecclesiastical persons; the law of Appeals in our
Land, when Popery passed for true religion, in the reign of King Henry the
second, had this Process, from the Archdeacon, to the Bishop of the Diocese,
from the Bishop of the Diocese to the Archbishop of the Province, and from
him to the King, which was the final hearing and determination, beyond which
there was no further provocation, but to leave all to God. Therefore we
determine, that our Causes and our Persons are all vassalles, and subject to
our Sovereigns; and the immunities and liberties which we possess, we hold
them of the indulgence, and gracious favor of our most worthy, and loving
Princes, and our Solomon, our Ecclesiastes requires of his Clergy, no undue
obedience, that the judgment remains most just. They that resist (even of
the Clergy) shall receive unto themselves damnation.

They resist this power, who refuse this Oath of Loyalty to his most excellent
Majesty, as all Popish Recusants do, who set up a demy-god, as Bellarmine his
Parasite fawneth, and faineth, De Pontif. 5. 6. qui potest mutare, confer,
and auferre principibus regna: who has power to change, to give, and take away
Kingdoms from Princes.

Our Sovereign does not set up an Inquisition, to find out Papists, as Rome
does to discover Protestants: he does not make bare suspicion quarrel enough
to apprehend, convent, imprison, rack, and torture men, to force them to
selfeaccusation: he only deuiseth to know sheep from goats, loyal subjects
from heretical rebels; he is the Image of that King of whom we read, Matt.
21. 5. Ecce, rex tuus venit tibi mansuetus: Thy King comes to thee meek, and
gracious. It is the glory of a King to pass by an offense. How many Princes
of the earth would have put up such an attempt as the Gunpowder treason was,
with such patience? Might not Christian Princes have thought his anger just, if
it had drawn his Sword against all of that Religion, till none of them had
been left, and it had been no more then the equity of my Text, for they that
resist must receive judgment here, by just Magistrates, who bear not the
Sword in vain, and hereafter damnation, by the Sentence of the great Judge of
Quick and Dead. The Israelites thought this Sentence just; for thus they say
to Joshua; Whosoever will rebel against thy Commandments, Joshua 1. 18.
let him be put to death: And God gave a fearful example hereof in the
rebellion of Corah. The reason is given by the Almighty himself in this case
of opposition to sovereign dominion, why he takes it so to heart: For he
said to Samuel, They have not cast thee away, but they 1. Sam. 8. 7.
have cast me away, that I should not reign over them.

In these cases of resisting, GOD is most sensible, for his own Scepter of
Rule is touched in them: For by me Princes reign, says his Wisdom.
Therefore the usurping pride of Rome, struggling and wrestling with the Holy
one of Israel for the Scepter of Regiment, may now look, that the censure of
Saint Gregory the Great then Bishop, given upon the Patriarch of
Constantinoples ambition of the name of Oecumenicall, may turn into a
prophecy of these times, and then Elatio tanto citius rumpitur, quanto magis
inflatur. And we may all expect the breaking of the head of Leuiathan in the
great waters. David said, they that hate thee have lifted up the head. Saint
Augustine upon that place says, Nec capita, sed caput quando eo peruenturi
sunt, vt etiam illud caput habeant, quod extollitur super omne quod dicitur
Deus, and quod colitur, quod Deus interficiet spirituoris sui: that is, he
says not their heads, but they shall lift up the head, seeing they shall come
to that pass, that they shall have that head which is lifted up above all that
is called God, or is worshipped, which GOD shall destroy with the breath of his
mouth.

The time of my warning to this place, and the time limited to this short
Preface to a long business, are both impatient of prolixitie. Let me therefore
address my speech to you my reverend Brethren, in the holy Ministry of the
word of God, to stir you up, not only to express and approve your own
undoubted loyalty to your Sovereign, by your oath publicly given for the
same, but further, to employ the uttermost of your wits, and tongues, and
pens, to recover so many of our recusant brethren, as are not frozen in their
dregs of superstition, but led in blindness, for want of light, to the
unity of our Church, and the obedience of our Sovereign: and withal, to
stir up the Magistrate to zeal and fervor in the cause of God, to detect,
and pursue recusant Papists, and to lay them at the foot of our gracious Lord
the King: For Solomon says right well; A King that sits in the throne of
Judgment, chaseth away all evil with his eye, Prou. 20. 8. or if they be so
grounded in their disloyalty, that they dread not the power of that Sword which
he bears, and not in vain: if they be so blinded with superstition, that
they cannot see in the Majesty of Sovereign government, the ordinance, and
Vicegerencie of God. A wise King (as a wise King says) scatters the wicked,
and makes the wheel to turn over them: verse 26. Our King has Wisdom like
an Angel of God, to dispute with them, and confute them: Even a divine
Sentence is in the mouth of our King, Prouer. 16. 19. He has Justice like the
Deputy of of the most High, to punish them that are obstinate, he has mercy
like the Son of God, to manage Justice, with moderation, and to pardon those
that offend, not of malicious and precipitate rebellion, but of ignorant and
misled oversight. And his search tending to the detection of Gods enemies, I
wish my Text written by the finger of Gods spirit, in the royal heart and hand
of our most gracious Lord the King, that all his faithful subjects may read
it in his practice; They which resist, shall receive to themselves judgment.

For, what greater discouragement to our Ministry, then this, to see the bold
freedom of recusant Papists, daring to affront our Church, to impugn our
doctrine, to despise our Bishops, to scorn our Ministry, and to pronounce us
all damned to the second death without hope of redemption; and all this with
such assurance, as if they had no law to contradict them, or no Magistrate to
see the law executed upon them. God himself has written a law against such,
in their blood, and let Gods subordinate Deputies on earth from the King that
sits upon the throne, to the lowest Magistrate trusted with the Sword of
Justice, lay to heart the speech of God by his Prophet to Ahab, 1. Reg. 20. 42.
Because thou have let go out of thy hand, a man whom I appointed to die, thy
life shall go for his life. Let this sentence fall upon the Kings enemies, and
rather then one hair should fall from the head of the Lords anointed for his
remissenes herein to those whom God has appointed to die: let his milke-white
mercy be dyed into a crimosin tincture of judgment. Exurgat Deus, dissipentur
inimici. Let God arise, let his enemies be scattered. What their mercy is, the
day shall declare it, the fifth of November shall declare it to posterity,
their vault, their powder, their bars of iron, their logges, and billets of
wood, even all their instruments of sudden and cruel death, which if men
should forget, God would remember, for though men wink and sleep, the holy
one of Israel sees, and God the auenger will arise, and They that resist shall
receive to themselves condemnation. The Pope that absolueth others, herein
cannot be absolved. Saint Paul has sealed Paul the fifth, now living and dying
in his present Religion, to condemnation: and my Text is sufficient proof,
that no Romish Catholic, living and dying in the obedience of the Bishop of
Rome, and in difloyal rebellion, and resistance to their lawful Sovereigns,
can hope by the revealed will of God to be saved: for his sin is resistance
to Gods ordinance, which is flat Th^omachie.

Let us all therefore be instant and earnest in the maintenance of this truth:
our tepidity and luke-warmenesse in religion makes us justly tataxed to
resemble the church of Laodicea, which is threatened to be cast out of Gods
mouth. It is the cause of God, it is the cause of Jesus Christ, the cause of
the Church, the cause of the Commonwealth. It is the cause of the supreme head
of the Church and Commonwealth next under Jesus Christ, our wise, learned,
gracious, and peaceable Solomon. He is neither good Christian, nor good
subject, that is not stowe, and confident, in so religious, and loyal a
quarrel.

I presume I have but spoken the thoughts and affections of all my reverend and
learned brethren in the holy Ministry; and I say no more but Amen. Let God
ratify and confirm it: even so be it for Jesus Christ his sake: to whom with
the Father and the holy Spirit, be given all glory, and power, and dominion,
now and evermore.

AMEN.
Laus Deo.
THE SVPPER OF THE LORD.

A Sermon preached at Hampton. September 10. 1615. By SAMVEL PAGE, Doctor in
Divinity.

REVEL. 19. 9. Write: Blessed are they which are called to the Marriage Supper
of the Lamb. LONDON Printed by Nicholas Oaks for Simon Waterson, dwelling in
Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Crown. 1616.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, the Lady Anne Howard of Effingham.
MAdame, these Meditatio^s acknowledge themselves yours, as drawn from your
first request, and addressed to your ear, and now returned to your eye. You
were more then a Guest at this feast, for your euer-honoured Lord, and you,
were also bidders, and you invited a gracious Congregation to this holy Supper
in the house of Wisdom. You give an honorable evidence to the Church of God,
of your love to Religion, affecting greatness in no way, but in the way of
goodness. I pray God for your growth up to perfection, and the Crown of it,
desiring your Honor to receive your own again, from him who shall reckon it
amongst the great blessings of his holy calling, if he may add any fire to
your zeal of Gods glory, or speed to your pace in the ways of God.

Your Honors in all humble service and acknowledgements of duty. S. P.

THE SVPPER OF THE LORD.
The second Sermon.
PROVE. 9. 5. Come eat of my Bread, and drink of the Wine, which I have
drawn.
In the beginning of this chapter, Wisdom buildth her an house, that is,
Christ, a church, and it is not like to our great houses, without hospitality:
here are three rooms expressed in it: a Slaughterhouse: For she has killed
her beasts: Matthew. 22. 4.
the Oxen and Fatlings in the Parable: here is her Wine Press: for she has
mingled her Wine, says the new translation, it is the phrase of Scripture, to
express the making of wine of the juice of many grapes commixed: or it is her
cellar, for the old reading was, that she has drawn the wine. Here is also
her dining room, or place to eat in, which is not some close, thriftie
parlour near the kitchen, but a very spacious room, where the table is
provided: the largeness of the room is easily gathered, and guessed by the
inuitation.

Wisdom sends sorth her Maidens: that is, Jesus Christ his Ministers: so
called, not in respect of the virginity of Priests, so much urged in the Church
of Rome, so little practiced; for David does not always esteem that happy:
the fire consumed their young men, and their maidens were Psalm. 78. 63.
not given in marriage: but in respect of their modesty, and courteous
affability, lovingly bearing themselves in the business of this inuitation.

The Commission is large: for all that are simple and want understanding, are
invited, so the house had need to be of good receipt, and the Table both
large and well furnished, to entertain so many guests.

All sin is folly, and all sinners are fools, these does Christ our Wisdom
inuit: For he came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance: but
they must be such, as will forsake their folly, and embrace understanding, that
is, penitents.

We will examine the Inuitation to a word, there must not a crumme of this
bread fall beside the Table; and the best Method, to handle these words in,
is, to imitate and follow the order, in which they are set down to us, by
Wisdom.

The parts of this Text be as many (almost) as the words thereof.

1 We must come. 2 Being come, we must eat. 3 The provision for eating is
Bread. 4 Not every bread; My bread. 5 We must also drink. 6 This drink must
be Wine. 7 This wine must be of Wisdoms own drawing or mingling.
1 Come. We must come to Wisdoms house, that is, to the Church of God. He
that bids us, seems not to come home to our houses. Behold, I Reuelat. 3. 20.
stand at the door and knock, and if any man open unto me, I will come in to
him, and suppe with him. He now desires the like good fellowship from us,
that we would come to his house: he will be our guest unbidden: let us be his.
David was glad when they said unto him; Come let us go up to the house of the
Lord, Psalm 122. 1. And when he was hindered in that liberty, his soul longed
yea and fainted for the Courts of the Lords house. Psalm 84. 2.

It is a pleasing resort to Gods house, for there the Lord sits between the
Cherubins: Psalm. 99. 1. 77. 13. 96. 6. Gods way is in his Sanctuary: yea,

Gods power and beauty are in his Sanctuary, That was one of the great
inducements to move David, so earnestly to desire that house, to behold the
Psalm 27. 4.
beauty of the Lord. This is no where more clearly, and cheerfully discerned
then in the house of God. Blessed are they that awell in thy house, they Psalm
84. 4.
will ever praise thee. And, in his temple every one Psalm 29. 9.
does speak of his glory. The new Translation reads in the margent, Every
whit of it utters his glory: So full of majesty is the place it self, where
God has put his name: and, where his honor dwells. Therefore no place like
unto the Church of God, to behold the beauty of the Lord.

Augustine upon the words of Solomon; Go to Prouer. 6. 6.
the Ant thou sluggard, behold her ways, and be wise says; Vide formicam
Dei, surgit quotidie, currit In psalm. 6. 6.
ad Ecclesiam, audit lectionem, recondit intus grana electa de horreo. Behold
the Ant of our Lord, he rises day by day, he speedeth to the church, there
he hears the reading of holy Scriptures, and he makes his provision of
choice grains out of that barn, which he lays up in store. The use is this.
In time of winter and tribulation. Comedit intus labores aestatis, he feeds
in foul weather upon his summer labors.

Beloved, this is absolutely the richest blessing of our Church, and Kingdom,
under the religious government of our gracious Sovereign, the liberty of the
Church, and our free and open access to the house of Wisdom.

It is made a law and ordinance to Israel, that the Tribes shall all go up
thither, even a Statute law enacted in the high Court of Parliament, That all
of all sorts shall diligently resort to their Parish Churches, and a pain is
set upon the heads of them that do refuse to Come. Therefore, they that Come
not, do not only offend the law of God, but they also violate the ordinance
of the Kingdom and State, and so show themselves, both in Religion, and in
civil Obedience irregular. In this rank are all recusant Papists, who
directly refuse our Church, and all negligent Professors, that care not for
the public service of Almighty GOD, and all profane worldlings, to whom the
Sabbath day is as a common day, and the house of God is despised; and all
Seperatists, that will go to their own Synagogues, and Parlour- Conuenticles,
but will not once come at the house of the Lord.

The Parable in the Gospel concludes against all these: First, they are given
over, and no more invited: Secondly, the Master of the Feast pronounces
against them, saying; Verily I say unto Matthew. 24. 8. Luke 14. 24.
you, they are not worthy, they shall not taste of my Supper.

These be the days of the son of man, wherein he shows himself in the
word of his holy Gospel, and is even Crucified in our sight. Let Galat. 3. 1.
us fear lest CHRIST JESUS beholding our negligence do say unto us: The days
come, in which you shall desire to see one of the days of the Luke 17. 22.
Son of man, and shall not see it. Luke 17. 22. Come then whilst you may,
and thank God that you may come and go safely.

1. Come. Come then your selves, and bring with you as much good company as you
can; it is S. Austins counsel. Adduc eos ad domum Dei tecum, qui sunt in domo
tua tecum: matter Ecclesia aliquos a te petit, aliquos repetit: petit quos
inu^nit apud te: repetit quos prodidit per te, acquirat quos non habuit, non
p^angat quos habuit: that is, Bring those with thee to Gods house, who are with
thee at thy own house: our mother the Church requesteth some of thee, some she
requires, she requesteth of thee those whom she finds with thee, and she
chalengeth thee for those whom she has lost by thy means: let her gain those
which she never had, but let her not bewail the loss of those whom she has
had sometimes.

Your own good example who have charge of families, is full of power, to fill
the church of God, and the more eminent you are in your state and degree, above
your brethren, the more inducing is your good example, and the fuller your
families are, the fuller shall you make the congregation in the Lords house, if
you bring them all with you, thither.

Is it not strange! play houses, alehouses, and tauerns have no steeples, nor
rings of bells to toll men to them, and yet they have full resort. Churches are
(for the most part) furnished with these loud voices to ring in our ears this
duty, and to say to us, come, yet we come not so readily. Is it the Sign,
that has such virtue to draw multitudes together. Surely the house of God
does not want a Sign: if that will do it, Wisdom shall never want guests
at her house.

I read of four Signs in holy Scripture, and they do all belong to the
house of God.

1 Jesus Christ himself is a Sign, God dwells at this Sign, and here is
his Ordinary kept. Isay 11. 10.
And in that day the root of Ishai shall stand up for a Sign to his people:
the Nations shall seek to it, and his rest shall be glorious. Here is a
Sign. Here is good Company, and good Lodging: for here is rest.

But this is that which makes so many forsake the house of God, the Sign is
not liked of many: so old Simeon prophesied of Christ, being then in Luke 2. 34.
his arms. This Child is set for a Sign that shall be spoken against.

2 God dwells at the Sign of the Sabbath, I am the Lord your God, hallow my
Sabbaothes, and they shall be a Sign between me, and you, that you may know
that I am the Lord your God. Ezechiel chap. 20. verse 20. And indeed, what
need is there of any other Sign, to summon us to appear before the Lord in
his Sanctuary, then the name of a Saboath, the day of God. Upon this Sign,
Almighty GOD has written a Memento; Remember that thou keep holy the
Sabbath day.

3 The word of the Lord, is an other Sign: So does the Prophet call it; An
everlasting Sign, Esaias 55. 13.
which shall not be cut off.

4 The Ministers of this word are Signs: Lo I, Esaias 8. 18.
and the children that thou have given me, are for Signs: The Prophet and the
Prophets children: Signs and wonders, and such sights do draw company, but
these signs do withal contract scorn and contempt, by the unwelcome message
which they bring to sinners, and Gods house is unfrequented by this means. Yet
these are they whom Wisdom sends to inuit her guests: yet their preaching
is by the world called Foolishness. 1. Corint. 1. 18.


2. Eat.
We are invited to eat, and that is good news to a good stomach; an evil
stomach hears of eating, with some loathing. And there are not many good
stomachs to this eating: for we surffeited in Paradise, upon the forbidden
Fruit, and there we lost our appetite. Gods table is the best remedy against
the danger of that surfeit; for his guests do ever get them a stomach with
eating: for none do more desire to eat there, then they that eat most. They
that make their meat their god, have nothing so good stomachs, as they that
make God their mea^te. GODS guests do so, for they feed upon the flesh, and
drink the blood of JESUS CHRIST, by faith in the Sacrament of the Supper of
the Lord: here is no danger of surfeit at this Table: for Wisdom makes the
Feast. The Master of the feast says to every guest: Open thy mouth wide, and
I will fill it. Psalm. 81. 10.

Come not to the Table of this eating without appetite: the Provision here is
very great, and the Master of the house open handed. Thou openest Psalm. 104.
28.
thy hand, and fillest all things living with plenteousnesse. Of him is said,
Thou fillest the hungry Luke 1. 53.
soul with good things. There be some that will come to the house of GOD, but
being come, they will not eat: such are our Church-Papists, who will lend us
their company at the divine Service, but will not receive the Sacrament.

There is also a great fault, which many are guilty of, and few are sensible,
that they do evil: this is to come to a Church, where there is a Communion,
and there to hear the word of God, and after to forsake the Congregation even
at the Table of the Lord.

Our Church in our English Liturgy, has appointed a special exhortation, to
be used, and read publicly, when the Minister does find the people
negligent, in the receiving of the holy Sacrament, in which two things are
severely, reproved.

1 When men go away from the Communion, being present, where they may receive
it, which is there called a great injury to God.

2 When men go not away from Church, but stand, and look on, whilst others
do receive the Sacrament, but do refuse to receive it themselves, this is
there called Decision and Contempt of these holy mysteries. Therefore, Come,
but eat also. Some do come for fear of the law, and eat also, to save
charges, but it is against stomach, for they love not the meat.

Others come, and they like the meat well, but they are loath to eat, in
regard of the sauce which they like not the taste of, that is the Ceremonies of
our Church, used in the administration of the Sacrament. Yet has our Church
protested sufficiently, that the Sacrament is entire, and pure without them,
and there is no cause to require, and exact the reverent use of them, but for
outward decency; of which it is more fit, that a Church should judge, then
every particular person to have liberty to use his own form and fashion.

Others keep state, they are willing sometimes to eat, but they are loath to
take the pains to Come, and eat: They look to have it brought home to their
own houses. This will one day be judged, too much keeping of state: And, if
God make strange, to admit them to his Eternal house, to eat with Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob Matthew. 8. 11.
there, they may thank their own idleness and pride for it. Me thinks that
this eating should be a good reward of their coming so far, as to Church,
and it should be no dishonor to any person on earth, to be seen often, at the
house of God.

Let us then do both: Come and eat. Christ cheereth up his guests. Eat O
friends! he accompteth Cantic. 5. 1.
them his friends, that will come and eat with him.

When the three men passed by Abraham sitting at his Tent door, in the heat
of the day, Abraham besought them earnestly, to come in and eat with him. If I
have now found favor in thy sight, pass not away from thy servant. Genesis 1.
18. He would have taken it for a great unkindness, if they should have
refused his entertainment, as he acknowledges it a favor done to him, for
them to eat, and rest with him, but even a while. And no doubt but our Inuiter
will as much take it to heart, if we shall neglect him, and will as kindly
take it, if we Come and eat.

This Food is not carnal but sacramental; it is Mentis, non dentis cibus.
The food of the inward, not of the outward man. The Element is literal, and
corporeal, the grace is inward and spiritual; Do this: that is, Eat in
remembrance of me.

The next circumstance shows us what our fare shall be.

3 Bread.
Our fare in the house of God is Bread; First, that David says, that it
strengthens the heart of man: The penitent sinner has need of this: for he
has a broken heart, which does want strength. The Bread of this Supper of the
Lord, is the seal of our Faith, in the belief of our redemption, wrought and
accomplished by Christ, the bread of life: The metaphysicall faith of Rome,
does believe the very flesh and blood of Christ in this Sacrament; and
affirms, that here is neither Bread nor Wine, but only the accidents
thereof, the forms, color, and taste, and they miraculously, and unnaturally
subsisting without subject. I will not bid the adversary battle in this
quarrel now, my business is the positive Divinity of our true Chucrh. We have
heard with our ears, out of Wisdoms inuitation, that we must eat bread
here, and our Fathers have told us so.

This which we receive here, is Bread, common in the nature of it, sanctified
in the use: but De nature. ser. 4.
as Leo says, with the same difference that was between the Virgin Mary
before the Annunciation, and after, for in both The holy Ghost came upon her,
in the Annunciation, upon the Bread, in the Consecration, and the power of the
Highest ouershadowed both. Luke 1. 25.

Or as Saint Chrysostom; vt Saram non natura, sed Dei promissio fecit matrem:
As Sara was not by Natures way, made a mother, but by virtue of the promise: so
it is not Nature but Grace, and the Ordinance of God, that makes this Bread of
the Supper, the body of Christ; yet, as Sara ceased not to be Sara, when she
became a Mother, neither does this Bread cease to be bread, when it is made and
consecrated an holy Sacrament.

Cyprian says, Adest veritas signo, spiritus Sacramento: Truth comes to the
Sign, Truth does not abolish the Sign, the Spirit comes to the Sacrament,
it does not extinguish the Sacrament. For as iron heated red hot in the sire,
has the very heat and burning force of fire, yet it cease not to be iron
still: so the Bread of this Supper, by the virtue of the Spirit which comes
to it, is Bread of life, and is the Instrument to convey to every worthy
receiver the force of the Holy Ghost, yet cease not to be Bread: and so S.
Paul calls it: The Bread which we bless, is 1 Corin. 10 16.
it not the Communion of the body of Christ?

I conclude then with Wisdom; Come and eat Bread.

4 But Wisdom adds; My Bread.
For they that feed at this Table, must feed of such Bread, as the son of
God does provide for his guests. We have Bread too. In the sweat Genes. 3. 19.
of thy face, thou shall eat Bread: And we do pray, Give us this day our daily
bread. But this Bread of the Sacrament, is Gods bread; so made in the
consecration, by divine institution, in remembrance of Christ; yet so, that by
our worthy receiving of it, we may make it our Bread: For, to unworthy
Communicants, it is common Bread, and they find themselves after it, no more
refreshed, then they were before: as a Deed sealed, is but Parchment and Wax to
any, but them whom it does concern: therefore if thou eat not of his Bread,
that inuiteth thee, it will not nourish thee.

5 and drink.
Wisdom makes not a dry Feast, her guests shall drink too: it is so in our
Savior Christ's own Institution of this Sacrament: Drink ye all of this: And
Saint Paul an Apostle of JESUS CHRIST 1. Cor. 11. 26. puts them both
together; So often as ye eat of this Bread and drink of this Cup.

The Papists will come, and eat, but they will not drink: the Lay men and
the Priests that do not Consecrate, may not drink. This is one of the most
improbable and weakest defended absurdities, in any real point of difference,
between them and us. But they do affirm, that whole CHRIST, and the
memorial of his whole Passion is comprehended sufficiently in either part, and
therefore the Bread alone does suffice, without the Wine. Yet Wisdom
provides both to eat and drink at her Feast, and Christ, who instituted the
Sacrament, thought both necessary, and gave both to his Church in equal
precept.

But if they would needs separate whom the Lord has joined together, had it
gone by most voices, the eating had rather been laid aside, then the drinking:
For that does not so much to the life express the Passion, with the benefits,
as the drinking does, but this will appear much more clearly in the next
point. I will conclude this with Saint Basils blessing, and let it light upon
all them that violate the Institution of CHRIST, without repentance: Cursed be
that man, that forbids, where CHRIST bids, or bids where JESUS
forbids.

6 Wine.
Gods provision is Wine. We may say of this Wine, In vino veritas. Here is
truth in this Wine; for it is the very soul of that saving Truth, the
shedding of the most precious blood of our Redeemer for his Church. I can not
find the Lay man left out in this Inuitation, or in this part of it. All that
are simple and destitute of understanding are bidden: and I am sure and
certain they be not all Clergy men. He means indefinitely, all that are
sensible of their own defectes, and imperfections, who see their own folly,
and are ashamed of it, and desire amend it, whether Ecclesiastical or Lay
persons.

To them he offers Wine, the fruit of the Grape, as himself calls it, as
the Sacrament of his Blood: and it is that seasonable Wine mentioned in the one
and thirty chapter and the sixth verse of the Proverbs; Give Wine unto those
that be of heavy hearts. Such are the true Penitents, bitter in their souls,
for their trespasses committed against Almighty God. They that do refuse to
drink of this Wine, shall taste of another cup: For in the hand of the Lord
there is a Cup, the Wine is mixed: the wicked of the earth shall drink the
dregs thereof, Psalm. 75. 8. What shall they do amongst the rest, who mangle
the holy Sacrament, and rob the guests of Wisdom of half their
entertainment? So did the Conuenticles of Trent. Hear their Canon. Si quis
dixerit De Conc. sub vna specie. cap. 2.
Sanctam Ecclesiam Catholicam, non justice de causis and rationibus adductam
fuisse, vt Laicos and etiam Clericos non conficientes, sub panis tantum specie
communicaret, aut in eo errasse, Anathema sit. If any man shall say, that the
holy Catholic Church was not led by just and reasonable inducements, to
minister the holy Communion, only in the one kind, in Bread, to the Lay men,
and also to the Priests, that do not themselves consecrate the Host, or that
the Church has erred in so doing; let him be accursed: whereas their own
Gelasius calls it Sacrilege to divide De Cons. did. 2. Comperimus.
the Communion so; saying: Aut integra Sacramenta percipiant, aut ab integris
arceantur: Let them either receive the Sacraments entire, that is, according to
the Institution, or let them be denied them altogether. Tertullian says
rightly of them, Credunt sine Scripturis, vt credant contra De prescript.
Scripturas: They believe without Scriptures, that they may believe against
Scriptures.

The Counsel of Calcedon determines, (...) Euagrius lib. 1. cap. 17. Council.
Calced. Actio. 2.
Cursed be he that parts, cursed be he that divides the Sacrament.

Saint Cyprian says excellently well: Non iungitur Ecclesiae, qui ab Euangelio
seperatur: He is not joined to the Church, who is divided from the Gospel:
Against those who pretend the authority of the Church, for the violation of
that Institution, which is set down in the Gospel.

The pouring out of Wine, has a visible representation of the effusion of
CHRIST blood: and, in the drinking of the Wine, which presently warmeth, and
comfort the stomach, more sensibly than in the eating of the Bread, is the
powerful operation of the inward Grace, comforting the conscience to the
receiver thereof expressed.

So Hugo defining a Sacrament, requires that Hugo de sancto Victore de Sacram.
lib. 6. part. 9. citat. in Sum. Hug. in casibus Consc. tit. Sacramentum.
it be ex institutione figurans: it must be the sign of something, according
to the institution; but in the denial of the Cup* the Institution has wrong,
and so the Figure imperfect. He says also, that it must be, ex similitudine
representans: that in the similitude to that whereof it is a Figure, it must
make a visible representation: but the breaking of the Bread only, makes no
such sensible remonstrance to the outward sense of the shedding of CHRIST'S
blood, as the pouring out of Wine, joined also with it does. Therefore
Wisdom says; Eat of my Bread, and drink Wine.

7 Which I have drawn or mingled.
The Master of our Feast, will have the wine of his own drawing and mingling.
He has not thought it fit, to trust men with the drawing of his Wine, or the
stopping of it up, at their pleasures. This cannot be understood better, then
of the wine of this Sacrament. For it is the sole Institution of Jesus Christ,
the wisdom of God. He ordained it, and the purer Churches have ever received
it according to his preparation.

Where men have taken upon them to draw, and to furnish this Table with
provisions, sundry foul and gross aberrations have succeeded.

Some have mingled water with this wine, it is a precept of the Romish church
since the corruption of it: And Cyprian, otherwise a worthy Father of our
Church, seemd to incline to this mixture.

The Master of the Sentences says, Aqua vero Libr. 4. did. 11. Cyprian. epl.
l. 2. epistola 3.
admiscenda est vino, quia aqua populum significat, qui per Christi passionem
redemptus est: vino miscetur aqua, Christo populus. But water is to be mingled
with the Wine, for water signifies the people, redeemed by the passion of
Christ; the wine is mingled with the water, Christ with the people. The people
have the more wrong, who are forbidden the wine, saying, they who forbid it,
do give it out to be the Sacrament of their union with Christ.

Others have ministered in water only, without Lib. de Here Is. beres. 64.
wine: so says Augustine, Some Heretics were called Aquarij: quod aquam
offerant in poculo Sacramenti: Because they offered water in the Cup of the
Sacrament. See the Jesuits gospel by Master W. Crashaw De Consecr. did. 2. Cum
omne. Quo de diuinis officijs.


Others have ministered, not in wine, or water, but in milk; and I wonder that
the Jesuits of late times, have not preferred this practice, who ascribe
equal efficacy to the milk of the Mother, and the blood of the Son of God:
at least, that they have not mingled wine and milk. Others have given bread
dipped in the wine.

The worst drawer of wine for this feast, was he who drew the wine, and
mingled it for Pope Victor Act. and Mon. volum. 1. p. 168.
the second. Brazutus, who is recorded within the space of 13 years to have
empoisoned six Popes, he mingled poison with wine in the Chalice for that Pope;
as their own Stories report.

All the mysteries of religion, and doctrines of faith, must be of Christ's own
preparing for his Church: therefore we hold, that no counsel, nor all the
Church has power to alter any thing, in the doctrine of faith, or in the
doctrine of the Sacraments, the seals of our faith, contrary to the ordinance
of Christ. They must needs be fools that do not follow the directions of
Wisdom.

You my beloved brethren are now in the house of Wisdom, and you are invited
to VVisedomes Feast: Come therefore, and eat of Wisdoms bread. Surely, this
is your Fathers house, and here is Bread enough: taste it, and you will be all
ready to John 6. 34.
say; Lord give us evermore of this Bread: Drink of the wine now which
wisdom has drawn for you, Psalm. 116. 13.
and say every soul of you within it self: I will now take the cup of
Salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord.

Come eat (my friends) drink, and make merry, Cantic. 5. 1.
and much good may it do your souls,

Amen, Amen.
The Cape of good HOPE.

Five Sermons for the use of the Merchant and Mariner. Preached to the
worshipful Company of the Brethren of the Trinitie-House: and now published
for the general Benefit of all Seamen. By SAMVEL PAGE, Doctor in Divinity.

LONDON Printed by Nicholas Oaks for Simon Waterson, dwelling in Paul's
Churchyard, at the sign of the Crown. 1616.

To the Honorable and Religious Knight, Sir THOMAS SMITH, Governor of the
East India Company, and to all the Honorable and worthy Adventurers in the
same Society.
THese Sermons, delivered in the hearing of our chiefest Mariners the Brethren
of the Trinity house, at their anniuersary meeting, which they religiously
observe, are especially addressed to the use of the Seamen. I have conceived
hope, that they whom they most concern, may make some good use of these
Meditations, even then, when they are far off from those many helps which our
Church at home affoordeth, both for Knowledge and Devotion. I have also made
choice to recommend them by especial direction, to you, the honorable
Governor, and worthy Adventurers of that Society, which sends forth the
Seaman furthest from home, to the remotest parts of the known world,
beseeching you to admit of this mine adventure amongst yours, with which you
shall ever have my earnest prayers to God, for the prosperous success of your
commerce and navigations. For this I rest Gods petitioner for you all, humbly
acknowledging my thankful duty to you, by whose unexpected and undeserved
hounty, my Labors and Studies have been comforted and encouraged.

S. P.

THE Cape of good Hope.
The first Sermon.
DEVT. chap. 33. verse. 18. 19. Verse 18. And of Zebulun he said: Rejoice
Zebulun in thy going out, and thou Issachar in thy Tents.

Verse 19. They shall call the people to the Mountain: there they shall offer
the Sacrifices of righteousness: for they shall suck of the abundance of the
Sea, and of the Treasures hid in the Sand.


I May with a little restraint of the words of the first verse of this Chapter,
give you the contents and sum of my Text in a few words: Now this is the
blessing, wherewith Moses the man of God blessed the two Tribes of Zebulun, and
Issachar before his death, and said; Rejoice, O Zebulun, etc. The better
welcome, may I hope to this Discourse, because the Argument of it is a
Blessing, and he that breathed it was acceptable with God, even Moses, though a
man, yet noted with that honourablest of all Appellations, a man of God. The
meekest man, and the faithfullest in the house of God, that lived in his times
upon the earth. And it is his dying farewell, prophetical, and patheticall.
For it is the happy evidence of his wisdom in foreseeing, and of his charity
in wishing all this good to the twelve Tribes, and to their posterity.

Concerning Zebulun, whose blessing I have chosen for my Text, as best
befitting this present hearing, and the occasion of this holy meeting; it
consists of two parts.

1 A well-wishing to that Tribe. 2 A Prophecy concerning that Tribe, which
Prophecy does contain a double prediction. 1 One is, of the service that they
shall do to God. 2 The other is, of the mercies which they shall receive from
God.

1 Of the well-wishing of Moses.
Rejoice O Zebulun in thy going out. Zebulun was to help his estate by voyages
at Sea, he was the Merchant-Aduenturer, and the Seaman; of his Tribe were the
best Mariners, the greatest Travelers. Moses by a Spirit of Prophecy did
foresee this, and remembering also what old Israel had prophesied of this
Son, and his posterity. Zebulun shall dwell by the Seaside, he shall be an
Haven for Ships: he does wish this Tribe good success, and joy in their goings
out, that is, in their voyages by Sea.

In which we are taught these things:

1 That God has long before, not only determined of us, but of all our
courses of life, and vocations, and means of living: for Moses did read this
future estate of this Tribe, in the Book of Gods providence, opened and
revealed unto him, by the mighty God of Iaacob. Therefore, let us make this
double use hereof.

1 That no man ascribe it to fortune, or chance, that one man is a Scholar,
another a Soldier, a third a Seaman, a fourth Mechanical; and that some by
one, others by other means raise, and advance their estates. For this is the
direction and ordination of divine Providence.

2 That no man repine at his lot, in what ground soever it has fallen, but let
him with all thankfulness to God, endeavor himself diligently in the
calling, whereunto God has called him, to pursue both his own particular
good, and the good of the state, in which he lives.

Secondly, we are taught, that this is a lawful, and honest vocation, to
travel upon the great waters, and to practice and exercise Navigations: for
otherwise, this man of God Moses, would not have wished them good prosperity
in it. Yet it falls out, that even this course of living also (as all other
the most honest vocations that are in use on the earth) is often abused; yea it
is thought somewhat more then the rest. The ancient Fathers do observe, that
our Savior Christ did express himself to this Sea-tribe, more then to any of
the rest: For he was conceived at Nazareth, a city in the Portion of Zebulun,
and in this city he was brought up: he began to preach first here: and
Mount Thabor, upon which he was transfigured, was in the Tribe of Zebulun
also. The reason which they give, is this, because he thought, that Tribe did
most need this extraordinary direction of his doctrine, and example, of any
of the rest. Indeed those places that do confine upon the Sea, and are Havens
for ships, partly, in respect of the continual dangers that they do behold,
and the grecuous losses of men and goods, which happen in sight and hearsay,
have their hearts more hardened then others: partly, in respect of the ready
passage to convey away such as have deserved evil, and are pursued by the
Sword of Justice, and so by impunity are encouraged to offend, partly by the
entertainment of such as come thither with the spoil of their Piracies, and
Sea-robberies, which commonly are as wastefully rioted at Sea-towns, as they
are desperately, and with hazard gotten upon the Seas, and partly by the
importation of strange and corrupt manners brought out of other countries,
which Apish imitation can scarce forbear to entertain and affect: surely, by
some, or all these means, such places are so corrupt, that they needed all
this mercy of the Son of God. Therefore these abuses in your calling, you
that are grave experienced men, and that have eminent place of charge, and
authority in these affairs, may do God good service, to make a conscience of
admonishing those, that are under your command, of all these things: and here
in let Almighty God give you both to will and to perform that, by which his
blessed name may be glorified, both aboard, and ashoare.

Thirdly, we are taught by the holy, and charitable example of Moses the man
of God, to wish Zebulun good speed in his Voyages, and surely the prayers and
well-wishings of Gods servants, and the breath of charitable benediction, is an
happy gale for all that go to Sea. In us it is charity; for they are our
Brother-tribe, bone of our bone, and flesh of our flesh. The Church, and the
Commonwealth do both bear a great Adventure in every vessel, that goes to
Sea, and therefore the Church does teach us to pray For all that travel by
land, or by water. The rather let us wish them all good, because Sea-losses are
losses without recovery commonly, that malice it self (me thinks) should not
be so malicious, to wish that to perish, by whose loss no advantage comes to
him that suruiueth. Again, these Adventurers deserve our charity, more then
others, because they seek their own poor means of bettering their petty
estates, in the general advancement of the state, in which they are subjected:
for what is the particular man's gain, in comparison of that good, which the
Commonwealth recelueth by the service and employment of these men? Therefore
it shall be very worthy of our Christian charity, to say to Zebulun, Rejoice
O Zebulun in thy goings out.

And to Zebulun, that is, to the Seamen themselves; it is most necessary,
that they have the holy and devout prayers of the Servants of God; the pains,
the unrest, the wants, the dangers that they endure, are infinite, so that of
all men that live, none are more often, or more seriously admonished to prepare
themselves for death, then these men. I do not speak this, as though all were
so well with us ashoare, that here were no danger at all. For many do think,
that it is little better then a desperate aduenturing of ones self to go to
Sea: they fear the closeness of the Cabbins, the infectious air of the
ship, the danger of drowning, they see no necessity to enforce this hazard.
To such I say, and I speak with grief of heart, to see the judgments of God
upon our Land, even in the compass of a few years. For, did not our last
great plague teach us, that the open air of the Country, breathed no more
health in her Inhabitants, then the close Cabbins in a ship, or the thick*
set houses in our greatest City? Did not the great floudes in diverse parts
of our Land show them, that dare not go to Sea, for fear of drowning, how God
can bring home the Sea to our houses* and drown us in our beds? Did not the
great Frost, which paued our waters, as the streets of our great City, teach
us, that God can as well punish us with too little water, as too much. And did
not the great dearth succeeding, in which we felt the hardness of men's
hearts, not yet thawed, but keeping in provision of corn, till the poor bring
forth their curses upon them, which God in Heaven hears and ratifieth? Does
not this teach us, that our Land, as plentiful as it is, and though it seem
surcharged with store, that it sends much away, yet it may need the help of
other Countries, to supply her wants, and to put bread in the mouths of her
children. To this purpose, let Zebulun weigh Anchore, and set-Saile; and God
give him joy in his going out, and his return.

Rejoice, O Zebulun, in thy goings out. It is a lamentable thing, that any
should be found in a Christian Commonwealth void of this charitable
well-wishing to Trauailers, rather desiring that they might perish in their
journey, and never return in peace to their own places of habitation. To
discourage any such uncharitable heart, let me give you an example, even a
fearful president of Gods displeasure expressed on two men, two Christians,
two Divines, two Preachers, two Bishops, they were in their times, Socr. eccl.
did. 6. 13.
great, clear and worthy Lights in the Church of God: the one was Epiphanius
Bishop of Constance the Metropolitan city of Cyprus. The other was John
Chrysostom Bishop of Constantinople, who being at great ods, by reason of some
difference in opinion; Epiphanius did sail from Cyprus, to Constantinople, to
speak with Chrysostom, and no accord being made there between them, rather
their emulation and wrath mutually increasing, they parted, with this
uncharitable exchange of most unchristian imprecation. Epiphanius said to John
Chrysostom, I hope thou shall not die a Bishop: Chrysostom said to
Epiphanius; I hope thou shall not return alive into thine own country. The
Lord that dwells in heaven brought these two judgments upon them both; for
Epiphanius dyed aboard the ship home-ward bound: and John Chrysostom was
deprived of his Bishopric, and died in exile.

Far be this uncharitableness, and the success of it from the children of
God, from all professed Christians, and in stead hereof, let Moses the man of
God teach us, to wish Zebulun good passage, good success, good return in his
voyages. And now the rather, because I have Anno 1609
not heard of any time, in our memory, which has showed to us more heavy and
sorrowful losses, then have happened of late. The Lord bless Zebulun in his
voyages, the Lord bless his going out, and his return, the Lord hear him in
the day of his trouble, and the God of Iaacob mightily defend him.

2 The Prophetical part of my Text, first does foretell what service this
Tribe shall perform to God: and that has two parts of holy duty.

1 Concerning themselves in their own particular duty to God: for they shall
be religious, and shall go to the mountain: that is* to Jerusalem, and Sion,
and the holy Temple to worship there, though they do dwell a good distance
remote from it.

2 Concerning others, They shall call the people to the Mountain, and draw
others, not only of their own brethren, but of strangers also, to the same
service* for their own affection in matters of religion. There must be a
ground of Religion, and a love of religion, and a practice of religion in
themselves, before they can win others: and the often threatening of their
life, has a notable force, and strength this way. For there is nothing does
more abette sin, then hope of long life. Nothing makth a man more truly
religious, then expectation of death; and therefore men of wise and settled
judgment, do use before they go to Sea, to set their houses in order, to
dispose of their estate, by their Will and Testament, to make even with God
and the world, not because they must, but because they may die, they may die
all together, and not one remain, as in the losses, and land-wrecks of blessed
Job, to bring word, and to tell the heavy tidings of their loss: and who can
tell how Death found them? whether provided for it, or asleep? or drinking
drunk? or swearing and cursing, and blaspheming the name of God? or any
otherwise offending: so carrying them presently away to their judgment and
answer for all these things.

O happy is their preparation then, to whom no death can be sudden,
whenever it comes. And to this purpose it is most requisite, that Zebulun
be well grounded in his Religion; because when he is at the Sea, he is
divided from the Mountain of the Lord, from the holy Temple, and the
Congregation, and the assembly of them which meet together, to hear the
holy word of Almighty God: they that are thus removed from the ministry of
the word of God, had need to consider, how they are now left to the exercise
and practice of that, which they have learned already, and unto the continual
reading, and meditation of the holy word of God.

To this purpose it is a godly, and religious use that you have aboard, to
pray to God morning and evening, with an united heart, and to sing holy
Psalms, to praise the GOD of your help and trust, with a loud and cheerful
voice, and privately, to bestow hours of leisure upon the reading of such good
Books, as may stir up your zealous and religious hearts to a serious worship
and service of your God. And blessed be the God which teaches us, we have
helps in this kind for our understanding, and for our comfort in so great
plenty, that we cannot be without great and just blame, if we leave this
duty to God undone. But it suffices not, that Zebulun be zealous himself, he
must do good with his zeal, and by all good means endeavor to win others to
the knowledge, and love, and obedient service of his God. That does Moses also
foretell.

They shall call the people to the Mountain. That is, they shall call sheep
to the fold, or to the green Pastures, and sweet rivers of waters: and this
fruitful piety in them, shall show strangers, the way to the house of the
Lord, and shall tell them what things he has done for the people that he
has chosen to be his inheritance.

This were an happy benefit to our Church, and a great honor to our Tribe of
Zebulun, if our Masters and Mariners were so expert in the managing of the
holy word of God, that they could win others of foreign Countries to the
love of our Religion, and the forsaking of their own superstition. This would
be joy to both the Ierusalems, the Church of God on earth, and the
Congregation of Angels and Saints above. But it is much to be lamented, that
our Sea-voiages, and the trauells of our Protestant gentlemen and others to
foreign parts, does rather loose us many, to the two great agents for Satan's
kingdom of darkness, the Turk, and the Pope, then gain us any from them; and
that our me^ could but return home with the same Religion that they carry out
with them, and that they would not buy the profits, and pleasures of foreign
Countries, with the loss of their Religion, and the pollution of their
consciences, and the shipwrecke of their faith.

When Epiphanius Bishop of Constance was to part from Costantinople, where he
misliked many things, and that some of the City brought him to his ship, he
took his leave of them in these words, Relinquo vobis hanc vrbem, hanc regiam,
hanc hypocrisin: Ego autem me hinc mature expedio, valete. I leave you this
your City, this your Court, and this your hypocrisy, and I make all the haste
I can to be gone away from you, fare you well. So let all true English
christian and religious hearts, take leave especially of our Popish
adversaries: we leave you your great City of Rome, the seat of Antichrist
your holy Father, the usurper of Gods right, your ignorant devotion, your
blind guides, your idle and superstitious ceremonies, your dissembling with
God, and your deceiving of men, and we hasten from you with all speed we can
make: Fare you well.

This would become our protestation of faith well, and there is need of all
the caution that we can devise, to arm our travelers against the entising and
bewitching persuasions, and tiring importunities of the Church of Rome; for
look upon the show, and Religion looks more like devotion amongst them then
amongst us, any man that comes into their Towns, shall presently see a face
of Religion, and shall find that the laws of their Church, do not creep
fearfully the laws of their Church, do not creep fearfully upon the
ground, amongst the common people only, but they are bridles for Princes, and
the greatest States. They shall see that their grandes scorn not to forsake
their horses, and their coaches, to kneel down in the streets and
highways, in all weathers, to worship their sacrament, as it is Theatrically
carried up and down, whilst all the many that are within the sight of it,
are upon their knees, beating their breasts, and casting up their eyes to
Heaven, muttering of some of their blind devotions in a tongue that they
understand not. He shall see them fasting in good earnest, even to the
weakening of their bodies, their hands full of alms, and their severe
discipline drawing out of their own backs, with most cruel selfe-whippings,
and many undertaking long Pilgrimages, in which they sustain exceeding great
pains, and many wants. And they want not learned, and eloquent faire-spoken
Jesuits, and Friars, that can set forth all this, to the uttermost, to
persuade strangers to come unto them. But amongst us, it is too much contrary,
it is hard for a stranger to find out, whether we have any religion, or not:
for it is not easily discerned by our conversation. For, do we not live, as
if Bacchus were our God, in drunkenness and sensual superfluity? Do we not
swear and blaspheme, as if there were no God to be angry with it; or as if the
God whom we serve did delight in it, as a daily sacrifice? do we tremble at
any sin? or, do we labor to win any to righteousness? how has the prince of
darkness benighted us, that we can see lewd and ungodly men, take upon them
the fashions, and speeches, and behauiours of honesty, and religion, and
conscience to serve a turn; and we fear to appear like our selves indeed,
righteous and religious in show, as our heart is true to God. Perchance,
because men see Puritans so shaken up, and their teachers deprived, they are
afraid to make any show of religion, for fear of being taken for Puritanes. No
(beloved) let us never be ashamed of the gospel of Christ, though powers and
principalities oppose it: that ever will be, The power of God to salvation to
all that believe.

Take heed of appearing what you are not, and take heed of concealing what you
are. Si bonum If it be good to seem good, it is better to be so.
est bonum apparere, melius est bonum esse. And it is said of God, in him we
line, move, and have our being, not our seeming, and show of what is not, but
a realitie of existence. Satan is all for the out side, and no more.

I beseech you that are the heads of our tribe of Zebulun, that you would be
careful of these things for your selves, and for your companies, of which you
do take charge; that wheresoever you come, you may be known to be Christians,
and to be Protestants, that it may be heard in the Psalms which you sing,
that it may be seen in the devotion that you use, that it may be testified by
all your carriage in bargainings, in your eating, and drinking, and universally
in your whole conversation, that you may shun the devil, and those false
Jesuits and Priests which have belyed our Land to the Adversary to be without
Churches, our people without a God, or any form of religion. And if any could
return home so fortunate, and successful in the cause of God, as to bring
home but one of them from his superstition, to the sincere worship of our God,
that one soul won from the servitude of Popish bondage, and reconciled to the
Church of God, were the best, and worthiest freight that ever your vessel
transported; and the Church of God should have very great cause to rejoice, and
clap their hands, saying, Truth is great and it prevails.

To this purpose let us bless Zebulun with the blessing of Moses the man of
God, and say, Rejoice O Zebulun, in thy going out, God of Heaven prosper thy
voyage, that in it thou may call the people of other Nations to the
Mountain of the Lord thy God.

But what shall Zebulun, and what shall the people that he brings along with
him do at the Temple and Mount of God? Surely they shall not come
empty-handed: For they shall offer the sacrifices of righteousness to the Lord
their God there.

And this is that which David requires in Psalm. 4. Offer to God the sacrifice
of righteousness, and call upon the name of the Lord. Religion in these times
of Moses, was very full of ceremony, and so it continued long at Jerusalem, by
direction from Almighty God, as may appear in the holy history of Exodus,
Leuiticus, and Deuteronomie, etc.

These Sacrifices are called Sacrificia iustitiae, because they were Sacrificia
iusta, that is, due Sacrifices. For, seeing God required them, they that
offered them, merited nothing by them at the bands of God; they did but give
God his due, it was but the payment of a debt to him: or, they were called
Sacrificia iustitiae, Sacrifices of righteousness, in respect of Gods eye upon
them, which was not upon the Sacrifices so much, as upon the righteousness of
the offerer of them to him. For God does not respect quantum, but, ex quanto,
not how much is in the hand, but how much is in the heart; not what is given,
but with what zeal of Gods glory, with what holy affection: or they are
called Sacrifices of Righteousness, because all Sacrifices were types and
representations of that true, and absolute propitiatory Sacrifice, which was
once offered for all, even JESUS CHRIST our righteousness. For in them he was
offered.

But now to sort this Doctrine, and to persuade this duty to those times, in
which old things are passed away, and all things are become new, let us learn
our duty herein of the holy Apostle Saint Peter 1. Pet. 2. where he says,
Ye are made an holy Priesthood, to offer up spiritual Sacrifices acceptable
to God by Jesus Christ: And of all the Sacrifices that in the old Law were
offered to God, let the Holocaust, or Burnt-offering be our example, for that
resembles our holy and true mortification: for therein all was consumed to
ashes, and nothing thereof was left. So says Saint Gregory Sunt quidam qui
nihil sibi reseruantes, totum Deo immolant. Again, Omne quod habent, omne quod
viuunt, omne quod sapiunt, Deo offerunt. There be some that offer all to God
without reservation, all that they have, whatsoever, is in their life, or in
their knowledge. Of such a man he says, Ipse qui sacrificat immolatur. He
that sacrifices, is the Sacrifice. This kind of immolation pleases Almighty
God best, this resembles the Sacrifice of JESUS CHRIST, who was Sacerdos and
victima, for he offered up to the Father, himself, the price of our redemption.
This is the Doctrine of Saint Paul; I beseech you Brethren, that you offer up
your bodies a lively Sacrifice unto God, etc.

To this purpose is this your holy meeting in the house of God once by the
year, that you may recount the manifold, and gracious mercies of God
vouchsafed to you in your voyages, in the protection of your persons, and of
your goods, in deliverance of you from perils of the Sea, from perils of the
Winds, from perils of Rocks, and Sands, from perils of professed enemies,
and of false brethren. And for that he has blessed you with the blessings of
the earth, both native and foreign, with the blessings of the Sea, and of the
great Deepes. And that you may for this offer unto God sacrifices of
righteousness and pay your vows to the most High, even your sacrifices of
praise and thanksgiving. I will conclude this point with the holy
benediction of the Prophet David, which I pray God to give to the whole Tribe
of our English Zebulun, both at home and abroad.

The Lord hear you in the day of your trouble, the name of the God of Iaacob
defend you.

Send you help from his Sanctuary, and strengthen you out of Sion.

Let him remember all your offerings, even your offerings of righteousness,
and turn your burnt-offerings into Ashes.

And grant you according to your heart, and fulfill all your purpose.

That you may rejoice in your salvation, and set up the banner in the name of
your God, when he shall perform all your petitions.

Concerning the second part of the Prophecy which promises mercies to the
Tribe of Zebulun: we see how blessed is the man that fears the Lord, and
walks in his ways: For he shall eat the labor of his hands; his labors
at home and abroad, ashoare and aboard, wheresoever he labors: thus David
puts the service of God, and the mercies of God together. First, Let the
people praise thee (O God) let all the people praise thee. And Then shall the
earth bring forth her increase, and God even our God shall bless us. Such is
the consequence of my Text. Zebulun shall offer to God sacrifices of
righteousness, and then shall the Sea bring forth her increase: for they shall
suck of the abundance of the Sea, and of the Treasure hidden in the Sand.

But I will reserve the handling of this Point, until it please Almighty God,
we meet upon this like occasion: till then, The grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, etc.

Laus Deo.
Zebuluns Blessing: the second Part.
To the same Audience, June the twelfth, being their Election day, as before.
Anno 1609.
DEVTER. 33. 19. For they shall suck of the abundance of the Sea, and of the
Treasure hid in the Sand.
THE second Part of Moses his prediction to this Tribe, is in these words, and
they are a good encouragement to them that adventure by Sea: for it assures us
of the lawfulness of that vocation, seeing God blesses it. There be many on
earth, that strive and struggle to increase their means, and to make
themselves an estate, who because they work not in a lawful calling, fail of
the blessing of God upon their labors, their treasures are hid in bottomless
bags. Therefore let Zebulun go forth and prosper: God does bless him, and
Moses ministerially pronounces it, saying, They shall suck the abundance of
the Seas, and of the treasures hid in the Sands.

In the meditation of which blessing let us consider these three things.

1 That God has filled the Seas with abundance: 2 That God has hid treasures
in the Sands: 3 That both these shall be Zebuluns blessing.
The first.
In the first creation of the world God made the waters, and he called the
gathering of them together, Seas; and God saw that it was good: Genesis 1. 10.
And God, not loving a barren good, added this blessing; Let the waters bring
forth in abundance every creeping thing that has life, Genesis 1. 20. Then
God created the great whales.

David says, There is Leuiathan, who takes his Job 41. 24.
pastime therein. Job says of him, In earth there is none like him, his iaws
are like to doors, his scales to shields, and the Sea is said to boil like a
pot about him. For the use of this abundance of the Sea, Moses shows, that
God appointed man to be Verse 26.
the Lord over it: Let us make man, and let him rule over the fish of the Sea.
Yea those great whales (by virtue of this dominion) are subject unto man, and
he makes them his prey.

This abundance of the Sea was created for the use of man. It has been an
ancient practice in the Church to diet her children, appoynting some days for
eating of fish, and forbidding the use of flesh in those days.

The reasons hereof in medicine, I am more ready to learn, then to teach. But
because Gods works are seen on the Seas, and his wonders in the deep waters,
and that our Seafish does come with more adventure of the fisherman, and with
more seen providence of God, when men fish for an unseen prey: therefore even
this diet advises us, to value the creature more, and to honor the bountiful
giver thereof unto us. For Abraham's servant to fetch in a Calfe from the
stalles. Iaacob to bring a Kid from the fold; Esau some venison from the field:
this does not so much express how God fills us with plenteousnesse, as does
the unseen prey, which the fisherman brings from Sea: therefore they may
say with Iaacob most fitly and properly, Genesis 27. 20. Because the Lord my
God brought it to my hand. Thus our meat may make us meditate on the good
providence of God. So, whether we eat or drink, or whatsoever we do else,
we shall take continual occasion to glorify our God.

Some have made question, which is richest, the Land, or the Sea? we read of a
blessing of abundance given to the great waters, God does all abundantly; but
this sea-aduenture is known to us but generally, and but little of it (in
comparison) is yet discovered to men, the abundance of the earth is much more
in sight. All Scriptures do testify that God is plenteous* abundant in
goodness and in truth: he fills the hungry with good things. He fills
every living thing with plenteousnesse: he gave Manna to Israel, till they
cried out upon it, they were weary of that light meat, and he gave them
flesh till it came out again at their nosthrills.

It is noted in the Son of this God, living on earth, that in the miracles
which he wrought, he did work more abundantly in the quantity, and in
quality made all things very good. No better wine could be, then that at the
Marriage in Cana of Galile, and he caused the measures to be filled up to the
brimme.

He turned the five Loaves, and two Fishes; at another time, the seven Loaves,
and a few little Fishes into so plentiful a provision, that multitudes were
sufficed, and great remains of the broken meat left, even more then the first
proportion, when they sat down to eat.

And not on earth only did he perform this plenty, but to show his power,
even in the great waters, he coming to some of his Disciples when they were
fishing, commanded Peter to cast his net into the Sea, and Peter doing it upon
his word, contrary to the rules of fishing: there yet was so great a draught of
fish, that the nets brake with the weight thereof. Thus has God sown the
great and boisterous element of waters, with the spawne of all sorts of fish,
and crowned the deepes with abundance.

Besides this blessing of the seas, God has made the great waters pervious to
our vessels, and has taught us to find paths in those deserts of waters, to
stranger shoares, so leading us to a new abundance, by commerce and importation
of commodities useful for the necessities of men.

This tribe of Zebulun is the Merchant and Mariner, his goods and life are
adventured to fetch in this foreign abundance, these transplant the plenty of
other Nations into their own Land, and bring home abundance.

Who can discern that our Land does want the two rich commodities of Wine and
Oil, and the fruits of neighbour-nations.

Great is the distance of those Indies, which furnish us with Spices of all
sorts, yet our ships semicircle the world, going and returning rich fraights
of those commodities: all this is the Abundance of the Seas.

And we inhabiting these Countries of Great Britain and Ireland, being
Ilanders, and lying in the Sea, as Tyrus sometimes did, do much depend upon the
Seas, for our store of many necessaries. This moat which the hand of God has
dug about our Lands, this girdle of great waters, wherewith he has
surrounded us, does bring us also abundance of strength, that we may say of
our God, he husbandeth and tilleth the Seas for our use, for our profit, for
our pleasure, and for our defense, And I hope there is none amongst us, so
unthankful, but he will confess, that as the wisdom and power of the
Almighty: even so, the gracious providence of God, is, That Spirit which
moves upon our waters: so great is the extent of man's domination, not limited
on the dry ground, but spread on the deeps.

They who take use of these benefits of God, and taste of the abundance of the
Sea, must either adventure their persons, or their goods, to fetch in this
plenty there will be expected from them, very great industry. This earth on
which we live without culture, and much pains of the Husbandman, yields
nothing but the curse of weeds, and great is his travel that diggeth or
ploweth up the furrows thereof.

The Seaman tastes of the abundance of the Sea, but he earneth it with much
loss of his rest, with many fearful conflicts with wind and water, and
oftentimes, with the present horror even of visible death.

So neither Land nor Sea feeds the idle, both of them say nay to such, as
would eat, and would not work.

Yet there is a work, and travel to fetch in by Sea transmarine abundance,
and this is much in use now: it is by Sea-theeuing and piracie, illis robur and
aes triplex: Surely their hearts are more hard then Adamant, who traveling in
the continual fight of death, and hell. David says of their Sea-tosses up to
heaven, and down to hell; the Sea opening upon them like a grave, and their
ships seeming to them but Coffins, in which they go down quick into the
deepes: who having in continual sight, not the ordinary works of God, but his
wonders: and seeing the right hand of God armed against them, yet do not fear
to dare the Almighty with their professed rebellions, both against God, who has
given a contrary law, and against their neighbors, whose lives and goods, thou
ought, by the law of true charity to tender, and preserve to the benefit of
their brethren, as carefully, as their own to their proper use: and against
the merciful loan of the creatures, the Sea, and winds, and shipping lent to
us by our Maker, to make us more able to do him service, and to be more
comfortable one to another. These gather in the abundance of the Seas, and
ingrosse the gatherings of their brethren, bought with the dear hazard of their
lives, and with many sorrowful sufferings.

Let me deliver my opinion and thoughts concerning these men, as I hold no life
on earth that has liberty, so full of gall, as is the Sea man's, nor any goods
more dearly bought then what he fetches from far: so I hold no theft so
mischievous, as to rob him, to strip him out of the fruits of his great
labors, to take his victuals from him, and to spoil him of his munition: it
is all life blood, that is so taken away, and no robber can deserve more
severity of justice, then the pirate does. In this woorld I may safely, and I
justly do wish it; Let there be judgment without mercy to him that shows no
mercy. Therefore let Almighty God and man punish such in this world, that God
may save their souls in the world to come.

The second.
1 Hidden. In the next place we considered, that God has buried treasures in
the Sands: And no doubt but Sea and Land have yet a plentiful store of riches
undiscovered to man: Some may ask, were not all these things created for the
use of man? how is it then that man has them not?

To this our answer is, that God is not pleased to let us have all those things
in sight, both out out of his justice, and out of his wisdom.

For the justice of God herein we may behold the strength of Adams curse upon
his posterity: Thou shall eat thy bread in the sweat of thy face: God will
put man to the pain, to seek out for this treasure: he loves not that man
should eat the bread of idleness; labor may be called Sacramentum
maledictionis humanae, even the sacramental sign of man's curse; it puts us
in mind of our sin, and still calls upon us to take heed, lest some worse
thing fall out against us.

Man (says the Prophet) goes forth to work, and to his labor til the
evening: the Seaman does hold it out often from morning to morning, he cannot
call the night his sleeping time, but in the worst of weather, when all ashoare
hide themselves from the fury of a storm, he must bear the violence and
rage thereof, in the darkest night he must say to his eyes, close not, and to
the remples of his head, take you no rest.

Thus has the justice of God set man aworke, hiding these treasures out of
sight, to put us to pains to find them: and how many be there of our
brethren, who have put their lives and their little All, that they have, into
one adventure, in one Bottom, casting all upon the providence of God, to
travel his paths in the Seas, and to search foreign Sands for these hidden
treasures.

O that we were wise to understand this! and to behold the riches of the mercy
and love of God to us; he has hid our temporal treasures, but has opened to
us our spiritual riches, the treasures of grace are not kept under lock and
key, the light of his countenance is not hid under a bushel: He spoke the
word, and there were multitudes of Preachers: he has given us his word, verbum
faciens, in our creation, a making word, verbum loquens, in the mouth of all
his Prophets, which have been since the world began, a speaking word: verbum
factum a word made for us, even his Son, Jesus Christ manifested in the flesh:
verbum scriptu^, a word written for us, which he has left to his church.
Neither is Deuteronomy. 30. 13.
it beyond the seas, that we should say, who shall go over the Sea for us, and
bring it to us, and cause us to hear it, that we may do it. But the Word is
very near 14,
unto thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart to do it.

And Christ bids, Search the Scriptures, for in the^ John 5.
you think to have eternal life. The word that is near to us let us search,
the most fear we have, is, of the word brought from far, and of religion
that is imported in strangers Bottoms.

Thus God that opens his hand in spiritual graces, inhearteth it in temporal,
so that these are hidden and our industry exacted to seek them out: yet a
promise is annexed: Seek and ye shall find: Yea a caution is prefixed, Seek
first the kingdom of God.

God is a great hider, for even in spiritual favors, our faith beholds many
things unseen: and we see in Anigmate, in a dark saying* and we know but in
part. There is a great measure of loving kindness, which God has laid up for
them that fear him, beside that which he has done before the sons of men.
But where are the treasures here mentioned?

2 Hid in the Sand.
This concealment, hiding riches in Sand, is;

1 Paruum in magno: A little hidden in a great deal, the Sands are infinite,
great treasures are hardly found: if hidden in them, this requires a great
search and industry. The vein and rich thread of gold in the earth is but
little, yet it discourageth not men, for it to dig deep, and to remove
great quantities of earth, to discover it, and to bring it forth.

But indeed such are all the comforts of life: Dij omnia vendunt laboribus:
God sells men his treasures for their labors.

2 It is Pretiosum in vili, in vile sands are hidden precious treasures; and it
teaches how these riches of the world are to be valued, their Maker thinks
the sands treasuries good enough for them. Whereas foolish man ouerweeneth them
so much, as to think Cor Cordis, the in most chamber of his heart a place,
scarce good enough, to lay up the love of these things: o that we would take
notice where our God disposes of these things, Dust in dust.

3 It is Incertum diuitiarum; these be discovered to be uncertain riches: o
trust not in uncertain riches, you are unsure to find the^, they be hid, the
foundation of them is sands, and sands by the sea, subject to the wash and
remove of the waterbreach, he builds on sands that trusts them.

4 It is Fructus in sterili, Fruit in a barren soil: For of the sand it is
said, Pluuium recipi, and fructum non facit: yet here has God hidden treasure
for us, so graciously turning all to our use, and benefit: Only man is a
barren soil, he brings forth no fruit; and worse then these sands, for he
has no treasure hidden in his nature.

Only some rich men are like these sands, that hide and heap up much
treasure, yet neither bring forth any fruit, nor show it; except the wash of
the sea, some troubles of life, discover it.

Let the good servants of God take comfort of this; that God is so rich in his
mercies, and has so enabled all creatures to the service of man, that the
barren sands of the sea shall be their storehouses, of rich treasures, to
retain their wants.

3 Moses blesses Zebulun with these things: In which observe: first, that no
Tribe nor people do better deserve to have hidden treasures revealed to them
then the Mariners. Reuben is safe in the noise of the bleating of his Lambs.
Issachar takes his rest in his tents. These men deprive themselves of the ease,
and plenty, and pleasure of the earth, and endure all weathers: yet for all this
Moses does wish these treasures to the^ as Gods blessings, and not as the
deseruings of their pains. They deserve of them that set them aworke, but not
of God, and therefore let them esteem the fruits of their labors, the free
favors, and blessings of the Almighty: that this consideration may both make
them more thankful, for the receipt, and less wastefull in the expense of
these gettings: For is it not pity, that Gods good treasures should be
profusely squandered, which he had so carefully hidden. And that is to turn
the good blessing of God into a curse.

2. Note in the Phrase here used: They shall suck: The tenderness of God to
his servants, of whom David says, As a father has pity on his children, so
shall the Lord have compassion on all them that fear him.

Here he puts out his children to nurse, to the Sea, and this is a
boisterous and rough nurse, but her milk is abundance: to the Sands, and this
seems a dry and barren nurse, but her milk is Treasures. Thus are we all in
this life like children at the breast, to be fed, and it is the gracious
goodness of God to us, that when we beg of him nothing but panem
quotidianum: Daily bread, he gives us abundance, and enricheth us with
treasures.

This is the reward (my Brethren) of your Labors, in your lawful vocation:
let the Giver of every good and perfect gift be pleased to freight you with
this abundance, and with these Treasures.

But do not you withhold Gods Custom from him, the humble and devout
thankes-giuings of your hearts, and voices, the calves of your lips to his
praise: so shall you, by his favor, make many rich returns, and God shall
give unto you the Blessing of peace.

Laus Deo.
Zebuluns Blessing: The third Sermon.
PSALM. 37. 5. Commit thy way to the Lord, and trust in him, and he shall bring
it to pass.
THESE words lead us into four especial Considerations, fit for the
occasion of this meeting:

1 That the Sons of men have their ways, that is, their vocation, wherein
they must walk [ Thy way.] 2 That true Christians, even all the faithful
Servants of God, in these their ways, cast their care upon God, using the
means, but depending upon God for the success: [ Commit to the Lord.] 3 That
they do this merely out of faith, and trust in God, not out of presumption,
or idleness [ and trust in him.] 4 That this is done with good success, and
most happy reward of faith: For [ he shall bring it to pass.]
Of the first, that is, The ways of men.
Almighty God that gave a being to the sons of men, and wrote in the hearts
of men, a Law of Nature, did not suffer his reasonable part to be so much
decayed in the ruins of our first Parents, but that men, so soon as they grew
up to the understanding of themselves, began to bethink themselves of, and
shortly to apply themselves to means of promising likeliehoode to give them
maintenance.

God gave this light first, who turned Adam out of Paradise, to till the earth,
and sold the sons of men, the fruits of the earth for the sweat of their
brows.

This made Adams sons, and childrens children fall to work, Iubal in Tents,
Iubal in Music, Tubalcain in Brass and Iron.

Thus was the world kept in breath, thus were wants supplied, and thus were
many excellent things devised daily.

All these be the ways of man, the several employments in this life: Issachar
for Burdens, Zebulun an Haven for Ships: some travailing upon the Land, some
upon the great Waters. In all these we behold;

1. That God who makes us, leaves us not so, but being created, he takes
care to dispose of us also in the world: we do not come under the tree of
Fortune, (as it pleases the Painter to set it forth) to take such choice as
befalls us, but God propounds unto us our course of life, and frames our
likings to it, so that we give it the name of Vocation, because God calls us
unto it.

This is given us in precept; Let every man abide in that calling wherein he
was called.: Cor. 7. 20. And there is a gracious promise; He shall give his
Angels charge over thee, to keep thee [in all thy ways.] This the Devil
skipt in the quotation of this Scripture, when he tempted our Lord, that it
might give us hope, even when we are out of our ways, and do things without
the warrant of a lawful calling. If you be in any evil way, assure your
selves, that you are out of your way; for ye are not called by God to
uncleanness, but to holiness, 1. Thessal. 4. 7. Therefore, whosoever live
here by unlawful means, unjustifiable by the word of God, are all out of
their way; and the faster they go, the further they flee from grace and glory.

2. We may infer properly, that if God dispose men in all lawful callings,
he does enable so many as he does dispose with understanding, judgment, and
discretion in some suitable measure, to the business of that calling. For
ways do imply walking: So he fills Bezaleel, and Ahaliab with his Spirit to
carue in wood, and brass, and for all curious needle-worke.

So that a natural indisposition to such a course of life, or a natural
unfitness in us, for it, is a great argument to discover our undertaking such a
trade or profession; for it is via: but not via tua: it is a good profession,
but not thy profession.

Surely, the Lord fails not them that do go aright: he makes their feet
like unto Hindes feet. He prepares their way, and enableth them in their
expedition, and facilitateth their journey.

3. This painful variety of industrious professions in the life of man,
serves to show us the reward of sin, for sin did put us to all this
pains, and need found out Sciences, and Arts: this differs much from the
pleasing exercise of Adam, in the state of Innocence, which was, to walk the
Garden of Eden, and to dress that.

For he could have found himself work in that Garden, in the experience of
many natural Conclusions, whereof he had the theorie and contemplation, in
the perfection of his Image, but now by sin expulsed thence, he was put into
a courser and homelier service. Thank sin for the travel of your whole life:
and when you groan under weary burdens, and feel the tedious length of
painful iournies, cry peccavi: for that has brought upon thee all this.

4 Let us thank our God, who has by these our callings, set us into a course:
first, of thrift, both to relieve our necessities, and to gather something for
posterity: secondly, of charity to supply the wants of our needy brethren,
whom God has cast upon our charity, and for whom we must labor: thirdly, of
policy, to support the Commonwealth, in which we live: For the Plough helps
to support the Crown, and all lawful vocations have as a particular and
private gain to the industrious agents themselves, so also a most profitable
resultance to the Commonwealth.

In which kind the Merchant and the Mariner have their special right done
them, to be esteemed men working bono publico, for the common good. They that
plow the sea for an harvest, and go to a people whose language they understand
not, to vent the ouer-plus of our plenty: and to import into these Dominions,
the rich exchange of foreign commodities: these give much content at home and
abroad, and divide the benefit of their labors amongst us, and our
neighbors: the fruits whereof are these two, Riches, and Peace.

5 Let the name of a way given to our calling, set us a going. Ways are not
for sitting or standing, or lying, for eating, or sleeping, but properly for
going: And let us walk in these ways, not as Fools, but as Wise, not in
surffeting and drunkenness: For that turns men into beasts: not in
wantonness, for that softneth the hard temper of validity, and melts
magnanimity* and high spirits into baseness: not in covetousness, for that
makes us Idolaters, to give our Gold the honor which is only due to him
that has made both it and us also:

Not in pride, for that robs us of our selves, and makes us our own
Idols: not in envy, for that makes us fall when others rise: not in
contention, for that armeth the right hand against the left, and teaches the
teeth to bite the tongue: not in idleness, for that is the rust of Virtue: not
in disobedience to Superiors, for that is Anarchie and confusion: not in
disobedience to God, for that is theomachy and rebellion: and if thou do fall
into any of these ways, thou art not in the way, wherein of right thou
ought to walk.

There was a rich young man and a Ruler, (for so the Evangelists do express
him) who fearing that he went not in the right way, came running with all
speed in his body, and with as much zeal in affection: and kneeling with
humility and reverence in outward gesture, demannded of JESUS CHRIST, Master,
what shall I do they I may inherit life everlasting?

Let him be our example, seeing we must needs walk, let us go to JESUS
CHRIST to enquire the way. I am the way (says he) and no man goes to the
Father but by me. They that make their own reason and understanding, or their
own appetite and will, the Bynosure or Pole Star, by which they stiere their
course, in this Mediterrane Sea of humane life. They that sound their deapth
with their own lead, their own leaden and misled judgment: they that fill
their sails with the gale of popular breath, and have no better Anchors then
earthly hopes, nor truer Compass then humane fore*cast, wonder not if they
founder in the Sea, or wrack in the haven where they think to sing Welcome
home.

6 The name of Ways here used, admonishes us, that we are far from home,
we are in via, traveling home-ward, let the hope of homecheere, the tedious
passages of our weary pilgrimage here on earth: and let the name of a way,
put us out of desire to build Tabernacles here, or to seek residence where
we have but our passage.

2 We must commit these ways to God.
Devolve te super Iehovam: Cast thy self upon God; it is as much as, Cast your
care upon God: it is a Precept much urged by our Savior, in his Sermon upon
the Mount, that we should not be too solicitous for the things belonging to
this life. Many arguments are there urged: Consider,

1 The power of God, who can provide for us. 2 The goodness of God, who will
do it. 3 The evil that we suffer in the rack, the distraction of mind. 4
The disabling of us in the service of God:
For these cares do not allow us time to serve God: and they be those thorns
that choke the good Seed in us. It was merrily spoken of the Cynicke
Philosopher, who being laid down to rest, and his purse by him, espied one who
thought him asleep, secretly reaching at it, to whom he said; Aufer vt vterque
securius dormiamus. Take it that we may both sleep the sounder. He found that
a little money troubled his rest, and brought him care, and therefore easily
parted with it: they that do know these things to be cares, stoop under them
as burdens, they that esteem them as rich treasures, stoop to them, and
adore them as idols.

Let thy ways be honest and lawful, and commit them to the Lord boldly: let
no man think, that God will bear him out in dishonest courses. And be thou
moderate in the way, for it aduauneeth the speed of thy journey. When Jacob
recommended his way to God, he made very few and moderate demands. If God
will be with me, and will keep me in this journey, which I go, and will
give me bread to eat, and clothes to put on, etc. Genesis the eighteenth
chapter and twentieth verse. Such a way we may boldly cast upon God, and he
will take charge of us.

Agur the son of Iakeh so desired to be limited by Almighty God: Give me not
poverty, nor riches, feed me with food convenient for me, Proverbs the
thirtieth chapter and the eighth verse: This he thought a safe way, between
the danger of Fulness, which is The denial of God: and the danger of
Necessity: which is, Taking of the name of God in vain.

To speak more particularly to you, whose goods, and whose persons, in the
eye of man, seem a great deal more endangered, being adventured on the Seas,
then theirs, who abide on firm land: to you I say; Commit your ways to the
Lord: his way is also in the Sea, and upon the great deep: and his providence
is not confined to the shore, in the many fearful appearances of danger and
death, in the hideous noise of the winds and waters, remember to cheer up
your selves as the Apostle does. But I know whom I have trusted, I have
committed my ways, and rested my hopes upon him that cares for me. To this
purpose, it is an holy wisdom in the Adventurers, to make good choice of the
Master, and Officers of the ships, that take charge: let them be such as
fear God, that for their sakes God will be favorable to the voyage, and bring
them to the Haven where they would be: and let God be earnestly solicited for
his blessing upon the voyage. For (as Moses says) so may you all say, at the
setting sail first, and at your first weighing of anchor: If thy presence go
not forth with us, carry us not hence, Exodus chapter thirty three and fifth
verse: So shall he bring you to the Haven where you would be.

3 This is done by faith in God: trust in him.
True faith is known by this note among many others, it trusts God only,
with the success of all our actions, but uses all the means that God affords
for the accomplishment of our ends. He that at Sea sits still, having charge of
a ship, and commands his company to rest, saying God shall be Master of the
Ship, and he shall bring it to the desired Port; shall never arrive.

David expresses Gods ready and gracious help, but it is when the Mariner
has done his best, and is now at his wits end, when all his Cunning is gone,
when the Saylors stagger like drunken men, then the Lord comes between them
and their danger, and makes the storm to cease: Teaching that where we have
used our whole endeavor, there we may safely cast our selves upon Divine
Providence.

An excellent example hereof Saint Luke relates in Paul's voyage, where the
danger was great, the ship laden, and the souls above 276, they had so sore a
tempest, that with their own hands they cast forth the very Tackling of the
ship, Neither Sun, nor Star, for many days appeared, and no small tempest
lay on them, all hope that they should be saved was taken away, then God, by
his Angel, promised to Paul by night, that he would give him all that sailed
with him: yet the same S. Paul did require, that they that could swim should
cast themselves into the sea, and eseape so: others, should lay hold on boords
and broken pieces of the ship; so trusting upon the promise of God that they
did neglect no means of safety.

That we may boldly trust to him in times of danger, it is required that we
seek him in fair weather, least he know us not in a storm: they that make
no conscience to offend God in their mirth, do loppe the tree which should
shade them from the Sunne-beames, and shelter them from a shower: they that
provoke God to anger, cut the bough they stand upon, and make themselves fall.
It is holy policy, to maintain friendship and love with our God, that in
the most grown Sea of tribulation, we may Commit our way to the Lord, and
trust in him.

Saint Paul thinks it the most reasonable service of God, for us to give up
our bodies to him a living sacrifice, to make a Present of our felues to God,
and we cannot loose by it.

It is recorded of Socrates, that whereas he received great rewards of his
Scholars, for his reading to them, Aeschines a poor Auditor of his having
nothing to give him, said; Quod vnum babeo, meipsum tibi dono, qui plus
dederunt, tibi reliquerunt plus. Having nothing else to give thee in reward, I
bestow my self upon thee; they that have given thee more, have left themselves
more: and he did this to his own great advantage: for Socrates took it so
kindly, that he answered him: Habebo curam, vt te tibi reddam meliorem quam
accepi. I will have a care to restore thee to thy self better then I received
thee. Our God requires, saying, My son, glue me thy heart. And Danid says,
Thou shall make me to understand wisdom in the secret in my heart: so gaining
by the giving of himself away to God.

But this is no sufficient trial of our trust in God, if we only trust to him
in respect of the good which we receive from him. Satan will inform against
us, that if Almighty God shall once punish us, Then we will curse God to his
face. Therefore the trial of our Faith and Trust, is in affliction and want,
when we are under the rod of God, when he smites, and yet we praise his
name, even when we smart, and when our fear comes.

This will be a good evidence for us, that it is not because we are idle, that
we do depend so confidently upon God. It was the false challenge of Israel by
King Pharaoh, That they desired to go and serve their God, because they were
idle; and therefore he put more work upon them. Certainly, the Elect trust in
the Lord, so as they neglect no duty by him enjoined, but do mingle Obedience
with their Faith: and although there be many things which we possess in this
world, which do serve for good use; for help, for delight, for necessity, all
of them ordained for our good; yet we find none of all these worthy to be
trusted; Trust not in Princes, nor in any son of man: Cease from man, whose
breath is in his nosthrils; for wherein is he to be esteemed?

Trust not in riches; If riches increase, set not thine heart upon them.

Trust in God only, he can add to thy stature, he is thy ancient
acquaintance, he knew thee in thy first shapelesse infirmity, he fashioned thee
in the womb, he has given thee breath and life to thy body, he has taken
account of every hair of thine head: he says, Put all thy tears in his
bottle: and only he can say to thy Soul, I am thy salvation.

Thus did David recomfort his disconsolate Soul, why art thou so disquieted
within me? trust in God: and such a trust it must be, as in this Psalm is
followed with good life: For David having first persuaded to trust in the Lord,
ver. 3. He exhorts to be doing of good, verse 4. He requires to delight in the
Lord: showing that true Faith has obedience to express it, and delight to
encourage it.

4. The success of this dependence: He shall bring it to pass.

He that sows, sows in hope of an Harvest, the righteous are promised to
eat, The fruit of their labors. How can he but prosper in his ways, who
makes his beginuing at him, who is the alpha, and beginning of all things? how
can the tree be unfruitful, which the right hand of God has planted, and set
by rivers of waters, to water it at the root, and refresh it with showers of
the early and latter rain? Learn then,

1 To acknowledge God the author of the success of all thy affairs, that thou
may entertain both prosperous and disastrous events, with equal
thanksgiving. The Lord gives, and the Lord takes away, in both Blessed be
the name of the Lord: take heed of Sacrificing to thine own net: or kissing
thy own hand: in which two phrases is expressed our thanking our selves, for the
success of our delights.

2 Learn to know how far thy care may stream it self, and where it must rest,
the industry in the use, as well as the wisdom in the choice, of lawful and
likely means; both these are Gods gifts to thee, and he requires of thee,
that thou employ them in thine affairs and businesses of life, but the issue
is the Lords; let not thy care disquiet thee for the event: take heed of that
compass wisdom which so belaieth events, as if God should not interpose a
Cross: this tastes much of selfe-confidence, and distrust in God. The
servants of God have ever found it safe, to cast their care upon God: it must
needs be a way of thrift: for God which holds nothing from them that be of
an upright heart. And the Apostle says, That Godliness is great riches. There
be few of us, but have experience sometimes, the Mariner more then the most,
that God does sometimes plunge us in such hopeless impossibilities, that our
best reason can find no evasion, the Mariners cunning fails him, and we are
lost in our bethinkings, yet he gives an issue, and all to make us acknowledge
that it was he that he brought it to pass.

To him be given all glory, of whom we beg all things necessary, and in him
be all our trust and confidence, from this time forth and for evermore, Amen.

Zebuluns Blessing: The fourth Sermon.
PSALM. 95. 5. The Sea is his, and he made it.
IN this Psalm, the faithful do provoke one another to praise the Lord: two
things are especially urged, to induce this duty: First, the greatness:
Second, the goodness of God: his greatness is 1 proclaimed v. 3. for the Lord is
a great God etc. 2 exemplified 1 on earth, 2 at Sea: in my Text, in which, 1 in
profundis, the deep places. 2 in sum. lati Sus, the highest mountain.


let us consider these three things;

1 Opus, the work done, the Sea. 2 Opificem, the Worke-maister, he made it. 3
Dominium, the sovereignty over it, it is his.
1 The work
Concerning the work done, the Sea, it is a work of that nature, that it has
in it, opera, and mirabilia, both Works and Wonders: for here is.

1 Miraculum in modo: a miracle in the manner of the operation. For as S.
Ambrose says: eodem modo producitur balaena, quo rana, non laborat Deus in
maximis, non fastidit in minimis: he makes the whale as easily as the frog, he
does not travel in the production of greatest creatures, nor scorn the
production, and creation of the least.

2 Miraculum in modo: a wondet in the knitting together of these two elements
of water, and earth in one sphaericall and round body.

There be four things which make the work of this creation of the Sea most
admirable.

1 Situs. The situation of the Sea, which God has so wonderfully divided from
the earth, that we may have a dry land to dwell upon, and yet so joined it to
the earth, that it is one Globe with it.

2 Motus. The ebbing and flowing of the Sea, which is the natural Motion, and
the violent Agitation of the great waters by the force of the winds: the first
is rather disputed then resolved in the Schools of natural learning, and the
wonder is of all confessed.

Faetus. The breed of the Sea is yielded to be full of wonder, so many sundry
sorts of fishes, and they multiplying so innumerably, that the Sea is thought
more rich in the variety of creatures, then the earth, and in the number more
populous, and many of our creatures on earth daily discovered to resemble those
on the shore.

4 Vsus The use of the Sea is another wonder, for it is diverse, I will limit my
self; it is fourfold: 1 Natural, 2 Artificial, 3 Moral, 4 Divine.

In the naturali use of the Sea S. Ambrose notes: 1 Natural.


1 It is Hospitium fluuiorum, the receptacle of all rivers: for as all rivers
come from the Sea through the secret passages of the earth, whereby the inward
parts of the earth are humected, and the secret mines of the earth, which are
hidden treasures, are hereby maintained: so do all rivers return again to the
Sea, and here they exonerate themselves, whose ouerflow would else oppress the
earth, that they seem rather ad sitim, to quench the thirst of the dry Land,
then ad ebrietatem, to drown it: Thus the earth is dreined, and the Sea is
that common Sewer to carry away all the waste thereof.

2 It is Fons imbrium; For from hence does the Sun exhale those vapors which
being bound up in clouds, by the almighty hand of God, are by the same hand let
lose again, to water the earth, and to refresh the surface thereof, with the
early and latter rain, whereby the inheritance of God is cheered and repaired.

2 Artificial
Secondly, the Art of man has made the sea useful, as S. Ambrose observes
further, for sundry purposes.

The first is inuectio Commeatuum, it yields us for food sundry sorts of
fishes, both wholesome, and delicate provisions, that the sea contendeth with
the earth both for plenty, variety, and delicacy.

The second is Copula distantium: For navigations has by exportation and
importation, made such exchange of commodities of several Nations, as hereby
Merchandise, one of the strong sinews of Commonwealths, the riches and peace
of civil States is maintained, and distant Nations hereby confederate.

The third is Compendium it ineris: For shipping does make great burdens
light, and long ways short: And Art has scatce brought forth two more
admirable inventions for common good, then the building of good ships, and
the navigations in them.

The fourth is partly natural, and partly artificial, and it is Furoris
impedimentum; for nature having dug this ditch between diverse Kingdoms,
they are so much the more out of one another danger, seeing the preparation
for Navigations, and sea fight, ask time, and give the blood leave to cool,
that passion cannot make sudden incursion, and the winds are at no man's
command; and Art has devised both defenses at Sea fit for the propulsation of
an enemy in equal correspondence, and fortifications ashoare in fit landing
places, to keep off the enemy; all serving to stop fury in the greatest and
most violent pressure.

3 The moral use of the Sea in Navigations, is also four fold.

1 As Saint Ambrose says, it is Secretum temperantiae; the secret of
Temperance: for there do men live privately, content with small cabbins,
garments rather for necessary use, then unnecessary show; food no more then
sufficient: vtuntur mundo: men there do but use the world to serve their
turns, and a little serves them.

2 It is Exercitium continentiae: the exercise of Continence: for ashoare the
eye does evil offices to the heart, and it is the window of concupiscence: one
of the best conseruators of holiness in the heart, is priuatio obiecti, the want
of that object which is full of temptation. Job made a covenant with his eye
against tempting objects: at Sea men are removed from this danger, and deprived
of the means to offend, so the temptation is disabled, and the tempter
unweaponed: the things of this world turn often into facultates male agendi,
instruments and abilities to offend, but the poor that want these, receive the
Gospel: fair sights, full meals, soft lodgings, and leisure, be Satan's arms
against the sons of men.

3 It is Domus laboris, the house of Labor; men at Sea rest by turns, there
is no shutting up of doors, and all to bed: this labor does make their rest
sweet, and their diet wholesome, and nourishing: surely work is no where done
with more speed, and with less fear of wind and weather, then at Sea; and the
labors of the body be armours of thr soul against temptations. Here is labor
necessitatis, Necessity makes every man put hand to work: and labor
charitatis: charity makes some to spell others, that some do watch, whilst
others sleep, and some labor whilst other rest.

Some have compared a ships company to a Commonwealth; I would our
Commonwealth were comparable to a ships company, even for this, that we would
be content to watch and labor one for another, all for the safety of the whole
body: if in a ship no man's safety is in single care for himself, but in the
common good of the company; so is it in the Commonwealth also: therefore no
politic body can prosper, or make a good voyage, where private respects make
prize of public proiects, where the little finger will wear a Diamond,
though the stomach which feeds all, do want meat to sustain the whole
body. This S. Paul so earnestly disswadeth, that he calls the mutual love of
Christians, the bond of love tying us together.

4 It is Schola disciplinae,; the school of discipline, for in a ship all men
know their places, and service: and there be two ways in which men go;
faciendo bonum, every man doing his duty: or, patiendo malum, the offenders
suffering worthy punishment. Discreet Masters and Captains have such
encouragements for such as deserve well, and bilbowes, and the yard arm, and
other punishments for foul offenders; they have spurs for the idle, and
resty, and restraints for stay of the rash and ouer-hardy. They find order to
be one of the well-fares of their voyages, and some storms within-boorde, as
necessary to rouse up their men, as fowle-weather without.

Many have compared the Church of God to a ship, both of our Protestant, and
of our Aduersary-writers, but we do not both acknowledge one master thereof.
Our master is a master of the Trinitie-house, the second Person in the holy
Trinity: God the son, who has called his Apostles and Evangelists, and
Disciples, and their successors, the now ministers of the word of God, to be
Maisters-mates in this spiritual Navigations. Their master is the Pope of Rome,
who like a notorious Pirat, boords the ship, and then runs away with her.

Let some of our own, who do not relish our church-gouernment, see how they
can like theirs in a ship, which is the model of a Church.

4 The Divine use of the Sea, and the navigations 4 Divine. 1 Contemplation.
upon it, is, 1 for Contemplation: 2 for Devotion: we have there a double
contemplation: first, of God: in whom we do there behold; first of God:
secondly, of our selves.

1 His power in the whole element it self, and the working of it, and the
creatures in it, toawe us with fear of his so great Majesty.

2 His wisdom, in the government of all, and his managing of the whole
creature, and the furnishing of it with such admirable variety.

3 His mercy, in addressing all this to the use and service of man: O what is
man that thou art so mindful of him: thou have made him to have dominion over
the Sea, and of the Fishes thereof, thy paths are in the great waters, thy way
is in the Sea: and thou have taught man to find a way there.

2 For our selves; Two things fall into our contemplation: 1 There is no place
that better shows us whereof we are made, then the Sea does. There is no
difference of hands, but as all are made of the same stuff, so they go all to
the same use; for in times of danger, every man puts his whole strength* and
wit to it to save the whole, and in want of victuals, every man's share is
alike: the force of weather beats upon all alike: Nature ever carries an
equal hand to all the sons of Adam, it favors none more then other: the
world is a flatterer, and puts difference.

2 There is no place that better admonishes us of our end, for it brings
death so near the eye, and fills the sense so full of it, that often dangers
can not but be a means to set the house in order, and prepare for death. And
expectation of death has ever provided above all persuasions, to bring a man
home to himself, and to God.

2 For Devotion. Saint Ambrose calls it Incentivum 2 Devotion.
devotionis: The kindler of Devotion: for here is evermore matter for Divine
Service, seeing occasions are often renewed for prayers and thanksgiving, much
more sensible, then ashore: And the Service of God generally, is both more
frequently, more reverently, and more heartily performed in well-gouerned
ships at Sea, then on the dry Land: For ashoare our zeal, is like fire in a
chimny, which has much cold air about it, to allay the heat thereof:
aboorde our zeal is like fire in a Stoaue, so enclosed and kept in, and out of
the cold gale of temptations, that Devotion is ready to come and fall down,
and kneel and worship before the Lord our Maker.

The fault is, that this holiness and devotion in many does live but the age
of a storm, or some fearful danger; and in most, but the age of a voyage. The
Farewell and Well-come home, are commonly as giddy and reeling as the storm
at Sea: but the danger more, because the fear is less; the one seasoneth a
Soul for Heaven, the other transformeth men into beasts, and robs them of
themselves.

Of the work thus far: The Sea.
2 The workemaister.
2 God is the Creator of this work: He made it: even he alone, who stands
thus differenced from all other gods. Who is so great a God as our God? Lord,
who is like to thee? The Sea was part of the work of the third day, and God
saw it good: all inferior workmen have praise from their work, when it is
well done: Gods works do praise him, but he them much more: it is the glory
of the great and little world too, that God made both.

The Sea remains of all things beneath the maine most like to the Creation,
for we read not of any special curse put upon the Sea, at the fall of man:
and in the punishment of the old world, the Sea was the rod of Gods wrath: and
God honored the Sea in a memorable Miracle of the Israelites passage through
the midst of it on dry land.

Saint Ambrose limiteth this work too much, Fecit mare Deus propter elementi
pulchritudinem: God made ths Sea for the beuty of that Elements sake, that is
true, but not enough. For all is (...) The world is beauty: but he says, Non
ad nauigandum: God did not make the Sea, to sail upon it. Dixit Deus,
dominamini piscium maris, non, nauigate in fluctibus. God said (says he) bear
rule over the fishes of the Sea: he said not, sail you in the way thereof.
Alas! it were a poor dominion that man should have over the Sea, if there were
not navigations; and God made it not for show, without use. It is enough to
prove it good in the Creation, and good for the use of man, that he made it:
for he made all things for man, and man for himself, and his own especial
service. Hear David particularizing Gods words, and man's lordship: Thou made
him to have dominion over the Psalm. 8, 6.
works of thy hands. thou have put all things under his feet: all sheep and
oxen, yea and the beasts of the field. The foul of the air, and the fish of
the Sea, and whatsoever passes through the paths of the Seas. And from thence
we hear of his glory, and they that use navigations, do behold it.

S. Ambrose challenges man most justly. God said to the waters: Be you
gathered together in one place, and they were so: He often calls upon men,
saying; Congregamini, gather ye together in full congregations, to call on the
name of the Lord, and they are slack in the performance of this duty. God
loves full assemblies in the house of his service, as all the waters run
into the Sea. Schismatic conuenticles be but ponds, and fennes, they are not
collectio aquarum, the gathering together of waters into one.

Further, He made it, concludes against the eternity of it, the dream of
some Philosophers, who fancied an eternity of this lower world. Must we needs
determine the world eternal, because we are not made privy to the operations
of God before time? Here in is a sinful curiosity, to be
ouer-busie-Questionists, where there is a certain impossibility to be
resolved. David says he made the Sea; so does Moses, let the Sea therefore do
him all the honor it can; much more we, for whom he made the Sea, and who
have found our paths in the great waters.

3 The lordship and dominion of the Sea.
3 God is Lord and owner of the Sea. The Sea is his: he made not the Sea, as
workmen on earth, who when they have sinished their work, do then forsake it,
but he retains the lordship, and he performs governance and protection to
it, and ever keeps the possession of it; Man has but the use and service of
these inferior creatures.

A great happiness is this to man, that the sea is his, and not ours: for what
man on earth would, rather all the men on earth could not, rule and manage this
unruly and boisterous element, only God can and does, still the noise of the
sea, and appease the waves thereof. The waves of the sea are wonderful, but
God on high is more Psalm. 65. 7. Psalm. 9^. 4.
mighty.

Thou rulest the raging of the sea, when the waves Psalm. 89. 9.
thereof arise thou stllest them: Of which David makes this use: O Lord of
Hosts, who is a strong God like unto thee?

This rule, which God does exercise upon the sea, shows, that we can go no
whither out of Gods Dominions: Jonah fled from the presence of the Lord to sea,
and God met him there in a violent storm, for the sea is his: Of all sorts of
offenders God has no fugitives to punish: For whither shall I fly from thy
presence? If I abide on earth: The earth is the Lords: If I clime up into
heaven, thou art there: If I go to sea, the sea is thine also: Thine,

1 By right of creation.

2 By right of Dominion, for none but he, and he can command it: He sets
it bounds which it shall not pass: He has said: Hitherto Job 38. 11.
shall thou come, and here shall the pride of thy waves stay.

3 He has right of protection, for it is he that protecteth by his providence
the Sea, and all that lives in, or trauelleth upon it. Therefore whatsoever
good we expect at Sea, we must go to him for it: and whatsoever good we
receive by the way of the Sea, we must thank him for it.

Many do call Sea-aduentures, especially in long voyages, casual, and they
think lives desperately hazarded upon great waters, let them remember, The Sea
is his: it neither swells nor swalloweth without leave: he has done
whatsoever he will in the Sea, and in the great deepes. Therefore let God have
glory of all our good successes there, let him have our devout prayers for all
adventures both of goods, and especially of persons employed there: and when
losses come, let us say with Job: The Lord has taken away, and I was dumb,
and opened not my mouth, because thou Lord did it. With David, The Sea
shall give up the dead, which it has swallowed, in the resurrection of all
flesh, as well as the earth: and the Elect of God shall find as ready a way to
the rest of God through these waters, as the people of Israel, found to Canaan
through the red Sea. God give us all an happy and glorious meeting there. For
we have here no abiding City;

Amen, Amen.
Zebuluns Blessing: The fifth Sermon.
Preached Anno 1610.
DEVTER. 30. Verse 13 Neither is it beyond the Sea, that thou should say,
who shall go over the Sea for us, and bring it us, and cause us to hear it,
that we may do it.

Verse 14 But the word is very near unto thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy
heart for to do it.


MOses, in this whole Chapter persuades Israel to Obedience of the Law and
word of GOD: the Argument which he uses in this my Text to enforce this, is
drawn from the facility of obtaining the benefit of this word: in the urging
of which argument, Moses presses two considerations.

1 Of the travel that many men are put to for many necessaries, to go to Sea,
and to seek them in foreign and remote parts.

2 Of the benefit Israel had, who for the greatest and best commodity of all,
even for the word of God, needed no such pains, for they had that near them.
In which comparison he discovers clearly to them, the mercy of their God in
matters of most dear account, not to fail them.

Of the first: In the division of countries one from another by the great sea,
God maks Zebuluns portion to border by the sea side, and sets men aworke to
study and practice the art and skill of Navigations, which both in religion and
policy aduaunceth a common good: For since the curse of God for sin does
press sweat out of all men's brows: and seeing Saint Paul would not have them
Eat that refuse to labor, and policy it self cannot dispense with idleness;
this is one of the means by which many are set on work, both in the building
of ships, and in the use of them at Sea, and in the necessary businesses of
merchandise, or of war wherein they are employed. And therefore, if any man
be so unwise, to think that the charge given to Adam, to till the earth, does
bind men, even all his posterity, to that only labor for their living upon
the earth, and that all other travail is unlawful: let him, know, that when
Moses said, The Lord made the Heaven and the Earth, he included the Sea also.

And therefore their calling is also lawful, that till and plow the Seas for
an Harvest, and thriftitily husband them, to their own private, and to the
common good. So that saying of God to man, Vesceris pan^ tuo, does intend more
then food, and more food then bread, as we do see the extent of that word
in the Lords prayer, where daily bread does include all things of necessary
use for the life of man, which things are not always on this side the seas; and
where the great deep diuides us from these things, we must travel and ve^ture
our goods or persons or both of them. Thus God will have it known that he has
set his right had on the flods, that both land and sea might praise him. This
division of kingdom from kingdom was not to divide so much, as to unite the^,
that too near neighborhood might not make one troblesome to another, and
that by exchange of commodities Princes and people of divided nations might
maintain trading, which are the perswaders to, and the fruits and signs of
peace.

Yet it seems that men multiplied exceedingly, and it was very long before
the art of Navigations was in any use; for most writers do agree, that the Arc
of Noah was the first flotie vessel, that ever was made, and a very ancient
Greek author that writes the Testaments of the Patriarchs affirms, that
Zebulun the Son of old Israel, was the first that ever devised, either to
set mastes aboard, or to spread sails: whosoever he were that first
adventured it, the Poet thought him to be a man of a during spirit, and bold
undertaking.

Illi robur and as triplex circa pectus erat, qui fragilem truci commisit
pelago ratem primus. The matter which Moses presses in this Text, is the
travel and peril that men endure on earth, especially Seamen, and Merchants
that travail for the means of their maintenance upon the great waters. Yet
even these men have these notable comforts of their life, accompanying them in
these their ways. First, they see the works of God* and his wonders in the
deep: and seeing this is the meditation of Gods power, it breeds in them the
fear of the Lord, which is the beginning of their wisdom: And the way to
Obedience is, to begin at the fear of Gods power, and to proceed to the
love of his goodness and mercy: for we must begin at the consideration of
our our sin, and that will bring us to the Court of Gods justice, and from
hence we shall very diligently seek out CHRIST our Redeemer appealing to the
Court of Gods mercy.

Secondly, you that are Seamen, have a most notable and continual
consideration of the good providence of Almighty God going in and out with
you, and protecting you from dangers, and making his unruly and boisterous
creatures, the winds, and the Seas to serve you, and teaching you to find out
a path in the inuious and vast waters.

Thirdly, as amongst the ancient Romans this had wont to be a principle in
experience that castra were scholae virtutum, Tents in war, were the Schools of
Virtues, because men that lived there in continual expectation of their death,
lived preparedly to entertain an end of their delights, and dangers: so me
thinks we may as properly say that Naues be scholae virtutum: ships are the
schools of Virtues: For therein are learned many notable virtues, Divine and
Moral: For example.

1 Diligence in the Service of God: For in all well-gouerned ships, they
begin and end the day with Prayers, and hearing of the holy word read unto
them, they sing Psalms with a most united cheer of heart and voice. They pray
with affection and zeal, even with a full and perfect sense of their wants,
and hereunto they have many prouocations. For the rule of Almighty God is true
eternally, I will smit^ them, and they will call upon me. Perils and hazards
of body and goods, will soon move us to seek the face of God, even as the
Prophet David says, right early.

2 Sparing and contentment with alittle both in diet and apparel for these be
the Schools of temperance, and therefore those that do so far forget their
own dangers,, and provoke Gods displeasure by drinking immoderately, till they
stand as unsteady as their Vessel, which is tossed upon the waters, sin
presumptuously against Almighty God, and show that they despise the riches of
Gods mercy: inciting them by so many inducements to repentance and mediocritie.

3 Vigilance is taught here, for the charge of so much worth as the vessel that
houseth the^, and the goods that fill it, and the lines of those persons that
menage and rule it is so great, that they share and divide the night, and time
of rest, amongst them, to keep continual and careful watch to prevent such
dangers as may encounter careless and sleepy negligence: O that in our
Spiritual Navigations, upon the seas of this troublesome world, our souls did
keep so true, and vnsleepy watch, to avoid all temptations that either, of our
three dangerous enemies, the flesh, the world, and the devil, by the help of
our own corrupt concupisence shall at any time suggest, to withdraw us from
the obedience which we owe to our God.

4 Expedition and dispatch of present business is notably taught aboard your
ships, that which you do is directed and performed at once, and without
delay: the counsel of the Master is seen in the hand of the company, and
direction goes the nearest way from the head to the hand: present peril,
requires present advise, and execution: Make it your souls case with almighty
God, and delay not your repentance, for the gusts and storms of wrath and
judgment, menace this vessel of frailty with foundring and ouersetting.

5 Your ships are the schools of hardness and patient endurance, high
winds, rough seas, raging waves, cold nights, wet skins, parching heats,
thin diet, hard lodging, watchings, and untimely breakings of the hours of
rest; these be the familiar and ordinary guests, which Seamen do entertain.
And these they bear out with such easy sufferance, that they are fit for
action and employment abroad, and their service is made by this means
profitable to the commonwealth in which they live: And if you endure thus much
abroad, to seek your temporal goods, let it not grieve you, nor any true
Christian, to put up more sorrows for an eternal weight of glory, graciously
provided for all them that serve the Lord in fear, and rejoice before him with
reverence.

One thing more I remember as a great comfort in the furthest distance from
home, and from any land, consider how far God has removed you from those
many and dangerous temptations, which ashoare do entertain your eyes and
ears, and thoughts, with variety of false delight and pleasure, to divert and
swerve your thoughts from grace and gooduesse; and the better to give way to
this happy weaning of you from vanity, it shall testify well of your holy
desires that way, to make good choice of your company that go with you, that
there be none of notorious evil condition: and for that, the example of king
David in his house-gouernement is very notable, make it your own by imitation
of it, and say; Mine eye shall be unto the faithful of the Land, that Psalm.
101. 6.
they may go in my ship, he that walks in a perfect way he shall serve
me. There shall no deciptfull person lie aboard my ship, he that tells
lies shall not abide in my sight.

A master thus accompanied, a company thus governed, a ship thus managed,
give and take comforts by mutual exchange. To such a ship is the virtuous
Woman compared by Solomon: She brings her Merchandise from far away.

The scond part of my Text shows the riches of the mercy and love of God,
which in this comparison appears most gracious: for you take all this pains
for the meat that perishes, and for the clothes that wear out, and come to
nothing; but there is yet a far more worthy and noble diet then this. For,
Man shall not live by bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of the
mouth of God. This Word of God is to be had and enjoyed at home, without our
traveling to foreign and remote parts. Thus Israel had it: thus we have
it: By the Word of God is meant in this place, the Law of God, and so by
consequent the Gospel: for the Law is our Schole-master to CHRIST. These two
be the Rod and the Staff of the great Shepherd of our souls, JESUS
CHRIST, with which he does correct and support his flock. This commodity must
not, as others, be valued by the desire that men have to it: For Merchants
employ their stock in those things that may yield them the best market, and
their transmarine wares are valued, according to the want of them here with
us: but the commodity of the Word of Almighty God is such, as the greatest
part of the World do neglect and esteem no better of then Foolishness:
only some few that have made proof thereof, have found it to be such an
harvest, that like unto the covetous rich man in the Parable in the Gospel:
they have not spared to pull down the old and narrow Barnes, and have built
new in their places; even new hearts, to receive in the Word of GOD, with an
holy covetousness, striving to engrosse, and to stir up the commodity
thereof.

And this thriftie couetize, is an infallible mark of the Child of God, as
CHRIST our Lord and Savior has expressed it, saying; He that is of God,
hears Gods word: you do not hear because you are not of God, John chapter
8. David the Prophet had a perfect taste of this sweetness, and well
understood how to value and esteem it, as the whole hundred and nineteenth
Psalm does testify for him; in which Psalm he prefers it to the honnie
and the honnie-combe in sweetness; above Gold, and that refined Gold in
purity: and above precious and rich stones in worth and price: And we, if we
will prize it according unto the necessity we have of it, must needs give
the first place to this holy word of God. For there is no way to the Father,
but that which it teaches: there is no passage to life, but by obedience, that
is taught in the word of the Law. No obedience opens heaven, and satisfies
Gods justice, and reconcileth man to God, but the obedience of JESUS CHRIST:
that is the argument and sum of the word of the Gospel. Therefore ask
CHRIST, What may I do that I may have eternal life? and he will presently
send me to the word; Keep my Commandments, Do this and thou shall live.

If then we value commodities by the necessary use of them, the word of God
chalengeth the first place, for there is no passage to the Father, but by JESUS
CHRIST, and he is that word which was made flesh for us.

If we value commodities by the profit, which they bring in to us, the word of
God does carry it away from all things else, seeing it is that which shows
to us the way of everlasting life. When the Angel of God had loosed the
Apostles out of prison, their charge was this: Go your way and stand in the
Temple, and speak to the people all the words of this life, that is, of life
everlasting, Acts 5. 20.

S. Peter being sent for to Caesarea, the man of the house told him, that he
had seen an Angel which bade him send for him, saying: He Acts 11. 14.
shall tell thee words whereby thou and all thy whole house shall be saved.
And what commodity like the word then, seeing it were no purchase, to gain
this world, and all the riches of it, and to for feit our souls to judgment
and death.

If pleasure set price upon our commodities, what delight like to that which
the word of GOD brings with it? David calls it the very joy of his heart:
and at such time as his heart had most need of joy. For Except thy Law had
been my delight, I had even perished in mine affliction.

Therefore when God threatened the sins of his people, to bring upon them the
rod of his wrath. He threatened not a famine of bread, nor a famine of water,
but of the word of God, meaning to deprive them of all spiritual comforts, and
to expose them to temptations, taking from them the sword of the Spirit, the
word of God, wherewith they should be armed to offend their enemies.

We may therefore bless the God of mercies, who has opened to us these rich
treasures of grace, that we have both the word of God it self in plenty, and
no Nation upon the earth has more helps to advance Religion and pure
Devotion then we have: so that we need not send beyond the Sea for the word
of God.

Indeed we are all afraid of that word of God, which is brought into our Land
from beyond the Sea: for that is falsely so called, it is the word which
comes thence, that breeds treasons and insurrections, which pioneth in the
earth, and under the Parliament house, which buyeth, and congesteth great
quantities of gunne-poulder, which touches the Lords Anointed Princes, and
does his Prophets harm, which turns Religion into Policy, Verity into
Acquiuocations and lies, charity into robbery, this word is written in the
blood of Princes.

And in this particular you are men that may do good service to God and his
Church, to our Sovereign and this State, if you establish religious orders in
your ships, if you confirm your company in the true service of God, that
they may take no infection abroad by the suggestion of contrary doctrine, if
you keep your company aboard, so much as may be, in places of danger to our
Religion, and keep watch upon them in your necessary employments of them a
shore, that the fly of Egypt blow them not, that the Romish spider, which
spreads unseen nets, entangle them not, to inspire them with the natural
unnatural poison of their superstition.

And further, if you have especial care that there be no importation of any
dangerous books, or instruments of superstition, which being spread abroad in
our Land, may infect the ignorant.

And most of all, if you keep good watch upon such persons, as shall desire
passage hither from beyond the seas; for an honest eye has advantage of a
dissembling presence, and the wisdom of a serpent, will soon detect the
malice of a serpent: Take heart to you to do these things, for God and your
Country may have most happy use of your good service herein: And your business
herein is not great; for all idolaters, and enemies unto the truth of
Almighty God, are Fools, and they may be taken in the crafty wiliness that
they have imagined: All this to keep Idolatry out of our Land. Remember the
Israelites which sat weeping by the waters of Babel: They hung up their
Harpes upon the Willowes: for how should they sing the Song of the Lord in a
strange Land? We shall have more cause of grief, and less patience to bear
it, if ever those sons of strangers should come to sing their Songs in our
Land to make Music in our Church, and to set up their Dagon, where we have
now the Arc of Gods Covenant so well settled.

Blessed be Almighty God for it, never since Joseph that buried the body of
CHRIST JESUS our Lord in his own grave, did first preach the Gospel in this
Land (as our Histories do make faith) had this Land less need to send over
Seas for the word of GOD: our Churches are many of them learnedly furnished
with sufficient Pastors. I dare say boldly and truly, never yet so well. Our
Universities the Seminaries of the Church, are like fruitful gardens, never
more hopefully grown: our Libraries never so bookt with all kind of learning.

Thirdly, we have had Manna for gathering, now many happy years of peace
together: the te^pter is potent to assault, and cunning to take advantage, and
ready to surprise: the word of God is that double-edged weapon which he
fears most. They that have it in a strange tongue, have it always sheathed,
it will not, it can not cut; they that have it, and use it not, have it not,
because they use it not. You see it is a blessing to have it near to you,
there is no better light in obscurity, or bridle in prosperity, or spur in
stupiditie, or comfort in adversity, then to have this word near you: let Cor
be Cordus; your heart your storier, os promus, your mouth the dispenser of this
word: for with the heart man believes this word to righteousness, and with
the tongue man confesses to salvation: so shall thou be a convert, and a
conuerter, because thou beleeuest, therefore thou will speak, and thou being
converted shall strengthen thy brethren. The God of this, and all other
mercies, say: So be it.

Laus Deo.
THE Remedy of Drought.

Two Sermons, THE FIRST, Preached at Deptford, alias west-Greenewich, in the
County of Kent, the thirty day of July. 1615. By SAMVEL PAGE, Doctor in
Divinity.

LONDON Printed by Nicholas Oaks for Simon Waterson, dwelling in Paul's
Churchyard, at the sign of the Crown. 1616.

To my Honored friend, Sir John Scot, Knight.
Worthy Sir,
TO keep fresh the memory of the mercy herein expressed, I have put these
two Sermons into this way of suruiuing with posterity, here is our Semination
in prayers: and our Harvest in preuailings. Here is Gods Semination in his
benefit of rain: and his Harvest our devout Thanksgiving. These I have made
bold to communicate to the Church of God under your well known and well-beloved
name, as an acknowledgement of my debt to your love of me, who in short time
have learned to be ever bound unto you. Deptford.

S. P.

THE Remedy of Drought.
The first Sermon.
1. KINGS 8. 35. When Heaven is shut up, and there is no rain, because they
have sinned against thee: if they pray toward this place, and confess thy
name, and turn from their sin, when thou afflictest them, etc.
THese words are a part of that holy Prayer which Solomon sent up to God, in
the Dedication of his Temple: the Argument and Substance hereof is, a remedy
against Drowth: and they are a Supposition of a special inconvenience, which
may hereafter fall upon the people of Israel for sin: For in this Prayer the
King wisely and carefully forecasteth, how the people may, in time to come,
provoke God to displeasure, and so draw upon themselves several judgments, as
corrections of their sin, wherefore he prays God, if any such thing
befall, to receive all those into favor, who by repentance and prayer do seek
to recover him again.

The Supposition is double 1 Mali, of evil: and that is also twofold. 1 Mali
poenae, of the punishing evil, in the shutting up of heaven: no rain. 2 Mali
culpae, of the evil of transgression, because they have sinned.
2 Remedij: of the remedy which is, 1 Prayer. 2 Confession of his name. 3
Repentance.

First, of the Supposition of the evil that is in punishment, when Heaven is
shut up: that is, when there is no rain. For the Heavens are the storehouses
of this lower world, containing those treasures wherewith God does enrich the
earth: so God speaks by Moses: The Lord shall open to thee his good treasure,
the Heaven to give thee rain Deuteronomy. 28. 12.
to thy Land in his season. But here he supposes this treasure shut up: and
this judgment is great: for God promised to his people; The Land whither thou
go to possess it, shall not be like the land of Egypt, from whence ye came
out, where thou sowedst thy seed, and wateredst it with thy foot, as a Garden
of herbs* But the land of Canaan is a land of hills and valleys, and
drinks water of the rain of Heaven.

This Land suffered Drought in David's time, for the trespass against the
Gibeonites, three years, which brought an heavy famine upon the Land, 2. Sam.
21.

Again, in Ahabs time, Heaven was shut up, three years; and six months,
1. Kings 17.

Drought is one of the rods of God, whereby he scourges the Land, and
makes a fruitful Land barren: it is the sorrow of our Land at this present,
and has continued now many weeks upon us. I presume we are sensible enough of
the evil which we suffer.

That which I would urge, is, That as the drought in David's time, made him go
to ask counsel of the Lord, that he might know both the cause and the remedy
of it: so might we seriously and religiously bethink us how this evil has
come upon us, that we may quit the cause and embrace the remedy of so great
smart.

2 The cause is sin: Malum culpae; Because they have sinned against thee: in
which consider,

1. What is done amiss: they have sinned. 2. By whom: The Israelites Gods
people. 3 Against whom: Against thee. 4 How dangerously. Because of this;
therefore is all this punishment come upon them: this is it which has shut up
Heaven against them.
1 Of the offense, Sin.
It is not expressed what special sin it was that Solomon most feared, neither
did he forecast particularities. There is but one way, all the rest are
errors. There is but one good, all the rest is evil. We have a natural free
will to that which is evil, we have a natural Antipathie, to that which is
good. This made Job fear his sons, and daughters at their feasts, lest they
should offend God in their mirth, Job 1. 5. Saint Gregory says, In bono
itinere contrahitur puluis: Men gather dust, that travel upon occasion, and
the best of our actions do relish of our corruptions. But this is not the
sin which Solomon fears, man's natural frailties: he fears Crying sins,
such as awake Justice, and make the Father of mercies Reveal his wrath from
Heaven. Not errors, but rebellions, of which sort is Idolatry, which sets
up a new god in the place of the true God, and it was one of the National
trespasses of that people: Sensuality was another, eating, drinking, and
rising up to play, requiring meat for their lust, and then both surffering
upon it, and despising of it. Murmuring at God was another, and these were
eminent sins amongst this people. For these was the care and fear of
Solomon; and he had cause to dread this, in the posterity of Israel, seeing
he found the present prope^sion of the people to these sins. To come home to
our selves, our sins have not been of low growth, nor of a still voice, but
shooting up high, and crying in the ears of God, horrible blasphemy, profane
swearing, breach of the Sabbath, contempt of the word, even treading under foot
the blood of the covenant of grace, and despising the long suffering of God,
inuiting us to repentance: wantonness, contention, oppression, secret
underminings. These things are done, and the Sun shines upon them, the Land
mourns for them, and the earth groneth under the burden of them, and God
held his Asal. 50. 21.
peace: and we thought him to be like one of us: but he has uttered his voice
now, and that a mighty voice. The sins which do deserve best this judgment
of Drought, are the abuses of the fruits of the earth to sensuality,
drunkenness, and gluttony: for does not God do well, to withdraw from us the
faculties of evil doing, and to deprive us of the means by which we do
dishonor him? And we have cause to think these sins the present
provocation of the wrath of God in this drought.

2 They.
The consideration of the persons supposed to sin, does add weight to this
matter. They, that is, the Israel of God: the people whom God has singled out,
to pour on them the riches of his mercy, of whom David says; He has not
done so to every Nation. If they sin. Their sin is injury, and
unkindness too, Thou, O man, my companion and my familiar frieud.

Hear Nathan pleading this quarrel of unkindness 2. Sam. 12 7.
for God to David, after his double sin, Thus says the Lord, I anointed
thee King over Israel, and I delivered thee out of the hand of Saul etc. And if
that had been too little, I would have done such and such things unto thee.
Wherefore have thou despised the commandment of the Lord? So might God say to
Israel, I brought thee out of the land of Egypt: I saved thee from thine
enemies that pursued thee: I divided the red Sea for thy passage out of Aegipt:
and the waters of Iordane for thy entrance into Canaan; why have thou despised
the commandment of the Lord thy God?

And semblably, may not personal considerations aggrauate our sins, whom
Almighty God has delivered from the Pope, a worfe oppressor then was King
Pharaoh: to whom God gave a religious, wise, virgin Sovereign, the wonder
both of the rank and sex, to rule over us so many happy years of gracious
peace at home, and glorious victories abroad: and with whom this favor of God
did not die, but has continued in the succession of our gracious King, under
whom we continue to enjoy peace, and the holy liberty of the Gospel: to
whom God has given a plentiful land, and has enriched us with the riches of
neighbor and remote Nations: If we sin, can there be less then a fearful
expectation of judgment?

For Turks that have a Mahomet, a Mammet for their Messiah, for Jews who know
no JESUS yet in the Flesh, for Papists that worship Idols, for Indians that
worship the Devil, to despise the commandment of God, this God takes not so
much to heart, for brambles bear no figs. But he must needs take it
unkindly, if we living amongst so many assurances of his tender love, whose
sheep have brought forth thousands, and ten thousands in our Pastures, and
have eaten the fat of the earth, and drunk of the river of his pleasures, if
we turn the grace of God into wantonness, and abuse his mercy to provoke his
anger. Nehemiah in chap. 6. verse. 11. said, should such a man as I fly?
Consider what kind of man thou art; borne in the Church, and washed in the
water of holy Baptism, taught in the word, fed with the body and blood of
CHRIST, possessing the fruits of the Land in peace, should such a man as I live?

3 Against thee.
The next circumstance makes the fault greater, the sin is supposed to be
against God: contrary to him, and we do in some sins expose our selves to
God. Israel was guilty of two sins which were against God: one against the
majesty of God; that was Idolatry in the worship of strange gods: wherein it is
a wonder, that a people to who^ the true God did so manifestly reveal
himself, should be so led to the embracing of strange worship: an other
against his mercy, in abusing the plenty of outward things, to their lust,
until the wrath of God came upon them, even whilst the meat of plenty, was
in the mouth of surfeit.

For Idolatry, the light of the Gospel has so long time shined upon this
Land, that (except with those of the Popish strain) Idols are out of request:
and we may say, The knowledge of God is amongst us: yet Drunkenness and
Gluttony make their belly their god.

But for abuse of the good Creatures of GOD, we are as much in fault, as if
David, when Saul had armed him against Goliath, should have presently encountered
Saul himself: So we fight against Almighty God with his own weapons, so that
the Lord complayneth, All these things are against me.

4 Because of this.
Here is the provocation. You see now where to lay the fault, because a people
so much beholding to me, have made no conscience to commit sin, a thing so
hateful to me, sinning against my Majesty, or my mercy; therefore I have
shut up Heaven, and there is no rain. Sin then is found to be the cause of
drought

I deny not but there be natural causes, which produce drought, and the
learned Students in the* Books of celestial bodies, give good account often
of these accidents: but Nature is Gods servant. Eliah tells Ahab: As the Lord
God of Israel 1. Kings 17. 1.
before whom I stand, lives, there shall be no deaw nor rain these years,
but according to my word: and CHRIST expresses the time, three years and Luke
4 25.
six months. The Prophet was Gods Prognostication to them, to tell them what
weather they should have: for God took the matter into his own hand: and
Nature sat all the while, and looked on. See what a Sequence here is at this
foolish game of sin. First sin, then anger, then no rain, and no fruits of
the earth, and the perishing of man and beast; God takes it upon 2. Chron. 7.
13.
him: If I shut up Heaven, and there be no rain.

God says to Job, Has the rain a father? or, Job 38. 28.
who has begotten the drops of deaw?

Can thou lift up thy voice to the Clouds, that abundance of waters may
cover thee? Surely man Job 37. 6.
cannot help himself in this. He says to the snow, be thou on the earth,
likewise to the small rain, and to the great rain of his strength.

So Eliphaz, who gives rain upon the earth?, and Job 5. 10.
sends waters upon the fields? Wonder not then seeing you know who is Lord of
these treasures, if he be spare of them, and shut his hand, Because they
sinned against thee.

It is not enough to think upon our sins, but if we do think upon them, as
the cause of this judgment, these have made the heavens above us as brass,
and these have locked up the treasures of rain. The earth is sensible of this
calamity, the face of it is discolored, the grass is burnt up, the fruits
fail, the green herb is withered, the earth opens her mouth wide, and
gapeth for thirst, and no clouds but of dust, have for a long time rained upon
us: the beasts of the field have felt this woe, who have wanted their necessary
food: only we who know the cause of all this, and are too blame for all
this, for whose sins, the earth, and the beasts of the field suffer, we do
not change garment, or countenance for the matter, the drunkard drinks not a
draught the less, nor comes to Church the more for it; the wanton abateth
nothing of his delights, nor the worldely man of his desires: But ask the Rich
man of the earth, will all the wealth which they have heaped up buy us one
shower of rain now in this our extremest necessity: I say not to quench the
great thirst, but to lay the dust thereof*

With what heart then can any considerate man sin against God, who bethinks
himself, that if he sin, he shuts up Heaven against him: that if men did
regard things temporal only, this life can not be happy, but in the favor of
God; nothing but Godliness has the promises of ehis life and of the life to
come. And it is as easy to be happy in both worlds, as in this only, the
fear of God does it in both.

2 The Supposition of the remedy.

The means to be used to divert this judgment, are three.

1 Prayer: If they pray toward this place. 2 Confession of Gods name: and
confess thy name. 3 Repentance: and turn from their sins when thou
afflictest them.
1 Prayer: Here he supposes,

1 That they will fly to prayer. 2 That they will perform this in their own
persons. 3 That they will direct their prayer to God.
1 They will fly to prayer.
Prayer has ever been esteemed and approved the best remedy against calamity;
and therefore the Saints of God have used it in all afflictions: so James 5. 16.
says S. James, Is any man afflicted? let him pray: This medicine has a
probatum est: The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man prevails much:
He proves it thus: Eliah was a man subject to the Verse 17.
like passion that we are, and he prayed earnestly, that it might not rain,
and it rained not on the earth three years and six months: And he prayed
again, and Verse 18.
the Heaven gave rain, and the earth brought forth her fruit. Here is the
force of Prayer, even in this point, concerning the watering of the earth,
prayer opens Heaven, and prayer shuts it. Any man afflicted with any
affliction, let him pray: but our prayer must be:

1 Multiplicata: we must be frequent in prayer, Saint Paul bids us to be
(...) such as put our whole strength of spirit into our prayers. Or as in
another place; Pray continually. Our Savior CHRIST prayed thrice in the
Garden, the same words. John saw another Angel, who offered much incense
with many prayers. Reuelat. 8. 3.

He requires not here long prayers, but often, lest Devotion languish, and
Zeal take cold. Augustine says, That the brethren had in the wilderness,
Crebras orationes, but breues: often, but short Prayers, for fear of wearing
and wearying their intention, for flesh and blood are soon tired and out of
heart.

David used this frequent prayer, but his prayers were short, but they were
effectual: one thing have I desired of the Lord that I will require. I will
not be said nay. The Widow in the Gospel is made our example; not for the
length, but for the importunity of her Petition: and the Apostle wishes the
Romans (...) to strive with God by their Prayers for him, that is, to wrestle
with the Angel for a blessing, or to strive with Satan: For Origin says, In
oratione daemones obsistunt: The Devils do oppose us when we pray. The
Prophet bids, Keep not silence, give Esaias 62. 7.
the Lord no rest, ye that make mention of the Lord: So he gave them example
for Sions sake, I will not Verse 1.
hold my peace, for Ierusalems sake I will not rest. In the common calamities
of whole Nations, the Church of God has used to set apart solemn days to
the deprecation of Gods wrath, in the public conuenings of the faithful: and
we do hear that this drought has in some places, where Popery is professed,
brought forth solemn and public Processions, and set Services to divert this
woe.

I expected all this while, the command of authority, to put this upon our
general practice, but perceiving that their Wisdoms do cast this upon the
holy discretion of particular Pastors in their several Charges: I have
blamed my tardie, and behind hand omission of this duty: yet presuming that
none of you in your private Devotions have neglected this good office, as you
have joined also in the prayers of the Congregation, now I admonish you to
stir up your selves to give the Lord no rest, till he have mercy upon us,
and take away from us this, even this calamity also. We have aerumnas
multiplicatas, our sorrows multiplied, let our prayers be multiplied also.

2 But our prayer must be praesentataper Christum:
CHRIST our Advocate must present our prayers to God: for our prayers are but
the fuel, CHRIST'S mediation puts fire into them, and makes them incense.
Prayer is Medicina, the Medicinal Antidote against misery; but CHRIST is
vehiculum, the means to convey this Medicine into the inward parts, and
therefore as, we begin our prayers, In the name of JESUS CHRIST, so we use to
end them, through JESUS CHRIST our Lord. We have no grace with God for our
own sakes; CHRIST says, Whatsoever you ask in my name, it shall be given
you. Matt. 21. 22. For without me you can do nothing. John 15. 5.

3 Our prayer must be acceptabilis Deo: Such as God will accept. God hears
not sinners pleading for themselves, either slightly, with a customary
Miserere: Lord have mercy upon us, or Luke 18. 11.
prowdly, I thank thee, I am not as other men are, as the Pharisee. But if we
come to him by Christ, He cannot deny himself, as Diez a Portugal Friar 2.
Tim. 2. 13.
wittily notes: If we beg of God the riches or honors of this world, these
are not himself; if revenge, that is not himself: but if we beg mercy, that
is God himself. He is called the Father of mercies; that is, the Father of
CHRIST: For Christ is our righteousness to God, and Gods mercy to us.

2 They must pray themselves: If they pray.
Although we are commanded to pray one for another, yet we are not thereby
freed from praying every man for himself. Is the affliction common, let the
prayer be also general: let every man solicit God in JESUS CHRIST for
himself, every man for all, all for one another, even for the whole Land, of
which we are parts: let us not only trust to the prayers of others for us.
Saint Paul entreating the Romans to pray for him, desires them also to pray
with him.

Popery has the credit to have first devised this lazy and idle doctrine of
borrowing, hiring, and buying prayers: so that rich men have turned praying into
paying: But Solomon supposes that they will pray for themselves that sin
against themselves, and against God, and unless they so do, they have no part
in these his prayers. Samuel, Job, Daniel, all the holy men on earth, loose
labor, if they pray for such as will not pray for themselves, God puts them
off thus: I will not hear them.

Even in this calamity have not all and each of us our particular woe: let us
therefore pray all and each of us.

3 They are supposed to pray toward this place: i. toward the Temple at
Jerusalem.
They pray to God, and therefore address themselves toward the Temple, which
is Gods house, wherein God did put his name, and establish his worship, and
wherein was the Arc of the Covenant, the Sacrament of Gods real presence.

Daniel being in a strange Land, went into his Dan. 6. 10.
house, and his window being open in his chamber toward Jerusalem, he kneeled
upon his knees, and prayed three times a day.

In Daniels example we see a frequent resort to God by prayer three times, not
three set Canonical hours, but thrice, at times of fit leisure; and we find
his worship directed to God, toward this place: peradventure as David did,
Evening, morning, and at noone: for so we recommend Psalm 55. 17.
to God, Initium progressum, and exitum; the beginning, the proceeding, and
ending, of businesses of the day.

This unhurtful ceren any was in use amongst the Jews.

1 In respect of the promise which God made of his presence there.

2 In a mystical reference to Jesus Christ, for he was the fulfilling of all
the ceremonies of that place, and all the Sacrifices offered there, were types
of his one Oblation of himself. To this place their resort was commanded. But
unto the Exodus 12 5.
place which the Lord your God shall choose out of all the Tribes, to put his
name there, even to his habitation shall ye seek and thither thou shall come.
This was too much for them to do often, because that many dwelt far off,
therefore they did this. They worshipped and prayed toward this place.

David did both. But as for me, I will come into Psalm 5. 7.
thy House in the multitude of thy mercy: and in thy fear will I worship
toward the Temple of thy Holiness.

If the reverence of the house of God so far Ecclesiast. 4. 17
off, did make impression; Take heed to thy foot when thou entrest into the
House of God. The sanctification and use of this place calls upon thee for
holy preparation. Thank God (beloved) for the happy liberty that we have in
the house of God, the Doors are open, the Belles inuit us to it: God is at
home, and at good lesure to hear our suites, and to give us remedy.

2 They fly to Confession, and confess thy name.
The name of any thing is that whereby it is known and distinguished from
other things: the confessing the name of God here required, is the honoring of
God, to the uttermost of our knowledge of him, and of his revelation of
himself to us, and this is that which we beg of God, saying, Hallowed be
thy name.

And even in this, they that seek to God for remedy, when he has brought any
judgment upon the earth, must confess the name of God, and give him the glory
due to him, which is done,

1 By confession of their sins, for his name appears so much the more
glorious, by how much our unworthiness is more in sight, so Joshua Joshua 7.
19.
said to Achan: Give glory to God* and make confession unto him, and tell me
now what thou have done, hide it not from me.

2 By confession of Gods Justice to be such, as that he will exact of us an
account of our whole life, because all our ways are before him.

3 By confession of his goodness and mercy, who is not so unplacable but that
we may come to him with our prayers: many men provoked to anger, are so
violent, that they can not brook any sight of the party with whom they are
offended, they will not hear him, or any that plead his cause: God does not
so, but receives the petitions of sinners for his names sake.

4 By confession of his name, seeing the holy name of God is violated in our
sins, and we have neglected him* whose name should have been a sufficient
disswasiue, to have daunted us from unrighteousness, there is no better way
then by confession of his name to declare to the world, that not in it self
alone, but even in our estimation also, Holy and reverend is his name.

5 By confession of his name in our punishments, acknowledging that it is God
who has brought upon our Land this general drought, it is he who sent the
bitter Frostes to keep in the Spring, and the parching heat in the Summer, to
burn up the food of our cattle, who opened the heaven in the Spring, and
sent down such plenty, and continuance of Snow, that the earth was shut up
against us, and the beasts of the field: and who has now a long time shut up
the Heavens, that no rain does fall upon the earth, to refresh the withered
beauty thereof.

6 By confession of his name in the remedy: for we must also declare, that
our help stands only in the name of the Lord, who has made Heaven and
Earth. For as we must bury all our murmurings in his name: Because thou Lord
have done it: so we must quicken and enlighten all our hopes at his name; for
only the hand that wounded us, can heal us, and none but our God can renew
the face of the earth.

3 They fly to Repentance: This is called
1 A turning from their sins. 2 It has Externum motiuum: an outward motive:
affliction.
The turning here mentioned implies two terms.

1 Terminus a quo: from what we must turn. 2 Terminus ad quem: to whom we
must turn.
1 From what.
1 That from which we must turn is sin, and this is hard to do, because
sin hangs so fast on, especially the sins of plenty, as gluttons,
drunkards, and wantons, sins committed with such delight, that men are loath
to part with them, and we see very few recovered from them: Surely, many seem
rather turned into these sins, then turned from them.

And if God should not have mercy upon us out of the multitude of his own
tender compassions, and for the favor that he bears to a few righteous
souls, that do make conscience of these sins, till the sensual drunkards,
gluttons, and wantons of the earth, do turn away from these sins, to seek
his mercy, who of us should hope to see an other shower of rain fall down
upon the face of the dry and thirsty earth again?

The phrase of turning from sin, imports a great mercy; for God knowing
whereof we be made, and how frail the sons of men are, exacteth not a
perfect integrity, a pure, and full separation from all our sins, only he
requires of us to turn away from them, as we do from those things which are
loathsome to us, and that we do express our dislike and hatred of them.

The phrase of Christ to Peter: Get thee behind me, does show as much: Let us
esteem our sins our enemies, that we may strive to leave them asterne of
us. We say, They go far that never turn: They do indeed; so far, as they
that would go thence to Abraham's bosom, cannot.

But every turning will not serve the turn; thou may turn away thy hand
from the action of evil, and turn not away thy heart from the affection to
it: Many so far over rule desire, as to keep them from operation, but thou
must turn away, not only the instruments of sin, the members and parts of
thy body, but even the heart that sets them all aworke, from sin and
iniquity.

These evils which we would put behind us, will be still courting of us, and
Satan will never leave tempting us to them, but God is our Terminus ad quem,
we must turn to God.

2 To whom.
Repentance seeks the face of God: the penitent go not back-ward to their
Father, as Sem and Iaphet did, but forward, like the unthrift in the Gospel,
who said within himself: I will go and say to my Father, Father I have
sinned, etc. for he thought, no doubt, many others, even all that trace me
and my evils, have gone to my father, and said as much of me, and this cannot
choose but be an extreme grief to him, now I will go my self and say so to
him, and I hope it will please him well.

This is that (Beloved) which would soon prevail with God, and obtain the
opening of heaven. Thus Peter who had ouer-weened his own love of his Master,
and whilst he warmed himself at the high Priests fire, lost the heat of his
own zeal, and denied his Master, but he went forth, and when Christ looked
upon him, He wept bitterly: so Mary Magdalen turned to Christ, and in his
loving service she employed her eyes, her locks, her lips, her hands, her
knees, her feetointment, which she had not always bestowed well, it is more
then likely, most times ill.

Turn thus to the Lord, and let those knees which have been bent in drunken
Healths to the earth, dwell upon the Earth in our prayers to Almighty God for
forgiveness. Try now if you can surffet upon the Fatness of Gods house, who
have forsaken the house of God to do service to your bellies, making them your
gods, or have come hither so full of your own houses, that you have but come
to take your rest here. Try if your tongs, used to blasphemous swearing,
cursing, bitter jesting, slanderous reuiling, lying, and filthy speaking, can
change their tune, and turn into the Publicans Miserere; Lord be merciful
unto me a sinner.

We have great encouragement hereto, for the Lord to whom we turn, is gracious
and merciful, Joel 2. 13. 14
slow to anger, and of great kindness, and such a one as repents him of the
evil. Who knows if he will return and leave a blessing behind him? And
again, the sins from which we turn, are well forsaken, Repent and turn your
selves from all your transgressions, Ezech. 18. 30.
so iniquity shall not be your ruin.

2 The eternal motive, when thou afflict est them.

This comes somewhat near the heart, for it seems an hard condition, that a
man, a congregation, a kingdom and nation, should seek to him that afflicts
them, yea even when he makes them smart. But such is the wholesome correction
of God, that it draws us to him when all his good mercies do but arm us
against him: this commonly is Gods last refuge, amongst his outward Hosea 5. 15.
means of man's conversion. Hear himself. I will go and return to my place,
till they acknowledge their offense, and seek my face: in their affliction
they will seek me early. And where this fails, the Prophet seems to be
out of hope of turning them to God. The people turns not to him that smites
them, neither do they seek the Lord of Hoastes: therefore Esaias 9. 13. 14.
the Lord will cut off from Israel head and tail: root and branch in one day.

It is then a sign of the good presence of Gods good spirit with us, if
affliction do not put us into passion, and make us murmr against God, but
that we have the grace to pray, and confess the name of God, even while the
rod of God is on us.

Thus did David, The sorrows of death compassed Psalm. 116. 3.
me, and the pains of hell gate hold upon me: I found trouble and sorrow:
Then called I upon the name of the Lord: O Lord, I beseech thee deliver my
soul. Affliction first found out David, as he was wandering out of the way of
Gods commandments: then David found affliction, and made the right use of it,
to put him to his prayers, that God would be his deliverance. Affliction found
him in his prosperity, even then when he said; I shall never be moved: and
suddenly he found himself in adversity, but still adversity was the best
incentiue to inflame him, with the zeal of Prayer: the best impulsive to put
him on upon his God.

This therefore is our season and fittest Seeds time for our prayers and our
repentance, whilst our souls do find trouble and anguish. Yea but the
heavens are shut up against us: how shall our Prayers ascend thither? Be of
good comfort, The Psalm. 34. 15.
eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears are open to their
prayers: and the penitent sinner is in the roll of the righteous: He also will
hear their cry, and will help them. This is such a favor, that David says;
Blessed be God which has not turned Psalm, 66. 20.
my prayer from him, nor his mercy from me. This takes away fear from us,
even in the evil day: when the iniquity of our heels, which Bellarmine
understands Iniquitas extremae vitae: The iniquity Psalm. 49. 5.
of our last of life does compass us about: or when iniquity follows me at
the heels, to bring judgment on me: or when my heels offend God in running
from him, and turning my back to him.

The deathbed is not fearful to such: The Lord will strengthen him upon the
bed of languishing: he will make all his bed in his sickness. Pray then even
whilst the soar is running, whilst all thy sins lie open before God, and
Heaven is shut up against thee: pray and open the Heavens, and leave not thy
God until he bow the Heavens and come down to thee. We have his promise. If
you Leuit. 26. 3. 4. 5
walk in my statutes, and keep my commandments to do them: then will I
give you rain in due season, and the Land shall yield her increase, and the
trees of the field shall yield their fruit: and the threshing shall reach to
the Vintage, and the Vintage shall reach to the sowing time, and you shall eat
your bread to the full.

Now beloved, you have heard both of your sin, the punishment of it, and the
remedy of your grief, let me conclude with this earnest request unto you, That
you be not like to the people of Israel, of whom God himself says to the
Prophet Ezechiel thus; They speak one to an other, every one to his brother,
saying; Come I pray you, and hear what is the word of the Lord, that comes
to you: and they hear thy words, but will not do them: with the mouth they
show much love: but their heart goes after their covetousness.

Your affection cries for God, Seek ye the face of God, let your soul
answer for you; I will seek thy face, O Lord, right early. To that God, that
is, to the Father, Son, and Holyghost be given al praise, and thanksgiving;
now and ever,

Amen.
A Thanksgiving for Rain.
The second Sermon.
PSALM. 68. 9. Verse 9. Thou O God did send a plentiful rain, whereby thou
did confirm thy Inheritance when it was weary.
Beloved Brethren; my last business in this place, was to call you to a
consideration of the heavy judgment of God upon our Land, in the shutting up
of rain, whereby the earth was parched and defaced: and thereupon I moved your
Christian devotions, to send up to the Throne of God, your humblest
Supplications for remedy. Your prayers were no sooner gone up to Heaven, but
The Heaven heard the Earth, and God heard the Heaven: And thou (O God) did
send a plentiful rain upon thine inheritance, and did refresh it when it
was weary. When Christ had healed ten Lepers, and but one of them returned
to give thanks, he enquired but Where are those nine? Thanksgiving is our
duty, and his expectation. To this purpose I have made choice of this Text,
which puts into our mouths a Song of Thanksgiving, containing a
thankful Commemoration of the mercy vouchsafed to us; In which,

1 The benefit received is, Rain. 2 The fulness of the benefit, a plentiful
rain 3 The nature of the benefit, Thou did send. 4 The benefit of the
benefit, Whereby thou did confirm thine inheritance when it was weary.
1 Of the benefit, Rain.
The people of Israel being in Egypt, where they had no rain, (for the earth
is there watered once a year by the inundation of Nilus) had this promise;
That the Land whither they went to possess it, should not be as the Land of
Egypt, from whence they came, where they sowed their seed, and watered Deuter.
11. 12.
it with their foot, as a garden of herbs: but the land of Canaan, is a land
of hills and valleys, which drinks water of the rain of heaven. And David
here confesses that God has performd that promise, and has given them rain
from Heaven, and saved them the labor of watering the earth. This Moses
calls Gods opening to us his good treasure: Deuteronomy. 28 12. Isay 55. 10.
For the rain comes down, and the snow from heaven, and returns not
thither, but waters the earth, and makes it bring forth, and bud, that it
may give seed to the Sower, and bread to the Eater: so the benefit of rain is
bread for this year, and seed for the next year (...) called a treasure, that
is, (...) for it is provision for to day, and store for to morrow; rain is the
milk of heaven, whereby the herbs, and grain, and Isay 44. 14.
the plants of the earth are nourced: Man planteth the Ash, and the rain
nourceth it: David expresses this thankfully, observe his sequent: Sing Psalm.
147. 7. 8 9.
unto the Lord with thanksgiving, sing praise upon the Harp unto our God, who
covers the heavens with clouds; and therein, he prepares rain for the
earth; and thereby, he makes grass to grow upon the mountains, and gives
to the beast his food: This is now our benefit, these must be our thanks: our
sins deprived us of this blessing, our prayers have re-obtained the same: It
remains now, that by our thankfulness and obedience hereafter, together
with our devout supplications, we keep heaven open, and continue upon us the
shewers of blessing, whereby the Ezech. 34. 26.
tree of the field does yield her fruit, and the earth shall yield her
increase. What can we desire more of God? This is all that the holy Prophet
wishes to the King in name of the Church: The Ps. 20. 1. 2 3* 4.
Lord hear thee in the day of trouble, the name of the God of Jacob defend
thee; send thee help from his Sanctuary, and strengthen thee out of Syon,
remember all thy offerings, and accept thy burnt Sacrifice: grant thee
according to thine own heart, and fulfill all thy counsel. This, all this,
has God done for us; for in the time of trouble when we wanted rain, he
heard our prayers: From heaven did the Lord behold the earth, he accepted the
burnt sacrifices of our devotion, and zeal, and the offering up of our hearts,
and the calves of our lips, and gave us rain according to the desire of our
own hearts: We must add out of the next verse, We will rejoice in thy
salvation: David's example is a good guide to us herein. I Verse 5.
love the Lord because he has heard my voice and supplications, because he
has inclined his ear unto Psalm. 116. 1.
me, therefore will I call upon him as long as I live: Wherein two things by
him promised are expected from us:

1 To love God; this is the Law of our duty, and God does exact this as debt,
yet he also purchases, and buyeth, it of us with his benefits.

2 To pray to him, and to this duty it is a good encouragement, Because thou
hear the prayers, therefore unto thee shall all flesh come.

2 The fullness of the benefit.
This rain is called in some readings, A gracious rain: the Interlinearie
reads, Pluuium munificentiarum: The rain of bounty: Arst: Fell: pluuiam
liberarum voluntatum; the rain of freewilles: All express a full and free
benefit: a rain of his free will, to show how frankely his benefits come from
him: or a Rain according to the full desire of our will, so seasonable for the
time, so reasonable for the quantity, so gentle in the fall, as the heart of
man could desire. Here then is pluuia voluntatis diuinae; Gods will was, that
we should have it. And pluuia voluntatis humanae: Man's desire is graciously
satisfied: the thirst of the earth is quenched, and yet the Haruestman not
hindered from gathering in the rich treasures of the ripe fruits of his fields
with joy, even the joy of Harvest: For the Mower fills his hand, Psalm. 129. 7.
8.
and he that binds his sheaues his bosom, and they which go by, say: The
blessing of the Lord be upon you; we bless you in the name of the Lord. Thus
has God renewed the face of the earth, and made the field rejoice, and all
that is therein.

Now, full benefits would have full thankes-giuings: God has sown
plentifully, let him also reap plentifully: Pluuia voluntatum; Rain according
to our hearts desire has gone before: gratitudo voluntatum; the thankfulness
of our willing hearts to praise God must follow it at the heels. God loves a
cheerful giver of thanks to him.

3 The Author of this benefit: Thou O God.
Now we see that Solomon directed us well, to send us to him, for here it
appears, that he shut up Heaven before: and now we find that he is the only
giver of Rain. Thou did send: And thy messenger did his errand faithfully.
It is God that makes the small drops of water, they power down rain
according to the vapor thereof, which the clouds do drop and distill upon
man abundantly, Job 36. 27.

And the Prophet enquireth, Are there any among the vanities of the Gentiles,
that can give rain, or can the heavens give showers? Art not thou he, O Lord?
Therefore we will wait upon thee, for thou have made these things, Ierem. 14.
22.

You may know the Author by the plenty, for when God gives, he stilleth
abundantly. He is abundant in his goodness, and in his truth. He is never
spare and reserved but in his judgments, there he is always slow to wrath,
and behindehand with us, but he is prior in dilectione: we cannot prevent him
in his love, he loved us first.

This will make us both seek to him for rain, when we want it and thank him
only for it, when De Ciu. Dei 2. 3.
we obtain it. Saint Augustine shows the spite and malice of the heathen
Romans of old, against Christians, who used this Proverb; Pluuia defecit causa
Christiani: The Christians is the cause that we have no rain. Tertullian
complained of them that they thought omnis publicae cladis, omnis popularis
incommodi, christianos esse causam. That the Christians were in fault, for all
the destruction in the Commonwealth, for all inconveniences that befell the
people. Si Tiberis ascendit ad moenia, si Nilus non ascendit in arua, si terra
mouit, si fames, si lues, statim Christianos ad leones acclamatur: If the River
of Tiber swelled too high up to their walls: if Nilus did not drown their
fields: if there were any Earthquake, any famine, or infectious disease, then
they cried: Let the Christian be given up to the Lions to be devoured, for he
is the cause of all, and for his sake all this evil is come upon us. So
complayneth good Saint Cyprian, That the Christians are traduced Contra Demetr.
for the cause of all these evils, because they do not adore and worship
the Gods of the Heathens: but he searches out the true cause, even Salomons
cause, because they sin against thee: Heathens agree that the cause is sin,
and the Judge is Almighty GOD: only they knew not the true GOD, that they
might seek to him, nor the right worship and service, that should and ought to
be done unto him, who only prepares rain for the Earth, and waters the
dry furrows thereof: who also makes a fruitful Land barren, for the
iniquity of the people that dwell therein. Take not then this benefit of Gods
gracious rain, as a natural and customary debt, which the Heaven does owe to
the Earth, but as a special favor and bounty of Almighty God, and give unto
him for it, the honor due to his Name.

4 The benefit of this benefit: whereby thou did confirm thine
inheritance, when it was weary.
The Author of this benefit of Rain has bestowed it.

1 VVisely: upon his own in heritance. 2 Effectually: thou did confirm. 3
Seasonably: when it was weary.
1 Wisely.
The people upon whom God bestows this favor is called here Gods inheritance:
the Church of God: the children of Abraham: so called, because God made them
the heirs of his promise, and under this title, all the Elect are
comprehended, the children of Abraham's faith. Wherein we are taught: first,
That none have right and interest in the good favors of God, but the Elect,
those are heirs of the promises of God: so that the way of righteousness is the
only way of prosperity, and there is no such thrift, as true religion: for
godliness with contentednes is great riches, only that has The promises of
this life, and of the life to come. Daniel that feeds on Pulse, though he fare
worse, looks much better, then they that are fed at the Kings Table: it is not
the benefit received in outward things, but the blessing of God upon it, that
makes us fat and well liking: it was David's observation, The Lions do lack
and suffer Psalm. 34 10.
hunger, but they that seek the Lord, shall not want any good thing.
VVhereupon David reads this Lecture of Thrist to the sons of men. Come ye
Psalm. 34 11.
children hearken unto me, and I will teach you the fear of the Lord. What
man is he that desires life, and loves many days that he may see good?
Keep 12. etc.
thy tongue from evil, and thy lips that they speak no guile. Depart from
evil, and do good. Seek peace, and pursue it. The eyes of the Lord are upon
the righteous, and his ears are open to their cry.

Saint Augustine upon these words says, Si ad literam accipias, videtur te
fallere: If thou understand this place literally, it seems to deceive
thee: and therefore he thinks it safest to expound these words of the life to
come. I think that the scope of the place will press another sense: namely,
the goodness of God upon them: the just, even in this life, which does not
consist in riches, and outward things, but in the blessing of God, and in the
watchful eye of his Fatherly providence, who fails not to take care of the
Elet, teaching them how to abound, and how to went: and in all the miseries of
life still supporting them.

This blessing is not so much in sight, as the outward things are, yet not
altogether unseen. For have we not seen many men great in power, great in
favor, great in revenue, and yet bare and needy, borrowing, and much indebted,
yea borrowing of those, who have less means to enrich themselves: when some
of poorer estates are still purchasing, and in cheerful vegetation. Some like
ships with too much sail ouer-set in the Sea of this world, whilst others,
that spread less cloth bring home their freight. The blessing of God is the
cause of this difference. This seems a foolish doctrine to the worldling: but
give me a little with this blessing, rather then Satan's offer of all the
Kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them, without it. David says in the
fourth Psalm and the eight verse, I will lay me down in peace, and take my
rest, for it is thou Lord only which make me dwell in safety. And he
chideth them that Rise early, and go late to bed, and eat the Psalm. 127. 2.
bread of carfulness, for God gives his beloved sleep.

Set your rest upon this, be faithful in your service of God, and in the
duties of your lawful callings, and then permit Deo caetera: Leave the rest
to God. Cast your care upon him, for he cares for you. Your leaf shall not
wither, and look whatsoever you do, it shall prtsper, Psalm. 1. 3. Hear the
word of your God by his Prophet Jeremy 22. 13. Woe to him that builds his
house by unrighteousness, and his chambers by wrong, that uses his neighbors
service without wages, and gives him not for his work. And particularly he
says to the son of Josiah; Shall thou reign because thou closest Verse* 15.
thy self in Cedar? Did not thy Father eat and drink, and do judgment, and
justice, and then it was well with him? Was not this to honor me, says the
Lord? Here is a fair example, they that make conscience of their lawful
calling, have their portion in the favor and blessing of Almighty God. Strive
then to be, and to declare your selves the Inheritance of God: For the eye of
God is upon such, and his ear always open to their suites. David instanceth,
I have seen the wicked in great power, and spreading himself like a green
Bay tree: yet he past away, and he was not: I sought him, but he could not be
found. Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright man, for the end of that
man is Psalm. 37. 35.
peace. That which deceives the world in the comparison of the just and
unjust, one with an other, is the odds in quantity. The unjust has much
often: and the righteous but alitle: against which, let us oppose that
infallible rule of David, Psalm. 37. 16.
A little that a righteous man has, is better then the riches of many wicked.

2 We are taught further out of this place, that seeing it is in respect of
Gods inheritance, that God is so plentiful in watering the earth, whereby the
wicked of the earth grow rich, and their portion waxes fat, by this means,
surely we may conclude, that the wicked even in temporal things, do fare much
the better, for the sake of the righteous: for they have the greatest share in
these outward and temporal things. A clear proof of this point is in Sodomes
case, in which, if but ten just men could have been found, the sinning cities
had been spared: and in that story, the Angel of God said to Lot, Haste thee,
escape thither, for I can not do any Genesis 19. 22.
thing, till thou be come thither.

And what is it that deferreth the day of Iudgemnent of all flesh, but Gods
expectation to accomplish the number of his elect? when his number is once
full, he will come to judge the quick and the dead. Therefore it was a
mischievous suggestion of Satan, that Christians were the causes of common
calamities: No (beloved) the righteous are they that hold Gods hands: good
Kings such as Solomon was, who prayed for his people, good Samuels that say,
God forbid that we should cease praying for you: good David's, whose eyes do
gush out in rivers of waters, for them that keep not the Law: good Daniels,
that open their windows toward Jerusalem, and pray thrice in a day to God:
good Ieremies, that wish their heads fountains of tears, to bewail their
people: good Obadiahs that hide, and feed the Prophets of the Lord in time of
persecution. These be they that keep heaven open, and the mercie-seate
accessible; for the Son of God is their elder brother, and they are able to
do all things through him, that strengthens them. This church of God is
scattered over the face of the earth, and all the earth does fare the better
for it. Abimelech confesses to Abraham, God is with thee in all that thou
do: and therefore desired an oath of confederation Genesis 21. 22.
with him.

Abimelech requires the same of Isaac his Son: Genesis 26. 28.
For we saw certainly, that the Lord was with thee.

Laban observes, I have found by experience, that Genesis 30. 27.
the Lord has blessed me for thy sake: and in Joseph's story, both Potiphars
house, and the prison, and all the Land of Egypt, found the benefit of
Joseph's company: he was homo boni pedis: a luckie man, as the Proverb says,
where ever he came: therefore the Apostle says of sundry worthy persons, of
whom the world was not worthy, Hebrews 11. 38. For as God said to Abraham,
Genesis 12. 3. Thou shall be a blessing: So are all the servants of God,
blessings to the place in which they live, and I have willingly embraced their
pious judgments, who have thought, that when S. Stephan prayed for his
persecutors ( Saul by his own confession being one of them) the prayers of
that holy Martire were a most holy and helpful means of Saul's conversion, who
was after that, shortly, Paul an Apostle of JESUS CHRIST, and preached the
Gospel, which before he persecuted. And in this general ouer-growth of
iniquity, in this Land, those few that watch, and fast, and pray, and make
conscience of their ways, and of the service of our God; these are they that
bind the hands of God, that he cannot smite the Land: if he shut Heaven,
these open it again: Such a treasure is piety, such a liberty is in the
service of God: Strive therefore to be the favorites of God. Princes favorites
have but their seasons, their great Masters may die, or their living love may
run in another channel: Trust not in Princes, for there is no help in them:
What a glory is this to religion, that it is not wordly pomp, and high Titles,
full Tables, full Coffers, gay Garments, that prevail with heaven, but
godliness, Which has the promises of this life, and of the life to come.

2 Effectually: Thou did confirm thine inheritance: this is more then to
refresh it; for he did settle and establish his favor upon it: such is the
love of God in duration, whom he loves to the end he loves them; and the
continuace of our service cannot fail of the continuance and confirmation of
his love to us; and upon that condition do all his promises pass to his own
Israel, to Abraham's seed, to David and Solomon, If they keep my Commandments:
Do you desire that God should confirm and settle his mercy upon you and your
children: Be you his children, serve the Lord in fear all the days of your
life; for all the benefits of life depend upon the mercies of God to give them
to us, and to settle them upon us. Thus was the inheritance of God, the people
of Israel, confirmed in the assurance of Gods favorable protection; they found
now that God was good to Israel in the performance of that gracious promise of
rain, whereby the land of their possession became friutfull unto them: and
hereby the faithful in the Land were confirmed in the faith of his truth, and
in the love of his mercy, and in the obedience of his will. Our Savior
required this good service of Peter: Thou being converted strengthen the
brethren. Let not us inconstantly waver in his obedience, who does constantly
continue his loving kindness to us; but let us win as many by our experience
of his love to us as we can: so did David: Come hither, hearken unto me, and I
will show you what the Lord has done for my soul: So shall we confirm our
selves and others in the mercies of God, which are called, the sure mercies of
David.

In this grievous drought which so long parched the face of the earth, we had
now and then a gracious shower, which refreshed the face of the earth, and laid
the dust of it; but we wanted two degrees of the favor now obtained, and in
my Text expressed, for we had not liberatem pluuiam: we had not a plentiful
rain, neither had we that title confirmed, and settled upon us, but the Sun
soon dried it up: But now God has remembered us in the fullness of his mercy,
for we have the early and the latter rain, pluuiam voluntatum: even such,
and so much rain, as we our selves would have: What shall we render to the
Lord for this? let us pay our vows in the sight of the Lord, even now, in
presence of all his people.

3 Seasonably: when it was weary.
The Earth was weary of suffering thirst so long, the cattle were weary with
pining for want of necessary food. Men were weary with watering of the earth
with the foot, weary with bearing the weight of Gods long displeasure, weary
with crying, and calling upon God for help; Because the Jeremy 14. 4.
ground was chapt, for there was no rain upon the earth: the Plow men were
ashamed, and covered their heads, and the eyes of the cattle did fail,
because there was no grass: Even then did God visit us with a liberal rain,
to refresh the earth, and to Confirm his inheritance: yet so moderately, as
not to hurt our hopeful harvest, that all hands work cheerfully to gather
in the riches of the earth. Now let me say to you: Behold you are made whole,
sin no more lest a greater judgment fall upon you: lest he punish you with
too much rain, as he has done with too little: for God has many Arrows in
his quiver of Vengeance. Keep heaven open with your prayers, and send up
thither a morning and evening sacrifice of praises, and say unto your God as
the Prophet does; O the hope of Israel, the Savior thereof in time of trouble,
why Jeremy 14. 8.
should thou be as a stranger in our Land, and as a wayfaring man, that
turneeh aside to tarry for a night? Thou (O Lord) art in the midst of us, and
we are called by thy name. Leave us not.

I conclude, and herein I desire your thankful hearts to join with me in
all serious and sincere devotion: The Lord has done great things for us,
whereof we rejoice. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the
Holy Ghost: As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world
without end,

Amen.
FINIS.

