TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL AND HIS Approved good friend, Master Frances Young,
of Brent-pelliam, in the County of Hertfort, Esquire: and to the most kind
Gentlewoman, and my Mistress, Susan Young, his loving wife, and my Mistress:
as much happiness wishes, as their own hearts can desire.
SHould I (right worshihful) as flatterers are wont to do, set down a
Catalogue of your commendations, and enter into a Laborinth of love toward you,
I know your wits so good, that you would quickly epsy it, and I confess mine
own nature such, as I heartily hate. My present purpose then at this time, is
neither to rehearse your many stinde favors, which I know you rather love
privately to enlarge, then listen publicly to hear laid open; nor report
mine own unthankfulness, which I am sorry has been so much, yet you will
forget, although it were far more: bui as a dutiful remembrance of both
these, though not able to be shadowed in one subject, yet sufficient (in your
conceits I know) being but in part acknowledged, I send you this honorable
History of Prince Palmerin of England, which cost me no more paiues in
writing, then I hope it will be pleasing to you in reading.

The Epistle
This first part is but to relish your taste, how ye can like of such worthy
Knights loves, and memorable adventures, whereof at my last being with you in
the Country, I saw ye use no mislike. Then finding such gentle
entertainment, as I make no question of, the second part shall be with you
very speedily after. So committing your worship, and my sweet Mistress your
wife, to the heavenly protection, I remain yours to my uttermost.

A. Monday.

TO THE LADIES AND GENTLEVVOMEN OF ENGLAND, THE Author wishes such a
courteous moderation in judgment, that his labors be not hastily reproched,
nor hatefully received.
AMong the best choice of flowers (fair Ladies) all are not sweet: where is
most variety of Medicine, some are not sovereign: so amongst all the conceits
you shall find in this Book, all are not pithie, though the most pretty. When
the Lion roareth, the Lamb trembles, when the Captain takes his Lance, the
Coward ferareth his life, even so, the bravery of the learned is so great a
blemish to him that has little, that he fears to proceed, not daring to
step a foot without a pardon. Such are the ingenious inuentio^s (right noble
minded and courteous Ladies) so plentifully sent to your perusing, that (were
it not the bountiful respect of your gentle judgments, did assure me to taste
of your friendly favor) I should convert my studies into so great despair, as
the very thought were sufficient to kill him that dies every hour, fearing
displease. But as mercy does always accompany your noble sex, and mildness
repress any choleric chance, so know I, that rigor cannot dwell, where is no
desire revenge, but as of all men are faulty, I shall be forgiven for company.

Your most bounden by duty, A. M.

In lucubrationes. A. M. Epigramma.
R. W.
VT legi, placuit, nec enim placuisse mireris,
Namque tuum nomen, front libellus habet;
Laudo animum, cupioque tibi sint saepe labores.
Grati: suecumbas ne mala verba ferens.
Nomines Indoctos, doctosque reuoluera scripta,
Indoctique cito fulmen ab ore venit.
Sed tu perge tamen, tipis ornare libellos
Persoluent sumptum gloria fama decus.
Quaeso feras, animo, patienti me tibi calcar
Addere currenti: sum tuus, esto meus.
R. W.

THE FIRST PART OF THE NO LESS RARE, THEN EXCELLENT AND stately History, of
the famous, and fortunate Prince Palmerin of England.
CHAP. I.
How Don Edward son to Frederick king of England, having obtained in
marriage fair Flerida, daughter to the Emperor Palmerin of Constantinople,
returns home again into England, and going on hunting, lost himself in the
unfortunate Forest of great Britain, by pursuing an inchated Bore, which
brought him to the Castle of the Giant Dramufiande, where he remained Prisoner
a long time.
AFter that Don Edward son to the aged Frederick king of England, had
finished his long desired marriage with Flerida, daughter to the renowned
Palmerin d'Oliua, Emperor of Constantinople, (not only to his own good
liking, but also to the content of his friends and familiars) he took his
voyage from the Empire of Greece (as it is at large mentioned in the book
entitled Primaleon of Greece) toward the realm of England, accompanied with
the Princess Flerida his espoused Lady, beside, a train meet to attend on so
puissant a person as the Prince was. Being arrived at the English Court, to the
no little joy of the Knights Father, and great delight of his kinsfolk and
friends, they were welcomed as beseemed their royal estates, and joyfully
received to their hearts content. It chanced in short space after, the
Princess Flerida waxed great with child, a thing of no small comfort to the
aged king, nor of little pleasure to the young Prince.

Now is the tediousness of their travail, the wearisome labor of their long
journey, clean cast out of remembrance, as of no account, and the joyful
Prince Don Edward deuiseth each dainty delight, and each gallant attempt, that
either might procure the Princess to pleasure, or by any means give her
occasion of pastime. And for because the pinching pangs, which always
frequentetth one in her case, might either cause doubt of her good delivery, or
danger in her well doing, (her person being somewhat ouercharged with
sickness) the young Prince was as careful in preventing such ill chance, as
circumspect in providing to shun any such change. Leaning the Court, he
walked with her in Prograce through the Forest of England, for that he
supposed the sight of the spreading Trees, and pleasant passages through the
grassy groves, would be an occasion of the vnminding her former fits, and drive
out of memory the sudden assaults that were incident unto her feeble nature,
using himself very pleasantly, and calling himself Julian, the more to
increase her mirth.

All this while remained the aged King in his Palace, where the English Prince
being armed, cast his eyes on the portrait of Gridonia, having by her side a
Lion, and a tender infant, the sight whereof was of such maruailous estimation
in his conceived thought, both by the show of beauty he held, and shape of
bounty he judged in her, that he abandoned his natural Country, to try his
good fortune against the courageous Knight Primaleon. For the more certainty
whereof, you may at large peruse the effects of his valiancie, in the discourse
of his memorable adventures, and concerning the fortunate proceeings which
passed between them as well the prowess of the one, as valor of the other: I
must needs say it was such, and of so great authority, as it bare the title
of perfect magnanimity. But return we to our matter.

The Princess Flerida perceuing the courteous care, and diligent endeavor,
that her royal spouse Don Edward used for her greater delight, so lovingly
laboring to avoid that motion, that either might seem to her person
displeasant, or by any sinister means to make show of her disprofit, destred
him to appoint such provision for her, that there she emight discharge her
heavy burden, and not to depart before she saw the fruits of her labors. To
which reasonable request, the Prince right courteously consented, being right
glad to fulfill that occasion, that might be to her content, and for that cause
as yet he refused the governing of the kingdom, appointing the whole affairs
thereof, to the wise discretion of King Frederick his father, until such time
as he saw the Princess in better estate of her health. And in this order
sought he each unfrequented place of passage, and each solitary habitation, to
remove his Tents when pleased the Princes, deeming those places to his better
content, then the youthful delights of the King his Fathers Court. But as the
fairest colors soonest fades, the freshest flower, soonest withers, and the
cleerest day quickly cloudy, even so the man to whom Fortune does anouch most
freendlinesse, is soonest intrapped by he dissembling falsehood: and when least
he thinks of any secret doubt, he is deceived by sudden danger. So this
valiant and renowned Prince, whom Fortune had encouraged by his admirable
conquests, and advanced his name in respect of his Nobleness, new reclaiming
her former and woonted courtesy, causes him to taste her present cruelty,
and where before she held his Honor as best worthy her favor, now in a
chollericke humor breaks of her freendship, causing him to know, though she
had helped him long, she was now minded to hurl him down at last. The time
being come of her appointed treachery, and the mean devised to accomplish her
cruelty, she caused Don Edward to leave the company of the Princes Flerida,
and all other his Lords and Ladies who were there present with her, and walks
to the Sea side, which was not far distant. Returning agaiue. he caused the
tents to be pitched four miles from the Forest, on a pleasant green platte,
by a little running river, which delighted the mind of the Princess, the
place was so fine and fitly chosen out. On a sudden there was heard a great
tumult, in a thicket of trees near adjoining, to see what it might be, the
Prince mounted on Horseback, and rode to the place, where casting his eyes
aside, he espied a wild and mighty Bore, which sight the Prince was not a
little glad of, but with diverse of his noble Lords, made present pursuit
after. Don Edward still rid after the game, that the other had quite lost the
sight of him, which they sought again to recover, but all was in vain, for
the day being clean spent, and waxing somewhat dark, caused them to retire
again to the Princess. Who seeing her Lord Don Edward not return with them,
fell into great dismaying, and doubting of his safety, which she had just
cause to do, for that this his sudden departure, was greatly lamented through
the Realm of England, and all kingdoms in Christendom, before they had his
presence again.

The strayed Prince, being thus allured by Fortune, affects his game with
such great delight, that he never minded the Princess distress, but gave
himself wholly to his present pastime, not fearing for foreseeing what might
be the peril. His Steed with tediousness of travail, waxes stract in his
limines, which caused the Prince to stay and alight, for the darkesomnes of the
night had lost his game, and the fayning of his Horse, required to have rest.
Don Edward resting him at the foot of a Tree, began at last to call to
mind, the desolate estate of the Princess Flerida, and the grief his Lords
would conceive for want of his company. Feign he would have slept, but could
not, for still the doubts that assailed his mind, one while for the Princess,
another while for his Peers, first to think how his absence, would cause her
to judge somewhat of his unkind dealing, then how his Lords would stand in
fear of his danger: these, and a thousand more tristfull terrors, with held
him from receiving that sweet rest, he gladly looked for. Alas (thought he) how
hard is his hap to whom Fortune is adverse? how contrary his good luck that
awaiteth her liberality? the one is a thing ever to be doubted, and the other
ought at no time to be desired. The night is spent in these and such like
cogitations, and at the appearence of the day, his eyes began to wax heavy, as
commonly it happens unto those, whom conceived sorrow denies the required
rest, at last very grief of it self constrains them to slumber. This
careful Prince, having obtained such quietness, as the extremity of his
pain would permit him, stretching forth his arms, calls again into
question, the retchlesse regard he had of himself, so lighly to leave his
Lady, and so ungently to forsake his company, which although it happened
against his will, he judged they would not accept it so in worth. Then mounting
upon Horseback, rode on to find his company, so unadvisedly lost, but Fortune
still denying his pretended purpose, by how much he esteemed himself near to
his comfort, by so much the farther of she set him to the contrary, yet hasting
on in hope, at last he arrived in a great Grove of Trees, the thickness and
height whereof, caused him to fall into admiration with himself. Through this
grave ran a fair and clear River, wherein he perceived the resemblance of a
Gallant and curious Castle, as strongly fortified, as rarely edified, the sight
whereof, somewhat asswadged the egernes of his grief, likewise, the pleasant
rattling of the green leaves, with the mellodious harmony of the pretty
chirping Birds, exiled the former heaviness of his heart, and caused him to
remember the gladsome time, wherein he spent his labor, to gain his best
beloved, during the wars of the Emperor Palmerin, where first he named
himself Julian. In these pleasant conceits, he rid along by the River side, so
ravished with his inward delight, that he little suspected the imminent
danger, for unto that place did he cheifest frame his desire, which Fortune
had appointed to work his distress. Don Edward beholding the brave situation
of this Castle, so curious in workmanship, and costly in outward resemblaunce,
the Bridge at entering whereof was so large, yt four knights might easily have
Combatted thereon, no less insued at his sudde^ arriual, then he meruailed at
this his strange adventure. The Porter of the Castle, with double diligence,
more then deserved thanks, set open the gate to allure him in, which the
Prince perceiving, misdoubted no danger, or any secret guile in his gallant
prospect, because he neither saw any to resist his entrye, and the Porter
being unarmed made him doubt the less. It last, more on a youthful courage,
then an advised care, he advanced himself to the Gate of ye Castle, desiring
to know the name of so pleasant a place, and who protected a thing of such
force. The Porter not to learn his lesson, but smoothely coloring his secret
craft, to the good lyking of the Prince, and furtheraunce of his Ladies
pleasure, cunningly coined this gentle reply. Sir (quoth he) my self am a
servant, to her who likewise to your person owes service, and if you please
to enter the Mansion of your Vassaile, what wants in cost, shall exceed in
courtesy, and your self satisfied to your farther content. The Prince regarding
the circumstaunce of his words, and not respecting the collusion of his wyles,
alighted, and presently entered the Castle, where with humble duty he was
conducted to the great Hall, and served with humility in every respect. The
Lady of the Castle, who was chief in this devise, having woone the man, whom
most she made account, of, to cause him as yet to dread no doubt, or else to
fear any ensuing danger, came and welcomed the Prince with such large
protestations, as his thoughts were quite absent in thinking of any peril. The
Prince well noting the courtesy of the Lady, (whose comely countenance and
gallant behavior, not only gave a show of singular modesty, but also bare
the face of apparent honestly) persuaded himself, that all the commendations
in the world, were not of sufficiency, to requite her great gentleness. For
being so bravely ga^ded with gallant gentlewomen, and every one at beck and
call with dutiful humility, he rather deemed her a second Lucrecia, then
doubted her to be a dissembling Lais, rather one that regarded fidelity, then
in such sort to entrap him by flattery. But as the sweetest Rose is not without
his sharp prickell, or the finest Velvet but has his bracke, so under the
smoothest countenance, is soonest found deceit, and in the fairest talk, to
be the foulest treason. And there was a trusty Damon, so was there a trothles
Damocles, as there was a faithful Laelius, so there was a flattering
Aristippus, happy may he be that finds a friend, which prefers the honor
of his faith, before the horror of falsehood, more accounting of the welfare of
his friend, then any thing else in his wordly affairs. But to return to y^
prince who made great account, of his so gentle entertainment, and esteemed well
her friendship that she handled with such dexterity, which to gratify with
thanks, he entered into this discourse.

Lady, if this sudden motion do strike me into a maze, and your sacred
manners, enforce me to muse, impute the one to the rare perfection of your
beauty, and judge the other, as the rash presumption of my boldness. First, your
famous mansion did not a little daunt me, and now the fair mistress does no
less delight me the one excelling all in bravery, the other surpassing every
one in beauty. Wherefore good lady, if it shall like you to report, and license
me to request, let me understand your name, and who is governor of this place.
The Lady as one current in her coy, conceytes, and not to learn how to use
Courtier, quickly sounded the depth of his desire, and as a skitfull pilot
struck Sails against a storm, then taking Don Edward by the hand, she walked
to the window, and shaped him this answer. Worthy sir, the great fame of your
nobleness does well deserve that title, and the sufficie^cy of your present
behauior does urge me to use it, the excuse of your boldness full well we allow,
in respect of your bounty which we cannot mis^ike, for that the authority of
your name, does bear you out in the one. and the effects of nature does brave
you in the other. I would my beauty were so ample as might content such a
Gallant, or my bounty sufficient to entertain such a Guest. Letting that
pass, I would the proportion which has liked you to praise, were answerable
in perfection or able to please. Touching your request, both this Castle and
Governor thereof, rests at your command to what you shall desire, and if it
shall like you to accept of one nights lodging here, not for the good cheer
you shall find, but for your good company which we fancy, you shall be
resolved in every doubt, and to morrow or when please you, you may depart. Don
Edward perceiving her courteous proffer, thought it stood with his honor to
accept it, and against his honesty to refuse it, and while they were using the
time in these and such like familiar speeches, the Tables wre covered, and
every thing provided to a brave and sumptuous banquet, which in cost exceeded,
and in delicate fare surpassed, that in the King his father Court, he could not
be more gallantly served.

There Banquet finished, and the Tables withdrawn, courtesy on all sides
artificially offered, he was conducted into a notable fair Chamber, the
sumptuousness whereof surpassed, where preparing him to Bedward, he conuayed
his good Sword under his Pillowe, which Sword was of such great virtue, that
while it was about him, no enchantment could prevail, or by any means annoy
him. Bearing in Bed, he called to mind the great distance of place, and
diversity of passage, between his beloved Flerida, and his sorrowful self,
which with many a grievous sigh he often bemoned, but at length convinced with
heaviness of sleep, for that the night before he enjoyed no rest, turned him
to the wall, to receive the charge which was toward him. The Lady of the Castle
being marvelous seen in Magic, and knowing by her Art, that the Prince was
sound asleep, sent a Damsel to his Chamber to steal away his Sword, which
while he had, she could not accomplish her desire.

The Damsel in all respects fulfilled her Ladies mind, and having brought it
to her, she commanded her to go unto her Couzin Dramusiand, and desire him
with all speed to haste him thither, for now he might take secure reuengement
on the Prince Don Edoard, for the death of his father, who was slain by one of
the lineage of this noble young Prince. The Damosel went speedily and did her
message, returning with the young Giant whom the Lady sent for, and having
understood the full mind of his Aunt, entered the chamber of Don Edoard, where
taking the sword of the Prince in his hand, brake forth into these or the like
speeches.

Sometimes thou did remain in the service of a man no loss famous then
fortunate, who little knewes now that thou art in my keeping, but since my hap
has been so good to gain thee, I dare avouch to make thee more redoubted,
homaged and esteemed, then when thy Lord Don Edoard did gird thee about him so
putting it up again into the sheath, he approached unto the Bed, and spoke in
this order. Don Edoard, awake then captine Prince, has was thy hap to light in
my hands, and froward thy Fortune to approach this place, bid now adieu thy
former delight, and content thy self to live endless delleur, the court of
England was sometime thy pleasure, but now this Castle of mine must be thy
Prison, all the youthful affections, which were wont to be thy sollace, thou
must forsake, and pass the remainder of thy days in sorrow. I rue thy case,
but can give thee no comfort, I sorrow to think on thy misery, and can give
thee no remedy: blood will have blood again, and cruelty will have the like
rewarded, thou shall feel the force of my chollericke mood, and by
reuengement will be so sharp, as will be trebble grief for thee to sustain
it.

The Prince being vanquished with a sudden fear, to hear the Giant use such
words of fury, put up his hand where he^ thought to find his Sword, but
failing of his purpose, he presently said. In the greenest grass lies the
most deceitful Serpent, and in the calmest waters the deepest whirlepoole: so
in those places where aman thinks himself farthest of all mishaps, he is
soonest assailed by some sudden mischance. Well (quoth the Giant) though my
anger does urge me unto great impatience, and that I cannot brook the open
injury done unto to me, but am bent severely to revenge me on thee and all thy
Kindred, as my after dealings shall make manifest, to their great dishonor,
yet will I keep thee, being first chanced into my hands, that thou may
witness to the rest my his displeasure. As for thy life, I franckly and freely
give thee, seeing the Kingly Lion disdaineth to vaunt on his conquered Prey,
and the Princely Eagle scorneth to stoop to a Fly. Besides, thy life is not
of sufficiency in such a cause as this, being first the death of my Father,
next, the distress of my Friends, now, the present grief of my self, and
lastly, ever hereafter, to all my issue an eternal sorrow: which to appease,
the life of one, no not of ten, no, nor yet of an hundredth is able to make
recompense, or suffice to quench my rigor. Nevertheless, in poor and meanest
sort I minded to use thee, not as thou list, and as I like, not to thine own
choice, but as I shall find occasion: so that to recount thy posted pleasure,
and also to think on thy present ensuing pain (though it be grief to me to
use it, and so hard thy hap, that thou can, nor may refuse it) shall
witness a world of miseries that thou art to abide, and the rarest
Misfortunes, that ever man did taste.

This is thy luck, and this is my law: this thy hard hap, and this my heavy
hatred, as (...) thou departest, thou shall sufficiently understand, and by
that time thou know, what and who I am, that have this authority, thou shall
feel to thy greater woo my pretended injury. Having thus finished his talk,
he caused him to be carried into his strongest Prison, which was in the top of
the Castle, and clapped a great pair of Gyues on his legs, minding in this
fury, never while he lived to take them off again. Don Edoard thus suddenly
changed, from Princely pomp to present penury, from the Court of his Father,
to the Cabin of his Foes, from the presence of his Lady, to the loathing of
his life, enclosed in a Castle so admirable, in a prison so uncomfortable, and
in a Dungeon so dispaireable: closing his arms together, entered into these
sorrowful mo^es.

Oh poor Prince, is thy hope thou had of so great courtesy, and so soon
changed into extreme cruelty? Did thou credit fair words to be such
troth, and now do thou find them, quite turned to treason? Alas, who sooner
deceived then the well meaning man? and who more quickly beguiled then he that
means most honestly? Has Fortune hitherto allowed thee honor, and will she
now leave thee to taste this horror? has all thy life hitherto been spent in
delight, and shall thou now end thy days in this direful distress? Alas,
then have no help to the contrary, wherefore thou must hold thee content,
there is none near to succor thee, wherefore suppe up thy sorrow. Thy aged
Father will miss thee, thy loving Lady will lack thee, and all thy Courtly
companions will sorrow for thy want. And what of that? Bucephalus will stoop
to none but Alexander: and Mercuries Pipe will be scunded by none but Orphaeus:
Even so my proud so may no ways be entreated, but either must be conquered in
strength, or craftily deceived in sleights, which how far my thought is from:
delivery, so far from comfort is my poor oppressed heart.

O my dear Florida, when thou shall call thy unkindness into question, and
my last departure from thy presence into a Woman's opinion, I know the care will
no less trouble thy mind, then my want of thy comfort causes my misery.
Alas, though I have thus left thee by folly, yet think not but I still love
thee faithfully: and although thy grief (as I know) is great, for my loss,
yet think not but my sorrow puts me to extremity of my life: in that this
Prison so amateth me with sadness, as I am of opinion, never again to see
you, without whose company my life cannot long endure, but either to despair
upon my hard Adventure, or presently die in so sharp an assault.

O invincible Prince Primaleon, what grief will you abide for loss of your
brother? and what sorrow will you conceive for your dear Friend: whose
misfortune (I fear) will cause you leave your Parents, and whose tried
friendship move you put your life in peril. Except the Sultan of Niqu^e,
Maiortes, Gatterit, and the King Tranies, by their friendly persuasion, may
otherwise determine your purpose. And though their mere Love keep you at
home, yet I think my mishap will enforce them to be sorry: So that some of
them will endeavor to hear of me again, although it be impossible to give me
succor, except favor may plead their cause wi^h the Lady of this Castle,
whose cruelty I fear will no way be entreated. In these and such like rufull
complaints, the Captive Prince spent his time: until earnest opinion of his
Lady to be present with him, urged him to break forth into these speeches.
Alas my good Lady, this cruel Prison is not cause of my death, but to see
your person accompany me in distress, when the Court were more meet to
shrowde your seemly self, then this uncomfortable Dungion, for you to set
foot in: Whose presence procures so fierce an assault in my heart, that the
fear of your safety is more to my peril, then a thousand torments might be to
my pain.

Wherefore, good Lady, content* yourselfe, and suffer me to moan, blemish
not your fair face with rufull tears for me: the one may endanger your
prosperity, and the other may no way be to my profit. Thus clasping his arms
together, and entering into a farther conceit in his mind: I leave the
extremity of his grief, to those that have tasted the like mishappe, that
where before he was equal with any for good fortune, he is now above all,
respecting his ill luck.

CHAP. II.
In this Chapter is declared, why Eutrope the Enchauntresse procured thus the
hard hap of the Prince Don Edoard, and what the Gaint was, that detained him
Prisoner.
THe History does discourse unto us, how when the Emperor Palmerin of
Constantinople, left his royal estate, to seek aduenttures as a wandering
Knight: that he arrived in England, accompanied with Trineus the Emperor of
Allemaignes son, who for the love of fair Agriola in the English Court, left
his native Country, and behaved himself so valiant, that she might esteem
him as one of her (...) favored Knight. And in sooth, not to diminish his
praise, or hold back one title of his brave behavior, the exploites both of
him and the Emperor Palmerin (being both to most unknown) were such, as the
King of England, with all his Courtly assistaunts, not only commended their
valor, but also gave them entertainment, agreeable to their bounty and
magnanimity. For he perceiving that their daily endeavors, tended both to the
safeguard of their person, and honor of his whole Realm, gave them that
preferment in Court, which they deserved in chiualry, and that honor in name,
which they both argued to have in nature, whereby they were encouraged to
attempt the hardest adventure, and so be honored in their knightly behavior.
In favor of their Prince, and jove of their Country, at length they obtained
the full issue of their enterprise: which was to have with them the Prince
Agriola, whom on a day, through leave obtained of the King with the Queen her
mother, they got leave to walk into the field, not far distant from the
Court, accompanied with diverse Noble men, and Gentlemen, as you may read more
at large in the History of Palmerin d'Oliua, which faith, That sporting
themselves there on the top of a hill, on a sudden (altogether unlooked for)
there came a Giant named Frenaque, well attended on with twenty fighting men:
who perforce took the Queen and her Daughter Agriola from them, neither
respecting the woeful mean of the Ladies, nor gentle entreatie of the
knights, who had no defense to rescue them, nor company enough to resist them:
But at that time were more ready to use a distaffe with Hercules, then a Spear
with Hannibal, and rather required to handle a Lute in Venus Chamber, then lift
a Lance in Mars his Camp, and for a soldiers i^uniti^n, using sweet Parle
with their Mistrisse, and their Ladies laps, for the hard lodging in the
field. So being thus altogether unprovided, lost the sum of their pleasure,
and honor of their Knighthood. Palmerin and Trineus (who had been with the
King in walking) arriving there, and hearing of this loss, encouraged them as
well as they might, offering themselves to die, ere they would put up this
injury. So willing them all to provide them presently, for that a rash
encounter, might turn to an hard adventure, they proceeded in pursuit after
the giant, and ouertaking him, behaved themselves so worthily, that he was
slain by the hands of the Emperor Palmerin. Then the young Prince Trineus, as
well that his Lady Agriola might perceive his hardness, as also the Queen her
mother might give his deeds commendation, so valiantly menaced his courage,
that by the help of the other Knights, all the Giants train were vanquished,
so that the Queen and her Daughter, had suffered no spot of dishonor by their
cruelty, which greatly they stood in fear of.

This Giant had a Sister named Eutropa, so cunning in Magic, that neither
Zoriastes, nor all the other Magitians, were in this deuilish Art comparable to
her, by help whereof, she had knowledge of the death of her Brother, which
entered so deep into her heart, that she vowed her reuengement should exceed
this cruel mischance. And having in her Castle with her a Nephew of hers, and
the Son of this Giant Frenaque, named Dramusiande, by whom she meant to seek
her sharp revenge: she took him in her arms, and entered into these rufull
complaints. Ah sweet Nephew, albeit thou art fatherless, yet art thou not
friendlesse, and though in thy tender time, Fortune has framed thy mishap, yet
espect a farther time, which my Art shall begin, and thy manhood finish. And
he that has thus cruelly murdered the Father, both he himself, his lynage,
friends and familiars, will I persecute with extreme rygor. After these and
such like speeches uttered, she provided to fortify and make strong her
Castle, least the King of England should seek both the ruin of it, and
destruction of the Giants kindred, when once it came to his ear the Treason
she pretended against him, wherefore, she armed her self with all those of
her kindred, knowing that to resist the power of a King, asked no small defense.
And for a further remedy, least worst should happen, she enchaunted the Forest
round about, so that none could enter her Forreste without her leave, until
such time as the young Giant Dramusiande were able to bear Armor, and receive
the order of Knighthood. In process of time, the young Giant grew able to
bear Armor, and then his heart began to thyrst for revenge of his Fathers
death, the which to accomplish, he was very desirous in Travel to adventure
his strength, according as his heart desired.

But Eutropia perceiving the courage of his mind, to exceed the strength of
his person, de^iled him to stay his Journey, and she would yield into his
hands such a one on whom he might sufficiently revenge the death of his
Father. Thus, and with these persuasions, she changed the mind of Dramusiande,
until the hard fortune of the Prince Don Edoard brought him to her Castle,
where he entered without any danger, for that his good Sword, kept the force
of all Enchauntments from him, but having lost it by her Devilish deceyte,
remained as I have expressed in vnspeakeablie.

Leaving this matter, it shall not be amiss, to speak somewhat of the state
and condition of Dramusiande, who albeit he were a Giant, which commonly are of
rough and impatient nature: yet was he endued both with civility of life, and
honesty in behavior, exempting cruelty, and surpassing all of his stock and
parentage in courtesy.

For after he had a long space kept Don Edoard in Prison, and not only
perceived his Princely qualities, but also the sobriety and great gentle^^^
his life, he caused his Fetters to be taken from his feet, and gave him
leave for recreation, to walk about the Castle, upon condition, that he
would not seem to pass beyond his limits, without his consent.

The courteous Prince, gave him his hand and Oath, that he would not pass one
foot further, then his License should permit: Yet notwithstanding for all
that, he gave charge unto diverse to respect his walking abroad, in that he
respected his Aunte Eutropaes promise, which was, that many valiant Knights,
would Adventure their lives in the search of this strayed Prince, whom she
doubted not but to have also as Prisoners in the Castle.

And against the coming thither of any such, she caused to lie in Embush in
the Forest, a great number of Armed men, to aid Dramusiand against them, if
his hard hap should miss of his purpose. Tssus passed the young Giant his time
in pleasure, and Don Eodard acqusinted himself with his former sorrows, (as
it chances unto those, who of long time are kept from the sight of them they
most desire) as well for the want of his espoused Lady, as also the grief the
King his Father would conceive for his ill luck. But yet the gentle pastime
that Dramusiand would often use with him, caused him to spend the time in
pleasure, that else he would have wasted in mourning. Thus leaving the captive
Prince in his forced content, we will return to the Prince Flerida, whom we
left in the Forest, sorrowfully exp^cting the glad return of her Lord Don
Edoard.

CHAP. III.
How the Princess Flerida, awayting the return of her loyal spouse Don Edoard
in the Forest, was delivered of two goodly young Princes: and how a Savage man
walking by her with two Lions, took them from her to feed his Lions withal.
And of that which happened to sir Pridos, son the Duke of Galls, in his
search of the Prince Don Edoard
WHile the Princess Flerida, with no less grief of mind, then agony of her
whole person, remained in the Forest, expecting that which came not, as well
to abandon diverse chollericke humors, that ouercharged her impatient mind, as
also to exile the eger passions, which were still approaching her weak nature,
she busied her self in gathering flowers, accompanied with the fair Attaida
and diverse Ladies and Gentlemen, for that this time of recreation, was more
correspondent to her good liking, then heretofore she could conceive the
opinion to like any. On a sudden, she fell into remembrance of her Lord Don
Edoard, whose long absence she admitted to some misfortune, or else
ungentleness in himself disdained her presence. In which of these resalue her
self, she was doubtful: for that in the one she might convict her self of
rash belief, though in the other she might stand upon good occasion. Between
these cogitations she spent the whole day, yielding her complaints likewise to
the uncomfortable night approaching: which indeed seemed to her more obscure,
more griesly, and more despairable, then any night passed to her remembrance.
So that upon this hard motion, she fell into a resolute opinion, never to hear
good tidings of her lord Don Edoard, for that the knights who had spent their
labor in his search, were returned without any tidings.

The Lord and Ladies perceiving these passions to be more extreme upon her
then any heretofore, began to cast with themselves whether they might depart
and leave her in these fits, or stay still with her, which was to their great
grief: at length they thus concluded, to abide the return of the Duke of
Galls, for whose absence likewise the Princess was more agreeued then she
would have been, had he been present. This uncomfortable night gone, and the
cheerful deawes of Phoebus displayed over the earth, the duke of Galls
returned a glad sight to the Princes, and no less joy to her attendants, for
that she hoped of wished news of her Lord, and they to hear what was become
of their Sovereign. But their expectations were far disappointed, for he was
as ignorant of the Prince, as they which caused a fresh hurt upon the old
grief: nevertheless, he entreated the Lords to take themselves to travail,
it might so fortune (he persuaded them) that they should have better success
then he had. In the meanetime, he would abide with the Princess to comfort
her, for that she had vowed never to return from thence, till she had heard
some tidings of her best beloved.

The noble Gentlemen, of no less loyalty to their Prince Don Edoard, then
love they bare to the Princess Flerida: addressed themselves presently to
fulfill this request. Among whom Pridos, eldest son to the Duke of Galls,
and chief Gentleman attendant on the Prince, rode along the sea shore, where
he met with two of his companions, who likewise endeavored themselves in the
search of Don Edoard, with whom he determined to return, for that he was past
hope of any good success.

Nevertheless, to avoid the evil conceit of the Princess, and the angry
mood of his aged father, he left them, and rode on very solitary, sometime
exclaiming on Fortune for his hard hap, and then again blaming his solly, when
he perceived no remedy: In midst whereof, he brake forth into these, or the
like speeches. If it were meet for mortal creatures, to blame or inuey
against their heavenly Creator, then both justly, and by good reason, may I
claim the like occasion, whose sorrow can not enjoy one hour of succor, whose
moan be admitted on half hour of mirth, or whose extreme grief, but once
taste the savor of half a minutes rest. The Horse haung labored all day, can
take rest in his Inn at night, the little Bird, can comfort her self on every
twigge: the Fish can sport and make pastime to himself in the River: in
brief, every creature enjoys a quiet and pleasant life, man only excepted,
who excelling all creatures, both in form and feature, is inferior to them all
in tranquillity of life. So that surueying the whole course of man's life, both
from the beginning and to the end, I will admit the Philosophers sentence.

Either never to be borne, or quickly to die.

A good while he continued these careful complaints, and longer would have
done, had not the presence of a Damesell caused him to forget them, who was
mounted on a black Palfrey, and attired likewise in black garments, who
coming still toward sir Pridos, made him somewhat amazed: yet took courage
again, in hope to be certified by her, of some glad ^idings, as concerning the
strayed Prince Don Edoard. The Damosel behauing her self very courteously, with
no less audacitie of wit, then exquisste qualities of maiden civility: taking
Sir Pridos Horse by the bridle, saluted him with these speeches.

Sir Knight, if my presence do argue a presumption, or my boldness to break
off your silent cogitations, seem not Maydenly in me, or more then modesty in
your eye, let humble entreaty pass for the one, and the tidings I bring, crave
pardon for the other.

The pains you take are to very small purpose, and the grief you ouerloade
your mind withal, to as little avail: for proof whereof, give ear to my
words, which shall somewhat ease your mind, and here make an end of my
travail.

Don Edoard your Prince, whose nobleness has ever been more famous, then his
late adventures has proved fortunate, he lives, yet deprived of his liberty,
and captive to him, whose anger will not be assuaged of long time, which he
must stay to his grief, and my sorrow. Wherefore, on thy knighthood I charge
thee, to certify the Princess Flerida, how dangerous it is for her to use
such great impatience, as may cut off her time, yet not abate his troubles. And
how she might manifest a princely magnanimity of mind, in conquering this
grief, by valor of her patience, because Fortune is prepared to another
mishap, which because it will happen too soon, I refer it to her that shall
feel it, and to you that shall know it. And therefore give her to understand,
her grief is as needelesse, as his state is helpelesse, until the appointed
time, when all extreme sorrows, shall finish with unspeakable joys. And thus
say, that Argonida sends her these tidings: to whom, her loss is as
displeasant, as to her self.

The Damsel ending here her Tale, gave bridle to her Palfray, and left Sir
Pridos: into whose remembrance the knowledge of this Lady presently came. That
she was the Daughter of the Lady Enchauntresse, of the Isle where the Eagle
ravished Ardesdegno, begotten by Primaleon, at the time when such excellent
Tryumphes were made, after the Battle fought against the Knight of the
unknown Isle.

And of this Argonida, Don Edoard had a son, named Pompides, (as it is at
large rehearsed in the Book of Primaleon) which I will let pass, and return
to sir Pridos. Who having well noted the tale of Argonida, returns to the
place where he left the Princes, and declaring unto her all that had happened,
she became more sorrowful then before, for that she desired nothing more then
his company, which living she ought to have, and yet he alive could not have.
Her sorrows took so deep a persuasion in her heart, that immediately she
fell into labor, which the Ladies perceiving, and the Gentlemen giving place,
as was their duty, after many grievous pa^gs (which are incident to those in
that taking (she was happily delivered of two goodly men Children. The Lady
Atraida receiving the two young Princes, wrapped then in rich and costly
clothes, and then preseuted them to the Princess, holding opinion that the
sight of them, would somewhat mitigate her great vexation of mind, and she
taking them in her arms, mixing her talk with tears, declaring motherly
affection, thus said. Ah sweet Infants, I rejoice in so much as Fortune having
wrought her malice upon me, yet that to you twain she has attributed no
disloyal accident, for more then she has done, well she cannot do,
respecting I have lost a friend, and you a Father. How happy had I been, if
in bringing you twain into the world, I had departed my self? Yet Nature
urges me to recall my words, in that the Fathers absence, is appeased by the
Mothers presence, and yet so sharp are her assaults, that when I would heartily
nourish you twain, I am heavily brought into dismaying of my life.

Remaining in this heavy complaints, to the two young Children, such provision
was made, as they would be Baptized and she being demanded how she weuld have
them named, willed that the first might be called Palmerin, after the name of
her Father, for that the effect of this misfortune, might be well compared to
his before passed. The other, for because they were borne in the Forest, she
desired that his name might have relation to the place of his birth, which was
thus determined, Florian du Desert, as much to say, as Florian of the Forest.
The Ceremonies accomplished, which were required in this matter: the Princess
received the two Infants upon her lap, one while with mournful tunes to
still their crying, au other while with the Teat to bring them asseepe, ever
minding the hard misfortune of her Lord, and never ceasing to deplore the
miseries of her life, esteeming the one to excel all in hard hap, and the
other to be above all in unlooked for mischaunce. But as commonly it happens,
no pleasure is without his pain adjoined, nor no quiet calm, but by some
accident or other, is converted into a rough tempest: even so this careful
Princess, whose extreme grief and mishappe, added a persuasion of mind,
that Fortune had done her worst, and executed her uttermost spite: so that
what wanted to accomplish her quiet, as concerning the absence of her loving
Don Edoard, she determined a resolute opinion, (albeit far incomparable to
her loss, yet as Nature willed her, by a forced content) to assuage her urgent
Passions, on the presence of the two young Princes: by whom in time she had
good hope to end her grief, and on whom as present occasion did serve, she was
somewhat satisfied. But mark how unkindly it happened.

In this Forest of long time remained a Sauadge man, who not using the
company of reasonable Creatures, became unreasonable of himself: as the
course of his life, being brutish and Beastly, his diet on the Herbs and
Roots of the ground, his Apparel framed of the skins of wild Beasts,
showed that he was a man in name, but not in nature. This Sauadge man, walking
as was his wont, along the Forest, leading in his hand a couple of Lions,
whom he used sometime to kill the Game, that would serve for his nourishment:
unhappily espied the Princess and her Train, which moved him to withdraw
himself into a thicket of Trees near adjoining: where at pleasure he behold
the Ceremonies, used at the Baptizing of the Children.

Now had Fortune determined the second mishappe of the Princess: for that
she urged the Sauadge man, to go take the two Infants, who were sweetly
sleeping on the Mothers lap, and give them for food unto his Lions, that all
that day had received no sustenaunce. Forth from among the Trees he coms, too
the no little astonishment of the Princess (whose sorrowful mind, was subject
to any moytie of fear) and the great dismaying of her Courtly attendants: who
at this presence of so grim a sire, betook themselves to flight, not one
receiving the courage of heart to abide by the Princess, but the Lady Attaida,
who neuor shrunk one foot from her, but would have adventured the death in
the Princess defense, had her might been answerable to her good stomach. When
the Princess saw herself subject to so hard a mischance, that the old Duke of
Galls, and all the other being unarmed, were glad to fly, which indeed was
their best help: she wished for Sir Pridos, but he was departed to London, to
fetch a Chariot to bring her to the Court, which urged her thus to content her
self: Let it suffice thee poor Flerida, that thou art the only she, borne
unto all misfortune. Then approached to her the Sauadge man, and took from her
the two young Princes, neither using any words, or offering any harm to her,
but departed presently to his Cave, leaving the Princess overcome with a
trance, whereout, the Lady Attaida by her diligent means recovered her.

CHAP. IIII.
How Sir Pridos being departed frow the Forest, where he left the Princess,
came to the Court to the King Frederick, and declared unto him the loss of
the prince Don Edoard: which was no small grief to him, and all the Citizens
of London. And how the Princess Flerida left the Forest, and was brought to
the Court.
AFter that Sir Pridos had seen the Birth of the two Princes, he resolved to
depart from thence to London, to the end that he might cause a Chariot be
brought into the Forest, to convey the Princess unto the Court of her father
K. Fredorick. Who leaning in his chamber window espied sir Pridos come ryding
in great haste, which caused him to cast a doubt, of some evil news
approaching: in that he judged a show of more sadness to be in him at that
instant, then before time he could perceive in him the like. Whereof to be
resolved, he presently sent for Sir Pridos, to know the cause of his so sudden
arrival: whose grief could not conceal the loss of Don Edoard, but in
tears laid open a discourse, which grieved the Aged King t^ hear it, and
galled his heart to recount it. The King at these unlooked for news, fell into
such extreme passions, both with the tears that bedeawed his Aged bearde, and
grievous sighs that issued from his heart, that Sir Pridos could hardly keep
life life in him, or by entreaty use any means of a patient persuasion, for
the Aged King was stricken into such a debility of hope, that between the
impatient assaults of doubt and danger, he thus began to use speech with
himself.

O my Don Edoard, nature wills me to deplore thy loss, and entire affection
makes me dye for thy lack: whose presence was the staff of mine Aged days,
and whose absence is the Sword, that wounds me to the death. But as no Grass
will hang on the heels of Mercury, nor Moss abide on the Stone Sisiphus, so
no certainty can be looked for at the hands of Fortune, whose sicklenesse is
seen in change, and whose frowardness in chance. Too long have I trusted
her, and too late has she deceived me: the one my folly, the other her
fashion. Yet doubt I not, but if thou enjoy thy life, the substance of thy
valor shall exceed the sharepnesse of her vengeance, which will be no less
welcome to thee, then long wished of me. But alas, Well may (...) hide my
grief, but never heartily forget it: well may I awhile brook it, but for no
long time bear it: for that the want of my comfort, will cut off my days, and
the doubts I conceive bring me in greater distress, where if thou were
present, my mind would be satisfied, and in spite of Fortune, award all
mischances. While the King continued in this great agony of ^inde, the Queen
entered: who likewise understanding the loss of her Son, began to add
another Stratageme of grief, bewraying her motherly affection, both in tears
and heavy complaints, which to appease, the aged King thus began. Madame, the
honor of a noble mind, is tried in adversity, when as the extremity of
grief, is conquered by patience of the mind. But the mind being impatient,
and not kept within the lymittes of a moderate government: the least Cross
that happens, is too weighty in pain, when the sense is far too weak in
reason. It pleased the Almighty to give us a Son, in whom we received no
little comfort, and by whom, our Fame has been Knightly advanced. And now to
try how we can brook a moitie of his displeasure, he has caused some
accident to happen, to keep him from us, whom we most of all desired, yet not
depriving us of hope: but as to our grief we have lost him, so to our comfort
we shall see him again. In mean time, let us tolerate this sharp
affliction, on his two Princely Children, who till we enjoy the fight of the
Father again, shall with their noble Mother, comfort our sorrows, and we also
endeavor to abate their mones. So one with another shall bear an equal share
of adversity, and be partners also in good Fortune, if any chance to happen.

Thus the King and the Queen remained, one while in a persuasion of patience,
an other while wholly vanquished with the force of their grief: whose Passions
I refer to the judgments of those, that have tasted the honor of Fame, and
hatred of Fortune. Return we now to Sir Pridos, who in this time had caused
his Brother to ride with a Chariot to the Forest, that the Princess might be
brought to the Court, who being placed in the Chariot, and ready to depart:
She gave so heavy a farewell to the place, as well for her Lord Don Edoard, as
misfortune of her Children, that her attendaunts seemed as it were drowned in
sadness, to see the Princess overcome with such sorrow. Being come to the
City of London, the Citizens, who at her coming from Greece, did not only
excel in variety of devises, but also discovered their joy in singular
Triumphs: Now with a sorrowful disposition, they bewrayed the terror of
their loss, and yet with an intermedled show of joy, to assage the dolor of
the Princess.

When she came to the Court, and perceived the great change, of woonted
disportes, both in the King and Queen, as also in all the nobility, who
likewise understanding the mishap of the two young Princes, altogether begin a
world of lamentations. The king dismaying of any good hope, the Queen
dispayring in double extremity, the Lords and Ladies, both in apparel and
iesture, wholly exclaiming on the cruelty of Fortune. The Inhabitaunts
throughout the whole Realm of England, whose delight was many times, to fit
and conceive maruailous opinions, of the no less Knightly, then famous
adventures of the Prince Don Edoard, now sit sighing, wringing their hands,
and pulling their bonnets over their eyes, using as it were in a general voice
amongst them: Oh, none but we unhappy.

The King having thus passed this night, in no less grief of mind, then
sickly assaults of his aged person, (the Queen, and the Princess Flerida,
equally considered) on the morrow he determined to send a Knight of his Court,
named Argolant, Son to the Duke of Horten, and Brother to Traendos (who also
had bin amourous of the Princess Flerida) to the Emperor Palmerin, at
Constantinople, to let him understand the late misfortune of England. He being
ready to depart, as he rode through London, the Streets were adorned with
black, and the Citizens arrayed in black and mourning manner, bringing him to
the Sea shore, where he took shipping and departed.

The Princess Flerida became very feeble of person, insomuch that there was
doubt of her good recovery: but God not suffering her to end, as she
willingly would, gave her strength again by little and little, and comforted
her self best, when she was forth of all company, which caused many Knights
to leave the Court, and live in search of the strayed Prince Don Edoard, who
pitied her case, and his abscence. Thus remained fair Flerida, as chaste
Penelope, to her absent Lord Ulysses: not failing one jot in true and
faithful Love, though she daily contemned the adverse estate of her life. And
he likewise failed not in constant loyalty, but preferred the terror of death,
before the falsifying of his faith to his Lady. Justly fulfilling, that neither
distaunce of place nor extremity of Fortune, could part in sunder their mutual
conjunction of spotless amity.

CHAP. V.
What the Sauadge man did with the two young Princes, how pity vanquished the
bloody tyranny, he was minded to execute on them. And how Argolant arrived at
Constantinople, at what time the Emperor Palmerin was at the Triumphs, for
the birth of fair Polinarda. Where declaring his tidings, the Emperors Son
Primaleon, presently took himself to travail, beside diverse Noble personges,
who followed in the search of the famous Don Edoard.
Return we now to the Sauadge man, who as the History declares, hastened to
his Cave, with the two young Princess in his arms, his Wife there awaighting
the return of her Husband, having in her arms her own child, being about
the age of one year. He bing come to her, presented her the two young Princes,
declaring that all that day, he had found no other Dinner for themselves and
the Lions, then those two Infauntes, whom he willed might presently be
dismembered in pieces, for that his hungry stomach required to have meat. The
Wife, in whose heart motherly pity, excelled Sauadge cruelty, for that
indeed, Women by nature, do bear a more estimation of mercy, then is
requisite in men: she used such kind persuasions with her Husband, as also
finding the mean to provide other necessaries for him, that she saved the
lives of the Infants, and satisfied the hungry appetite of her Husband: so that
lovingly she became their second Mother, and as carefully nourished them, as
had they been the fruit of her own body. Where we will leave them a while,
to God and good Fortune: being not forgetful of Argolant, whom we left sailing
toward Constantinople. After so long being on the Seas, as is required in so
long a journey, he arrived at the famous City of Constantinople, on a Sunday
morning, where he perceived as gallant Triumphs in preparation, as were at the
renowned marriages of Primaleon, and the Prince Don Edoard. The cause whereof
was, for joy of the birth of the Daughter of the Prince Primaleon, whom the
Emperor gave to name Polinarda, in token that her beauty and good Fortune,
should excel any Lady living at that day. In honor of this joy, the Triumphs
were proclaimed: which procured the assembly of many noble personages, among
whom, was Tarnaes the K. of Lacedemonia, Polendos, King of Thessalie, and
Belcar the Duke of Duras: the presence of these States, being no small honor
to the Emperor, and Fame to the Court of Constantinople.

Argolant, attired all in black Armor, rode through the City, and in short
time arrived at the Emperors Palace, where beholding the valiant behavior, of
each courageous knight, to win honor in this Triumph: with an heavy sigh
he called to memory, the unlooked for sorrows of the Court of England, which
was adorned with no less grief, then was the Emperors Court with gladness.
Which persuaded such an unkind conceit, in the heart of the gentle Knight
Argolant, who esteemed the loyalty of friendship, to serve as an especial
remedy to the afflicted mind: that he feared his news, were not of force
sufficient, to change their exceeding mirth, albeit his expectation was
deceived in that point. Then approached he the place where the Emperor sat at
dinner, where with no less civility of iesture, then modest behavior of
personage, he vayled his helmet, offering to kiss the Emperors hand, which
might not be permitted, in that he was ignorant of whence he was. Which he
perceiving, began in presence of them all, to declare his Embassage, not
forgetting the place and person, which in every point he handled with duty.
The Emperor well noting the sad tale of Argolant, the misfortune of his
Son Don Edoard, and heaviness of the English Court, he withdrew himself
from the Table into his Chamber, where as patiently as his grief would suffer
him: he began to use his speeches in this manner.

I know not whether the Gods in granting me a prosperous course in youth, have
determined to ruinate my days in mine age, or Fortune holding me then in
favor beyond al men has allowed my misfortune now to be above any: if so it
was appointed, I would my life had ended then in tranquillity, who^ I feared
no endamagement, then prolonging my days in hope of an aunswerable age. to be
subject to the misery of time, and abject from the honor of a noble heart.
Well, what has passed to thy high good hap, and what is present, to the no
small anguish of thy heart, let the remembrance of the one, extinguish the Fame
of the other, and the cruelty of chance, root up the inestimable praise of
thy conquest. These and sundry other heany complaints were uttered by the
Emperor, and the triumphs were now of small estimation, for that through the
whole Court, these sorrowful tidings had strooken a sudden alteration. But
most of all in the heart of the noble Primaleon, who understanding the
misfortune his dear Friend and brother Don Eodard, stood not to cast doubt of
this matter or that accident, either how Fortune might favor him, or endamage
his sudden enterprise, but as covertly as he might, departed from
Constantinople, refusing Father, Mother, Wife, Children, Lands, living and all:
that the loyalty he bare to his friend, might declare he preferred his
safety, before his own solace. And that his deeds might be answerable to his
good intent, he vowed to trauatle the course of his, to search in every
desolate and unfrequented place, but he would find his dear friend Don
Eodard. Whose welfare he as heartily desired as his own life, for that he had
found the like trusty and unspotted affection in him: when through his valor,
he defended him from the Giant Gatherin.

The Emperor was advertised of his departure, by the unaccustomed pensiveness
of his espoused Lady Gridonia, as also by the great sadness of the Empress
his mother: whom neither the gentle persuasion of the Emperor might satisfy,
nor endeavor of her Courtly Ladies, might win any mean to pacify. Who used
the more diligence in the matter, only for the affection they bare to the
Princess Flerida, by whose virtuous and Princely behavior of life (which had
not only ravished the minds of all, but obtained the good liking of every
one, in that virtue is the chief ornament of noble or ignoble:) they were all
encouraged to attempt any occasion to set the Empire at quiet.

When the Emperor perceived her great disquietnesse, that the speeches of the
Ladies, as also of himself, were bestowed to small effect, he began to use
commendations of the valiant attempt of his Son Primaleon, in that his
courage of mind urged him to so famous an enterprise. Desiring her to consider
the loss of the Prince Don Edoard, their Son in law: and that the good
Fortune of Primaleon, might bring inestimable comfort to all Kingdoms in
Christendom, so that the honor of his hardy attempt, deserved rather a
general rejoicing, then such sad complaints as they seemed to bewray.

The knights who had likewise been partners in the Triumph, and bare great
good will to the Prince Don Edoard, as also to the noble Primaleon, withdrew
themselves to their lodgings, and armed themselves presently, posting with all
speed they might after the aduenterous Primaleon, some taking one way, and some
another. As well those that used the Triumphs for their Ladies sakes, as also
those whose redoubted behavior, has both won the honor of the field, and
dignity of fame. All with a mutual consent, adventured limme and life, that
the report of their deeds, might manifest the renown of their knighthood.

And because you shall have knowledge, who behaved themselves most worthy
co^mendations, in this no less famous then rare adventure, I will bewray some
of them to you, that yonr gentle opinion of their pains, may yield them in
recompense part of a condign praise. The first that took the courage to
hazard himself in the field, had to name Polendos, King of Thessaly, Son to
Frisol, the King of Hungaria, accompanied with his brother Belcar. The next,
was the Prince of Allemaigne, son to the Emperor Trineus, and named Vernar, who
honored the beauty of fair Bazilia, youngest daughter to the Emperor
Palmerin, to whom he was newly married, and stood in doubt how to proceed, least
Fortune should not be so favorable to him as he expected, which caused some
slacknesse in good will. Nevertheless, after he had considered the honor of
Mars, and sharp co^flicts of Venus, how the one was lasting in Fame, and the
other linked to an effeminate fancy, he determined to follow his Companions,
driving into oblivion the pleasant conceyts, that he often esteemed in his
best beloved, using this persuasion with himself, That he which vanquished
himself with the vanity of Fancy, and yields the liberty of his will to
fond affection, is more meet to handle a Lute, then a Lance, and better to
court a Lady, then deserve the brave name of a Captain. In this persuasion he
departed, intending so knightly an opinion in his mind, that the honor of his
name should express his noblenes, and valor of his bounty, be esteemed of his
fair Bazilia.

Thus was the city of Constantinople, (as it were desolate,) wanting the noble
knights which were thence departed, which caused the Emperor to visit the
chiefest places in the City, to the no small content of himself, and joy of
the Citizens, who little minded the absence of the noble Gentlemen, in that ye
Emperor so lovingly vouchsafed the^ his co^mpany. The^ departed Argolant from
the Court of Constantinople, toward the realm of England, bearing answer of
his Embassage from the Emperor, to his Lord and sovereign, how y^ loss of the
Prince Don Edoard, was blazed in the courts of diverse noble Princes. As in the
court of Armedes King of France, his Cousin, and Son in law to the Emperor of
Constantinople, as also in the court of Recinde K. of Spain, in the court of
Pellagris, the Souldan of Niquee, with the noble Maiortes, and many Princes
more, to whom the loss of the English Prince, was as grievous as to himself.
For proof whereof, the employed pains of diverse noble minds might remain
as witness, who walked the Forests and unknown passages in many Countries,
that Martial behauior was never more esteemed, the^ it was during the search
of this strayed Prince. Argolant being departed from the Emperor, after many
days Travel, he arrived at the English Court, whereas to the king
Frederick, the Queen, and the Princess Flerida, he delivered the answer of
his Message, who were greatly satisfied in hearing the Noble Attempts of the
Grecian Knights, by whose endeavored pains, they had good and prosperous
success.

CHAP. VI.
How Primaleon endeavoring himself in the diligent search of the prince Don
Edoard, happened to meet with the Funerals of the sorrowful Lady Pandritia,
Daughter to the K. of Lacedemonia, the which she solemnized for the unkind
repulse she sustained by the Prince Don Edoard.
NOw Primaleon determining his secret escape from the City of
Constantinople, as I have before declared, commanded his Esquyre to bring his
Courser and Armor, and closely to convey all his Equippage and furniture
behind the Storehouse of his Sister Flerida, for that none should be privy to
his intent, but only he. The Esqu: failed not to accomplish the pleasure of his
Lord. And being come to the appointed place, he armed the Prince, except his
Shield and Helmet, which he bare himself, so mounting on Horsbacke, they both
departed, vowing to rest in no place, till he might recover some wished
tidings of his Brother and Friend. Don Edoard, without whom he would never
return to Greece again. Long he traveled, before he encountered any adventure
worthy the rehearsal. But at length arriving in the bottom of a valley in
Lacedemonia, when the Sun was declined to the west parts, he was discoraged,
for that the night was obscure upon him, beside thicknes of the trees, made his
passage more tenebrous, the^ else it would have been, so that very hardly he
could find his way. Wandering on still, using his mind with several
Imaginations, at least to the comfort of himself, and joy of an Esquyre, who
sorrowed to see his Lord so suddenly pensive, he espied a gailant troop of
Ladies, bearing in their hands lighted Torches, each one well mounted on a
lusty Steed, attyred all in black, and framing their voices to great
lamentations. Primaleon surprised with great grief of mind, to see such fair
Ladies wear the habit of Mourners, took the boldness of himself, to
behold what they were, and drawing himself somewhat nearer to them to them,
perceived the chief Lady and Mistress of them, her Palfrey trapped with black
Velvet, her Vesture of the same, and four ancient Knights in the midst,
bearing a Funeral, covered all with black Velvet. Primaleon perceiving their
heavy lamentations, and that they were nothing abashed at his presence, but
held on their Journey, as though they had not seen him, he took such an
earnest desire in himself, that he must needs demand the cause, why they
mourned in that manner. Then presenting himself before the chiefest Lady,
whose fair face had sustained a great blemish, by the abundance of tears that
issued from her Eyes: in this manner he prepared himself to give the Onset.

Fair Lady, impute it not to flattery, that I call you so, nor to Folly, in so
much as you are so, but rather of your nature cannot admit your own praise, for
the perfection of your mind, being answered in persuasion of my unfeigned
meaning, which esteems you, as I have said, albeit far inferior to that I
could say. It is no more my desire, then under duty I may demand, nor my Suit
no otherwise disposed, then may stand with your Honor to reply, and my
honesty to request, I being a friend to all Ladies, and foe unto none, insomuch
that a moytie of their desires, should rather hinder me by mishap, then
dishearten me by any danger. So that in brief my request is thus: why you
frequent this solitary place, accompanied with these who are equal with you in
sorrow, althougy not worthy comparison (it may be) in Sovereignty? And why you
accompany this Funeral, with such heavy complaints? considering the
pleasures of the Court were more fit for your delights, then the uncomfortable
abiding in this solitary Desert. Thus much on my Knightly Oath auouching, that
knew I, you had sustained injury at the hands of any, I would either cause him
recount what he has done you in hishonour, or constrain a revenge on his
dearest blood.

The Lady having well noted the courtesy of Primaleon, as well his Knightly
offer^, as the good opinion she conceived of performance, satisfied his
Request, with this gentle replye. Sir Knight, less I judge you not to be, and
more (being ignorant of your estate) I may not term ye: Nevertheless, if I
fail in the one, let friendship yet forget the other. Let suffice, that I am
one whom Fortune has iniuryed every way by mishappe, and aduantaged no way by
no good luck, so that to answer your demand, I am the only Lady, who may
compare with all for misfortune. As touching my ame, which may in some sort
urge you to remember my meaning: when you are not ignorant of me: understand
that I am called Pandritia, daughter to the famous King of Lacedemonia, and
although at this present in this uncomfortable Wildernesses, yet am I
gouernesse of his Princely dominions. And hereby in a Castle, I pass forth my
unfortunate life, having no other company then these whom you may behold, who
bear part in my moan and mishappe. As for the estimation of my life, the joy
is so small, and the grief so well acquainted, that I am rather desperate to
end it, then desirous to endure it. And now I make my return unto my careful
Castle, the which, for that it is not unprovided of fair Ladies, such as you
see here present, I have termed it the Garden of Damosells, wherein I receive
as much sollace by mourning, as any Lady tasting my mishappe, can obtain in
mirth. I am sure if you have traveled Countries, you are not ignorant, how the
King Ternaes my Brother, who after the death of my Father, was enchaunted into
the Castle Des noires Oyseaux, until such time as by the valiancie of the
famous Prince Don Edoard, he was delivered out of so grievous perplexity. This
Prince afterward remaining with my Brother in Lacedemonia, so long as him
pleased, where were such Tryumphes ordained, as might gratify such an
Honorable personage, I (the more unfortunate I) conceived so good opinion of
his valiant behavior, that I chose him as the honor of my life, and Patron of
my Love, esteeming all other but base in respect of him, and he to be as far
beyond them all, as I was deceived far from my hope. But my Cake was dowe,
and my labor spent to loss: for that long before he had vowed his service to
the fair Damsel Flerida, to whom he was Espowsed, when he departed forth of
this Kingdom. Thus was my Love despised, my self disgraced, and she honored
with that Gallant, whom I loved too soon, and lost too late: which causes
me refrain all Courtly company, betaking me to the sorrow of my Folly, that
mist the good hap, I desired in Faith. And yet behold, in remembrance of
this unkind Don Edoard, I have reserved this Picture, as the chief ornament
of my Chamber, imagining the person present, when God knows he is far enough
from me in distance of place, but farther off in good will of heart. Yet often
do I blame the Picture for the Masters sake: whom had I but half so much
power over, as I have of this Portrait, he should well know, my Love is more
then he can possibly desire, and so much that he can never live to deserve. And
as you may perceive this Picture addressed in manner of a Funeral, which
(being deprived of all Hope) I mean to Solemnize in this sorrowful manner
that interring it in my comfortless House of Sadness, I may forget the fond
Love I bare to such an ungentle Friend. Which to see accomplished, this
careful company, as you may perceive, are ready to assist me in this heavy
travel. And therefore courteous Knight, if you please to see my Funerals, and
Picture of that ungrateful Prince Don Edoard, lift up the Hearse, and you
shall bear witness, what I have given you in words. Pandritia concluding her
discourse with an heavy sigh: the Prince Primaleon lifted up the Hearse, where
he beheld the lively Portreit of his dear Friend Don Edoard, so Artificially
drawn, that he doubted whether he had been slain thereabout or no, for under
his head were two Pillowes of black Velvet, and on either side of the body two
burning Tapers, which enforced the Prince to turn his talk into tears, and
there he bar^ Pandritia company for all that Night, enduoring her Comfort, but
her vowed sorrow would not suffer any persuasion in this case. Ye would not
Primaleon depart: but bare her company into another valley, and what time fair
Aurora began to show her cheerful countenance, and cloare Phoebus hastened to
his chariot, to run his course about the earth. Through this valley ran a
black and ugly River, beset with high Trees round about, which made it very
obscure and unpleasant to the beholders. In the midst of this River was an I Will,
wherein was placed an ancient Mansion, covered over al with black: which
declared small pleasure to those who remained there, and great occasion of
sadness to any that should come there. The chamber of his solitary place, were
adorned with many pictures, as witnesses of the great misfortunes that had
happened to many Lovers: as the tragical motion of Hero and Leander, the
sorrowful end of Piramus and This bie, accompanied with the mournful
Philomela. Then next her stood the unhappy queen Dido, having the blade of
Eneas pierced through her harmless heart, the workmanship so cunningly
ordered, that you would have judged the fresh blood to drop from her fair body.
Medea, Progne, Arcana Fedra, and Arife, were all worthily painted, with the
whole discourses of their lives. There stood Orpheus wrapped about in the fire
of Hell, having in his hand his harp, which in times past could recover him
his wife Erudice. Acteon bare company with these unfortunate lovers, in the
shape of an Heart, and torn a pieces by his own hounds: by him stood
Narcissus, and diverse other, which I omit for brevity, as (...) fearful to
be too tedious. Pandritia being now come to the door of this foresaid mansion,
she caused the damsels to bear in the funerals of the Prince Don Edoard,
then turning to Primaleon gave him this farewell. Sir knight, lo here the rest
of my misfortunes and last Sepulcher of my heavy travels: I shall request your
company no further, for that none must enter here, but he that vows to be
partner in our pensiuenes, and can abandon the name of all pleasures, to
express his mishaps in bemoning my funerals. She entering, the knights closed
the door, so that Primaleon had not the mean to answer her, nevertheless, he
stayed to hear the sorrowful clamors they made within: which was no less
irksome to his heart, then had he seen the perfect interring of his brother
Don Eodard.

At last he departed, dyrecting his course into such places, where he thought
soonest to hear tidings of his straied friend: So trauayling on in good hope,
we will leave him a while. And declare more at large, the cause of Pandritia her
great mourning: as also what fortuned to the two young Princes, nourished in the
Cave of the Sauadgeman.

CHAP. VII.
The cause why Pandritia led this solitary kind of life. And how the young
Prince Florian straied from the Cave of the Sauadge man, and by Sir Pridos was
brought ^o the English Court, and what further happened.
THe occasion why Pandritia bare such great affection to the Prince Don Edoard,
is at large declared in the Book entitled Primaleon. How that after the
Prince had delivered her Brother Tarnaes out of the Enchaunted Castle, wherein
his Father had devised the way to enclose him, and the came home with him into
Lacedemonia. She oft^^ ^^emed to move good liking on her behalf to the
Prince Don Edoard, but he by no means could direct his fancy after her
course, for that his promise before passed to the Princess Flerida, withheld
the consent she gladly looked for.

To avoid therefore what might happen, he refused to use her company in talk,
as before he was wont, which very much displeased Bellagris, who was Solda^ of
Niquee, after the death of Molerin, his eldest brother. For he understanding
the secret affection and great good will, that she entirely bare to the noble
Prince Don Edoard, adventured to try Fortune, who so favorably prospered his
intent, that under the title of Don Edoard, he entered his sisters Chamber:
where acquainting himself with her, to his desire, and her deceit: time
brought tho^^ pleasure to a goodly Son named Blandidon, of whom hereafter,
you shall be more largely certified.

But Pandritia giving credit to her self, that the noble Don Edoard had
received the estimation of her honor: grouuded such firm affection on him, as
was more then we ought, and more then he would grant. So keeping his Picture in
his absence, and understanding of his supposed death, she used this soleunitie
in honor of his Funeralles, and attyred her self according as became her
misfortune, departing from the Garden of Damoselles to her House of sadness,
supposing thereto end her life with the loss of her love. So remains she in
place, where she shut the door against the Prince Primaleon, who is likewise
endeavoring himself in his adventures. Return we now to the two young
Princesso, whom the Savage man's wife had carefully nourished up, as had they
been her own Children, she could not have used more motherly compassion.

In short time they grew to such estate, that their whole delight was to hunt
the savage Beasts in the Forest, whereunto Florian^ had more affection then
his brother Palmerin, for he used every day to bear his bow, and lead the
two Lions, that he became more expert then the Savage man himself: and thus
for ten years space lived these two young Princes, beloved w^ll of him, who
before was their greatest enemy.

It fortuned on a Sunday morning, the Princes Fletida, walked forth into the
Forest, as well to sorrow for her Luue, as to lament the estate of her
unfortunate life, having accomplished what she desired she returned. At this
time Florian wandered about the forest with his Lions, which he tied up,
meaning to take by force the first wild Beast that should appear in his
sight. Having long stayed without any prey, he determined to return: but at
last he espied a mighty Heart in a grove of trees, whereat he let sly an Arrow
with such force, that it passed clean through the body of the beast. The Heart
feeling himself wounded, prosently took flight: which he perceiving, let slip
the Lions after him but all in vain, for the swiftness of the Heart outreached
the speedy pace of the Lions.

And Florian strayed so far, that he had lost the sight of the Lions and the
Heart, as also the way to the Sauadge man's house: which caused him to wander in
heaviness, till the dark Night ouershadowed him, when he espied two
Shepherds making a little Fire of sticks to warm them, because the Night was
exceeding cold. Florian being there arrived, he sat him down by a Rivers
side, in the very same place that his Mother brought him into the World: where
sitting a pretty while, he espied a Knight come ryding, attyred in black
Armor, spotted with red, bearing in his Shield, the figure of a Gryffon, with
a certain Poesy, which was unknown to any, his Lady and himself excepted.
This Knight was named Sir Pridos, who still advanced himself in the search of
the noble Prince Don Edoard, and he rode very pensive and sad: till casting his
eyes upon Floran, his heart began somewhat to conceive a marvelous inward
Joy, for that his countenance bare the perfect Image of his noble Father.
Whereupon Sir Pridos, fell in diverse demaundes with him, which Florian very
courteously answered: So that Sir Pridos fell into great desire, that he would
bear him company to London, wherein the Kings Court, he would present him,
among the number of those, whom renowned Fame did ever accompany. The young
Prince Florian, more desirous to lead his life among the brave Gallantes, then
so to pass his time so solitary among the vnfrequenten places, in the Wild
Forest, gave his consent, and iournyed with Sir Pridos to the English Court,
where he presented him to the King, clothed in the Skin of an Heart, a thing
of no small admyration to the King: yet did he receive him very graciously, in
that he supposed him to be one of the Sons of the Princess Flerida, unto
whose Chamber he walked with this young Prince, and in this manner began to
salute her. Fair Daughter, among all the grievous vexations, that afflict your
weak Nature, lo, here the Honor Sir Pridos does present you withal: who
in searching your Noble Lord, and my Son, has found this Jewel, which he
offers to you, as the frustes of his labors. And trust me, the oftener I
behold his sweet countenance, the more I conceive Opinion of his Alliance to
my Son Don Edoard. The Princess Flerida was not a little pleased with so
glad a present, in sign whereof she embraced her Son, albeit unknown, and
went straight way to Sir Pridos, who certified her, that he found him sitting
in the same place where the Sauadge man came with his two Lions, and took her
two Children from her.

This moved Flerida, to suppose him for her Son, but Fortune would not as
yet suffer a perfect assurance, that either he should know her for his
Mother, or she him for her Child: Nevertheless, she gave him the name of
Desert, training him up in the company of a young Gentleman, Son to Sir
Pridos and Attaida, named Don Rosiran, De la Bronde: with whom I will leave
this gentle Prince Florian, to know what the Sauadge man and Palmerin did,
seeing Florian returned not as he was wont.

CHAP. VIII.
How grievous the Sauadge man took the sudden loss of the young Prince
Forian, when he perceived the two Lions return all washed in the blood of the
Heart that they had slain. And how the young Prince Palmerin, walking to the
Sea side to seek his Brother, accompanied with Siluian, the Sauadge man's
Son, departed thence in a Galley, with Polendos King of Thessalie, who sailed
to Consta^ntinople, where he presented them to the Emperor. And how a Damosel
mounted on a white Courser, and bearing Arms, arrived at the Court of
Constantinople, where she presented the Emperor, with a Letter sent from the
Lady of the Lake, which gave him at large to understand, what should oappen to
^he young Prince Palmerin.
LOng expected the Sauadge man she return of Florian, and seeing it waxed
dark, and his hope deceived, he was out of measure disquieted for the absence
of Florian, whose company, both for expertnesse and towardness in his
exercise, was more commodious to him, then his grief would suffer him to
express: wherefore he concluded thus, young Florian was some way distressed,
and himself utterly disdained of Fortune. But in the morning the Lions
returned home, al washed in the blood of the Heart which they had slain: when
the Sauadge man percelued their guide wanting, and they thus pollnted, what
with anguish of heart, and chollericke perswasi^ns in his dosperate mood, he
slew both the Lions, and entered into such a disquietnesse, that nothing could
assuage his extreme passion.

The young Prince Palmerin, sustaining great sorrow for the absence of his
brother, walked to the Sea shore, accompanied with Siluian, the Sauadge man's
Son, where sitting comforting each other on the green bancke, as naturs
moved the one, and nurture the other, they espied a Galley to strike on shore,
where they twain disported.

Polendos King of Theslalie, being chief Captain in this Galley, who likewise
directed his journey for the finding of Don Edoard, commanded to cast Anchor
there: because for recreations sake, he would walk up into the Forest, as
also to find sweet water, whereof he was greatly destitute. Palmerin and
Siluian, seeing the King landed, and fearing least they should sustain some
harm, in that they were ignorant what they were: determined by courteous deme^
nor to let them pass by, so should they have no cause to molest them, but to
depart friendly perceiving nothing but courtesy.

Polendos deholding the beauty of Palmerin, with the no less civil, then
comely behavior of them bdth, desired them to go abrdad with him, and he
would prefer them in such place, as they should be raised to honor, and
find all things equiual^t to their gentle natures. Palmerin, whose fancy could
hardly brook that sauadge kind of life, but rather desired to acquaint
himself with Courtly exercise, gave grant to that which ^he King had
requested, albeit Siluian used entreaty to persuade him to the contrary: but
when he saw all means that he devised, could take no effect, as well for the
great love that was between them, as the inuiolate affection he always bare to
the young Prince, he vowed never to leave his company, either for misery,
misfortune, or any accident whatsoever. The King no less delighted in mind,
then greatly contented with the manners of Palmerin, (his servants being
returned with such necessaries as he sent them for,) went abroad, and heysed
Sails presently, committing themselves to God, and the mercy of the waves. So
riding at their pleasure, the King desired Palmerin (if he might lawful crave
so much) to certify him, as concerning his birth and Parentage, which the
courteous Prince right willingly gave consent unto, declaring his life with the
Sauadge man, whom he certainly supposed to be his Father.

After many days failing, they arrived at Constantiuople, which at that
present was endued with as great heaviness, as in time past, it surpassed in
Princely delights, the Port or Haven, likewise being nakedly provided of ships,
for that the Occean and Mediterranian seas, had scattered y^ whole Navy in
search of the P. Don Edoard, as also to know what was become of the Noble
Primaleon, yet in all this time, no wished tidings heard. The Emperor
understanding y^ Polendos was arrived at Constantinople, walked d^wn to the
Haven, to accompany him to his palace, where being come, and hearing by him no
tidings of his sons, became very sorrowful, as he had continued so a long
time. Then Polendos to put the Emperor out of this sad cenceyte, presented
unto him the young Prince Palmerin, accompanied with Siluian. Who cas^ing his
eyes on the young Prince, entered presently into such an alteration of joy, as
had he been his own son Primaleon, he could hardly have been better
contented. Wherefore he commanded a Knight to conduct hm to the Princess
Gridonia, willing her to give him as servant to the fair Polinarda, whose
beauty was so excellent, her feature agreeable in every lyneament, her modesty
so decent, and virtue thereto apparent, that she was rightly termed the Phaenix
for beauty, and most famous among Ladies for bounty. The Empress and Gridonia,
received the young Prince, albeit ignorant of his estate, yet as beseemed their
honors, respecting who sent him, and went straightway to present him to the
fair Polinarda: who in time caused him to adventure his good Fortune among the
pikes of mischanches, and hazards of most danger, only for her love, which
he bought as dearly, as she gave it daintily: for proof, let suffice what
hereafter ensues. But attend a strange and rare event: On a subdaine was
arrived in the Emperors Palace, a comely Damsel, mounted on a Courser, as
white as a Swan, bearing Armor also answerable to the same in color, her hair
spread over her shoulders, which gave cause of marvel to all that saw her.
She being come into the presence of the Emperor, to the no little admiration of
him, with all those that bear him company: she drew forth a Letter,
delyuering the same with such Majesty of behavior, as was meet to gratify
such an honorable personage: which the Emperor delivering to one of his
Heralds, commanded it to be read in public audience: who vnseaking it, began
as follows.

To the Invincible, and most renowned Palmerin, Emperor of Greece, Salutations.
REnowned Emperor, at whose name the enemy quaketh, and the Subject rejoices,
in whose Court, your name is the riches of the valiant, and friendship the
reward of any that be venterous: I wish thy state as permanent, as thy deeds
has been puissant, and the unanimity of thy friends, to prosper in
longanimitie of happy Fortune. The young Prince that thou have received into thy
Court, albeit thou may think incredible, yet shall find it certain (when
Time does will it must be): it is descended of two the most puissant Kings in
Christendom, and himself as victorious as ^uer was any. Wherefore, let his
entertainment be such as his honor does deserve, and his estimation according
as his valor does declare: for he it is must needs defend the Diadem of thy
domiminions, when it shall remain destitute of wished defense, and he it is
that shall make thee lauded of Fortune, and loved of thy enemies as of thy
dearest friends. Likewise, the two most unfortunate Princes of the world, shall
enjoy their liberty by him, in which many have, and shall attempt, but he
alone is oidained to finish this Exployr: for that he is above all in the
Favor of Fortune, and he shall exell all in the Nobility of Knighthood. Thus
leaving the sum of my promise to your gracious trial: I wish the noble
Emperor of Greece may live in eternal honor and felicity.

By her, who is more in duty, then by pen or words, she can any way disclole.
The Lady of the Lake.


The Emperor no less amazed at this happy adventure, then contented at the
glad news of this noble young Prince: desired of the Damosel, who might be the
Lady of the Lake. To who^ the Damsel replied: Noble sir, she is altogether
unknown of me, but thus much I dare boldly assure your Majesty, that what her
Letter presents, shall be performed in this worthy young Prince. These
speeches ended, the Damsel departed: which the Emperor perceiving, sent for
the young Prince, upon whom using many cheerful countenances, he desired his
noble Gentlemen standing by, that he might be termed of all Palmerin, after
his own name, for that he thought he should be the better esteemed of his Lady
Polinarda, in whose favor he was greatly esteemed, as the wearing of his Ladies
colors, he might give some cause of belief. But the Empres and Gridonia, still
lamented the loss of Primaleon, whose absence from the court, was chiefest
cause of their sorrow.

CHAP. IX.
Of that which happened to Vernar the Prince of Allemaign, in his search of Don
Edoard, and of the controversy between him and Belcar, the Duke of Duras, in
the unfortunate Forest of England.
I Have declared to you before how Vernar the Prince of Allemaigne, and son
to the Emperor Trineus and the fair Agrigola, left the Court of
Constantinople, when Palmerin departed to seek the Prince Don Edoard. In which
affairs, this gentle Prince likewise, behaved himself so worthily in many
rare exploytes, that his Fame remains as a perfect type of his hononr in the
Allemaigne Chronicles: for which cause, I leave to rehearse them, returning to
that which happened this Prince, and is in my charge to speak of. It fortuned
that he having spent no small labor in travail, arrived at last in great
Britain, where he had good hope to hear some news to end his labor.

And being entered into this unfortunate forest, ryding very sadly, for y^ his
mind was somewhat distracted with remembrance of his fair Bazilia, at length
there met him a comely Knight, very bravely mounted, attyred in gilt armor,
whereon was wrought many Leopards by Artificial device, yet crazed and broken
by some rough encounter that he had been in. And in his Sheeld he bare a
Serpent, in a field of Silver, travailing also in the search of the strayed
Prince, as likewise to meet with such who professed the magnanimity of mind,
to combat in the honor of their own good Fortune: for which cause he left
the Ladies in the English Court, among whom he was called The Knight of the
Serpent. Passing by the Prince Vernar, he used such courtesy unto him, as
beseemed his Knighthoode, and was meet for such a Noble person: but he
altogether using his thoughts, on his fairest Bazilia, had no leisure to
behold the Knights courtesy. The Knight of the Serpent supposing, that
eythere he willingly would not perceive, or seeing, scorned the gentle
Salutations he used: revived the Prince Vernar, with these speeches. Sir
Knight, me thinks it might stand with your Honor and profession, and no
blemish to you any way, but bounty every way, to have thought well of him, who
meant no ill to you, and to have gratified him like a Courtier, that disdained
to pass by you, and not use courtesy.

The Prince being driven forth of his dumps, whereto he had more pleasure,
then to the Knights gentle proffer, between Iset and earnest thus answered.
Sir, I muy be offended without blame, and judge your behauior to be very bald,
that would constrain me to speak, not hearing your speech, when I had more
matters in mind, then would suffer me to see you much less to hear you.

Sir (quoth the Knight of the Serpent) this excuse is far too simple, in
denying both your Hearing and Sight: for though statelynesse would not suffer
you to see me, yet the leawdnesse of my speech does justify you might hear
me. Vernar hearing the large language of the Knight, which might quickly move
him to anger (being before subject to over much Melancholy*) thus shortly
replied. Sir Knight, you have better license to depart, then leave to stay
here: for that my mind is troubled with such metters, as rather requires your
absence, thea allows your presence. Giving you farther to understand, that
your company is so much to my heart, that the strife which may arise between
us, will be to your great harm. When the Knight perceived, what small
estimation Vernar had of him, thus roundly replied. Sir, either your bringing
up, has been over churlish, or your present behauior scant current: in that
you esteem courtesy, more like a Carter, then a Courtyer, and Civil
demeanor, more fit to hold the Ploughe, then fine qualities to honor your
person. I esteem it both meet and modest, that you express such a Frivolous
motion, as does repress abruptly the nature of Friendly manners: for greater
danger is in concealing what I desire, then damage in concealing such a simple
demand. I desire rather (quoth Vernar) mine own ruin, then I should be so
simple to grant what you request: In so much, that it is expedient none should
know my thoughts, she only excepted, that must be privy to what I think.
Wherefore, esteeming thy Manhood as small to command, as thy might to
compel, I will bury my Thoughts with my Death, before I intend to satisfy thy
desire. So leaving off words, they fell to their weapons: where shiuering their
Spears and Armor, they Encounted with such Bravery, that they were glad to
take breathing: when the Knight of the Serpent began thus to charge him, I
believe Sir, you find this Skirmish more hot, then your concealed thoughts
may be esteemed wisdom, and that your Estate stands in a more sharp
hazard, then your mute conceyts are of force to yield you any sure help:
which I hope shall show you the difference, between a careless Groom, and a
Courtly Gentleman.

Sir (answered the Prince Vernan) your opinion is as yet far beyond my
purpose: for that you are as wide from your hope, as you are scant wise to put
your intent to hap. Persuade your self thus, that the courage I have to your
foil, and secrecy I esteem of mine own faith, shall ere long, give an
absolute answer, whether I shall perish in my determination, or thy self
prevail in what thou demandest: which shall crave no longer forbearance, then
my Sword has taught you manners, that against my will would teach me your
kind of modesty. Then fell they to a fresh Combat, which was more dangerous
then their first Assault: when being wearied with Swords, they endeavored by
wrestling to suppress the strength of each, but the equal behavior of their
force was such* as the loss of their blood was great: yet their valorous
hearts would conceive no faintness. The Knight of the Serpent had such a
desire to know against whom he fought, that once more he began to use fair
speeches to him. I perceive Sir, you more esteem your earnest opinion, then
you stand in fear of the loss of your life: which were more honor for you to
deliver unto knowledge, then such a severe chance, should happen unto either
of us: yet is my mind so affected, that I will know both your secret and your
self, or it shall value my life. As for my life (quoth. Vernar) I am so much the
more willing to loose it, by how much I perceive you zealous to know what you
shall not. Whereupon they began again the third time, albeit, more faintly
then before passed: which caused their Esquyres standing by, to enter into many
heavy complaints, especially the Esquire of the Prince Vernar, who as thus
framed his moan. Oh unfortunate Emperor, who is ignorant, that Fortune at this
time will deprive him of his joy.

The Knight of the Serpent noting these words, presently coniectured that it
was the Prince Vernar, son to the Emperor of Allemaigne, against whom he
entered Combat, and how grievous the Emperor Palmerin would take the matter, if
he heard of the loss of either of them both. Beside, himself would be loath,
any way to displease the Gentle Prince Vernar, wherefore for more assurance of
him, he beheld his broken Shield, wherein he perceived the devise of his Lady
Bazilia, colored all in Purple, with the half burning Heart in the midst: and
on the Armor of the Prince, was her Portraite curiously drawn: which gave him
persuasion that was he, to whom he thus used his speech. Sir. Vernar, my
mind constrains me to give over the fight, being right sorry that I have
continued it so long: for that the Princess Bazilia is cause of your sorrow,
which you feared to utter, and now by my self declared. Pardon your friend
Belcar, who is so heartily sorry, that he rather desires the death, then to see
you in any distress. The Prince Vernar, perceiving that it was his friend
Belcar, ran to him, embracing him in his arms, giving him a thousand thanks,
that he had so found the mean, to cut off their quarrel. Then taking their
Helm to to their Esquires, who did their best to bind up their wounds, they
rode to the City of Brique, which was not far from the Forest, recounting to
each other, what had happened them in their search of the Prince Don Edoard.

CHAP. X.
How Eutropa gave Dramusiande to understand of the arrival of a Knight at his
Castle, whose valiant behavior should put him in some cause of fear: which
words made him presently to fortify his Castle, to avoid any peril that
might annoy him. And how Primaleon (who was the Knight Eutropa spoke of) came
to the Castle: where he Iusted against his dear Friend Don Edoard, in which
Fight they had knowledge of each other. And how in hope to purchase his
delivery, he overcame Pandare and Alligan, two monstrous Giaunts, entering into
Combat likewise with Dramusiande, who ouercam^ Primaleon, and took him
prisoner into his Castle*
DRamusiande, still retaining in Captivity the Prince Don Edoard, was on the
sudden advertised by the Enchauntresse Eutropa his Aunte, that there should
arrive a certain Knight at his Castle, whose valor and Prowess should go
near to attainte his Honor: as also enforce his life to stand in some hazard.
He giving credit unto her persuasion, and likewise somewhat careful to avoid
the imminent peril, fortified his Castle with such sure defense, as he thought
sufficient to award the Enemy, and maintain the intent he had vowed to
prosecute. For fear some times makes a man to become wise: that else in a
desperate mood, would set the world on wheels.

So Dramusiande albeit famous in his deeds, yet fearful to be surprised by
any danger: uses the industry of his Aunte Eutropa, with the help of his
Friends, whose courage he knew equal to their wise foresight, to be revenged
on all Knights, for the death of his father Frenaque. Which the better to
accomplish, he entertained into his Castle, two hardy and fearful Giants, the
one named Pandare, the other Alligan, whose stature were no less in ugliness,
then their strength cruel in resistance: and because he would have every thing
in due preparation, he determined (when need should be) how he would have his
Castle defended, as thus. The noble Prince Don Edoard against all Knights that
came, should have the first honor of the fight, next to him the Giant Pandare,
should give a fresh assault, which twain, if they should fail by misfortune
(as his Auntes words made him doubt of some mischaunce) stout Alligan of the
Obscure Cave, would give them their last welcome: whose countenance was
fearful to all that saw him, and whose might was cruel, to all that should
hap to feel him.

Fortune bending her brows on the courageous Primaleon whom she had erst
advanced to honor, and now determined to unhappiness: directs his course to
this unfriendly Castle, where he should end his travails, with his own
thraldom.

For after he had left the solitary Pandritia, in the realm of Lacedemonia,
he traveled through Burgondie, where happening among other Knights, to come in
place of a Triumph, himself bravely mounted, all in green Armor, which color
somewhat assuaged his extreme Melanchollies, and in his Sheelde on a ground of
Azure, a Sea bravely painted, he bare for his device.

At this triumph he bare away the honor of the day, so travailing on in his
journey, he arrived in this manner at the Castle of Dramusiande. And being
come near the Castle, the Noble Prince Don Edoard came forth upon the
bridge, very valiantly mounted, his armor all black, whereon was a
resemblaunce of little flames of fire, tormenting a Lovers heart, which was
engraven in the midst of his breast. His Sheelde was aunswerable in color to
his Armor: in the midst whereof, was curiously painted the Image of a sad
conceited minds, so artificially framed, that the beholders might easily judge
the heaviness of the knight, to be according to his sad Devise. Primaleon no
less abashed at the bravery of the Castle, then to see a Knight so well
appointed at Arms, began in this order to use his speeches. Sir Knight, I
would be so happy, or else so hardy, to enter this Castle, without offering you
Combat, as well to satisfy mine own desire, as loath to offer you any rude
demean: desiring you, if my request stand not with reason, to let pass your
choler, upon Knightly courtesy.

Don Edoard perceiving the comely behavior of Primaleon, of whom he was as
ignorant, as the other was from knowledge of him, shaped him presently this
answer. If you knew Sir Knight, the hard entertainment, and unfriendly usage,
of all Knights whatsoever that enter this Castle, you would be loath to spend
speech in such a fond request; but rather use speed in a safe retire: For as in
other places you may increase your Fame, so in this place you may stay to
sorrow for your Folly. If these persuasions cannot withhold your intent, but
that rashly you will run into a continual trouble: know this, you must
first award my puissance, who resists Knights that seek wilfully their own
peril. But admit, that Fortune deny me the victory, and seek your
overthrow, under title of your valiance, yet are there such hazards to pass,
as does discourage me to think, and will dishearten you to try.

Trust me Sir (answered Primaleon) your words were sufficient to make me fear,
if I bare the mind of a c^auen, and not of a Captain: but hereof assure your
self, that neither your persuasion of danger, nor the doubt it self that is
to come, can cause me fear at a show, or shall make me fainte at a shadow.
For this estimation I always bear with me, that the more hard the Adventure
is, the brauer will be the victory. So that sir, take this for a certainty, I
have settled my hope, which neither you nor: any can remove, but only Death it
self.

Thus concluding their speeches, they couched their Spears, and began a sharp
encounter, wherein they behaved themselves so bravely, that they who stood in
the Castle, beholding them, did no less commend their Valor, then the good
intent each othar showed in hope of victory. At last, so fiercely they met
together, that they were both unhorsed, which very much displeased Primaleon,
being never in all his life cast forth of his Saddle before: then drawing his
sword, he thus approached to the Prince Don Edoard. Sir Knight, I will try, if
your strength in using your Sword, be equal with y^ force. I have felt at your
Spear: which having made me impatient, being never before overthrown, does
increse my courage, to know him that has done that at this instant, which in
many Attempts before could not be done by any. Don Edoard, no less offended at
this mishap, then amazed at the courage he perceived in his Adversary: began
to suspect, that the Knight against whom he endeavored himself, was his Brother
and friend Primaleon, the cause that moved him to think so, was the equal
state of their strength, which in time past he had often proved: of which
doubt to resolve himself, he thus began. Sir Primaleon, as it may rather be
termed Presumption, then politic foresight, in him that would strive to be
your match, who are above all in Manhood: so in me might it be accounted
rather a Foolish hardiness, then any friendly heed, to do that in a Bravery,
which should exceed the limits of Bounty, and to strive with my Friend, whom
in duty I ought most to honor. Primaleon hearing these friendly speeches:
presently knew that, it was his Brother Don Edoard, when casting his Sword to
the ground he embraced the Prince with these loving salutations. If my heart
were able to think, my tongue to speak, or my self to make manifest by any
mean, not only the inward joy I conceive, but the high good fortune I do
esteem of my trauells, then should my dear friend and brother perceive, my
health is his happiness, and Primaleon lives no longer, then Don Edoard
rejoices. Long have I desired this happy day, and long have I sought this
good luck with danger: albeit never so prosperous as to hear of you, yet now
the most fortunate of all men, to come where I see you. Don Edoard would have
answered again, but the Giant Pandare brought word from Dramusiande, to break
off their talk, and come to him, whose commandment the Prince obeying, entered
the Castle. Primaleon offering to go in with him, but Pandare being Armed,
with a great iron Mace in his hand, and a very strong Shield, thrust him back
with these churlish words. Stay Sir Knight, I mean to see what thou can do,
to deliver thee out of my hands, as also how thou can warrant thine own life.
Primaleon beholding the great pride of Pandare, with the dishonor he offered him
in words, as also the disdain he took to be thus controled, gave him this
answer. It is more difficult for me to answer thee, as thy words require,
then dangerous to correct the boldness of such a proud Rival: and I scorn to
use words with such a Peasant, whose manners are so far from honesty, as the
Master can never come in knowledge thereof: whose Plumes I may pull with such
a due reward, as he shall think my warrant better then his own wisdom, and
that I can escape his brags, when his own bravery may hap to lie in the
lurtch. Pandare vexed with y^ reply of Primaleon, not knowing whether he were
best to answer him with words or deeds, at last sent him such a blow with his
iron Mace, that Primaleons shield shiuered all in pieces, which grieved him,
standing in some need, and made his foe triumph, who hoped for his death. But
he espying a part of the body of Pandare unarmed, reaches him such a blow in
revenge of his Shield, that he began to stagger, hardly withholding himself
from falling to the earth, and Dramusiande leaning with Don Edoard, forth of a
window in the Castle, and perceiving the courage of Primaleon in this
dangerous Combat: desired to know his name, and of whence he was which Don
Edoard answered, according as he desired, giving him further to understand,
that not only in this, but in many other adventures, he had put his life in
hazard, only for his sake. Which when Dramusiande knew, he determined
Primaleon for apartner with Don Edoard, and to keep them twain in captivity,
till Fortune sent more customers.

Pandare seeing his blows bestowed to small purpose, and that Primaleon
returned him many shrewde greetings, flung down his Sword and Target, in a
great fury, pretending the destruction of Primaleon, with his iron Mace. And
after many sore strokes, passed on either part, Primaleon followed his
determination so well, y^ he had stricken off Pandares four fingers, wherewith
his Mace fell to the ground, which he stooping to recover, Primaleon had gotten
such good advantage, that he had stricken off his head, had not the ougly Giant
Alligan of the Obscure Cave, been his Rescue, who stepping between them, thus
saluted Primaleon. Sir Knight, thou have a fresh labor to begin: wherefore
withdraw thy hands from him that is conqnered, and come deal with me, who
hopes to conquer thee: and therewithal Primaleon, being not fully provided,
received such a cruel blow on the head, that it put him in some danger.

Primaleon seeing such a fearful Enemy, and what mighty blows he still
charged him withal, he bethought him on his Friend Don Edoard, whose help in
this fierce assault might do him no small pleasure. Yet he considered with
himself, that doubtless he was in some need, or so kept under, that he
might not assist him, else he persuaded himself, he would be as requisite to
help him, as he ready to wish for him. Then he taking up the Shield of
Pandare, between Alligan and himself began a hotteskirmish, as the place
where they fought, altered in color with their blood, made manifest. Yet
Alligan for all his rough behavior, had little hope of any good success,
because the hardiness of Primaleon, had both martyred his Shield and Armor
in pieces, so that he had no defense to bear off the blows., but by the fresh
and eager Assaults of the Noble hearted Prince, he brought him unto such a low
estate, that he supposed he had quight slain him. Which moved him to sit
down to rest him, for that faintness with loss of his blood, and weariness
in so long continuing Battle, made him both glad and desirous of a little ease,

Dramusiande perceiving the hard event of this Combat, and standing in doubt
that Fortune by some sinister means or other, would seek his overthrow, and
so deprive him of that he looked for, and what his Aunte labored for, Armed
himself presently, and came forth to Primaleon, assailing him first with
these words. Sir Knight, my Friend if you please, my foe, if you dare: in the
one you may find comfort in your distress, in the other any incurable
mischief to bear you company, in so great danger. Me thinkes^ it were more
honor for you to yield, with no blemish to your Knighthoode, then to endure a
fresh Assault, which will be to your great hazard. So, if you esteem of my
courteous offer, I will see your wounds cured at mine own charge, and your
weak estate comforted, as beseems a good Knight. Primaleon well nothing the
honest words of Dramusiande, and fearing his fair talk might bear favor of a
shrewde meaning, made him this answer.

If sir, by the pain I have bestowed, and sharp encounters I have eudured, I
might purchase y^ delivery of my dearest friend Don Ddward, then would I not
only make estimation of your courtesy, but confess my self during life,
yours ever bound by duty. But as I judge, you mean nothing less, and the
reward of my travail desires nothing more, so my heart is bent unto that
hautie enterprise, which if entreaty will not serve, shall be gained perforce,
and where courtesse is not esteemed, compulsion may and shall command. The oath
I have made my friend, does discharge my heart of fear, and the hope I have
of victory, bids me rather die, then be vanquished, so shall I award the
reproach of the world, and be true to my friend, whose safety I tender as my
own soul.

Dramusiande at this pause, took occasion to reply in this manner: Sir Knight,
for two causes I account it honor, to use thee courteously. The first is, that
I greatly pity the harm, which may ensue to an vnuised head, which does
that in a bravery for a fashion, he is glad with bitter tears, to bemoane in
folly. The second cause is, that to conquer thee, would rather discredit me,
then any honor were to be gotten by the victory, considering thy unfortunate
and miserable estate, with the Knightly puissance I shall bestow on thee.
Nevertheless, to charm the proud speeches thou have used, and correct the
rash behavior of thy unstayed wit, thou shall know, how I can tam^ the
mallepart, and bridle those that cannot rule their own manhood. Upon these
words he laid fiercely at Primaleon, (whose debility rather required
quietness, then such extreme strokes as he must needs suffer:)
nevertheless, he employed himself to such nimble defense, as his weary
travail would permit him: which moved a great compassion in the mind of
Dramusiande, to see the weakness of the body, not agree with the invincible
courage of the heart, and would not for any thing have slain him, as very
easily he might have done, but that he once more would use persuasion, which
he discharged after this order. Sir Knight, thou may see I refuse the fight,
more for the grief I sustain in thy hurt, then any fear I have of thee, to
do me harm: in token whereof I set thee, at liberty, as one more willing to
do thee good, the^ any desire I have to bereave thee of life. But if thou once
more refuse my courtesy, and desperately seek thine own destruction, I
promise thee, that neither mercy may assuage my rygour, nor any mean beside,
shall withhold me from revenge: for that he which is careless of his ow^e
life, it were great pity but he should loose it.

Primaleon casting his eyes upon his armor, which he perceived al broken, and
battered in pieces, as also bathed in the blood which issued from his wounds,
then calling to remembrance his Lady Gridonia, whose heart might hardly brook,
to hear any mischance of her best beloved, walked a little by himself, using
these silent cogitatio^s. Madame, behold the last day of our heavy departure,
and my last farewell sent you in tears with a bleeding heart, subject to mine
enemy, whom I strive to conquer, and yet rather desire the death, then lose
the honor of my name. I know our next assault is the last Tragedy of my time,
which I must not refuse, if I love my friend, and yet should forsake,
remembering your loss. Well, hard is the hap, when Fortune has determined all
to extremity, which if I should seek to shun, would justly repay me with
deserved shame. O famous Emperor, and my renowned father, whose thoughts are as
far from my heavy case, as my troubled heart is void of any comfort: yet let
this just persuasion cut off the grief you may sustain, that I lives for my
friend, whose freedom was my felicity, and now die for my friend, whose
thraldom is my misery, which I desire to finish, ere I will shrink one jot in
the honor of knighthood. Albeit the loss of my blood ouerchargeth me with
faintness, and my long continuance in fight, oppresses me with wearines, yet
shall it never be reported, Primaleon turned back, forgetting bounty, or left
the ^ield for one, having already conquered twain: for the joy I conceive in
finding my chiefest friend, bids me die ere I leave him, so shall he try,
if I love him. And think not dear father, nor my sweet Gridon^ia, that I
forget the duty, which law of nature wills me to bear you, or that I
desperately run on mine own death, to increase your sorrow and continual
mones. But think as I have ventured upon the honor of your love, so the
estimation of my friend at this time commands me to hazard my life. Wherein,
I swerue not from you in obedience, nor from my friend in amity.

This pause had so hartened the noble Primaleon, that he ran courageously upon
Dramusiande, with these words. Defend thy self, for either will I win what I
have promised, or leave my life as a gage in thy presence. Whereupon they fell
very fiercely to combat again, which made Dramusiande to muse, to see the
noble courage of Primaleon,, and the weak defense he had for himself, who at
last through extreme faintness fell to the ground, as though he had been
quite bereaved of life: which caused Dramusiande to bear him into the Chamber
of Don Edoard, commanding his Chirurgions and Physicians, to use great care
and diligence in saving his life, if it might be possible, because he was
greatly affected, to save the life of such courageous Knights. Don Edoard was
very pensive for the great danger of Primaleon, of whose health he was no
less careful then he had been venterous to purchase his delivery. And when
he was somewhat receuered, they had knowledge by Eutropa, what great friendship
and good will, they should both of them in time to come, sustain at the hands
of her nephew Dramusiande, which should make a double amends for all mischances
that had happened.

Thus leave we Dramusiande, using all means he might, for the health of
Primaleon, as also the recovery of Pandare and Alligan, whom at last he had
brought to good constitution of body, to his joy, and great comfort of the two
faithful Princes, who lived, loved, and reioyc^d in each others friendly
company.

CHAP. XI.
How the Emperor of Constantinople, made the noble young Prince Palmerin
Knight: with diverse other young Princes and Lords that were in his Court, whom
he honorably made Knight at Arms.
PPalmerin remaining long time with his father, beloved of every one for his
princely behavior, and esteemed with the best through his gentle nature: grew
unto such ripeness of age, that he greatly desired the order of Knighthood,
but the fear to loose the service of his Lady and Mystresse Polinarda, (to
whom he had not only vowed the duty of his heart, but the whole course of his
life, in Knightly adventures) withdrewe his mind from so bold an enterprise.
And she likewise was joined with him in equal affection: but that modesty
caused her to cover it, and maydenly demeanor, did move her to conceal it,
for that she would not rashly run into the suspicion of those, who frame their
whole endeavor to the reproach of Ladies, neither regarding their honor, nor
their own honesty.

The Emperor remained somewhat pensive for his two Sons, seeing never a
Knight returned, that departed in their search, which caused him to remember
the Lady of the Lake, and to comfort himself somewhat in her tidings as
concerning the young Prince Palmerin, by whose means he had good hope to
understand their estate, albeit affection would hardly permit him, that he
should travail.

Wherefore he being willing to content his subjects, who stood in doubt of
their government, after the Emperors decease, he caused a Triumph to be
proclaimed, wherein he would try, if the towardly beginning of Palmerin,
would encourage his mind to expect any good success, Upon this determination,
he willed all the young Knights, who should be De^endants against the other
Knights of his Court, to be ready prepared against the Easter holy days, so
that the rumor of this famous triumph, caused many Scaffoldes and Galleries (by
the Emperors consent (to be built round about the Tiltyard, which rejoiced the
Citizens, that their long time of sorrow, should now obtatine a general
consent of established pleasure. The knights marched in very gallant order,
before the Emperor of the Chapel, where after divine Service was
accomplished, he returned to his Palace, to make the young Prince Palmerin
night. Where first the Emperor embraced the noble young Prince, then Frisol,
King of Hungaria, fastened the spur on his heel: and the fair Polinarda, by
commandment of the Emperor, did gird his sword about him. Which gave such an
encouragement to the valiant Palmerin, that for her sake he attempted such rare
adventures, as increased the honor of his Fame, and nobleness of her beauty.
Then were the other young noble Gentlemen called forth, to receive likewise the
order of knighthood. As first, Gracian Prince of France Nephew to the Emperor,
and son to the King Arnedes, Berold Prince of Spain, and Son to the
puissant King Reciende, with Onistalde, and Dramian, his two brethren.
Estrellant, son to king Frisol of Hungaria, Don Rosuell, Bellizart, the son
of Bellar, Bazilland, son to king Tarnaes, Luyman of Burgo^dy the son of
Duke Tryole, Francian who was so expert in music, son to Polendos, king of
Thessaly, and the fair Francelina. Polinarda son to the Emperor Trineus, and
brother to the Prince Vernar, Adrian, the son of Maiortes, German, son to
the Duke of Orleance, Attenebrant, son to the Duke Tirendos, Attremoran, son
to the Duke Lecefin, Frisol, son to the Duke Drapos of Normandy, and Nephew to
king Frisol: beside many other, who were brought up in the Emperors Court,
being some of them well nurtured in virtuous educations, which are chiefest
required, either in Princes, or Noble men's children: by which, both their own
Fame is increased, and a continual renown left to all their posterity. King
Frisol by the Emperors commandment, to all these gave orders of knighthood,
as also to Florendos and Flatir, both sons to the renowned Primaleon. These
matters thus dispatched, they went up into the Hall, which was very sumptuously
adorned with clothes of Gold, where every Knight was placed at dinner,
according to their estate and nobleness of birth. The dinner ended, and the
Tables withdrawn, the Emperor, with the Empress, the Princess Gridonia, and
the fair Polynarda, walked to the place where they should behold the
Tryumphes. And the knights having every one appointed himself as the exercise
required, came r^^ing very bravely into the Tilt yard, of whom Palmerin was
chosen chief Defendant, which what did stomach the fonnes of Primaleon: till
perceiving the whole day was ordained in his honor, which moved them to
quietness, submitting themselves under his puissance, to show their Prowess
and magnanimity.

CHAP. XII.
How the Noble and courageous young Knights, began the Tornament, each one
behauing himself very valiantly. And how two Knights arrived there among them,
attired in green Armor, who behaved themselves bravely, in the presence of the
Emperor.
THe Knights being all entered within the Lists, and the Trumpets sounded to
begin the triumph, Palmerin who was appointed to begin the first Just, gave
courtesy to his Lady Polinarda, and to himself thus opened his present thoughs.

My good Lady, whose beauty is the prize that allureth me to the field, and
whose courtesy, is the honor I strive to attain: let but your favor remain
assured, and I dare warrant my self the victory: for as you are above all in
beauty, so shall I by your bounty, conquer all mischances. Wherewith he
couched his spear against Libusan of Greece, enduring abraue Combat, till at
last he taught Libusan to sit his ho^^^aster. Palmerin nothing dismayed, but
ioying that he had conquered one of the chiefest knights of Greece, which
greatly pleased the Emperor, and his Lady Polinarda, as also the whole company
of knights, whose eyes were partners of this gallant exployt. The Prince
Florendos encountered with Follane, and his brother Platir, with Attenebrant,
the Black Knight, whose valor the one against the other, was no less
cheerful to the beholders, then delightful to themselves. Gracian and
Tragandor, brake their spears with such violence, that horse and man were sent
to the ground. Berolde, Onistald, and Dramian, ran against Trusiande, Clariball
of Hungaria, and Emerolde the Fair: but Fortune was so adverse to the three
first, that they were all dismounted, and the Steed of Onistalde, had one of
his fore legs broken. Next them Don Rosuell, Estrellant, and Bellizart,
received the County Valerian, Archillagus, and his brother Guendolin: whose
strength was far too weak in resista^ce, and therefore bare dishonor forth
of the field. Francian, Dridan, Tremoran, German of Orleance, and Lnyman of
Burgondy, met jointly with Crispian of Macedon, Foruolant and the strong
Flauian: yet all unhorsed, except Tremoran, who kept his saddle valiantly.

Thus was the first Encounter very gallantly discharged, to the no small
pleasure of the Emperor and his Nobility, as also the Regardants, who gave
great commendation to the hautinesse of this 1. Exployt. Libusan of Greece,
somewhat offended at his unfortunate fall, was remounted by his fellows, and
entered the field, to revenge him on his enemy, but Berolde of Spain,
receiving him at the point of his Lance, charmed his bold attempt, with such
Knightly behavior, that he was esteemed for one of the chief knights in the
triumph, as the rest of his deeds hereafter, will show he deserved no less
praise. Then Tituball, the Red Knight, Medrusian, the Fearful, Tracandor,
Trusiande, Trofoliant, Clariball of Hungaria, and the puissant Frouolant on the
one side. And of the young Knights* were Gracian, Frisoll, Dramorant,
Onistalde, Estrellant, Don Rosuell, Bellizart, Suyman of Burgondie, Bazilliart,
Francian, and the Prince Florendos, all falling to wrestling, where they
behaved themselves, both with policy, and diversity of subtle sleights,
that the Emperor and all the Ladies, took great pleasure to behold them:
supposing that the report of this famous Triumph, would call home some of
those Knights, who were in the search of the two stayed Princes. So that in
brief, the honor of Palmerin, and the other noble young Knights, was
commended of every one: especially of the fair Polinarda, who gave her servant
Palmerin no small commendations. The Empress and Gridonia somewhat sad for
Primaleon: yet rejoiced to see the towardly behavior of young Palmerin, with
all the Knights of his train, who had almost forced all the other out of the
Listes. But on the sudden, entered among them two Knights bravely mounted, and
attired all in green Armor, who running against two of the young Knights,
brake their Spears very valiantly. Then laying hands to their Swoords, they
dealt such Knightly blows amongst them, that every one was driven into great
admiration. Palmerin perceiving the hardines of these two Knights, and doubting
least his train should be endaungered by them, bowed himself to his Lady
Polinarda, and rode forward, using these speeches to himself: It is not sweet
Lady, time that I should dismay my self, having your person before me, whose
sight is sufficient to conquer any proud enemy: But it is that time, wherein
your name shall be eternally honored, and your knight esteemed worthy so good a
Mistress.

So advancing him to one of these strange knights, who was called of every one,
the Knight of the Savage man: he looked on the device in his Sield, which was,
a wild Man, leading a couple of Lions in his hand. After he had well viewed the
Knight, he joined Combat with him, which was so fiertely handled on either
part, that all which had passed before, was far incomparable to this
fearful assault.

The Regardants, seeing the equallitie of their strength, could not judge to
whom victory was likeliest, which caused the Emperor to marvel, desirng that
they might be parted but themselves would not thereto agree in any wise. While
they twain thus egerly dealt with one another: Platir set upon the companion
of the Knight of the Savage man, who was soon brought under, by the puissance
of Platir, so all the other Knights were forced out of the Lists: Tremoran,
Luyman of Burgondie, and Bellizart excepted, who were feign to be carried
forth, they were so sore wounded.

The Emperor perceiving the rough assault, between Palmerin and the knight of
the Savage man, was so overcome with doubts, that he scant knew what to say,
for that he esteemed this Combat, the best that ever he saw in all his life
time, not comparing the fight which himself had, with the Giant Dramaque, nor
his Encountering with Frenaque in England, neither the Combat betwe^ne him and
Frisol in France, for the contention about the Picture of the Empress
Polinarda, much less esteeming the hardy adventure, between Primaleon, and
the Prince Don Edward, giving the only praise of all, and above all, to the
invincible courage of these twain. The Emperor perceiving it drew toward
night, and feared the endamagement that might come to either of them, sent
commandment to leave off, and fight no more, but they desirous still of
victory, would hardly agree, till the Trumpet sounded the retrayt, that every
Knight must hasten unto his Captain. Then the two green knights (because they
would not be known) departed secretly that way they came, and the Emperor with
all his knights, departed to his Palace, to a sumptueus Banquet, that was
prepared for them, every one forgetting the anger that was between each other
at the Turnament. The Banquet ended, the knights fell to dancing, and Palmerin
somewhat bashful to speak to his Lady Polinarda, courted Dramaciana, daughter
to the Duke Tirendos, and chief Gentlewoman attending on his Lady and
Mistress. The prince Florendos, because he would not strain overmuch cutesie,
took his sister Polinarda, with whom he thought he might lawfully be so bold.
Platir, chose Floriana, the daughter of Ditree, and Niece to Frisoll of France,
Gracian desired Claricia, the daughter to king Polendos of Thessalie. Berold
Prince of Spain, delighted in Onistalda, daughter to the Duke of Normandy.
Bellizart, requested Deiesa, daughter to the king of Sparta. And Francian, was
amorous of Vernande, daughter to the valiant Belcar. Thus every one, after once
Courting his Lady, fell to dancing, and so ended their pastime for that night.

The Emperor departed to his Chamber, accompanied with Palmerin, and the two
noble sons of Primaleon, who with the Empress Gridonia, and the fair
Polinarda, all generally gave great commendations to the brave behavior of the
young Prince Palmerin. But the Emperor was somewhat offended, that the two
green knights were so departed, without knowledge from whence they came, or
what they were: but as their courage made manifest, they were two valiant
approved knights at Arms, and deserved the reward of honor, ^ where ever they
came. Thus rejoiced the Emperor, for that in his Court, remained the flower of
all Chivalry: both in the young knights, who never tried themselves before, as
also the courageous Palmerin, whose hardiness would give place to no hazard,
which made the Emperor famous, and themselves enrolled in the book of
eternal memory.

CHAP. XIII.
How on the next day after the Triumphs, a Lady arrived at the Emperors Court,
declaring of a Shield which was sent from the Sage Aliart of the Obscure
Valley, to the young Prince Palmerin: and was taken from her, by the Knight of
the Savage man, who kept the same in the Forest of the Clear Fountain,
until any Knight durst adventure to fetched it from him. And how many Knights
enterprised to win it, but lost their labor, till Palmerin came, who brought
it away with him.
ON the morrow after the Tournament, the Emperor accompanied with Kng Frisol,
and all the other young Knights sat in his great hall, giving such
co^mmendations to their late taken travel, that they esteemed themselves
highly honored, to find such courtesy at the Emperors hands, every one
wishing they might have gained knowledge of the two green knights, that behaved
themselves so worthily. To break off their talk, there suddenly entered
before them, a Damsel attyred after the English fashion, in a Robe of Velvet,
and about her middle a skirt of Gold: and her face endued with no less
beauty, then her garments were adorned with sumptuous bravery. When she had
well beheld all the knights, and failing of the person she sought to find,
bending her knees to the Emperor, thus used her salutations.

Most renowned Emperor, whose name is no less honored then your deeds held
worthy of immortal memory: pardon the rude entrance of a bold maiden, and
attend the discourse I shall deliver to your Majesty. The great and Sauadge
Magitian, named the Sage Aliart, of the Obscure Valley, who heartily wishes
your continual happiness, in faithful oath of his obedience, kisseth the
hands of your Imperial Majesty. And because your highness has bin lately
conquered by much sadness, to the no small grief of your Courtly assistants,
as also himself, who is your unknown subject, he promises your loss shall be
recovered to your joy, when neither Fortune shall let it, nor any mishap avouch
the contrary. The cause of my coming was to present you with a Shield, which
by your Majesty's hands, should be given to the famous young knight, that in
your Triumph won the honor of the day, and bears the title of perfect
knighthood as his just desert. But as I have often heard yet dare ^cantcy
credit, A tale of more novelty, then importing any truth: that your laws did
revenge the injuries of Ladies, and that your knights in such causes would
adventure their lives. Well it may be so, but I find it not so, or perhaps my
misfortune denies it should be fo: for that I have safely traveled through
many a fortaine Coast, and found rescue of diverse noble Knights, in every
strange Country, till happening into your dominion, where I least suspected
doubt, and there, too soon I fell into extreme danger: which I must either
admit to mine own mishap, or to such unkind Knights, as deny to help fair
Ladies, in so great a hazard. For the Shield I had in charge to deliver your
Majesty, and the reward of that knight, whose desert is meetest, is taken from
me, by a Knight in green Armor, who bearing in his Shield, a Savage man,
leading two Lions. And thus he willed me to certify the Knight, whose valor
and worthiness has deserved this Shield, that he will meet him within these
three days, in the Forest of the Clear Fountain, where, if he meet him not,
or some other knight for him, to fetch that away, which I have unhappily lost,
undoubtedly he will bear the Shield away with him. For this cause did I so
circumspectly behold your Knights, to try if any Fortune had been so good, to
know that courageous mind, for whom I entered my travail. And thus having done
my duty, I refer the rudeness of my discourse, to your gracious pardon,
whose wisdom will accept the simple declaration, considering that Maidens are
seldom acquainted with eloquence. The Emperor pondering on the damsels words,
with the friendly message of the Sage Aliart, whom he never heard off before,
sent her to the Empress, and the Princess Gridonia who received her so
honorably, as the hope they had in her glad tidings, increased their comfort.
Upon these news, diverse of the knights determined with themselves, to go
fetch the Ladies Shield, resolving them thus, that if it were their Fortune to
win it, the honor were inestimable, that they should gain by so brave a
victory. Whereupon Clariball of Hungaria Emeralde the Fair, Crispian of
Macedon, Flauian, Rotandor Medrusian the Fearful, Trofollant, and the proud
Foruolant, who were no friends to the Emperor, but came to the Tournament to
seek reuengement of ancient malice that they bare unto his Majesty, for that
certain of their Predecessors, had felt the force of his fury. And a fresh
spite was engendered, because the young knights had given them such a great
disgrace before their Ladies: wherefore they would pursue the knight of the
Savage man, and win the Sheeld from all the knights that should come after
them. When they were come to the Forest of the Clear Fountain, they beheld
the sheeld, hanging on a Tree hard by the Fountain, and the noble Knight the
Savage man, there ready to defend it. Foruolant took the courage to give him
the first assault: who being set beside his Saddle, had his sheeld and helmet,
hanged on the Tree, in sign he was conquered. He had not long staid, but
Crispian of Macedo^, Clariball, Emerald, Flauian, and Rotandor, bare him
company, whose sheelds and helmets were likewise placed, as vanquished.
Trofollant seeing the hard hap of his companions, and somewhat angry at the
hauty courage of the knight of the Savage m^n, thought to have done more then
his strength would permit, and so was dismounted, with his horse upon him.
Having recovered himself on his feet, he drew his sword, and began a fresh
encounter. At which time Palmerin, accompanied with diverse noble knights, as
Gracian, Dramian, Florendos, Platir, and the rest arrived there, and saw
Trofollant sent to his conquered companions whereupon the Prince Palmerin,
began in this manner. My desire is sir knight, neither for gain or glory, but
for friendly affection I bear you, to bind up your wounds, which are as
grievous to my sight, as to you who feel them. Yet not respecting more
friendship of you, the^ I desire to find at the hands of mine enemy. The knight
of the Savage man, not staying for his answer, thus shortly answered. Sir, if
the appearance of my grief, take such desire in you to do me good, you may do
as you shall find occasion, and I remain the more deep in your debt. But I
judge you are either ouerfond, or else forgetful of your self, to offer such
friendship to a stranger, who does neither desire it, nor can any way deserve
it, you being as I suppose, rather come to stay me, then salve me. Sir (quoth
Palmerin) the estate I see you in, does command me to use this speech, and
constrain me (if I might) to be your succor, neither fearing what you can
do, or falling one jot from that I should do. But to tell you why I come, is
to desire you by entreaty, or co^pel you by force, to restore a shield again,
which you have disloyally taken from a traveling Lady. Considering you might
diminish your honor if you should deal with her so ungratefully, and seem an
enemy to knighthood, in not regarding to help the wrong of any injured Lady.
The knight of the Savage man, beholding the great courtesy of Palmerin, and
esteeming his words to be spoken for his advantage: both conquered by his brave
behavior, as also the inward affection that did naturally move him, gave him
this answer. I have often heard (Sir knight) that words can more deeply
wound, then weapons, and that courtesy can compel, where cruelty may never
conquer. Such has bin your high good fortune at this time, and such is the
knightly demeanor that I have seen, as your gentle language has entered, where
your lance cannot, and your friendship won more, then either fear or force
may constrain. And seeing you have taken the pains to find me out, and have
done more at this instant, then before could any, I deliver you the shield, as
best worthy to wear it, both for the gifts of Nature, which flourish in you
abundantly, and gracious Nature which does adore you nobly. With these words,
he embracing the P. Palmerin, presently mounted on horseback, and departed.
Then returned the Prince accompanied with his knights, who were greatly
delighted in beholding the Shield: In the midst where, in a Field of Azure, was
placed a very fair Palm Tree, so lively framed, as if it had been a natural
Tree: and that which was most wondered at of them all, was a certain Poesy in
Letters of Gold, engraven round about the sides, so darkely placed, that none
in the company could judge what they should mean. At length they came to the
Court, when the Emperor was newly risen from supper, who being certified of all that had happened, was very much displeased in mind, because his whole desire
was, to have had knowledge of this valiant Knight of the Savage man.

Then taking the Shield, and looking very earnestly upon it, he sent for the
Damsel, to know the Poesy that was ^ngrauen about it. The Damsel answered,
I would most gracious Emperor, it were in my power to fulfill your request:
but being as ignorant thereof, as you or any other, I must desire your gracious
pardon. When she saw the Emperor had given Palmerin the Shield, who vowed to
use it as became a Knight at Arms, Making her obeisance to his Majesty, and all the other Knights, she presently took her leave, and departed. And the
Emperor determined among all his Knights, to consider more largely on this
strange adventure.

CHAP. XIIII.
In this Chapter is largely described, who was the Sage Aliart of the Obscure
Valley: that sent the Damsel with the Shield of the Palm Tree, to the
Emperors Court; to bestow the same on the valiant young Prince Palmerin.
BEcause you shll be resolved, who was the Sage Aliart of the Obscure Valley,
and why he termed himself by such an uncustomed name, mark what this
Chapter shall give in relation, and then consider of his proceedings afterward.

When the P. Don Edoard left the realm of Lacedemonia, and as occasion willed
him, to stay in the Empire of Grrece, after he had delivered the king Tarnaes,
forth of the cruel enchanted Castle, he entered a Galley, and so departed on his
voyage. Not long had they bin on the seas, but that a Damsel suddenly chanced
into the Galley, not using speech to any: but taking the principal Ore in her
hand, turned their passage quite contrary to another Island, where Don Edward
being landed, delivered a comely knight out of the hands of diverse cruel
tyrants, who were leading him to abide an unmerciful death.

The Damdsell conducted the Prince, to the habitation of Argonida, where being
friendly entertained, and staying as a welco^med Guest, such conversation was
between them, that they had two goodly Sons, named Pompider, and this Sage
Aliart, of whom we mean to discourse. Whose Grandmother being expert in the
Science of Magic, nourished this Aliart out of popular conversation, that
through her means, he became maruailous ingenious of wit, and very skillful
in her devilish exercise, so that he was esteemed the notablest Magitian in all
the world, whose memory being not touched in the book of Primaleon, I will
declare in what order he passed his whole life.

This Aliart, reputed of no less fame then learning, was not inferior to any,
but bare the estimation above all, so that none durst offer him injury, albeit
he deserved it, nor none would contend with him, they stood in such awe. He
seeing himself honored of the mighty, when they durst do no other, and loved
of the most part, for his excellent cunning, began to exercise himself in
Martial exploytes, which showed him to be the Son of the renowned Don
Edward. And having received his Knighthood at the hands of the Giant Garatie,
he behaved himself as famous in his exploites, as he was esteemed singular in
his practiced Art. And then he understood his Fathers imprisonment, with the
noble Primaleon, in the Castle at Dramusiande, who by the skill of his Aunt
Eutropa, endeavored to have all the flower of Chivalry in like captivity. But
albeit the imprisonment of these Princes, was unknown to all the Knights, that
labored continually in their search: yet this Aliart was so well acquainted
with the matter, as they that kept it most secret, for that his Art gave him
the power to know, what was done in all Countries in the world. For when the
Grecian knights, whose affection to these two Princes, caused them to leave
their native Country, and were happened into the unfortunate forest of great
Britain, which was bravely replenished with many courageous hearts, as also
sundry gallant Ladies, preparing many hard adventures, there were very few
escaped, but for the most part, were all lost in this unfortunate search. Among
which noble minds, was Recined Prince of Spain, Arnedes King of France,
Maiortes, and Sir Pridos, whose absence was greatly bemoned in the English
Court. The Princes Belcar, and Vernar, Ditree, and the Sultan, Bellagris, with
the renowned Polendos. All these for the honorable affection they bare to the
strayed Princes, left their kingdoms and signories, and unhappily were taken
prisoners in this cruel enchaunted Castle, which was great grief to their
friends, and inestimable sorrow to their well peopled Dominions. When Aliart
had considered all these unfortunate accidents, enterprised so ho^ourably, and
falling out so unhappily, he determined to hazard himself in the search of his
father, and to try his strength against the Giant Dramusiande, whose force he
little or nothing esteemed, but bare a great desire to his adventure, which
could no way be finished, but by his means only.

In this mind he departed to the Valley of Perdition, which was named so,
because all the noble Knights were there lost: and there he determined to make
his habitation, to follow his study, and provide remedies against diverse
mischanches that were like to happen. And because his nature desired to be
solitary, in that his bringing up was forth of all company, he builded him a
little Fortress between two great high mountains, which kept the light of
the Sun away by day, and the Moon in y^ night season. This dwelling he
called the Obscure Valley, but others termed it, the Valley aboce the Clouds:
the entrance whereof could not be found by any, as Aliart caused the Giant
Trabollant, to know to his cost, with his son also, who was Lord of a fair
Castle in a Velley near adjoining, which Aliart had newly erected, and
garnished within, with many fair Books, where spending his time very long in
study, at last, he got the mean to be called Sage. Thus lived the Sage
Aliart, in this Obscure Volley, often using to the Castle of Dramusiande,
bemoning the misfortune of the Knights, which he could no way remedy, till the
appointed time. The often repayring of the Sage Aliart, caused both Eutropa to
doubt something, and Dramusiande to stand in great fear: yet could they no way
hinder him, when it was his pleasure, to visit the captive princes. And as he
sat one day very pensive in his study, he understood by his Art of the
triumpes at Constantinople, when the Emperor would try the young Knights, that
he had nourished in his Court. Against which time he framed a shield, which he
sent by a Damsel, to Palmerin of England, to bear it with him in all
adventures that he should undertake: but by the way it was taken from her by
the knight of the Savage man (whom hereafter I will disclose unto you,) yet
restored again by the gentleness of language, that the Prince Palmerin used
with him. Thus remained the Sage Aliart, expecting the time, for the delivery
of the Princes, who concealed their griefs, and spent their time in silent
opinions, as both their misery would suffer them, and their little rest infer
occasion. Yet never fallig one jot in amity, though they had a world of woes,
to constrain them to it.

CHAP. XV.
How Belcar and Vernar, after they were cured of their wounds they had received
one against the other, arrived at the Castle of Dramusiande, accompanied with
Polendos, King of Thessale, where after Combat entered between them, they were
all taken prisoners.
VErna Prince of Almaigne, and Belcar, Duke of Duras, remained in the City of
Brique, till they felt themselves in good disposition of their health, and then
they departed to London, to the English Court, disguised and unwilling to be
known, to see if happily they might attain the sight of the Prince Flerida.

The Princess remaining still pensive, and therefore kept her Chamber, and
they failing of their pretended purpo^e, travailed through great Britain,
where they valiantly revenged the quarrels of Ladies, and enlarged the report of
their redoubted Knighthood, which neither time can wear out of memory, nor
death it self by any means dissolve.

Proceeding thus in their aduenturous travail, Eutropa had gotten them within
her circuit, that she was as sure of them, as had they been in her prison, but
yet let them alone awhile, to try the hardness of their Fortune. They having
spent the day in travail, and the dark night ouercharging them, with her
uncomfortable hours, they determined to take their rest at the foot of a
Tree, for that they were far from any other provision. So alighting, and
giving their Horses to their Esquiers, Belcar sat^ him dowe, and fell soundly
asleep, but Vernar, whose mind was on his fair Bazilia, satte conferring
with her Shrine, having no stomach to sleep. And that he might the better
accomplish his amourous devises, he withdrew himself to a little River, a
pretty way from his friend Belcar, and there what with the sweet Harmony of
the little Birds, and the silent passions he used to himself, the gentle
prince was greatly delighted.

Polendos K. of Thessalie, wandering that way, by Fortune took his place of
rest, near to the Prince Vernar, where he heard all the lovely Ditties, and
sweet discourses, that he used in commendation of his fair Bazilia, being
very loath to disquiet him, or to be known that he was so near. But at last
took occasion by the brave inventions that he had heard vttred by the Prince
Vernar, to enter into commendation of his own Lady, fair Francelina, and so
they twain, in this manner* passed away the weary night. In the morning, when
he might easily espy the Prince Vernar, he could not hide his presence any
longer, but went to him with his salutation. I know Sir Vernar, that your
amorous Passions of extreme grief, will scant suffer your opprssed head, to
enjoy any gladness, because the remembrance of your fair Bazilia, has urged
you this Night, to bewray the sundry assaults of an afflicted mind. Whose
far distaunce from your presence, has made you grievously to sigh, when you
would gladly have slept, whereof your Friend is a witness, who is not a little
forrie to understand your w^es.

Vernar embracing the noble Polendos* declared the great joy he conceived for
his company, yet somewhat displeased that any should be privy to his Amorous
complaints, which might cause him to be judged rather effeminate, then any way
Famous. While they were earnest in talking, Belcar came walking unto them, who
rejoicing at the sight of the King Polendos, embraced him, using these pleasant
sp^eches. I care not greatly, if I take reuengement now, for the sharp assault
you gave me at the Port of Corderia, where you bare away the prize, and I the
repulse, but Vernar will be loath that we should fight: therefore let us all
join together like trusty Friends.

After many gratulations passed on all parts, they mounted on Horseback, and
rode on, recounting the Adventures had happened each other, in seeking the
Prince Don Edoard. And Polendos rehearsed unto them, how he brought the young
Prince Palmerin to Constantinople, not forgetting the Letter sent by the Lady
of the Lake, and was only procured by the Sage Aliart, of the Obscure Valley:
which made both Belcar and Vernar, somewhat abashed, to hear the happy
success that had chanced. In continuance of this talk, they came before the
Castle of Dramusiande: every one giving his verdicte on the Braue^^e and
strength of this Fortress, till at length, to put them forth of these
thoughts, the Prince Don Edoard came upon the Bridge, in the same order as he
fought with the noble Primaleon which urged Polendos to this pause. Me thinks
this Castle should be invincible, if it be well provided within, of such good
Knights as this which we see without. Upon this accident, the Prince Vernar
prevailed by entreaty, to have the first Iouste with Don Edward, where
presently they Encountered onean other, with such large appearance of
Knighthood, that Don Edward lost one of his Styrrops, and the Prince Vernar
was vnhorssed. And having recovered himself, he drew his Sword, and came
courageously to him again, but Don Edward stayed, delivering him these
speeches. Sir knight, it may be that your skill on Foot, is more agreeable to
your strength, then the foresight you have on Horseback, the which I would it
might have been my hap to try, but it has not so pleased him, to wh^m I am
subject, for that against every Knight that comes, I am allowed but the first
Exployte.

Then Belcar very desirous to enter the Combatet, pacify Prince Vernar, with
these few words. Sir Vernar, since the Knight has fulfilled his first, and we
remain to begin a fresh Challenge, you may not refuse to forbear the Fight,
considering he has observed his duty in the Field. Whereupon Don Edward and
Belcar, began the second Encounter, whose hap was so hard, to bear his
friend Vernar company. Which Polendos pe^ceyuing, began the third Iouste,
very courageously, which remained a whilesome what doubtful, for that they had
battered one an others Armor very much, till at last, Polendos was dismounted
likewise.

Then came forth the Giant Pandare, commanding Don-Edward to goein again: to
whose command he obeyed, very sorry that he might not speak to the knight he
last ran withal. So entering into the Castle, the Prince Vernar thrust in
after him, to whom Don Edward presently said. Sir Vernar, your will has led
you beyond your wit, for that in this place you shall abide more distress
then in all your life time: you cannot fall into like danger, but he that is
desperate of himself, would little esteem his Friends life. Vernar hearing
these words, and not knowing who he was, and half angry at his ill luck, made
him this answer. Sir, I esteem your wit, as little as my wisdom, and your
friendship so simple, that I will scant impute any troth to your words: And
this understand, that neither year, nor any shall withdraw my desire, although
I buy it with mine own death. At which words, Pandare saluted him with his
Mace, so that between them twain, was a fierce skirmish, and Primaleon
leaning in his Chamber window, took great pleasure to behold the hautie
courage of Vernan, whose name being known unto Dramusiande, he was not a
little glad of him, for that his Father Trincus was also the causer of the
death of his Father Frenaque. Vernar so long assailed Pandare, that he had
broken his Sword to his hand, and his Shield c^eane through the middle,
whereat Pandare being somewhat angry, caught him in his arms, and shaking him
very sore, threw him against the ground, that it was doubtful if he had any
life left in him: wherefore he was presently carried into Don Edoards Chamber,
where provision was made to relieve his own estate.

Then was the Gate held open, ^ill Belcar and Polendos were entered, when it was
presently shut again, and then came Pandare against Belcar, who received him
very courageously, but yet was brought under, and carried in to his friend
Verner. Polendos seeing he must ^eeds enter Combat, and that Pandare prepared
himself against him: first summoned him with these words. Me thinks it were
for thy great honor, as also expedient for reserving thy health, to yield thy
self to me, who rather respect mercy, then to enter fight on a man, so
cruelly mangled. Do but behold thine own blood, and then consider of my
pro^^e^ad bounty, so shall thy life be saved, and mine honor reserved. Sir
(said Pandare) if I should submit my self to thy will, thou might account my
wit to be ever weak, or if I would stand to thy mercy, I should show mine
own cowardice, and no manhood: Wherefore resolve thy self, that I will yield
with thy death, which is the su^me of my desire. With that they fell to their
fight, wherein Polendos prevailed so happily, that Pandare was thought past all
recovery. Whereupon, the cruel Alligan came forth to defend him* who finding
himself also to be mated every way, and in frustrate hope of victory any way,
he dispaired of himself: and in fine, they were both so faint and wearyed,
that they fell down, neither gayning the Conquest of the other. Don Edoard and
Primaleon took Polendos into their Chamber, where to their three Patients,
they both used wholesome and comfortable Physic: being very sorry, that the
misfortune of them twain, should bring so many Noble Princes, and Aduenturous
Knights into that cruel Castle. Yet did they remain in good hope, which
they found with as good hap, in that at the appointed time, they were delivered
by a strange Knight, who was hardly known to any of them. Then Dramusiande
went about the Cure of his sick persons, that they might be in good health,
when any other Knights should happen to come.

CHAP. XVI.
How Recinde King of Spain, and Aruiedes King of France, left their Royal
Dominions, to wander in the search strayed Prince Don Edoard. And of the
Adventure that happened between them, the Black Knight, and the Knight of the
Dog, when they were arrived at the Castle of Dramusiande.
RECINDE King of Spain, hearing the great pursuit of many Noble Knights, to
make enquyrie of the two young Princes, Don Edoard, and Primaleon, he
absolutely determined with himself, to try the hazard of Fortune, if that his
employed pains might compass any good luck. And leaving the whole Government
of his Estate, to the Duke Orliande, and the Marquess Richard, of no less
Valiancie then true Nobility: Departed with no body, but his Esquyre attending
on him, through many Countries, till he came to the Court of France, where he
was Royally and graciously received by the King Arnedes. Who understanding the
sum of his noble determination, and being him self affected to those
worthy Princes, committed his Kingdom to his Queen Melitia, and traveled
with Recinde, in this hautie enterprise.

After long travel, they arrived at the English Court, being so disguised,
that they were not known to any, where because they could not see the
Princess Flerida, they would not stay, but departed on their Journey. And
hearing that all the Knights were lost in the Forest of great Britain, and
that they which entered there, were not seent to return, they made their course
that way, till mishap brought them to this cruel Castle, where on a sudden
they met with two Knights, excellently well mounted. The one having his Armor
spotted with red and crimzen colors, and in his Shield for his devise, he
bare a Dog, upon an Azure Field. The other Knight was all in black Armor,
and his Shield of the same color, without any other devise: these four met
together, striving which of them should first enter upon the Bridge. Don Edward
being come forth, and seeing them at such controversy, sought to end the
matter with these words. Gentlemen, if you come for honor, or for zeal, to
try the magnanimity of your courage, strive not in this order, which may
return to your great discredites, but let him that is boldest first begin:
so shall you finish what I judge you come for.

Upon these words, Recinde couched his Spear, but the Knight of the Dog
offered him this stay. Sir, it seems you neither regard civility, nor
Knightly courtesy, to offer me this great wrong: who both came before you,
and was prepared before you, and therefore of right ought to begin before
you. Recinde, somewhat moved at these words, shaped him this reply. Sir, if
in a bravery you seek to go beyond me, or in peremptory words, to bear the
Prize away, you are far deceived: for that words cannot cutface me, nor your
weapons fear me, for I was first provided, and therefore will not be
prevented. Don Edward perceiving these questions were like to grow to a
Quarrel, assayed once more to set them at quiet, and thus he began. This
sudden enmity, drives me to a shr^wde suspicion, that you come more to
talk, then to try your manhood, or rather to jest, then to Just. If you are
disposed, let the other twain come and deal with me, in mean time, you may
try which of you shall be first, or last.

The knight of the Dog being greatly vexed, as well at the words of Don
Edward, as also the stay Recinde held him in: charged him very boldly in this
manner. Since you have denied me my right, and offered me words importing great
rygor, know that I will revenge this wrong upon your person, and die in the
field, ^re I put up this injury. Wherewith they ran together very fiercely, and
Arnedes prepared himself to the Black Knight, so that between them began a
hot skirmish, wherein Horse and Men were al laid on the ground. Then rising up
again, and drawing forth their swords, they charged one an other with such
mighty strokes, that their singular courage made manifest the valor of their
noble minds.

Dramusiande accompanied with Primaleon, Polendos, and the other knights, stood
looking forth at a window of the Castle: giving no less commendation to this
notable combat, then the behavior of the Knights did justly deserve. Yet none
of them could judge of whence, or what they were, saving that Don Edward knew
the Knight of the Dog, (by remembrance that he was always wont to bear that
device) to be the courageous knight Maiortes, not knowing any of the other, but
commended them all, as they were well worthy: Maiortes throwing down his
sword, joined Arms with his enemy, to try his strength in wrestling and
Arnedes likewise reciued the Black knight, so that the blood issued forth upon
their Armor, and they althrough great weakness fell down on the earth. Then
came forth Dramusiande with his Noble Prisoners (whose promise made unto him
by oath, would not suffer them to start away) and taking off their Helmets,
Primaleon knew the Black Knight, to be the Sultan Bellagris, and certified
Dramusiande, that the other twain were Recinde King of Spain, and Arnedes,
king of France: who were all presently carried into the Castle, that their
wounds might be cured, and themselves recovered.

Dramusiande used all the Knights very honorably, refusing to take extreme
revenge for his fathers death, but supposed their imprisonment, to be
punishment sufficient. And for this cause he showed himself more mild and
gentle, because through their help, he had good hope to conquer the Isle of
the Lake, which was kept by the Giant Almadrago, who in time past, had taken it
from him by force. In time, Maiortes the Knight of the Dog, the Soldian
Bellagris, the Black Knight, Arnedes, and the King Recinde, had all obtained
their former health, rejoicing that they were imprisoned with their dearest
friends, whom they travailed to seek, and had so happily found. But the
Prince Don Edward, was not obliuious of his fair Lady Flerida, as also the
grief he supposed in his aged Father, whose sorrow proceeded through his
great misfortune, which in time he had good hope should turn to as great joy.

CHAP. XVII.
How Palmerin of England, desirous of travail to seek after strange
adventures, took the courage to speak to his Lady and Mistress Polinarda, as
loath to depart without her leave: And having sustained a grievous repulse,
departed secretly from the Court, not taking leave of any, calling himself the
Knight of Fortune.
AFter that the young Knights, had made manifest their great expertnesse in many
Triumphs, for the honor of their Ladies, and estimation they held of
themselves, the Emperor grew into more pleasant conceyts, then of long time
before he had used the like, causing every night dances and devises to be
performed, for the delight of the Empress, and the Princess Gridonia: but the
fair Bazilia still refused their company, for that the absence of the prince
Vernar, caused her spend her time in pensiveness.

Palmerin of England, affecting strange adventures, and desirng with other
Knights, to make proof of his Knighthood, would gladly discover his earnest
mind, but that he feared to procure the ill will of his Mistress. It chanced
on a night, the Princess Polinarda was sitting very solitary, and Palmerin
came and sat down by her, both of them overcome with many grievous Passions,
and both striving to speak, yet neither would begin. As commonly it fares
with those, that march under the Ensign of amorous Venus, who are subject to
many efeminate follies, as an idle head, a dulled wit, a pale and wanny face,
their thoughts still silent, yet always at work, their mind mute, yet never
in quiet, speaking faintly, behauing themselves fondly, walking solitary, and
using sickly ieastures, ever exclaiming on Cupid, but never remembering their
own cowardice; still crying, fie on Love, when it were more meet to correct
the folly of their life.

These are the Passions of a Lover, which enters through Idleness, is kindled
by Desire, set on fire by affection, and if Perseverance help not, is utterly
wasted by Desperation. After Palmerin had sitten a good while, and his Lady
still silent, he gave her occasion to speak by these speeches. Fair Mistres,
if I might as freely speak with your blame, as my thoughts are far from any
spot to bounty, I should then esteem my self happy, in gaining such leave, as
I account my self honored by your gracious love. Yet persuading my self,
your gentle nature will not quip your friend, nor give any cross motion that
may cut his fancy by your pardon, and on no presumption, I shall yield the
circumstance of my discourse to your gentle construction.

It is so, that feeling in my self the desire of honor, which I can no way
attain, but by some hautie enterprise, I have thought good to venture among the
Pikes of mischaunces, either to increase my renown, or end my life in an
infamous reproach. For many will send at large their speeches of defame, and on a
private spite seek to work me discredit: as lo, there is the Knight that
crept into his Fetherbed, when Fame does allure him into the Warlike field. But
he has more mind to Mask with Venus, then march with Mars, wearing a Glove
for his Lady, when he should use a Gantlet for her love.

These speeches, fair Mistress, is more grievous to your servant then his
patience can express, or your gentle nature suffer to hear. Which to avoid,
as well to prove my loyalty, which unspotted I bear you, as also to show my
duty, wherewith I honor your noble father, I have vowed to endeavor my self
in this attempt, which will be no less welcome unto your seemly self, then
it has been long wished ^f your vowed servant. For neither can any danger
withdraw my mind, nor any doubt cause me to think on mishap, having your
license, which is the courage of my travail, and your gracious love, which
awardeth al troubles. So that in any accident which may annoy me, or any
oppression, that may suddenly deceive me: I lived your Knight in favor, and
will die your Knight in fame: and as you only have the flower of my love, so
shall it never fade, till the latter end of my life.

The Princess Polinarda perceiving his intent, and her gentle heart, loath to
have his absence so soon, with the tears standing in her eyes, thus made her
answer. Servant, such has been the courtesy at your hands I have found, and
so loyal the continuance of your promised faith, that neither am I able to
gratify as I would, or to give you the honor, that by duty I should. Your
princely behavior made me choose you for my servant, and your equiuolent
bounty, made you loved of my self: so that I loved none more then you, albeit
none knewit so little as you. Beside, the estimation ^^y father has always
given you, with the notable deserts, has ever been in your self, increased
the love of all to you abundantly, but chiefly my love, which as yet flameth
freshly. But ^^nce the desire of your departure grows through me, and perhaps
there is some occasion that grieueth you, I would be glad to know my crime,
that I may make you recompense, for I had rather give you leave to tarry, then
grant you license to depart.

Lady (quoth Palmerin) though the cause be in you, yet is it no crime, and
though I depart for your sake, yet am I free from any such suspect: for it is
only the favor I have found at your hands, and the friendship you have
granted to my continual honor: that I can no way recover you such duty as I
ought, albeit I travailed for your sake, through my whole life. And to see such
a gracious person unrequited, my self being now of years, to put recompense
in proof, I might rightly deserve to be reproched of all men, much more to be
refused of so sweet a Saint. The Princess arising in a marvelous choler,
highly offended at his passed talk, she gave him this cooling, to quail his
hot attempt. I have often trusted, and been rewarded with treason, and where I
placed steadfast affection, I have bin soonest beguiled: which now I repent,
when it is too late, and bridle my fancy, when I see mine own folly.
Wherefore, seeing my fault is such, as you can rather afford me your room,
then your company, I give you this command, in your poasting voyage, that as
you will think to honor me, seem not to presume into my presence, which I
both bind you by my duty, and straightly command you to observe. So turning her
back, she flung away in a fume: leaving Palmerin in such an alteration, as one
could hardly judge, if he had any life left in him. But as hap was, no body
was present to descrie his heavy complaints, for that every body had conducted
his Lady to her Chamber: saving the Princess Polinarda, who stayed not to be
entreated, but went flinging through the Gallerie, as greatly vexed, as she had
left her servant passioned.

Palmerin departing to his lodging, tossing and tumbling himself on his
restless bed, and at every thought of his Ladies discurtesie, he fell into
an agony as bitter as the death, not suffering sleep to enter into his head,
but still bewailed the estate of his adverse hap. At last, when Aurora was
risen, out of the arms of old Titan her husband, he determined to fulfill
his Ladies command, albeit to his great pain, in granting consent. Then
getting on his Armor, which bare the color of a Heart in the Forest, very
thickly set with little golden shrubbes, and bearing in his Shield Fortune,
holding her tottering and unsteady wheel, and naming himself the Knight of
Fortune, he very secretly departed, accompanied with Siluian the Savage man's
son, whom he called brother, because they were nourished together, and he
bare the Shield of the Palm Tree, that was sent him from the Sage Aliart,
neither taking leave of the Emperor, nor of any, but in the vehemence of his
grief, mounted on horseback, and so rode both away. All the way as they rode,
Siluian endeavored himself by persuasion, to drive away his heaviness, but he
was as far from his purpose, as the Prince himself was deuoide of patience,
who rode on, using no words, he was overcome with such an extreme melancholy.
Yet was his affection so earnestly grounded on his Lady, as he vowed in her
behalf, to adventure his life, not doubting, but the duty he would show in
her absence, should win her favor again, and grant him her presence.

CHAP. XVIII.
How Palmerin of England, under the title and name of the Knight of Fortune,
still continued in his pensive journey, till at last he happened on a Castle,
where, in the honor of his fair Lady and Mistress, the Princess Polinarda,
he conquered a Knight, who termed himself, the Knight of Death.
STill travailed the valiant Prince Palmerin, heavy, sad, and greatly
lamenting his so late misfortune, neither resting in any pla^e, or abiding in
any place, or abiding in any company, but only his brother Siluian, who he both
loved and highly esteemed. At last, happening into a a Grove of Trees, he
espied a very fair Castle, standing very solitary, beset round about with a
green bancke, at sight whereof, the Prince alighted, which Siluian perceiving,
alighted likewise, and led both the Steedes to pasture.

In which time, Palmerin seeing no body near, and remembering the great
unkindness of his Lady, entered into these heavy mournings. O Palmerin, son
to a poor Savage man, and borne in the unfortunate forest of great Britain,
too soon preferred to honor, and too late thrown down into hatred. What regard
had thou of a Princess, thy self being a poor Pesant? Or what estimation
had thou of modesty, to move so great offense in thy gracious Mistress,
whose love was the only state of thy life, and whose favor was the flower of
thy prosperity? Ah sweet Lady, on your courteous pity, let pass my
presumption, and what has been more then duty, impute to may rude behavior,
which your clemency may both punish and pardon. And yet my good Lady, if you
respect my trusty service, with the constant loyalty I have always borne to
your Sovereignty, my fault committed rashly, deserves no such repulse, in
that this ingratitude is too much for you to show, and more then I can any way
suffer. For if you regard your own beauty, with the stayed assurance of your
servants bounty, you shall perceive my words to be for your honor, and not
worthy any hate, in that I will prefer your name, above all Ladies in
nobleness. And yet am I contented to abide your hard doom, and according to
your pleasure, wast my days in distress, till either you will move you to
recant, or my spotless loyalty to relieve my mishap, which the longer you
deserre, the more is my dolor, and you remaining obstinate, my pains are
helpelesse: but that your gentleness gives me hope your displeasure shall end
with my eternal delight.

Thus having finished his complaints, he drew near to the Castle, where by
good hap he heard the sound of Music, which gave him occasion to enter
further. And coming to a great Hall, he espied in one of the corners, one
sitting all in black, with a fair long Beard, and a very grave countenance,
showing by his sad complexion, that he had more mind to moan, then to any
mirth. Palmerin would not as yet enter any further, least he should break off
his quiet exercise, which was, in singing many sad Dittyes to his Lute, that
himself had framed, in the praise of his Lady. Palmerin having heard what
singular reports he gave his Lady, as that none might compare with her for
beauty and bravery: was very much offended, in that he esteemed all Ladies,
as counterfeite to his fair Polynarda, wherefore he brake off the Knights
Sonnet, with this kind of Salutation. Me thinks Sir, you either want manners,
or modesty, to glory in your Lady, as thought there were none her like: Sir,
your late comparison has urged me to great choler, for that my Lady is above
all in beauty* and for honor of her Name beside, beyond all in Noblenes of
Nature, and therefore worthy all praise, because she is superior to any.

The ancient Knight, seeing one entered upon him so suddenly, and to correct
his pleasures, with such sharp words: advanced himself toward him with this
answer. Sir Knight, your bold entrance into this place, with the great
offense you have offered my person, may hap to be set at so dear a price, as
shall cost the Blood you would be loath to spare. Is there any to be equal
with my Lady, who is not meet to bear the comparison of any? whose very
remembrance, makes me live in unspeakable torments? If thou dare stay till
I am Armed, I will make thee either deny thy bragges, or buy my Ladies honor
with the loss of thy life and breath. And I will so reward this thy
presumption, as shall teach thee thy duty, and win me my hearts desire. Sir
(said Palmerin) cease these words, and execute your wrath: if I have spoken any
thing to your displeasure, revenge your self, and there an end.

The ancient Knight withdrewe himself into a Chamber* where as his Esquire
presently Armed him, and Palmerin went forth, where he mounted on Horseback,
and attended his coming. At length came forth the Knight attired in black
Armor, bearing in his Shield, the portraite of griefly Death, lying on a
Toomb, covered all with black. Using no more words, they fell strait to
fight, each of them behauing themselus very valiantly: but the Knight of Death
was at length thrown to the earth. Then dealing a while together with their
Swoords, Palmerins luck was so fortunate, that he overcame his enemy, then
coming to him, and taking off his Helmet, he entered into these speeches. Lo
Sir Knight, contrary to your expectation, you are become my Prisoner: Now must
you gainsay, what before you have boldly said, in extolling your Lady, above
her who^ I honor, or prepare your self to the extreme rigor of death.

To whom the Knight of Death replied: Sir, well may you esteem your valor,
and make account of your victory, in that you have foiled him, who had good
hope never to be dismayed by any. But concerning the hard choice you put me
to, either to deny my Lady, or to leave my life: Suffice your self in this,
that no rigor can constrain me, no, not the death it self, may, or shall
compel me: for I rather choose to abide your cru^lty, then I will offer my
Lady so great discourtesie: this is my answer, take it as you please. Palmerin
comparing the loyalty of the Knight, with the constancy of his own Love, and
his affection to be as surely planted, as was the earnest desire in himself,
satisfying himself with the Conquest, called Syluian, and departed. The Knight
of Death returning into his Castle, where he was carefully tended, and looked
unto by his Esq^yre, greatly contemning his fortune, in that he was so suddenly
foiled.

CHAP. XIX.
Here shall you understand, who was the Knight of Death, that the renowned
Palmerin of England had conquered: and what was the cause he remained in his
solitary Castle.
IT is registered in ancient Hys^ories, that in Sardignia, sometime Reigned a
King named Euandrin, who espowsed Queen Emeralda, Daughter to the Duke Armian
of Normandy, and Sister unto the Noble Duke Drapos. This King had one only
Son, who was named Floraman, of no less expertnes of capacity, then Knightly
behavior in courage, which made him liked of all that saw him, and loved of
all y^ knew him. It so chanced, that this Floraman growing to ripeness of
years, became enamoured of Altea, Daughter to the Duke Charles of Cicilia, who
was subject to the King Euandrin, so that between these twain, was joined
such a league of perfect good liking, and such a mutual consent of faithful
love, that they supposed neither any accident could hinder their determination,
nor any extreamitie ^euer their plighted promise. But as Fortune is enemy to
the hauty courage, and prepares her malice against the well meaning mind: so
this Love could not please the King his Father, but by all means he could,
thought still to prevent it. When the King perceived he could hardly reclaim
his Son, but that his affection still increased to fair A^tea, he sent her
home to the Duke her Father, meaning to match his Son to Adriana, the Queen
of Cicilia, whom Floraman denied to love, or in this to grant to his Fathers
mind, but rather endeavored to follow his Lady, whose absence procured the
languishing of his life. The King well noting the intent of Floraman, that he
could not fancy his Fathers choice, by secret treason in the Duke of Ciciliaes
Court, he found the means to poison the fair Altea, to the no small grief of
her noble Father and friends, as also the Gentlemen that were in his Court, of
whom her beauty was honored, and the ciuility of her life greatly commended.
The Duke misdoubting that the untimely death of his daughter was procured by
some unnatural mean, because she was so soon sick, and so suddenly gone,
sent for Allaricqua her bedfellow, and by executing sundry torments on her, she
confessed, that being hired by the king of Serdignia, she ministered the potion,
that cut off her flowring years. When the duke heard the discourse of his
Lord and Soueraigns unkind dealing, he caused the Anatomy of his Daughter to
be artificially figured, which he placed upon a Toomb, representing her
Funerals, and thereupon in golden verses, writ the Epitaph of her rare and
virtuous life, and by her was the image of Death very lively drawn in perfect
proportion. This rare piece of workmanship, he laid in a goodly fair Chariot,
and leuying a great army, went against the King of Serdignia: Of whose coming,
when Floraman heard, he could not find in his heart to enter Battle against
his Ladies father, but with a company of well appointed knights, he brake through
the ranks, and entered the Camp, from whence he took the Chariot, with the
Picture of Altea. So ryding presently to a Port of the Sea, he took shipping,
and coasted into the Turks Dominion, and building there his solitary Castle he
lived there, bemoaning the unkind act of his Father, and the unfortunate
death of his fair Altea. To whose Picture, he would often report the
afflictions of his mind: and with sundry Lamentable Sonnets, discover her
praise, and his own pain, which to his Lute he often recorded, as the only
mean to persuade him from any desperate intent.

In this place remained Floraman, till such time as the Prince Palmerin visited
him as you have heard: and although it was the good Fortune of Palmerin to
conquer him, who was both wasted with mourning, and grown into great
debilitie, by his exceeding sorrow) yet was Floraman esteemed a Knight of
singular Prowess. And when Palmerin was departed, and he entered into his
Castle again unto his Ladies Picture, he appealed in this manner. Alas my
Altea, impute not this Conquest to any right in mine Enemy, but rather to the
feeble and weak assaults of your servant, which extreme sorrow for your
mishap, has caused, and grief of mine own misfortune, that so aduersly
chanced. Wherefore, to make amends for this great mischaunce, and that you may
know your Knight esteems none but you: I will in my adventures, so blaze
your memory, that all Ladies shall report, you are the only Altea: and cause
them to know, she is as yet unborn, that must be your equal. Long he stayed
in that comfortless place: till at last, the King his Father understanding
where he was, sent for him, and because he would not show himself
disobedient, he departed thence, bearing with him his Ladies Portraite, still
using his black Armor, and the Shield wherein Death was painted, as the
only Sepulcher of his great sorrows: using no other name for himself, but
the Knight of Death. And what rare Adventures were by him achieved, in the
honor of his Lady, and great reputation of himself, you shall be at large
certified in the sequel of this History.

CHAP. XX.
Palmerin of England, after he was departed from Floraman, the Knight of
Death, happened to come where he saw a combat fought between three Knights,
and the Knight of the Bull, named Pompides, who at the commandemens of a Lady,
kept the passage of a bridge, and how the Knight of Fortune bare away the
Victory.
WHen the renowned Knight of Fortune had conquered Floraman the Knight of
Death, he with his brother Siluian, proceeded on his journey, never showing any
sign of a lively disposition, but heavy and pensive all the way as he rode,
which Siluian desirous (if he might) to remedy, used these words unto him. Good
sir, wast not the time in woe, that you should use in pleasant recreation,
seek not the ruin of your self, for he that regards so ^lenderly your
proffered courtesy: rather extinguished her memory, as she has lightly left
you, or think on her, when you judge she is mindful of you. Unto which words,
the knight of Fortune thus shaped an answer.

Siluian my dear Brother, and friend, if thou cauldest discern the drops of
blood, that fall from my oppressed heart, as thou perceiuest the moist tears
that issue from my head, or if thou could judge the world of woes I abide in
my silent thoughts, as thou do perceive some motion, by outward appearance,
thou would rather wish me in my grave, then to see me remain in this
remediless grief, which no way can be remedied, but only by the last
extremity, which is death. And albeit, as thou say, she esteems not my
Passions, but rather is merry, when I mourn, and laugheth, when I languish:
yet shall it never be said, but Palmerin lived without fraud, and therefore
dyed in faith, preferring an honorable death, before a hapless life. I would
I had been blind, when first I saw her beauty, or that I had stayed with our
Father, then to enjoy such an ungentle friend, where we might have lived in
quiet estate, now not enjoying one hour of rest: for albeit I live in
spotless loyalty, yet am I rewarded with most ungentle loyalty. And what of
that? let it suffice, she is unkind, and thou unhappy: she bent to cruelty,
yet will thou live and die in constancy: desiring no longer life, then I may
be free from any spotte in my promised Love. And hereupon Syluian, assure thy
self, her Beauty shall hazard my honor on a thousand Lances, but she shall
confess her self, Palmerin is above all in loyalty. Thus passing the time in
talk one to an other, the Knight of Fortune in great pain, and Syluian still
continuing his persuasion, they arrived at a Bridge, where they saw three
knights before them, who would have passed over, but were resisted by a Knight
in fair white Armor, who kept the Passage, bearing in his Shield for his
Devise, a Bulls head, and was called the Knight of the Bull. One of the three
Knights, very courageously, gave Combat to the Knight of the Bull, but wan
quickly set beside his saddle. In fine, the Knight of the Bull prevailed
against them all three, to their grief, and his glory.

The Knight of Fortune knowing these three knights that had been foiled, to be
of the Emperors Court, as Luyman of Burgundy, German of Orleaunce, and
Tenebrant: he was not a little sorry for their mishappe, and presently menaced
his courage against the knight of the Bull, who met so stoutly together, that
they were both dismounted. Then charging one another with their swords,
between them began a doubtful skyrmish: but at last, the knight of Fortunes
hap was so good, that he struck him down: and setting his foot upon him,
charged him to tell what he was, and wherefore he kept that Passage. The
knight of the Bull, seeing himself brought under, and hearing his demand,
which he was very loath to grant: at last, discovered himself as thus. Sir
knight, it has been always my desire, to keep my self unknown to any, not
that I hyde my name for fear, but till my Noble exploytes might deserve to
make me known. But since it is my Fortune, by you to receive my first
conquest, and must declare, what you stand desirous to know: understand that I
am son to Don Edord the famous Prince of England, and Argonica, the Lady of
the Enchanted Isle, having to name Pompides. As concerning why I keep this
passage, thus it is. A certain Lady who cured my wounds I received at my last
encounter against two knights whom I slew: commanded me to keep the passage,
until I conquered a knight which she greatly desires, and can no other way
come to the knowledge of him. And here have I remained for the space of twenty
days: yet neither happening on that knight, nor conquered before his present.

The knight of Fortune hearing his words suffered him to arise, and gave him
this answer. Me thinks sir it might be more to your ^ame, as also the
happiness of your good fortune: not to link your life to this simple
enterprise, but to advance your self, to try the hazards of all places, for
in this place you sit idle, while abroad you might be better employed: which if
you think amiss of. I leave you to your Ladies command, and so Siluian and he
departed. The other vanquished knights, who greatly desired to have knowledge
of the knight of Fortune, were very sorry that they suffered him to depart,
without using any conference with him. Nevertheless, they supposed that it was
the renowned Palmerin: but that the device of his Sheeld deceived them, which
he bare for that purpose because he would not be known to any, otherwise then
by the name of the knight of Fortune. Well, after him they rid, and Pompides
went to his Ladies Fortress, where he might have his wounds cured, which made
him very faint, he had lost so much blood. Now will we return to the knight of
the Savage man, who having delivered Palmerin the sheeld, and left Trofol^ant
with the other conquered knights: trauail^d, both with reputation of knight,
hood, and good Fortune in all attempts, till he arrived at the Tristfull
Valley, where what befell unto him, you shall presently understand.

CHAP. XXI.
How when the knight of the Savage man had left the Prince Palmerin, and the
conquered knights in the Forest of the Clear fountain, he chanced to come
into the Tristfull Valley, where he tried his strength against Blandidon knight
of the Swan, and son of the sorrowful Lady Pandritia, where he conquered him.
FOr because we will not be unmindful of the knight of the Savage man, who
behaved himself so bravely at Constantinople, as also in the Forest of the
Clear Fountain, you shall understand, that endeavoring himself in travail,
Fortune directed his course to the Tristfull Valley, which might rightly be
called so, for that no Knight could enter there, witheut great affliction and
heaviness of mind, which made the sorrowful Pandritia to abide there in her
House of sadness As he rode on in this Valley, he espied a great tree, whereon
there hanged a great many a Sheeldes, and near to the Tree, was a Cave or Den,
at the etrance whereof lay Trunchions of spears, broken swords, and other like
weapons, which declared there had been many combats fought in that place. Out
of this Cave, there came a knight in black armor, bearing in his shield upon a
ground of sand, a fair white Swan, who having espied the knight of the Savage
man presently sounded a horn, unto a house which was near adjoining. At the
sound of this horn, the windows of the house were presently opened, and there
was laid a fair cloth of black Velvet, and Cushions of the same, when there
came a fair Lady, with her Damsels, and leaned thereon to see the combat,
which the knight of the Swan determined to have with the knight he saw
coming. This sight moved the Knight of the Savage man to stand in a great
maze, as well to behold the fair Ladies, as also such a seemly Knight, in a
place of so small frequentation. Out of which study to revive him, the Knight
of the Swan sent his Page, who summoned him in this sort. My Lord and Master
(sir Knight) whom you here behold, and can no way escape, has kept this
passage for this six Months, to the advancement of his honor, and disgrace
of no small company of good and hardy knights, as their Shields my suffice for
witness, that hang on yonder Tree, which they have left behind them, being
unable to withstand him, who as yet has been vanquished of none. He therefore
has sent me, and I in his name solicit you, that if cowardly fear do
enforce you to faint, and not daring to venture, where so many has been
vanquished, you are permitted the choice of two extremes, whereof you must
choose one, or receive such authority, as he will charge you withal. The first,
you must pass no further, but return from whence you came, being bound by
your Knightly oath, to make known to every one, your shameful repulse, not
sparing to tell the truth, for fauer to your self, but manifest your
cowardice, to the commendation of my Lord. The second, if you be so desirous,
that you would needs pass, without endamaging your self with the foresaid
peril, you must fulfill that which you will be loath, if you either esteem
Knighthood, or the happy state of your life. You must first give your Shield to
be placed by the other, and your name to be written under the same, to the
intent all Knights that happen this way, may know him that came like a Knight,
but departed hence like a fainting Crauen, so shall their extreme rigor in
speech, procure the means to your eternal shame. Beside, you must vow to this
sorrowful Lady, who with all her company, spends the time in wailing, never
to rejoice, in remembrance of her grief, but to be part^er of her sadness,
while your life endures, If none of these twain please you, come to my Lord,
and he will ease you.

The Knight of the Savage man, smiling at this discourse, which menared
disloyalty, as also threatened danger, sent the Knight his answer, in these
words. Go tell thy Lord, that he has met with such a one, as neither
respects his proffers, nor regards his puissaunce, not minding to go
forward, nor yet to return, till he has caused him to know, that he has as
much authority to constrain, as himself has to command. Upon this answer
they met together valiantly, each charging the other with such Knightly blows,
as the Ladies gave great comme^dation to the fight, hardly judging who was the
likest of victory. They breathed, and fell to it again, the knight of the
Swan, accounting himself well ^^ated, and the knight of the Savage man,
thought him indifferently matched. At length, the victory chanced to the
Knight of the Savage man, who rejoiced, that he had conquered so good a knight,
and he vnclasping the Knight of the Swans Beuere (who was quite overcome with a
grievous trance) wrought the means to get life in him again, when as he
charged him to tell, what he was, as also, wherefore these Ladies lived there,
and why he undertook to keep that passage, unto which request the Knight thus
answered. Sir knight, if in loosing my life, I might profit her whom I ever
sought to please, and finish that which must be brought to end, I would rather
embrace the death, t*en satisfy your desire, that craves the thing, I would
never show to any. But seeing my grief cannot be helped that way, nor greatly
eased this way, you having now authority to command, I will accomplish your
mind in every point. I am called Blandidon, Son to this sorrowful Lady
Pandritia, who has too long, yet longer must, abide in this her Castle, called
the House of Sadness. Where, the more to my grief, yet no way to be remedied,
she has vowed to end her life with her misfortune, and to continue in
mourning, so long as she lives. Only for the love she bare to a knight, who^
in travel I am sure you have heard of, in that he is no less famous for his
hautie deeds of Arms, then above al knights for his achieved victories, he
is called, as I have heard of many, Don Edward of England. And because I cannot
find the mean, to persuade my mother from this sorrow full kind of life, but
that she will still remain in her v^wed heaviness, I have determined to guard
this passage, making all that I conquer, partakers of her grief, and forcing
all that refrain, to the shame you have heard, wherein I honor her, which is my
desire, and try many a good Knight, to the increasing of my fame, though I
never sustained the like mishap by any, nor hope to meet the man that shall
do it again.

The Knight of the Savage man, hearing the tale of Blandidon, (who was esteemed
for a Knight of no less valor then good Fortune,) desired him to leave the
solitary place, and to bear him company to the Forest of great Britain,
declaring, that more renown might there be gotten in a day, then during his
life time, in that heavy passage. Which Blandidon would have granted to right
willingly, if the pensive estate of his sad mother, had not persuaded him to
the contrary, whom he was loath to leave, yet desirous to keep the Knight of
the Savage man company, who^ he was very earnest to have knowledge of. At
length, a little before he departed, the Knight of the Savage man, thus
persuaded Blandidon. Sir Knight, I account my self happy to meet with so
good a Knight, and would condemn my self altogether of ingratitude, if I
should not requite your gentleness, so far as without mine own harm I may,
whose company I would gladly have, yet unwilling your Lady mother should
remain destitute of a guide. To resolve you what, and who I am, you shall
know, that I am called the Knight of the Savage man, by which name, I am known
to many good Knights, who have both tried me, and found gentleness at my
hands. No farther can I disclose my name, till I am better acquainted with my
self, then as yet I am. And now I intend to hazard my self in the adventure
of great Britain, whereas many noble Knights do enter, and not heard of
afterward, whom I mean to bear company, or else to end the great danger.
Blandidon would gladly have assaied this adventure also, but the faint estate
of himself, with the great care he used to his mother Pandritia, would not
suffer him to depart. Wherefore, using such friendly greeting at their
departure, as beseemed their profession and loyal intent of courtesy, the
knight of the Savage man took his way on his journey, and Blandidon to the
castle, to comfort his mother, as also to have his wounds recured. Assuring
you, that this strife between them, wrought such marvelous endeavors on
either part afterward, as has seldom been heard of, which you shall read in
the sequel, wherein, the virtue of their nobleness, with the unanimity of
their conjoined faithfulness, was not more desirous to the one, then
delightful to the other.

CHAP. XXII.
How Floraman the Knight of Death, and Prince of Serdignia arrived at
Constantinople, at the Emperors Court, where he caused his Tent to be pitched,
in the honor of his fair Altea. And how before the Emperor, he made challenge
against all the Knights of his Court* in the defense of his Ladies beauty,
where his Fortune was so good, that he overcame the Prince Gracian, his
brother Guerin, and the other Knights that adventured for their Ladies sakes.
GReat was the sorrow that the Knight of Death sustained, for the foil which
Palmerin the noble knight of Fortune had given him, whereof to be revenged
(after he had visited the king his father, who had sent for him) he continued
in travel so long, that at last he arrived at Constantinople. Where before the
Emperors Palace, he erected two fair Tents, very artificially made in
workmanship, al of black Silk and Gold, whereon was given to view in brave
Pictures, the rare beauty of his Lady Altea, as also the whole course of his
mournful life* a spectacle of great delight to all that took occasion to see
it. In the one of these Tents was prepared furniture for his lodging, and in
the other stood his lusty Coursers, with the Spears and Weapons to maintain
his Tournement, and on the top, between both the Tents, was placed the
perfect Image of his fair Altea, which he took from the Duke her father,
while the two Armies were waging battle. The Knight of Death having every
thing in readiness, with his two Esquires attending on him, he entered the
Emperors Palace, attired in his accustomed Armor, which made the Emperor
somewhat abashed, yet very well pleased with the civil demeanor he perceived
in him. Then kneeling down to kiss his Majesty's hand, he was not suffered as
he would, but was kept back, which he abiding very patiently, began to fire
his eyes upon the Empress, and her Courtly Ladies, to see if he could find
the Lady, that might for beauty, compare with his Altea, and after a good
whiles pause, in this order he began to render his speeches. Most puissant
Emperor, let not my boldness be admitted to any ill intent, or my rude
behavior, to merit your gracious disliking, to whom I not only vow, my
heart and hand, but my unfeigned service, to the hour of my death.

I am that unhappy Knight, whose misfortunes can not be recounted, for that
all my life hitherto, has bin nothing but misery, and am threatened to spend
all my life in infinite calamities, which has drawn my mind into such a
debilitie, that I can neither honor your Grace as I should, nor behave my
self as gladly I would.

For first, when I had appointed my mind to a quiet estate, which I thought no
mishappe could alter, or any extreamitie change, but resolved my self on an
infallible joy, Aye me, one fling of Fortune ouerturned all, and the Heaven of
my happiness became a hateful Hell. When my youthful years allured me to Love,
and fancy made choice to mine own good lyking, I esteemed my self the
happiest of any man alive, though my chance were more hateful, then my grief
can unfold.

For spite, not only berefte of my Lady, but allotted my poor self to
exreame ill luck, when I forsook all Courtly company, only determining to
waste my tune in a solitary kind of life, which I spent in remembrance of her,
who most regarded me, and still lauding her Beauty (which I esteemed above
all) there I remained (me thought) a merry, though indeed a mournful time.
Yet was not Fortune satisfied, but rubbeth a fresh grief upon the green
wound, in sending a knight to break off my silent devotions, who repining that
I should extol my Lady, above his Saint that was unknown to me, entered the
fight, which returned to my foil, he bare away the victory, and I was
vanquished. Thus have I been ever indamaged, every way distressed (and may say,
that no knight can say) I am the only man for mishap. And because I will not
be reputed so ungrateful to my Lady, that one repulse shall make me forsake
her sweet shrine, I have vowed in all Princes courts, to extol her beauty,
to whom (referring comparisons) I can esteem none her equal. And these
Knights who honor their Ladies, and dare contend with my Altea, either for
beauty, or bounty, I am ready to give Combat to all, for that I will allow
the superiority to none. As concerning the order appointed in this fight,
which I would all to obey, and none to break: thus under your gracious leave,
it is requested. That those knights, who esteem their quarrel so good, as to
enter the field for the beauty of their Ladies, shall bring with them her
Portrait, for whose sake they adventure, which will be to their own honor, and
fame of their Ladies. Beside, if my hap be so good as to gain the victory,
they must enter my tent, to render their Armor, and their names to be
registered in my book, which I have termed the Sepulcher of Lovers. But if my
enemy prevail, contrary to my expectation, he shall be Lord of the riches
which remains in my tent, beside, my self as his vassaile, to stand at his
pleasure. And this favor I must request of your Grace, that none shall not
enter Combat, with the sword, with out he be able, to mate me in the Just. This
is the cause of my coming, procured through the knight yt gave me the
overthrow, who protested himself to be of your Court, for which cause, I
desire that I may here begin my knightly enterprise, I will return to my tent,
to expect the coming, of him that dare first presume. Thus with taking leave,
he departed to his tent, the Emperor remaining desirous to know of whence he
was: which was declared to him by some of his Court, that he was Floraman,
Son to ancient King of Sardignia, at which report, the Emperor was very
sorry, that he had not entertained him, according to his valor and Nobility
of birth. On the next day, the knights prepared themselves before the Tent of
the Knight of Death, and the Emperor, with the Ladies of the Court, standing
ready to behold the Combat, which was first enterprised the ye prince Gracian,
for the love of Claritia, daughter to the king Polendos, being gallantly
mounted, all in gylt Armor, and in his sheeld, bearing for his devise, a
Damsel her face covered with a green shadow, like unto a Net. The gentle
Prince looking toward his Lady Claritia, who stood in the window, by the
princess Gridonia, unto himself used these speeches. Fair Mistres, I desire
you to continue your woonted affection toward me, and not to let fall your
favor, for that your love does encourage me to the fight, in assurance
whereof, I shall cause mine enemy to know, that his Altea, is far
incomparable, to my fair Claritia. With these wards, he ran against the knight
of death, encou^tring one another with such knightly behavior, that both the
Emperor, and all the Ladies, took great pleasure to behold them. At their
second pause, the knight of Death, turned him to the picture of Altea, with
these words. Can my courage ^aint, remembering you my good Lady? or can any
dismay me, having embraced your favor? no, the honor of your name, has
called me to the field, and your beauty is so perfect, that none can cause me
fly. Then began they a fresh assault, as doubtful to the one, as to the
other: but at length the knight of Death had unhorsed the Prince Gracian, to
the great sorrow of his Love, and no less to himsefe. Then was he led into
the Tent, where he resigned his armor, and his name was written down, in the
Sepulcher of Lovers. Then approached Guerin, brother to the Prince Gracian, who
for his Lady Clariana, adventured to the Combat, who^ the knight of death,
brought likewise to the Sepul^hre of Lovers. After these came Flauian,
Rotandor, and Emerauld the Fair, whose strengthes were not to compare with the
knight of Death, and therefore were all unarmed, and brought to the Sepulcher
of Lovers.

The Emperor commanded the Tournament should end for that day, and sent for
the Knight of Death, to a sumptuous banquet, where the Ladies and gentlewomen,
made such estimation of him as his singular Prowess, and hauty courage
deserved. Which made him in sighs, to think upon his Altea, whose
commendation was ever best welcome to him, yet h^eacute;e dissembled his
grief, with a merry countenance, because every one should not be privy to his
extreme Passions. So after the banquet was ended, and their Dancing finished,
taking leave of the Emperor, as also the whole company, he departed to his
Tent, and the Ladies to their Chambers.

CHAP. XXIII.
How the Knight of Death at his second Io^st. conquered the Prince Polinarda,
who adventured himself in the behalf of the fair Polynarda, yet was he
vanquished, with diverse other knights. And how Berolde Prince of Spain, and
knight of the Sphere, suddenly arrived there, and maintained against the
knight of Death, the beauty of his Lady Onistalda.
THe knight of Death on the next morning, came foorch before his Tent, attyped
in black Armor, whereon was painted in diverse places, the resemblance of the
fair face of Altea, and in his Sheelde was figured a knight, clasping his
arms together in great heaviness, and by him stood y^ image of ugly death,
and standing stedfast^^ke looking and beholding the Picture of Altea, unto
himself the began in this manner. I rejoice (my dear Altea) that Fortune
has not altogether forgotten me, but allows my in this place, to revenge
the foil I sustained at my sorrowful Mansion, in that by my good endeavor all
the Ladies of this Court, shall be forced themselves to confess that I
maintain the quarrel of perfect beauty, and therefore worthy to bear the
prize away.

To break off these imaginations, Polinard the brother of the Prince Vernar,
presented himself before the tent (when the Emperor and the Ladies were set in
their appointed place) his Armor being blew, and his Sheelde, the cheerful
countenance, of a very beautiful Damsel, which he bare in the honor of the
Princess Polinarda, unto whom he vowed great affection, but bashfulnesse did
hinder himm from making it known. The regardents of the Joust, willed him to
beliuer his Ladies favor, because it was the order of the fight, that he
should do so: to whom he answered. The favor of my Lady, which as yet I have
found very slender, shall be brought on this knight, whom I have hope to
conquer, and I will deliver him that small favor I have, to her Fame, and his
eternal dishonor. The knight of Death replying: Many a good Knight had
thought so, and yet has been deceived, and although you brag you so, you
may hap to have as hard a bargain.

So without mor words, they encountered very fiercely, but Polynard was
ouerthrown, with his arm grievously broken, with incensed him with such anger,
that he would have bin at his enemy again, but the knight of Death, gave him
this persuasion. Sir, you have done enough for this time, when your arm is in
estate, you shall have a fresh combat. These speeches so vexed Polynard, that
he became so troublesome to them both in talk and behavior, that he would
neither yield his Armor, nor obey the orders that were appointed in the
field, which caused the Emperor to give him a great check, whereupon he
departed, giving great offense to the knight of Death, in denying that which
was his right and title to have.

Then dealt he with five knights more, and vanquished them all, sending them
into his Tent, to the Sepulcher of Lovers, by which time it drew toward Dinner,
and the Emperor with the Ladies withdrew themselves, and every one departed,
till they had refreshed them, as nature required. When dinner was ends, the
Emperor went to the stent to see the knight of Death, to whom he gave no small
commendations for the worthy behauior he had seen in him. So continuing that
after noone in their sport, to the foil of many a good knight, among whom was
Trusiande, and Bellizart, that bare company with other knights to the Sepulcher
of Lovers.

And when they were ready to leave of their pastime, there suddenly came
ryding a very seemly knight, whose Armor was beset with grieve Spheres,
bearing in his Sheelde likewise a Sphere of the same color, he perceiving the
Emperor with the company of so many brave Ladies, came prancing, and showing
many tricks with his horse, before the knight of Death. At last he drew forth
a little table, with a circle of gold round about it, wherein was live Pictured
the fair face of Onistalda, Daughter to the Duke of Drapos of Normandy, and
looking steadfastly upon it, began thus to use his tal^ke. Sweet Mistress, I
have enterprised this journey, under the soueraign title of your^, singular
beauty, not doubting but to vanquish him, who as yet has borne the prize from
al. Therefore, let not the favor, which was my accustomed reward, he denied me
at this time, for that your beauty makes me enter the field, which I will
maintain to my desire, or sustain thd death. So delivering the table to the
Regardants, who were appointed to receive it, they set the Spurs to the
horses, and met with such puissance together, that they were both thrown to
the earth, when drawing their Swords, they charged one another so bravely, that
this combat bare the commendation, above all that had been seen at that
Tournament.

Great desire had the Emperor, to know the knight of the Speere, but their
fierce encountering, would not suffer any answer to be made. Retiring a little
to take breath, the knight of Death beheld his Armor, all flasht and broken,
on the fair face of Altea, which caused him to fall into these complaints.

Ah my sweet Altea, how can I desire your favor, or make account to enjoy
your love, suffering your blameless face to be thus offended? in whose
remembrance I have, and do enjoy the honor of all good Fortune.

On the other side, the Knight of the Shpere complained to his Lady, saying:
How happy might I esteem my self, my (good Lady) if for the price of my
wounds, I might enforce my enemy to say, you are the only Goddess of beauty,
which either I will do, or die, ere I depart out of the field. But if you with
draw your favor, then shall mine enemy be conqueror, and I constrained to
live in eternal detriment of my life. By this time it waxed very dark, and
because they would not give over, the Emperor caused Torches to be lighted,
which gave great cause of courage to them both, to see the good will of the
Emperor, and would not depart the field till one were conqueror. At last
joining themselves together, through extreme faintness and weariness, they
fell both to the ground, but the knight of the Sphere was underneath, the
Ragardaunts giving the victory to the knight of Death. Then leading the knight
into the Tent, where he rendered his Armor, and his name to the Sepulcher of
Lovers, they knew him to be Berolde the prince of Spain, which when the
Emperor heard, he sent for him into his Palace, where he was carefully
tended, until his health was perfectly restored, yet he was maruellously
offended with himself, that his Lady past without the honor of the day.

The knight of Death could bear no Armor a great while after, for that he had
found the puissance of the Prince Berolde, of no less force, then worthy
commendations. But when he had gained hs good estate of health, he still
maintained his quarrel, against many strangue knights, of whom by his good
Fortune, he had always the victory, replenishing his Sepulcher of Lovers, to
his own hearts content. And the Emperor Palmerin gave him such honor, in the
time he endured his adventures, that he was double encoured, to maintain the
beauty of his Lady Altea.

CHAP. XXIIII.
How the Knight of Fortune, having left Pompides, chanced to meet with the
Green Knight, that accompanied the Knight of the Savage man, in the Turnament
at Constantinople, who was the son of Sir Pridos, named Don Rosian, De la
Bronde, in whose company the Knight of the Savage man, was nourished in the
Court of England, who trying their strengths together, Don Rosiart was
vanquished.
EEduring the Tournament of the Knight of Death, many Noble Princes and valiant
Knights, left off the the strayed Princes, and came to Constantinople, to
defend the beauty of their Ladies. Which caused the Knight of Death, having
such prosperous Fortune, to leave his black Armor, the Image of his
heaviness, and fought in a gorgious new Armor, mingled with colors of red
and white, all beset with Pellicans of gold, every one holding in their bills,
the tormented heart of a Lover. His Shield also was answerable thereto,
bearing in the midst a golden Pelican, upon a ground of Sinople, where, to
his brave victories, we will leave Knight of Death, to declare what happened
the Knight of Fortune, when he had left Pompides.

After that to his own renown, and honor of many Princes Courts, he had
succored the distress of sundry defamed Ladies, and borne away the prize from
many famous Knights, suddenly coming forth of a Forest in Greece, musing
upon the great ungentleness of his Lady Polinarda, he met a Knight, mounted
on a gay Courser, and attired in green Armor, which was all hackt and hewn,
and his Shield sore polluted, whom he remembered to be the knight that came with
the knight of th Sauadge man to Constantinop. which caused him in gentle manner
to offer him Salutations, whereupon the green Knight put forth this demand.
Sir, I h^pe by your means to he resolved in the occasion which makes me
travel in all places, and stay in no place. The Knight of Fortune stayed him
with these words. The heavy thoughts which do often ouercharge me, will hardly
suffer me to use any talk with you. Why Sir (quoth the green Knight my
request is so reasonable, as it need not offend you to make me answer. I would
gladly know, if in your travel, you chanced to meet with a Knight, in such
Armor as y^ see me wear, carrying for his Devise in his shield, as Sauagde
man, leading two Lions, in a field of silver. I would my self (answered the
Knight of Fortune) gladly know where he is, for that my travel, is partly to
seek him, but I fear me, we shall both miss of that we look for.

Sir (quoth the green Knight) for what cause do you labor your self in his
search? If he has done any thing that does displease you, behold him here,
that will answer in his cause.

The Knight of Fortune hearing these words, presently returned him this
answer. If I should report (Sir) that either he, or any other Knight has
iniuryes m^^, I should misreports of them, and greatly reproach my self. For
the grief which I sustain, is caused through a Damsel, to whom I never gave
dese^t, or know the cause, why she should offer me such great ungentleness:
and neither is the Knight you seek, (...) to my griefs, and he is yet
unborn, that shall compel me to show it: wherefore, you proceed in your
enterprise, and let me continue in bemoning my misfortune. Sir (said the green
knight) by how much you are desirous I should depart, by so much the more I am
determined to tarry, and will c^mpell you to show why you seek the knight of
the Sauadge man, or force you to abide the peril, which by denial you may
find. Whereupon, he presently ran against the Knight of Fortune, (...) Siluian
could possible deliver him his Spear^, which made him glad to trust to his
Swoorde, till at lastly (after a (...) whiles Fight) the green Knight came
with such force, that his Horse ran his nose against the ground, and
overthrew his Master, which the knight of Fortune seeing, alighted, and then
dealte with him at his pleasure, until such time as the Green^^knight waxed
very feeble, and the Knight of Fortune perceiving it, did use very much merry
to him, but the Green knight having not the good mind to respect it, came
against him courageously, with these words.

What Sir Knight, begin you to fainte? nay, defend your self hardly, for
since you would not esteem my gentleness, when it was proffered, you shall feel
the recompense that belongs to selfe^will. Then joined they agaiue, till at
last the knight of Fortune reached him such a sound stroke, that he brought
him on both his knees, at which advantage, he offered the motion to have slain
him: but the grieve knight considering his estate, began in this manner to
use his entreaty. Sir Knight, the puissance I did esteem in my self, in
thinking at no time to find my peer, made me use this presumption to you,
which I buy now with too dear a price. My life stands at your courtesy, to
whom I know not well how to frame entreaty, for that my rash attempt, does
rather crave a just reward, then any favor to be shown. Yet thus much, on
your mild nature I persuade my self, that you rather esteem the conquest,
then my death, and will suffice your self with the one, though I am unworthy
to deserve the other.

Sir (quoth the Knight of Fortune,) I account of my victory* much more then
thy Death, and because thou shall know, that Patience does always conquer my
Anger, I give thee thy life upon this condition, that thou make known to me
the Knight of the Sauadge man: as also of whence, and what thou art, and why
thou do so labor to seek him? Trust me Sir (answered the Green knight) as
concerning the knight of the Sauadge-man, his name, nor of whence he comes,
is known unto me: Nevertheless, if I did know it, and he had desired me to
keep it secret, you should have my life, before I would discover him. As for
my self, I am called Don Rosian, de la Bronde, son to sir Pridos, the Duke
of Galls and Cornwall, and Couzin to Frederick, the famous King of England.
This is all that I can or will declare, which if it will not suffice you, on
Gods name take that I would hardly spare.

The Knight of Fortune, satisfied with this answer, mounted on Horseback,
giving him this farewell. It had been much better sir knight, to have used
such fair language as I gave you then to cause both of us to hazard our lives,
upon a quarrel that has no foundation, which to prevent against another time,
let this I wish you serve for a warning. And so Siluian and he departed to a
Castle, where, by a Lady named Rianda, he was cured of such wounds as he had
received: leaving Don Rosiran to ride whither it pleased him.

But concerning why he departed from the Knight of the Savage man, the History
declares, that it chanced in this order. After they were come two days
journey from Constantinople, it fortuned they met a young Gentleman, ryding a
great pace, and using a heavy clamor all the way as he rode, to whom they
advanced themselves, desirous to know the cause of his complaints. To whom
the Gentleman declared, that three knights had taken a Lady from him, desiring
greatly to abuse her honor: wherefore he requested them, as they tendered the
estate of Ladies, so they would help to defend her from injury.

This heavy tale, urged them to ride with the Gentleman, till by Fortune they
met with the Damosel, in the Forest of the Clear Fountain, that brought the
Shield from the Sage Aliart, to deliver to the young Prince Palmerin, who^ the
knight of the Savage man was desirous to know. When Don Rosian saw, how he had
taken the Shield from her, and sent her with the answer you have heard before,
he desired that he might accompany the Gentleman, to relieve the distressed
estate of the Lady, promising to return to what place he would appoint.

After leave obtained, he departed with the Gentleman, and had such good
Fortune, that he slew two of the Knights in combat, and compelled the third to
flight, himself being before hurt, and his Armor bruised, as you have heard,
when he met with the Knight of Fortune.

But because you shall be certified why he was called De la Bronde, you shall
hear what in the English Ch^onicles is affirmed for this matter. King Mark
had by his Queen Yseul, a daughter named Yseul, who was thought by some, to be
the daughter of Tristam: she being joined in marriage with the Duke of Galls
ha^ a son by him, named Blasanon de la Bronde, Duke of Galls and Cornwall,
who espowsed Marlott^, daughter to the king Charlian of Ireland, who having a
son by her, at her request, named him Marlo^, De la Bronde. And in this order
it did conti^e, to the Duke of Galls: who because he would not have his house
grow into oblivion, named the son of sir Prid^s and Attaida, Don Rosiran, De
la Bronde. Who after he ha^ thus been vanquished by the knight of Fortune, was
conducted by his Esquire to a Monastery, where he remained till his wounds
were he^led.

CHAP. XXV.
How the knight of Fortune stayed so long in the Castle of Rianda, that he was
advertised by a Damsel named Lucenda, who was newly come from the Emperors
Court, the knight of death, in defense of his fair Altea, had born away the
prize from all Ladies. And how upon this report he rode to Constantinople,
accompanied with Siluian, and there in the honor of Polinarda, he vanquished
the knight of death, who resigned his Tent to the noble knight of Fortune.
COncerning the knight of Fortune, who remained at the cure of his wounds, in
the Castle of Rianda, who shall understand, that a Damsel, who was attendant
in the Emperors Court, and Couzin to this Lady Rianda, desired leave to came
and visit her Aunt, in the time that the Knight of Death, endured his
Tournament for the fair Altea. This Damsel being named Lucenea, arriving at
her Aunts Castle, was presently known by the knight of Fortune, because he
had been daily in her company in the Emperors Court, which urged him thus to
commune with her. Mistress Lucenda, it is marvel to see you so far from the
place, where I wish my self ever, both for the honor of the persons, as also
their happiness of pleasure.

Lucenda right glad to see the Prince Palmerin, gave him her answer as thus.
Trust me sir, if you would follow my counsel, not that I speak by way of
command, but rather on earnest desire to entreat you, I would wish you to
hasten your self to them, and well to discharge you of the Emperors anger, as
also to satisfy those, that received no small offense at your sudden
departure. The Emperor and his Knights think more then I will speak, and
the Ladies judge worse of you then I can say, in that the one imputes it to
your small friendship, and the other suppose, you owe them small favor. But if
you are desirous to wipe out this blemish, and to make appearance of your
perfect bounty, now is it time to win you the Spurs, or to gain you the
report of a contin^all shame: and now shall they know, if your affection be
such, as prefers their Fame, before your own ease. The Knight of Death, who
came thither lately, and has set up his Tents, in the honor of his Lady,
has eclipsed the beauty of our Courtly Ladies, to the reproach of many
Knights, and glory of his fair Altea. If now there remain in you, either the
Nobility of Knighthood, or unspotted love you have aduouched to your Saint,
let him kn^w there is one far above Altea, that both shall and must bear
away the title of beauty: so shall you express an invincible mind, and al
Ladies triumph in so gallant a Champion.

These news set the knight of Fortune in a chafe, for that he knew he had
conquered him once already, which made him leave Lucinda, and take himself to
his Chamber, where a thousand heavy thoughts do on sudden ouercharge him.

First, what might be thought of his long absence from the Court, then, how he
might incur the displeasure of his fair Polinarda, whose commandment did
bind him out of her sight, yet must come in her sight, if he went to avenge
her quarrel.

But when he considered every thing as he ought, comparing likewise the bold
atempt of the knight of Death, he determined to thrust himself in the face of
Fortune, and either to finish his tormented life, or to make known the truth of
his inuiolate love. In the morning, Siluian armed him in a very fair armor,
all beset with golden Lions, and taking his leave of Ricada and Lucinda, they
rode both of them toward Constantinople, the Knight of Fortune all the way,
being very pensive and sad, whom Siluian would often cheer in this manner. Good
sir, consider with your self, if you forsake your Lady in such great
extremity, how can you think your self worthy^at any time to have her
favor? Imagine with your self, the honor you shall gain in this fight, with
the noble report, both of your friends and foes: think again the shame that
may attaint your Knighthood, if you leave off this enterprise, which is the
only type of renown. O withdraw these sad conceits, and think if you were
now in the field, how Polinarda would triumph, to bear the name of all
estimation, and the Knight of Death die with sorrow, to see his good Fortune
dashed in the presence of such a royal assembly. Trifle not the time therefore,
with any fond delay, because danger may arise by lingering, and dolor by
overmuch loytering. These words of Siluian, were greatly esteemed by the knight
of Fortune, who made such haste, that at last he arrived at Constantinople,
where passing by the Palace, and the Chamber of his Lady Polinarda, he fell
into a multitude of amorous complaints, but Siluian left him not with his
wonted persuasion. At last he came before the tent of the Knight of Death, when
he had even then conquered a Grecian Knight, named Titubant, who adventured for
the beauty of Cardigna, Daughter to the Giant Fiottan, who was sent presently
to the Sepulcher of Lovers. While they were vnarming Titubant, the Knight of
Fortune came prauncing into the Listes* upon a very fair Courser that Rianda
had given him, who being seen of the Emperor, and all the Ladies, had the
general verdict, to be the seemelyest Knight that entered there since the
Tournament began.

The Knight of Death was somewhat offended, to see every one such make
estimation of this Knight, against whom his malice so increased, that he
avouched to work him the greatest injury he could. It chanced the knight of
Fortune, to lift his eyes to the Windows, where in the Empress Chamber, he
perceived his fair Polynarda, whose presence made him (as it were) clean
beside himself: but Syluian (being disguised that none should know him)
rounded him in the ear, saying. Sir, you are now in place where you must use
your strength, and not your study: be mindful of your Lady, but not to the
detriment of your own life. These words awaked him, when he thus talked to
to himself. My dear Mistress, I would think my self most happy, if you
would remember me in courtesy, not that I fear mine enemy, but that it
would give me the greater courage to maintain your Beauty.

These words thus ended, the Regardaunts demanded of him the Picture of his
Lady, as it was the custom: to which he thus answered. I am loath to show my
Ladies favor, for that it is as dainty in sight, as it is dangerous for me to
show. Nevertheless, if I be vanguished, I will not be he that shall break
your Order, but will show you that I esteem above all Riches. This answer
was accepted, and at the sounding of the Trumpets, they encountered one another
courageously, with such laudable behavior in fight, as was greatly commended
of every one.

At length, the Knight of Fortune threw his enemy against the ground, with
such violence, that every one thought he had been slain down right, and
s^epping to him, he would have smitten off his head, but the Emperor
commanded the contrary, granting to him the Conquest, with the Tents of the
knight of Death, and the picture of Altea, to use at his pleasure.

Then came the Emperor and the Ladies down, to see the knight that da^ won
this honor, ^ut he perceiving them, coming, and fearing to be known called
Syluian to him, and slipped away among the Throng secretly, which highly
displeased the Emperor, till he understood, that he would not have himself
known. Then the Knights triumphed, the Ladies rejoiced, (though ignorant of
the Lady, for whom the Knight of Fortune adventured) and so they accompanied
the Emperor joyfully to his Palace, the knight of Death being brought after
them, very sore wounded, and lead by his Esquyres. Thus may you see fair
Ladies, the uncertainty of Fortune, who raises when she list, and throws
down when she list: so that it is better to keep at her foot* in a quiet
estate, then presume to her head, and gain so sore a fall.

CHAP. XXVI.
How the Emperor in honor of the good luck that had chanced, ordained that
night a brave Dancing, wherein he greatly gratified the Ladies. And how on the
next morning, he went accompanied with the Empress, and all the Ladies, to the
Tent of the Knight of Death: where the Ladies took the courage, in the behalf
of their Knights, to ransacke and spoil the Sepulcher of Lovers.
AFter that the Emperor had seen this brave Conquest, he desired the Ladies
that Night, to end the Triumph, with all Courtly pastimes, both of Masking and
of Dancing, which request all generally gave consent unto, except the
Princess Bazilia, who still mourned for the absence of her Lord Vernar. When
the knights that had bin vanquished by the Knight of Death, heard of this
general joy, they to make their Ladies amends, for the repulse they had
sustained, came into the great Hall, where Courting their Ladies, they daunced
and passed the Night* with honest and decent talk, in their delightful
exercise. The Princess Polinarda, as by the mutual consent of the Ladies, she
bare the superiority of beauty from Altea, so had she commendation, for her
stately behavior in the Dance, which graced her person maruellously, and made
the more lively apparaunce of her beauty.

On the morrow, the Emperor was desirous to see the* Tent of the Knight of
Death, wherefore he gave commandment that his Dinner should be there
provided: and so walking thither with the Empress Gridonia, the fair
Polinarda, King Friso^, and Florendos, with diverse of his Knights and Ladies.
where they were bravely and royally feasted. When Dinner was ended, they went
to behold the whole Tent: where, at the first entrance, was placed the Statue
of the fair Altea, whose beauty made excuse for all the Knights, in that they
were conquered by one, whose fair and splendaunt hew, was esteemed excellent,
and that the knight of Death, had good occasion to take it heavily: for her,
whose Beauty was comparable to any, the Princess Polynarda excepted. Then went
they to see the Sepulcher of Lovers, where the Ladies beheld the names of their
Knights, with their Armor and Devises they had made, in the behalf of their
favors, a thing which displeased some of the Ladies, in that they should be
thought Prisoners to the knight of Death, which moved the fair Onistalda,
seeing the bashfulnesse of the Prince Berolde here Servant, to begin thus.
Fair Systers, it seems we are beholding unto none, but only the hardy
Knight, who has done us this honor, to defend that by his valor, which else
had been deprived from us for ever. And because we will no longer be subject in
this Prison of our Love, I will take the hardiness upon me, to set first hand
to the spoiling of this Sepulcher. Wherewith she took up the Table, wherein
was the Image of her own beauty, which the Prince Berolde presently caught from
her, and hid it under his Gown. Then every Lady began in such order, that they
had quickly defaced y^ Sepulcher of Lovers, using such courage in their
dealings, as the Amazonians, when they came to the aid, of the stately Town
of Troy, where the Greeks were no more earnest in their desire, then these
Ladies were in the destroying the Sepulcher of Lovers.

The Emperor upon this sight, was very sorry that he could not gain the
knowledge of the knight, nor for whose sake this honor was done, therefore he
knew not to which Lady to impute it, yet he somewhat persuaded him self,
that in^time he should know him: partly coniecturing that it was the Noble
young Palmerin, which caused him to use comfortable speeches to the knights,
that had to their great heaviness, been captives in the Sepulcher of Lovers.

Then walking unto his Palace, the Empress caused the Image of Altea to be
taken down, and brought into her Chamber, where she placed it according as her
rare perfections did deserve, which was taken in very ill part by all the
Ladies, that their Beauty should us disgraced by a strange Daine, and she so
highly esteemed in the Empress favor.

The Knight of Fortune made great haste, doubting least he should be sent for
back, and so have discovered what he was: for that if the Emperor sent, he
durst not disobey his will, which the better to prevent, he rode till he
resolved himself he was far enough from recalling. But as he was greatly
contented with his honorable Conquest, so was he heavily oppressed, in
thinking on his Lady, whose angry countenance made a more deep wound into his
heart, then the weapon of his Enemy had power to enter. But Syluian, who was
Chyrurgian to his Masters Passions, used his good persuasions, which was of
more force with the Prince, then any other that might offer to talk to him.
For Nature willed him to accept his entreaty, when neither courage nor cruelty
in any other, might compel him.

CHAP. XXVII.
How the knight of the Savage man, leaving Blandidon in the Tristfull Valley,
in the Realm of Lacedemonia, took shipping to try the adventure of great
Britain, but chancing to go on land in Ireland, he came to the castle of the
Giant Calfurnien, who kept three Ladies prisoners in his Castle. And how the
knight of the Savage man encountered Calfurnian, and slew him.
HEre have I thought good to remember the knight of the Savage man, who leaving
Blandidon in the Tristfull Valley, came to the city of Lambel, where he
embarked himself toward the Forest of great Britain, minding to visit King
Frederick, and the Princess Flerida, and then to seek the Castle of
Dramusiande, which was greatly talked on, for the loss of the knights. And now
had Dramusiande set the Esquires of the knights at liberty, but carried them
forth in such pollitique manner, that they could neither return again to the
Castle, nor give any report in what place it stood.

The knight of the Savage man had such a prosperous wind, that at last they
had sight of the coast of England, but on a sudden, arose such a tempest, as
carried them perforce upon the coast of Ireland, taking haven at the mount of
Saint Cyprian* because they could not reach the port of Moricque. The knight of
the Savage man had a great desire to land: but the master persuaded him to the
contrary, with these words. I desire you Sir, to take good respect in what you
enterprise, for well you know, unhappiness dwells next door to hardines,
and danger is the neighbor to earnest desire: therefore in all your actions,
use a good foresight, so may you the better prevent any For on yonder
Mountain, dwells a Giant of no less vglynesse of person, then renowned in
his puissance, he has to name Calfurnien, whose cruelty is such, that if any
chance into his hands, it is their present death. Wherefore, good Sir, be ruled
by your friend, who would be loath you should fall into so great folly. Sir
(quoth the Knight of the Savage man) I give you as great thanks, as I perceive
your counsel tends to my welfare: But it he be so cruel as you speak of,
it were good to teach him some courtesy, if he can conceive none of himself.
And so much trust do I repose in Fortune, that she will suffer me to deal
with him, albeit not to conquer him which if it return the loss of my life, I
esteem it the less, in so much as he shall perceive courage and courtesy, in
one that would wish as much in himself.

The master seeing no persuasion might avail, sent him with his Esquire
Artifer on land in the little Cock, committing him to the reward of all good
Fortune. The knight of the Savage man, accompanied with his Esquire, traveled
up the Mountain, which was very thick beset with Trees, till at last he came
to a little Pauilion, before which lay a great many Trunchions of Spears and
broken Armor, belonging to such knights, as were there foiled, in seeking the
Castle. Walking on farther in a litlle path, which he saw traced with very fresh
blood, he was lead by the drops thereof, to the sight of the Castle gate,
which was placed on such an unmeasurable height, that he was feign to alight,
and walk upon foot, his armor being very troublesome unto him, and walking
through such a narrow passage, that he was very weary. When he had attained
the top of the hill, he saw the Giant, being such a man, as the Master of the
Ship reported, before him stood seven well appointed men at Arms, holding
four knights on their knees before the Giant. Three Ladies looking forth at
the Castle window, which the Giantesse kept there (as Prisoners perforce)
seeing the Knight of the Savage man, and sorrowing any good knight, should come
to such a Tyrant, they all began a grievous and sorrowful lamentation. The
Giant espying the knight of the Savage man, sent three of his knights to take
him, and bring him to his presence, who stood leaning upon his Sword, for that
he was very weary with coming up the high hill: then they came to him,
commanding him to yield, or else they would slay him. The knight of the Savage
man, hearing their rough words, stood not waiting for nice terms, but made
this answer. I rather choose to abide the danger, in denying your command, then
to trust to your courtesy, in yielding my self, for as I little esteem your
friendship, so do^ I make less account of your fury. With these words he
saluted one of them so friendly upon the head, that he fell down dead at his
foot^: as for the other twain, he dealt with them so reasonably, that he paid
them their debt in the same coin.

Then advancing himself to the Castle gate, Calfurnien who had knowledge of
this mishap, came forth very strongly armed with a mighty shield, and a
great Mace of Iron, having the head very thick beset with Azure nails, that
no shield nor armor, but it would enter into: and in this manner he spoke to
the Knight of the Savage man. Alas, poor knight, Fortune was not overmuch thy
friend, when she conducted thee hither, but rather thought her self much
cumbred with thee, and that I should sacrifice thee to her for mine own
honor. The abuse thou have offered me, in ^laying my knights, has prepared a
rod so sharp for thee, as thou will wish thy boldness had been better
governed. The courteous knight, who had never seen any Giant before, and
maruelling at his mighty stature, would not use any persuasion to himself of
prosperous success, but in this manner gave him his answer.

Me thinks sir, it were more commendation for you, and greater honor every
way, to disburden your heart of cruel attempts, and embrace a courteous and
civil kind of life. For as God has made you more mighty then other men, so
to those that are your inferiors, you should use a gentle demeanor, which
would better agree with Knighthood, then with savage qualities. Calfurnien was
in such a rage at these words, that he presently returned him this answer. I
would there were before me, ten of the strongest Knights on the earth, that
I might revenge these taunting words on them, because thy death can not
satisfy my fury, and then should thou perceive what it were to me with
impatience. God Sir (quoth the knight of the Savage man) disdain not weak
men, though your own strength be monstrous: but if it shall like you, to
Combat in the Court within your Castle, I may hap to save mine Knights a
labor, because a tenth is here, who though he be not so big as ten, will do
as much one. Then Calfurnien willed the Knight of the Savage man, to go with
him into the Castle, and at length they came into a fair Court, where stood a
fair Fountain, the water issuing forth of the mouths of two Dwarffes, that
were artificially made in Crystal upon it, and all about it, was very fair
Jasper pillars, the court having such goodly lodgings and Chambers, that he
greatly pitied ^o fair a place should be kept by such a cruel person, For as
the History makes mention, this goodly Castle was built by the King of
Ireland, wherein he would often recreate himself, when he rode on hunting: but
the father of this Giant, named Rauiassor, took it from the King perforce, and
lived therein, with all his progeny.

Calfurnien and the Knight of the Savage man, being ready appointed, charged
one another with such puissant strokes, that the victory stood very doubtful,
especially in the knight of the Savage man, who had his Shield all broken in
pieces by Calfurnien his Mace of Iron, beside, the sore blows he had upon his
body, put him in great danger of his life. Yet did he so well apply himself to
Calfurnien, that he had mangled his body, arms and legs, in diverse places,
which moved him to such anger, that he threw down his Shield, taking his Mace
in both hands, intending the present death of the hardy knight. But he
escaping the stroke, and taking up his Shield, which was somewhat too heavy for
him: held him play, till he was glad to draw his Fauchion, wherewith he sent
such a blow upon his own Shield, that he could not recover his Fauchion out
again, which the Knight of the Savage man, perceiving, str^gke his hseles
upward, so that he got him upon his back, where, with his sword that was
half broken off, he lest him not while he found any life in him. Then sat he
down to rest himself, being sore wounded. and very faint with the loss of
much blood, which made him to lie still a good while, ere he could move
himself any way.

CHAP. XXVIII.
How the three Ladies that were Prisoners in the Castle, healed the wounds the
Knight of the Sauadge man, had received by the Giant Calfurnien. And how when
he was in perfect good health, he gave the Castle to Orianda, one of the
sisters (and all three, the Daughters of the Marquess Beltamor) and so he
departed toward England.
WHen the three Ladies that were in the Castle, perceived the Giant Calfurnian
to be slain, and the noble Knight of the Savage man, to lie in such danger of
his life, they came all speedily unto him, and taking off his Armor, were very
careful to stench his bleeding of his wounds. Orianda, the eldest of the
Sisters, who had greater experience in Medicine then the other twain, and was
of a more sharp and ingenious capacity, would not suffer her other two
Sisters to meddle in any thing, but took the whole charge unto her, to provide
him such needful things as were requisite, and to show her self thankful,
for his well employed pains. At last, Artiser his Esquire came up with his
Masters Horse, and seeing the great danger he was in, became very pensive and
full of grief, and while the Ladies carried his Lord into a very fair
Chamber, he barred fast the gates, so that ^one might enter in, which they
somewhat stood in fear of, because the Giant was slain, that any should come
to his reskew There was the knight of the Savage man kept, until such time as
he had attained to more strength, who when he had gotten a little health,
would feign have been gone, but the ladies restrained him to the contrary,
declaring to him, the danger that might happen unto him, if so soon he would
load his body with his armor, that was brought very low, and rather required
more strength. Their great courtesy liked him so well that he was loath to do
any thing they should mis^ike of, wherefore ^^tting talking with them, he
desired them that without offense he might demand, as considering their
estates, their names and Country, and by what mishap they chanced into the
Giants government? Artanaina, the second Sister, whose beauty was equal with
her Maidenly behavior, resolved him of their names, and then began this.
Worthy Sir, albeit the uttermost of ^ut power, is too ^^mple to (...) our noble
pains, yet esteem the valor of our good (...), which is the richest reward
we can requite you withal. (...), our estates, we are all three sisters, and
daughters to the (...) Beltamor, vassaile to the renowned Frederick King of
England, who upon the envious report of slanderous tongues, (our Father being
endued with great riches, and large possessions, when he came to inhabit this
place, whereupon three mountains, he caused to be built three fair castles,
determining one to each of us after his discease: which place both was, and is
yet called, The Mountains of the three sisters) all this aforesaid living, he
was in the Kings displeasure disinherited of, and we left to abide other men's
reuersion, saving the three Castles, which were left for honors sake, to
sustain us in. After our Fathers death, we resorted each of us, to our
appointed Castle, keeping them (...) from this Giant whom you have slain, that
(...) to defeat us of them. But when we were in (...) his mind, because he
had well le^t (...) then were we soonest of all deceived. For (...) full twenty
days (...), we met by appointment all together, (...) our Castles, where a
little Pauillion was (...), for the time, having in our company (...) and
loving friends. This Giant (who by his Spies was admonished of our being there)
came suddenly upon us, three of our Knights slain, the other glad to take
themselves to flight: and he brought us with him into this place. To which
place, if good Fortune had not conducted you, we had been deprived of our
small wealth, but that which is most of all, the chief Ornament of our honor,
had stood to an uncertain award.

The Knight of the Sauadge man, who had been well acquainted with their Father
in the Engl^^^. Court, and heard of the good report of his three Daughters:
^eioyced that by his only means they had purchased delivery, and that it was
his hap to Land in such a lucky time, promising them to use such means on
their behalf to King Frederick his Sovereign, that they should again
possess the Livings belonging to their Noble Father, whose offense he knew
to be so small, that he might easily purchase the Ladies their own. When he
had abode there, till he was well able to bear Armor, he desired Orianda to
accept that Castle, in recompense of the pains she had bestowed on him in his
weakness: promising both to her and her Sisters, his Hand and Sword, when any
need should require. the Ladies used large thanks unto him, for his so great
courtesy, desiring him to make known his Name unto them, that they might
commend his memory, who had been so good a friend unto them.

To which request he thus answered: Ladies, my name is as yet so little known,
that I am the more unwilling to show it to any, till I deserve to be esteemed
among those, whose nobleness is no less then their Name. Desiring you to
accept of this auswere as now, and think not that my deeds shall reprove my
word: but that at any time, I will employ my self in your service. But first I
must hazard my self, in the Adventures of great Britain, wherein so many
Noble and famous Knights have received great advantage, which if I may finish,
or in trial, safely escape, you shall know the small estimation I will repose
of my life, to try the deepest doubts for such Honorable Ladies. Sir (quoth
Artinarda) if our Prayers may prevail, or our wishes return to any good
effect, doubt not but we will be earnest therein, for your prosperous success
in great Britain. And esteem your poor handmaides, not stretching beyond
the bounds of modesty, yours so far as courtesse may and shall command.
After many gentle salutations, the knight of the Savage man departed,
accompanied with Artisar his Esquire, leaving the Ladies in more severity then
he found them, not offering them once injury or disloyalty, for that he
esteemed the small faults of the noble and famous, were worthy as severe
punishment, as their hauty deeds of Arms, did rightly deserve eternal
commendation, So in this manner he left them, taking shipping with all speed
toward the realm of England.

CHAP. XXIX.
How the Emperor walked to comfort the Knight of Death, who remained in great
heaviness for his fair Altea, who by the persuasion of the Emperor,
determined to leave that sorrowful kind of life, and to employ himself in
seeking strange adventures. And how the Damosel Lucenda, returned unto the
Court, where she gave knowledge of the Knight of Fortune, which greatly
rejoiced the Emperor, and all the noble Knights of the Court.
IT has been already declared unto you, the great displeasure which the
Emperor took, for the departure of the knight, who bare the honor away
(unknown) in the Triumph, wherefore, now you shall understand, how the
Emperor remembering the heavy and pensive estate of the knight of Death, went
accompanied with his Princes and Lords, to give him some occasion of comfort,
which might be a mean, to drive forth of his memory the continual mournings
he used for his fair Altea.

The Knight of Death being advertised, how the Emperor was coming, came to
the gate, attired in a long black gown, agreeable to his sad and ioylesse
kind of life, where he received the Emperor, according to his obedient
duty. Then would the Emperor use to give him such pleasant speeches, as
might constrain him to forget his rufull complaints, but he giving small
attendance thereto, made answer to his Grace clean contrary, to the no small
amazement of his highness, as also his Courtly attendance, who greatly
maruailed, to see how unfortunate desteny had ahe power to bereave a man, both
of reason and understanding, which was amply verified, in this sorrowful
prince of Sargignia. The Emperor to persuade the extremity of his fits, would
rehearse diverse persuasions of his own knowledge, who had been subject to
the like infirmity, and either cut off their time by desperation, or continued
in a life bemoned of all persons: upon which words he took occasion to use
this talk.

I would sir Floraman, not only commend your loyalty, but likewise attribute
high honor to your constancy: if tears could call the dead to life, or the
rufull mon^s, recover your great loss. Yet do I consider with my self, love
compels you to this, and your settled affection, has brought you to an
immoderate evil: but compare the impossibility, with the state and condition
of your grief, you shall find the one as needless, as the other is helpless,
and the extreme to be refused, when the maine can not be recalled. Consider,
if sorrow eat into the heart, it is not presently to be withdrawn again, if
vexation have won the chiefest place, persuasion may wear her tongue to her
teeth, ere she can bridle the impatient desire, so that if wisdom be not in
man to intollerate his grief, it may cost him the dearest him before he have a
quiet life. Do but thus remember your self, impatience bring sorrow, sorrow
sickness, sickness consumation, consumation the miserable Anatomy of
himself, which is at error to his kindred, an eye sore to his friends, the
delight of his enemy, and the continual heart breaking of all that love him,
so that the sooner he ends, the better he mends.

On the other side, if a man apply himself to any exercise, as either
travail, for the honor of himself, and fame of his Country or spending his
time in martial exploytes, or according as his estateis, the poor to take
pain, the rich, pain with pleasure the Artificer and such, to their handie
craft, the noble mind, the Courtly Gentleman, either to the exploytes of the
field, or such exercise as may avoid idleness. Then is the eye directed, the
sense quickened, the mind preserved, the heart quieted, the conscience
unpolluted, affection governed, love bridled, and, lust banished, the good name
perfected, virtue established, honor well exercised, and Fame enternized.

See here the difference, between heaven and hell, between the contempt in
this life, and content eternal to the Soul, which who so seeks shall find,
but they that will not, are over fond. Think thus with your self, Altea is
dead, though I shrink her beauty on earth, yet is her substance shouelled in
the clay, though I delight in her Image and Picture, yet has Death made an
Anatomy of her fair person: while she lived I loved her, being dead I
remember her, and in her love, I live for her, as the honor I will enterprise
shall witness, and the adventures I will hazard shall manifest. So drown this
dulled desire, in remembrance of your knighthood, which you enjoy for manhood,
not for mourning, to display your worthy deeds, and not to play in amorous
Dities, but one months using this Medicine, trust me will extinguish this
mallady.

When Floraman perceived she earnest words of the Emperor, to be both for the
honor of his name, and noblenes of his life, he replied thus. Most gracious
Emperor, I see chat Goats blood will molifie the Adamant, and the little
drops of rain, pierce into the hard Marble, s wisdom reproouing wilfulness,
shows him his folly, and persuasion piercing into the obstinate, does more
by friendship, then others can do with force.

I confess, the affection to Altea, has both ouercharged my mind, and clean
dulled my wit, so that I neither seem as I should he, nor do that I ought,
but sit musing on her love, who has no life, and endamage mine own life, by
such over fond love. And since your Majesty has quickened mine idle Nature,
and reuiaed the duty which I owe unto Knighthood, I will remember my self in
forgetting her, and though I cannot exclude her Love on a sudden, yet
tolleration and persuasion, in time may do something. And because the honor of
the field, can assuage this fondness, and my duty commands me, to employ
my service, I will hazard my self on my good Fortune, to win as much by
strength, as I have lost by ill hap. Wherefore desiring that your Majesty
would entertain me in your Court, and under your noble Name, to seek after
Adventures, I am resolved to forsake all folly, and pursue that valiantly,
whereto I have been enemy.

The Emperor seeing the change of Floraman, to be as heartily pretended as
himself desired: he thus answered: I think my self both highly Honored, and
greatly steeemed in the favor of Fortune, to receive so good a Knight, by
whose endeavor, I hope himself shall be worthily accounted, and the Fame of my
Court for ever extolled. Then Floraman would have kneeled to kiss the
Emperors hand, but he graciously sustained him in his arms, with great
thanks on either side, liberally bestowed.

By this time was the Damsel Lucenda returned to the Court, whom the Empress
among her other ladies, came walking withal, to the Chamber of Floraman, where
knowledge was given, that she could reveal the Knight who had conquered
Floraman. The Emperor being very desirous to know, willed her to make report
of him, when she began in this manner. The Knight of Fortune who has
accomplished this Noble piece of service, is the young Prince Palmerin, that
Polendos King of Thessalie did present unto you, when the Lady of the Lake
sent her Letter to your Highness. For he happening to the Castle of mine Aunt
Rianda, when with your gracious consents I went to visit her, I rehearsed the
pensive estate of our Courtly Ladies, seeing all their knights sent to the
Sepulcher of Lovers, upon which report he came, and has fulfilled that which
could not be done by many. And as I returned to the Court again, I met him,
very hastily riding, yet stayed to desire me, on his behalf to crave pardon of
your Majesty for his so sudden departure, not intending to return unto the
Court, till he had assaied the adventure of great Britain, wherein he
supposed all the famous Knights to be lost. Moreover, he desires your
highness, to bestow the tent of the Knight of Death on her that had the power
to stain the beauty of Altea, and to whom he is ever dutiful affectioned,
his Lady and Mistress Polynarda, which said, he departed, leaving me to
declare what your Highness has heard.

The Emperor not able to conceal the pleasure which his heart had received,
began thus. I promise you fair Ladies, my mind did somewhat persuade me that
it should be he, although I would not perfectly resolve thereon: for in what
place so ever he shall adventure. I dare imagine his Fortune such, as he shall
prevail, both to the comfort of the destressed, and to satisfy the longing of
our minds. As for his Tent, it shall be bestowed according to his desire:
nevertheless, I would wish it might be well used, until it shall be his good
luck to return, for I believe he will employ it with continual victory, as
he has endeavored to win it by valiancie. As for you Lucenda, I will not be
unmindful of your good news, as also esteem of you, as you do justly
deserve. So returning into his Palace, the joy on every side, made appearance
of the glad receipt of these wished tidings.

CHAP. XXX.
How Recamon, the Knight of the Green Tree, and Son to the King of Bohemia,
came to the Emperors Court, to defend the beauty of his Lady Lucina, against
the fair Altea, and the Knight of Fortune, whom he heard had conquered the
Knight of Death. And how Tremoran, on the behalf of the Knight of Fortune,
waged Combat against him.
NOt long after Lucenda had declared these tidings, when the Emperor sat with
his knights rejoicing in the towardly behavior of the young Prince, there
entered in a knight in his presence, bearing in his sheetd a Green Tree, and
his armor of the like color, who after his obeisance made began as thus. Let
it not enter your-disliking (most famous Emperor) that I presume so boldly
before you, insomuch as the cause of my coming does urge me to this enterprise.
I am one whom promise binds to conceal my name, till I have tried the
adventure of great Britain, wherein if I prove fortunate, it will give me
the; greater courage to bewray my self. It has been greatly famed abroad,
that a Just was proclaimed in your Court, for the beauty of a Lady named
Altea, in which to adventure my self, I have traveled hither, to maintain
that my Lady and Mistress called Lucina, deserves the perfect praise above
all for beauty. But since I arrived here, it has been told me that a knight
is departed from your Court, bearing the renown of this Triumph away: which
news do not a little displease me, in that it was my desire to contend with
him, or any on my Ladies behalf. Wherefore if I may desire so much courtesy,
as to know where he is, or whither he departed. I shall think my self
continually bound to you in duty, and will search that Knight, though it be
to the loss of my life. Sir (quoth the Emperor) I would as gladly hear of
that knight as your self, and am as ignorant where hr is at this time, as
yourselfe, but I think you shall not travel very far, but you shall hear
such famous report of him. as will conduct you to the place where he is,
because the valor of his behavior is such, as he is unknown in no place, but
to be heard of every where. Nevertheless, if might counsel you I would wish
your mind changed from so fond an enterprise, because I can hardly believe
that the adventure will quite your labor.

The good opinion you hold of him (answered the Knight) makes me the more
affectionate to seek him, and the more famous his deeds is, the greatter
estimation shall I conceive to deal with such a one. For if Fortune stand my
friend, and I conquer him, that is so well liked of all, I doubt not, but the
reputation I shall gain, will constrain you to think as well of me, as now
you repose a good affiance in him. Tremoran, the son to the Duke Lecesia, and
Nephew to the Emperor Trineus, hearing the proud words of the Knight,
advanced himself toward him, with this greeting. Imagine that Fortune has
been greatly your friend, to send you hither when he is gone, least by
misaduenture, you should chance to meet him, who would so settle your armor to
your shoulders, that you would curse your Lady, to abide his Canuazado.
Nevertheless, albeit he is not here, yet he has such friends here, as would be
sorry you should depart without some recompense for your travel. And under
the Emperors correction, I will be the man that shall bring you acquainted
with the Knight of Fortune, so that ere you depart, you shall know he has left
such friends behind him, as will give liberal entertainment to those that
seek him in this manner.

The Knight was half offended at the words of Tremoran, which made him
presently to give this reply. I think sir, the good will you bear to the
Knight, makes you so foolish hardy in that which appertains not unto you,
yet because you dare adventure so much in his behalf, and will welcome Knights
in such a bravery, arm your self presently, because I would be loath a cold
calm should come over this hot matter. The Emperor (though unwilling)
accepted their gages, and granted them license to Combat. When in short time
Tremoran came into the field, gallantly mounted, wearing black Armor, as the
sign of his heaviness, for the departure of the Prince Primaleon, bearing in
his Shield a ramping Lion: then at the sound of the Trumpets, they couched
their Spears, set Spurs to their Horses, and made a very brave Encounter,
that the Trunchions of their Spears flew up into the Air, and were feign at
last to end their Combat with their Swords. In fine, what with expense of
Blood, grief of their wounds, and great weariness in Fight, catching each
other in their arms, they fell both to the ground: the Regardants attributing
the victory to Tremoran.

The Emperor seeing they were so fore hurt, caused Tremoran to conveyed into
his Palace, and the Esquyre of the other Knight, conducted his Master to his
Lodging: where he used such diligence in his Attendaunce, that he recovered
to a little stranger estate: Then sent the Emperor to require of whence, and
what the Knight was: word being returned, that he was Son to the K: of
Bohemia, and named Recamon, upon which tidings, he presently sent for him into
his Palace: where he was honorably used, till such time he had gained his
healbh.

And then he departed from thence toward great Britain, accompanied with
Florendos and Platir, Son to the Prince Primaleon: who pitying the great
sorrow of their Mother, the Princess Gridonia, adventured among the other
Knights, in the search of their Noble Father, as also to hazard the Adventure
of great Britain.

This Recamon being traveling thither, and being one addicted to a great
vain glory of himself, by the trust he reposed in his own manhood, hearing
how Floraman had attempted at Constantinople, altered his mind, and came
thither to defend the beauty of the Lady Lucina, who was Daughter to the King
of Denmark. Speeding there so ill as you have heard, he returned with the
Knights to his former determination, they leaving the Emperor somewhat sad for
their departure, yet their hautie attempt, with the glad issue he looked for,
persuaded him to take patiently their absence for the time.

CHAP. XXXI.
How the Knight of Fortune, taking shipping at Totnes, at length landed in the
Realm of England, and chancing into the Forest where he was borne, he met
with the Savage man, that had nourished him so long in his Cave.
LOng travailed the Damsel Lucenda, till at the last he came to the Cape of
Totnes, where he took shipping toward England, and landed at the port of Saint
Matthew, two miles from Sorlingue, accompanied with a Gentlewoman, that came in
the Passage with him, at whose house he rested one night, and departed on the
next morning. Then rode he foreward, friendly talking with Siluian, and
rejoicing that he was arrived in the place, where he determined to put his
Fortune in trial. Traveling on along in a Forest, he came at last to the
Fountain where he was christened, where sitting down by this water to refresh
himself, he espied come running forth of a thicket of Trees, a Heart very
fiercely pursued by a Lion, who running still toward the Prince, at last came
and lay down at his feet, as one might judge, to crave his defense. Wherewith
he arose, and offering to strike with his sword at the Lion, he presently
yielded himself at his feet likewise. Their two horses moved with fear by
the Lion brake their bridles, and ran into the woods, after them Siluian hied
a pace, leaving the Prince with two gentle beasts.

The knight of Fortune looking about, espied coming from the place, where the
Heart did issue forth, a Savage man with the skin of a beast made close to his
body, in his one hand a bow and arrows, in the other a couple with a chain,
where with he led his Lion. When he had espied the knight of Fortune, he drew
his bow and let sly an arrow at him, with such force, that it pierced into his
sheeld, but the gentle prince knowing him to be his foster father, who had
nourished him so long in his Cave began to use reverence unto him* and to
certify him what he was. The Savage man having not the patience to hear him,
came toward him with such violence, that he was constrained with his sheeld to
thrust him away, so that therewith he fall on the ground. Then the Prince
embraced him, giving him to vnstand how long he had nourished him, with his
son Siluian, who was gone to take his horses, that had started away at the
fight of the Lion. With these words the Savage man did remember him, and
embracing him in his arms, he walked with him unto his Cave, desirous all the
way to tell him, how he had taken him out of the arms of his mother: but
because he would not so soon for sake him, he held him with other talk, and
so spent the time, till they came to the Cave, where the ^auage man's wife
embraced him very lovingly: requesting what was become of her son Siluian.
Her husband did declare, about what business he was gone, which did pacify
her very well, and so she dsired the Prince to rest that night, in a little
closet, wherein he had slept many night when he was there and so feeding on so
small pittance as they had, they went to take their rest. On the morrow, the
woman would have shown him the linen clothes ^he had about him, when her
husband brought him home, but he he would not suffer his wife to do so, because
he should not esteem him still for his father, and Siluian for his brother,
whose long tarria^ce abroad all that night, and as then (...), greatly
dipleased the Prince, as also his parents, who were desirous to see him. At
last, seeing he came not the Prince took his leave and departed, to see if he
could meet him by the way, because he doubted some harm had fallen him: the
Savage man and his wife greatly la^^^ting for his departure, as also because
they might not see their son.

CHAP. XXXII.
How the Knight of Fortune departing from the Savage man, rescued Siluian from
four cruel villains, that tormented him very grievously, and how he slew the
Giant Camboldam, brother to the Giant Calfurnian.
AFter that the Knight of Fortune was departed from the Savage man, he
traveled on foot the most part of the day, til at last he came to the place,
where Polendos King of Thessaly received him into his ship, when as he brought
him to Constantinople, which constrained him to remember the great courtesy of
the Emperor, with the great unkindness of his Lady Polinarda, on whose
behalf he fell into such extreme Passions, that what with weariness, and
forcible assaults of grief, he suddenly fell into a slumber. He had not long
slept, but in great fear he awaked, for that his mind did persuade some ill
adventure toward him: then looking about him, he espied a ship covered with
green boughs, and thither he went to see what it might be.

Being there arrived, he saw two men come forth of the ship, making great
lamentations, desiring him to fly, if he had regard to his own life. But
then to his greater amazement, stepped forth four armed men, with Holbardes
and Dagges in their hands, cruelly beating Siluian whom they had taken, and
compassing the Prince, that he should not escape. Then the Prince offered to
unbind Silnian, but they told him, that he must abide: which moved the Prince
to such anger, that with his Gauntlet he struck one of them so sore upon the
face, that he tumbled him clean over, then with his sword he assailed the
over three: that two of them were slain, the other escaped in slight: which
done, he untied Siluian, requesting him to report, how he chanced into that
mishap.

Siluian was so amazed with fear, and so sore with beating, that as yet he
could not answer to this demand, but looking aside, they espied two men come
leading their two horses, and after them a tall and ougly. Giant, bearing in
his Shield, three Giants heads, whom Siluian reported to be the man, that had
in this order abused him. The Prince was somewhat in fear at his monstrous
bigness, and offered him reverence according to his courteous stature: but the
Giant seeing his men slain, stood not to use words, but struck at the Prince
very vehemently, with which stroke, his shield was cleft in the midst, that
he knew hardly how to defend himself. Nevertheless, such was the valor of
the noble knight of Fortune, (albeit the fight was dangerous to either part)
that at length he conquered the Giant, and struck off his head: presently
falling on his knees, and giving thanks to God, whose providence did aid him
in such a dangerous Combat.

The men that lead the two Horses, came and fell down before the Prince,
desiring him to save their lives, for that they were constrained against their
wills, to attend on that mischievous wretch, who used them likewise too too
cruelly. Their fair entreaty had quickly persuaded him: so that he desired
them to report what this Giant was, and after what manner he lived. Their
answer was, that he was called Camboldam of Mulzell^, the Lord of Penebroque,
one of the cruellest Tyrants in all the world: who having knowledge, that a
knight had slain his brother Calfuinia^. he v^wed to take sharp revenge on
every one that should happen into his hands. Upon this occasion he sailed from
his Country, and landing on this Coast in yonder sh^p, he f^^nt to see if
Fortune would send any, to appease the hell of his bloody mind, and meeting
with that young man running to catch his Horses which had strayed from him, he
committed him to these which lie here dead, that they might torment with
endless pain. Thus have we certified all we can say, desiring you to use us
in what service yon please.

The Knight of Fortune rejoiced in his goodlucke, and desired them to go into
England, and certify unto the King Frederick, how the Knight of Fortune had
slain the Giant Camboldam, and they should command him, in any thing to
pleasure them. They promising to fulfill his request, departed presently, and
the Knight of Fortune with Siluian, mounted on their Horses: and took their
journey presently toward great Britain, where he meant to accompany the
noble Princes, or else deliver them out of their long servitude.

CHAP. XXXIII.
How Siluian declared to the knight of Fortune, in what manner of the Sheeld of
the Palm Tree was taken from him, to save it from the cruel Giant Camboldan.
And how happened to see the Combat, between Platir, Floroman, Pompides and
Blandidon: As also how the Sage Aliart of the Obscure Valley, came and brought
him to his Castle, where he showed him many goodly, and not able Monuments.
FOrtune advancing the honor of her knight, in obtaining this famous Conquest,
caused him to proceed on further, to discover the depth of other, hidden
doubts, and as he rode, perceiving his shield past any means for service,
asked of Siluian the shield of the Palm Tree, because his journey lay through
dangerous places, and therefore esteemed it wisedoms to be always provided.

When he saw the sheelde was gone, wherein he reposed most affection, keeping
it for an extreme need, he willed Siluian to report, how and after what
manner, he had suffered it be taken from him, to which demand, Siluian thus
answered.

All the way as we have iournied, I was devising how I might make known to you
this loss, without gayning your disple a sure, or moving you to Anger: which
two causes, made to conceal it all this while. When such was my mishap, that
this cruel Giant took me, a Damsel mounted on a white palfrey, came crossing
over the Forest to me, using her speeches thus:

Siluian, deliver the Shield thou bear, to me, ere thou suffer it to fall
into the hands of this Giant thine adversary, where it can never be recovered
again, and may cause a great endamagement: and thus much I will faithfully
promise thee, to yield it into thy Masters hand again, when he shall stand
in such need as to use it. Her gentle speech, and the present danger before
mine eyes, did urge me rather to give it her, then mine enemy, should enjoy a
thing of such honor: wherefore I gave it to her, who presently departed, I
could not tell which way, and then the Giant took me, using me as you found me.

The Knight of Fortune mused at the Event, and could not judge to what end it
was wrought: wherefore Siluian to put him out of his study, desired him to
attend a great noise, which he heard in a little Grove by them, as though it
were the flashing of weapons in a Combat. Directing his course thither, he
espied four knights on foot, very fiercely assailing one another: their
Armor so bruised, and their Shields so battered, that he could hardly perceive
any of their Devises, except it were one, which was the head of a white Bull,
belonging to Pompides, the son of Don Edward. The sharp assaults between
these four, urged the Knight of Fortune to break forth into these speeches.
Gentlemen, the great danger I perceive you to stand in, with the grievous
endamagement that may happen unto you, constrains me to desire, you would
leave this great rage, and end your strife friendly with reason, so shall you
find it to your own commodity, and my self always bound to you, If you accept
of my counsel. Indeed (answered one of the Knights) our quarrel is grounded
on so slight an occasion, as we might easily agree to your honest desire. It
does only consist in the knight of the Bull, who will the name of the knight
he seeks for, although he desired of us likewise to understand some tidings
of him.

It is impossible for me to tell his name (answered the knight of the Bull) or
if I could satisfi your desires, you could not any way compel me, so long as I
have this hand and sword to defend me. These words procured a fresh strife, and
too it they f^ll again very fiercely, and without any regard of themselves:
which greatly pitied the knight of Fortune, to see such courageous minds,
subject to so great a hazard, which he was very loath to tarry and behold: but
he greatly esteemed one of the knights, who was in white Armor, and dealt his
blows so freely, that he was in least danger of them all. Then did the knight
of Fortune once more persuade them to leave the fight, but they were so
severely bent the one against the other, that they scant knew themselves what
they did.

At last a sudden darkness sent from the Castle of the Sage Aliart,
ouershadowed them, at the departure whereof, the knight of Eortune saw all the
four knights laid in a Charyot, drawn with four black Horses, which made him
somewhat abashed, and moved him to demand of one of the Esquirs, that drove
the Chariot, what knights they were, that had fought this sore Combat: To whom
he answered, that the knight in the white Armor, was Platir, son to the
noble Primaleon, the other was Floraman, the Prince of Sardignia: the other two
knights were Pompides and Blandidon, who entered their Combat, about the
enquiring after the knight of Fortune, which made them leave the Emperors
Court: enterprising likewise the adventure of great Britain, if they might
meet with this knight, whose friendly company they always desired. But see the
misfortune, as they arrived here, not far from great Britain, these two
other knights met the^, demanding also for the knight of Fortune, so words
arysing on either side, why they should seek after this knight, they fell to
this fierce skirmish, which your self has partly seen, to the loss (I
fear) of our noble Masters, except we were near some place, where we might
make provision for them.

The knight of Fortune was greatly moved at this tale, and persuaded the
Esquyres, to hasten with their Master to London, where in short time no doubt,
they might recover their health, and thus in grief he departed from them. And
as he rode very sad, he espied one come riding toward him, with his horn about
his neck, attired like a hunter, who began in this manner to greet him.

Behold thou noble Palmerin of England, the time wherein thy famous deeds,
shall bring out of oblivion, the worthy Prowess that long time has been hid,
so that great Britain shall enjoy the former quiet state. Be not offended,
because I did enterprise so boldly to name you: for I am privy to that, which
shall happen by you, although your self remains ignorant thereof.

The knight of Fortune knew not what to think, to hear himself named in such
a strange place, where he persuaded himself he was vnknowde to any: at length
he began to think that it might be the Sage Aliart of the Obscure Valley,
yet would he not certainly give credit to his suspection, out of which doubt
to remove him, Aliart thus spoke again. Be not dismayed worthy Palmerio, for I
am Aliart your servant, who would gladly employ my self in your service, to
do you the greatest honor I might. But as concerning what shall chance unto
you, I neither may or will as yet declare, bnt this assure your self, that you
shall enjoy a more quiet and happy estate, then as yet you do.

Sir Aliart (answered the knight of Fortune) God forbid I should request any
thing, which you are not willing should be known, but for the great bounty
and friendship you have used toward me, I remain while my life endures, both
with love and duty to honor you. So walking on, at last they came to the
Obscure Valley, where Aliart conducted the knight of Fortune into his Castle,
and showed him many rare and excellent Monuments, the lively shape of men and
women, in fair Portraitures, which gave a great delight to his noble mind, so
that he thought this Castle, the fairest that ever he had seen in all his
life. There remained he so long as him pleased, very well entertained by the
Sage Aliart, who gave him to understand, how Platir and the other Knights
should be healed of their wounds without any danger. These news pleased the
knight Fortune very well: as also the great gentleness, he found into the Sage
Aliart, to certify him many things that he desired.

CHAP. XXXIII.
How the Knight of the Savage man, arriving in England, travailed toward the
City of London, And how Eutropa sent a Damsel, and caused him to enter
Combat, with the Princes Gracian, Francian, and Polinarda. In which fight they
were all in great danger, till the Knight of England riding on hunting,
chanced to meet with them, who set them at unity, and brought them to the
Court with him.
THe Knight of the Savage man, being departed from Orianda, in the Castle of
the Giant Calfurni^n, so long continued on the Se^s, that at last he arrived in
England, entending to take his way strait to London, because he would see the
king Frederick, and the Princess Flerida, but greatly lamented to see the
Forest so full of strange Knights, and Damsels that procured perilous
adventures. At last he espied a Damsel on a white Pal^ray, come riding
toward him, her hair spread over her shoulders and her garments seeming to be
greatly misused, all the way aa she rode, she used many skrikes, and grievous
lamentations, which was greatly pitied by the Knight of the Savage man, who
saw a knight came hastily riding after her, whereupon she began to this gentle
knight, in this manner.

Good Sir, as you regard the honor of knighthood, and the distressed estate of
a poor Damsel, so at this time help to defend me from him that seeks to
dishonor me, of that which makes me esteemed amongst all virtuous persons.
These words pierced so deep into his noble mind, that he stayed the knights
coming, who was very well armed, and bravely mounted, to whom he began in these
words. I perceive both knighthood, and that armor is ill bestowed upon you,
that employ your self in the persecution of a fair Damosel, when you are both
bound by duty, and by law of arms to defend her.

Sir (answered the strange knight) I desire you, let not the fained tears, and
unjust complauit of this Strumpet, inueigle your mind, for it is not troth
that she reports, neither am I so base minded, to pursue her causlesse. The
knight of the Savage man, was so persuaded by the Damsel, that he would not
credit what he said, bnt answered him thus. Sir, you shall rather disadvantage
me then dishonor her, and therefore provide for your self. The strange knight
seeing him so egerly bent, said, I am content, since you will enforce me to it,
and not rule your desire by reason. Whereupon touching their Spears, they met
together courageously, so that the strange knight was cast, and the knight of
the Savage man feign to leap off from his horse, and drawing their Swords,
they laid at each other very cruelly, to the great hurt of them both.

In the mean time they were in figh, the Damsel had left them, and returned
accompanied with two knights more, showing them the knight of the Savage man,
and said. Behold Sir knights, the man that has slain my Father, and now
would gladly work the death of this my Brother (pointing to the knight that
before had pursued her) wherefore I desire you to take reuengement on him. At
these words, one of the knights alighted, and perceived the knight that the
Damsel named her brother, to be very sore wounded, stepped between them,
saying to the knight of the Savage man, Come Traitor deal with me, and not
with him, whose loss of blood and weariness beside, desires rather to take
rest, then the Combat.

The knight of the Savage man, was greatly offended at these words, wherefore
he left the other, and went to him saying: I will make thee either recant thy
words, or else I will leave my life in this place. So charging one another
very puissantly, the Knight of the Savage man, laid him at last along on the
earth, which the other knight seeing, and also the Armor of the gentle knight,
to be greatly broken in many places, began as follows, I see Sir Knight, you
are brought into such debilitie, both with the great expense of your blood, as
also weariness, with long enduring the fight, that I think it great dishonor
to give you a fresh assault, and small manhood in me, to urge you to such
extremity. The knight of the Savage man still incensed with fury, for the
unkind words he had received of them, returned him presently this answer.

As I have little cause to esteem of your friendship, so have I less
opportunity to crave your favor, and though my wounds be yrkesome in your
sight, yet can I endure the uttermost that you can charge me withal, wherefore
set apart these words, and execute the extremity of thy disloyal will. Thus
breaking off their talk, they began to assault one another very rigorously,
so that the knight sitting on Horseback, conceived great marvel at the hauty
courage of the knight of the Savage man. While he occupied his eyes in
beholding this noble exploit, such feebleness entered the mind of his fellow,
that he could scarcely hold his Sword, or keep himself from falling to the
ground, and fearing he could not escape the death, being in such great
disadvantage, he alighted from his Horse, and to the Knight of the Savage man
began in this manner.

Me thinks Sir knight, it were for your better assurance of health, as also
great gentleness you might offer to these knights, to satisfy your desire upon
this victory, then to hope on a farther of me likewise, and so be deprived of
that you might hardly spare, which might yield you greater disadvantage, then
the conquest you have gotten, will enlarge your renown.

Sir (quoth the K. of the Savage man) except he recant the shrewde words he
gave me, or confess himself vanquished, and to rest at my command, I will
finish his boldness, by honor of my Sword, say you what you can, and he
what he dare. Trust me Sir (answered the knight) if you will not grant to such
a small request, as shall both extol your Fame, and manifest your friendship,
I shall be enforced to enter Combat with you, which I am very loath to do,
considering your present estate, in so much as I would not be he that should
deprive you of your life.

Good Sir (quoth the knight of the Sauadge man) this care in you is more then I
have deserved, or desire you should use unto me: wherefore hereupon assure your
self, I am as able to deal with you, as they have found me indifferent to
conquer them. At these words, the knight (whom this noble Victor held in
subjection) fell along on the ground, through faintness of much blood that had
issued from him, as also the grievous wounds, he had so unhappily sustained.
Which made this other knight to assail the knight of the Sauadge man very
rigorously, in hope to have revenged his friends hurt, with the detriment of
his noble Enemies life, but he found the knight of the Sauadge man so great of
strength, and so greatly affected to a farther Victory, that he partly
repented himself for entering such hazard. Yet did he behave himself with
greater courage then the other knights, which made him endure Combat a longer
time.

It chanced the King of England, to come on Hunting into this Forest, where
espying these two knights so eager at their fight, and commending both their
expertnes, and brave behavior, he entered between them, using great entreaty
to leave off their Combat, which they presently did, for that they would not
disobey the kings request, whom they knew, and were very glad to see. The
knight of the Sauadge man, lifting up his Beuer, came and presented himself to
the King, who perceiving him to be the knight, was nourished in his Court, as
also the man he had greatest delight in, received him very graciously, in
sign whtreof, he suffered him to kiss his hand.

When the King had knowledge, that the other Knight was Gracian, son to the
noble Arnedes King of France, he alighted from his Horse, embracing the Prince
very lovingly, and desiring him to show the occasion of their discord, as also
what the other Knights were, that lay on the ground. The Prince Gracian, after
he had done his duty to the King, and to the Noble company, that then were
there present began as thus.

If it shall like your Majesty, the knight that lies hithermost, and is
nearest to your Grace, is named Francian, Son to the famous Polendos, king of
Thessaly, In whose company, to mine own honor, and either of our contents, I
traveled from the City of Constantinople, through many places where we have
approved our Knighthoode, and made manifest such deeds of Arms, as our
years and skill would suffer us,

To this place we were conducted by a Damosel, who reported her self to be
Sister to the other Knight that lies on the ground: the gave us to understand,
that this knight (meaning the knight of the Sauadge man) had cruelly slain her
Father, and did his endeavor to kill her Brother likewise: wherefore she
desired us to stand her Rescue, and to deliver her forth of such grief, as
she might conceive by his death. Francian perceiving her Brother in such
estate, as he could not awarde the heavy blows this Knight charged him
withal, entered between them: and in like manner was brought to as low estate
himself. Yea, and I persuade my self, had not your Grace come to end the
strife, my self had been partner of their hard mishap.

The knight of the Sauadge man, hearing what the Prince Gracian had said,
began in this order to discourse how it happened. My grations Sovereign, the
Damsel of whom this Knight has spoken, came Ryding toward me, her hair
dispearsed on her shoulders, her Face all blubbered with tears, her Garments
torn, and very much polluted: all the way as she came, crying how that this
knight (whom she after named to be her Brother) did seek to dishonor her,
and therefore desired me to defend her in so great extremity. When I had
joined Combat with the Knight, soon after she came again, and brought these
two knight, reporting to them, as he has informed your Majesty: so leaning
us in this strife, she departed, we know not whither. The King well noting the
deceyte of the Damsel, which was only to seek the ruin of those Noble
knights, caused the Helmet of Francian, and of the other knight, to be taken
off, when feeling the air, they came to themselves again, saving that their
wounds made them very feeble. Then was the other Knight known to be Polinard,
son to the Emperor Trineus: when presently the King caused Francian and
Polinard, to be conveyed in a Chariot to the City of London. And by the way,
the King questioned with Polinard, for what cause be pursued the Domosel, when
this noble knight took in hand to defend her? By your gracious leave (answered
Polinard) I think she was the most wicked, and deceitfullest Damsel on the
earth, for through her persuasion, Onistalde and Dramisian my friends, were
brought into such ignorance, and such credit of her, that they entered Combat,
and had almost slain one another, had not I arrived at their fight, when they
were hardly to be judged, if there were any recovery for their health. At my
request they ended their strife, and rode together I know not well which way,
nor if they be alive as yet: but I followed the Damosel, to know the occasion
why my brethren were fallen to so great debate, when this knight came and
prevented me as your Grace has heard.

The King was greatly displeased at this misaduenture, and sent presently
about, to hear tidings of Onistalde and Dramisian, that if their bodies were
found dead, they might be interred according to the nobility of their birth.
But they were found living, and by the king sent to the Monastery of Clear
Victory: where they were carefully cherished, by the brethren of that Religion,
which was first found by Amadis de Gaul, near unto Fenrisse, and thither were
his bones carried after his death, from the great Britain, to witness the
victory he had got of the Kings in that place.

The king caused a great many of knights to pursue after the Damsel, but
their labor was in vain, for her Mistress Eutropa who sent her, kept her
safe enough from them.

When the King was come to the Court, he caused the Princes to be so provided
for, as they recovered again their health in short time: and the knight of the
Savage man lying in his accustomed Chamber, was diligently looked unto by the
Princess Flerida, and the King would often visit him, because his mind did
still use persuasion with him, that he should be somewhat allied to him in
kindred. To be resolved whereof, he would entreat the Princess, and he
himself would often question with him, to make known unto them what he was,
or of whence he judged himself to descend: but he would never by any means
satisfy their request, because indeed, he could not gain any knowledge of
himself.

CHAP. XXXV.
How the Sage Aliert brought the bodies of Fl^raman, Platir, Pompides, and
Blandidon, in a Chariot to his Castle, where he healed their wounds, and set
them again in the place where they fought their Combat, which made them know
one another, and join together like friends. And how a Damsel came and
talked with them, and gave them Horses and Armor, with four Esquires to
attend on them, so they all departed with the Damsel, to finish an adventure,
which made her live in great sorrow. And how the knight of Fortune, departing
from the Castle of the Sage Aliart, happened to lodge in the house of an
ancient Gentleman near London, where a Damosel came to entreat him of an
adventure he should take in hand, on her behalf, against the noble knight of
the Savage man.
SAge Aliart, of the Obscure Valley (as the History declares) caused the
bodies of Platir and the other knights, to be brought in a Chariot to his
Castle, where separating them in sundry chambers, ^ee used such great care and
diligence for re^^ring their health, that in short time they had escaped the
point of danger, and were in as good constitution of body as they had been
before. For this occasion urged him to use more circumspection to them, that if
their lives had failed through misaduenture, then had not only their noble
kindred been oppressed with grief, but also their Dominions remained
destitute of their chief defense. For which cause he had thus provided for
them, albeit out of their knowledge, whence such friendship should proceed:
neither how they left the place of their Combat, and were brought into so
strong a Castle.

Platir and Floraman, were at last lodged in one Chamber: in like manner were
Pompides and Blandidon, where they no less marvelled at their sudden recovery
of health, then at the Princely attendance was daily used to them: but which
was more to their grief, they could gain no knowledge of their Host, either
what he was, or wherefore he used such great courtesy unto them.

The knight of Fortune, (who as yet remained in the Castle of the Sage Aliart)
could never compass the mean, to find the Lodgings of these Knights, but was
very pensive, to think of their great hurts received in the Combat:
Nevertheless, the persuasion that the Sage Aliart used with him, as promising,
all should be safely recured, urged him to exempt so great a debut. When time
served, according as the Sage Aliart thought convenient, by force of his
charms, he cast them in a dead slumber, and brought them to the place where
they sought their Combat: where when they awaked, they found the place
bestrewed with the Trunchions of their Spears, as also pieces of their armor,
and the grass somewhat died with the effusion of their blood,

Every one well holding himself to be sound of body, in perfection of health,
and the place so fresh with their blood, as though it had been but as then
split, fell all jointly together into a great admiration, and Floraman began
thus to express his marvel. If I should speak as I think, or think as I
have occasion, I should be offensive to some, and but small to mine own
benefit. In this place I remember we fought our Combat, not to the grief of
one alone, but to the harm of us all in general, and in this place are we
now, in good and perfect estate, relieved out of a danger, and succored from
so great distress, wherefore I must needs think, the adventures of this land
to be rare: and rare, because I have not been accustomed to the like.

Trust me (quoth the Prince Platir) these two knights were out enemies in the
Combat, and invade us still, that we might end our former enterprise: but if
so be their intent, they are as unprovided as we, and neither of us horse,
weapon, or armor, so rescew himself from his enemy. These words thus e^ded,
Floraman came toward the other two Knights, desiring them (if they could) to
resolve them of this doubt. We are (answered Pompides) in such an uncertainty
our selves, that had not you moved the question when you did, my self would
have requested the same of you.

After a little talk passed between them, they fell into knowledge of each
other, when forgetting their former enmitn, they embraced one another, and
greatly rejoiced, that they had so happily met, unto their several
contentation. To break off their friendly purposes of salutations, they espied
a Damsel come riding to wards them, mounted on a bay Palfrey, attired all in
black, and her countenance bewraying a sad and sorrowful disposition. When
she was come unto them, restraining the bridle of her horse, and well eying
them, began at last in this manner.

Gentlemen, it seems some such accident has happened, as has defeated you
of such refuge, as sometime you had, which may seem strange to you, yet not
rare to me, who know the misaduentures of this Country, to the grief of my
friends, and sorrow of my self. Fair Lady (said Blandidon) if we should
rehearse in what manner our mischance has happened, we should be ouertedious
to you to hear it, and in danger ourselves, while we stand to show it, wanting
our Armor to avoid what may happen, and being in a place out of our own
knowledge. Admit (quoth the Damsel) my self would be the mean, to provide
you all of horses and armor again, would you grant the small request I should
put forth unto you? Lady (answered Floraman) respecting our own need, and
the duty the owe to any distressed Lady, has wrought that in me, and I am
sure the like in all my fellows, (the conditions fulfilled) that we will abide
the uttermost extremity for you, and in your defense.

Every one protesting what Floraman had promised, the Damsel departed,
returning in short time with four Esquires, bearing four very fair and
strong armours which four more that led four goodly coursers, all of one
color and bigness: when to the Knights shoe thus beg^de. Lo Gentlemen, what
your present estate, and my earnest affection hat constrained me to do,
desiring you to make estimation of these gifts, according as you shall find
them in proof. Giving her grrat thanks, the esquires armed them all presently,
their armor not differing from one another in color and richness, four
shields were like wise delivered them, the deuiss where you shall understand
hereafter. When they were armed and mounted on horseback, the Damsel showed
them, that they must accompany her three or four days, in which time (through
their assistance) she should enter her lamentable sorrows, and grievous
mishaps, giving them likewise those four Esquires to serve in stead of them
which were departed.

They not denying what the Damsel had requested, rode on with her, where at
this time we will leave them, and return to the knight of Fortune, who passing
the time away with y^ Sage Allart, in remembering his mishappes, his frowards
chances in Love, and all accidences that had happened him in travail,
determined to take his leave of the Sage Magitian, who would not let him
understand his birth and Parentage, for the reason which you shall hear
hereafter. But commending unto him the adventures of great Britain, as also
what necessity the good Knights stood in for want of his help: and arming
Siliuian with an armor, much like that which his Master had alwais worn, they
embraced to together very curtuously, and so depart the Sage Aliart promising
him to be in all places where he should stand destitute of his help, and would
assist him against all misfortunes.

So rode the knight of Fortune, toward the ancient and famous City of
London, desirous to see the English Court, the Fame whereof was blazed through
the whole world. After three days travel, he arrived at the house of an
ancient Gentleman, which was not far from London, and there he reposed for
that night, conceyuing great pleasure to confer with his Host (who loved to
entertain all wandering knights) about the estate of that Country, with the
noble adventures in old time passed, as also at that present in great
Britain. After Supper, they came and sat in the Porch of the House, where at
last they saw ending the gate, a Damsel accompanied with a young Gentleman:
who requested of the Gentleman of that place, to have a Lodging there for that
night. The Gentleman, whose custom was to entertain Strangers, commanded her
a Chamber, with such provision as she should stand in need of. She giving
thanks to her friendly Host, for his so great courtesy, came and sat down by
the Gentleman of the House, which the knight of Fortune perceiving, removed
his stool, and sat down by her: and among other talk, requested of her, for
what occasion she was so pensive and heavy, which was great grief to him to
behold, as for her to abide.

The Damsel taking occasion to behold him, and espying the shield of Fortune,
so much esteemed and famed through all countries, cast her self down at his
feet, and in tears began this sorrowful discourse. I perceive the anger of
Fortune, satisfied with the former injuries, that she has executed on my
poor self, will at this instaunt change her rigor, and favor her that has
been altogether unfortunate, in that I have found the Knight, who not only
can, but (as I hope) will end my miseries by his knightly Valor. So it is
(worthy Sir) that sometime I had a Son, ingenious in every exercise, but
chiefly well nurtured in Martial affairs: and had his fortune agreed with
his towardly behavior, then had I bin a Matrone of joy, where now I am the
Mother of Misfortune. It so chanced, this my Son to grow amorous of a young
Beautiful Damsel, who had retained in favor an other Knight, before my
Son was admitted her Servant: but such was her affection toward my Son,
that her love to the first Suter died with cold, and she esteemed him as worthy
of her good will.

This perceived in the sight of all, was not his from the Knight, who began
greatly to stomach it, and finding opportunity fit for his purpose, assailed
violently my Son, who (notwithstanding the danger on both sides) brought his
enemy into hazard of his life, and himself the better into his Ladies liking.
When time had admitted this conqueror into better estate, that his wounds were
healed, and his strength conquered (not forgetting the repulse he sustained by
my Son, as also the earnest love he bare to the Damsel,) he returned with
a knight attyred in green Armor, bearing in his shield the Portrait of a
Savage man, leading in his hand a couple of Lions, who seeking revenge on the
other knights behalf, my Son took the courage to enter Combat with him.
But such was the spite of Fortune, and so great her malice against me, that my
Son was brought in subjection to this strange Knight, who not contented with
the victory, cruelly cut off his head, and gave it to his mortal enemy. Thus
considering the great injury that the Knight had wrought me, and that none
will do me that favor to revenge my untimely loss, I determined not to leave
my travail, till I had found you, who bearing the name of the Knight of
Fortune, (renowned in all Countries, that has either seen or heard of you)
can compel my enemy to confess his fault, and give him the reward that
belongs to so great discourtesie.

Wherefore most worthy Sir, at which words he stayed her thus. Fair Lady, the
extreme grief of your inward thoughts witnessed by the abundance of tears
the bedewe your rosicheekes, constrains me to believe what you have said,
and to bear a part with you of accustomed heaviness. Wherefore, considering
your wrong, and the great ungentleness of the Knight of the Savage man, if my
Fortune may be so good to meet him, I will revenge your injury with his death,
or leave my own life for a pawn with him. And the rather am I urged to deal
with this Knight, for that there remains a controversy between him and me,
as yet unfinished, and now your mishap shall give me good occasion, to
recompense him for both together, if I knew certain in what place to find
him. Truly sir (quoth the Damsel) I left him at the city of London, where
his valor is held in such estimation, as is more then I can speak, whereof I
judge him not a little proud.

The knight of Fortune, perceiving the earnest desire of the Damsel, to be
revenged on him, whom he would as gladly find, promised her to sens him
defiance on the next morning by his Esquire, and that he would be as diligent
on her behalf as she was desirous to have it dispatched: to which words the
Damsel replied. I can now sufficiently justify what I have often heard, that
your care has been so great to the welfare of Ladies, as that Fortune has the
better prospered all your affairs, and in so much I can judge it the more to
others, by how much I find such great courtesy my self, which if I die before
I deserve, let yet your gentle nature afford me a good opinion, for that all my
life time, shall be spent in the honor of your name.

The ancient Gentleman, understanding that his guest was the Noble knight of
Fortune, esteemed his good luck more then he could any way disclose: wherefore
he desired pardon, that he had not used him according as his famous report
deserved: and that his ignorance might serve to excuse any fault committed. And
the rather he used the less suspicion toward him, because he had entertained
so many noble and valiant Gentlemen: among whom (as he was well worthy) he gave
great commendation to the knight of the Savage man, as he had heard of many,
and partly had seen himself.

Which good report, incited, and greatly moved the knight of Fortune, to use
the more diligence in finding him: in which desire, as time served, they brake
company, and departed to their lodgings. This courageous knight sustaining
small rest in his (...) the clear morning appeared, arose, and armed him with
all speed, taking his leave of his Host and the Damsel, departing toward
London accompanied with Siluian. And drawing somewhat near the City, he took
a great pleasure to behold the brave Towers and strong Edifies, which by the
shining of the Sun, gave great contentation to his mind, and urged him to
aligh^, because he would take good view thereof: using much talk with Siluian,
as concerning the great fame of that ancient City. So long he stayed there,
till he supposed the aged King to be risen, when he rode into the city, where
both the bravery of the place, and the remembrance of the famous Exployts,
there begun and finished, provoked him to some hautie attempt, that might
enrowle his name among the number of those, that were held in high estimation,
For that the report of noble deeds does urge the mind of the courageous to be
equal with those, who bear most commendation of their approved valiancie.

CHAP. XXXVI.
How the Knight of Fortune arriving at London, passed away the time with an
ancient Hermit, in seeing the monuments and Funerals of many noble persons:
until he had sent Siluian to the English Court, where, in the presence of the
King, he declared his Masters challenge to the knight of the Savage man, which
he willingly accepted, albeit the king would hardly, agree unto it. And how
they endured the Combat so long, that the king accompanied with the Princess
Fl^rida, were feign to come* and entreat them to leave off their enterprise,
at whose request, they both gave consent, neither of them giving the victory
of the other.
MAny were the grievous cogitations, that passed the mind of the knight of
Fortune, while he was entered the famous city of London, as well for the
ungentle dealing of his Lady Polynarda, as also sundry other conceits that he
had occasion to think on. At last, remembering he might not be licenced the
combat till after Dinner, he withdrew himself to an Hermitage, where after he
had heard service, he was desirous to see the ancient monuments that were in
the Chapel, which for the most part were ruinated, yet some of them remained
in good estate of their beauty. Among all the things that were there to be
seen, the knight of Fortune behld an ancient Sepulcher, which was cunningly
framed in workmanship, albeit long continuance of time, had both wasted and
dimmed the works and figures thereof, so that one could hardly read what was
engraven about it, saving at the one end was perceived the name of Arbam of
Norgalles, who was buried when King Lisuart ruled the the crown of England.
Upon the sight of this ancient monument, he questioned with the hermit, if in
time past the ancient Sepulcher had not contained a much larger quantity, to
which demand, the Hermit thus answered. Good Sir, when first I came to
inhabit this place, which by computatio^ of time, I guess to be about 34.
years since, I found this ancient Sepulcher in the same estate you now behold
it. But as I have heard of many, and therefore may be hold to report it, when
the Infidels did invade this Land, they did ruinate and spoil this Tomb above
all the rest. Not sparing these other by it, as you may perceive, wherein are
inferred Don Grumedan, and Don Cuillan the Pensive, beside other personages of
no less nobility then knightly behavior.

The Hermits talk, urged him to remember the discourse of the life of this
noble Don Guillan, comparing his hapless life, with his heavy estate, which
was in like manner procured, as his Lady Polynarda, was the original of his
sorrowful mourning. At this remembrance, falling into a great agony of mind he
was constrained to lean on the irons that compassed this ancient Sepulcher,
uttering such rufull complaints within himself, as the grief thereof caused
the tears to run down his cheeks.

Standing a great while as it were in amaze, the Hermit supposed he occupied
his mind about some evil intent, but Sriuian stepped unto him, declaring that
it was his wont to be often encumbered with Melancholy, and therefore willed him
to use no more doubt in this matter. At length he happened forth of this mute
study, turning his head to hide his extreme grief, when Siluian went unto
him, desiring he would noc forget his enterprise, with the knight of the Savage
man, and to leave ^ch thoughts, as would draw his estate into such debility, as
might greatly hinder his former determination. With these words he was somewhat
displeased, saying: I more doubt of that which my late studying has called
into remembrance, the^ either the fear or force my enemy can use to me. So
taking his leave of the Hermit, he rode toward the City where he met the
Gentleman his Host, and the Damsel, on whose behalf he had enterprised the
Combat, then because he would not enter the City as yet, he sent Siluian to
the Court, to manifest before the King his Masters challenge, and to use great
circumspection, what answer the King returned.

Siluian well noting his Masters commandment departed and in short time
arrived at the Palace, where going up into the great Hall, he perceived the
King was newly risen from Diuner, walking with his knights, among whom was the
knight of the Savage man, being well and perfectly cured of the wounds he had
received, when he fought against Gracian, Francian and Polynarda, who were
there also in his company. Siluian came into the presence of the king, where on
his knee, with such duty as is required in that respect, he began as follows.
Most puissant Prince, the knight of Fortune my noble Lord and Master, by me in
humility of his own person yields the homage of his heart and knightly
Sword, at your Graces command. Such was his intent, as in your Courts he bowed
to make proof of his service, but Fortune not so agreeing, in stead of aquiet
entry (under your Graces leave) he means to come by way of a challenge. For
as he travailed, he met a Lady, whose cause of misfortune, she does
attribute to the Knight of the Savage man, and my Lord taking her distressed
case in hand, by me gives challenge to him of Combat, to meet him if he dare,
so that your Grace will allow my Lord a safe entrance and returns, without the
disturbance of any to hinder his determination, the Knight of the Savage man
only excepted. The king who had heard the fame of the knight of Fortune, to be
such as was extolled in all Princes Courts, was very sorry that his arrival
should move such a request, and would willingly have denied the Combat, but
that the Knight of the Savage man came before his Majesty, and used these
words. My gracious Sovereign, the Knight of Fortune is of such reputation, as
neither may your Grace deny his request, nor my self refuse to enter Combat
with him. And albeit his puissa^ce has urged him to a Challenge, and the
advantage gotten in other countries, makes him the more earnest to have his
deeds known here: yet can neither his greeting dismay my courage, nor his
presence compel me to leave the field. Wherefore, I desire your Grace to
grant his request, that he may have liberty of the Just, according as he
ought: otherwise will I go to him, as well to satisfy his desire, as to
compass the affection I have of my self.

The King seeing all excuses would not serve to hinder this matter, but that
the Knight of the Savage man would needs take on him the fight, returned
Siluian with this answer. My Friend, tell thy Lord, I am both pleased, and
offended at his request yet seeing his demand stands with law of arms, which
I can no way justly deny, I grant him free leave, without contradiction of
any. But better would I have judged of him, had his challenge been to any
other Knight, where being as it is, he will not so lightly escape, as perhaps
he makes account of.

With this message Siluian returned to his Master, who having heard the
pleasure of the king, came prnsently to the place appointed for the combat,
where the king with the Queen, and the Princess Flerida, with all the
nobility, were ready placed, to behold this noble attempt. The Citizens
likewise repaired thither to see this combat, which was so suddenly noysed
abroad, so that the place was filled with abundance of people. The knight of
Fortune entered, and made his obeisance to the king, and passed by, then came
the knight of the Savage man, accompanied with many knights and noble
gentlemen, among which company was Argolant who brought him his spear, and Don
Rosiran de la Bronde deliuerd him his sheeld, so marching on by the king they
left him, using this talk with the knight of Fortune. I know not sir knight,
what should be the cause of your so great challenge, without it be to injury
him that never offended you. Sir (answered the knight of Fortune) behold the
Lady here present, to whom you have offered no small abuse, which I will see
you recompense, or constrain you to abide the doom of my mercy. Trust me sir
(quoth the knight of the Savage man) the Lady is altogether unknown of me,
neither have I offended her, or any body beside, that I should deserve to be
thus ungently accused: but I see the good opinion you have of your own
manhood, causes you to be so earnest in this matter, which I will not denym,
albeit I could, yet give no spot to my honor. So departing themselves to fetch
their careere at the sound of the Trumpetst, hey met bravely together, breaking
half a dozen Staves a piece, yet neither able to stir the other. When they
saw they could not dismount one another, they took their swords and charged
each other with such pollitique behavior in their fight, that it was
marvelous to hear, what commendations were generally given.

When they had well wearied themselves on Horseback, they alighted, and
endeavored to endanger each other with such rigorous blows, that it was thought
the Combat would not long last, ere one of them were slain. For their sheelds
were shiuered all in pieces, their Armor so broken, that the blood trickled
down their sides, then fell they to wrestling one with another, their gripes
made the blood to issue forth abundantly, yet neither had the advantage of
the other in strength, but both so equal, that it could not be judged, who was
likest of victory. The Princess Flerida greeuing at their great effusion of
blood, departed in such heaviness, as if she had known it to be the blood of
her sons, that was so cruelly spilt. The king with all his Courtly
attendaunts was stricken into such a maze, when he saw them take their swords
again, that he thought the flower of all Chivalry was there present before
him, and was in great heauinesso, for that they would not give over by no
means.

The knight of the Savage man seeing himself destitute of Sword, sheeld, and
Armor, began somewhat to fear, that his life would stand in great hazard, but
yet he contented himself, that if as then his death were ordained, he should
sustain the less reproach, in that a knight of, such honor had given him the
overthrow, wherefore at a pause, he thus began. Why should I discourage my
self at the death, seeing I shall depart in the flower and prime of mine age,
and end my days at his hand, who is only esteemed for good Fortune? Yet the
oath I have made to the Princess Flerida, with the great duty I find in my
self, as her desert, constrains me to wish a longer time if it might be, as
well to exalt her honor, as to try the adventure which has endamaged so many
good knights, whereto I did ever bend mine affection, as the only enterprise
in all my life to win me renown. But seeing I am fallen into so great mishap,
as both Fortune does deny me, and mine own manhood fail me, I will yet so
behave my self upon mine enemy, as when he has won the uttermost, he shall
not boast of his Conquest, and such a writ will I deliver him to seal, as I
hope shall crave no other signet but his heart blood.

In like manner the knight of Fortune stood debating with himself, as well
upon his present danger, as also his passed dollour, not forgetting his Lady
and Mistress Polinarda, to whom, as had she been present, he began this
complaint. Madame, behold now the time wherein your anger does kill me, and
your favor revive me, which except you will bear the cruel mind to work my
Tragedy, restore in wonted clemency the encouragement of my hapless labors,
which since it lies in your hands, cast a friendly look on the man, that in
all extremities is none but yours only. If you deny me this small request,
neither shall I adventure the enterprises of great Britain, nor do that
honor to you, which my heart has ever desired, so shall the flower of
Chivalry remain in their great misfortune, and you through your obstinacy
accounted the loss of them all. This knight has put me in more danger then
ever did any, yet neither of us both enjoys the Conquest: and if the
unfortunate death return to my share, I shall think my self honorably
failed at his hands, but my poor heart cruelly martyred through your hard
dealing.

Then fell they to the Combat again, not able to charge one another so
fiercely as at the first, yet laboring earnestly to end their strife one way
or other, which moved the king to descend, accompanied with his Knights, and
fearing the loss of their lives, sought to set them at unity. But such was
their desire of victory, and so courageous their minds in midst of most
doubt, that the King was feign to return, because they would give no ear to
his persuasion, Then went he to the Chamber of the Princess Flerida, where in
this manner he began to use his speech. Fair Daughter, if my noble Son Don
Edward your Lord be living, and that he may be delivered by the valor of any
earthly creature, I persuade my self, that one of these Knights shall be the
mean to relieve his adverse estate. But if in this Combat, as I greatly
fear, they shall end their lives upon this hautie attempt, then farewell all
hope that I ever reposed, for both you shall lose him, and my self shall ever
lack him, where, by them I might (assure my self) both to hear of my Son,
and enjoy him in my Court, in his woonted estate again. Wherefore, if you
bear such love to him, as you have always protested, and favor me in this my
earnest desire, vouchsafe the pains to walk unto them, for that one word of
of your mouth will enfore them leave the combat, so shall you possess what you
have long wished, and I be honored in so great a courtesy. The Princess, who
since the absence of her Lord had seldom come abroad, but always kept her
Chamber in her wonted lamentations, at the request of the aged king came
walking down with him, and four Damsels attired all in black attending on
her, her self apparrelled in the same manner: saving that the veil on her
head shadowed all her face, so that none could have full view to behold her
beauty.

When she was entered the place of the Just, to the great amazement of all that
were present, she came to the Knight of Fortune, and took him by the arm,
with these words. Sir knight, if either you make account of the honor of
Ladies, or will manifest in your deeds that you owe them any duty, then at my
request I entreat you to leave off the Combat, as well to avoid the hazard of
your lives, as to content this noble company, who are satisfied with your
famous exployts.

The knight of Fortune well eying the Princess, and perceiving her to resemble
the countenance of his fair Polinarda, he humbled himself on his knee, with
these words. Fair Lady, my desire has been greatly bent to end this Combat,
and to render this Knight the victory, as he has well deserved, but seeing you
have charged me with such a courteous command, I rather desire the death, then
to yield any deny all.

Sir (quoth the knight of the Savage man) if I should report the estimation I
have of your knighthood, with the forceable charges I have received at your
hands, I might say that justly, which you have rightly deserved, you are the
only knight to whom I will grant my Conquest. But seeing you have made grant
to her, whom in duty I must always reuence, and that her entreaty has moved you
to end our debate, if I should contrary what she and you have appointed, I
might worthily be reproched among all knights, much more disped among fair
Ladies.

The Princes was so well pleased with this good agreement, that giving each of
them hearty thanks, she returned to her Chamber, and the King not a little
pleased at this good event, commanded the knights should be brought into his
Palace, where such respect should be used to them, that in short time they
might recover their former good health. But the Knight of Fortune would not
accept the knights offer at that time, but departed with the Gentleman his Host
to his house again, whether being carefully brought in a Chariot, such
provision was ordained for him, that by the help of the Gentleman's Daughter,
who was maruailous expert in the Art of Medicine, his weak estate was
relieved into indifferent good plight. Then was the Damsel sought for, who
was the cause of this Combat, but answer was made, that so soon as they had
entered the fight, she secretly shrunk away through the preace, so that they
could gain no knowledge of her.

The knight of the Savage man was conducted to his Chamber, where he had such
great attendance in the curing of his wounds, as by any means they could
devise, what might best serve for remedy. For never were his hurts so
dangerous, as those that he had received at this Combat, nor his life in
greater hazard, then it was at this present, which made the Princess so
diligent about him, that she enterprised as much as the simplest, that had any
occasion to travail for his health.

The King was greatly displeased, that the knight of Fortune would not
vouchsafe the lodging in his Palace, where we will leave awhile the two
unknown brothers, till they have attained their health, that the^ we may have
more occasion to speak of them. And loath were I to be forgetful of the
Knights of the Court of Constantinople, who assembled themselves in tranaile in
the Forest of great Britain, trusting to the tickle dealings of fleering
Fortune. Who if she favored them a day, frowned on them again for a months
space after, and when they thought themselves in surest estate of good, hap,
then were they nearest to their own destruction.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
How Eutropa the Enchantresse, who had sent this Damsel, that procured the
Combat between the Knight of Fortune, and the knight of the Savage man,
caused all the Grecian Knights to come before her Castle, where they severed
themselves in manner of two Armies. And how she sent two Damsels more, who (by
their feigned reports) set such a discord between both parties, that they
prepared themselves to a dangerour Battle.
EVtropa the enchantresse, and Aunt to the Giant Dramusiande, seeing her
Castele stored with good Knights, and fearing the time drew nie to prevent her
wicked purpose, she sought to set such discord among the Knights that were
lately arrived in England, as they should without knowledge spoil the lives of
each other. For to this end and purpose she framed her intent, that if she
could execute her will on the courageous Knights, who endeavored themselves in
the search of the strayed Princes, she would set such strife and enmity through
all Christendom, that the Paganes should ruinate and spoil all the Dominions,
and be Lords over the kingdoms and Countries.

And the better to bring her devises to pass, she sent Damsels continually
abroad, through the circute of great Britain, to set strife and discention
between all the trauayling Knights, and the Damoselles were so diligent in
their Mistress command, that they daily brought many good Knights into hazard
and danger, as you have partly heard, and shall do hereafter.

One of these Damsels was the occasion of the Combat, between Polinarda and
Knight of the Savage man, the very same Damsel brought the Horse and Armor,
to the Prince Platir, and his companions. She also set the strife between the
Knight of Fortune, and the Knight of the Savage man, for this Damsel had
tears at her command, and such subtle reports for the avail of her
Mistress, that she was only beloved and esteemed with Eutropa, yea, she
referred the whole substance of her practice, to the deceitful reports of the
Damsel.

The Knights that were lately come from Constantinople, and remained a while
for their pleasure in the English Court, were enforced by these crafty means
to take their departure, and to seek the adventures that were in great
Britain.

So when the Combat was ended, between the knight of Fortune, and the Knight
of the Savage man, they disguised their Armor, changed the devises of their
Shieldes, least they should be known, and put themselves in travail, which
way they were enforced, to find the Castle of the Giant Dramusiande.

Eutropa had brought all the knights into the field where the Castle stood,
seuering them in two companies, and a River running between them, where their
Tents were pitched, and such provision appointed, as though they had determined
to fight a maine Battle. On the one side was the Prince Gracian, Onistalde,
Dramain, Francian, Polinard, Tremoran, Claribal, and Emeralde the Fair, on the
other side was the Prince Berolde, Dridan, Belizart, Guerin, Estrellant,
German of Orleance, Platir, Floraman, Blandidon, and Crispian, with diverse
other. And both the sides brought into such estate, that they neither could
tell what the other were, nor by what means they were brought into that place.
At last forth of the Castle came two Damsels, the one accompanied like a
person of great gravity, the other having no body with her, but a young
Gentleman that was her guide, who presently went to the Pauillions next the
Castle, and the other to the Prince Gracian and his company, that were on the
further side of the River.

After she was come into the presence of the Princes, and very gently and
courteously entertained, preparing her self to a deceitful course, and
intermedling her talk with tears, she began in this manner. Sir knights,
the crown of your noble deeds, and continual Fame of your well employed
Knight-heed, is sufficient to irritate your usurping enemies, and to confound
all such as swell against honorable duty, so that their own drifts shall
prepare their just destruction, and their evil devices run into contempt of
the whole world. As concerning the presumption I have used in my rash entry,
with the bold behavior you may perceive, to my reproach, I shall desire you,
first to consider the extremity of my grief, and then to pardon my enterprise,
when you are privy to my Passions This ancient Castle which you may here
behold, does belong to me that have lived in it, both a heavy and happy time,
in that in times past, I have been better acquainted with pleasant conceyts,
then for a long time I could enjoy the like tranquillity, as they to whom my
misfortunes are very well known, can witness the great alteration of my
former estate. For Fortune among all the liberal benefits she had bestowed on
me, as wealth to maintain me, and a quiet government to protect me, gave me a
Daughter, so perfect in beauty, so pure in modesty, so precise of her
personage, and so exquisite in her usual behavior, that many noble Gentlemen
have put their lives in hazard, to deserve her good liking, that was liked of
all.

Great has bin the entreaty of many Honorable personages, to have her in
marriage, which I have always denied, till now, making choice of one above all
the other, I have agreed to accomplish his importunate desire.

This being known to a knight, who had long time been a Suter, yet never so
fortunate as to gain his intent, now presumes upon his strength to take her
from me perforce, and to iniure him that has obtained my consent to espouse
her. In sign whereof (pointing to the Pauillions of the other knight, on the
farther side of the river) behold where he has placed his Tents to invade my
Castle, and through the help of his friends, purposes to ruinate this mine
ancient dwelling, and to use violence to her, who is betrothed to another. When
I considered there was no mean to remedy the necessity of my case, but eiter
to keep my Hold, and there be famished, or yield me self to my foes, and so
be dishonored: I sent one of my Damsels to the English Court, at whose
request you are here arrived in this place, where you may behold my usurping
enemy, and the great danger I stand in of the hard award of fortune. And once
more have I sent by way of entreaty, to will them break up their siege, and
not to trouble me for her whom they cannot have, though they use never such
violence. But such is the great malice of this knight, and his intent linked
to such an extreme purpose, that neither gentleness may entreat him, nor
fair demeanor serve to persuade him. Wherefore noble Gentlemen, as you respect
the honor of an oppressed Virgin, and the oath that your knighthood has
avouched in this behalf, stand now her friend who is void of all defense, and
maintain her cause, which is both for your renown, and her good fame for ever.

She having thus ended her coined protestation, they stood debating with
themselves what answer they ought to make herat last, the prince Gracian (they
having referred all to his disposition) took the Damsel by the hand, and
thus shaped his answer. Fair Lady, since this honorable company have appointed
me (un worthy) to answer on their behalf, and that we are persuaded you would
not inform us of any misreport: thus I dare awareant for them all, that you
shall find them as ready to defend you, as your enemy dare presume any way to
molest you. The Damsel hearing the answer of the Prince Gracian to be such as
served fit for her purpose, gave the^ all hartg thanks and calling* her tears
again into remembrance urged the knights to such pity, that they greatly
desired to enter Combat with the other company. Then returned the Damsel,
that had been with the other knights (informing them likewise of such a false
report:) when being entered the Pauillion, to the Damosel (with courtesy) she
gave forth these speeches. Mathe enemy to your honor, and friend to his own
damage, will not be persuaded, but will follow his enterprise: and in derision
scoffeth at this noble assembly reporting them to be so weak, that they dare
not show themselves.

These words urged Onistalde unto such anger, that he presently brake forth
into these speeches: I believe, that had they tried those whom they have
adventured to dare, they should find the chastisement of their peremptory
bragges, to be aunswerable in effect, as they have justly deserved. Tush (quoth
Polinarda) it is easy for our enemy to talk his pleasure, but when he shall
find his treachery, rewarded with due recompense, he will wish he had used
himself more freendely to this Lady, whom he has so greatly iniuryed. Then
Francian was desirous to send them defiance, which the Damsel would not
suffer, lest her dealings should be espied, but to work the surer in her
deceit, she sent the other Damsel once more, to will them to depart
presently, whereto if they made denial, that she should summon them in arms,
to prepare for the fight. In maane while she was gone on her message, this
other crafty Gyrle, used such familiarity with the Prince Gracian and the
other Knights, that their heats were enflamed against them beyond the River. To
whom the other Damsel had reported, that the Prince Gracian and his company,
did endeavor themselves to take the Castle from her Mistress perforce,
whereupon she requested them to defend her Mistress right, and to cause them
know they went about a disloyal enterprise.

The Prince Floraman having well pondered the words of the Damsel, returned
her presently this answer. Albeit out duettie is to defend any distressed
person, and so gainsay the mishap of any iniuried Lady, yet reason wills us,
ere we presume too hastily, to be acquai^ted with the cause, and well advised
ere we begin such a rash attempt, else may our enemy judge, we come more upon
a bravery, then Knighthood may awarrant our behavior, and so run into
danger our selves, for that the rightful cause has always the victory.
Wherefore thus resolve your self, we will first know if your reports be of
truth or no: least we enter into such defectes, as we may perhaps repent us.
With that the Demosell began to rehearse their promise, at such time as she
delivered them Horses and Armor in their great necessity, for which cause she
desired then to accomplish their promise, threatening them, that their Nobility
might be defaced in denying their words. Trust me (answered Platir) I have such
a good opinion in her dealings, that she would not use persuasion to us of an
untroth. Wherefore tell us fair Lady, does your enemy still remain resolute in
his determination? albeit my Companions deny to aid you as they have avouched,
yet will I abide by you to the death, in what I have promised.

Then the Prince Berolde coming to the Damosel, began as thus. Can we (fair
Lady) see you in such great hazard, and not Employ our selves to give you
succor? No, assure your self, for mine own part, and so I dare avouch for
the rest of my company, that we will pawn the blood of our hearts, ere we will
see you remain in such a heaviness. The Damosel, at these words returned to
the Prince Gracian, certifying them of their willingness to the fight, and not
long she stayed, but returned to them again, her face all be sprent with
tears, which was chief veil to cover her treason, and thus she spoke.

Now Gentlemen, your quarrel is of more force then before, for they ha^ing my
Lady and Mistres in their hold, have vowed not to let her depart, without she
will render to them her castle. And moreover, they send you word by way of
defiance, that they are so ready to deal with you, as they judge you dare not
come forth to them, either to defend the cause of my Lady, or to make proof of
your loyalty.

This report provoke such an earnest desire in the knights that they mounted
on Horseback, and began to show themselves in the field, using such behavior
with their often recourses, that the other knights could enjoy no rest, till
they were likewise prepared. For such was the envious dealings of Eutropa, that
in this fight, she set the Son against the Father, one Brother against
another, and the dearest friend to be enemies one to another: and to see how
furiously they behaved themselves (not knowing them they fought against) would
have made one judge, there was no other means but present death. Such was the
force of her devilish devises, in the Treasonable attempts the Damsel
undertook, that neiter civility was regarded, nor their own safety at this
time respected.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
How after the Damsels had ended their subtle persuasions the knights joined
themselves together, to a dangerou^ and doubtful fight, wherein they had so
sore endamaged one another, that their lives stood in hazard of any recovery.
And how the Sage Aliart, seeing the intent of Eutropa, to work the utter
spoil of these courageous knights, came and charmed them in such order, that
they quickly left of the battle. When as the Giant Dramusiande came forth
wirh the captive Princes (who greatly lamented to see their sons and kindred
in such doubtful estate) and took them all prisoners into his Castle.
NOw that the Damsels had accomplishe^ the disloyal practice of their
Mistress Eutropa, they departed, leaving the knights in readiness to enter
battle, who had so changed their Armor, and the devices of their Sheelds,
that they had no knowledge of one another. The Prince Gracian was attired in
green Armor, mingled with spots of white, and a Coat of Maile over it of the
same color, in his Sheeld he bare a red Lion rampaunt, in a field of Sinople.
Onistalde had his Armor black, whereon in artificial devise, was made pretty
things, resembling the scales of a fish, and in his sheeld he bare a Gorgons
head, his Brother Dramian being armed in the same manner.

The Armor of Bazilliart was somewhat green, very thick beset with Lyonesses
of Gold, bearing in his shield for his devise an Eagle. Francian had his Armor
resembling little flames of fire: in his shield likewise the same order of
devise. Dridan was armed in black, bearing in his shield the Tower of Babylon.
Polinard had his Armor of a sandy color, whereon was painted many broken
Spears in token he had lost the victory, against the noble Floraman, when he
adventured for the beauty of fair Polinarda, and having for his devise in his
shield, a spear broken in the midst. Frisol had his Armor in color red,
beset with sundry pretty antiques faces of Sable, and in his shield he bare a
white Lion, in a golden field.

Tremoran was attyred in a Carnation colored Armor, very bravely beset with
golden Pellicans, and the devise in his Shield, was the Image of Sagittarius.
Luyman of Burgondie, and Clariball of Hungaria, had their Armor white, and
their shieldes alike in devises. Flauian, and Emeralde the Fair, had their
Armor black, finely bespotted with red, and in their shieldes the resemblance
of a fair Cloud, in a field of silver.

The Knights on the other side of the River, were in like manner disguised,
giving show to their enemies, of their hautie courage and magnanimity. The
Prince Berolde, first advanced himself in the field, his Armor black,
whereon was cunningly besprent the tears of a Lover, and in his Shield, a
bleeding heart, rent violently in a number of pieces. Don Rosuell and Belizart
came next him, their Armor of green and carnation color, bearing in their
shieldes, the amorous passions of a Lovers mind, in a field of Azure.
Estrellant would not change his Armor, but defaced the devise of his shield,
that he could not be known. Trofollant had his Armor green, whereon was
figured many golden Doves, and in his shield he bare the Troyan Horse, in a
field of Sable. Guerin was in white Armor, bearing in his shield a Pecocke,
in a field which resembled the coullour of many Needles. Rotandor, and
Crispian of Macedon, were both Armed alike. Germayne of Orleance had his Armor
of Azure, bearing in his Shield a beautiful Damsel, which he kept in
remembrance of the fair Florenda, Daughter to Arnedes King of France, for
whose sake he determined to try the adventures of great Britain. Platir,
Floraman, Blandidon, and Pompides, to whom the Damsel of Eutropa, had
delivered Horses and Armor, came forth, their Horses all alike, and their
Armor black, beset with silver Swannes, their Helmets very sumptuously
gilded, and adored with rich Pearls, and in their Shieldes their devises were
all alike, which was the smokie Forge and Anuill, of God Vulcan the Smith. Both
the companies marching forward till they met, where they beheld each other in
maruailous great contempt, when taking occasion as it served, they couched
their Spears, and encountered together very valiantly. Between them continued
such a dangerous fight, what with the sore hurtes they received, as also the
great debilitie they were all brought into, that the effusion of their blood,
witnessed their earnest desire of victory, and the adverse estates of them all,
remained as a pattern of their great peril.

Don Edward, Primaleon, Recinde, Arnedes, Belcar, Vernar, and the Sultan
Bellagris, standing with Dramusiande in a window of the Castle, beheld the
fierce assaults of these courageous Knights, whereto they gave such
commendation, as the most hauty exployt that ever they had seen, which moved
Don Edward to say, I have in times past, not only seen many a notable
skirmish, but also have had experience, of the behavior of many noble knights,
yet comparing them past, with this which I now behold, I must needs say, all
the rest has been counterfeite, and this is only worthy eternal
commendations. Indeed (quoth Primaleon) the adventures in this place is
marvelous, which makes me to suspend my judgment of this courageous
assembly, but if it be a natural fight indeed, and no imagination given unto
us by the practice of Euchantment, I must commend this for the most knightly
adventure, that in all my life time I could gain the sight of.

Dramusiande likewise was abashed at this present spectacle, and knowing it had
come to pass by the means of his Aunt, and fearing least in this Battle
some of them should be slain, he went to her, and entreated her to pacify
this grievous Stratageme, but her mind was bent to such cruelty, that she
would use no respect to his words. So long endured their violence to each
other, that faintness made them let fall their weapons, and catch hold of one
another, in the manner of wrestling: which was great grief to the Princess in
the Castle to behold, and sore pains to themselves to continue fight so long.

The Sage Aliart understanding of this great mishap, and scorning that Eutropa
should attribute the triumph of this victory wholly unto her self, came to the
place where these knights were assembled, and entering into the Camp like an
ancient old man (having a rod in his hand, where about was wound a Serpent,)
he struck upon the ground with it, when presently the knights fell all to the
earth, in such a strange and marvelous alteration, that one would have judged,
they had been deprived of their lives.

After he had there finished what pleased him, he went up to the Castle of
Dramusiande, sending such a dark smoke over all the Valley, (wherein might be
perceived great flashes and flames of fire) that the Princes in the Castle were
marueilously affrighted. This moved Eutropa to such great anger (because she
could not gain the knowledge how this had happened, no work her will on ^he
knights, as she had certainly purposed,) that she went raging all about the
Castle, moved to such disquietnesse, that no body could persuade her.

At last this great darkness vanished away, and nothing could be seen but the
Knights, that lay all grouelling upon the ground: which caused Dramusiande with
his noble Prisoners, to go forth and fetch them all into his Castle. When
they had taken off their Helmets, the King Recinde knew his children, and the
king Arnedes his sons: Polendos knew Francian his son, and Bazilliart and
Don Rosuel, were visited by the valiant Belcar, Dridan was carried the arms of
Maiortes, and Platir was borne in by his noble Father Primaleon, who because he
had left him when he was somewhat young, did hardly know that it was his son.
In brief, they all lamented to see their kindred and friends in such great
misfortune, and conveyed them into the Castle, where they were so honorably
used, that in short time they had good hope to recover them from this danger.

When they had attained some part of their former health, they rejoiced greatly
that they had happened into the company of their dearest friends, and declared
in what manner they were deluded by the two Damsels, which was not strange to
them, who perceived the daily practices of Eutropa, to be grounded on such
treacherous deceits,

Now did Dramusiande greatly commend his good Fortune, in gaining so many
courageous and well approved knights: as he was fnlly resolved, he should now
easily conquer the Isle of the Lake, which as yet he would not make known to
any of the Knights, but used himself so pleasant in their company, and
frequented them daily with such delightful exercises, that generally they bare
him great good will and affection,

For this opinion he conceived, that using them with gentleness, and showing
himself courteous in all attempts, he should win their good wills, which he
made more account off, then all the riches in the world. As it is always
seen, that friendship sooner wins the gentle mind, theu the rich promises
and delivery of Coin, can purchase any faithful persuasion: which craves a
more covetous interest, then the persons esteeming virtue, will strain their
minds to amount unto.

CHAP. XXXIX.
How Eutropa after she had obtained all the Knights prisoneners in her Castle,
began a new treachery, to bring to ruin the Emperor and City of
Constantinople, by sending Letters to the Sultan of Babylon, declaring how the
Emperor was destitute of his chief knights, and how he might easily overcome
the city. And how the noble knight of the Savage man, after he was healed of
the wounds he had received by the knight of Fortune, left the Court of England,
and traveled to seek the adventures of great Britain, in which endeavor he
arrived at the castle of the Giant Dramusiand, where he unhorsed the Prince
Primaleon and his noble Father the Prince Don Edward. Likewise how he prevailed
against the kings Arnedes and Recinde, and foiled the G^ants Pandare and
Alligan: so that he entered combat with the Giant Dramusiande, each of them
fore wounding the other, yet neither could enjoy the victory. And how the Sage
Aliart came again, and made such a marvelous darkness, that the knight of
the Savage man was carried away no body could whither.
GLad was Eutropa that she had gotten these Knights her prisones, whom she
stood in great fear of, and Christendom in most need of: and yet not
contenting her self with this extreme cruelty, would practice another
mischief, to bring to destruction all the noble knights on the earth. It so
fortuned, that by politic means, she was advertised of the death of Olorique
Alchediane, the great Sultan of Babylon, and dear friend to the Emperor
Palmerin: who had a son remaind alive, not of the gentle nature of his
father, but a great enemy to the whole estate of Christendom.

This serving for fit her devilish purpose, she gave him by Letters to
understand, what great and grievous mischances, his Progenitors had received by
the Emperors of Greece, in that many Princes of his blood and lineage, had
been cruelly slain before the walls of Constantinople, which natural love
and duty, did enforce him to revenge, else should he be justly contemned and
reproched of the whole world: where if now he would vex his enemy upon so just
occasion, and urge him to the small defense he had left for his succor, he
might be Monarch of the whole world, and have more at command then all his
Predecessors had.

As for a convenient time, he could with for no better then was at that
present: when if he would lay siege to Constantinople, it had no other Rampire
of defense, then the aged Emperor, whose years forbad him to enter the field,
and whose dominions lay ready at his own appointment. As for the noble
courageous knights, whom all the world feared, and were the only safeguard to
that famous City, were in such place, where they had more need of succor
themselves, then come to defend the aged Emperor. Yea, and all other realms
were so unprovided, of those that were the mean to let this determination,
that neither could they help him, or promise safety to themselves, so that if
he would, he might bring under his obeisance, the most of all Christendom.

There letters were conveyed to the Sultan of Babylon, who provide for the
attempt which Eutropa had willed him: where to his determination, we will
forsake him at this time, till we gain more fit occasson to discourse of
proceedings.

The hardy knight of the Savage man, was purposed now to see the adventures of
great Britain, for which cause (when his wounds were perfectly healed) he
took leave of King Frederick and the Princess Flerida, proceeding in his
travel, till fortune brought him to the Valley of Perdition, where he
presently espoed the Castle of Dramusiande. Not long had he stood to take view
of this Castle, but he perceived to issue forth a brave company of well
appointed knights, among whom were Giants of a monstrous stature, which gave
him occasion to suppose, that he was arrived at the place where so many famous
Knights were detained Prisoners: yet was ge driven into a great doubt, in that
such comely Knights should keep company with such ougly fellows. At last, he
beheld the Knights preparing themselves, as it were to Just: when (after he had
done his devotions in prayers, as was his accustomed use) he received a Spear
from his Esquire, which he charged toward Pecinde the King of Spain. When
Dramusiande saw the courage of the Knight of the Savage man, they all came
down to the foot of the bridge, meaning, as it was their custom, the Prince
Don Edward should have the first course: but through entreaty, the King
Recinde got leave first to try his strength. The Knight of the Savage man
being ready prepared, encountered the King with great valor, but such was his
misfortune, that he was sent to the earth. Arnedes, who had always in travail
borne him company, prevailed through earnest desire, that he was granted the
second Just: but he was enforced to bear the King Recinde company. Primaleon
seeing his friends receive such dishonor before his face, without taking
leave of the Prince Don Edward, took the Spear and ran courageously against
the Knight of the Savage man, when they brake their spears, yet neither of
them any thing shaken. Dramusiande, who desired to see the end of this noble
exploit, commanded the Spears should be presently brought forth, when each
of them took their choice, and fell to their enterprise again.

At the third attempt, Fortune turning her back to the noble Primaleon, caused
him likewise to be dismounted to the earth. This mishappe greatly displeased
the Prince Don Edward, and he taking one of the strongest Spears, gave the
Encounter to the Knight of the Savage man, which was discharged with so great
magnanimity, that both their Horses and themselves were laid on the ground.
Don Edward quickly taking his feet again, and maruayling at the puissant
strength of the Knight of the Savage man, who came unto him and saluted him
with these words. Trust me (Sir Knight) I would esteem my self both honored
of Fortune, and highly preferred unto all good luck, if I were in a place
where, to do you such service, as is your reward through your brave behavior.

For this assure your self, that you are the Knight who ought to bear the
general praise among men, especially of me, who in all his life time never
sustained so sharp a plunge, as at this encountering you have put me too. Sir,
(answered the Prince Don Edward,) I know not if my behavior seem so praise
worthy to you, but this I speak unfeignedly (not to cause you conceive a pride
in your self) that I never met with a stranger knight, since I knew what
belonged to the bearing of Armor.

Pandare came to end their tale, giving these words to the Knight of the
Savage man. Since (Sir Knight) you have done more in the Just, then every one
supposed to be in your power, you must now endeavor your self to deal with
me a while, for that all such as enter this Valley, are bound to fulfill this
ancient custom. But if your heart serve you not to fulfill this enterprise,
because fear may somewhat allay your youthful courage, I wish you to yield
your self, which will be more honorable, then to hazard your life, where you
are certain to lose it.

O sir (quoth the knight of the Savage man) it seems your Father was a
Senator, by your Clarkly persuasion, and that you being his son, would do
more with words then he could with deeds: but if your Father has given you
more wit then you can bear, I mean to beat it out of you, rather then you
should be ouerburthened. Pandare somewhat offended to hear these stumpes,
began to charge the Knight with his iron Mace, and he change blows with his
good sword, so that between them passed such notable behavior in fight, that
Dramusiande, Don Edward, and Primaleon, commended marueilously the hardness of
the Knight of the Savage man. At length, such was the good Fortune of this
noble knight, that he brought Pandare on both his knees, when he had sent his
head from his shonlders, had not the Giant Alligan come presently upon him.

Then was he constrained to leave Pandare and award the mighty blows Alligan
charged him furiously withal: but such was the great foresight of the knight
of the Savage man, that he still bare off his strokes, and would not strike
again, as well to refresh his own weariness, as to make the giant somewhat
stract with his long labor. In fine, when he perceived his time, and saw
Alligan was out of breath with his long continuance in fight, he came upon him
with such fresh delivery blows, and followed his enterprise with such
exceeding courage, that he brought stout Alligan likewise under his obeisance.

This Combat was so well esteemed of all the Princes, and so greatly
displeased the mind of Dramusiande, that he approached to the knight of the
Savage man as, thus. The good fortune (Sir knight) which has returned you
victory, beyond our expectations, or your good assurance: me thinks should
move you have respect to your bleeding wounds, which may more ^^damage your
person, then all the peril you have sustained in fight.

Wherefore, let me entreat you, to finish your desire in this travail, and to
strive no farther, but yield your self to my friendship, and by my Sword I
swear, to use you in such honorable manner, as shall be for your health, and
mine own honesty.

If you refuse this my courteous offer, and a private pride shall cause you run
without regard, I shall be urged to that, I would be very loath to do, which is
to give you a fresh assault, when the estate you are in, does rather require
ease, which may be to your grievous detriment, and to my great dishonor.

These courteous words (answered the Knight of the Sauageman) would serve very
well to a faint hearted man, or to him that is so sore as I in body, but not
to him that is so sound in mind: wherefore I am to thank you for your great
pity, and would accept it, if that I did conceive any such pleasure. But as
it seems to me, you are the Lord of this fair Castle, that at this present
does deaine the flower of all Chivalry: wherefore I would gladly have you to
understand, that though my limbs be not in their best estate, my heart is in
such sure hope, that my life shall purchase their present delivery.

Dramusiande seeing he scorned his good will, and esteemd his words of no
better account, presently returned him this raplie. I perceive Sir, it is high
time to cause you know what benefit you might have received, in following my
Counsel, and what danger shall happen through your own folly, so arming his
head, and commanding his Sword and Sheeld to be brought him, he charged the
Knight of the Savage man in this manner. I would wish to join combat with a
Knight so hardy as your self, so that the disposition of his health were such,
as my blows might be well welcome unto him. But seeing your stomach so good,
yet your body sore hurt and ouertrauailed, I have small pleasure to be thought
I would deal with such a one, saving that your fond words does withhold my
pity, and denying my gentle offer, does urge me to exact the uttermost.

The knight of the Savage man would make him no answer, but taking up the
Shield of the Giant Alligan, which was in much more better estate then his
own, he advanced himself to Dramusiande, showing such agility and nimble
behavior in his fight, as though he had not been so wearied as he was, but yet
his dexterity, and magnanimity of courage, had not the power to abash the
hardy Dramusiande: who was both esteemed and aporooued to been of the
strongest knights under the Sun.

The Knight of the Savage man, found this enterprise the worst that he had yet
attempted, the happy ending whereof, were sufficient to win him perpetual
renown: wherefore he did endeavor himself with such goodforesight, as all the
Princes received good occasion to commend his valor. For oftentimes the
desired hope of victory, does encourage one to adventure, the greatest danger:
so that receiving but a good opinion of success, does so animate the courage,
that he follows his purpose with an invincible pretense. Don Edward and
Primaleo^ maruelling at this hautie exployte, seeing Dramusiande, never gave
blow, but it was so fiercely rewarded, verily supposed the perfect nobility of
Knighthood, to remain in thy never dismayning knight of the Savage man, which
after a long times fight, caused Dramusiande to use these speeces. Trust me
(sir Knight) the perfect proof of your infallible mind, constrains me to
lament your present approaching danger: in that the grievous expense of your
blood, cannot long sustain you from the unhappy death. But if Fortune appoint
the ruin of your days at my hands, and that (as it is no other like) but it
must of force be so, I shall condemn my self of monstrous ingratitude, in
that such a hardy knight shall be cut off in his flowring years. Wherefore let
me entreat you, that our Combat may here take conclusion, and to venture no
more the danger being imminent, which it self will may not suffer you to
grant, yet the ruin of your Armor, the sore wounds on your body, and the
blood that has colored the ground under your feet, me thinks should provoke
you to satisfy my request. Good counsel is better late followed then never,
where it tends to the advancement of honor, and maintenance of the spotless
estate of knighthood.

Sir (quoth the knight of the Savage man) your request does ask such a scope
of argument, that I rather desire to renew the Combat then consume time in
making you answer. And hereupon assure your self, that neither your eloquence
can allude, or your force compel to hinder my enterprise, but I will have it,
or else resign thee my carcass, to glut up thy greedy mind. With these words
they went to it again cheerely, delivering such forceable blows to each other,
that in short time their weakness withdrew them from any more hurt. For
though the Knight of the Savage man were in great debilitie, Dramusiande was
brought into as great danger, that the Redants knew not to whom to impute the
most hurt: so that the Giant would gladly that the knight had made acception of
his offer, because he felt himself to have received small advantage in this
fight.

But no marvel if the Knight of the Savage man were weak indeed, having
iusted and dealt with so many before, net did he always bear such a courage,
that they who beheld him supposed the contrary. Primaleon and the Prince Don
Edward came, and were uery desirous to separate them asunder, because they
feared the death of the knight of the Savage man, but they labored in vain,
for no persuasion could withhold the hardy knight, who saluted Dramusiande with
such a mighty stroke upon the Crest, that he cleft his Helmet, and wounded him
very dangerously on the head, wherewith his sword brake in a great many pieces.
Dramusiande seeing his sword was broken, and himself lie likewise unprovided
of weapon, came and caught the knight about the midst, who received him in
like manner, that they threw each other to the ground with great violence, being
judged as men deprived of their lives, so that it could not be said whether had
the victory.

The night approaching very hastily on, the Sage Aliart knowing of this Combat,
addressed himself thither in all the have, who made such an obscurity over all
the Valley, as he had done before at the other battle, in which darkness he
departed, and the knight of the Savage man was taken away, no body could
imagine how or which way, so that theregardants, who thought to have carried him
into the Castle, could not tell themselves in what he was gone.

Dramusiand was conducted into his fortress, where he was diligently tended by
his Aunt Eutropa, who fearing least at thie time, the knights would seek
means to escape away, she locked them into a great hall all together, where
they had no light but what came in at a very small window, at which likewise
they received such things as was needful for them. In this order she used
them till Dramusiande and his Giants had recouerd their former health, when she
brought them forth again into their accustomed chambers, greatly displeased
that Dramusiande would behave himself so friendly to them as he did. But such
was the conference he reposed in their oath, in that they would not attempt any
thing contrary to his will and pleasure, that he exempted all discourtesie from
his heart, continuing his wonted friendlinesse to the captive Princes.

For on this he always grounded his persuasion, that it were a point of
marvelous ingratitude, to break the vowed oath a man had made to his friend,
and he that would so greatly dishonor himself, should be esteemed and
reputed as one that alienated and estranged himself from the course of all
virtuous deeds.

CHAP. XL.
How the Knight of Fortune, staying in the house of the ancient Gentleman his
Host, had his wounds very well recovered, and his body established in sound
and perfect estate of health, which moved him to depart from thence, to seek
the adventure of great Britain. And how in travail he arrived at a little
Pauillion, wherein he found the Knight of the Savage man, lying sore wounded on
a Knightly Beer, and Don Rosiran de la Bronde, standing by him, using many
sorrowful and heavy lamentations. And how the Knight of Fortune, by marks he
perceived in the face of the Knight of the Savage man, and by conferring with
Don Rosiran about him, had knowledge that it was his brother Florian, whom when
he thought to take further view of, was presently carried away by the art of
the Sage Aliart. And how the Knight of Fortune departed on his journey, and Don
Rosiran, carried the Armor of the knight of the Savage man to the English
Court, where he manifested the death of the hardy knight, and presented his
Armor to the aged King Frederick, who caused it to be placed in the House of
Ensigns, amongst the Armor of many famous Knights.
THe renowed Knight of Fortune, (whom through occasion we left to speak of)
remained so long in the house of the ancient Gentleman his Host, that his
wounds were perfectly healed, and his body well able to endure the bearing of
Armor. When Siluian had provided him new Armor like his other, and a shield
with his usual devise of Fortune upon it, he departed which way he thought
soonest to find the Castle of Dramusiande. At last arriving at the foot of a
mountain, he espied a little Pauillion, wherein were a great many of lighted
torches, which because the dark night was somewhat entered, gave a very great
show of light to the place. This strange sight moved him to take his way
thither, as well to see what it might be, as to drive other fancies away that
greatly annoyed his mind. When he was entered the Pauillion, he perceived two
seemly Knights, the one lying on a sumptuous Beer, more like a dead then a
living creature, the other making great lamentations, and pittious bemonings
over him, whom he presently know to be Don Rosiran de la Bronde, the Cousin
of the aged King of England, which made him suppose that the Knight on the
Beer, was some man of great authority and estimation. Coming to Don Rosian,
and saluting him very friendly, he presently had knowledge of him, that he was
the noble Knight of Fortune, to whom he began in this manner following.

Sir, I see that Fortune has greatly favored you, in permitting you to see
the dead body of the Knight of the Savage man, to whom you were always a mortal
enemy, yet could not be he that should vanquish him in fight. The Knight of
Fortune hearing the words of Don Rosiran, was overcome with such heaviness,
that the tears trickled down his cheeks, when he began to frame his answer
thus.

Indeed, never had I more desire to prevail against any man, then my mind
labored to conqure this hardy Knight, whose prowess is no less bruted every
where, then his knightly behavior deserved. But now since death so has cut
off this famed Champion, whom I labored to know, yet could never attain my
wish, I will end the enmity that has bin between us, with so sharp a revenge
of his untimely death, as were it possible for his ghost to embrace my
friendship, himself should perceive his enemy, is become as dear a friend to
him as ever was any. Wherefore of all courtesy, show me the place where he
has received this misfortune, and I will die on him that has been the death of
so good a knight.

Trust me Sir (answered Don Rosiram) my arrival has been here so lately, that
I am ignorant how he happened to this mischance: nevertheless I was advertised
by one,) who departed not long before you came) that at the Castle of
Dramusiande, where all the knights remain that have bin so long lost, he has
sustained this unfortunate, hap, yet not without iniuring him and his train,
as the memory of this knight, shall remain to him while he lives, albeit
Fortune would not suffer him to end the adventure.

The knight of Fortune greatly displeased, to see this knight brought into such
extremity, began to conceive better estimation of the adventure, then ever he
did before, albeit he was greatly abashed, that so good a Knight had failed in
that enterprise. Then began he to behold the Armor that lay there by him,
being defaced and hacked in so many places, which urged him to commend them
that had the strength to use it so, but more the man that had the might to
resist such an extreme danger: whereupon he say. I may well persuade my self,
that the hope to end this adventure is altogether lost: the Knight beeng dead,
who had the puissance to finish all other. At these words he approached to the
Beer, to see if he were clean deprived of life, when lifting up the sheet of
Silk, he perceived his countenance so grim and hardy, as it was at the time he
entered Cambate with him. As he stood wishly beholding this noble Knight, his
heart began greatly to conceive an inward joy, and his mind began to muse on a
thousand matters. But chiefly the less of his Brother was his greatest
thought, whom he suspected this knight to be, by diverse marks he knew ie his
face, for the better assurance whereof, he called Siluian, willing him to
behold the knight, and report as his mind served, his answer was comfortable
to his Masters opi^ions, giving credit that it was Florian, who returned not
after he departed with the Lions. Upon this persuasion, the knight of Fortune
desired Don Rosiran, to certify him of the name of the Knight of the Savage
man, insomuch as it should neither disprofite the one nor the other, but that
he might resolve him in a matter, which caused him to use great suspicion, to
which words Don Rosiran thus answered.

Sir Knight, in what I may or can satisfy your desire, assure your self I
will do my best. As concerning his name, neither my self, nor any other that I
know, were so happy as at any time to understand it, for that he used no other
name, then to call himself the Fatherless. But in times past, he has often
declared unto me, that the best friend he had remembrance off, was a Savage
man, who nourished him a long time, and whom he supposed to be his Father, but
because he could not certainly assure himself thereof, he termed himself as I
have told you.

The Knight of Fortune, whose mind was maruellously revived at the words of
Don Rosiran, persuaded himself, that the knight of the Savage man, was his
Brother Florian, for which cause he offered to embrace him as he lay, but on a
sudden there entered four men, who lifting up the Beer upon their shoulders
departed away with it in very great have. The Knight of Fortune endeavoring to
follow them, they willed him to the contrary, giving him to understand, that
such good provision should be used to him, as if the Divine bounty would agree
thereto, his life would be preserved, and his estate recomforted. With this
persuasion he^ returned to Don Rosiran, to know which way he intended to
travail, because he had determined himself, to go seek the place where this
good knight had been so ill handled, and revenge his cause, though it were the
loss of his own life. Sir (quoth Don Rosiran) I mean presently to take my
way toward London, where I will present the armor of my dear Friend, to the
king mine Uncle (at whose hands he received the order of knighthood) that it
may be reserved in such a place, where the remembrance of his deeds done in
his life time, may eternize the memory of his unfortunate death. With this
answer, the knight of Fortune was very well pleased, desiring if he could
show him the way to the Castle of the Giant Dramusiande, to whom Don Rosiran
replied. Credit me Sir, I think few or none can accomplish your demand, such
incantations and exorcismes are spread over all the ways, but as it should
seem by this good knight, it cannot be far hence, as you might judge by his
wounds.

Thus with sundry embracings they departed, the knight of Fortune which way
pleased him, and Don Rosian with all speed rode to London, bearing before him
the Armor of the Knight of the Savage man, which he could not put upon his
body, because it was so cruelly martired. Being come to the court, he found the
king sitting very solitary, for want of the noble knights that were wont to
keep him company: and coming into his presence, with dutiful reverence he
began in this manner. Most gracious sovereign, I neither thought my heart in
quiet, nor the time so happy as it should be, till I had presented your
Majesty, with the Armor of the courageous knight of the Savage man, whereby
you may perceive (although the more misfortune) he maintained his life in
honor, and with Fame ended his days in the face of Fortune, proouing himself
no less then he was, the man that deserved most the name of a Champion, And in
reward of his taken pains, he craves no more of your Majesty, but that his
Armor may beautify some place of honor, to witness the virtuous behavior
he was wont to employ it in.

After he had certified the King of the whole request, he declared at large
the adventures of this hardy knight, against the Giant Dramusiande, and his
noble Company, not forgetting to tell him, how he met the knight of Fortune,
at the Pauillion, who took such great grief for this mishappe, that he is
gone to revenge his death on him, and all his.

The King thinking on this froward mischance, and breaking forth into diverse
passions, expressing the great dolor of his mind, he commended the valiant
attempt of the Knight of Fortune, and bemoned the loss of his son Don Edward,
with his princely children, attributing this mishap to be procured through his
search, and how many aduenterous Knights were lost to find him. Now he began
to vespayre, that he should never hear of him again, since the Knight of the
Savage man was dead, in whom he placed sure trust for his delivery, yet again
he remembered the Knight of Fortune, judging the adventure such, as none but he
could finish. Then went he into the Chambers of the Queen, and the Princes
Flerida, showing them the Armor of the Knight of the Savage man, and by what
misfortune he had lost his life. As concerning their heaviness for these
unhappy tidings, because I will not Gentlewoman that you should conceive any
sorrow through their dealings, I refer their lamentations to your gentle
judgments.

The King commanded the armor of this good knight (to whom he gave the name
of the Fatherless) to be placed where the ancient Kings of England kept their
Armor, so that their worthy deeds should not grow into oblivion: and this
place was called the House of Ensigns, which they always used to adore their
Triumphs, and wherein was registered the perpetual renown, achieved by such,
as used their Armor to the advancement of virtue. Here was the Armor of the
valiant Marlot, and also of the aduenterous Sir Lancelot du Lake, as also of
diverse of the Knights of the round Table: in this place the Armor of the
knight of the Savage man, was royally hanged up, to witness what adventures he
had knightly discharged.

The Knight labored in devotion, to put out of memory the loss of this hardy
knight the Fatherless, setting his mind on everlasting, true and permanent
things: as for the other, as they were transitory and vain, so to their
frailty he gave them over. For Nature has bestowed so great a benefit upon
us, that she has left us judgment to discern between good and evil, and
by what means we shall purchase our eternal heritage, which is the chiefest and
best riches she could indue us withal, and the only direction wherein to
spend the whole course of my life.

CHAP. XLI.
How the Knight of Fortune being departed from Don Rosiran de la Bronde,
arrived in the Valley of Perdition, at the Castle of Dramusiande, where a
Damsel brought him the shield of the Palm Tree, which was taken from
Siluian, when he was Captive to the Giant Camboldam. And how the Knight of
Fortune Iusted with his Father the Pricne Don Edward, vanquished Pandare, and
cut the head of the Giant Alligan, entering Combat with Dramusiande, whom he
likewise conquered, setting all the captive Princes at liberty. And how an
aged man came with two Domosels, and healed the wounds ot the knight of Fortune.
AFter the knight of Fortune had taken leave of Don Rosiran de la Bronde, he
had not travailed long, before he arrived in the Valley of Perdition, when
because it was night, and he knew not well which way to take, he alighted,
sitting down at the root of a Tree, where he determined to sleep until the
next morning, but such was the grief he received, at the wounds of the knight
of the Savage man, with sundry other cogitations that tormented his mind
(being all this while ignorant, of whence or what he was, so that he could not
suffer his eyes to receive any sleep, nor his troubled thoughts to enjoy any
rest. For still desired to be at the Castle, where so many noble knights were
held as Prisoners: vowing to redeem them from that adverse estate, or he
would leave his life there, as pledge of his valor. In the morning, Siluian
brought him his steed, when presently they mounted on horseback, and rode on
which way he thought soonest to end his pretense, Eutropa having now brought
Dramusiande, and all his Knights to their woonted health, that they could bear
Armor and resist their enemy, suffered the knight of Fortune to come before
the Castle, where he perceived the knights newly come forth, making a show of
resistance if he durst offer to venture.

This sight caused him presently to couch his spear, when on sudden a
Damsel came riding on Horseback, with a shield upon her arm, and this
stayed him. sir knight, I desire you before you begin your Combat, to take
this Shield for your better defense, because this is the day you shall have most
need of it, and this day it shall stand you in cheifest steed. Here ending her
talk, and delivering him the shield immediately she departed in such great
have, that he could not have the leisure to speak unto her, or to give her
thanks for her so great courtesy. Then he delivered his Shield of Fortune to
Siluian, fastening the other upon his arm, when he knew it to be the Shield of
the Palm Tree, that was taken from Siluian, when he slew the Giant Camboldam
of Mulzella, which made him to expect some good adventure, for the words the
Damosel spoke when she took it from Siluian, how y^ she would restore it
again, when he should have most need to employ it in service. This moved him
to approve the shield, because of the speeches of the Damsel, before the
Emperor of Constantinople, when the Sage Aliart sent her, as you have heard
before: likewise because, this was the most dangerous adventure, that in all
his life time he enterprised, he could not wish for a more fit occasion, then
at this instant to make not wish for a more fit occasion, then at this instant
to make trial of his shield. Don Edward being ready provided, menaced his
courage to yt knight of Fortune, who received him, with such exquisit behauior
of fight, that Don Edward was sore hurt, but the good knight by receiving his
stroke upon the sheeld escaped the force of the lance, The knight of Fortune
upon this good luck would have entered the combat with the sword, but Pandare
coming forth of the Castle, commanded the Prince toreturne, so that he could
not satisfy his request. Don Edward entering ye castle, the knight made such
speed that he entered with him: which when Pandare perceived, he shut the gate,
and came vanting with his sword toward the good knight, who in short time
dishartned Pandare, because his blows could not pierce the sheeld, but he so
spoiled the armor of the giant that in short time he brought him under his
obeisance, being greatly commended of Dramusiand, Don Edward, and Primaleon,
for his noble exployt.

The Grecian knights had partly knowledge of him, in that some of them were at
Constantinople, when the damsel brought the sheeld, which they knew by the
beauty, and the brave device: and such was their opinion of this knight, that
if he failed to end the adventure, they doubted they should never get delivery
from that cruel Castle. Yet so great was the pleasure they conceived of him,
as they could not tell wether they should go to welcome him, or enter the
combat, and so deliver him: but seeing how he used Pandare, urged them to
believe he should have good success in this hautie enterprise.

Alligan seeing Pandare was near losing his head, came and fiercely assailed
the knight of Fortune, but he welcomed him with such a pure payment, as he
made him quickly retire to take his breath.

Dramusiande seeing Alligan so shrewdly handled, was so vexed he knew not well
what to say: for he thought it impossible to conquer this hardy knight, having
such a sheeld as could not all this while be pierced, so that he began utterly
to denounce Fortune, that had favored him so long, and would now leave him at
the last. Alligan (albeit very unwilling) began again to assail the knight:
but such was his reward for his travail, that he was brought under his
subjection, and left his head on a gage to the knight of Fortune.

When Dramusiande saw that Alligan was slain, in a great rage he called for
his Armor, vowing to execute severe revenge on the good knight, in the mean
time, the Prince Don Edward came unto him, requesting such friendship at his
hands as he would suffer him to have a sight of his face. Floraman seeing he
was unwilling to discover himself: said to him, that he ought not to deny
such a small request, to so noble a Prince as Don Edward was.

When he heard Don Edward named, who was reported to be such a singular knight
in Prowess, and for whose sake, so many valiant Princes had left their
country and kindred, to find him who was lost, none could tell where, he
caused Siluian to take off his helmet, when the Prince delighted with his
comely contenance, presently said. I hope (Sir knight) as God has endued you
with such a seemly and honorable shape so he has reserved you to finish this
perilous and strange adventure, for that your behavior does eneourage us all
to so good an opinion. Neuerthelessee, if Fortune do allow you the victory, I
desire you to use courtesy to this Giant, who prepares himself to encounter
with you, for that his gentle usage to us, does constrain me to speak so
favorable in this case. The knight of Fortune, had not not the leisure to make
him answer, because he perceived Dramusiande coming toward him, when Siluian
having armed his head, they began to charge each other very furiously, so that
now began the proof of the fight, for all that had passed before, was nothing
in respect of this present exployts.

The strokes of Dramusiande entered the knight of Fortuns sheeld, as easily as
it would have done in any other, which urged the good knight to think, that the
promise made of the sheeld was false and of no truth, seeing it failed when he
stood in most extremity. But then he persuaded himself again, that if he
gained the victory, it should not be attributed to the virtue of the sheeld,
but rather to the gotten by the valor of his person, which should be esteemed
of more renown, then to atchieue the conquest by such a provided mean.
Wherefore reposing no longer confidence in his sheelde he trusted to his
strength, and the good success he did assure himself off: using Dramusiande
in such sort, as he had little cause to boast of his bargains. But to speak
uprightly, small was the advantage on either side for they were both sore
wounded, both alike wearied, and both in great danger of the present death,
which made all the Princes heavy, and the regardants sorrowful, to see such an
unfriendly spectacle,

Dramusiande retyring to take pause, began to suspect that this was the
Knight should bring him and all his under obeysanue, of whose coming, his Aunt
Eutropa always cast a great doubt: which to prevent, he thought best to render
him some of the Princes, and so to will him leave off his enterprise: but when
he considered, that to present such a condition to his enemy, might express
his cowardice, and extinguish the good report of his woonted knightly deeds,
he determined to end his life with so good a champion, rather then to be
reproched by continual infamy.

The knight of Fortune walking up and down, communing with him self in this
manner. If do loose my life to deliver so many of my dear friends, I account
it the chiefest honor of my life, and the best adventure that ever I
enterprised. Then suddenly turning his thoughts to his fair Polinarda, in
this manner he began to utter his amourous complaints. Madam, if at any time
you respected the vowed duty of your servant, then at this time vouchsafe to
remember me in your Princely favor, so that if the victory return according as
I wish, I may manifest the honor of mine attempt, to your sovereign bounty,
by which I live, and in which I have hope to confound my enemy.

Then they began again in such wrathful manner, that all supposed there was
no other remedy, but the death of them both, such was their feeble estate, and
so great the loss of their blood, that Dramusiande was constrained to fall
down, he could no longer sustain himself, when the Knight of Fortune sat
down by him, as glad to have a little rest, he was become so faint. Don
Edward, and the other Princes came running to Dramusiande, and took off his
Helmet, that he might receive the Air, desiring the Knight of Fortune to
conteut himself with the victory, and not to work the death of the friendly
Giant, to which he answered.

Although mine intent was to part his head from his shoulders, yet will I not
at this time execute such cruelty, respecting the honor you have done me to
entreat for him, and I have done as much as my heart desired. The Princes
conducting them both into ye castle, were so diligent about the^, at their
dangerous estate required, especially to Dramusiande, who was reduced into very
weak estate.

As they were so busy about the^, they heard a great knocking at the gate,
which the prince Platir opened in all speed: where he beheld an ancient man,
apparelled after the Grecian fashion, who entered the Castle, accompanied with
two comely Damsels, carrying in their hands two golden Boxes of precious
Ointment, wherewith they enbalmed the Knight of Fortune, as also the other
Knights that had received any hurt.

The ancient man would not suffer any to be about the wounded knights, but
only the two Damsels: wherefore he commanded all the other forth of the
chamber, promising them they should recover their woonted health again. This
promise did greatly content the Princes, who desired nothing so much, as the
health of the Knight of Fortune: in that by his conquering the Giant, they had
received their former liberty again, and all the cruel Enchauntmentes that
Eutropa had practiced in the Valley of Perdition, were now fully finished, and
her power to be no more esteemed. The ancient man took his leave of the
Princes, commanding the Damsels not to depart from thence, till they had all
recovered their sound estate of health again.

The Princes did daily accompany the Knight of Fortune, and Don Edward would
often visit the Giant Dramusiande, laboring to show him great courtesy,
because he would not be ungrateful for the frienship he had found at his
hands. In this manner did the Princes pass away their time, until their
dearest friend had gained a good constitution of his body, which the Damoselles
accomplished, before they would depart from the Castle.

CHAP. XLII.
How the Princes in the Castle of the Giant Dramusiande, for joy of their
delivery by the puissance of the renowned knight of Fortune, sent Floraman the
Prince of Sardignia, to the court of the king of England, to whom, in the
presence of the Queen and Princess Flerida, he declared the joyful news of
Don Edward, as also of the other Princes that had been long time kept
prisoners. Which caused the king to send Argolant again, to the Emperor of
Constantinople, to declare the glad finding of the prince Don Edward, with his
son the noble Primaleon. And how Sir Pridos came to the English court, to
verify the Prince Floraman.
DRamusiande being thus happily overcome and remaining in such great debilitie,
as it was doubtful of his speedy recovery, the Princes would not depart from
thence, till the knight of Fortune were able to bear them company, to who^ the
Damamosels neither spared labor, nor good endeavor, so that they had good hope
in short time he should be of strength to travail with them. In the mean
time, they determined with themselves to send a Messenger to the King of
England, that he might understand the good Fortune that had happened to them,
which would make amends for the great sorrow he had sustained of a long time.

The Prince Floraman, because of his great wisdom and judgment, was
appointed by general consent to bear these glad tidings: who went into the
Armourie, belonging to the Giant Dramusiande, and put on his own Armor, which
was battered and broken, as also colored with the blood which came out of his
body in the skirmish, before he was taken prisoner into the castle. When he was
armed, he took his leave of them all, and rode in such haste that on the
second day he arrived at London, where he was very much beheld, because his
armor was so greatly bruised.

At length he came to the Court, at what time the king was ready to go on
Hunting: to whom Floraman presented himself, desirous to kiss his Graces
hand. After his Esquire had taken off his Helmet, the king had knowledge of
him, when he embraced him with these words. Certainly sir Floraman your Armor
brought into such a great alteration, does witness the great danger has been
incident to your person: which trust me is as grievous to me in beholding, as
it has been yrkosome to your self in abiding. It seems you should bring but
sorrowful tidings, being in such great mischance as it seems you have tasted:
Nevertheless, having often received such a sad reports, I can the better
endure this, therefore say on.

My gracious Lord (answered Floraman) if you would vouchsafe to return into
your Palace, where I might behold your Queen, and the Princess Flerida, I
shall discover such joyful news, as your long continuing wishes shall be now
prensently satisfied.

At these words, the King took Floraman by the hand, and walked with him to
the chamber where the Queen and princess were sitting, who welcomed him very
graciously, and used him according as his noble birth required. Floraman being
never so happy, as before this instant to have a sight of the Princess
Flerida, esteemed himself the gladdest Knight alive, to bring tidings to such
a rare Princess of beauty, then after he had done his duty, according as the
place and persons beseemed, he began to salute them with these speeches
following.

To be tedious in words (my gracious Sovereign) or to trifle the time with
long circumstances, might offend your patience to stay to hear it, and cumber
my memory tastand to show it. Wherefore to use breuity in sch a case, as you
have long desired, and at last deserved: I think it expedient considering your
heaviness, and therefore attend how it has luckily happened. Don Edward your
noble son, Primaleon with the other Princes and Knights, that have been so
long time lost, and now found at last, in remembrance of their obedient duty,
do all kiss the hand of your Majesty. Their long oppression has now obtained
a happy end, and their grievous sorrows finished with a general delight, in
that they have recovered their wonted liberty, albeit it has been bought with
a sharp resistance. It will not belong before they come themselves, for honor
and duty wills them to stay as yet, because the renowned Knight of Fortune,
whose Prowess has freede them from bondage, has not recovered such health as
may permit him to journey. Until which time, they remain in the Castle of
Dramusiande, who has kept them prisoners, till this long adventure has been
so worthily brought to end, and thus have I certified your Grace what has been
given me in charge to accomplish.

These words moved them to look on each other, doubting whether they might give
credance to the report of Floraman or no, who seeing them al in such an
amazement, as though they did hardly believe what he had said, began again to
persuade them as thus. I trust your Grace does not think, that I would presume
to manifest before you a tale of untroth, which to do, might remain a blemish
to mine honor, beside the offense unto your Grace did deserve no pardon. And
therefore I desire you, not to mistrust what I have been so bold as to
disclose, nor credit me, your noble son Don Edward is a line, and yesterday
I left him with the other Princes, for the causes which I have already declared.

The king perceiving the earnest protestations of the Prince Floraman, came to
him, and embraced him with these words. I have that opinion (Sir Floraman) in
you, that you would not dalude us with any false report, yet blame not my
hardness of belief, because I have been so often certified of tidings, which
gave an impossibility to what you have declared, so that for this cause I was
filled with the more suspect. Nevertheless, yet such is the confidence I
repose in you, and such is the gravity that accompanies your daily attempts,
that I am resolved of your joyful tidings, and give you a thousand thanks for
your employed pain, then which nothing can be more acceptable to me, nor any
thing more welcome then these long desired tidings.

The Queen and the Princess withdrew themselves into a Chamber, manifesting
such ioyfall distourses to each other, as might witness their great
contentation, yea such were the several motions of gladness, that took place
within their sorrowing minds, as themselves had not power to express it, nor
I the leisure to declare it: The king was desirous to know, by whom Don Edward
and the other Princes, had been so long time kept Prisoners, as also how the
knight of Fortune behaved himself, in that so many had ventured, yet none so
happy to prevail as he. Floraman rehearsed the whole state of their
imprisonment, from the first to the last, with the continuance of accidents
happening in that time: but when he declared the last combat of the knight of
Fortune, against the Giant Dramusiand, the king was taken with a marvelous
astonishment which urged him to enter into these speeches.

Certainly, the war that the Giant Frenaque made against my father, has been
the cause that all this mischief and adverse mishaps has chanced: so that my
life had likewise come into danger, had not God in mercy used more respect unto
me: but tell me Sir Floraman, is the Giant Dramusian de yet living?

Certes my good Lord (answered Floman) I left him in very grievous and
doubtful estate of health, and your son as careful for his welfare, as he
is for his own prospertie, and he desires your Grace, at such time as he
shall come to your court that you would entertain him as gently as you will
receive himself, so great is the affection of your son to him, and surely his
behavior has deserved no less.

The King well pleased with this report, promised to fulfill the desire of his
Son in any thing: and so he went to the Chamber of the Princess Flerida, to
whom he rehearsed all the talk that had passed between him and the Prince
Floraman.

These news were so blazed through the City of London, that many came to
welcome the Prince Floraman, and many took the way to the Castle of the Giant
Dramusiande, showing such ioyfulnesse for recovery of their lost Prince, that
the passed sorrow was nothing thought upon. The gladness of the Citizens
being understood by the Princess Flerida, exiled from her heart all her former
fear, and made herb^ more conversant with the Courtly company, then of long
time she had been, and would sit talking with such as returned from the
Giants Castle, witnessing that the Prince Floraman had before declared.

The King thought good, to give knowledge of this happy chance, to the Emperor
Palmerin of Constantinople, and calling Argolant (who had been Ambassador
thither before) gave him his commandment following. Because you carried
tidings to the Emperor, when the great mishap befell to my Son, I am minded
you shall now go give him a cause of as great joy, as then you did of
heaviness.

Declare unto him, how my Son Don Edward, with his noble Son Primaleon, and
all the other knights that were lost, are now delivered from their Captivity,
and enjoy their former liberty again.

With this Message, Argolant armed himself, and departed speedily toward
Constantinople. Within three days after, the King desirous to see his Son
and the other Princes, determined to ride to the Castle of Dramusiande, but the
arrival of Sir Pridos, changed his mind presently: certifying him, that so
soon as the Knight of Fortune, and the Giant Dramusiande were able to abide
travail, they would not stay, but come to the Court with all the speed they
might.

The King embraced sir Pridos, and conducted him to the chamber of the Princes
Flerida: who rejoiced greatly to see him, but more gladly would have had sight
of her husband Don Edward, whom till she saw, she thought all their words to
be but tales and fables.

CHAP. XLIII.
How the Damsels, having cured the wounds of the Knight of Fortune, and the
Giant Dramusiande, took their leave and departed to the ancient man again.
And how Don Edward with all the Princes, left the Castle and came to London,
where they were royally welcomed by the King Frederick.
OFtentimes would the Prince Don Edward, with his company of renowned Knights,
visit the Knight of Fortune: until at last they had attained such strength,
as they could well endure to bear Armor, when he concluded to abandon the
Foretresse, but would appoint such a knight to gouernoit, as should render it
into his hands, when he were willing to receive it. And to Eutropa (albeit her
discourteous dealings deserved small favor, her Nephewe being vanquished) he
would give her another Castle, as well to manifest his noble mind, which had
the power to pardon her extreme cruelty shown to him, as also to cause her
leave that hellish and abominable exercise of life: wherein she had not only
vexed him, but a number of Princes of great reputation. This granted, and well
esteemed by general consent, the Prince Berolde was appointed to go give her
knowledge thereof: but presently they heard such a noise in the Castle, as they
supposed it would have fallen down on their heads: beside, there arose
suddenly such a terrible darkness, as they could neither behold one another
nor had they power to abide there altogether. At last, in the air (as they
judged) they heard a grievous cry, which sounded in their ears after this
manner. Don Edward, seek not to pleasure her, who shall requite thy freendship
with great unthankfulness, nor labor thy self toward her good, whose
extreme cruel nature delights in thy grief. I am that Eutropa who all this
while has plagued thee and thy noble friends, and will continue in tormenting
thee and thine, until this world has made an end of me. I go now to the place
where I shall have leisure, to forget the injury thou have done unto me, and
power to fulfill my desire in thy continual vexation.

These words thus ended, and the Air waxing somewhat clear again, they might
perceive the Enchantresse in the Air, environed with a dark and gloomy mist
like a cloud, and and how she cut the Air with a great many fiery flashes
about her. When she was departed forth of sight, they remained in a great
amazement: yet being all glad that they were rid of her, who was so ill
affected to them.

The Damsels, who by the commandment of the ancient man, had stayed there
till the knights were perfectly rerouered, came to the Prince Don Edward, using
these words.

Good sir, give us leave now to depart: seeing the knight of Fortune, and the
Giant Dramusiande, are out of danger, and strong enough to endure the travail
of their Armor. Trust me Ladies (answered Don Edward) your great courtesies
has so severely bound me, that I might be justly reproached of ingratitude, to
suffer you depart, not using such honorable recompense as you have well
deserved. Nevertheless, such is the simpleness of this place to your worthy
desert, and so great affection to see you liberally rewarded, that if you would
vouchsafe the courtesy, to come to the English Court, or report where I may
send to your abiding, what I will do, I leave to your good opinions to report.

Sir (quoth the Damsels) the virtue which is always resident in your noble
mind, and fameth your knightly deeds throughout the whole world: that neither
Envy can blot out, nor accident of time have power to extinguish, so that we
may well be esteemed happy, who has so good a Champion to defend her honor.
As for your Princely offer, we find our deserts so simple, as we were loath to
presume in place to seek any recompense: yet if our presence at London, may
either profit you or pleasure your friends, we will be as ready to come, as
you can be desirous to wish us there. But such is now our business, that your
friends being reduced into their former estate, we must needs depart, wherefore
we desire you to vouchesafe us leave.

Ladies (quoth Don Edward) he that should seem to deny you and you not giving
consent thereto, should by his boldness with my blood, that would offer them
injury, who have deserved more then I can say. And therefore when you shall
think good to depart, you may right willingly, for here is none will gain
you, or that dare deny you. The damsels perceiving the great humanity of this
gentle Prince, failed not to give him courteous thanks according: so taking
their leave of the Knight of Fortune, with all the other Princes, they went to
the gate of the Castle, where they found two Palfrys appointed for them, and
being mounted thereon, returned to the place from whence the ancient man
brought them.

Don Edward seeing al was in good readiness, and that Dramusiande was meetely
strong-againe, he offered the castle to the knight of Fortune, who would not
refuse it upon condition, that from that day forward it might be called the
Fort of Fortune: so leaving Pompides there to keep it, they departed al toward
London, accompanied with Dramusiand, bearing the Armor wherein he had
combatted against the knight of Fortune.

The Citizens being admonished of the coming of their long lost Priuce Don
Edward, gathered themselves in such heaps in the streets, that the Princes
could hardly pass, without hurting some of them with their Horses. Some of
them preased to see the Prince Don Edward, because he had been so long absent
from them, other some to see the giant Dramusiand maruelling that the knight of
Fortune had the power to conqure him, who had subdued so many. Thus passing on,
they arrived at last at the Court, where Don Edward casting his eyes on the
princess Flerides Chamber, the tears trickled down his cheeks, remembering
how long time he had been from thence, and had not seen her, whom he most
honored and entirely loved: but seeing he was come again at last, and at his
gentle behavior should recompense what had been amiss, he quieted himself,
least any should behold his amorous passions.

King Frederick at the entrance of the Cour, came and received them all
graciously: giving them such Princely entertainment, as their nobility of
birth, and hoyourable estate required. Don Edward and Dramusiande, were the
last that presented themselves to his Majesty: where kneeling down, and
humbling himself to kiss his hand, the Prince began as follows.

My Sovereign Lord and Father, if I either have, or may find favor at your
highness hands, then let me not at this time be denied of the same, as to
entertain this Giant, not after the cruel deserts of his Father, but even as
the most courteous and friendly knight in the world. The king embracing his
son, received him in his arms from the ground: bedeawing his white any heary
Beard with abundance of tears, which through mere love he shed for the
presence of Don Edward, when he began to answer him in this manner.

What he is my son, who conceiving so great desire, as I of long time have to
see you, that could find in his heart, to deny any thing that you should
require? Then coming to Dramusiande, who endeavored to kiss his Graces hand,
embracing him in his arms, he thus began.

My intent was not to show courtesy to him, that has been the cause of my
long continuing heaviness, but the report my son has made, of your great
bounty and gentleness, has conquered the extremity that I once had sworn
to use unto you, so that he which would now offer to vex you any way, should
be enemy to me, and so not escape unpunished.

The knight of Fortune humbling himself in his presence, the King cast his
arms about his neck, with this greeting. My mind did assure me, Sir knight,
that the heavy sorrows I endured too long a time, should be ended by the
valor of your hautie deeds of Arms, who is so welcome to my Grace, as no
living creature on the earth could be more.

My sovereign Lord (answered the knight of Fortune) what I have done, has bin
through Gods appointment, whose power assisting me beyond my desert, have
finished the adventure, which no policy could otherwise bring to pass. In
honor of this happy victory, they went al to the chief Church of London, where
service was accomplished with great solemnity, and then returning to the
Palace, the Queen and the Princess Flerida, received them all with great
bounty, the knights using such courteous demeanor, as beseemed the roialty of
their persons, being right glad to have a sight of the fair Princess. While
Flerida was using courtesy to the other knights, the king lead the Queen to
the Prince Don Edward, saying, Madame, behold now your Son, for whom you have
wished so long, now may you at leisure make known unto him, the grievous
passions which for his absence you have suffered. And I desire you to
entertain these noble Princes, with as great favor as you can any way devise,
for that we are greatly bound unto them, considering the danger they have
passed, to find our Son Don Edward. Then he showed her the noble Primaleon,
to whom she went, embracing him in her arms, and gave him a sweet kiss for
his welcome. The like she did to the Prince Vernar, the king Polendos, Recinde,
and Arnedes, with all the Princes and Knights.

Then Flerida coming to her brother Primaleon, embraced him in her arms, with
these words. Let it not be offensive to you my noble brother, that I have
stayed so long, not welcomming you as I ought: for sure the glad coming of my
Lord Don Edward, made me unmindful of any other body. Your reason Sister is
allowed (answered Primaleon) and he that should blame you for it, were not
worthy to be esteemed among those that seem to profess honor and virtue.

Then the King commanded their lodgings should be presently provided, which
they found in every point so royally adorned, as they could not speak
sufficient in praise of the court of England. Thus stayed they a good while in
the English Court, every one desirous to return into their own Dominions,
more to set such things in order as their Deputies had failed in, then for any
desire they had to leave the Court of England. But because those whom they left
in charge with their kingdoms, had dealt in such order with their subjects, as
they were ready to rebel against their rightful Prince, therefore they
thought, the sooner they departed, in the less time they might allay all the
troubles again.

CHAP. XLIII.
How Trineus the Emperor of Allemaigne, hearing of the happy delivery of the
Princes, out of the Castle of Dramusiande, left the Court, and with the
Empress Agriola, travailed till he arrived in England, where he was very
royally and Princely entertained.
REport had blazed in all Countries, how the Princes and Knights that had
been so long time lost, and could not he heard off, were now at liberty, and
the adventure of great Britain fully ended. Trinens the Emperor of
Allemaigne, who had spent his days in great sorrow and grievous complaints
for his two Sons, Vernar and Polinard, now understanding that they remained
in the English Court, his heart was supprised with so great joy, that not
bewraying his intent to any, he determined to travail, till he came into
England. So accompanied with the Empress Agriola, and such knights as
beseems his royal estate to have with him: he passed through German,
where, at diverse Cities he was honorably received, and at last landed on the
Coast of England. King Frederick had knowledge of the coming of the Emperor
Trineus, wherefore he commanded the Chamber should be provided, wherein the
Empress from her childhood had talk with her, at such time as the Emperor
Palmerin and he came to present their service to the King of England. Many
noble Estates prepared to go meet him, three miles from the City of London,
and the king accompanied with Vernar and Polinard, came to receive him into the
City.

But to rehearse unto you, the royal and gracious entertainment they received
by the king, with the sumptuous and rare devises, fcamed by the Citizens to
welcome him withal, would ask a greater time, then I can well stay so long
from discoursing of our History, but so great was the kings favor, and so
liberal the expenses of his dutiful subjects, that they said within
themselves, England had no fellow. When they were come to the Palace, the
Queen and the Princess Flerida, being very gorgiously attyred, against the
coming of such a great State, received him with such royalty, as is not here
to be spoken of. With great honor they were conducted to their Chamber, all
retyring back, except Vernar and Polinard their sons: whom the Empress
commanded to stay with her, because she had a great desire to talk and
confer with them.

All the knights determined with themselves to prepare some notable shows of
pleasure, wherewith they might delight the mind of the Emperor, that he might
perceive, what loss both Christendom, and their noble Parents should have
had, if fortune had determined their continual servitude to the Giant
Dramusiande, and had not wrought the mean to grant them their liberty.

The Emperor and Agriola, passed away the time in pleasant communication, to
hear what adventures their noble Sons had passed, and yet safely to escape
such a bitter plunge, for which they both lauded Fortune, and esteemed their
age, the happiest time of their life. Then would he often declare to Agriola,
what sharp assaults he had endured in that chamber, being amorous of her love,
and bestowing his affairs in her service: wishing for the time again, wherein
he spent his flourishing youth so valiantly.

But knowing that his desire, was impossible to be receuered, he delighted to
rehearse what pleasant cenceits had passed between him and her, as well when
she was coy, as when she made acceptance of his courtesy, and showed her the
secret places of danger, which full many a time he made hazard in, when he had
desire to speak with her. But n^w considering how his ancient time had cut off
such amorous drifts as then he put in practice, between tears and pleasant
talk, he passed this remembrance in his silent thoughts, knowing that youth
must of force give place to age, and as then he had pleasure in amor^us
devises, so new to content his age with ancient discourses. And often would he
rehearse what strange and rare adventures his sons had reported, during the
time they sought for the strayed Prince, as also the pleasures of
Constantinople: which was a mean to persuade his urgent passions, and to
forsake such complaints as were bootelesse to be rehearsed.

The fair Aurora had no sooner left her old and ancient husband, and showed
her bright beams upon the earth, but that galleries and scaffolds were made
about the Tiltyard, where the knights determined to show the Emperor their
valor.

The knights of England and Allemaign, held both one side together, and the
Grecian knights maintained the other side: each one behauing themselves with
such hautie courage, that the Emperor did assign them singular commendations.
For sometime Fortune makes cheyre of a weak Champion, and allows him to be
as aduenturous as the most hardy knight: even so the weak and strong prevailed
so well together, that both sides were praised, aad the noble estates
sufficiently pleased.

CHAP. XLV.
How Argolant arrived at Constantinople, where in the presence of the Empress
Gridonia, Polinarda, and the fair Bazilia, he declard how the knight of
Fortune had delivered Don Fdward, Primaleon, and the other captive Princes, out
of the cruel Enchanted castle of Eutropa and Dramusiande.
ARgolant (who by the commandment of the king of England) was departed on his
voyage toward Constantinople, to declare unto the Emperor Palmerin, the good
success of his son Primaleon, and the other Prince endeavored himself so
well in his journey (through the help of good wind and weather) that at the
last he attained the end of his travail. And as he rode through the City, he
espied the Emperor among a great many of Soldiers, whose beard was grown so
white, with anguish of mind, and his face so wanne by reason of his continual
mourning, that he stood in doubt whether it were the Emperor or no, but that
he was certified thereof, by the people which made their recourse through the
streets. Who told him, that report was given abroad, how the Soldans of
Babylon and Persia, had gathered a mighty Army, intending to besiege their
City, which made the Emperor in his own person, to go see to the
fortifying of the walls, that his Rampires of defense might be ready to
resist the enemy, Argolant coming before the Emperor (who presently knew
him) alighted, and kneeling down, humbly kissed his hand, to whom the Emperor
thus spoke. You may see Argolant in what necessity the city of Constantinople
is now unhappily fallen, which in times past, has urged me to the opinion, that
neither wars could surplant it, treasons invade it, nor any disloyal
accident once use spite against it. But such is the alteration of times, and
so uncertain the favor of Fortune, that the famous monuments of most honor
and antiquity, are as soon subverted as the weakest defense, so that it
remains to me to say, which once I could justly say, I have been happy. For
such is the danger threatened to our estate, and so doubtful the mischance
that may suddenly annoy us, as my Subjects stand every hour in fear of
their lives, and my self in despair of mine own safety. Because I want those,
whose names in the ear of mine enemy, has carried as great estimation of hot
resistance, as they now being absent, do ouercharge me with a cold comfort.
But how fares thy Sovereign Lord, the king of ^ngland? to demand for other
tidings, were as needelesse, as I suppose them helpelesse.

If it shall like your Highness (answered Argolant) the king my Sovereign and
Lord, saluteth your imperial estate, with all happiness that he can wish, or
you possibly desire, as for my charge, if you will vouchsafe the place, where
the Empress Gridonia, and the other Ladies may be present, you shall all be
certified (I trust) to your contentations. The Emperor at these words rode
strait to his Palace, not staying till he came where the Empress, Gridonia,
and the fair Polinarda, were sitting altogether, but Argolant missing Bazilia,
wife to the Prince Vernar, began on this wise to entreat the Emperor. Let it
not be offensive to your highness, in that I trifle time so long, because I
want one here to be partner of my happy tidings, which is the fair Bazilia,
whose heart (I am right sure) thought the absence of her Lord Vernar too long.

The Emperor supposing there was some glad tidings toward, in that they
concerned not one alone, but all such as had long time been oppressed with
heaviness, and knowing likewise, the Princess Bazilia would hardly leave her
Chamber: took the pains to g^e for her himself, when being al set down
together, Argolant in this manner uttered his Embassage. As it is not unknown
to you most mighty Emperor, as also these gracious Ladies, who since that
time have endured no small oppression of heavy conceits, that at my last being
in this place, I brought the unfortunate report, which caused (as you know full
well) a grievous mishap, ensuing upon the loss of our no less famous then
redoubted Prince Don Edward, which provoked your noble son Primaleon, with a
number of valiant Princes and Knights of your court, to pursue in his search:
So now, I durst not present my self, where my former news caused such grief,
without I might bring those tidings, as should (in recompense (cause a mutual
and general gladness: which loath to conceal from you too long, thus it is.

The knight of Fortune, the myrrour of Chivalry, the only Lamp and
Lodestone, to draw the aduenterous mind to all valiant attempts, as his
exploytes in your Court against Floraman, who for his fair Altea, made the
only challenge for the supreme title of beauty, may not only remain a
witness, but as a perfect example of all worthiness, to such as shall ensue
after him, for his memory, and their learning. This worthy Champion attempted
the adventure of great Britain, where, by the Magique of Eutropa, and might
of Dramusiande, (son to the Giant Frenaque, whom you slew before your
departure forth of England) our Prince Don Edward, your son Primaleon, with a
number of Princes and noble Knights, were all this while kept as prisoners,
only to revenge the death of the aforesaid Giant Frenaque. Wherein he spedde
so happily, that (notwithstanding the cruel enchantments, dispersed over the
whole forest, and retaining the knights in such a servitude, as they might do
nothing without the consent of this wicked Eutropa) he withstood her helli^^
charms, the force of her nephew the giant, and fulfilled that hauty attempt,
which could be finished by no other. And our Prince Don Edward chancing first
into this mishap, was appointed to endure the first Just against all that came:
so that through the help of two Giants (whom the Knight of Fortune has
valiantly foiled) all the wandering Knights were caught captive in this Castle.
In fine, when this famous Conqueror had found the way to this Fortress, and
behaved himself against the resistaance with singular magnanimity: he entered
the Combat with Dramusiande, where a bloody and doubtful fight was presently
begun.

The Emperor suddenly staying Argolant at these words, in a maze and great
fear put forth this demand. Good Argolant before you proceed any further,
resolve me of a doubt, wherein the last report of your discourse has brought
me: know you where as now the knight of Fortune remains, and whether he be
alive as yet or no? for if he fare otherwise then well, my state cannot endure
without bearing him company: to which Argolant replied. At such time, my
gracious Lord, as I departed from the Realm of England, I left him in such
good disposition as himself could wish, or your Majesty desire, when every one
rejoiced for the good success he had against the Giant Dramusiande.

But may I (quoth the Emperor) upon your faith and knight heed, assure my self
of this report? If it may please you my good Lord, answered Argolant, to give
credit to my Message, then believe me, that the knight of Fortune is in good
estate of health, and has done what I have manifested before this honorable
assembly. Likewise the Forest of that disloyal Eutropa is subdued from all
her Enchantments, so that Don Edward our unfortunate Prince, Primaleon your
noble Son, and all the other captive Princes, in despite of her and the giant
Dramusiande, are relieved from their long and unhappy imprisonment. Then
turning to the Princess Bazilia, he began courteously to salute her, as thus.
It stood with good reason, fair Lady, that your presence should be partaker of
these happy tidings insomuch as you, I am sure, have suffered no small
afflictions, for the absence of your dear friend the Prince Vernar, whom I can
assure you to be in as good health as you can wish: saving that he is not here,
as you could willingly be content, and he himself, as in short time he will, I
dare awarrant you.

Gridonia ravished with the report of Argolant, was so suddenly overcome with
exceeding joy, that she caught the Princess Bazilia in her arms, (either of
them cured of one sickness) that one could hardly judge, whether their present
gladness excelled their passed grief, or in what order they received these
news, but it suffices, they had good cause to be pleasant.

The Empress came, and took either of them by the hand, conducting them into
her Oratorie, where in hearty and solemn devotions, they gave thanks to God
for this prosperous success. In the mean while, the Emperor desired Argolant
to rehearse the names of such noble Princes and Knights, as were partners in
this long captivity, which when he had heard he greatly rejoiced that the
flourishing noble minds of all Christendom, bare parts of the mishappes of the
renowned English Prince, a token of their great love and friendship, in that
they disdained not the terror of such hard misfortune, to bear him company,
whom all hautie hearts did honor. And the rather was his joy the greater,
because the knight of Fortune contained the magnanimity of courage, as
(notwithstanding all bitter brunts to threaten the contrary) he was the chosen
Champion to accomplish this rare adventure.

Now he called to remembrance, the letter sent by the Lady of the Lake, the
same day as Polendos king of Thessaly delivered him that royal present, as
also the message of the Sage Aliart, which had now discovered the full effect
of their promises. Through all the City, was presently noysed the recovery of
the Grecian Princes, which caused every one to make small account, of the
presumptuous brags of the Soldanes of Babylon and Persia, in that they judged
themselves under the surest defense that might be, now they had obtained those,
whom they ever esteemed. The Emperor causing Argolant to be brought to his
chamber, went straight to the Closet of the Empress, where he rehearsed all
that Argolant had declared, as concerning the success of the knight of Fortune.

Argolant departing on the next morning, was desired by the Emperor, to will
the knight of Fortune make have unto Constantinople, because he had a great
desire to see him. And now ye Emperor with all his court was endued with as
great joy, as he conceived sorrow at his departure, which he had good cause to
do, having lost his cheifest defense, in the absence of the Princes and
knights, that were kept prisoners in the Castle of Dramusiande, by the accursed
means of the Enchantresse Eutropa, and now possessing the freedom of his
loss, he might well esteem the volour of this hardy knight. But such are the
changes and mutabilities of Fortune, who when the heart is drowned in grief
past any hope, she sends a happy success, to requite the former mischance,
and likewise, where most pleasure has continual residence, there she soonest
provides the greatest mishap.

CHAP. XLV.
How the English knights and the Grecian knights, in honor of the Emperor
Trineus and the fair Agriola, enterprised a brave Tournament, wherein each one
behaved himself very valiantly. And how three strange knights arrived there,
whose noble behavior urged the royal assembly to great admiration.
EIght days after that the Emperor Trin^us was arrived at Court, the knights
among themselves determined a triumph, for which cause, the Tiltyard had many
scaffolds and galleries built about it, that they might the better behold this
hauty attempt. When the Emperor with the fair Agriola, the king Frederick,
the Queen, the Princess Flerida, Don Edward, Primaleon, with the other noble
Ladies and gentlemen of the Court, were come to the place appointed for them to
see this Tournament, the English knights entered the lists, where they meant to
manifest the affection they bare to their Ladies, that in honor of their
favors, they feared not to hazard the uttermost of their lives.

After them entered the Grecian knights, every one bravely mounted, and attired
in fair new complete Armor, which graced with their persons maruellously, the
Prince Gracian by their general consent, was chosen Captain, to whom they
referred the state of their conduct for that day, because Palmerin of England
would not enter the Ioust against his friends, left his valor should turn to
their disadvantage.

At the sound of the Trumpet they all prepared themselves encountering one
another with such knightly courage, that the Estates presents, with such a
whole multitude of people, attributed great commendation to this hardy exployt,
for that they dismounted one another on either side, as it was doubtful to say
which company were likest of victory.

Gracian ran fiercely against Eutrope of Beltran, an English knight of great
strength, and very well esteemed, but Fortune turned her back toward him that
day, so that he could not withstand the knightly puissance of the French
Prince. Platir encountered with Normant the Proud, and gave him such a cold
welcome, that they were feign to carry him forth of the field.

In like manner Carlente sped, at the hands of the Prince Berolde, and
consequently the English knights (albeit their deeds did justly merit eternal
commendations, both at the Tilte and Tourney) were urged to the repulse,
because the Grecian knights were the stronger side.

Berolde breaking through the ranks, using such singular behavior in all his
attempts, as was greatly liked of the Regardants, came to Clariball of
Hungaria, who settled themselves stoutly against each other, that they endured
both a doutfull and a dangerous fight, neither having the advantage of the
other, but such an equal condition passing between them, as the Emperor with
all the royal company were greatly affected therewith.

The king Recinde (albeit the sharp strokes his Son received, urged him to
take it some what impatiently) yet the general applause which was given unto
him, constrained him to think well of his valiant proceeding. Eutrope came now
to the assistance of Clariball, accompanied with Sir Pridos, Archirin, La^bert,
Roquendar, Rugerald, Flocandrisse, Alberraz, Lamonstrant, and Brutamont,
against whom to maintain the quarrel of the Prince Berolde, came Gracian,
Frisol, Luyman, Onistalde, Dram^an, Tenebrant, Don Rousel, and Bazilliarde, all
these behauing themselves very gallantly at Arms: yet at this brunt was too
weak, to resist the hot assaults of the valiant English Princes, which was still
maintained with fresh supply of noble minds.

They being in some doubt to gain the overthrow, suddenly entered the field,
Platir, Floraman, Francian, German of Orleance, Vernar, Polinard, with
others, so that as then began the bravery of the fight, which, as it was well
worthy, past not without notable praise, and the English Knights came still
afresh to fiercely on them, that the Grecia^ Knights were through near
constraint urged to retire.

But behold, on a sudden, to aid the Grecian Princes, there entered three
strange Knights very bravely mounted: the first of them bearing in his shield
on a ground of sand, the God Satur^us, compassed about with Stars: the second
had for his devise, in a green field, the Image of the House of Sadness: the
^hird would not have his Shield known, and therefore bare it covered.

These three seeing how the English Knights prevailed maruellously in their
resistance, couched their Spears, and ran among the thickest of them, whom to
the great danger of both sides began a fierce battle, so that Vernar,
Tremoran, Tene^rant and others, were feign to be carried out of the field, they
were so sore wounded.

In like manner were diverse of the English side, till the Re^^eite was
sounded, when the Prince Gracian with his company retired into his Camp, and
the English Knights conducted the Emperor and the King into the Palace, where
sweet music, and other delightful exercises, joined them all friends in
their former unity.

CHAP. XLVII.
How the three Knights that came to the Tournament, were known to be the
Knight of the Savage man, the Sage Aliart of the Obscure Valley, and Blandidon.
And how Aliart discovered in the presence of all the Princes, how Palmerin of
England, and Florian of the Forest, were the sons of the noble Don Edward,
and the Princes Flerida: for proof whereof, he brought the Savage man, and his
wife (who had nourished the two young Princes so long in their Cave) into their
presence, by whom this great joy was fully confirmed.
WHen the Triumph was ended, and the Emperor with King Frederick returned
into the Palace, the Tables were ready prepared, when immediately they sat
down to take their repaste, being sei^ed in such honorable and comely order,
as the princes were greatly in love with the court of England. Against supper
was done, the King gave in charge, that the Knights should prepare themselves
to the dancing: which done, a sumptuous Banquet should presently be served on
the tables.

The Dancing and the Banquet finished, and they sitting pleasantly ieasting one
with another, they entered the Hall the three Knights, who had behaved
themselves so bravely in the Tournament. Many desired to come near them,
because they would know of whence they were: but to hinder their intents, such
a mist on a sudden arose in the Hall, as the lights were dimmed, the Torches
burned very scarcely, and the Ladies being dismayed, caught their Knights in
their Arms.

To put them out of this fear, the mist departed, and the Hall was as clear
as it was before, when straight way they beheld in the midst, a Lion and a
Tiger enduring a great fight together, and to set them at unity, there entered
a fair Damsel with a golden rod in her hand, wherewith she touched them
both, and they humbled themselves at her feet. This done, she departed, and
they arose again in the form of two fierce and untamed Bulls, which caused
such an astonishment to all the beholders, that they wished themselves to be
forth of the Hall. But the Knights seeing their Ladies so greatly discouraged,
persuaded them that it was but some devise, artificially provided for the
delight of the Emperor: but they would hardly believe them, because the two
Bulls fought so vehemently the one against the other, and being ouercharged
with wearines of fight, fell to the ground, breathing from their mouths an
horrible and ougly black smoke, as was before.

The Hall avoided of all these accidents, and in the same estate it was at
first, they might behold that three Knights, with their heads unarmed, so that
he, who would not have his shield known, was found to be the gentle Knight of
the Savage man: who presently went to the king, and kneeling down, kissed his
hand, with these words. My gracious Sovereign, I earnestly entreat at your
hands, this Knight may receive the courteous entertainment, your Grace will
afford him at my request, for this is the Sage Aliart, your Majesty's most
affectionate servant, to whom your grief has been so displeasant, that he
thought himself not in perfect quietness, till he might manifest his humble
deuoite to your Grace.

King Frederick, who had often heard report of the Sage Aliart, by reason of
the renown and fame, was spread abroad of him, stood in a doubt how it should
be he, because his youthful years was much unlikely to embrace so great
cunning and learning, as was every where famed of him: nevertheless, giving
credit to the Knight of the Sauadge man, he embraced him with these
salutations. Certainly, sir Aliart, I am bound in duty to make good account of
you, as well for your virtuous dealings, which does justly deserve it, as also
for bringing me my Fatherless Knight, inso sound and good disposition of
health, wherein you have not only honored me, but likewise approved the
unspotted faith of your Knighthood.

My gracious Lord (answered Aliart) the desire I have to manifest the loialtie
of my service, urges me to this opinion that might I live never so long, I
could not accomplish so much as duty does require in me, respecting the great
friendship, I have found at your Graces hand undeserved. But man I under your
Sovereign pardon, presume to disclose so great a secret, as shall both
content your Highness, as also this illustrious assembly? The King supposing
some glad tidings toward, requested all the Princes to vouchsafe their audience
when being every one quietly placed to their own content, Aliart humbling
himself to the Princess Flerida, began as follows.

Madame, it were hard for me to distinguish, between your extreme griefs
passed, and the sweet solace you enjoy at this present: for albeit, this is to
be thought beyond comparison, yet in time when you were heavy, your woeful
complaints were equally as vehement, as they that were privy to their adverse
case, could easily bear with the urgent cause. But referring long discourse of
matter, you are to esteem your self highly honored, by this no less hauty
then happy, and famous Knight of Fortune, who for your sake has suffered the
annoiance of pain, in recompense of the dangerous travail you sustained for
him, at such time as you were delivered of two Children in the unfortunate
Forest, when your Lord had left you. For when the Savage man had taken him,
and this redoubted Knight, your Son Florian, his Brother, to sacrifice them
to the ravenous jaws of his greedy Lions, pity so pierced the heart of his
poor and loving wife, that she saved them from the bloody slaughter, and
nourished them as carefully, as she did this other, who is her own Child. And
Madam, let not be forgotten the words sir Pridos rehearsed unto you, (at such
time as you had lost both husband and children) which was reported to him by
the Lady Argonida: for lo at this instant her promise is accomplished, your
noble Lord Don Edward is restored, and your two lost sons safe and sound
recovered, whose Knightly valor, has sufficiently discharged the sorrow,
that then your afflicted person suffered. The Knight of Fortune, is your Son
Palmerin, to whom you gave that name, in honor of the Emperor Palmerin, your
Father, who by the means of the Knight Polendos, received your son into his
Court, when he likewise caused him to be termed by his own name.

And this aduenturous knight of the Savage man, is your other Son, which
according to the place of his birth, you called him Florian of the Forest, him
have you nourished and brought up by your motherly care, albeit he was known
to you for no other then a stranger. Thus to knit up your former joy, I
thought good to presume so far, as to make you partners of that, which was
not known to any, but only God and my self.

The Princess Flerida, and Don Edward well viewing one an other, were suddenly
ravished with such an inward joy, as it is impossible for me to give judgment
thereon: then Palmerin and Florian came and embraced each other, which moved
the king and all there present unto such delight, that they could not conceal
the great pleasure they conceived, whereupon the king entered into these words.

Trust me Sir Aliart, these news were altogether unlooked for at this present,
albeit they have been earnestly desired long before this time, but yet do me
the favor, to certify me how you are assured of that which you have given
forth for a manifest troth, it may be, here are some that dare hardly
adventure to believe it. If I should my good Lord (answered Aliart) fable in
such a case. I were well worthy such severe punishment as is due to him that
should falsely inform a Prince. But nevertheless, to give you the better
assurance thereof, mark what shall ensue, and then answer how you are
satisfied.

Then drew he forth a little Book, whereon having read a pretty while, the
Savage man and his Wife entered the Hall, who had nourished Palmerin and Florian
so long in their Cave, when presently the two Princes beholding them, went and
embraced them both with great courtesy, the the like did Siluian, who having
learned more ciuility in court, then when he remained with his Father in the
Cave (kneeled down unto them as was his duty. The Princess Flerida received
such exceeding joy, that she embraced them both very lovingly: and Palmerin
thinking it great dishonor to him, to be unmindful of his nurses that had
used him so gently, took them by the hand, and brought them before the King:
giving him to understand, that they twain had deserved a good reward, in
recompense of the great affection his Brother and he had found at their hands.

The King taking them from the ground in his arms, promised that their labor
should be honorably rewarded: so lifting his eyes up to heaven, he uttered his
joy in this manner. O heavenly Father, this is the last good hap that ever I
desired to see, wherefore now if it be thy pleasure, take me out of this
miserable world, before unconstant Fortune determine any more mischance to me.
This done, he took his two Nephews, and brought them to the Princess Flerida,
before whom they humbled themselves on their knees, kissed her hand a great
many times, and she casting her arms about their neck, in tears remembered
the great danger she saw them both in, when they endured the bloody Combat, at
such time as she was feign to set them at unity.

Then Don Edward their noble Father, in remembrance of the valiant behavior,
he had seen in them both at the Castle of Dramusiande, received them in his
arms, with such courteous greetings on either part, as the joy in such a case
did urge them to manifest.

The Emperor Trineus, a partaker of this Fortunate sight, came to both the
Princes, and used many friendly speeches to them, in like manner did the
Empress Agriola, the Kings Recinde and Arnedes, with all the Princes and
Ladies, whose joys were not small for this happy success. Then Palmerin used
great courtesy to the Prince Primaleon, for that he understood him to be
father of his Lady and Mistress Polinarda, and Son to the Emperor his
Grandfather, who had vouchsaued him his honor, dnring the time he remained in
his Palace at Constantinople. The Savage man and his Wife were very graciously
entertained, who seeing the two Princes in dignity, beyond their expectations
when they were in their Cave, did greatly rejoice that Fortune had so
favorably preserved their noble lives. Palmerin seeing the time that every one
prepared themselves to their chambers, commanded Siluian to conduct his father
and mother, to a fair and rich Chamber which was provided for them. Every one
departing, the king accompanied Aliart to his Chamber, where he desired to
know, what the other knight was that came in his company? If it please your
Grace (answered Aliart) to morrow morning you shall be resolved to the
uttermost, in the mean space assure your self that he is such a one, as his
valor deserves to be remembered amongst the most renowned. Thus with a
general gladness, every one went to take their rest, forgetting all grief
that was passed before in remembrance of the fortunate success, that had
happened at this instant determination of joy.

CHAP. XLVIII.
How on the morrow, Blandidon was known, and Aliart bewraied himself and
Pompides, to be the Sons of the Prince Don Edward and Argonida the Lady of
encha^ted the Isle. And how the Emperor Trineus with the other Princes,
determined to depart from the Court of England, but were desired first to go
see Castle of the Giant Dramusiande, wherein the Princes had remained Prisoners
so long time.
THe pleasures in the Court of the aged King of England, of the Prince
Palmerin, and Don Florian his Brother, that the Citizens passed away the night
merrily, in making of great Bonefires and ringing of Bells, to manifest the joy
which they likewise conceived for this happy accident. In the morning the king
went to the chamber of the two Nephews, where he found Primaleon and the
Prince Vernar, merrily disposing themselves together: and so accompanied with
Arnedes and Recinde, they went to the chamber of the Emperor Trineus, who
being already stirring, prepared themselves to go hear divine Service, which
was accomplished with maruailous great solemnity. When they returned un to the
Palace, such was the assembly of people to see the two Princes, that they
could hardly ascend the stairs to the great hall, the people were gathered
into such a prease.

The strange Princes endcucured themselves to entertain the Sage Aliart very
honorably, so that from the hightest to the lowest he was greatly made account
of, insomuch as every one thought his labor well employed to do him service,
and every one were desir^us to question with him, how Don Florian was
guarantized of his wounds, which he had received at the Castle of Dramusiande.
When dinner was ended, they went all to the chamber of the Empress Agriola,
with whom the Queen and the Princess Flerida had dined: and the king desiring
silence when they were all placed, began in this order to the Sage Aliart.

Let it not seem displeasant unto you good Sir, that I presume to remember you
of a promise made yester-night, as also to deliver me from a doubt that I have
conceived of your self, which is (if I may request so much favor) to tell me
of whence you are, because the great cunning and science, I have heard to be in
you, does argue you are descended of some noble lineage. To which demand Aliart
presently returned this answer. I was determined (dear Sovereign) never to
bewray my self to auy: but since your Majesty has commanded me, whose words
are more of force to compel me, then any prince or potentate may or can
constrain me, I will certify you of that, which neither friend nor foe could
yet get of me. This knight whose name you are desirous to know, is called
Blandidon as concerning his birth and Parentage, the Prince Florian can at
large give you to understand, for which cause I will pass no further to
discover what he is. But as touching my self, this knight here named Pompides,
and my self are Brethren, both of us the sons of the Prince Don Edward, and
Argonida, the Lady of the Enchanted Isle, as has been affirmed to us by the
oath of diverse.

Don Edward sitting by his beloved Flerida, and loath to conceal any thing
that might profit in this case, humbling himself to the King his Father,
began as follows. Dear father, what Sir Aliart has delivered to your Grace,
I must and will avouch to be most true, they are both my Sons, wherefore I
desire you to entertain them as your Nephews. And my sweet Flerida, let it
not seen as disliked of you, because it was long before I entered acquaintance
with you: and such were the crafty devices Argonida used with me, that what
with peril of my life, and the pleasure I had also in her company, these
twain are the fruits of our long familiar labors.

The King came to them, and embraced them very lovingly, when presently Florian
(at his instant request) declared the hautis Exploytes and Knightly deeds, he
had both tried and found in the noble Blandidon. Flerida forgave her Lord Don
Edward this offense, smyling at the subtle inventions Argonida used, to gain
the desire she bare to the English prince, when immediately Aliart and Pompides
came and submitted themselves to her, whom she welcomed as heartily, as had
they been her own children, and so continued pleasantly talking with them,
till time required they should depart to their Chambers.

Palmerin of England held y^ Sage Aliart in great estimation, when he perceived
he was allied to him in kindred, so that altogether he framed his delight to be
in his company, and would not attempt any thing, but he should be privy to it.
The Triumphs and sumptuous feasts continued daily abundantly, and every
night there was Marking, Dancing, and rare devises put in execution: so that
the Grecian Knights, highly honored the Ladies of England, whose brave gesture
of Courtly entertainment, was not only esteemed of them, but as much
commended (at their return) in the Court of Constantinople.

After a long continuance of this exceeding joy, Arnedes and Recinde concluded
to depart to their kingdoms, leaving their sons to accompany the other
Princes in their pleasure: which the Emperor perceiving, determined to journey
toward Allemaigne also. But when they prepared themselves to take their leave,
Don Edward and the other Princes, desired them to vouchsafe the pains, to see
the Castle of Dramusiande, wherein so long time they had been kept as
prisoners. This request pleased the Emperor very well, so that he desired
Arnedes and Recinde to bear him company also, and then they would depart
together. Entreaty had quickly won them, so that on the morrow they departed
themselves thither, accompanied with the Ladies and Gentlemen of the English
Court, who greatly longed to see the Castle so much spoken off, that had caused
great Britain to stand in such fear, and by the prowess of the Noble
Palmerin, was brought into subjection.

CHAP. XLIX.
How the Emperor Trineus, the King of England, with all the Princes and
Ladies, rode toward the Castle of Dramusiande, where by the way, they saw the
Cave of the Savage man, wherein the two Princes had been so long time
nourished. And how all the way as they rode, the Sage Aliart presented them
with many rare and brave devises, until such time as they arrived at the
Castle. Where they met with a strange knight, who in honor of the beauty of
his Lady Miragarda, Iusted with diverse of the Princes, and departed again from
thence, unknown to any but the Sage Aliart, who discovered to Palmerin of
England his name, and whence he was.
IN the morning, the Knights, who had behaved themselves so worthily in the
triumph, providing them of new and rich Armor, made great haste, because they
would be ready to go with the Giant Drausiande, only because they would
gratify their Ladies, in bearing them company to see this Castle. At their
departure forth of London, the King by sound of Trumpet and Heralde, caused
them to be proclaimed, that no Citizens should offer to follow them, because
he had determined (being so many of themselves) that none should enter the
Castle, but the Ladies and the Knights. For that night he concluded to lie in
the Forest, and therefore sent such provision of Tents and Pauillions, that
when they were arrived there, they found every thing to their own contentment.

The Princess Flerida, was desirous to sport her self about the Forest, and
walking By the place, where she had suffered the extreme panges of her
travail, the Savage man came and humbled himself unto her, declaring how in
that place he took the two Princes from her, and nourished them in his Coue,
which was near adjoining. On this report, the knights were desirous to see his
Cave, so taking leave of the Princess, they walked with him thither: where,
after Primaleon, Maiortes, and the Soldane Bellagris, were entered, they began
every one to be greatly amazed, seeing this Cave to contain so large a breadth
and length: which made them suppose it to be in manner an intricate De dalus.
All about on the walls was hanged Tapistrie, not of Gold, Silk, Caddis, or
such manner of stuff, but the skins of Beasts, which the two Princes had
slain, very finely labored into an artificial frame, and so decked forth
the Chambers, that the Knights marueyled in so desert a place, to find such a
fair dwelling. A great while they stood debating with one another, about the
strange conceyts they perceived in this Cave, which made them to judge, that in
times past, it had been the solitary dwelling of some noble man exiled from
his Country, but therein they were greatly deceived. For this ancient edifice,
was erected by the Enchantresse Mellia, who kept that place a great while,
during the reign of the king Armace her Brother, Vrganda and she lived both at
one time, as it is rehearsed in the History of the Emperor Splandian, Son to
the valiant and most magnificient king Amadis, and the Princes Oriana his Wife,
Queen of the great Britain. When the Princes and knights had satisfied their
minds in beholding this place, they returned to the Pauillions to their
Ladies, who welcomed them all very lovingly, and Primaleon sitting down by
his sister Flerida, rehearsed to her the manner of the Cave where the two
Princes were nourished, which did not a little content her mind, in that the
place was not ruinated and put into oblivion. This night they reposed
themselves in the Forest, as honorably served, as if they had been in the
English Court, and in the morning they prepared themselves toward the Castle,
being all the way delighted with such five devises, sent by the cunning of the
Sage Aliart, that every one took great pleasure in this Princely journey.
There were Hunters who pursued wild Bores, Hearts, Bucks, and all such noble
game, and came wearily, falling down at the Ladies feet, but when they
offered to touch them, they were presently skipping on the farther side of the
River, these devises so pleased the Emperor with all the company, that they
gave great thanks to Aliart who frequented them with such pleasant pastime all the way as they rode. At last, they arrived at the Valley of Perdition, where
they had a sight of the Castle of Dramusiande, which went somewhat to the heart
of the Princess Flerida, seeing the prison wherein her loving Don Edward had
so long remained. The Emperor Trineus, and king Frederick, fell into great
commendation of the sumptuous building of the Castle, then which, they had not
often seen a fayrer: which moved the^ to entreat Dramusiande, who was the
founder of such a singular piece of workmanship: to which demand, Dramusiande
presently gave this reply. My gracious Lords, this Castle was first builded by
mine Aunt Eutropa, and through her means, it has remained thus long out of
knowledge. Trust me (said the Emperor Trineus) a Fortress of such strength
and beauty, ought not to be in the hands of one, who could employ it to such
great abuse, but commonly we see, the wicked do thrive as well as the good, and
enioyas great account in this world, as they that maintain all their actions
by justice and equity. So riding on, at last Dramusiande willed them to a
sudden stay, where he began in this manuer to unfold the cause. Me thinks I
see at the entrance of the Bridge, a seemly Knight ready appointed to the
Ioust, but I can perceive no body that offers him resistance, which makes me
supose, that he has attempted to keep this passage. At this unlooked for
accident, they stayed to behold the Knight who was very well mounted on a gray
Courser, his Armor spotted with white and black, which greatly pleased the
eyes of the beholders. In his sheeld he ba^e the naked body of a Lady, the
beauty of whose countenance was so excellently figured, that Altea (for whom
Floraman accomplished such chiualricus deeds at Constantinople) might not seem
to offer comparison to this beautiful spectacle, neither the fair Princess
Polinarda, might not presume to equal her self, with the brave shape of this
Lady, and at the lower end of this sheeld in letters of Gold was written
Miragarda.

While Princes occupied their eyes in beholding the singular form compacted in
his sheeld, they perceived his Esquire come toward them, who after he had done
his duty to them all, began to salute them with these protestations. Fair
Lords and Ladies, the noble knight my Master, whom you behold on the Bridge,
by me gives you to understand, the cause of his travails unto this place. He
is of a far country, from whence he had adventured himself (in honor of his
good fortune, and at the command of his Lady, whose humble servant he remains
at this hour) to try his knighthood at this Castle, which has been blazed
abroad to be most unfortunate.

But being here arrived, he is advertised how the Enchantment is fully
finished, and the strength of the Giant Dramusiande, with all his retinew
conquered, by the valor and hautie Prowes of a knight named Palmerin of
England, who has delivered the Princes, that were kept Captive by the cruel
means of the disloyal Eutropa, which news are most welcome unto him, in that
he desired nothing more. Yet for that he is loath to return to his Lady, being
at the place where knighthood has been tried, and he to pass back again not
approved of any: he craves to enter the Ioust with such as are disposed,
referring the Combat of the Sword, because he will adventure for pleasure.

This challenge increased such courage in the knights, that they entered into
strife who should first run with the strange knight, which the king
perceuing, returned the Esquire with this answer. My friend, tell thy Lord his
enterprise is worthy perpetual renown, and if he contain such courage in
proof, as both his Message and himself gives in show, his Lady shall have
occasion to use him, according as his valiant attempt deserves. The Esquire
receiving the kings pleasure, returned to his Lord, to whom he had no sooner
made it known, but Tremoran showed himself before the bridge, inuiting the
strange knight to the Ioust, who stayed not to accomplish his desire, but
encountering him with such a pleasant charge, that Tremoran was forced to leave
his saddle.

This chance somewhat displeased Luyman of Burgondie, who thinking to revenge
the repulse of Tremoran, was sent himself to keep him company. Belcar being
desirous to show his prowess among the young Knights, couched his Spear
against the strange Knight, who sent both Horse and man to the ground, when
presently Don Rosuell took the cause in hand, and was made pertaker of the
same mishap.

In like manner Guerin, Frisol, Blandidon, Floraman, and diverse other were
served, which moved the King Polendos unto such choler, that he would have
ventured against the strange Knight, had not the prince Don Edward persuaded
him to the contrary. Then there went a great murmuring amongst the knights,
who supposed the Sage Aliart had brought this Champion by his Art. to be a
disgrace unto all their attempts, and that he had used such means unto him, as
he might not be vanquished, but herein they greatly deceive themselves, for it
was only the noble force of the knight, which was continually animated, by
beholding the fair face of his Lady, which was so bravely proportioned in his
shield. Floraman being greatly bent against the Knight, and believing that his
victory, proceeded from the beauty of his Lady, would once more put his
Fortune in hazard, thinking the feature of his fair Altea, to be as sovereign
in authority, as the strange Miragarda, whereupon he thus began to confer
with himself.

Albeit Madame, I have suffered your name to be absent a while from my
thoughts, yet has your beauty been always extant in my memory, so that I
never vowed the title to any but you, although mishap would have urged me to
the contrary. Wherefore, at this time let your beauty so favor me, that I may
foil mine enemy, in the perfect honor of your fame.

Then they encountered one another again courageously, passing the first course
with the break of the Staff: but at the second time, Floraman and his Steed
was thrown to the ground very violently, when making recourse to his former
secret speeches, be began as thus. I perceive now Altea, that my misfortune
chances through your froward opinion of me, and that the more I attempt in
your honor, the more you repay me still with hatred, which will urge me to
forsake your service, and never assay any thing hereafter on warrant of your
courtesy.

The Emperor Trineus and all the Princes, were very sad to behold the sorrow
of Floraman, as also to see Onistalde and Pompides reduced into like mischance:
whereat the strange Knight triumphed, which Don Florian stomaking, to see his
friends on every side foiled, and the Knight to vant himself in such sort,
giving a Conge to the Empress and her Ladies, ran violently against the
strange Knight. Three times they met, yet neither preuayling against the other,
when the strange Knight looking on his Shield, and perceiving the fair face
of his Lady, to be somewhat raised with the Spear, began in this order to
talk to himself. Now can I execute my self of the dishonor I have received,
in suffering her fair face to be polluted, to whom I owe most dutiful
affection? for neither can I prevail against him that has done it, nor endure
long the Combat, I am so attached with sorrow.

At the fourth attempt, they met so furiously together, that they were both
laid along on the earth, when because the night approached so fast on, Palmerin
could not compass the mean to enter the Just, which made him suppose he
should displease his fair Polinarda, but Aliart to put him from that opinion,
he came to him with these words. Good Sir, let it not seem offensive to you,
because you have not Iusted with this Knight, for if your valor should
return him any disadvantage, your Lady and Mistress would think great
ungentleness in you. I thank you Sir Aliart (answered Palmerin) for your
courteous persuasion, in wishing me from that which might be my hurt, albeit
unknown unto me, yet by your Art made manifest to you. But may I request the
name of his knight, wherein you may make me greatly beholding to you, as also
it will cause me use more circumspection in mine attempts, wherein I only
desire to escape the anger of my Lady Polinarda, to which question, Aliart
shaped this reply.

Your courtesy is such, and so great in mine affection, that I cannot conceal
the thing, which may do you pleasure, wherefore you shall understand, that
this knight is named Florendos, who puts his noble deeds in proof, for the
honor of her, whose Image you may perceive figured on his Shield even as you
hazard all your actions, to purchase the favor of her who is your Lady, and
his Sister. At these words Palmerin embraced Aliart, giving him hearty thanks,
in that he had satisfied his earnest desire, which he vowed to keep secret,
and not discover to any.

Don Florian being mounted on Horseback again, was somewhat offended, that he
had received no better success against the strange knight, whom he perceived
with his Esquire, ryding away in great have, as loath to be known, because he
had not sped according to his hauty desire, for which cause he departed in no
small sorrow.

CHAP. L.
How after the strange knight was departed, Sage Aliart bewraied to them the
fair Miragarda. And how they entered the Castle of Dramusiande, which Palmerin
gave again to the giant his friend: who in his honor caused it to be called
the Invincible Fort of Fortune. Departing from thence, Aliart brought them to
his Castle in the Obscure Valley: where he showed them many rare and strange
devices, from whence the kings, Recinde and Arnedes, (taking their leave of the
Emperor, and the king of England) departed home into their countries. And how
in a while after the Emperor and the Princes journey from the court of England,
when as Don Edward discovered to Soldane Bellagris that Blandidon was his
son, begotten on the sorrowful Lady Pandritia.
THe strange knight being very speedy in his departure, the Emperor with the
other Princes, ceased not to commend his redoubted enterprise, greatly
desiring to know what he was, which made them very importunate so the Sage
Aliart, but they labored in vain, for he would not in this matter satisfy
their desire.

But to the Prince Primaleon he told in secret, that he was a personage of
great authority, whose valor was excellent, and his virtue equally thereto
apparent: and that the Lady whose Portraite he used in his Sheeld (to whom he
bare such affection, as he would in nothing disobey her will) causes him to
absent himself from the company of all other, till he have attained that
title which his Lady desires, and himself deserves. And to satisfy his
Ladies pleasure, he has ventured his life to arrive at this place, thinking
the adventure of Dramusiande to be reserved for him: but when he perceived it
was already finished by the Prowess of the knight, to whom he voweth his
humble service, he could not with his honor but proffer you the Ioust, to
cause you know both his bounty and courage is sufficient, to have enterprised
such a hautie and pecillous aduedture.

Then Don Eward desired him to show the name of the Damsel, to whom he had
vowed such earnest affection, whose will Aliart loath to gain say, began in
this order to answer his request. The Lady to whom this Knight has vowed his
service, is named of every one the fair Miragarda, whose face if any would
take occasion to contempleate, should behold the perfect, rare and substantial
Image of only beauty. As concerning her birth, she is daughter to the County
Arla^, and of great authority in the dominion of Spain, whose singular form
when this knight had beheld, he could not choose but thrust himself among the
pykes of hazard, insomuch as none that has seen her, could withdraw their
effections, but have adventured limme and life for her, who is beyond any in
comparison.

Trust me (said the king Recinde) I have been well acquainted with the County
himself, but as for such exquisite perfection to remain in his daughter, I
never before this time could gain the knowledge: for indeed when I left the
kingdom of Spain, she was so little that none did make account of her beauty.
Then alighting from their horses, and taking their Ladies each one by the hand,
they entered the Castle of Dramusiande, so greatly delighted with the sumptuous
building, and brave conueyance of the commodious places, the galleries and
chamber made over such little fine Brooks and Rivers, that they ^magined all
their commendations not sufficient for this place Dramusiande endeavored
himself for their entertainment, according as the time of the year, and their
sudden coming would permit him, but in such good order was every thing
disposed, with fine, neat and excellent quick dispatch, that the Princes were
very well pleased, and Dramusiande accordingly thanked.

On the next morning they concluded to depart from thence, because the
Princess Flerida was become somewhat sickly, when Palmerin delivered the
Castle again to Dramusiande, who both in reverence of his worthiness, and
memory of his own good luck, called it the Invincible Force of Fortune.
Departing thence, the Sage Aliart conducted them the way to his habitation,
frequenting them still with such singular devises, that the Ladies by their
weak nature were somewhat dismayed, but the Princes themselves maruellously
delighted.

When they were arrived at the Obscure Valley they behold the Castle of the
Sage Aliart, which was so ingeniously edified, and strengthened so sure by his
industry, that if I should stay to recite their opinions hereon, I should
weary your minds with a tedious discourse. There they stayed for the space of
four days, having such royal service by the means of Aliart, that they
supposed in their own Courts, it was impossible to be more Princely served.

Arnedes and Recinde desirous to their own Kingdoms, took their leave of the
Emperor and all the company, the one taking the way toward France, and the
other toward Spain, having no body with them, but each one an Esquire
attending on him, as for their Sons, they left them still with the other
Princes, for that their years were more fit to endure travail then as yet to
incline themselves to the ease of the world.

Then returned the Emperor and king Frederick, with the rest of their train to
the English Court, where in a while after the Emperor and the fair Agriola
took their leave likewise, when was such grief on either side for their
departure, as because your judgments is sufficient conceive, I cease to
speak of the Soldane Bellagaris and Maiores, having kissed the hands of the
king Frederick, came and embraced the prince Don Edward, for whose sake they
had left their Countries, to be partners in his imprisonment, when the Prince
accompanying them part of the way, began in this order to the Soldane
Bellagris. I trust Sir you are not of so base memory, but you remember the
pleasure, that under color of my name, you received with your your Sister in
Law Pandritia, in the realm of Lacedemonia, which for the Ladies cause, I
cannot admit into oblivion, your labors being grown to such a knightly issue.
Assure your self that this knight named Blandidon is your son, which until
this time I have kept in secret, yet thought to discover it to you when time
and place required, because you should amend the default of your faith, passed
under supposition of my self. Wherefore you brother being long since dead, and
her people sorrowful at her austere kind of life, you shall manifest your
honor to espouse her at last, beside, you shall enjoy a Princess of excellent
beauty, and a Son highly esteemed for his knightly bounty. Bellagris paused
hereon a pretty while, debating in his mind on the quality of his
enterprise, which he supposed to crave a deeper judgment, then the remembrance
of his offense which was done past, at last having remained mute for a good
space, he required the Prince Don Edward with this answer. Credit me Sir, I
was never more amazed at any thing, which either Fortune has sent me by
mischance, or mine own folly by accident, then at this report which you have
vouchsafed to disclose, being as far from my thought, as I am from my native
Country. Nevertheless, I make such estimation of Blandidon, that I account my
self happy to have such a Son, and for the affection I bear to him, I will
accomplish that, which else I never thought to have done, and hereupon I bid
you heartily farewell, vowing to send you word of my proceeding, so shortly as
possible I may.

Thus departed the Soldane Bellagris and Maiortes accompanied with Polendos,
Belcar, and Vernar, whom the love of his fair Bazilia called home to
Constantinople. Shortly after the Prince Primaleon left, he English Court,
travailing alone by himseife without any company because he meant to try the
adventures, that Fortune could any way present unto him, not sparing his
person, but would ieopard himself in the places of most peril and danger.
Knowing very well, that the life and loyalty of the courageous, ought to be
employed in their defense, whom misaduenture kept in restraint, or the terror
of the time in any sorrowful servitude.

CHAP. LI.
How Primaleon, being departed from the Court of England, arrived in the Realm
of Lacedemonia, where he intended to visit the sorrowful Lady Pandritia. And
how in the Tristfull Valley, he met with the Knight, who behaved himself so
well in the Just before the Castle of Dramusiande, on the behalf of the
beauty of his Lady Miragarda, having given himself the name of the Knight.
Where they twain entered into a dangerous Combat, till Pandritia and her
Ladies, were feign to come and set them at unity, and how Primaleon had the
knowledge, that it was his son Florendos.
PRimaleon having left the English Court, and be taken himself to the honor
of good Fortune, made little stay in any place, till he arrived in the
Kingdom of Lacedemonia, where not forgetting his last conference with the
sorrowful Lady Pandritia, as touching the manner of her solitary and Savage
kind of life, he concluded to visit her again, to try if she continued in
her former constancy.

Because some, either upon malice or misbeliefe, have reported the conditions
of women, to be lincked to inconstancy, and that no certainty might be
reposed in any of their dealings: but if they wept, it was for wantonness, if
they smilde, for subtilty, so that their tears was as full of treason, as
their pleasant conceyts, mired with spightful attempts. Which opinion
Gentlewomen, how far it is from my thought of your Noble Sex, so far I
wish disliking from you, in misconstruing any of my saying.

Long rode Primaleon, without any adventure worthy the rehearsal, till at last
being come to the Tristfull Valley, (where no knight entered, but was presently
convinced with sadness) he espied two Horses coming from the Castle of
Pandritia, one of them he knew to belong to the knight, that maintained the
Just before the Castle of Dramusiande, which made him somewhat amazed, to see
him wander without his Master. At last, casting his eye about, he espied the
knight setting behind a Tree, attyred in black Armor, and in his hand the
Shield with the Portraite of his Lady, whereto he used many amorous
complaints: which Primaleon desirous to hear, alighted, and delivering his
Horse to his Esquire, drew near unto the Knight, who was so far ravished
with beholding his Ladies counterfaite, that he perceived not the coming of
Primaleon, but thinking no body to be near, continued his discourses after
this manner.

Madame, if the desire of him, who has but once had the sight of your sweet
face, can be quallified by no means, till he come again into your presence,
how happy may they esteem themselves who not only have the continual view of
your heavenly beauty, but are partakers of your incomparable courtesy, which
being sufficient to inueigle the minds of the gods, has larger force to
entrap the heart of any earthly Gallant. How often do I embrace your Picture
with an unfeigned heart? And how after power forth my complaints in the midst
of all mishaps: living by the nobility of your name, as the Elephant does by
the Air, and rejoicing in your Shrine, when God knows I am too far from the
substance: Oh Florendos, borne to great happiness if thou esteem thy
Parentage, but brought into infinite mishaps through thine own persuasion, in
that thou do contemplate a thought without end, and beginnest to love her,
who ends in likeing thee. Well may thou call thy self Miragarda, and good
occasion had he that gave thee that name, for which my poor heart has paid
indifferently, but more shall do if thou use me with rigor.

Continuing these and a great many such like speeches, Primaleon well knew that
it was son Florendos, whose grievous passions caused him to call to memory,
the like sorrows which himself had endured, when he spent his trauayles for
the Princess Gridonia: wherefore, drawing near unto him he would not as yet
take any knowledge of him, but saluted him in these terms. Sir Knight, would
you not impart some of your greefes to him, who sorroweth to see you
ouercharged with such heaviness? Truly Sir (answered the Tristfull Knight) I
receive such contentation in my troubled thoughts, and have used them so long
to my good liking, that I would be loath any should be privy to my passions,
but only my self, to whom they are always welcome. But what are you that make
your self so hardy, as to disturb me from my contended exercise? certainly if
you dare expect a while, I will either force you to repent this discourtesie,
or bring you as a vassaile to my Lady and Mistress.

So calling his esquire to arm him, Primaleon mounted presently on horseback:
so greatly offended at his Sons words, that he would make him no answer, but
stayed his coming a pretty way from him. When the Tristfull Knight was ready
provided, and had bethought himself of his ungentle words, he came unto
Primaleon with these speeches. Sir Knight (pardon me I pray you) if I have
forgotten my self toward you, assuring you that I am sorry for the words I
gave you in my choler. Tush Sir (answered Primaleon) that is nothing to me, to
whom you may use what talk you please: but provide your self, for I am
determined to try your courage, because you would attempt to give me the dare.
At these words they couched their Spears, which were delivered on either side
with such force, that the Tristfull Knight was sent to the earth, Primaleon
bearing him company, because the girts of his Saddle were broken. Being either
of them greatly abashed, they drew their Swords, and charged one another with
very fierce strokes: Primaleon using no pity unto his son, but hacked his
armor as eagerly, as had he been his greatest enemy in the world.

By this you may perceive, that fury little regards freendship or affinity,
but is so extreme, both in the Father, and in the Child, that it stretches
beyond reason, or the limits of nature. Long was the fight, and very dangerous
on either part their armor spoiled, their bodies sore wounded, and their
strengths so much altered, that one would have supposed death to be the next
remedy.

Then withdrawing themselves to pause a little, they cast their eyes upon the
House of Sadness, the windows being covered with black, where Pandritia and
her Damsels st^^d to behold the Combat, which was a great grief to them to
see, as to the two Champions to endure it so long. Primaleon being greatly
afflicted to behold the Ladies, as also angered at the hautie courage of his
son: stayed his hand, and entered into these speeches. Sir knight, I will try
at this very instant if the Portraite of your Lady will stand you in any more
need, or the devotions that you use unto her, to deliver you out of my hand,
which if she fail you beyond your expectation, you shall know how vain it is,
to spend your time in such foolish cogitations.

Trust me sir (replied the Tristfull Knight) if I stood in need of her aid, to
make resistance against you, I think she would as willingly grant thereto, as
you are witless to move such a rash presumption, which ere long I have no
doubt, but you shall dearly know the price of.

After they had fought a good while again, and Primaleon seeing what sore
wounds he had given his son, began to rue his dangerous estate, whereupon
he used these speeches following, I think it best Sir Knight, to leave our
weapons, and for to end our Combat with some loving words: which may return to
our greater honor, then so to seek the spoil of one another life.

Not so Sir (said the Tristfull Knight) for at first you might have remedied
all this mishappe, but seeing you would not esteem of it then, my self
thinks scorn to grant it now. During the time of their talk, Pandritia came
forth of her Castle, accompanied with the Damoselles, being desirous to
pacify the dangerous strife, wherein they perceived these two Champions to
remain, so Primaleon seeing the courtesy of Pandritia, left the Tristfull
Knight, and thus saluted her. Madame, I trust ere long you shall receive more
contentation, then the grief you were in, at the first entrance of this
Castle: which cannot be more welcome to you, then it has always bin desired
of me.

Sir (answerered Pandrita) pardon me because I have no knowledge of you, but
for your good will I give you hearty thanks, being urged by the great distress I
see you in, to make entreatance that you would leave the Combat, and upon the
report of your name (if I may without blemish to mine honor) you shall enter
my Castle, where I will do the best for the relieuing your weak estate.

Credit me Madame (said Primaleon) I have so earnestly desired to do you
service, that I have not spared the travail of my person from a far
Country, to bring you such tidings, as I hope shall agree with your good
nature: and because you shall not remain in suspicion of me, I give you to
understand, that I am called Primaleon, Son to the famous Emperor of
Constantinople.

When the Tristfull Knight heard these words, he was overcome with such
extreme sorrow and heaviness, because he had entered Combat with his Father
Primaleon, that he had much ado to sustain himself: which the Prince seeing,
came to him with these words. Florendos, let no grievous motions seem to abate
your courage, for I had knowledge of you before we fell to the Combat, as for
what has passed, I frank and freely forgive, being glad that I have tried
your right to be of such reputation.

The Tristfull Knight kneeling down, and in great humility kissing his Fathers
hand, he sustained him graciously in his arms, and great were the salutations
that passed between them. Pandritia being glad to see the Prince Primaleon,
conducted them both into her House of Sadness, where they were lodged in a
goodly chamber, and their wounds attended by the Ladies, with very diligent and
loving respect.

CHAP. LII.
How Primaleon and the Tristfull knight, being healed of the wounds they had
received in the combat, by the courteous entertainment of the sorrowful Lady
Pandritia, after they had stayed there a little space (and Primaleon certifying
her of the happy delivery of the Prince Don Edward) they both departed from
thence, the Prince toward Constantinople, and the Tristful knight in his
journey toward Spain: when Pandritia likewise for these joyful ridings, left
her House of Sadness, and went to the Garden of Damsels. And how after
Primaleon, and the Prince Vernar were arrived at Constantinople, the Sultan
Bellagris, sent a Messenger to the Emperor, who gave him to understand of the
dealing of the Sultan of Babylon, who had staid his army, to contend with
certain Lords of his dominions, that rebelled, and entered into arms against
him.
FLoredos the Tristfull Knight, and his noble Father the Prince Primaleon, made
their abode for the space of certain days, in the careful Castle of the
solitary Pandritia, where they were so carefully visited and their feeble
estates so lovingly tendered, that in short time they recovered their perfect
health. In which time, Primaleon had certified her, of the prosperous success
of the Prince Don Fdward, whom she verily supposed to be dead long before: so
that she conceived such great delight in this report, as at the request of the
Prince, the left her House of Sadness, and returned to her Mansion named the
Garden of Damsels, using more pleasant conceits, then for a great while she
might suffer to think on. Primaleon having borne her company longer then
willingly he would, and declared to her the the names of the Knights that were
prisoners with Don Edward, as also the manner of their happy deliverance,
accompanied with the Tristful Knight, he took his leave of her, she being
loath they should depart so soon, but persuaded by their earnest affairs,
gave them the courtesy, and so they left her.

They twain thus ryding together, the Tristfull Knight desired his Father,
that he might leave his company, because the affection to his Lady, directed
his travail into Spain, who not denying his sons request, because himself
was minded to ride alone, to the end he might make the better proof of his
valor, embraced one another, the Tristfull Knight riding toward her, for
whose sweet sake he lived in great affliction and anguish of mind, where at
this time we will leave him, and return to the Prince Primaleon, who not
encountering any adventure, by this time is come to Constantinople, whereas full
often he wished himself, because he had heard of the Soldanes Army, which was
of such force, that it caused the whole Empire to stand in great fear.
Primaleon being entered into the City, kept close his Beuere, because he would
not be known to any: but intended to come suddenly upon his friends, which
would make him to be the better welcome. Being come to y^ Palace, and having
delivered his Horse to his Esquire, he went up into the great Hall, in the same
Armor that he used against the Tristfull Knight, which was very much defaced
with the blows he had received, causing great astonishment to all that were
present, who gave him way to come before the Emperor. Then kneeling down, and
desiring to have the Empress and the Ladies present, he would discourse (...)
his Highness, what had happened lately in England: which the Emperor desirous
to hear, yet not knowing what or who he was all this while, received him from
the ground, saying. That the honor of the place from whence he came, should
make him a great deal the better welcome: and so he conducted him to the
Empress chamber, where (by good hap) the princess Gridonia, Polinarda and
Bazilia, were present, when the Emperor took occasion to begin as thus. Fair
Ladies, this Knight comes from the Court of England, and would not declare
his message to me, until such time as he might come to your presence, before
whom he desires to show his Embassage, which I wish to be otherwise then I
think for, because of the tariance of my son Primalaon, whose absence is no
small cause of my heaviness. With that the Emperor sat down by the Ladies,
whom Primaleon began to behold very earnestly, because he perceived them grown
into great alteration, especially the Emperor his Father, whose countenance
was much changed, then when he saw him last, and the Princes Gridonia, had
greatly offended his fair face, with the continual mourning she used for the
absence of her Lord: so generally beholding them all, and staying from speaking
an indifferent long space, to the great amazing of the Emperor, as also the
company of the courtly Ladies: at last he unclasped his Beuer, and began in
this order. I desire you, my gracious father, to pardon my long silence, as
also the great time of mine absence from your royal Court, having no other
Message to present you, but the good health of your noble friends in England,
as also of your Son Primaleon, who humbles himself before your gracious
presence. The Emperor was suddenly wrapped with such an inward joy, y^ for a
great time he remained as it were in a trance, in like manner the Empress,
Gridonia, Polinarda, and all the Ladies, who came running altogether, and
embraced him with such joy, as it is impossible for me to give judgment
thereon. After he had used courtesy to them al, the Princess Bazilia came and
kissed his hand, to whom he said. Fair Sister, fear you not, your Lord Vernas
will not long abse^t himself from you, but you shall have him here right soon I
dare warrant you. Then was he unarmed, when the Emperor could not satisfy
himself, till he heard the joyful news lately chanced in England: but when
he understood, how Palmerin was son to the Prince Don Edward, and his
daughter Flerida, he received great contentation, in that he was nourished in
the company of the princess Polinarda, who concealed her joy from any one,
Dramacian excepted, to who^ she was accustomed to disclose her secrets. Great
was the pleasure for the return of Primaleon, whom the nobles and gentlemen of
the city came daily to welcome: but to their greater content, within a while
after, the Prince Vernar with a great many of the Princes and knights of
Greece, arrived at the Court, whose company was not so long desired, as now
they were joyfully and heartily embraced. In the midst of this great
triumphing and solace, a Messenger sent from the Soldane Belagris, presented
himself before the Emperor, who disclosed his message in this manner.

Illustrious Prince, the Sultan Bellagris, my Lord and master, in humble duty
kisseth the hand of your excellency, giving you to understand, that so soon as
he was arrived at his court he was advertised how the Soldon of Babilo^ having
with him a great and puissant army, prepared himself to ouerrunne your
country and Empire, and to make a general spoil of your people and Dominions,
your estate being weakened through the loss of those knights, who have left
your Court to seek the adventures of great Britain. But when he was taking
Ship, and his Army at point to hoyse their sails, word was presently brought
him, how certain Lords in his Realm, had levied a number of his own
subjects, to enter arms against him, for that they were able no longer to
suffer his oppressing tyranny. Upon this occasion he stayed his army, to bring
them in obeisance, that had been so hardy to rebel against him: which thing
he can hardly do, without the loss of 20000. Pagans, but when he shall finish
with them, thou he intends to visit you. Which that you might prevent, my
Lord thus willed me to make known unto you, wishing to see the hour of his
own death, before your imperial estate should be any way be distressed.

Gramercy my good friend (said the Emperor) at this instant I perceive the
great good will which the Soldane thy Lord has always borne unto me, to whom I
pray thee commend me with honorable thanks, protesting to do as much for him
if (as God forbid) he stand in the like need. I think it best for you to take
your rest a while, because having endured so long trauail, you cannot else
choose but be very sore labored: yet first I desire thee to rehearse, how
fares thy Lord since his coming home? My Lord (answered the Messenger) ever
since his arriual, has delighted to discourse of the strange adventures, which
not long since are brought to end in great Britain, which how rare they be,
I know your highness has heard, wherefore I need not to rehearse them. You say
true (quoth the Emperor) and assure your self that the imprisonment of the
English Prince Don Edward will cause the Castle of Dramusiande, to remain in
perpetual and renowned memory. Thus concluding their talk, the Emperor went
to the Empress chamber where, in the presence of the Ladies, he rehearsed the
Message from the Sultan Bellagris: and on the morrow the messenger departed,
bearing with him the Emperors letters to his Lord. Now was the Court and
Citizens replenished with as great joy, as before they were filled with
heaviness, when they stood in fear of the Army of the Sultan of Babylon.

CHAP. LIII.
Here the History discourses at large of the Tristfull Knight, who after he
was departed from Constantinople, in the company of the other Princes and
knights, that went to pursue the search of the Prince Don Edward, through
occasion of ill weather on the scas, landed upon the Coast of Spain. And how
in travail he came to the Castle of the Giant Almarol, where he became
enamoured of the fair Miragarda; for whose love he foiled the Giant, and kept
the passage there a great while, in the honor of her picture*
BEcause the Author, has all this while made no mention of the prince
Florendos, (who at this present terms himself the Tristfull Knight) and
endeavored himself likewise in the search of Don Edward: now as well to excuse
his own negligence, as also to favor the hard Fortune of this Knight in
travail, you shall be perfectly resolved of all his proceedings.

At such time as he departed from Constantinople, in the company of diverse
Knights who pursued the Prince Primaleon, every one taking a contrary way, his
course directed him to a haven of Sea, where imbarking himself in a Merchant
of England, time and occasion so served, that they took their departure.
Having endured so long on the seas, that they knew themselves to be within a
ken of England, on a sudden a contrary wind came upon them, and held them
in such danger between hope and fear, that at last in great hazard of their
lives, they chanced upon the Coast of Spain, where they took landing on a
Rock, which at this day is called Lisbone.

Florendos, seeing himself so far from the place, whither he directed his
course, and would have so gladly attained, rode on ouercharged with extreme
heaviness, and complaining on fortune for his unlucky travail. After he had
passed through the Province of Portingall, and by his hautie Chivalry obtained
a general commendation, he happened to come to the River Thesin, where ryding
on, and contemplating his amorous thoughts, he espied a goodly Castle situated
upon a Rock, which gave him great occasion of pleasure to behold it. This
Castle urged him to advance his course thither, but there lay a block in his
way, which was a great let to his former pretense, for under the green shade
as he rode, he perceived three Ladies of such singular beauty, as in all his
life time he supposed never to have seen the like. These Ladies continued a
very serious discourse among themselves, so that they took no heed to the
arrival of Florendos: who gave a great good liking to them all, but especially
she that sat in the midst, to whom the other twain showed very great
reverence, being of most stately beauty, as also of a singular and erquisite
behavior. But shall we say, that Florendos was enamoured at this fair
spectacle? O no, he could as well eschew it, as the Bird fast caught in the
Fowlers snare, and he liked her no better, then he that did most honor and
heartily love her: so that he changes his mirth into mones, his talk into
tears, and his whole cogitations, to a Lovers complexion: aiming the whole
course of his affection on the Lady, whose face had the power to detain his
freedom, and her behavior the operation, to be chief star within the
compass of his Sphere. Still he strove with himself, to go back again, and
shun the blaze that had set on fire his senses: but affection had hung such a
clog on his conceits, and one look brought his heart into such a Labyrinth,
that Ariadnes thread could do him no good, but only the saint that had given
him this glaunce. While he remained in these muses, such occasion the Ladies
received, that they leave the field, and walk into their Castle, which gave
such an unkind corsey to the heart of Florendos, that now his mind was in some
more outrage then before: yea, they were no sooner gone, but he fell into such
rigorous accusations against himself, partly because timeritie withheld him
from speaking to them, and then again, how necessary his cause was to have
moved speech, so that between the one and the other, he was eue^ as a man
distraught of his wits. Then began he to feel the several accidents, which
love imprinteth in the hearts of those, that delight to dally under her Banner,
and how the little son of the Goddess Citherea, can pierce more deep with his
aiming shaft, then the hardy enemy can enter with his lance: so that he
confessed himself to be in more surety when the Bullets flew about his
ears, then when Beauty had sent her charges to war against his eyes, which
was able to do more in an hour, then the other had power in the space of a
year. Well, sad as he was, he walked to the Castle, where finding the gate
shut, he fell into his former agonies: but by Fortune, casting his eyes aside,
he beheld a Sheeld hanging on the wall, wherein was lively given to view, the
Portrait of the Lady (who was mistress of his heart) which he judged to be
handled in such perfection, that it wanting nothing but in resemblance of the
person. Under this sheeld in golden letters, was artificially written the name
of Miragarda whereby Florendos verily supposed that it belonged to her who
justly deserved it: because her beauty did not only merit to be viewed, but
would likewise inuegle the hearts of the stoutest that durst conceive the
hardiness in themselves, to come to her place of abode. Yet were not those
letters placed there to that in tent or purpose, but only to advertise such
knights, as took occasion to travail that way, to be careful to themselves
for fear of the Giant Almarol, who was Lord of that Castle, and kept that
Sheeld there in the behalf of this fair Miragarda, against any knight that
durst presume to take it from thence. While Florendos stood using a thousand
amorous devotions to this singular picture, he espied the Giant to come forth
of the castle, armed with a Jack of Azier, no less fair then strong, and
mounted on a sturdy black Courser, when to Florendos he began to use these
words.

Credit me sir knight, the mystery of these letters, has gotten such a
maistery of you, that I fear you will repent when first you saw them, and that
fortune was so much your enemy to conduct you to this place. Trust me (answered
Florendos) if I did not more favor the portrait, then I stand in fear of thy
puissance, and regard more her sweet face who owes it, then I respect these
words thou use in thy ruff, I should hardly show her my desire, or give thee
thy duty, which since thou will have no forbearance but ready payment, I will
cause my sword at this time to seal thee quittance. These words, caused one
either side cruel blows with their weapons, not so dangerous to the one, but
as doubtful to the other: yet fortune favoring the Prince Florendos, brought
the Giant Almoral into such estate that he had been made shorter by the head,
had not Miragarda presently descended, who perceiving Almoral brought into
subjection, used these words to the Prince Florendos.

Sir knight, I desire you to make acceptance of the victory and bear not such
a bloody mind to desire the loss of his life, but if for my sake you will do
so much, then favor him to whom I am very much beholding, as well for his
gentleness, as also because he did guard me, and of this Fortress. Florendos
seeing he had gotten such good luck, that he might speak to her, to whom
before he durst not, requited her presently this answer.

Madame, of such force are your gracious speeches, as also the good opinion I
conceive of your seemly self, that I not only vow my heart at your command,
but also my hand to mainetaine your cause, wherefore I grant him his life,
desiring that your gentle nature would afford me the like, for that your beauty
claimed such a conquest of me, as none but your self can any way mitigate.
Miragarda giving him great thanks for his courtesy, departed into the Castle
again, accompanied with the Giant: Florendos still remaining without,
complaining on the wound he received by her beauty, and not of the hurts he
had gained through the Giant. In whose company he enterprised to keep the
sheeld of Miragarda, entering the Combat in her defense, with all the Knights
that made their journey that way, which indeed were nany, through the singular
report of her beauty, yet fortune at that instant preferring Florendos, caused
him still to remain the Conqueror.

Thus remained the Prince in extreme conflict of his love, frequencing daily
his Ladies picture, with his amorous and pensive complaints, which Miragarda
took such pleasure to behold, that she fained for to love him, only because
she would scorn at his fond and foolish dealings. But when Fame had blown
abroad the adventures of great Britain, how the knights were continually
lost in the Castle of the Giant Dramusiande: Miragarda conceiving such an
opinion of him, did earnestly request that he would take his journey thither,
persuading him that the adventure of the Fortress, was only reserved to be
finished by his valor.

Florendos loath to disobey her commandment, took upon him to crauaile, that
he arrived in England, at such time as he heard the adventure to be finished,
and the Princes were preparing themselves to come to the Castle, where on the
bridge he attended their coming, and behaved himself against them as you have
heard before. But now gentlewomen, whose rare excellency is such as you may
perceive, that it urges the gentle mind to attempt the deepest danger in your
gracious service, you shall be resolved how the fair Miragarda chanced to this
Castle, and why the Giant Almorol defended her as you have heard.

At such time as the King Recinde, was Prisoner in the enchanted Castle, and
that many Princes of Spain had betaken themselves to his search, the Queen
remained in such grievous sorrows, that nothing could move procure her to any
pleasure. Whereupon, the County Arlae presented his daughter Miragarda to the
Queen, to the end that we might receive some pleasure by her company, but the
noble Gentlemen delighted with this rare piece of beantie, enterprised Iousts
and Triumphs, only to win her to whom they were so affectioned. So that
expenses of them were so great, to do her pleasure who little regarded it, that
many of them were brought into great necessity, only by the riotous charges
her beauty set them at.

The Queen seeing her Lord so long absent from his Kingdom, and that the
noble Gentlemen of the Court, striving to excel one another in brave and rich
devises, were brought to an hard exigent of many of their livings, which was
only procured through the love of Miragarda, by the advice of the County and
her honorable Council (who pitied to see this great inconvenience) sent for
the Giant Almoral, to whom were given certain knights and Gentlewomen to
attend upon her, and he should keep her till such time as he should appoint
her Marriage, which at that instant he could not dispatch, because of the great
discord that was risen about her, amongst all the Princes and knights of the
Court. And so he sent her to the Castle of the Giant Almoral, until the
princes should be in quietness again, where in the mean time, she often used
to walk in the green feeldes for to delight her self, even as she did at the
time when Florendos come and found her, and there she lived, till some one
might relieve her from Captivity, as hereafter you shall understand how every
thing happened, during the time of her abiding there.

CHAP. LIIII.
How Palmerin departed from the Realm of England, and in his travail met with
the Prince Gracian, lying fast a sleep under a green tree, who gave him to
understand of an hard adventure, befaln to the Prince Platir and Floraman: And
how he riding to help them, met with a Damsel, who brought him to the place
where they were fighting the Combat, and there Palmerin slew Dramaco, who was
Lord of the Castle, and redeemed three Ladies from their tirannicall servitude.
SO Long remained Palmerin in the Court of the King of England with his noble
father and his friends who rejoiced in his company, that every one supposed he
would not travail again, which he could hardly keep himself from all this
while, but that the earnest entreaty of the King, with the Princes Flerida his
Mother, urged him to stay longer then gladly he would.

At last, when they perceived al means could not serve to hinder his
determination, but that he labored night and day in pursuing his pretense,
they gave consent he should depart whither pleased him, so taking his leave of
the aged King his Father, Mother, and all his Friends, who were not a little
sorrowful to enjoy his absence, he gave the^ every one a gentle Conge, and so
left them in their great heaviness. But within a while after, Don Florian
seeing his Brother Palmerin was gone, and how his honor was imbaced by staying
so long from travail: he began a fresh sadness throughout all the Court,
especially to King Frederick, whose affection was more inclined to him, the^ to
the Prince Palmerin, because he had nourished him in his Court, and therefore
his love was a great deal more surely grounded on him.

But first to discourse what happened the Prince Palmerin, who riding encumbred
with a thousand conceits, durst not take his way to Constantinople, fearing to
displease his Lady Polinarda, but remembering how near they were in affinity,
he had good hope she would make more estimation of his service. Contenting
himself with this thought, he rode on till he arrived in a very vnfertile
Valley, whose scarcity of Trees, or of any other thing delightful to the eye,
urged him to dispense with his thoughts a sudden sadness, till at last (after
he had ridden a good while) he came to a fair and mighty big Tree, whose
compass of Boughs, contained a fine and very cool shadow under it, where he
espied a Knight to lie fast asleep, having neither horse nor Esquire to bear
him company, which made him somewhat amazed, and loath to leave him in that
dangerous estate, he moved him with his lance, and these speeches. Sir Knight,
this place is not for such an one as you, to repose your weary limbs in,
because you are as uncertain of any safety, as you may assure your self it is
to be feared. The knight suddenly awaked, and setting hand to his Sword,
presently started up: When Palmerin had knowledge of him to be the Prince
Gracian, whose company was not a little welcome to him, being in such a
solitary and unfrequented place of passage, wherefore he began in these
terms following. Sir Gracian, let not my presumption be admitted to any
offense, but rather esteemed of in this sort, that I am yours any way to
command in service. Gracia^ being glad to see the Prince Palmerin, knowing that
his puissance might remedy part of his misfortune, which being willing to
disclose, he embraced the Prince in his arms, and in this order began to utter
his tale. As it is not unknown, worthy sir, how your knightly chiualry has
brought to end the adventure which was termed beyond any possibility, so know
I that your affection is inclined to aid those, whose misaduenture requiret
the help so good a Knight, and how happy your arrival at this time is, let
the spectacle you shall shortly see, remain as an undoubted and infallible
witness, which because delay in words may turn to some danger, thus it is.

If you follow on the way you see right before you, it will not be long before
you shall come to the place, where the Princes Platir and Floraman abide in
great danger, to whom you may yield maruailous friendly succor, if you make
have to them, who would gladly be so happy as to have a sight of you.

In the mean time, if Siluian will do me the favor, that I may mount up
behind him, if we come not unto you, I desire you to except us at the
Forgetful Stone, where have you no doubt but we will meet together.

Palmerin being sorry to hear these news, but highly commending his Fortune,
that he came so luckely to the aid of the two Princes, promising to fulfill
the requst of Gracian, he set Spurs to his Horse, and rode as fast as
possible he might toward them. He had not rode very long, but that he came to
a place, where two paths serving two several ways, made him to stand in a
muse which way he were best to take, but to drive him from his doubt, he espied
a Damsel come riding toward him, using such heavy clamours, as if one had
pursued her to deprive her of her life. Palmerin abashed at this unlooked for
adventure, stayed his Horse to question with her, but she perceiving his
intent, in a great fear gave him these speeches.

Good Sir offer me not the discourtesie, to be a hinderance to my happy
travail, for that you may endamage me, with greater harm if you stay me, then
the discourse of my misfortunes, can yield you any content to hear, which I
am afraid to disclose, because I doubt your valor can give me no comfort in
this great mishappe. Trust me Lady (answered Palmerin) as for my valor, I can
hardly make you any warrant of it, but so great is my desire at this instant,
that I must request you show me the cause of your grievous lamentation. Well
Sir (quoth she) since you are so desirous to understand the exextremitie of my
case, come with me, and you shall be certified hereof, as much as you can
possible crave. So riding on with her, at length he espied a goodly Castle, and
heard a great slashing and bruit of weapons, to which noise the damsel
brought him, and showed him where ten knights had settled themselves in fight
against twain, who defended them with so great policy, and charged their
enemies with such courage of mind, that in a little space they had laid fine
of them dead on the ground.

By these knights stood certain men, holding two fair and comely Ladies, with
whom they would have entered into the Castle, but that these two Knights kept
themselves still against the gate, so that it was not possible for them any way
to enter in.

Palmerin beholding the Combat very fierce on both sides, their blood cruelly
wasted, and their strengths altogether brought into great weakness, had not
stayed long before he perceived a mighey big knight to come forth of the
Castle, who was very strongly armed and mounted, with him ten well appointed
men, that guarded his person, and were very diligent about him. Aduauncing
himself, to the remainder of those that were left alive of the ten knights,
and endured still the Combat with the other twain: very Maiestically he gave
forth these words. Retire you Varlets, and let me break the bones of these
Caitifes, who have procured me to high and heavy displeasure. When Palmerin
saw the two Knights in very feeble estate, so that this fresh resistance were
the utter loss of their lives, he stepped to the knight, replying in this
manner. If thou have either regard of Knighthood, or the honorable conditions,
thou ought to use in any martial attempt, then leave them whom thou see
are too weak to resist, and provide thy self for me, who have enterprised
their quarrel.

The knight offended at these words of Palmerin, couched his spear, and ran
against each other with such puissance, that being not able to resist the
encounter, they were sent together violently to the earth. Then falling to the
combat of the Sword, the other armed men came in defense of their Lord, when
by good Fortune, the Prince Gracian came and aided them with such courageous
help, that they four assayling the knight and his companions, in the end
prevailed, and sieve them all outright, which caused the other standing by, and
seeing their Lord and his knights slain before their faces, to run into the
Castle, and betake themselves to dark Sellers and Vauts, only because they
stood in fear of losing their lives.

Palmerin seeing the field was theirs, and no body came to offer any more
resistance, he went to the Ladies, who were very pale of color, by reason of
the great fear they stood in, when the cruel Dramaco took them, seeking to
dishonor them, and to offer them what villainy he could: wherefore the Prince
in these words began to salute them.

Fair Ladies, show me I pray you the occasion why this villainous wretch
endeavored himself to your dishonor, because I am ignorant how it has
happened, yet being certified of your misfortune, came to do you the best
service I might. Platir and Floraman, when they had knowledge how it was the
Prince Palmerin, stayed the Ladies answer, coming and embracing him with great
courtesy, gave him hearty thanks for his friendly succor. Nay trust me
(answered Palmerin) give your thanks to the Prince Gracian, for I had not come
unto you at this time, if he had not declared unto me the heaviness of your
estate. Then taking the Ladies by the hang, they went into the castle, where
they found no body but two aged women, who sat wringing their hands for the
death of Dramaco: and seeing them coming in that had slain him and all his
companions, dissembled the greef which remained in their hearts, and submitted
themselves, fearing lest they should taste of the same cup themselves, only
requesting that their lives might be saved, which the renowned Palmerin of
England did presently grant them, Then were they and the Ladies brought into a
goodly Chamber, where their Esquires bound up their wounds, and made provision
to get them their strength again: but Palmerin desirous to have more knowledge
of the knight which was slain, questioned with one of the old women, who was
his mother, when she presently returned him this answer.

The Knight whom you to my grief have slain, was called Dramaco, he being my
son, and begotten by the valiant Giant Lurcon, sometime my husband: whom
Primaleon slew in Constantinople, at such time as he enterprised to revenge the
death of the famous Perrequin of Duras. Here have we long lived to our own
content, until froward Fortune conducted you hither: what more you are
desirous to hear, pardon me, for my grief will not permit me to rehearse it.
The Prince contented himself with this report, when departing from her, he
went to visit the Ladies, to understand of them, in what manner their mishaps
had chanced.

CHAP. LV.
How the Lady declared to the prince Palmerin, in what manner they were brought
to this Castle of the hardy Knight Dramaco, and how they met with the Prince
Gracian, who sent Platir and Floraman to rescue the Ladies from thence: where
Palmerin found them at the Castle, laboring still in their aduenturous
enterprise.
DRamaco and his companions being thus happily foiled, and the knights
remaining in the Castle till their wounds were healed, Palmerin determined to
depart from thence, but first he desired the Ladies, to tell him how it
happened, that they became so oppressed by this cruel Dramaco. The eldest of
the Ladies, perceiving the earnest desire of the Prince Palmerin, satisfied his
request in this manner. Worthy Sir, we are the daughters of a Lady, who
inhabiteth not far from this place in her Castle, where we lived in such
quiet content of life, and so well guarded (as we supposed) from any ensuing
danger, that we feared no mishap, being so well governed by our Lady Mother.

But as none can avoid what the destenies have ordained, but must abide the
doom of their appointed fortune: so we allowed to this great unhappiness,
have felt part of the rygour of this cruel tyrant. For he being addicted to
such a cruel nature, that the Noble he rewarded with bloody murder, fair
Ladies and Damoselles he defaced of their honor, and used all alike in his
villainous fury: he sent tent Knights to the aforesaid Castle of our Mother,
who finding us altogether unprovided of refuge at that time (insomuch as our
woonted safety gave us small cause of doubt:) without respect to her tears,
or our complaints brought us away by extreme violence.

By the way as they brought us, we met this Knight, meaning the Prince Gracian,
whom they dismounted from his Horse: and because they perceived him such a
comely Knight, they saved his life, but took his Horse, and left him on foot
to go whither him pleased, thinking scorn to accept the Combat, which by
sundry means he offered unto them. Leaving him there alone, they brought us
with them to the Castle, when these other two Knights swiftly pursuing after
us, stood our defense in such order, that they would not suffer us to be lead
into the Castle.

Then Dramaco seeing these Knights, prevailed so well against his servants,
came himself to accomplish what they could not fulfill, but then how well you
stood our friend, the happy effect remains as a substantial witness. When
Palmerin had well marked the discourse of the Lady, their great misfortune and
the monsterous cruelty of Cramaco, he rejoiced that he found Gracian in such
a luckie time, by whose means he had brought the adventure to such a good and
happy conclusion.

Then Gracian rehearsed, how in the time he stayed at the tree, Platir and
Floraman came that way (after the knights that conducted the Ladies had taken
his horse, and left him there in the order as you have heard:) to whom he
declared the mishap of the Ladies, whereupon they rid hastily after them, and
continued the Combat, as you have already heard, until such time as one of the
Ladies escaping away, met the Prince Palmerin, and brought him to defend their
oppressed cause. After they had sifted every matter, according as themselves
desired to know, the Prince Palmerin gave the Castle to both the Ladies, and
taking his farewell very gently of them all, he mounted on horseback, leaving
them at the cure of their wounds at the Castle.

The Ladies were very careful to help the Princes, who at length were brought
to their former strength: where they passed away the time pleasantly with the
Ladies, recounting the strange adventure which they had happily passed. But the
death of Dramaco coming to the ear of these Ladies mother, caused her to come
thither to see her daughters, who, when she was there arrived, gave great
thanks to the Princes for their employed pains, and gratified them with such
honor, as she could deutie expedient for the time and place.

When the Princes saw every thing in due and desent order, they determined to
depart from thence: desiring the Ladies to use courtesy to the ancient mother
of Dramaco, because she was innocent, and not culpable in his mischieeous
practices. At their request, the Ladies willing to show, that liberality is a
virtue of great commendation, gave her the castle of her son Dramaco, for
which she rewarded them with very courteous thanks.

So the Princes going into the Armoury of Dramaco, where they provided
themselves each one of a notable Armor: and from his stable likewise took
three of his fairest Steeds, which might better serve their necessity, then to
abide there, and put to no exercise. Then leaving the ladies there in the
Castle, ready to depart to their own abiding, they vowed to stay in no place,
till they had attained the City of Constantinople, where how they sped, you
shall hear more hereafter.

CHAP. LVI.
How Palmerin, after he had left the Princes and the two Ladies in the Castle,
rode on accompanied with Siluian his Esqure, til at last he arrived on the sea
shore: where finding a ship lying at Anchor, he entered into it, when presently
so son as he was in the ship, the Cable burst in the midst, and the
billows of the Seas brought the ship to a strange Island, in which Palmerin
went on land, and encountered a strange and hardy adventure as a Fountain. And
how Siluian met with Francian and Onistalde, to whom he declared the mishap of
his Master: for which cause, they betook them presently to his search. In
like manner, Siluian arriving at the Castle of the Giant Dramusiande, urged him
upon his report, to advance himself presently in travail.
WHen Palmerin was departed from the Castle, where he left the Princes, and the
Ladies with their Mother, he rode without any adventure, for the space of three
days together, till at last coming to the Sea side, which by reason of
distemperature made a great raging, he alighted and gave his Horse to Siluian,
desirous to look a while on the surges, which would drive other pensive
matters forth of his mind: Walking along on the side of a Rock, he espied a
Ship hard by him which lay at Ancker, but no Mariners nor any body else, he
could perceive in it, or near it: which made him desirous to go aboard, to
see if there were any body there, of whom he might be resolved from whence the
vessel was, and wherefore they struck on land in such an unfrequented place. A
while he stayed, supposing they had bin all gone on land, to fetch fresh water,
or such necessaries as was needful for their use: but when he saw no body came
in all that space, neither could he perceive whether any had bin gone there on
land, he prepared himself to enter the ship. But Siluian desired him to change
his mind from so fond an enterprise, and that in an adventure of no better
countenance, it was but mere folly to hazard his person, but when he saw his
words might attain no persuasion from his attempt, he suffered him to enter
the ship according to his own desire. No sooner was the prince fully entered,
but the Cable rope which held the Ship burst in the midst, when Siluian
presently cried to his master, who offered to cast himself on land again by
the boughs of y^ Trees, but all was in vain, for yt Ship lanched forth in the
deep, and with a full gale of wind rode merrily upon the surges. In short time
Palmerin had lost the sight of the shore, still thinking what fortune did intend
by this sudden adventure, and not dishartning himself, but judging all for the
best, he reposed on the mercy of God, and favor of the waves, expecting some
good issue of this unlooked for chance. Siluian remained in such he auinesse
for the loss of his master, that he thought to stay in that place, till he
had heard some tidings of him, either good or bad, but seeing that in three
days no news would happen, he read sadly from thence, leading his Masters
Horse in his hand, when he espied two knights in white Armor, beset with
Pellicans of red and Carnation color. Siluian presently knew them to be
Francian and Onistalde, who demanded of him, what was become of his master? but
when Siluian had declared the manner of his mishap, how he entered the ship, and
the Cable brake on such a sudden they feared some mischance would annoy their
dear friend, whose happiness they wished as their own health. Wherefore they
concluded that Siluian should not go strait to London, because king Frederick
would conceive great grief, if he should know of this unlucky chance, but
desired him to show them which way he thought they might soonest find him, and
on pain of death he should not go to London, nor rehearse the loss of the
Prince to any, but such a one as he knew to bear his master great affection.
Siluian promised to accomplish their pleasure, and so they departed from him,
vowing not to spare any labor by Sea or land, until they might hear of the
noble Palmerin.

Then Siluian being not fully resolved what he were best to do, took his way
strait to great Britain, where arriving at the Castle of the Giant
Dramusiande (who entertained him with kind and loving courtesy) he discovered
to him the loss of his Lord: when presently Dramusiande clapping his armor on
his back, promised never to return unto his Castle, without he might attain
the good recovery of the famous Prince. Siluian seeing the affection of the
Giant to be so great to his masters welfare, as himself could wish, presented
himself to serve him as his Esquire, till he might be so happy as to find the
Prince again: thus leave we them to the good fortune of their travail.

Return we now to the noble Palmerin of England, who enduring the sharp
brunts on the Seas, too long as he thought, at last the ship staying at the
side of a Rock, where, the Sea had left an Island which was uninhabited, and
there he forsook the ship, being very glad that he had gained the shore.
Leaving the Sea side, he betook himself to travail in a little path right
before him, which in a little while brought him into a fair green Meddow, in
the midst whereof was placed a Marble Stone of the height of a man, with an
inscription upon it: Take heed thou go this way no further. When he had read
this Posey (the Stone being placed there as he supposed, to cause all
Passengers be afraid they knew not of what,) his mind was greatly moved to
see the end of this accident, and being accompanied continually with a hauty
courage, he went on, taking great pleasure to behold the high Rocks, and the
green Trees, which spread their boughs so bravely over the path as he went.

Palmerin seeing no adventure would happen all this while, the Marble Pillar
giving such a terrifying manner of words) went on still without any fear, till
at last he was be nighted, when laying him down in the grass to take his
rest, he made his Helmet his Pillow, and so determined to sleep there for that
night. But such were the motions in his mind, that the more he thought to take
quiet rest, the farther off he was from his intent. For one while the
remembrance of his fair Polinarda presented it self as best worthy his
memory, because he had been so long absent from her, yet durst not enterprise
to come into her presence: and the^ the loss of Siluian, whose counsel always
served, as an especial remedy to his amorous assaults, and wanting his company
now in this heavy case, he was forced to utter diverse and sundry complaints.

Thus spent he all that night, in a Courtly debate between reason and his
earnest desire, the one to persuade him from that dangerous kind of travail,
and to exclude from his mind, the fond allarmes given by his fancy: the other,
how continually it wrapped him in an intricate or endless vexation of his
senses. But as often we see, Reason is subject to the amorous Desire, so the
prince not able to resist the aspiring drifts of his eger passions, resigned
both his will and wit, to follow the love and amity he had begun to his Lady
and Mistress. When he had wasted the night in this small order of rest, and
the cheerful morning delivered her fair countenance, he went on, still
musing on the words he had read upon the Pillar, which he esteemed to be flat
mockage, because he could perceive nothing that deserved such a forewarning.

But as he travailed in a fair plain field, still using his mind with his
former exercises, he came to a Fountain of singular beauty, the Pillars
whereof, was of fine wrought Azure, and the water issuing forth at the mouths
of diverse beasts very artificially made. The Prince standing a good while in a
muse at this Fountain, how so much water should ascend up such a high
Mountain, and why such a fair thing should stand in such a vacant place,
could not readily think with himself what he might judge thereon, for at the
lower end of the aforesaid Pillars, lay two cruel Tigers, and two fierce
Lions, who as he supposed kept Passengers that they should not drink at this
Fountain.

This strange sight made him somewhat abashed, and to stand in fear, that it
was some Enchantment practiced, to get him into some present danger: because
the beasts behaved themselves in such order, as though they might easily be
brought under subjection of the chain, which was of such bigness, as was
requisite to hold such furious beasts, yet were they tied at such shortness,
that they had very little scope of walking. Palmerin knew it was needles, to
ask leave to drink at this Fountain, of those that had no reason to make him
answer, albeit they were too strong in force, to offer him resistance:
wherefore he attempted to try the friendlinesse of Fortune, and to put his life
in hazard upon this adventure. Then advancing himself to taste of the water,
upon one of the Pillars in letters of Gold, was engraued these words: Behold
here the Fountain of the wished water. And going a little farther, he espied
an other, which was thus: He that has the courage to drink of this Fountain,
shall bring to end any enterprise that belongs to the advancement of Honor
and Fame: so that he shall accomplish as much, as may be comprehended in the
strength or prowess of a man. But over against it, was written these words:
Pass, and drink not. This made the Prince not a little astonished, in that as
the one gave him encouragement to approach the fountain, so the other stood in
the way to hinder his determination. But yet he concluded to try the adventure,
in that he judged it was impossible, to meet with an occasion of more hautie
enterprise.

CHAP. LVII.
How Palmerin encouraged at this rare adventure, entered the sight against the
Beasts that kept the Fountain, and at last (albeit with great danger) he
vanquished them all and then approached to drink of the water. Also when he
departed from thence, he arrived at a Castle, whereon he saw four Shields
placed, and being urged by the Poesies he saw written on them, to try the
end of this unlooked for accident, he entered the Combat against four
knights that came forth of the Castle, whereof he slew three, and saved the
life of the fourth, to discover to him the end of this strange adventure.
MAny were the doubts the Prince conceived in his mind, as concerning what
might happen by this gorgeous spectacle, because the poesies were placed in
such uncertain manner, that he verily supposed it was but some trappe or
secret fetch, to allure him to venture on his own destruction.

Wherefore he determined to depart from thence, and not meddle with the Beasts,
because he saw their fair show of gentleness, was but only to have him
approach the Fountain. When he had walked a little way from thence, he began to
accuse and blame himself, that either sear should cause him to forget his
duty, or any occasion withdraw his mind from such an honorable attempt.

Then returning courageously back again, he advanced himself against one of
the Tigers at the corner of the Fountain: who like wise gave himself in such
manner against the Prince catching hold upon his Shield so forceably, that the
handle brake off, and detained it in such wise, that the Prince could not by
any means get it again, but charged him with such a sound stroke over the
legs, that the Tiger could not use himself so well as he would.

To succor the feeble estate of the Tiger, came the other three Beasts,
behauing themselves so furiously against the Prince, that he thought this the
most doubtful adventure, in all his life time he had attempted. Having wounded
one of the Lions very sore, so that he was constrained to fall to the earth,
the Prince stouped down to recover his shield, which the Tiger had abandoned,
but the other Lion approached so near unto him, that catching hold upon his
Helmet, he drew him within his reach so violently, that he was enforced to
fall upon his knees, when the other Tiger crushed him with his paws so
cruelly, that had not his Armor been the stronger, he had torn the Prince in a
hundred pieces.

When he perceived himself attainted with such an extremity, that his life
stood on the very point of danger: with his sword he saluted him so deep
through the heart, that the Tiger sprawled on the earth clean bereft of life.
In brief, the courage of his noble mind, did animate him with such
hardiness, that (albeit with great pain and travail) he made a dispatch of
all their lives, when then he sat him down to take a little rest, because the
Tiger had pressed him to the ground with such extreme violence, that he
thought verily all his bones had been broken. After he had red him for a
pretty while, he went to the Fountain, being desirous to quench his thirst,
but he perceived another little Posey, which was so darkly couched, that he
could not gather any meaning of it, wherefore he presently drauke of the water,
finding no more pleasantness in it, then any other running River or spring.
But he judged both the Fountain and the adventure, to be placed there by some
cunning Enchantresse to disharten the timorous, and glut the eyes of the
valiant with a fair and pleasant show.

When he saw no other hazard to be tried in that place, he went on still in the
path, that was made from the Fountain, but at last on a sudden, he espied a
very goodly and well fortified Castle, so finely moated round about, with a
draw bridge at the entrance, and the Trees shadowing it in such a delicate
manner, that his mind was altogether delighted in beholding this rare and
seemly castle.

Before the gate there stood four very fair Jasper pillars, and upon each of
them was hanged a knightly sheeld, which Palmerin taking perfect view of,
beheld in the first upon a Silver ground, this Posey, No man dare conceive the
courage to take me down. No (quoth Palmerin) by your leave I will be so bold
as to try, for if the taking down of a sheeld should fear me, no matter if
the adventure did worthily foil me, and since your protestations are so
hautie, I will enforce you to humble your self to me, as well to serve my
need because I want a sheeld, as also to prove the bragges contained in these
words. When Palmerin had fastened the sheeld to his arm, he espied a knight
coming forth of the Castle, with a very great Majesty, being strongly
armed, who seeing the Prince without a Helmet, (the Lion having bruised it in
such sort, that he could not wear it) proudly began to utter these speeches.
He that will presume to take down one of these Shieldes, being not armed
according to finish such an enterprise, must taste the punishment due to his
fault committed, because he may learn against another time, to arm his head,
which stands in most danger.

With these words, (not staying to hear the answer of Palmerin) he began to
charge him with very mighty strokes, and still aimed to hit him on the bare
head, but Palmerin prevented his determination so well, that closing fast upon
him, he brought him down upon both his knees, and making semblance as though
he would have slain him, the knight desired mercy, and yielded himself to
the Princes courtesy. Palmerin saving his life, demanded of him if he had any
more to deal withal, to whom he answered, that the chiefest danger was
behind, whereupon the Prince arming his head, with the Helmet of the vanquished
knight, went to the second Pillar, whereupon the Shield in a Camp of Azure, he
read as thus, I am more perilous, and therefore worthy to be feared, for in
me consists the greatest danger. Trust me (quoth the Prince) it may be thou
say true, yet shall thou not supprise my mind with any cowardly fear, and
so leaving the first Shield, he took down the second, when presently came
forth another knight, who spoke to the Prince in this manner.

Truly sir knight, you have done unwisely to hazard your self in this place,
especially to take down the shield, which requires no rther ransom then
your heart blood. Sir (answered Palmerin) if you see that duty, or knightly
behavior has failed in me, behold me here ready to deliver a recompense with
my Sword, so leaving their words, and setting themselves stoutly the one
against the other, in the end the Prince reached him such a sure warrant on
the Creast, that the sword pierced so deep into his head, as he fell to the
earth, discharged of his life.

Then pausing a little while, at last he went to the third Pillar, wherein the
midst of the Shield upon a field of Sineple, in Azure Letters was written
these words: By me is to be gotten the honor of this adventure. When he had
taken it down, he expected the coming of the third Knight: who very, soon
after came forth in great haste, and without using any words, entered a more
dangerous Combat then the other twain passed: but I alemerin having cut off
one of his arms, and wounded him very sore in many places on his body, brought
him with long enduring the fight into such weakness, that he fell down, and
yielded up the ghost at his feet.

This good Fortune caused the Prince to advance himself to the fourth Pillar:
where viewing the Shield, he beheld in Letters of gold this good encouragement:
In me remains the happy victory. These words made him desirous to end this
fortunate adventure: when taking down the shield, came out the fourth Champion
with these speeches. I did not think your fondness had been such, that you
could not content your self with a sufficient conquest: wherefore that your
payment may witness your just desert, prepare your self to receive my hardy
blows. Palmerin not accustomed to make answer, in place where knightly
strength ought to show it self, delivered him his mind in half a score
strokes wellaid on, that (notwithstanding he was of more force then the other
three) yet he served him of the self same sauce, for joy whereof, he kneeled
down and heartily gave thanks to God, that his providence had permitted him to
enter this hauty exploit. Then demanded he of y^ knight that had stood by all
this while, and seen his noble behavior, if there were any other adventure in
the Castle, that he should hazard himself against: to which request he made
this answer. Credit me, worthy sir, there are as yet things to be finished,
which I persuade my self may be accomplished by your worthiness, because I
well perceive, in spite of any thing to the contrary, your valor must and will
enter into this place. For in you have I seen that, which I never thought to
find in any, as your present behavior constrains me to confess, that virtue
so governs all your actions, as she will see you Conqueror in any attempt
you undertake.

CHAP. LVIII.
How Palmerin having vanquished the three Knights, entered the Castle, where he
likewise slew a Giant that offered him resistance. And how he passed over a
black river in great danger, where he met with the Enchantresse Eutropa, Aunt
to the Giant Dramusiande, who threw her self headlong into the river, thinking
to have pulled the prince after her, but she failed of her pretense. Likewise,
how the Knight (whose life he saved) reported to him the death of the three
Knights of the Emperors Court, when they assayed to enter into the Castle, and
delivered to him Bazilliart and German of Orleance, who were kept prisoners
there in a Dungeon, and certified him, that the Castle was called, the
perilous Isle.
AFter that Palmerin had vanquished these four Knights, and he saw no more
come to offer him resistance, accompanied with this other knight, he entered the
Castle. Which being a thing of such admirable beauty, all about the Courts
were pillars of Jasper stone, ten cubits in length, whereon many goodly
chambers, and fair lodgings were built, the Court paued with Marble, wrought
into colors of red and green, with every thing so curious and ingeniously
framed about the Castle, that the Prince supposed it the most excellent thing
that ever he had seen. When he had wearied his eyes with beholding this
sumptuous Parallel, he walked through a fair Gallery, which brought him into a
Hall of singular beauty: at the entrance whereof a mighty giant presented
himself before the prince, holding in his hand a knagged Mace of iron, which
he held up in sight to resist his passage. Palmerin perceiving his bold
intent, would not seem to dismay himself: but remembering how fortunately he
had begun without, determined to end as valiantly within. And so settling him
to the Giant, found him play a while, but in the end he paid him home, so
that he made him quiet enough for speaking any more. Having thus worthily
conquered his enemy, he walked a while up and down the Hall, till at last
through a little gate, he entered into a more sumptuous Gallerie, wherein he
could find no way out, but first he must pass over abroad place of water,
where over was laid a little Board or Planke, of so small breadth and
strength, that he supposed it not able to abide the least wayght in the world.
Feign he would have been on the further side, but this unhappy place hindered
his determination, which moved him to so many grievous conceits, that he
began greatly to blame his adverse Fortune. For if the Board did break, he
should fall into a water so black and ougly, that the River Stix whereon
Acheron carries the damned souls to hell, might not be compared to this
fearful lake. Well, over he would though it cost him his life, wherefore
disarming himself, because the heaviness of his armor might be the chief
occasion to break the planke: with a good courage he began to venture upon
it, having nothing to defend him withal but his Sword, what ever might
happen. When he had attained almost the midst, this old rotten planke began
somewhat to crack, so that Palmerin then verily supposed, there was no other
remedy, but he must fall into the hellish gulf, wherefore calling his fair
Polinarda to memory, he began in this manner to desire her favor.

Madame, if hitherto I have adventure my life, both in Martial exploytes, and
dangerous attempts for your sake, craving nothing at your hands but your aid
and favor, I ought at this instant, by greater reason to wish for the same,
seeing that now I try the greatest hazard, only to advance your honor. Whose
friendship if I may be so happy as to find, which is the only mean to
encourage me in this distress, I shall assay such renown on your behalf, as
you shall be faithfully served, and my self for ever fully satisfied.

Thus concluding his speeches, to his no little joy, he had gained the further
side, when he perceived an old withered Creature, to come forth at a door
into his presence, her face al wrinkled, her hair ougly black, and dispearsed
all abroad over her her shoulders, so staying awhile began in this manner.

What estimation shall I make of my self? or what shall I judge all my cunning
to avail, which can warrant me safety in no place, but suffers me to be
vanquished by one knight so often? Then stretching forth her hand to take hold
on Palmerin, verily thinking to pluck him after her, she cast her self
headlong into that filthy puddle, ending her life as wickedly, as her
tretcherous and villainous deeds had deserved.

The Prince seeing she had failed of her intent, and overcome with sadness at
this wretched sight, went through diverse chambers to get down, where he found
many Maiden feruants, of whom he enquired for the knigt, whose life he saved in
the Combat, and when he had found him, he desired him to show the name of this
Castle, as also what she was that had so desperately drowned her self.

Worthy Sir (answered the knight) the proof of your noble valor is such, that
I cannot conceal any thing from you, which may do you pleasure to know,
wherefore mark what I shall show unto you. This Castle is called by the name of
the Perilous I Will, whereof some hold opinion, that the Sage Vrganda was the
first founder and Lady, and that in this place she hid her self because after
her heath this Castle remained Enchanted, so that no person could attain to
inhabit here, in this order she left this fair Palace, and the Fountain
which you see a little from the Gate. And because you may the easier believe
it, it was no longer ago then sithence our time, that it was inhabited by any,
who could give assurance of the situation of this I Will, but only the Dame who
is drowned, who was named Eutropa, Aunt to the Giant Dramusiande. For after he
was vanquished by the prowes of a famous knight of England, she coeceiued such
inward sorrow, that she had almost distraught her self of her wits, and to
revenge his mishap, she sent with all speed to the Sultan of Babylon, that he
should prepare a mighty Army, wherewith he might ruinate the City of
Constantinople, and the whole Empire of Greece.

But her devilish desire could not take effect, because the Soldane had enough
to do with his own subjects, who had raised themselves in a mutany and open
rebellion against him, for which cause, she seeing all her drifts could not
accomplish her wish, came unto this place, accompanied with the three knights
that you have slain and my self, so were we performed (more by her damnable
Art, the^ any volantary affection of our selves) into this Isle, where round
about she has so dispersed her enchantments, that she might allure all
wandering knights under her power, either to slay them presently, or to keep
them in continual orizon. And to satisfy her insatiable and bloody desire, we
here have maintained her safety a long time, being always so fortunate, that
many knights we slew, and some we took captive. But it chanced not long since
in an evening, that Fortune conducted hither five noble knights, who after we
had slain three of the^, the other twain conquered me, and two of my
fellows, but yet at last they were brought in subjection of the fourth knight,
and remain as prisoners here in the Castle. I pray you sir (said Palmerin)
show me the names of the three knights that were slain, as also the Prison
where the other two are, that I may bestow upon them their former liberty: to
which demand he made this answer. The first Knight was called Medrusian the
Fearful: the second, Titubal the Black: and the third was Foruolant the
Strong: whom I am sure sometime you have seen, in the Emperor Palmerins court
at Constantinople. Indeed (quoth Palmerin) I have seen their great ill will,
and wicked disposition, which was always bent to molest and trouble him, that
wished them most good, and ever honored them: wherefore the less I esteem
their loss, but rather rejoice that the world has cut off their envious
practices. During the time of this talk, they were come to the place where the
two Prisoners lay, who were without any company, by reason of y^ small abode
Eutropa as then had made in that place, wherein she had determined to execute
such tyranous cruelty, y^ this Castle should be ten times more feared, then
that where Dramusiande made his abiding. But the Sage Aliart, to whom all her
drifts and practices were discovered, willing to stop all the mischiefs that
this Enchanttresse did strive to commit, caused Palmerin to enter the Ship,
which he had sent for that purpose, only through him to disapoint her vile
pretense. Down went the Knight with the Prince to the prison, carrying a Torch
lighted in his hand, because it was so deep under the ground, as a man might
shoot with a Crossebow in length, which moved Palmerin to be greatly aghast,
thinking on the pains the two knights endured, in such an obscure and
uncomfortable Prison, which made him to enter into th^se words. Certainly this
Castle can I hardly believe to be erected by Vrganda, for that as the report
goes of her, she was never w^ont to use cruelty to any wandering knights. At
last they came to a grate, which they opened, and saw whereas the two knights
were, attending the coming of some to do them villainy as they supposed,
rather then to set them at liberty, which was the least part of their thought,
when presently the Prince knew them, the one was Bazilliart, the other German
of Orleance, who had great yrons upon their legs, and iron chains about their
middles, which caused him presently to fall into tears, and not able to suffer
that they should abide any longer in that heavy case, commanded the knight to
take off their chains and irons. But Bazilliart did not like this very well,
because he feared they should now be lead to some torments: wherefore he began
to speak unto them as thus. Sir knight, you might do us more pleasure, to let
us rest in this captivity, then to lead us now to any place of punishment. Sir
Bazilliart (said Palmerin) they that imprisoned you in this place, would hardly
consent to deliver you so soon. Then minding to put them out of this fear, he
would not hide himself any longer, but but off his Helmet: when German of
Orleance catching him in his arms, renewed his acquaintance in this order. I
see well, Sir Palmerin, that hereafter I must abandon all foolish fear,
because your prowess is wholly applied to redeem their captivity, on whom
fortune be^deth her lowering brows, as Dramusiande can amply testify. After
they had saluted one another very courteously, they came presently forth of
this noisome prison, and then they were all conducted into a very fair
chamber, where after they had refreshed their hungry stomachs, they discoursed
with each other, what had happened in their sundry adventures.

CHAP. LVIIII.
How during the time, that Palmerin remained in this Castle called the
Perrillous Isle, accompanied with Bazilliart, German of Orleance, and
Sa^ransfort the Knight that keeps the Castle, Francian and O^stalde (who at
their departure from Siluian, took upon them them to travail in the Princes
search) arrived there at the Castle, with whom Palmerin departed from ahence.
And how sailing on the Sea, he attained the Coast of Spain, where being
desirous to see the fair Miragarda, he changed his Armor, and under the title
of the Dispayring Knight, he travailed toward the Castle of the Giant Almarol.
LOng time these Knights spent in their friendly discourses, till it drew
toward night, when the Knight of the Castle named Satransfort, had provided
two fair beds, one for the Prince Palmerin, and another for his two
companions, who that night took more quietness, then since their first coming
into the Castle. In the morning they concluded to depart from thence, but first
they desired, to see all the Chambers and commodities in this goodly Castle,
which they found so rare and excellently ordered, that they could not choose but
commend it, as it did highly deserve.

Then walked they from thence to the Fountain, yielding no less laud to the
noble Conquest of Palmerin, then the dangerous attempt of such an exployte did
worthily merit. Returning unto the Castle, where, at the earnest request of
Satransfort, they stayed for the space of four days, and coming forth in an
afternoon, to sit in the pleasant shadow under the green Trees, they espied a
far off two knights come hastily ryding, who were presently known by their
Shields: for they were Francian and Onistalde, endeavoring themselves to seek
the Prince Palmerin. At such time as Siluian had declared unto them the loss
of his Lord, such was their good fortune, that they came to the place where
Palmerin entered the ship, and there they found passengers ready to cross the
seas, so that by entreaty they sealed with them, having such fair wind and
tide, that at length they discovered the Perilous Isle. This place made all
the Passengers greatly abashed, because they were both ignorant of the soil,
and knew not the danger they might receive in that place: yet at the request of
the two knights, they were somewhat pacified, and set them on land in the same
place, where Palmerin entered first on shore. When they had attained the top of
the hye Rocks, they came to the Pillar that had the fearful sentence upon
it, which using very little regard (because the affection they bare unto their
dear friend, incited them forward) they came as I have told you, both into y^
fight and knowledge of the Prince and the Knights: where they were received
very courteously, and embraced on another, in token of their mutual and
inuiolate friendship.

During the time of their abiding there, they visited the noble adventure of
the Fountain, and also the dead bodies of Tituball, Medrusian and Foruolant:
then came they to the place where Eutropa drowned her self, all the way
extolling the worthy Prowess of him, that had the power to atchieue and end
such singular exploytes. When occasion so fell that they would needs depart,
Palmerin left the Castle, in the custody of the gentle knight Satransfort,
intending to make a present of it to the noble Sage Aliart. So friendly
departing from thence, they came to the Sea side, where they inbarqued
themselves among diverse Passengers: the four Knights by themselves, and
Palmerin alone as was his desire. When they were enired the seas, from the
sight of any land, Sage Aliart who conducted the ship of the Prince, made him
to sail a contrary way from the other Knights, so that he knew not where he
should land: althought he had determined to go to Constantinople, to see his
Lady the fair Polinarda, for whose sake his heart endured diverse grievous
thoughts and passions.

At length, such was his fortune, that he attained the Coast of Spain, which
pleased him very well, because he would try his valor in the presence of the
fair Miragarda, to the intent that he might know, if her beauty were
comparable to his Mistress Polinarda. When he was come to the chief city of
Portugal, he heard marvelous commendations of Florendos the Tristfull Knight,
who because his father Primaleon had bruised his armor very sore, made
himself a notable fair new armor, and having done many famous Acts in the
Court of Recinde King of Spain, came home at last to the Castle of the Giant
Almarol. Miragarda so soon as he was there arrived, would needs know of his
success before the Castle of the Giant Dramusiande, albeit she had been
admonished thereof before, yet would she never accept of that which the
Tristfull Knight had done in England, but was of this mind, that whatsoever he
had done, she made no account of it. But being desirous to see, if his deeds
might be agreeable to the reputation he had deserved, commanded him to keep
the passage there at her Castle, thinking that so many good Knights would
endeu our themselves thither, so that this adventure should be as much
renowned, as was the Castle of Dramusiande.

The Tristfull Knight, loath in any thing to displease the fair Miragarda,
caused there a Sheelde to be made with the Image of her beauty, the report
whereof allured so many Knights thither, that in her defense he had conquered
more then two hundred, from whom he took their shields, and in remembrance of
his victory, hanged them up on either side the fair Portraite of his Lady.
Miragarda perceiving by the Shieldes, the Prowess of Florendos the Tristfull
knight, received an unspeakable contentment, yet making no show of praise, for
this so hauty an enterprise: where to his noble victory we will leave him, and
return to the prince Palmerin, who is trauialing in Portugal. In all this time,
he had made him an excellent fair armor, spotted with colors of scarlet and
white: which gave such great delight to them who beheld it, that every one was
desirous to make himself the like.

In his Shield on a plain of Sinople, was curiously figured the Image of
Deadly Hope, which was so singular well ordered, for the liveliness of her
face and lineaments, as also the seemels shadowing of her attire, that every
one judged it a very natural proportion: her name was likewise presented under
her, so that through this device, he was named of every one the Despairing
Knight. In this manner he rid toward the Castle of Almarol, very desirous to
try his force, in this adventure esteemed of so great fame, not fearing the
peril, if Fortune should unkindly turn her self from him. But persuaded
himself, that it was impossible to attain the top of Honor, if a man do not
hazard his person in those places, where victory is worthily presented to the
mind that bears the affection, to leave perpetual renown to his posterity.

CHAP. LX.
How Palmerin, under the title of the Disparing Knight, came to the Castle of
the Giant Almarol, where he saw the shields of diverse famous Knights and his
very friends, were hanged among the number of the vanquished: whereupon he
entered the Combat against the Tristfull Knight, whose strength was such, that
neither of them could win the victory. And how Miragarda took such anger
thereat, that she commanded the Tristfull Knight, to absent himself from
thence, and to wear no armor for the space of twelve months.
Certain adventures, which are not to be mentioned, were finished by the
Prince Palmerin, in the time he traveled toward the Castle of the Giant
Almarol: where when he arrived, he was greatly abashed, to see it placed on
such a hie Rock, which was a sore trouble for any to come unto it. The
Desparing Knight being come somewhat near it, espied two Knights were entered
the Combat, which being desirous to see, he set spurs to his Horse, to be
there before they had mad an end: but before he could come thither, the
Tristfull Knight had vanquished his adversary, and placed his shield among the
other: by which means Palmerin had certain knowledge of the conquered Knight,
who was called Carmelant, as the writing under his shield made manifest.

Palmerin beholding so many Shields about this Tree, esteemed the valor of
the Tristfull Knight of great reputation: at last he perceived the shelds of
Frisoll, Estrellant, and Tenebrant, who were his friends, and of great
renown, whereat he was so amazed, that he knew not what to say.

But when he saw the Picture of Miragarda, which represented such beauty, as
his senses were ravished, he could proceed no farther till he had used these
speeches. Certainly Madam, I see at this present the thing I never thought to
do, and cannot think amiss of your knight, who may well hazard his life for
so hare a Goddess: but yet I desire to approve my self against him, bearing
this opinion with me, that the beauty of his best favored and beloved, neither
is or may be equalled with her, for whose sake I will adventure the Combat.

The Tristfull Knight hearing these words, could not withhold himself, but
returned the Prince this answer. If your chastisement and correction sir
Knight, were given according as your proud words have deserved, you should be
repaied with extreme cruelty. Wherefore, fearing least in favoring you, I
shall deserve a rash report my self: I will try if your valo^^ be such as may
maintain the dishonor you have ungently offered Hereupon they fetched their
carire, and met together with so great a force, that they were both enforced to
abandon their horses, and drawing forth their swords, they delivered one
another such rigorous blows, as one would have judged, neither of them able to
endure.

The Giant Almarol abashed at this noble Combat, called the fair Miragarda to
come and see it, having spread a fair cloth of Gold along the window, and a
very rich Cushion whereon she leaned, her Damoselles standing by her to behold
this Knightly Chiualry. When she had presented her self in the window, the
two Champions retired themselves to take a little pause, by which means the
Tristfull knight gained the commodity, to contemplate his fair Miragarda with
these terms. What man is he, albeit his state were oppressed with never so
much debilitie, that would not assure himself to remain victor, maintaining
the qua^rell of so excellent and rare a Jewel? In like manner, Palmerin
complained to his fair Polinarda, but to break of these cogitations, they
began courageously again, the Tristfull knight beholding his Lady with great
grief, that he could not vanquish this Knight, having before failed so many.
Very forceable were the assaults they gave one another, their Armor cut and
cruelly mangled, their blood effused on the ground where they fought, their
Shieldes broken in an hundredth pieces, so that they were feign to take breath
again, as unable to endure such penitrable and grievous travail.

Palmerin standing leaning upon his Sword, beholding his Armor reduced into
such estate, and remembering the cause of his entrance into the Combat, with a
sad conceyt he began to say. Madame, either I am not sufficient to do you
service, or else you esteem so little of mine affection, that I am unworthy to
be your servant. As none but you grant me the honor of this fight, having the
only power to master me: so I desire you to assist me with your friendly
favor, since I have made hazard of my life, to advance the fame of your
loyalty, and suffer not this Knight to remain the Victor, seeing, in mine
eye, his Lady neither may nor will presume above you. The Tristfull Knight
walked up and down, debating with himself on the end of the combat, which he
began somewhat to fear, because in all his life time, he had not dealt with a
more hardy and valiant Knight, wherefore lifting up his eyes to the place where
Mirgarda stood, he began to discover his mind as thus.

I had sometime (dear Mistress) a Sister named Polinarda, whose beauty, both
of others and my self, was esteemed the most rare and perfect on the earth,
but after I had beh^lde the inequall state of your surpassing beauty, I
perceived my judgment on her to be very gross, in so much as she neither may
or ought, to paragon her self with your heavenly perfection. Wherefore sweet
Mistress do me the honor, that your favor may support me against mine enemy,
and suffer me not that have been vanquished by your beauty, to be brought
into such subjection to any other.

Then feeling themselves somewhat refreshed, they charged one another again
very valiantly, and continued frustrate of their expectations so long, ye they
caught one another about the midst, endeavoring that way who should get the
maistrie, but they labored in vain, for their strengthes were of such
equality, that one could hardly judge who had the greater advantage.

Miragarda commended this Combat, for the best that ever she had seen, and
desired that the victory might return to the Tristfull Knight, but both her
wish and expectation was deceived, for the night approaching so fast upon them,
they had not the commodity to try for the conquest.

Then came forth the Giant Almarol, and by his entreaty they parted
themselves, because indeed they could hardly see one another, so Palmerin
returned about half a mile from that place, where he remained till his wounds
were healed, determing when he had gained a little more strength, to come
again to the Castle, where he would so knightly behave himself, that he would
bear the Shield of Miragarda from thence, as the honor of his prize to
Constantinople.

Almarol conducted the Tristfull Knight into his Chamber, which was there in
the field, where he always used to lodge: but Miragarda being greatly
offended, that he had not the power to vanquish the Prince (standing upon the
trial between her beauty, and the Lady of the valiant Palmerin) sent a
messenger to Florendos with these tidings. That he should straightway absent
himself from that place, and not to wear any Armor for the space of twelve
months, because he had not been so fortunate, to vanquish his enemy in so
just a cause. This greeting was so displeasant to the Tristfull Knight, that he
became resolute, to make his life in sorrow, agreeable to his pensive name,
verily supposing, that Fortune had determined his utter detriment.

CHAP. LXI.
How the Tristfull Knight, at the commandment of his Lady Miragarda, departed
from the Castle of Almarol, accompanied with his Esquire Armello, who brought
back his Masters Sheeld and Armor, and left it at the Tree among the other
conquered Knights. And how Florendos met a Shepherd in his travel, with whom
he joined in such amity, that they vowed never to leave one another. And how
the Prince Palmerin returning to end the Combat, was certified by Armello, in
the cause of his masters departure, wherefore he likewise presently departed
from thence.
WHen the Tristfull Knight had received this sharp Message of Miragarda, being
loath in any thing to disobay her mind, he called his Esquire Armello, to whom
he bare great love and affection, and going into a little thicket of Trees, the
brinish tears trilling down his cheeks, he began to his Esquire this heavy
discourse. Armello my friend, so here the guerdon that frowning Fortune, in
recompense of my travails has ordained for me: which how patiently I suffer,
both God, thy self, and these sollitary woods remain my witness, that I am
neither moved at this mishap, nor storm against her great discurtesie: but say
with the Philosopher, Patience is the most noble conquest. Yet had I always this
opinion with me, that my trusty travail deserved a better reward, and that but
only respecting my faith, I did worthily merit some moitie of friendship. And
what of that? thy joy, thy mirth. thy happiness, and all thy comfort in the
world, is changed to the hard lot of all misfortune, only be thou patient and
prevail, using this for thy continual Epithet: Quid non facit Amor? Yet have
I one hope, which will be my chiefest remedy in this extreme affliction: that
Death will speedily finish my heavy complaints, and cut off the miseries
wherewith I am so cruelly assaulted.

Wherefore my good friend Armello, as thou will manifest thy wonted courtesy,
and pleasure me now in mine extreme need, take here my Horse and Armor, and
depart to Constantinople, and there give forth for a certain truth, that Death
has claimed his due at my hands* and that I have ended my life in this
unfortunate adventure: wherein I know thou shall not do amiss, because my
grief does assure me, I shall end, and that right soon. Only let me request
at thine hands, that thou conceal my late mishap to thy self, and let neither
friend nor foe understand it, but say to every one, thou art a witness of my
death.

Armello hearing the words of his Master, which struck into his heart a
grievous and extreme passion, with the tears in his eyes, he began in this
manner. Trust me my Lord, I know no place that can content me more, or be any
thing like to my desire, then in your oppression to bear you company: whom if
I should forsake, God knows the danger might happen to you, as also the sorrow
I should conceive of my self. Neither do I think it expedient to blaze
abroad your death, because a number of mishappes might arise thereby, which
entering severely the minds of your friends, will much more seem displeasant to
your Parents and alliance. Wherefore, a while bear with the fury of
Miragarda* and think not but her own rash dealing, will ere long move her unto
repentance: by that time she has considered your faithful service, how her
aspyring mind has been honorably maintained by you, she will recall her
ungentle words, and recompense you with that you have deserved worthily:
therefore expect a while good Sir, and all will frame well enough I warrant you.

I know (answered Florendos) the perfection of thy trusty zeal is so
carefully bent for my welfare, that in the despair I am at this present, I
have small occasion to think on it. For I know my fault is such as I shall not
be favored, and her ingratitude so severely bent against me, as were all the
torments in the world adioined, they might not deserve comparison with her
great displeasure. Yet what is that knighit in all the world, that would have
been vanquished, seeing he defended the only Phaenix of beauty? or where is
he that would not have made hazard of his last extremity, being encouraged to
the Combat by such an excellent mean? And can such cruelty dwell in such a
poorelesse person, or such an angry mind harbor under so fair a face: Well,
Fo^san and h^c ^lim meminisse iu^abit. But tell me, how can I esteem of my
self, having been conqueror over so many, and could not bring in obeisance
this one knight? Certainly I persuade my self, that on him I have used less
prowess, then in any adventure wherein thou have seen me, Wherefore, I have
good occasion to take it heavily, and to lament the honor I have lost, being
exiled from her gracious presence. Therefore good Armello, receive here my
Horse and Armor, and suffer me to walk alone in heaviness, that am the cause
of mine own hurt.

After he had ended these speeches, he forsook Armello, and wandering along by
a River side, till at last he sat him down under a Tree, desir^us to receive
a little rest, but the vexations of his mind would hardly suffer him. When he
awaked, he perceived a great heard of sheep feediug in the Pasture ground by
him: and under a tree near by, he saw a Shepherd playing on an Instrument,
whereto he recorded so many sweet ditties, that Florendos took great pleasure
to sit and hear him, persuading himself, that the Shepherd was not of such
base condition as he seemed, because his devises was so excellent well ordered,
both in the commendation of Love, as also the great injuries he had received
thereby. The Tristfull Knight well noting his complaints, and that Fortune had
conducted him to the place, where he might enjoy a partner to live in
heaviness, he came and used such friendly means, that in short time they grew
into good liking of each of other, Florendos being very glad, that he had met
such a friend to the solitary life. After that the Shepherd had uttered the
secrets of his mind, and the Tristfull Knight had bewraied the sum of his
grief, they vowed such amity to remain between each other, that no
misfortune should have power so sunder their friendship.

Armello having stood musing a good while, that his Master was gone out of
sight, and determined to travel without any company he came back again to
the castle of Almarol, where at the foot of the Tree, directly under the
Shield of the fair Miragarda, he placed his Masters Shield and Armor among
the vanquished Knights. And there in the presenc^ of Mirag^rda, he uttered so
many rufull and grievous complaints, that they would have moved any gentle
heart to compassion: but she being entered into such great disdain, esteemed
them not worthy of any account, but triumphed in the pains of the Tristfull
Knight, whom at this time we will leave in the Shepherds company.

Now the prince Palmerin having his wounds well cured, and provided him of a new
Armor, because his other was cruelly defaced, returned to the castle of the
Giant Almarol, intending not to depart from thence, before he had conquered the
Tristfull Knight. When he was arrived at the Castle, he heard the lamentations,
that Armello used, whereby he understood, that the Tristfull Knight was the
renowned Prince Florendos, which moved him to great displeasure, because he had
entered the Combat against him. And then he supposed, that the hatred of
Miragarda, might work an occasion of some greater mischance, in that the loss
of so valliant a Prince as Florendos was, might cause the great grief of the
Emperor Palmerin, as also the Lords and Ladies of his royal Court. These
thoughts urged the Prince to so great unquietness, that he could not determine
whether he might abide there in that place, or pursue after the Prince
Florendos, to cause him abandon that Tristful kind of life, and be a remedy
to any misfortune that might annoy him, by means of the princess Miragarda,
whom he supposed to be the fairest Lady that ever he had seen. Thus musing
upon a thousand matters, as also the beauty of Miragarda, to compare with the
heavenly hew of his Lady and Mistress, at last, remembering the effect of his
duty, he set spurs to his Htrse, and galloped from thence, not respecting
which way he went, but desirous to attain the City of Consantinople.

CHAP. LXII.
How the Giant Dramusiande, accompanied with Siluian, arrived at the Castle of
the Giant Almarol, where being amorous of the Picture of the Miragarda, he
entered the Combat with Almarol, and foiled him. And how Miragarda gave into
his custody her Portrait, as also the keeping of the passage, against the
Knights that came thither.
HEre we must remember the Giant Dramusiande, who after he had travailed many
strange Countries, accompanied with Siluian, to find again the Prince
Palmerin) arrived at the Castle of the Giant Almarol, within a while after the
Prince was departed from thence. When he had beheld the Castle he desired so
long to see, and could perceive neither any body near or about it, he came to
the Tree which he saw was laden with the Shields of the vanquished Knights,
whose names being subscribed underneath every one made him to have knowledge of
diverse that had been there foiled.

At last, at the soote of the Tree, he espied the armor and sheeld of the
Tristfull knight, which made him greatly to muse: that the Armor of the
Conqueror should deserve no better estimation, then to be placed there among
the number of the vanquished. Near to the Armor he beheld Armello, who having
endured his tears and pitiful complaints a long time, at length chanced to
fall fast asleep, but Dramusiande desirous to hear some tidings, used such
means, that he awaked him. But when he understood of the adventures of the
Fortress, as also the departure of the Tristfull knight, he began greatly to
rebuke himself, in that his Fortune failed to encounter with so good a Knight,
whose Shield he would have placed as highest on the Tree, but that Armello
desired him to the contrary.

Dramusiande taking good view on the picture of Miragarda, was brought on a
sudden into such an alteration, that his stout and hauty stomach could not
any way resist, the cutting cares that ouercharged his mind, yea he was brought
into such a great quandary, that he could not hold his Lance, but trembling as
a leaf stirred with the wind, eue^ so he stood (as it were) clean bereft of
his senses, whereupon he began to utter these speeches.

Madame, beholding in this Portrait, the beauty wherewith Nature has
plentifully adorned you, I wish and desire to keep this Passage, that I might
by my faithful service, make you renowned through the whole world. For since
your countenance has the courage, to conquer this heart of mine, which as yet
was never done by any, I desire that under your noble conquest, I may endeavor
my strength to exalt your Princely beauty, which who so dare presume to speak
against, shall receive the punishment due to so great an offense.

While he continued in this amorous thought, the Giant Almarol came bravely
forth of my Castle, whom Miragarda had sent, being offended to see the Giant
Dramusiande, wherefore advancing himself in his presence, Almarol delivered
him this greeting. Sir Knight, I think it might be more for your avail, to
set your shield in the rank of the vanquished, then thus to busy your self
in beholding this Portrait, which thing I would rather persuade you too by
gentleness, then to show you the constraint that may happen by my force, to
which words Dramusiande replied thus.

If I were persuaded, that the Mistress of this picture, would be pleased with
so small a matter, I had rather accomplish thy desire, then to do any thing
that might returns the contrary, for then my travail should be little, my
loss less, and my heart at liberty, where now it remains captive. And
because I would gladly receuer it again, I entend to enter the Combats with
thee, to the intent thou may report, thy words could not foil me, nor yet
thy works had the puissance to daunt me. Almarol, who naturally was
accustomed to cruelty, and not of such courtesy as was the gentle Dramusiande,
received these speeches in very angry manner, and being both ready provided,
encountered with their Spears valiantly together. Being both thrown beside
their Horses, they charged one another very fiercely with their Swords, and
Miragarda standing in her window to behold this exploite, gave great
commendation to the behavior of Dramusiande, whom she feared would overcome
the Giant Almarol. When they had sore hurt and well wearied themselves, they
retired a while to take a little pause, when Dramusiande beholding the fair
Miragarda was suddenly stricken into such amaze, that the remembrance of the
Combat was clean out of his mind. Almarol seeing into what estate he was
brought, only with beholding the face of Miragarda, awaked him out of his study
with such a sure stroke on the Creast, that the Sword cleft it, and wounded him
very sore upon the head. Which Dramusiande taking in very il part, returned to
Almarol with so great fury, that he enforced him to start this way and that
way, as glad to avoid the blows wherewith he was charged. At last Almarol
fell to the earth, when Dramusiande setting his foot upon him, unclasped his
Helmet, because he would have smitten off his head, but Miragarda presently
sent down one of her Damsels, named Lardemia, who stayed Dramusiande with
these words.

Most noble knight, the Princess Miragarda by me does sent entreaty, that you
would satisfy your self with the honor of your victory, and not to deprive
the Giant of life, whose loss might be more grief to her, then all your
endeavors can any way recompense. Madame (answered Dramusiande) I not only
grant him life, at the request of such a gracious Princess, but vow my self
to keep her famous Shield, if so be she can except of my loyal service, and
if Fortune conduct any Knight hither, that can conquer me, I desire her
(setting all pity aside) that she will suffer me to enjoy the death, so shall
both my travails and troubles, possess a long wished end. Lardemia having
lead Almarol into the Castle, out at the window returns him this answer. Sir
knight, my Lady and Mistress sends you a thousand thanks, and in recompense
of your courtesy, commits the safeguard of her shield into your hands,
wishing good Fortune may always govern your enterprise.

Dramusiande at these words was greatly contented, because he desired above all
things to pleasure the fair Miragarda, whose beauty had deprived him of his
wonted liberty, forcing him in love to grow somewhat amorous. For which cause
he remained there, keeping this fair Portraite, accomplishing such hautie
deeds of Chivalry, as was altogether supposed incredible: but the honor
which he got, had no long time of tarriance, for that fortune having a while
favored him, at last in her anger she forsook him: even as she is accustomed
to falsify her promise to those whom she perceives have any entrance into
prosperity.

CHAP. LXIII.
How Dramusiande, keeping the shield and passage of the Giant Almarol, entered
the Just with the Prince Gracian and Don Rosuel, of whom he had the victory,
and ended their strife with friendly acquaintance.
ON the next morning, Dramusiande to accomplish his promise to the fair
Miragarda, came forth and sat down at the Tree, where the Portraite and the
Knightly Shields were placed, using such grievous complaints, that Siluian
marueiled to see so mighty a man brought into such subjection by the force of
love. The faithful and trusty Esquire Armello, keeping them company, and
frequenting still his grievous mones, thought none worthy to keep such a
precious treasure, as was the shield of the fair Miragarda, but only his Lord
and Master, who did best of all deserve it: wherefore being not able to
conceal the passions his heart conceived, began in this manner to the Giant
Dramusiande. I know well sir Knight, that Fortune has greatly favored you,
in that my master is absent, and you keep the Jewel of his joy: but durst he
show himself in this place, which he is constrained to forsake by the command
of Miragarda, you should well perceive, that her fair Portrait is to be kept
by none but he: whereto Dramusiande replied thus.

My friend, the faith and affection thou bear to thy Master, seems to me
worthy of great commendation. And as his deeds remain a true confirmation and
witness of your woryes, yet you must not use any evil suspect to him, who is
altogether unknown of you, and would also enter combat which your Master,
were he present in this place. And if it were any chauce to to be vanquished by
him, I would content my self to be placed among these other conquered, whose
assurance have been as likely as mine, and peradventure it might be more to my
profit, if I left my Shield under her obeisance, whose will I only seek to
satisfy, by ending my life in such a hautie enterprise. Again, it might so
fortune, if it were your chance to see me combat wish your Master, you would
conceive another opinion th^n as yet you do, and judge me either better or
worse, then I perceive at this present you make your account. Wherefore I
persuade my self, that I am as well worthy and able to keep and defend this
shield of the fair Miragarda, as the knight your Master, who is unknown to
me, albeit I confess, not so worthy of her, as he that has so deerly deserved
her, not only (I am sure) by this notable co^quests, but also by proof of
this knightly courtesy. For if I should that way equal my self with him, It
might well be thought no truth remained in me. And if you shall stay here a
certain space, I doubt not but you shall see as hauty attempts ended, as at
any time have been by your Master finished.

While he continued these speeches, he espied a far off two knights, come
riding along the River side: one of them had his Armor colored black and
white, with diverse borders of Gold finely wrought upon it, bearing in his
Shield for his device, a murdered body in a camp of Sinople: the other had
his Armor of a green color, very thick beset with Lions of Gold, and in his
shield two Lions rampant. These twain were no sooner arrived at the Castle,
but Dramusiande incontiuently knew them: for the one was Don Rosuel, and the
other was the Prince Gracian, who sometime had been his Prisoners, and whose
amity he always made great account of. But albeit their friendship was very
acceptable to him, yet the promise he had made Miragarda, commanded him to the
contrary, confidering also that love had gotten the maisterie of him, and
directing his mind in this enterprise, made him neither to spare friend nor
foe, but used all alike that travailed thither. Then mounting on his steed, he
came forth before them, when they perceiving he provided himself to the Just,
were very well pleased, because they desired to approve their strength, in the
behalf of the fair Miragarda. But casting their eyes on her beautiful
Picture, which they beheld in the midst of the Shieldes that Florendos had
conquered, they were supprised with such a sudden amazement, that they had
quite forgotten for what cause they came thither: which Dramusiande seeing,
addressed himself to them, with this manner of salutation.

Sir Knights, the Portraite of this Lady is not here placed, to be contemplated
with so great ease, but he that desires to enjoy such a Jewel, must first
combat against me, who denies him that privilege, till I am vanquished, and
if that Fortune in this respect do favor him, yet shall he feel a double
torment by remaining Victor.

Trust me (answered the Prince Gracian) if a man's life may ataine the honor of
such a singular personage, behold him who has the courage to adventure first.
So concluding his speeches, he met Dramusiande valiantly with the break of the
Spear, which was with such force, that he was thrown to the earth with so
strong a violence, that for a great while he was void of any feeling. This
moved Don Rosuel to such displeasure, that to revenge his friend, he pricked
forth against Dramusiande, who being ready provided with another Spear, sent
him to bear the Prince Gracian company.

This rude encounter made them both marvel, and supposed that their enemy was
the renowned Palmerin of England, whereof being desirous to be resolved,
Gracian as the hardiest of them both, with his sword drawn in his hand,
entered into these terms. Sir Knight, although Fortune has been your friend
to foil us in the Just, yet I pray you to discende on foot, to the end we
may finish the Combat with the sword, because I would try your valor to the
uttermost, if I may depart from hence with the benefit of my life.
Dramusiande, who was ever accustomed to great bounty and gentleness, seeing
the desire of the Prince Gracian, on whom he had gotten the honor of the
victory, would not in that respect satis^ie his mind, but made him answer in
this manner. Sir Gracian, I do not make so small estimation of your life, that I
would be the man should bring you into such danger, beseeching you not to take
in all part, that which I have already so boldly ventured, being my self bound
by duty, to do any thing I may for your honorable welfare.

Gracian hearing himself named by the Knight, of whom he had no knowledge, was
greatly abashed, and replied thus.

Worthy sir, since my fortune has been so good, as to obtain the friendship
of so hardy a Knight, I esteem my self the happiest under the Sun, desiring
to have knowledge of you, if you shall find it expedient. At these words,
Dramusiande took off his Helmet, when presently they both ran and embraced
him: conceiving such an unspeakable joy for his company, that their mischance
was now put clean out of memory, because they judged it no shame, to be
foiled at the hands of Dramusiande: of whom they requested, for what cause he
remained in that place. To satisfy their desires, he recited the whole
occasion of his journey, and how he made promise to Miragarda (after he had
conquered the Giant Almarol) to keep the Shield in that place, until some
Knight by his prowess could bring him under his obeysan^^. Certainly (said Don
Rosuel) then I perceive you intended to keep it all your life time, because I
know nothing but death can overcome you. Trust me (quoth y^ prince Gracian) I
have in times past, both extolled and verily believed, that my fair Claritia
might be equal with any for her beauty, but having now beh^ld this admirable
Miragarda, I exempt from mind all other, desiring to accomplish the mean that
I might do her service. And credit me (said Don Rosuel) I have so forgotten
the love I bare to my Lady, that if I depart not the sooner from hence, I shall
fall into contempt, both of her, and all other Ladies, giving the only laud to
this peerless Miragarda. Then mounting on Horseback, he rid away so fast
as possible he could: in like manner the Prince Gracian possed presently after
him, neither of them using any friendly departing to the Giant Dramusiande, who
could not refrain from laughter, to think on the weak stomachs of these two
Princes.

CHAP. LXIIII.
How Palmerin of England travailing toward Constantinople, laid him down to
sleep hard by a fair Castle, from whence came four Ladies, who carried him
into the Castle. And how one of the Ladies bearing him loving affection, but he
disdaining her great good will, urged her to keep him there as her prisoner.
PAlmerin of England, after he had left the Castle of the Giant Almarol,
happened on the frontiers of Navarre, in the Dominion of France, which he
perceived altogether to be inhabited and governed by mighty Giants, whose
vnciuility of life, wrought many cruel spoils and villainous deeds in these
parts: among whom Palmerin behaved himself so worthily, that the effect of his
deeds returned his due commendation. Continuing his travail along the Coast,
at last in a fair green valley he espied a goodly and well fortified Castle,
and near unto it, was a fair largs Poole, well stored with choice of fish,
where the Prince alighted from his Horse, to let him feed a while in the
pasture. In the mean time, he looking all about and could see no body, that on
a sudden might come to endanger him, sat down by the water side, the
beholding whereof, drove many solemn fancies out of his remembrance.

As he was about to take a little nap, his Mistres Polinarda approached his
thoughts, as also the remembrance of his manifold courtesies, which he
received while he remained at Constantinople: so that some of these motions
provoked him to good opinion of joy, but other some to a number of heavy
lamentations, as especially the sharp command of his mistres: which being loath
to break, mad him to absent himself from Constantinople, longer then
otherwise he would gladly have done.

In these thoughts he fell into a sound sleep, when four Damsels came
walking forth of the Castle, who beholding the Prince his cheeks all dewed
with tears, and his eye lids very red with overmuch weeping, were all
constrained to great compassion. Then one of the Damsels, being of rare and
excellent beauty, called for certain of her servants, who with their help,
carried the Prince into a fair Chamber in the castle, causing his arms to be
fastened together with a chain, to the end he might use no resistance against
them. When he awaked, and found himself in this great alteration, he was so
overcome with grief, that he knew not what to say: but the Lady bearing great
affection to him, (at every instant changed color, which witnessed the ardent
love she had conceived in her mind) at last made manifest the sum of her
desire, whereto Palmerin by no means would give consent. For, being desirous
to shun any occasion, whereby he might be thought disloyal to his Lady,
determined to depart from thence without Horse or Armor, only to avoid her
importunate suit.

This moved the Lady to such extreme grief, that she violated the bonds of
Reason, whose limits duty had always warned her to keep within: and seeing
that neither tears nor intreatis might mollify the heart, she commanded him to
be brought into her Chamber, where irons were made fast about his legs, and
great speeches given forth to terrify him, because he would use no pity to
her outrageous passions. Palmerin not esteeming either her self or her words,
bare greater affection to clogging irons, then to all the amorous speeches the
Lady could use: who at last turned he hot love into extreme hatred, so that
absenting her self out of his company, caused him to be used in very
rigorous manner. But her cruelty had no long time of lasting, for her woonted
affection caused her to repent her hasty fury, and in her mind she thought to
discharge the Prince, seeking all means possible to banish him out of her
memory, for which cause she enclosed her self in her Chamber, laboring both
by examples and present proof, to extinguish the furious flames of her
continual Passions. But when she saw nothing would serve, but her grief was
driven to an impossible cure, she concluded to keep the Prince in Prison so
long, that at length she would glut her self with his remembrance. Or else,
at last the Prine would be so weary, that he not able any longer to endure the
cruel practices she used, would repent him of his so long denial, and so be
enforced to accomplish her amorous dessre. But Palmerin having already made
faithful vow of his love, by no torment or cruelty would be persuaded to
violate his promise, to the no small grief of the Lady, who frequented
himself still with her woonted suit, as also for his obstinacy increased her
several devises of cruelty.

CHAP. LXV.
How Don Florian remaining in the Court of England, made such entreatie on the
behalf of Orianda, and her sisters, the Daughters of the Marquess Beltamor,
remaining in the Castle of the Giant Calfurnien: that they were restored into
Kings favor, and married to three noble Gentlemen of his Court. And Don
Florian departing out of England, arrived at the Castle of the Giant Almarol,
where he entered the Combat with Dramusiande, where ending their strife with
great friendship, he departed accompanied with Siluian, desirous to find his
brother, the noble Palmerin of England.
DOn Florian of the Forest, of whom no mention has been made, since the
Prince Palmerin departed out of England, stayed a certain time in the Court of
the King his Uncle, to entreat favor for Orianda and her Sisters, the
Daughters of the Marquess Beltamor. For remembering the great service they had
done to him, at such time as the giant Calfurnien had wounded him so sore:
willing to discharge the promise he made them at his departure, which might
manifest his honor, and redeem them from that misery wherein they remained,
approached the presence of the King in this manner. I have always heard my
Sovereign Lord and Uncle, that laudable deeds ought to be recompensed with
the like, and that ingratitude and unkind dealing, should ever be banished
from the hearts of Princes, wherefore, fearing least my self should be found
faulty in such a heinous crime. I shall desire your gracious furtherance in a
cause, as shall present my duty, and your own honor.

It is so my good Lord, that at such time as I imbarqued my self from Greece,
the tempest ouer-reacht me with such a violent mean, that our Ship attained
the Coast of Ireland, where I would needs go on land, albeit both the Master,
and all in the Ship persuaded me to the contrary. Being then on land, such was
my Fortune that I met with the Giant Calfurnien, whose strength, although it
was redoubted indeed, yet good hap gave me the honor of his death.

In this bloody fight, I received so many grievous and dangerous wounds, that
I could no way have escaped the death my self, had not three Ladies, Daughters
to the Marquess Beltamor, (whom this cruel Giant kept there perforce) used
such honorable and goodly provision, that to their no small labor and
travail, I recovered a sound and perfect estate. Assuring you my Lord, that I
not only maste high estimation of their friendly courtesy: but also confess
my self indebted to them for ever, to spend my heart blood in their gracious
service.

Wherefore remembering their infortune, that for their Fathers offense they are
disherited, I promised to use such intercession to your Grace, as they should
be restored to their lost patrimonies. In the mean time they live in hope, and
I expect your wonted noble forgiveness on their behalf.

The King perceiving the desire of Florian, with the great friendship he had
received by these Ladies, returned him presently this auswere. Indeed I
confess, the Marquess their Father, both intended and accomplished a
treasonable enterprise against me and my state: yet would I not that his
daughters being ignorant and innocent of their Fathers crime, shall suffer
punishment for his offense. And since he has sustained Law according to
desert, and his whole possessions are fallen into our hands, we return them to
the use and profit of the Damsels, in recompense of the friendly favor you
have received at their hands. And for their more honor, I will that the eldest
of them be married to Don Rosiran my Cousin, and your great friend Argolant,
shall not refuse to marry the second: as for the third, we restore her to the
Marquisate of her father, and will join her in marriage with Beltamor, Brother
to the forenamed Don Rosiran.

Don Florian kissing his highness hand, in token of the unspeakable pleasure
he received at the Kings words, by the means of Don Edward his noble Father,
sent a poast with all speed to bring the Ladies to the Court, as well to see the
Kings will accomplished in effect, as to make proof of his good will habare to
the Ladies.

When these Ladies were come, end every thing in due and decent order finished,
Don Florian took leave of the King his uncle, and also Don Edward, and the
Princess Flerida, because he would try the adventures at the Castle of
Miragarda, whose beauty was so renowned through the whose world.

With great grief they suffered him to depart, so that when in travail, he
had passed the Court of the King Redinde, he arrived at the Castle of Almarol,
when Dramusiande had even then vanquished three Knights, whereof one was the
valiant Pompides, which made Florian somewhat abashed, because he was ignorant
that it was the gentle Dramusiande. Wherefore, being desirous to hazard
himself in the Combat, he prepared his Spear to encounter with him, which
Dramusiande seeing (not knowing him to be Florian of the Desert, the son of his
dear and loving friend Don Edward, against whom he would not have entered the
fight in any case) to satisfy the will of his Lady Miragarda, he met so
strongly with him, that they were both dismounted to the earth. Up again they
rose, and fell to it very violently with their Swords, in so much as
Dramusiande would not beast of his bargain, nor Florian brag of the choice
he had made, for that the Combat was so dangerous between them, as it was not
to be judged who was likest of victory.

Miragarda leaning in her window, extolled maruelously the hautie valor of
them both, so that excepting the Combat of the Tristfull Knight with Palmerin,
she gave the only commendation to this singular fight, which continued with
such outrage between them, that they were constrained to retire, to take a
little breathing. Dramusiande feeling the Prowess of his adversary, supposed
him to be Florian of the Desert, and therefore concluded many times to discover
himself, without bringing their Combat to any end. But fearing least it
should be reported, that he gave over for want of courage to maintain his
quarrel, changed his opinion, in that he was so desirous, to finish the
intent of the fair Miragarda, to whom secretly he began in this manner. My
dear Mistress, I know that the merit of my travails, shall be to bury
their commendation in the pi^te of oblivion, by you that little regard them,
yet is it great and insupportable grief, to him that is so unkindly requited.
Nevertheless, so great a conquest have you gained of me, and my whole
endeavors lincked to fulfill your good liking, that I can no ways contrary what
you have ordained, but remain more affectioned to do you honor, then al my
actions can merit your favor. Regard then the Knight against whom I maintain
your cause, and the fore^ of his deliverer attempts, will witness in what
need I stand of your friendly furtherance, which I beseech you not to deny
him at this presence, who in faith and loyalty, is more yours then his own,
lest my enemy winning the victory, cast in my teeth, that he has brought me
under in beholding your beauty.

Don Florian desirous to finish his enterprise, came and charged Dramusiande
the second time, so that Almarol debating with Miragarda, and Lardemia,
esteemed maruellously the valor of the Giant, in keeping the Shield, as also
the knight that offered him resistance. Siluian standing in doubt that
Dramusiande would be slain, which would be great grief to his Lord and
master, came to the Esquire of Don Florian, whom he presently knew, which made
him very joyful, believing now verily, that he should save the lives of them
both: wherefore he came to Florian with these words. I desire you Sir, to
pass no further in this doubtful fight, for he whom you labor against, is
Dramusiande your trusty and loyal friend. Siluian had no sooner spoken these
words, but that they presently threw down their Swords, embracing one
another with such gentle salutations, as though they had been the greatest
f^iends in the world. Florian was greatly amazed, to see Siluian there without
his master, wherefore he demanded of him how all things had happened: but when
he understood the loss of his brother, he remained in grief beyond all
persuasion, so that he determined to go straight to Constantinople, and if he
failed of him there he would seek all the world over, but he would find him
again.

So taking leave of Dramusiande, accompanied with Siluian, he departed from
thence, not desiring to see the fair Miragarda, least he should be brought
into like opinion, as was the gentle Giant Dramusiande. Not far from thence,
he met with Pompides, lamenting very heavily that he had been so vanquished:
then presenting himself to bear the Prince company, they embraced very
courteously, and so rid on loouingly and friendly together, desirous to
meet with some one to cure their wounds, that they might make the more
expedition, in seeking after the renowned Prince Palmerin of England.

CHAP. LXVI.
How Don Florian and Pompides, being cured of the wounds they had received, in
maintaining the Combat against Dramusiande, arrived at the Castle of the
Princess Arnalte, who was the Lady that kept the Prince Palmerin prisoner. And
how in discoursing with her, about the fair Miragarda, they at last got
Palmerin with them, and so departed from thence.
THe Giant Dramusiande being very sore wounded, was carried in to the Castle of
the Giant Almarol, where as great care was used to him as might be possible:
but so dangerous were his hurts, that of a good while after he was not able to
endure the travail of armor. In which time, Miragarda would not suffer Almarol
to enter the fight any more, because she had seen him three times vanquished:
so that many knights coming thither to try the adventure, were feign to stay
while Dramusiande was recovered, or else to return and lose their labor.

Don Florian and Pompides iourneying still together, happened into the house of
an ancient knight, whose skill was very great in the science of Surgery,
where they passed away the time, in discoursing the hauty aduentres
enterprised, at the Castle of Almarol, on the behalf of the rare and excellent
Princess Miragarda, to whom Pompides attributed high commendations, though he
were maruailously offended at his unfortunate foil.

When they had well recovered their strengths again, yielding great thanks
unto these gentle Host, they departed from thence, intending to journey toward
Constantinople, thinking there to find the noble and courageous Knights, who
had worthily proved themselves, as the only and perfect flower of all
Chiualry. Whereupon they took shipping at the next Haven, and Fortune favoring
their honorable intent, in few days brought them before the Castle, wherein
the noble Palmerin of England remained Prisoner. Staying to rest themselves a
while, they beheld a Damsel mounted on a white Palfray, accompanied with two
Esquires, to come forth of the Castle, to whom the Knights presently took
their way, and with a friendly greeting, requested to whom that goodly Castle
belonged, it their demand might be no hindrance to her hasty affairs: whereto
the Damsel made this answer.

Albeit Gentlemen, the business wherein I must presently employ my self, are
matters of weight and great importance, yet the gentle demands both of your
speech and outward behavior, has commanded me to stay til I have satisfied
your desire. This Castle was first founded, at the commandment of the noble
and courageous Prince Bazelie, sometime the king of Nauer^ed he being now
deceased, the Princess Arnalte his fair Daughter, is come to unhabite this
ancient and famous Mansion. For she being unwilling to govern her people, by
reason she is but young of years, as also unmarried, committed the guiding of
so weighty a charge, to such honorable persons in her Court, as she knew both
vertueus, wise and discrete, to use Justice to the usurping enemy, and equity
to her loving subjects in general. During the time she has remained here,
report has blazed abroad the adventures finished at the castle of the Giant
Almarol, in the maintenance of the beauty of fair Miragarda, whose stately
magnificence being so highly commended, is the cause as she supposes, that
she is not beloved of a knight, who remains in the Castle, and to whom she
hears great love and affection.

On this belief, she has commanded me to go see the Princess Miragarda,
whereby she may be certified, if her beauty that is so highly extolled, may
surmount that wherewith nature has so plentifully adorned her self. Which if
it so fall out, that the Princess Miragarda carry the credit from her, then is
she minded to deliver the Knight, and he shall remain no longer her prisoner:
but if my Lady prove superior to the canonized spectacle, then know I she
will put the knight to death, considering the injury he has offered her, who
has so much abased her self, as to bear an ungrateful person such affection,
of whom she can gather no knowledge or acquaiatance. Don Florian well pondering
the Damoselles words, and being somewhat pleasantly disposed withal, demanded
if the beauty of her mistress might compare with the indifferent condition
she had of her own. Mrust me Sir (quoth she) if you find any thing in me,
that deserved to bear the title of beauty, when you shall chance to have a
sight of my Lady, you will say you have made a very simple comparison. Fair
Damsel (said Florian) would you follow my counsel, you should here make
stay your hasty journey: for credit me, Miragarda is much more beautiful then
you. Lady (quoth Pompides) let not these words seem to stay you from your
Mistress command; but proceed in your enterprise, and you shall see that,
which neither of us is worthy to use any talk of: so shall you save the life of
the knight whom she loves, and certify your Lady with a certain report, as
for what it has pleased this Knight to say, his words are but jesting, for he
never saw the fair Miragarda. It seems then Sir Knight (answered the
Damsel) that you have been affectioned to the fair view of this Princess,
that you can so readily stand for a witness, in the behalf of her beauty. I
desire you therefore, to return with me to the Princess my Lady, so shall you
save me a journey, in that you are able to speak upon judgment, where perhaps
I might stray by using affection. So alighting from their Horses, they went
altogether into the Castle, when the Damsel gave her Lady to understand, that
she had met with two Knights, who were lately come from the Castle of Almaroll,
and could at large inform her, concerning the beauty of the fair Miragarda.
The Princess Arnalte being very glad of these news, caused a fair Chamber to
be provided for the two knights, where when they had disarmed themselves, and
taking a little ease, being weary with travail, she came and courteously
welcomed them to her Castle, showing all the commodities that might urge them
to pleasure, and walking forth to the Pondes side, sitting them down under the
Cipresse Trees, in a very pleasant shadow, she began in this manner.

Gentlemen, albeit I am ignorant how you can accept my words, or in what
manner it shall please you to shape me an answer, yet will I not be so
timorous, but that without any ill suspect I may crave such leave, as to cut
off a doubt, which has of long time been concealed. At such time as the King
my Father, who governed all this country, had finished the course of his
terrestrial time, I betook my self to live solitary in this habitation,
till the Governors of my Kingdom had chosen me such a Pheere, as might in all
respects satisfy the will of my late deceased Lord and Father. But Fortune,
the enemy to al mine actions, permitted an unknown knight to happen to this
Castle: whom I made such choice of, that he was the only man I loved,
because I never liked any but him, so that according to my affection, I
concluded him as Lord, both of me and all my Princely possessions. But he
neither regarding bounty nor beauty, applies himself so disdainful to my
gentle desire, that he rather takes pleasure in irons, wherewith I have
charged him, then in the Princely offers whereto I have chasen him. And
although his great despising me is an insupportable torment, yet have I
dissembled my disquietnes, supposing that his affection to some other has
ouercharged his wits, so that he could not perceive the honor wherewith I
presented him. And yet this opinion I used fondly with my self, that no ladies
beauty was sufficient to win him from me, the Princess Miragarda only
excepted, whose report fills every Climate, with extolling her benefit. Yet
because I had some doubt of her, I commanded one of my Damsels to take her
journey thither, to see if my beauty might not stand equal with hers, if so
be, she were only perfect without comparion, then had I determined to set the
knight at liberty: but if I were found to deserve as high a title as she,
then would I reward him with punishment, according as his disdainful nature
did worthily deserve. Horian well noting the proud mind of Arnalte, determined
to cause her abide in her vain opinion, as thus.

Truly Madam, I would with you not to use any other torment to the Knight, then
to let him persist in his obstinate and p^ruerse mind: for in the end, the
punishment of his own folly will be all, when himself shall lament the state
of his loss. And hereupon assure your self, that yt Princess Miragarda is as
fair as she is famed, yet are you very li^le beholding to the Knight,
considering that if both your features were lively to be seen in one
uniform, it might hardly be judged which should be soonest abased. The
Princess Arnalte, was very well pleased with these words of Floria^, and
steadfastly setting her countenance upon him, even as lightly she grounded her
love on Palmerin, so according to the mutability of an unsteadfast woman, she
began to gr^w in as great good liking of him, utterly abolishing Pelmerin out
of memory, as though she had never seen him in all her life. Wherefore, being
in every part replenished with an unspeakable joy, she took each of the
knights by the hand, and returned with them into the Castle, where against
their coming, the Table was ready covered, but before they sat down, Florian
desired to see the knight, at whose request, he was immediately sent for. But
when Florian and Pompides had a sight of him, they were not able to conceal
the great joy they sustained, especially Siluian, who as they embraced his
Master, he cast himself at his feet, being never so glad in all his life, as
he was at this present. Which made Arnalte so amazed, that she wished they were
al departed her Castle. Well, down they sat, and were feasted with honor and
great reverence, the Supper being ended, Palmerin and Pompides were l^dged in
one Chamber together, and a very fair Chamber was provided for the Prince
Florian, to whom she gave such friendly entertainment, that they stayed there
the space of eight days. Then Florian and the other Knights would needs
depart, ieauing the Princess very pensive and sorrowful, to depart from his
company she desired so feign, but he made her promise, that so soon as he
could, he would return to her. Hereon they all departed merrily away, the
Princess Arnalte greatly commending her good fortune, in that she hoped of the
Prince Florians return, when she had no doubt to win his heart, but he being a
little out of her sight, was fallen into such oblivion of her, that he made a
jest to his brother and Pompides, of the great favor Arnalte had bestowed on
him.

CHAP. LXVII.
How Palmerin of England, Don Florian his brother, and Pompides, being departed
from the Castle of the Princess Arnalte, met the fair Florenda, daughter to
Arnedes King of France, at whose request, Florian ran with twelve Knights, who
kept the Princess company in her prograce. And how during the time of the
Just, a Damsel came and entreated Palmerin, to have his help in the
finishing of a strange adventure: with whom he presently departed, and after
the Just was ended, Pompides and the Prince Florian rode after Palmerin, to
give him aid if he stood in need of any.
WHen these three Knights were thus departed from the Princess Arnalte,
Palmerin by the way, r^de with Siluian aside, to whom he expressed the great
perpleritie wherein he remained, for the love he bare his fair Lady and
Mistress Polinarda: to whom he feared to approach, because of the commandment
she gave him, at such time as he departed from Constantinople.

Whereto Siluian used this kind of persuasion, what she had given him in angry
speeches, was rather to try his constancy, then to move him conceive any
opinion of discourtesie. But Palmerin would hardly give any credance to his
words: because he supposed we had heard already, that he could not vanquish
the Tristfull Knight, entering the Combat on the controversy, between the
beauty of her and the Princess Miragarda which oppressed his mind with many
grievous thoughts, and was much displeasant to Florian and Pompides, who were
altogether ignorant in the cause of his heaviness.

When they had ridden for a few certain days, they came at last into a valley
in the Kingdom of France: where under a fine shadow of Trees, they perceived
four fair Tents erected, whereupon was placed twelve goodly Shieldes. But
that which was most to their admiration, was a brave company of Ladies, who
disported themselves there under the green Trees.

The Knights rejoicing to find company in such a solitary place, betook
themselves presently toward the Tents, but on a sudden came forth of one of
the Tents, a Knight attyred in a very fair Armor, all thick beset with
golden Glasses, who having put on his Helmet, mounted on his Steed, and took
a strong Lance in his hand, preparing himself courageously to enter the Just.
When Palmerin perceived the intent of the Knight, he caused his company to stay
a while, when presently an Esquire addressed himself from the Ladies, saluting
the Princes in this manner. God save you Gentlemen, Florenda Daughter to the
famous King of France, who abides in these Tents with her courtly attendants,
by me greeteth you in all courtesies possible, giving you to understand, that
delighting her self to ride in Prograce, she stays here in this pleasant
valley, til the heat of the day be somewhat more declined. And for as much as
she has seen in you, the perfect appearance of knightly and worthy behavior
she desires, if you will favor her request so much, that you would break a
few Lances with certain of her Knights, the fulfilling whereof will cause her
to reward you with all honorable thanks.

Trust me (said Palmerin) we all desire to fulfill any occasion, that may be
found pleasant to the Princess Florenda, and seeing it is her pleasure to see
us Just, certify her, that we remain at her gracious command. No sooner had
the Esquire delivered his answer, but the Princess Florendos Knights came
forth of the Tents, when Don Florian having obtained leave for the first
Just, encountered the first Knight with such hautie courage, that he sent him
to measure his length on the earth. In this manner he served five without
breaking his Lance, but on the sixth he sheuered it in pieces, wherefore
Pompides delivered him his Lance, being very glad to see him speed so
luckily. The Princess somewhat moved, to see her Knights foiled so fast by
one, exhorted the other to make better proof of their Chivalry, but in the
mean while, a Damsel came crossing the valley on a black Palfray, and
yielding her self at the foot of the renowned Palmerin, began to utter these
speeches.

I desire you Sir Knight, for the honor you have received in your knightly
deeds of Arms, at this instant to conceive such courage as to follow me, and
you shall receive the greatest praise in giving me aid, as in all your life
time you never gained the like. Palmerin, who bare Arms only to succor the
weak estate of the distressed, desired Pompides to keep his Brother Florian
company, not failing to aid him in finishing that noble enterprise, and he
would not be long before he returned to them again, so giving a Conge to the
Ladies, he read away in all the have with the Damsel.

One of the Ladies belonged to the princess Florenda, seeing Palmerin to
depart on such a sudden, came to Pompides with these words. Truly Sir, it
seems you deserve not to bear Armor, or that you are afraid it should be
too much bruised, that suffer your Companion to depart alone, not knowing the
mishap of the Damsel, or the hard Fortune that may hap to attach the Knight.
Lady (answered Pompides) the Gentlewoman is in the government of so good a
knight, as I dare awarrant she shall have little cause to fear, but because
you shall net account me of such cowardice. I will presently direct my course
after him, rather to behold his hardy pr^wesse, then to think he should stand
in need of my help. Whereupon he took his leave of the Lady, and endeavored
himself that way the Prince was gone before him, but he had so far outreacht
him, that Pompides could not overtake him a good while after. Florian having
dismounted eight of the Kuights, could deal with no more because his laace was
broken, but one of the ladies came and presented him with another, desiring him
to break that one lance for her sake. Florian thanked the Lady very
courteously, promising to employ that lance, as a Present come from the hands
of her, to whom he would adventure his life in service: which to witness, he
prepared himself against the ninth knight, who having a good opinion of
himself, began in this order to speak to the Prince. I have a great desire,
sir Knight, to try your valor which is of such estimation, being in hope that
I shall manifest that to you, which you have not yet seen. Thus concluding his
speeches, and casting his eye upon Carmelia, the handmayde to the princess
Florenda, whom he had chosen as chief mistress of his heart: he couched his
spear against the Prince Florian, thinking to honor his Saint with his
overthrow. But reckoning without his Host, he was feign to make a new account,
and possess the place on the ground himself, being now as sorrowful for his
ill Fortune, as he was pleasantly disposed before he entered the Just. Having
thus unhorsed them all the last Knight came and took his turn, being the
valiant Germayne of Orleance, who had undertaken the charge to conduct the
Princess, being her affectionate and loyal friend: he bare in his shield, a
Tiger bearing a white Lion in pieces, and not knowing the Prince Florian, to
revenge the dishonor his companions had received, encountered the Prince with
such courage, that at the third attempt he was enforced to keep his friends
company, not a little displeased to be foiled in the presence of her, to whom
he had vewed the honor of all his victories. The Princess seeing the Iousting
was finished, desired the Prince that she might see his face, as also to report
his name, and of whence he was: at whose request he alighted, and having taken
off his Helmet, desiring her pardon, offered in humility to kiss her hand,
but she would not suffer him so to do. German of Orleance, who had knowledge
of him presently, came and imbrac^ him in very c^urteous manner: and turning to
the Princess Florenda, he uttered his speeches on this wise. Fair Mistres, I
account it no dishonor to be vanquished by this Knight, for that in all his
attempts he ever remains victor. When the Princess understood, that he was
Florian of the Desert, somewhat allied to her by kindred, she came running to
him, and embraced him with a marvelous protestation of exceeding love. And
then commanding the Tents to be taken down, because it was the time of her
departure, she desired Florian to accompany her to the French Court, where she
might do him more honor, then she was able in that solitary place. But
Florian desired pardon, for at that time he could not satisfy her desire,
because he would follow the Lady, who allured his Brother and Pompides, to
stray from him in that manner. The Princess understanding, y^ the knight, who
went with the lady, was the famous Palmerin, took Florian by the hand, with
these words. Now trust me sir Florian, it grieueth me that I was not so
fortunate as to know him in the time he remained here, being the knight that I
always desired to see: wherefore I desire you to make haste after him, and at
your return to pass through the kingdom of my father, that I may do him the
service my heart desires. Then the lady, whose words procured Pompides to
depart after Palmerin, came to the prince Florian, with these speeches. Sir, I
would feign have knowledge of the knight, who has betaken himself to travail
after my Lord your Brother, desiring you to certify him, the sorrow I conceive
for the words I gave him. Fair lady (answered Florian) he is such a knight, as
I am sure will be ready at all times, to employ himself in your service: he
is named Pompides, my brother and ever approved good friend, I humbly pray you
(said the lady) that you would excuse me to him, in the greatest offense I have
ungently offered. Florian promised he would accomplish her will, so taking leave
of the Princess Florenda, and all her noble company, he posted apace that way
as the Prince Palmerin took, standing in great fear, lest any mischance
should happen unto him.

CHAP. LXVIII.
How the Damsel having brought Palmerin from the fair Florenda, conducted
him to the Castle of the Duke of Ronsillion, where he enterprised the Combat,
to redeem three Ladies, whom the Duke kept as prisoners there, to put them to
death.
GReat have made the Lady that conducted Palmerin, all the way using no words,
till they came to a little village in the Dukedom of Ronsillion, where she
desired the Prince to stay a while, and she would go in the village, where she
would not stay but return to him presently. In the mean while, Palmerin took
off his Helmet, and sat him down to rest him, because he was somewhat weary
with travail, when the Damsel returning, and beholding him to be so young
and beautiful, she despaired with herself, that he was not able to fulfill
her earnest desire, for which cause she presently fell into tears.

Palmerin not knowing the cause of her sorrow, desired her that she would
express it to him, whereupon she began to answer him thus. Alas Sir Knight,
no other cause have I to lament in this order, but that I am the only
unfortunate woman in the world, who have traveled through the whole kingdom
of France, thinking to find a valiant and renowned Knight, but now I perceive I
am greatly deceived. For when I thought to entreat the Princess Florenda to
give me one of her most strong and hardy Knights, I finding you in the company
of those, who unhorsed her Lords with great valiancie, I had so good an opinion
of you, that I entreated you to follow me, not rehearsing the perilous danger.
I should bring you too. So that now being at the place, where you should put
your deeds in proof, I find you so young and of such small force, that I am
void of all hope to have any good success. Fair Lady (answered Palmerin) I
shall not fail to do as much as my power will permit, and perhaps cause
you to have a better opinion of me, then I see as yet you are willing to use.
Therefore I desire you to tell me, to what intent you have caused m^ to
travail with you, and doubt not but I will adventure my life, to do you
service in what thing soever. O Sir (quoth she) how happy were I, if the effect
of your deeds would agree with your words, for in this Village there
remains three Ladies Prisoners, the Daughters of one of the most noble Lords
in this Country, who because their Father would not give them in Marriage, to
the Duke of Ronsilion and his two Brethren, they found the means to murder
him, and these three Ladies they kept here in a Castle, to whom they have
granted the commodity, to find a knight that can prevail in the Combat, and
then they shall be restored to their former liberty. So that this is the
prefixed and appointed day, when the Combat must first be tried, against
Bramerin the chief gentleman belonging to the Duke, and one of the most
renowned knights in all this Country. If it chance that he be vanquished, then
must you hazard your self, against Cliaster and Alfarin his two kinsmen, yet
all these being conquer, will not return this victory, for then must you
deal with the Duke and his two brethren, who are known to be such stout and
noble Knights, that no one will conceive the courage to deal with them. Yet
must the Ladies, this day find a knight to avenge their quarrel, or else the
Duke has sworn they shall loose their heads, and to put the Ladies in some
hope, I went and told them I had brought a knight, who would undertake to deal
in their cause, which the Duke no sooner hearing, but he began to be greatly
offended. Surely said Palmerin, I must needs venture my self again those,
that will take upon them to use cruelty to any fair Lady, and will always
disallow, that a King or Prince should suffer any injury, to be used to a Lady
within his Dominions, and in token that my deeds shall agree with my words, I
will go presently to the abiding of the Duke, where I will inuay so much
against him, that his own wicked will shall work his overthrow. The Damsel
perceiving the noble mind of Palmerin, and the little doubt he had to deal
with his enemy, used better affectition to him now the^ she had before,
whereupon she brought him to the Castle where the Duke made his abode, to see
the end of this noble enterprise.

CHAP. LXIX.
How Palmerin being come to the Castle, entered the fight on the behalf of the
three Ladies, wherein he vanquished Bramerin, and slew Cliastar and Alfarin.
And how he fought with the Duke and his two brethren, against whom he
prevailed, and restored the Ladies.
THe Prince and the Gentlewoman being come to the Castle, where where were
assembled a great multitude of people to see the Combat, the drawe-Bride was
let down by the Dukes commandment, when Palmerin prepared to enter the
Castle, but Bramarin being provided, and seeing his enemy before his face, came
unto him with these words. Abide Sir Knight, and before you approach any
farther, you must deal with me: but I believe you have made such an ill
bargain, that when you see your ware, you will not brag of your penny
worthes. Trust me Sir (answered Palmerin) how ever it happen, I must hold me
content, but I am of this opinion, that to whom the right belongs, to them
will return the best advantage: and therefore I am fully determined to the
fight, because I fear I shall lack daylight to finish mine enterprise. Sir,
said the Knight, you shall not need to complain on the lack of time, for I
warrant you we shall end, and that right soon: at least wise, if so be that
I chance to fail, you shall deal with such fellows in the Castle, as will be
loath to prolong the time with you.

So giving scope to their Horses, they met with their spears so nobly
together, that Bramerin was thrown to the ground, void of any feeling, which
Palmerin perceiving, alighted from his Horse, and set his Sword to his throat
with these words. Yield Varlet, and swear henceforth never to injury any
oppressed Lady, or by my Sword, thou shall die the death. Bramerin seeing his
life to stand in such a ieopardy, deferred not to fulfill his desire. When
Palmerin mounting on Horseback again, entered the Castle, and in the Court
espied Chaster and Alfarin, each of them in a very fair green Armor, thick
beset with Azure flowers, who when they beheld Palmeria, they ran both at once
against him very fiercely, but with his Sword he saluted one of them so
soundly on the head, that he made him sure enough for doing any more harm.
Which his fellow perceiving, came and behaved himself with very great courage
against the Prince, but in the end, Palmerin brought him under his obeisance,
when demanding if he would yield, he made answer no: because he thought some
would come to his reskew, but Palmerin seeing him so obstinate, failed not to
send his head from his shoulders. All this while, he was so happy to escape
without any hurt, whereupon he came to the gentlewoman, and asked if there were
any thing else, wherein she would have him to employ his service. Certainly sir
(quoth she) I see no danger can withdraw your coruage, but now you must hazard
your self, against the Duke and his Brethren: and their use is to Combat above
in the Castle, where I pray God to send you as fortunate success, as hitherto
you have had against these iii. knights, in hope whereof, I will not leave your
company, but be partner of all the Combats you shall try, to deliver these three
distressed Ladies. After the Gentlewoman had thus concluded her talk, she
showed him the stairs, which he ought to ascend, where he might find the Duke,
and his brethren, when Palmerin commanding Siluian to stay his coming without,
took his sword and went up, till at last he came into a very fair Hall, where
he beheld three Ladies sitting attyred all in black, and endued with such
singular beauty, that he greatly lamented their ungentle oppression.

He had not long stood beholding them, but he perceived three Knights very
well armed to come before him: and to the Ladies, one of them began in this
manner. Fair Ladies, why should you procure so great misfortune to your
selves, and also labor to work our ruin and destruction? you are the cause
our three knights have been so cruelly abused, whose deaths I entend to
revenge so sharply, and your lives shall satisfy part of our loss, whereat
your Champion shall be but little pleased, and we not with all this fully
satisfied. The Duke who spoke these words, came from the Ladies accompanied
with his Brethren, bearing all one manner of devise in their shields, which was
Cupid chased away, leaving his Bow and Arrows all bloody, and broken in
pieces, the Duke advanced himself to Palmerin, on this wise. Sir knight,
suffice your self with the slaughter of my knights, and yield your self
friendly into my hands, for surely it would be to my great grief, to be the
death of so good a Knight, whereto Palmerin shaped his answer. Sir, thing not
to abuse me, albeit I am in place, where you suppose you may command me, for I
am come to no such end, but rather to constrain you to use recompense to
these ladies, whom you have so highly offended, then for any favor I seek at
your hands. With that the Duke and his Brethren struck freely at Palmerin, and
he on the other side charged them courageously, the Ladies weeping, destred God
in the force of the Prince, to show some favor and loving regard unto them,
for they well perceived how dangerous the fight was, especially on his side to
contend against three. Yet in the end, such was his valor and high good
fortune, that by one and by one he overcame them all, but the Duke seeing his
Brethren vanquished, and himself left alone to abide all the hazard, took
occasion to pause with these words.

I pray you Sir Knight if your think it good, to tell me your name, and of
whence you are, that I may know him I shall vanquish, or at least that shall
remain victor over me. Sir, said Palmerin, the knowledge of me is so
needelesse, that I will no stand to satisfy your desire, first, let us make an
end of our Combat, and then perhaps I will let you understand more. Belike
(quoth the Duke) you make such account of the victory, that you will admit no
leisure to Parley: well, since you are so bent, I do not yet conceive such
weakness of my self, that I will make suit to you for any favor. Then they
began again, the great effusion of their blood, witnessing the perilous
danger of their fight, but at last the Duke was constrained to fall down at the
foot of the Prince, as il pleased as he was shrewdly handled, especially
because he thought never to see his Lady and Mistress again. Wherefore
humbling himself, he desired the Prince to save his life, who being always
accustomed to great pity, and seeing him so affectionate toward his Lady,
took him from the ground in his arms, promising to use the matter in such
sort, that he would make him to be highly esteemed of her. The Duke received
the Prince offer, but upon this condition: that if she scorned to be merciful
unto him, then should he presently bereave him of life, because it was
impossible for him to suffer such furious and sharp assaults, as he daile
proved for her sake.

CHAP. LXX.
How Palmerin having conquered the Duke and his brethren, procured such means
with the three Ladies, that he caused them to be married together. And how
Florian and Pompides arriving there, Palmerin departed with them toward
Constantinople.
AFter this great broyle was fully finished, and all things ordained in a
decent order, on a sudden there entered the Hall about twenty Soldiers, and
two Knights very well armed, who spoke aloude, that it was necessary he should
be slain, that had killed the most famous and noble Knight of the world:
wherewith they came to Palmerin, who defended himself with his Sword,
intending to be his Butcher that should first lay hands on him. But the Duke
seeing so great a tumult risen without his knowledge, put himself between
them, desiring a farther pause, that all matters might be taken up quietly.
Then was the Duke canducted to his Chamber, and Palmerin went to the Chamber of
the Ladies, where his wounds were very diligently dressed by Organel the Dukes
Surgeon, who was as careful for him, as ever he was for the Duke his Lord.
During the time that Palmerin stayed with the Ladies, he reported to them the
great estimation both the Duke and his Brethren made of them, how also the
cause of his sharp dealing, was only because they denied his love, with
diverse other reports, which the Ladies esteemed both laudable and honest: so
that they granted themselves, only to be ruled and governed by the advice of
P^lmerin, because he had stood so much their friend, and therefore they
promised to grant what he did think well of, seeing he determined nothing,
but what might stand with his own honesty, and maintenance of their honor.
Palmerin was so joyful to see the Ladies conformable to his appointment, that
he made more account of the conquest of them, then he did of the honor he
received in the Combat. Wherefore he walked to the Dukes Chamber, where after
he had embraced him, he declared the good agreement and conversion of the
Ladies, whereat the Duke received such content, that for a great while he
remained as it were in a sound: but being come to himself again, he began in
this manner to utter his spee^^^s. Sir knight, if at your hands I have received
any damage, I must needs confess your recompense is double, if so be your
deeds agree with your words (as blame me not Sir, if I am somewhat hard of
belief) you have brought me the only comfort and (...) of my life. Worthy
Sir, said Palmerin, what I have spoken, your Grace shall find the effect
according, and doubt you not, but both you and your Brethren shall now at last
purchase the delight, which neither your long study nor compulsion could bring
to pass. While they continued this talk, the two knights that were in the
(...) with the soldiers, came into the Dukes Chamber with their Helmets off:
when Palmerin seeing they were his two brethren, Florian and Pompides, ran and
embraced them with very great joy, desirous to know how they had sped at the
Iousting before the Princess Florenda, which Florian rehearsed from point to
point, as also in what manner they happened thither. The Duke seeing these
three Knights to be all brethren, supposed them to be persons of some great
birth: wherefore he commanded Organeli, because it drew toward night, to
conduct them to their chambers, where Palmerin certified them what he had done
in the Castle, as also the Marriage he had appointed, between the Duke, his
brethren and the three Ladies, and thus they discoursed, till sleep commanded
them to leave off. In the morning, the Duke and his brethren married the
Ladies: Dragonell the second brother, chose to him Armisia the second sister,
and Darofant espoused Arismena the youngest of all. Then was the feast
solemnized with marvelous great royalty, when Palmerin discovered himself
and his brethren, which made the Duke to conceive the better opinion of
himself, that he had been foiled by such a worthy Knight: to whom he shows
great honor, during the time their staying there, which was longer the^ they
would have dove, but only to pleasure the Duke and the Ladies. At length,
taking their leave of all the honorable company, they departed from thence,
intending to go strait to Constantinople, if no other chance did come to turn
them again.

CHAP. LXXI.
How Targiana the Turks daughter, commanded her knight Albayzar to go to the
Castle of the Giant Almarol, there to maintnine her beauty against the
Princess Miragarda. And how he arrived there, and entered the Combat with
Dramusiande, whom he was not able to vanquish, wherefore, in the night he took
down the Shield of Miragarda, and brought it thence away with him.
NEw must we a while, leave the Prince Palmerin and his brethren, who having
left the Duke and the Ladies, are travailing in their journey toward
Constantinople, and now let us see what has happened at the Castle of Almarol,
in maintaining the beauty of the fair Miragarda. I have already certified
you, that Olori^que Alchediane the Soldane of Babylon, had left a son behind
him, who was a great enemy to all Christendom, who seeing himself brought
into the despising of Fortune, determined to follow the course of knightly
adventures, and to make his valor known among the number of the most famous
knights. It happened, that first he went to the great Turks, Co^rt, which being
stored with courageous knights, he had the better mean to try his hardiness:
which proved so effectual, that above all there, the Fame was attributed to
this pattern of all their Chiuallry named Albayzar, who became the amorous
servant of Targiana, the Turks daughter, to whom the only name of beauty was
given, through all the Turks Dominions.

And as Love is usually an augmenter of their minds, who endeavor themselves
to be under his obeisance, having now en^lamed the heart of Albayzar makes him
to forsake his wonted liberty, and to wander in the solemn conceits of his
inucigled fancy, which made him to brook his passions more meekely, having
received the original of his grief from such an excellent occasion. Pargiana
likewise bearing him good affection, would (...) if Love had such a
sovereignty ^uer him, as in protestations and sweet pa^ley he often
confessed, so having her platform (...), and the order of her invention ready
coined, she calls (...) Chamber wind was was her wont, and there she began
this solemn devise.

Sir (...) if your (...) such an in^^llible foundation, as you have often both
said and sworn, it shall be (...) as easy for you to drive me from doubt, as
to provide your self against any encroching danger. And I have often told you,
that it is requisite I should understand the depth of your deeds, as well as to
be lead away with your amorous and fabulous words, for you have often told me,
that I am the fairest Princess living on the earth, and that you would venture
your life in maintenance thereof: to bring you to your trial, give care to the
adventure I shall give you in charge to finish.

It has bin blazed abroad, that in Spain, at the Castle of the Giant Almarol,
there remains a Princes named Miragarda, who is reported to be the only
Goddess of beauty, because the Gods never frame one more beautiful then she,
yea, and by the judgment of those that have seen her Picture, truly and
justly figured by the perfect proportion (being a Shield placed before the
castle, which who desires must first adventure his strength) this report I
tell you, affirms her to be no less fair, then the adventure of it self
has been tried famous. To this place should I have you to depart presently in
travail, and in my favor and defense of beauty, show your hauty courage
against the Giant her Champion, whom if Fortune will suffer you to vanquish you
can never do me greater pleasure, then to bring me hither the Sheeld of the
fair Miragarda. And at your return, I pray you to journey to Constantinople,
where in the Court of the Emperor Palmerin, you may witness your self against
all those, that dare deny you to be the most faithful servant to the fairest
Princess alive: the fulfilling hereof, makes you Lord both of me and mine. My
gracious Lady (answered Albaizer) I see at this present the perfect love you
bear me, in that you will vouchsafe to employ me in your honorable service,
whereto I will presently betake my self, promising to bring you the Sheeld of
Miragarda, which I will place at your feet, because all the Ladies in the world
ought to humble them selves to you.

Thus breaking off his speeches, he took his leave of her, wearing a very fine
green Armor, whereon was wrought many golden Spheres and in his Sheeld upon a
field of Silver, he bare for his devise a Phaenix, where under was written in
golden Letters, the name of Targiana. Travailing thus through diverse Kingdoms,
at last he arrived at the Castle of the Giant Almarol, soon after the combat
that Dramusiande had finished with the Prince Florian. Albayzar perceiving the
number of shields at the Tree, esteemed greatly the valor of him, who had the
power to accomplish so rare exploits: but when he beheld the Picture of
Miragarda, he could not choose but confess the advantage she had above his Lady
Targiana. Nevertheless, he would put her will in due execution, albeit that
night he could not, time was so far spent: but in the morning he presented
himself before the Castle, when Dramusiande advertised of his arrival, armed
himself, and came forth on Horseback, so after a little friendly greeting
passed between them, they couched their Spears, and at the third encounter,
sent one an other to the ground courageously. Then drew they forth their
swords, delivering such cruel assaults to one another, that Miragarda and her
Ladies did highly commend them: but yet she stood in fear, lest Albayzar
should vanquish Dramusiande. Albayzar, who all his life time had not felt such
hardy blows, thought not his promise so certain, as when he departed from the
Princess Targiana, and Dramusiande found his enemy so strong, that he could
hardly assure himself of any victory: for so cruelly did they deal with one
another, and wounded one another in such grievous manner, that one would not
have thought, how possible the life could remain in them: whereupon
Dramusiande began thus to the fair Miragarda. My good Lady, do not now refuse
your servant in so great a need, that he which has never done you service,
shall cause your Dramusiande to lose the recompense, which he thinks by his
travels to have worthily deserved. On the other side. Alybazar was in his
complaints to the Princess Targiana, desirign her but to remember him in
favor, and that was sufficient to ouercom his enemy: so commending him self to
his God Mahound, he began again afresh with Dramusiande. Long they fought, yet
neither could prevail, for they thought themselves indifferently matched, so
that the night approaching on, made the^ to leave off their Combat, and to
finish it on the next day if they could. Dramusiand entered his lodging, meaning
on the morrow to end their strife one way or other, and Albayzar retired being
of the same mind: but knowing no where to rest him for that night, that he
might the better deal with Dramusinde on the morrow, he returned to the tree
of the Shields, where remembering the promise he had made to his Lady, every one
being fast asleep, he took down the shield of the Prinesse Miragarda, which
he purposed to bear with him into Turkey. But first he would pass the Court
of the Emperonr Palmerin, according as his lady Targiana had commanded him: and
fearing least he should be pursued, he stayed in no place, till he was twenty
miles from thence, bearing the shield covered that no body should know it. And
there where he lodged, he stayed until his wounds were healed: very sorrowful
because he could not vanquish Dramusiande, to bring the perfect prize to his
Lady Targiana.

CHAP. LXXII.
How after Albayzar departed with the Shield of Miragarda, Dramusiande left the
Castle of Almarol to follow after him. And how Armello brought word to the
Prince Florendos, of the Shield, which made him presently leave his shepherds
kind of life, and with his fellow shepherd took themselves to travail.
NOw Dramusiande having dressed his wounds, so well as he might in so short a
space, in the morning returned to the Tree, intending to end the Combat, or
to leave his life in the field: but when he began to greet the Picture of
Miragarda, according as he was woo^^, and found himself dispossessed thereof,
he was taken with such sorrow, that he could abide in no place.

When he had sought all about the Tree, and could not find it, he began to
suspect, that the Knight against whom he maintained the Combat, had carried it
away with him: wherefore as secretly as might be, he concluded to pursue
presently after him, not staying till the Princess Miragarda was certified
thereof, because he could not yield account of that, which she had so
faithfully committed to his keeping. Then was he determined to seek all the
world over, but he would be revenged on this discourteous Knight, whose treason
he rehearsed to the Giant Almarol, of whom he took his leave, not staying til
his wounds were healed, nor yet thinking on the danger wherein he took
himself to travel.

After that Dramusiande was gone, Miragarda understood how her shield was
stolen by a Knight, after whom Dramusiande had determined to travail which
made her to take it somewhat heavily, thinking though Dramusiande were gone to
recover it again, yet when this mishap should be known to the Tristfull
Knight, he would now take his weapons to follow him, that offered her so great
discortesie, for in him she reposed a better confidence then in Dramusiande.
Armello seeing the shield was stolen, and that Dramusiande was gone in that
order, had good hope now of his masters good Fortune, which made him trudge in
have fromthe Castle, and all the way he went by the River Thesin, till at last
he found him keeping Sheep by a Fountain: where staying himself a while, he
heard the sound of a Flute, which often stayed, to utter the complaints of an
euercharged mind, so that Armello was greatly moved to hear his
lamentations. Then came he a little near to behold his face, which was so much
offended with essuse of tears, that Armello could not iusily say, whether it
was he or (...) at his feet fate another Shepherd very simply apparelled, and
playing many delightful devises upon his Flute, so that Armello verily thought
that place a wilderness of woes.

The sight made him in such case, that he kn^w not how or which way to begin
his tale, for well he knew his Lord had minded such a (...) life, at such (...)
as he left the Castle of the Giant Almarol, yet hardly did he know that this
was he: wherefore encouraging himself, he approached unto them with these
speeches. I pray you my friend, to report to me if you can, some tidings of a
young knight, whom Love has caused to undertake a solitary kind of life, when
his estate does rather command him to use knightly Arms.

Trust me my friend (answered the Shepherd) I am my self so cruelly urged
with the outrages of love, that I can hardly endure to make you any answer,
for I am he whom Love has allowed to all misfortune, but never to no day,
hour minute of quietness. With that the Prince Florendos began in this order.
Oh sir, do not you seem to blame Love so much, if you have sustained any
loss, impute it to the feebleness of Fortune and not to Love, let me alone to
complain of Love. Armello cast good view upon him, and knew that it was the
Lord, albeit he was changed out of all remembrance, wherefore, falling down at
his feet, he desired him, not to execute on himself such extreme grief, as
he would not favor himself with some pity, which would greatly displease
her, who had power to command him otherwise. Then was Florendos somewhat
offended with himself, if he had done any thing that might displease his best
beloved, which Armello seeing, stayed him thus.

Sir, I have taken the pains to come hither, that you might understand a
matter greatly for your profit. Dramusiande has long time kept the shield of
Miragarda, and many knights has he brought under her obeisance, but such is
the misfortune, that her Shield is stolen from thence by a Knight, of whom
she has no hope to recover it, but only by your means. Florendos, to whose
heart was already stricken a sudden joy, began in this manner. What will you
Armello wish me to go succor other, seeing me scant able to help my self,
how may I in this weakness presume against any one, when being in my chiefest
strength, I could not conquer one only knight? Nevertheless, because I will not
still remain in sorrow, which hitherto has daily and usually borne me
company, I will follow the Knight that has borne away the Shield of my Lady,
and will (if I can) make him to yield it me again, but if Fortune send him
the victory against me, then I shall be out of all troubles and sorrows in
this world. Thus rising up, he desired his fellow shepherd (who was his only
delight to accompany him in heaviness) to bear him company, and leave that
sad and silent kind of life, to follow the noble exercises wherein he had been
always trained, for albeit he was as then simple, yet had he been tried a
good knight at Arms. The knight, though he was content with his sorrowful
life, yet had he not that power to refuse the request of the gentle P.
Florendos, for whose amity they left their sheep, and went into a Town hard
by, where they remained till they were strong enough to endure travail. And in
their time of stay there, they made each of them a fine new black Armor, both
alike, without any devise at all, because the Prince would not be known, which
made him not to send for his Armor at the Castle of Almerol. Then departed they
from thence, and travailed to seek the shield of the fair Miragarda, but they
travailed not long together, for that a misaduenture unhappily parted them, as
you shall be certified more hereafter.

CHAP. LXXIII.
What and who the Knight was, that bare Florendos company while he was a
Shepherd, and what was the occasion that they parted company. And how Albayzar
proceeded with the Shield of Miragarda.
BEcause you shall understand, who the knight was that kept Florendos company
all this while, the History declares, that after the Knights (who were
Prisoners with Don Edward) were departed from the realm of England, Florama^
the prince of Sardignia, took his travails on the Coast of Spain, purposing
to try the adventures of the Princess Miragarda. And because he arrived at
the Castle of Almarol, when Florendos was gone into England, to try the
adventure at the Castle of Dramusiand, he had leisure sufficient to behold and
muse on the fair Portrait of Miragarda, which seemed apparent in his eye, that
he entered into praises, and surpraises of this beautiful Image.

Which made him desire, that some knight would take his way thither, to the
intent he might show some service to the gracious Princess, the seemelinesse
of whose Picture, caused him verily believe, that there was none in the world
might compare with her for beauty. But as he remained in this opinion, the old
remembrance of Altea claimed one title in his cogitations, which urged some
motion of strife to arise, because he became no less affectionate to
Miragarda, then the knight that on her behalf had won so many shields,
whereupon he began in this order. O Floraman, why will thou undertake to
exercise Arms, seeing thou have not the power to appease thy tedious
travails, but laboring to get out, thou enrollest thy self the farther in?
Thou wast once content to be vanquished at Constantinople, whereby thou might
shun any more to follow this deceitful Love, and art thou now desirous to
enter Armor, when both Fortune flies from thee, and thou not able any way to
endure it? Oh blinded affection, that must roue on every stranger, and know
how strange Love made thee of late. But seeing too late, I come to the
knowledge of mine error, and have gone so far, that I cannot return without
my feet wet, I purpose to pursue her, by whom Fortune has allowed me a
laboursome life, resigning joy to those that are wont to be familiar, and
contenting me with heaviness, since I can no way eschew the hap. And seeing a
grave is meetest for a dead man, a solitary Wilderness for a comfortless
wretch, I mean to bear her company with my mournful heart so long, that she
shall die to see me, and I twice dead at any time to seek her, then shall my
mishappes have a full conclusion, and despair strike me dead once for all.

Thus breaking off his lamentations, he walked along by the River Thesin,
forsaking Horse, Armor, and al knightly behauior, entering a little shade of
Trees, where he determined to live solitary. And the greatest contentation he
had, was when he sat keeping Sheep, to play mournful devises upon his Flute,
and to write and grave in the bark of Trees, certain amorous sonnets, and
Passions of a Lover, which as the Trees grew, so his several Sonnets
flourished upon them.

And albeit he was resolute to live from al company, yet when Florendos came
unto him, he found him so near agreeing to his complexion, and his manners and
motion coined in the like stamp, that he was glad to receive him for a partner
in his heaviness. So that they lived together with Herbs and roots, pangs,
grief, sobbes, sighs and salt tears, the daily food and sustenance of a
Lover, this was both their sollace and sorrow, till Armello caused them to
depart from thence, as you have heard discoursed already.

It so fortuned, as these two careful Princes rode along by the Sea side, they
espied a little Galley coming toward them, wherein sat a Lady endued with
such singular beauty, attyred in black, and accompanied with such a modest
behavior, as every one might judge her to be some person of Nobility. At
this Ladies feet sat two aged women, who espying these two Princes, commanded
the Mariners to row to the Shore, when beholding the Princes very rufully,
the Lady saluted them in this sort. Sir Knights, I desire the one of you to do
me so great favor, as to come abord my Galley, to aid me in a cause, which
desires the help of one only Knight. Fair Lady (answered Florendos) we
bear Arms for no other purpose, but to employ our selves in the aid of
distressed persons, so entering the Galley, he commanded Armello his Esquire, to
take his Horse, and expect his coming at the Castle of the Giant Almerol,
where he would not fail to meet him.

Thus leaving the Prince Floraman, the Galley launched forth, that it was
quickly out of sight: wherefore he rid on, desiring the company of Florendos,
to whom he became marvelous affectionate. After he had travailed three days,
he came to a very strong Bridge, at the four corners whereof, was four very
fair strong Towers erected, being desirous to approach there unto, he espied a
Knight willing to pass, but an other denied him, saying: if he would leave his
Shield behind him, and give up his name to be signed in writing, as was the
custom of the Fortress, he should be permitted to pass quietly. Such an ill
custom (answered the Knight) was not ordained to hinder such as my self, but
rather for such, as could not make their part good against their enemy: this
said, he gave his shield that he bare to his Esquire, and received another of
him, and so encountered with the knight of the bridge, but he not able to
withstand the force of the Spear, was dismounted from his Horse, and thrown
into the water. Horaman somewhat abashed at this hardy encounter, approached
near the Bride, where he behold in the Esquires hand, the Portrait of the
fair Princess Miragarda, which made him desirous to stay, to see how this
enterprise would take conclusion. The Knight of the bridge was no sooner given
the turn over, but there in one of the Towers one sounded a Horn very
vehemently, at sound whereof a knight came forth, bearing in his hand a mighty
Axe: wherewith approaching to the knight, he charged them with many sharp and
dangerous strokes, but in the end, such was the valor of the other Knight,
that he laid him flate upon the ground, giving his place to another, because
he had no leisure to arise. Then came forth a tall and ougly Giant, bringing
in his hand a Mace of iron, and to the knight he delivered these taunts. Thou
destroyer of my blood, do thy duty to defend thy self, for to revenge the
horrible injury thou have offered me, I intend to cut thy body in so many
pieces, that the Fowls of the air shall be glutted with thy carcass. The
knight refusing to give him any answer, covered himself with his Shield, so
that between the Giant and him, began a terrible and dangerous Combat, but in
the end, the Knight who was named the valiant Albayzar, so coniured the giant,
that he left him not while there was any life in him. Albayzar being very sore
wounded, and seeing no more resistance come, entered the Foretresse, where he
stayed till he was able to deal with Floraman, who desired to have a sling at
him, for to get the Shield of the fair Miragarda. For being in that low
estate, he did esteem it great dishonor to assail him: because courageous
minds, rather desire to encounter those who have might to resist them, then to
deal with such as have no power to defend themselves. Wherefore he past the
Bridge, not knowing whither he were best to take his way: for his desire was,
not to absent himself far thence, because he would not loose the commodity
to sight with Albayzar: in the mean time he wasted away the idle hours, in
this woonted silent and amourous Passions.

CHAP. XLXIIII.
Here is declared, to whom the Fortress upon the Bridge belonged, where
Albayzar behaved himself so worthily, and why the Custom was ordained. And of
that which happened to Florendos, sailing in the Galley with the Lady.
IN circumstance of the History it is mentioned, that the Duke Artilio in
Spain, had a daughter, who living to enjoy his possessions after him, was
nourished in company of the fair Belizarda, daughter to the King Recinda. But
love having gained the power of the aforesaid Lady, caused her to be fancied of
the Prince Onistalde, with such continuance between them, that in the end
their desires happened to take effect.

But after the Prince had received the order of Knighthood, in the Court of the
Emperor Palmerin, he changed his mind, and became affectionate toward a
Princess in the Emperors Court, so that he forgot the Duchess, in such sort,
as never since his departure, it was her fortune so see him.

The Duchess perceiving his unkind dealing, and she not able to er^lude it
from her memory, ordained this Custom at the Bridge, where she had a Castle,
and caused the passage to be kept by the Giant Lamortan, with two Knighes more
of his lineage, who suffered no Knight to pass the Bridge, without leaving his
Shield and name in writing, persuading her self by this devise, at length to
recover her beloved Onistalde.

For his sake were many Knights in great danger, who assailed themselves in
that strange adventure, till the valiant Albayzar came who ended the custom,
to the great grief and vexation of the Duchess. Nevertheless, for the
bounty and valor she perceuied in him, she commanded that he should be
honorably used, till he had recovered the hurt of his wounds, so that Albayzar
stayed there in the Fortress of the Duchess a good while, till at last he
departed from her, and took his journey toward Constantinople.

Now as concerning the Prince Florendos, who saled all the night with the Lady,
till in the morning they discovered a Castle in the midst of the Sea, which
was very artificial founded upon a Rock: where taking occasion to strike on
shore, she began to Florendos in this manner. Sir Knight, now will I declare
for what cause I have brought you to this place, letting pass my boldness
under your knightly courtesy. Within this Castle abides a Damsel, of as
little virtue as beauty, who understanding that I had espoused one of the
fairest Lords in this Country, devised the mean to acquaint her self with
him, by reporting that a Knight had deprived her of one of her Castles, so that
by her entreaty, she won him to stay her Champion in her distressed cause. At
the time as she had gotten him to her Castle, she fell into such unlawful
liking of him, that she vowed never to suffer him to depart from thence,
unless such a Knight came, as could prevail against five Knights of
marvelous strength, but against more then one Knight, she will not suffer
Champion to enter combat, so that I stand in doubt, never to recover my loving
Lord and Husband again, Fair Lady (says Florendos) send you to summon these
five Knights to the sight, mean while I will provide my self to stand in your
defense.

Shortly after, he advanced himself toward the Castle gate, he espied the five
Knights to com forth at a false door, who were all strongly armed, and to the
Prince one of them began in this order. Sir knight, we esteem it best for you
to yield your self, seeing Fortune has been so much your enemy to conduct
you hither: so shall you find us friendly to you, where otherwise you may
incur your self double despite.

Trust me (said Florendos) first I intend to try your cruelty, before I will
use any regard of your gentleness: afterward I will make you answer of my
further intent. Upon this they came and assailed the Prince, and he likewise
behaved himself with great agility against them: so that they confessed, they
had never found such valor to remain in one Knight, and he, never to have
assayed a more perilous adventure. Often they stayed and fell to it again,
the Prince having slain two of them, and the Lady using reproachful words
unto them, that they five had not the power to prevail against one, which set
the other in such a chafe, that they began to charge him with unmerciful
blows, seeing they had no way to escape from him, because on the one side the
sea hindered them, and into the Castle they could not retire, for the lady
within had commanded the gate to be made fast. Wherefore two of them fell down
dead before him, when the last Knight seeing the danger he stood in, took the
point of his Sword in his hand, and humbled himself before the Prince, as thus.

Most worthy Knight, since fortune has allowed you the honor of this
victory, and that you have prevailed against all my companions, let pity
enter into your heart, to save the life of him, who most humbly submits
himself to your mercy. I grant thee thy life (said Florendos) because I will
not be thought of such a bloody mind, to kill him that is not able to resist
me.

Then sat he down to rest himself, the Lady using great care to bind up his
wounds: when the Lady within the Castle, standing in fear lest her stubbornnes
might procure the greater injury, sent one of the damsels, who opened the gate,
which Florendos seeing, took the Lady by the hand, and entered the castle,
where they met the Lord that had been prisoner so long, who embraced his Lady
with very great thanks, for bringing the Knight that had won him his liberty,
to whom he began in this order.

Worthy sir, your Knightly deeds have gained such honor, that I cannot make
estimation of them according as they have worthily deserved, but if it shall
please you to rest here a while, we will yield you what courtesy we can, and
then we will depart together. Florendos gave him great thanks, and stayed
there to see the Lady that kept the castle: but he could not attain to his
desire, because she had made her self fast in her Chamber, so that no one
might come to have a sight of her.

Then went he to see the place, where the Lady used to imprison the Knights,
amongst whom he found the Prince Guerin: who rejoiced maruelously to see
Florendos, and knowing that he had finished this hard adventure, he accounted
himself happy to be in his company.

After that eight days were expired, they departed in a Galley from thence, to
the house of the Knight and the Lady, where Guerin and he found themselves so
graciously used, as if they had been in the Court of Constantinople.

Within a while after, they took their leave of the Knight and the Lady, who
gave to each of them a very good Horse, and in their traveling together, they
parted from one another, because Florendos desired to journey alone, that he
might better approve the adventure, which Fortune had reserved for him.

CHAP. LXXV.
How Palmerin, Florian and Pompides, in their travail met with a Damsel, who
brought them to the Castle of Dramorant the Cruel: where they found Albayzar
with the shield of Miragarda, who had vanquished twelve knights, and slew
Dramorant the Lord of the Castle.
PAlmerin and his brethren, continuing in their travail toward
Constantinople, riding through a Forest, saw a Lady come riding toward them in
very great fear: who being come somewhat near them, Florian stayed her
Palfray, saying: Fair Lady, I pray you to show us the cause of your fear?
Alas sir (quoth she) how can I stay to report any thing, seeing I dare scant
assure my self in your company? for when I enterprised my journey to the Court
of the French Queen, two knights came and resisted me, endeavoring them selves
to abuse mine honor. But Fortune was so favorable to me, that at my cry, a
Knight came who defended my cause: and behaved himself so worthily against
them, that in open fight he slew them both. Then passing by a Castle at the end
of this stone wall, he was assailed by twelve Knights: who, I fear me, will be
the death of him, if he be not speedily helped by some good rescue, and trust
me Gentlemen, the loss of him would be very great, being one of the most hardy
knights in all the world. I pray you Lady (said Florian) bring us to the Castle
where the knight remains in such danger as you seem to report: for it were
great pity, to suffer such a knight to die for lack of help, Although
(quoth she) I was otherwise determined, yet will I bring you to the place, as
well to try your worthiness, as also show my good will to the Knight, who in
his own danger has pleasured me so much.

This said, they rode on together, and in short time they heard the clattering
of the weapons, where they found the knight to have slain five or six of the
Knights, behauing himself also very manfully against the other, whereat the
Prince fell into great admiration, which the Lady seeing, how they sat still
and looked on, began to enter into these words. Why Gentlemen? if you
determined to do nothing when you came, it had been more honor for you to
have kept on your journey, rather then to suffer so good a knight to be slain
in your presence, and you stand by refusing to aid him, which makes me judge,
that your weapons are very ill bestowed on you. Fair Lady (answered Palmerin)
the Knight does so well discharge his duty, that we should offer him great
wrong if we presumed to aid him: for so might we cut off the praise, which he
should worthily bear in the obtaining the victory, which is the only cause of
our stay. Mary, if we should perceive the Knights, to have any dangerous
advantage over him, then would we show him such aid in their resistance, that
you should recall your words, and have a better opinion of us. While they
continued this Parle, the Knight (who was the famous Albayzar) of the twelve
knights had left but four alive, which urged Florian to this opinion in words.
I believe that this knight is ordained, to darke^ the deeds of all Knights,
yours only accepted dear Brother Palmerin, whereunto I know he neither can
nor may approach, nevertheless, I know not any one that professes knightly
Arms, but would strive to exalt his deeds, seeing the behavior of so noble a
Champion. In fine, they perceived all the Knights to be slain, except two, who
were constrained to yield themselves to this noble conqueror, when presently
came forth Dramorant himself, very bravely mounted and strongly armed, which
Albayzar seeeing, mounted on his horse, and came to the prince Palmerin and his
Brethren in this manner. I pray you gentlemen, to bestow one of your spears
upon me, to receive the knight that prepares himself against me, assuring
you, that I will not forget to remember your courtesy in so doing. Sir, said
Palmerin, because it is duty to favor such a Knight as you, I am content to
give you mine, but me thinks, seeing your self sore hurt, you should rest
awhile, and refer the Just to one of us.

Albayzar taking the Spear of Palmerin, said: If Fortune be so much mine
enemy, that she suffer me to be brought into this knights subjection, you shall
have the better leisure and love, to manifest the prowess which remains in
you. Then his Esquire seeing his master to want a shield, came and presented
him the Portrait of the fair Miragarda, but Albayzar refusing it, said. That
it was rather made to look on, then to employ it to any use in fight. So
preparing himself to run at Dramorant, who seeing him destitute of a sheeld,
cast his own to the ground with these words. Albayzar, I am very sorry to see
thee in this poor estate, because the victory I might obtain in vanquishing
thee, cannot return any great honor to me: and because thou shall not think
me, to have any advantage of thee, I give thee this privilege which never yet
had any. Here ending his talk, they fetched their course, and met each other
with such pusisance, that they were both forced to fall to the ground, very
sore hurt: then rising and taking their Swords, they began so fierce a
Combat, that Palmerin did highly commend the valor of Albayzar, whom he would
gladly have knowledge of, which made him to begin in this manner.

Truly I make such account of him, that detaineth in his puissance the Shield
of Miragarda, as I verily believe, Dramusiande who had it in keeping, has bin
vanquishing and brought into his subjection, which does urge me to great
marvel, seeing I could obtain very little more at his hands, so that were
this Knight so well disposed as I, I would hazard my self against him, to
bring the shield to the place from whence he has brought it. Credit me, said
Florian, I can hardly believe that Dramusiande is as yet vanquished, albeit the
deeds of this Knight may move us to think it: wherefore let him first finish
his combat, and then we may be resolved out of this doubt. Albayzar and
Dramorant strove so long together, that Palmerin would have parted them, but
his labor was in vain: for Albayzar would by no means give over, till he
had discharged Dramorant of his vital breath. When himself being at the point
ready to faint with his long travail, as also the loss of his blood:
Palmerin, Horian, and the Lady came and sustained him, leading him into the
Castle, where they were better received then they looked for, and had good
leisure to attend the wounds of Albayzar, which were very many, as also very
dangerous.

CHAP. LXXVI.
How Florian and Albazar made defiance each to other, and appointed to end
their strife in the Court of the Emperor Palmerin.
BEcause you shall understand more of Dramorant the Cruel, the History
declares, how Eutropa the aunt of the Giant Dramusiande, had a Brother, who
was named Dramorant, one of the stoutest Giants that in his time lived. He
being in his flourishing years, became amorous of a fair Damsel, the
daughter of a wise and discreet Gentlewoman, who would not give her consent to
the marriage, wherefore he took her away perforce, and had a Son by her, named
Dramorant, whose hauty and valiant deeds in time obtained the name of Cruel.
It chanced the mother died in her travel, which struck so deep to the heart
of the Giant, seeing her dead by whose love his life was maintained, that he
through extreme grief dyed shortly after, wherefore the child was kept by his
grandmother, until such time as he grew in years and strength, more then in
decent and virtuous manners: for his whole endeavor was, to kill the innocent,
ravish and spoil fair Ladies, with his continual inclination to all
desperate and cruel attempts, so that he was feared of the Country round
about him, until such time as Albayzar came, and prevailed against him as you
have heard before. Palmerin, Florian, and Pompides, keeping him company in the
Castle, until he had attained a better disposition: Florian desired him to
report, how he had gotten the shield of Miragarda. For (quoth he) I know not
well what to think, because he that kept it, is well known to be one of the
best Knights that ever professed arms.

Sir said Albayzar, I have won the shield by Prowess and worthiness, and
have vanquished him that undertook to keep it. Moreover, I have vowed not
only to present it my Lady Targiana, whose Knight and obedient servant I am
till death, but also to show it in all Princes Courts in the world, to manifest
to all Knights, who dare avouch the contrary, that my Lady Targiana, is the
most fair and noble Princess living. And in this opinion, I will first go to
the Court af the Emperor Palmerin, to make proof of that which I have here
professed.

Florian hearing his speeches so proud and arrogant, greatly envied thereat,
and returned this answer. I am of the opinion Sir, that this enterprise will
return you small advantage: for you shall find in his Court, Ladies, to whose
beauty your Targiana will seem altogether counterfeyte. But that which is
more, you shall find so many Knights to enter this challenge, that I doubt you
shall receive more shame by this ridiculous intent, then either fame or praise
can any way bear you company.

Albayzar in a great anger, stayed Florian with these terms. Sir knight, you
see well in what estate I am at this present, but if you dare take the pains to
come to the Emperous Court, whither I intend to go so soon as I may possible:
I will cause you to know, how far the beauty of my Targiana does surmount
any Lady that you can name, if so be you dare enter the Combat with me: and
hereon I give you my hand, that I will not fail to be there as soon as you, if
so be I may possible, where our deeds shall witness the worthiness of the
cause that we maintain.

The three Princes upon this departed presently, leaving Albayzar, to whom we
will return when occasion shall serve: but they endeavored themselves so well
in travail, that they arrived in the kingdom of Hungaria, being glad they had
attained so near to Constantinople. But Palmerin remained in his former
doubts, as concerning the command of his Lady and Mistress: but Siluian the
only Physician of these extreme Passions, governed his masters cogitations
exceeding well. Nevertheless, his two Brethren perceived somewhat, yet they
durst not intrude themselves in the matter, but rid on till they came to a
place, where they would take shipping to pass into Greece. And while the
Mariners were providing for their departure, the Princes delighted to walk
along in a fair plain, where they had not long stayed, but they espied a
Coach covered all with black, and three Esquires that drove it, making very
doleful and grievous lamentations. Upon this mourneful spectacle, Florian
approached the Coach, and lifting up the cloth, he beheld a knight lying in
green armor, so imbrued with blood, that one could hardly judge of what color
it was. This moved Florian to great heaviness, and being desirous to know the
cause of his misfortune, he came to one of the Esquires, willing him to report,
by what mischance the Knight was slain. The Esquire having small leisure to
stay, made him shortly answer in this sort.

If you desire to understand ye unfortunate hap of this knight, follow me, and
I shall bring you to the adventure, where you may atchieue such rare renown,
that neither death, nor time is able to extinguish out of memory. Surely
(quoth Florian) I have always desired to employ my self, where I supposed to
be the greatest danger, yet could neither fear dismay me, nor any doubt hinder
me. And thus concluding his speeches, he followed the Coach, desirous to see
the end of that the Esquire had told him. Palmerin and Pompides seeing him
gone so soon, walked softly along the valley, when in a while a Damosel
presented her self before them, mounted on a black palfray, and saluted them
in this manner. I desire you gentlemen, that one of you would so much favor
me, as to go with me to the succor of a Lady, whom three knights endeavor to
abuse, and to put herto death in most cruel manner. Pompides hearing the
co^plait of the Damsel, began as thus to the Prince Palmerin.

Seeing this present enterprse, does not require your force to be shown
therein, I pray you give me leave to accompany the Damsel, that I may try how
Fortune will assist me in this cause.

Palmerin, who desired to be alone in the company of Siluian was very glad that
Pompides should assist the Damsel: so taking leave of each other, Pompide^
departed about his enterprise, and Palmerin to the accustomed remembrance of
his Lady Polinarda, wherein he wasted so much time, that he could not repair
to any place of lodging, but was glad for that night, to take his rest in a
little thicket of trees. Where he had sooner laid him down, but he heard one
complain in very doleful manner: when drawing near, the better to hear him
(the night being so dark as they could not descrie one another) he heard the
heavy weight begin as thus. O fond Florendos, why do thou thus complain of
thy grief, seeing thy Lady Miragarda does take such delight therein, that she
forces not of his utter ruin, who submits himself chiefly under her
gracious regard? I knew right well, that all travail may be ended, in the
desire of one to do you service: but what shall he do, to whom you use such
entertainment, that you may not permit him leisure, that does you most honor,
nor will suffer him to be forgotten and deprived of life, whereby he might
have less occasion to complain of your cruelty? So ending his mo^es with a
grieous sigh, he sat him down and fell asleep: then Palmerin perceiving it was
the prince Florendos, determined oftentimes to make himself known, but
fearing to hinder him of his enterprise, changed his mind: bewailing as much
the heaviness of Florendos, as he did the extreme case of his own misfortune.
And when the day appeared, he departed as secretly as he could thence away:
desiring to attain the Emperors court, where he might conclude the several
motions of doubt and fear, which Love presented to his oppressed mind.

CHAP. LXXVII.
How Florian, accompanying the Coatch with the dead knight, met on the Seas
with Arduramet, the bastard Brother of the valiant Albayzar, where they defied
each other to the Combat. And what haphened to Pompides, following the Lady.
FLorian of the Desert, keeping company with with the Coach and the three
Esquires, being a great way out of sight from his brethren, one of them began
thus to confer with him. Sir, seeing you desire so much to know the Knight
who is slain, and that you seem affectionate to revenge his wrong if need
were, give ear, and I will discourse thereof to you at large. You shall
understand that this Knight is named Sortibran, the eldest Brother of the
famous King Frisol, whose worthiness has (...) been such, that he ever bare
the name of the most (...) in all his kingdom.

So it is, that Fortune very little (...) to him, as yester-day conducted an
Esquire (...), who with weeping tears, desired So^^bran to (...) doubtful
cause, whereto he courteously gave his consent, not thinking on the treacherous
intent of the Esquire, who brought him into a place wherefoure of his enemies
awaighted his coming, and settling himself against them all, in the end
Sortibran was there cruelly slain. We being advertised of this great mishappe,
came to fetch him to his Castle, where he might see his wounded body honorably
interred, mean while, one of his young Sons is gone to the Court, to sooke
some knight that will revenge his Fathers death. Therefore, if you desire to
Dsisist and succor him in this case, you shall not only enlarge your eternal
renown, but also shall work such occasion, that none may or dare presume to
commit any such Treason. Florian promising the Esquires to accomplish them
request, rid on with them, till they came to the Sea coast, where they entered a
Galley, that attended their coming, and having there sh^^^ed the body of
Sortibran, they sailed away with a pleasant gale of wind.

Not long had they been on the Seas, but they were discovered by four Turkish
Galleyes, (...) presently and borded them, when (...), who was a Moore, (...)
into their vessel, where beholding (...) Florian, and judging him to be a
noble Knight, he entertained him very courteously, commanding the Esquires, to
cast the dead body of their Lord into the Sea, and the next morning they heysed
sails, to go on their journey.

This Arduramet was the bastard brother to the Prince Albayzar, who was
travailing to seek him, to give him to understand, that the Soldane of Babylon
his Father was dead, after whom it was his right to succeed his place.
Arduramet in talking with Florian, demanded of him, that any time he had heard
of the Prince Albayzar, and reported such marks and tokens to him, that he knew
well it was he, that had vanquished Dramorant the Cruel.

Then bethinking him of the Combat, assigned between him and Albayzar, to be
performed in the Emperors Court, and that his business had so chanced, as he
could not meet him there at the appointed time, he began to be greatly
offended with himself, in so much, that Arduramet desired him to show the cause
of his heaviness.

But when he had understood each several clause, in a great anger he began
this to rage: Think thou there is any Knight in the World, that may or dare
attempt against my Lord and Brother Albayzar: certainly thou art much
beholding to Fortune, from delivering thee from so great a danger.

Nevertheless, if thou have so great a desire to show thy prowess as here
thou do seem to use in protestation, let us now go to the Court of the
great Turk, where I will make thee confess before the Princess Targiana,
that Albayzar is the most honorable knight living on the earth, and she, the
only and perfect Goddess for beauty. Beside, if thou think he has offered
thee any wrong, if thy stomach serve thee thereto, revenge thy self on me,
who will die in his cause, for proof whereof, receive there my Glove, if thou
dare.

Florian, who desired to manifest his valor in strange countries, received
very gladly the challenge of Arduramet, who thinking to honor his Brother with
the Conquest of Florian, went to the Court of the great Turk, where to their
determination, at this time we will leave them.

Let us now remember Pompides, who travailed with the Damosel till they came to
a thicket of Trees, where he heard one make a very great clamor, and looking
aside, beheld a Knight offering monstrous dishonor to a Lady, and two Knights
sitting by on Horseback, laughing at the simple shift she made, to defend her
self from the villainous intent of the knight.

Pompides not able to suffer so great shame in his sight, couched his lance
against him that abused the Lady, so that he ran him clean through the head,
and laid him dead on the ground before him: and dealing roughly a while with
the other twain, he served them both of the same sauce, as the just desert of
them that would abuse themselves in so vile a sort.

Then came the Lady, and submitted her self at the feet of Pompides, but the
fear she sustained by their cruelty, would hardly suffer her to use any
speech: wherefore Pompides taking her in his arms, and seeing the heavy estate,
and great perplexity, he comforted her in this manner.

Fair Lady, let no fear as now seem to dismay your mind, for here is no
body, but such as will employ themselves in your defense.

My Lord (quoth she) these bloody minded men have brought me into such fear,
that albeit I see dead before my face, yet the remembrance of their cruelty
does still make me afraid: wherefore I desire you to depart, and leave me to
mourn my great mishap, else shall I still be fearful, as the Bird on the
branch in danger of the Fowler.

Pompides began to smile, to see the little trust the Lady reposed is his
company: nevertheless, minding to satisfy her desire, who was very
beautiful, as also of a virtuous and honest disposition, he departed from her,
accompanied with the Damosel that had brought him thither. Who reported to him,
how the Knights that would have ravished the Lady, met with her as she
travailed toward the Court of king Frisol, who were newly come from the
slaughter of Sortibran, and meeting with her, endeavored by their fair speech
to allure her to their lust, but when they saw she would not consent, they
would urge her to it perforce. So Pompides departing from her, followed after
Palmerin, because he desired to travel still in his company.

CHAP. LXXVIII.
Of that which happned to Palmerin of England, after he was departed from the
Prince Florendos, and how while he was fighting with the Giant Bracandor,
Albayzar arrived there and help him to overcome his enemies.
AFter that Palmerin had left Florendos sleeping at the Tree, he came into a
Forest, half a mile from the City of Buda, where the King of Hungaria lay,
and there he perceived a company of Knights and Ladies by a Fountain,
wherefore fearing least their company might be some hinderance to is travail,
he turned his Horse to ride an other way, for it was all his intent to abandon
place of resort, because he might the better commune and dispute of his Love.
As he was ryding, he turned his head, and espied these pleasant company by the
Fountain, to be very fiercely fighting together: wherefore he turned again to
go thither, where he saw this great conflict, but before he came, all was
done and quiet, because the enemy had taken them that gladly strove with
resistance, who were the Duthesses of Pontus and Duraca^ travailing to the
Court of their noble Father, in the company of the prince Ditree, who in this
unfortunate skirmish was slain. Which urged Palmerin to great heaviness when
he saw him, as also the heavy cry the Ladies made, being in the hold of
Bracandor, a mighty Giant, inhabiting there in a Rock, and had ten Knights
there daily waiting on him.

Palmerin pitying the Ladies mishap, couched his spear, and ran against the
Giant with such force, that he laid him along on the earth, in manner as though
he were stark dead: which the ten Knights standing by and seeing, came
altogether running upon him, but he defended himself so well, that they had not
the power to unhorse him, for his hardy blows made them quickly cool their
courage. Bracandor being risen up again, commanded the knights to retire,
because he would reuengo his injury himself: whereupon they gave over, when
the Giant and Palmerin sternly dealing with one another, Bracandor in the end
began greatly to faint. The Knights seeing the danger he was in, forced not of
their Masters command, but came and beset the Prince Palmerin, who (albeit he
received many dangerous hurts) paid them their due, but little to their profit.

The Ladies continued in prayers for his good assistance, esteeming him the
best knight that ever they had seen: and Bracandor seeing the marvelous force
of one only knight, began to blaspheme his God, and ran in such violent
manner against the Prince, that had not God endued him with great policy and
force, the least of his blows was sufficient to have slain him. Bracandor
beholding six of his knights slain, through his dangerous wounds, and
despair of himself, fell to the ground: Palmerin being well pleased to be rid
of such an enemy, in short time sent the other four to bear their Master
company, to whom he came, offering to take off his Helmet, that he might have
presently cut off his head.

But Astapardo came forth accompanied with ten knights, and charged him so
sudainly, that he had not leisure to commend himself to his Mistreffe.
Palmerin was reduced into very great perplexity, yea, and his death appointed
in this furious skirmish: had not the puissant Albayzar presently arrived
there, who seeing the great injury was offered to one knight, and that it was
he which gave him his spear, when he fought against Dramorant the Cruel: he
ran against Astapardo in such manner, that his spear went quite through his
body and Armor, and the other behaved themselves so well, that the most part
were slain, the rest saved their lives by flight. Palmerin seeing himself
delivered from so great a peril, came and offered great thanks to the Prince
Albayzar: but he not suffering him to use any such courtesy, without making
known what or who he was, set spurs to his Horse, and rid away in great
haste.

Then Palmerin returned to Bracandor, and finding him to be as yet alive, he
commanded the Esquires to lead him after him, and so he rode to the City of
Buda, accompanied with the Duchesses and the Ladies, who were very sorry for
the death of Ditree and their other Knights, but well pleased again by the
noble and hautie deeds of Palmerin.

CHAP. LXXIX.
Here shall be declared unto you, what and who the Giant Bracandor was, and
wherefore he came to remain in that place.
SVch report the History delivers unto us, that in the Perilous Isle there
remained a Giant named Bucarquant, who ruled the Isle in such cruel manner, that
his subjects the did stand in more doubt of him the death. So that to put him
beside the government of the Isle, they concluded to conspire his death by
poison. As for his Son Bracandor, who was innocent of the wicked and
diuillish deeds of his Father, yet fearing that government would prick him to
the like cruelty, they chased him out of the Isle, giving him no other company,
then his Nephew Astapardo. These twain went into the Kingdom of Hungaria,
where they purposed to people a little Mountain, to which they had given the
name of the Inhabited Rock, for in no other place might they be suffered to
live in quiet, because revenge would be sought for the cruel deeds of
Bucarquant. There they had gotten a company of bloody minded and dishonest
knights living by robbery, deflowring fair Virgins and Ladies, and all
villainous deeds that might be devised, till at last they heard of these
Duchesses, who went to see King Frisol their Father in law, accompanied with
the Prince Ditree and other Knights. Suddenly they came and set upon them, so
that the Prince and the Knights were slain, as also five of them belonging to
Bracandor, till to their rescue came the Prince Palmerin, who behaved himself
as you have heard before.

When they were come to the City of Buda, the King Frisol understanding the
death of his Son, took it so heavily, as such a great loss did forceable
constrain him, yet he dissembled his grief, and came with the Duchess to
the Prince Palmerin, giving very great thanks for his courtesy, and commanded
he should be used with marvelous good respect, till his wounds were healed,
and his strength somewhat better increased. The Citizens took the giant
Bracandor, and without the kings leave they put him to death, burning his
bones, that nothing might be left to be seen of such a cruel villain. Soon
after, King Frisol, not able to withstand the extremity of his grief, meekely
yielded his days to the stroke of death, which was no small grief to his noble
Lineage, but as well to his loiall and obedient subjects, who greatly lamented
the loss of such a gracious Prince.

His Obsequies and Funerales most magnifically finished, Estrellant the Son of
the Prince Ditree, received the name of their rightful and renowned king, who
committed the government of the Scepter to one of the most noble Lords in all
Hungaria, because his time of ease was not as yet come, but would follow the
exercise of a valiant Knight at Arms. And Palmerin stayed a while in the City
of Buda, till his strength would permit him to bear Armor, and then he
followed his intent, which was always to see the places of greatest adventure.

CHAP. LXXX.
How Don Florian being in the Court of the great Turk, entered the fight with
the Bastard Arduramet, and vanquished him.
Here must we remember Arduramet and the Prince Florian, who being landed,
came to the Turks Court, where Arduramet received great thanks of the Turk
himself, for the Prisoners he had taken in his fortunate voyage. Then coming
to the Princes Targiana, whose gentle nature afforded him a gracious welcome:
Arduramet delivered his speeches in this manner. My gracious Lady, since the
time I departed from your excellency, I have endured along and tedious
travel, to recover my Lord and Brother Albayzar. And albeit it was not my
Fortune to meet with him, yet have I heard such report of his deeds, as my
heart is contented, and my labors finished, assuring you, that he has woone
such renown against the Christians, that they which have no knowledge of him,
do daily desire both to see him, and to make proof of their puissant
behavior against him.

Beside, I have heard, that he has conquered the Shield of the fair
Miragarda, wherewith he is gone to the Court of the Emperor Palmerin, to
maintain against all knights that dare avouch the contrary, your seemly
self, to be the only Goddess of beauty on the earth. And during the time I
was in his search, it happened I took certain prisoners: among whom I found
this Knight, who both told me news of my Lord Albayzar, and how he had
assigned to fight against him in the Emperors Court, whereupon such words arose
between us, that we have appointed a Combat to be tried and ended in this Court.

Florian seeing the great pride of Arduramet, was stricken with such collar,
that he began to utter his mind in these speeches. Arduramet, we are arrived
in this place, where I must entend the mean to accomplish my promise. And
albeit Albayzar is a valiant knight at Arms, as the effect of his deeds do
manifest no less: yet will I maintain and prove against you, that he has
not won the Shield by any manner of Conquest. As for the Prince Targiana, her
beauty I both esteem and confess of such authority, as he that ventureth
the field in her favor, cannot choose but speed happily in all his deeds. But
if it shall please her to license me the Field, I will defend against you,
Albayzar, and all the Knights of your law, that I rather deserve to be received
in her service, then you all, or any that you can esteem of.

Arduramet, who could not suffer these brave words, especially of one that was
his prisoner, in a rage cast his Helmet on the ground, and began to rail in
these terms that follow. Oh Mahomet, why do thou suffer in my presence, a
Christian to presume in so vile and presumptuous brags? My gracious Lady, I
desire you to assure this miscreant the Field, for I vow not to leave him, til
I have revenged this rare and monstrous injury.

Targiana commanded Florian to take of his helmet, to whose will in gentle
manner he presently obeyed: but he was so offended with the words of Arduramet,
that his beauty was far otherwise, then it was always accustomed, for which
cause, the Princess commanded Arduramet to depart, and to make himself ready
to enter the combat. As for the Prince Florian, her affection was so greatly
placed on him, that she took him prisoner under her protection: and the better
to assure him safe from danger, she commanded fifty Knights should be
presently armed, to see that none might come near to hurt him, during the time
he should combat with Arduramet.

Then Florian kissing her hand, departed to the place appointed for the fight,
and she up into the Chamber, to see how every thing happened, and then came the
f^^^^e knights into the field by the advice of Targiana, where Arduramet was
prauncing like a noble champion, and the great Turk himself stood in the
window by his Daughter, desirous to see the end of this noble enterprise.

Ardumaret bowing himself to the Princess Targiana, couched his Spear
against the Prince Florian, with these words. Now, my Lady, I will cause this
Knight to know, that your servants can, and will bring all other into their
subjection: but Florian brake his Spear so valiantly upon him, that he sent
him to the ground with marvelous violence, whereat the great Turk was somewhat
displeased, but Targiana greatly triumphed.

Arduramet sorrowful for this mishap, came to the Prince with his Sword in his
hand, as thus. Sir knight, my Sword shall make amends for this fault, which if
thou offer not the sooner to resist, I will trench my Blade in the belly of
thy Horse. I perceive well (said Florian) it is needless to use any advantage
to such a knight as you, and so descending from his horse, between them began
a dangerous Combat. Wherein Florian so cruelly martired the Armor of
Arduramet, that the great Turk would gladly have had them parted, fearing the
death of Arduramet, but Targiana desired him to let him try it out, because
her mind did assure the victory to the strange knight.

Arduramet seeing himself so ill entreated, thought many times to have yielded
himself: but thinking on the shame he might get in so doing, concluded to
fight till his latter gasp, which in short time he did, and fell down dead at
the feet of Florian, who departed out of the field, and came to the princess
Targiana, in whose presence he fell on his knee, uttering these speeches. Fair
Lady, it is not unknown to you, that through mischance and unhappy adventure,
I have been brought into this land, where I am strange to all, and not known
of any: where, seeing your bounty has allowed me the victory, I desire in
recompense of the great honor you have done me, that I may henceforth employ
my self in your service, wherein I shall manifest, how greatly I am bound to
your gentle and courteous nature. Targiana somewhat changing color, looked
earnestly on her Father, and then came and received Florian very graciously,
allowing him to be her only knight: whereat the great Turk was very well
pleased, and he stayed there in the service of Targiana, who was no less
affectionate toward him, then he was willing to do that which pleased her.

CHAP. LXXXI.
How Dramusiande and Florendos sought together, and hurt each other very
dangerously, and how Palmerin arrived there, and wrought the means to relieve
their feeble estates.
THe Giant Dramusiand, of whom no mention has been made since his departure
from the Castle of Almarol, travailed many Countries, to find the Knight that
had taken the Shield of Miragarda thence: in which tranaile, he proved both
famous and fortunate, that at last he arrived at the Castle of Dramorant the
Cruel, who was his kinsman, and there he understood, that he which had slain
Dramorant, was the Knight that carried away the shield of Miragarda, which made
him the more affectionate and desirous to seek him. And as he rode through the
Dominions of Hungar i^, he met a Knight riding very sad and full of heaviness,
attired in black Armor: to whom he used a courteous greeting, but the Knight
made him no answer at all, whereupon he took him by the hand, saying: Sir
Knight, why do you not make answer to those that offer you courtesy?

The Knight being in a sad conceit, and at these words reviving himself, cast
his eyes on Dramusiande very grievously, with this answer. Trust me sir
knight, this heart of mine is so afflicted, these eyes so ouerwatched, and
these ears with silent opinions so much dulled, that I am ignorant whether you
saluted me or no: but if you should think I heard you, and refused to answer
you with the like, credit me, you should very much deceive your self. I
perceive well (quoth Dramusiande) you have spoken the truth, wherewith I hold
my self well contented: but could you report me, where I might find a knight,
who bears a Shield, wherein is pictured the fairest face that ever nature
framed, having on it the letters of her name, which are, the peerless and
inequall Miragarda.

At these words the knight gave a grievous sigh, saying: Surely sir, I do
greatly desire to meet with him my self, because my travels are to no other
end, and I seek him, only to combat with him, to bring back the Shield,
with his head to the Castle of Almaroll, from whence he was so bold as to take
it away. So that this enterprise touches me more then any one alive:
wherefore, I desire you to give every our travel, and betake your self to
rest of your life, for mine has been preserved in the danger of this
adventure, which makes me the more desirous to follow it. Dramusiande (who was
ignorant of this Knight) seeing him to use his intent in that order, endeavored
to know him, but his labor was spent to no end or profit. Wherefore they were
so incensed with such anger, that they gave scope to their Steedes, and met
together so nobly, that they were both dismounted to the ground, and then they
fell to it a fresh with their swords, so that their Armor and expense of their
blood, witnessed the dangerous estate of both their persons. For Dramusiande
thought, no two Knights in the world could handle him so, without it were the
noble Palmerin, or Florian his brother, which made him a great while to think
this knight was one of them, till at last faintness one either side willed
them to breath, when Dramusiande looking on his battered armor, began on this
manner.

Oh wretched Fortune, am I brought into such debility, that I have not the
power to vanquish this one knight? (...) me dear Mistres, I know this mishap
chances, only because you have no mind to remember me. This fight have I
attempted under your gracious name, wherein suffer me not to be vanquished, but
grant me so happy, that I may render your Shield again into your custody: and
afterward (in recompense of my dutiful and faithful service) put me to death
if it be your gracious pleasure.

The Knight on the other side was as grievously passioned, thinking verily to
finish his days in this Combat: wherefore, he began in this order to use his
complaints. Madam, I should be very happy (considering the desire I have
always had) at this present hour to end all my troubles, because your
delight has ever been, to bring me to the last extremity of my vital course.
Yet am I highly one way contented, knowing that I die in the honorable
service, wherewith I have continually endeavored to gratify your desire.

So breaking of his speeches, they fell very egerly to their combat, and at
last was brought unto such feebleness, that they were both forced to fall to
the ground: but Fortune, who preserved them to a greater conquest of honor,
caused at that very instant, the noble Palmerin of England to arrive in that
place, who knowing Dramusiande, supposed verily that he was slain, wherefore he
came to the other knight, and taking his Helmet off, and perceiving that it was
the noble Florendos, he became so ouercharged with grief, that he could hardly
sustain himself from falling to the earth.

Then he commanded Siluian to go to the City, and presently to bring
Chirurgions with him, because he thought verily they were almost past recovery:
and Siluian knowing, that the death of these two knights, might be an occasion
to put his Masters life in danger, used such diligence, that in short time he
returned with two very expert Masters in Chirurgerie. Palmerin desired them to
manifest their knowledge at that present, in recovering the health of those
dangerous wounded Knights, and his recompense should exceed in liberality: so
when the Chirurgians had searched their wounds, they found them not so
dangerous, as their weakness and weariness, wherefore they promised (by the
grace of God) to bring them into as good estate of health as ever they were.
The Prince rejoiced at their good answer, and caused Siluian to fetch a Coach
from the City, wherein they were brought to the house of an ancient Gentleman,
and there Palmerin bare them company, until they were able to travail again.

CHAP. LXXXII.
How Albayzar came to the Court of the Emperor Palmerin, and of the conditions
he made there, to begin his aduenturous intent.
VEry well provided, and full of renowned Knights, was the Court of the
Emperor Palmerin, at such time as Albayzar (having left Palmerin of England,
where he slew Bracandor) arrived there: when alighting from his Horse, he
came vy into the great Hal, in very fair green Armor, beset with golden
Spears, with two Esquires attending on him, where finding the Emperor sitting
with the prinoipall of his knights, he thronged through them, and reverenced
himself before the Emperor, with these speeches.

Most dread and puissant Emperor, I have been constrained to visit your Court,
for two causes which I hold as especial: the one to see the noble minds that
are always here abiding, the other to try my self against them all, on her
behalf that has sent me hither. Giving you to understand, that for the love
of the fairest, and most noble Lady in the world, I have been at the Castle of
the Giant Almarol, where by force I have obtained the Shield of the fair
Miragarda, which by force I bear, only to honor that Saint, to whom I homage
my heart, and will enforce all knights to yield as vassailes. So that if your
Highness will license me the Field, I will compel all the Knights of your
Court, as also any other that dare avouch the contrary: My Lady and Mistress
Targiana, the only Daughter to the great Turk, my Lord and Sovereign, is she
that shall bear the prize all for beauty.

And these conditions I do require in mine attempt, that the Defendant, on his
Shield shall bring the lively Portayt of his Lady, with her name to be verified
at the foot thereof, because it shall be the only recompense the Conqueror
shall gain. And there be any, who will manifest themselves to be but
indifferently favored of their Ladies, they shall be sworn to give in writing
the name of their Mistress.

As for him that has the good hap to vanquish me, he shall not only be Lord
of the shield of my Lady Targiana, but shall have likewise delivered to him,
all the shieldes which Fortune shall allow me by my prowess. And furthermore
to be granted, that the knight dismounted in the Just, shall not have the
license to fight with his Sword, but as vanquished, deliver his Shield, and so
depart.

Now expect I your answer most redoubted Emperor, as concerning ye request of
him, that has travailed many a strange Country: and now comes to make
trial of the valor and puissance of your knights, if so be they can conceive
the courage to adventure the combat on the behalf of their Ladies. When he
had ended his speeches, a great tumult arose among the Knights and Ladies of
the court, who were very desirous to see Albayzar in the field: the Ladies, to
know the valor of their amorous servants, and the Knights to manifest the
cause to deserve their love, every one wishing to quallifie this presumptuous
challenge.

The Emperor would make no answer to Albayzar, till such time as he had
conferred with his Council: when then he returned with this reply. You have
(sir knight) attempted such a hauty enterprise, as if we should deny, we
should not only grant our cowardice, but also hinder you of many noble
Exploits, to the grief of your self, as also of such knights, as have a
desire to show themselves in the field. Wherefore, the field is licenced you
at what time you please, and your conditions allowed, which were before
specified: but I desire you first to resolve me of one thing, are you not
allied to the Soldane Oloricque of Babylon, because it seems you resemble him
somewhat in favor? My lord (answered Albayzar) the courtesy you have offered
me, moves me in humility to kiss your gracious hand, assuring you that I am
the son of the Soldane Oloricque, and am called by the name of Albayzar.

The Emperor arose immediately and embraced him, saying: I would gladly see you
in my Court, in another estate then you are at this present, but love shall now
excuse your enterprise. And then he commanded, a Chamber should be provided
for him, but he made refusal thereof, because he had sworn not to depart the
field, till he saw the issue of his hauty desire.

The Empress and Gridonia sent unto him, desiring that he would suffer them to
view the Shields of Targiana and Miragarda: whereon they entered into judgment,
that although Targiana was very fair, yet was she nothing comparable to the
Princess Miragarda. With several suppose they went from hand to hand, till at
last they came to the Princess Polinarda, who was somewhat offended, to see
the princess Miragarda so singular and fair: which made her now to wish, that
the noble Palmerin of England would now arrive at the Court, for she persuaded
her self, that his worthiness would advance her to the glory of the Shields.
So that sometime she was minded to send for him, but then by and by she altered
her thought: so that she ministered occasion, to some disdainful mind of that
noble Sex, how no stability or constancy, is to be found in a woman.

Then was the picture of Altea brought, which for a precious Jewel, supplied a
room in the Empress coffer: and comparing her with the fair Miragarda, she
was found to differ very far in beauty. Albayzar receiving his Shields,
departed to the place appointed for the Turnament, where the Emperor had
commanded two Tents to be erected: and on a Pillar near adjoining, was placed
the fair Portrayt of the Princess Targiana, and Miragarda was set at her
feet, in sign of being vanquished. And because it was as then somewhat late,
the knights had not the opportunity to try themselves that night, wherefore
they referred their determination till the next morning.

CHAP. LXXXIII.
What happened to Albayzar, at his first running at the Tilt.
ON the morrow, the Knights preaced apace to the Ioust, when striving who
should be first, caused a murmr to arise amongst them: wherefore the
Emperor commanded the Judges of the field, that no one should approach the
Tilt, but first to be permitted by their appointment. Then was Crispian of
Macedon allowed the first Ioust, but Albayzar would not receive him, because he
brought not in his Shield the Portrayt of his Lady, according to the order
appointed: in like case all the other Knights had failed in that point,
wherefore the Ioust was stayed for four days, in which time, every one had his
Lady to be artificially figured.

On the fifth day, Emerald the Fair, who was reputed in the Court, for a good
and hardy Knight, presented the Regardants a Shield, wherein was pictured the
fair Artezaura, and having done his duty to the Courtly Attendants, he ran
against Albayzar, who met with such puissance, that he sent him headlong to the
ground. Then Escarol entered the Field, presenting his Shield, wherein was
engraued his Lady, and Artinella bianca written under her: whose ill fortune
was such, that he was sent to keep the Prince Emeralde company, and their
Shields placed under the fair Targiana.

The next were Altaris and Rugeralde, both of them the servants to Belliana,
daughter to the Duke of Constance, each of them beating her Picture in his
Shield: whom Albayzar served even as he had done the other. Wherefore the
emperor commanded the Just to cease for that day: greatly esteeming yt noble
valor that he had seen accomplished by the Prince Albayxar. The Emperor came
to the Iusting place the second day, a great deal sooner, and the Ladies hied
to the windows, to see which of their servants should accomplish the best
endeavor, but Albayzar was on horseback, attending him that should first come,
who was Sir Badiart the Knight to Lucenda, but the slendernes of her beauty,
and simpleness of her Knight, made his Shield be placed amongst the other.
After him came Ricardoze, for his fair Adoreta, Argolant, friend to Poliphia,
Archanero of Sclauonia, the knight of the fair Iuliana, Leonardin and
Baruolant, French knights, and both affectionat to the Princess Arnalte,
Alisban, the servant of Armenia, and diverse others that I will not name, to
avoid prolixitie, but Albayzar still remained victor, to the little content of
the Emperor, who saw his Knights so foiled, as also the noble Primaleon, who
determined if he remained still conqueror, to enter the combat against him.
Oftentimes would Albayzar frequent the Image of his Lady, with his Amorous
discourses, being so blinded in Love, that the picture of Miragarda, whom every
one commended, he supposed inequall to his Lady Targiana. The Retrait sounded,
every one retired, and the Emperor after supper, required the Prince Albayzar
to the dancing, where the vanquished knights durst not show themselves, because
they were ashamed to come before their Ladies. The dancing done, every one
betook themselves to their Chamber, and the Prince Albayzar departed to his
Tent, enjoying very litte rest, because of the desire he had to be at his
pastime. In the morning, Albayzar was very early in the Field, rehearsing
diverse purposes before his Lady Targiana, no less proud and stately, then like
the frantic fittes of a Lovers invention. And while he stood musing to his
Lady, the Judges of the Field caused a Tree to be placed by the Pillar, to hand
the Shield upon that Albayzar won, and on the top they set the Shields of the
Princess Miragada, in token that it had been attained in Combat, whereas the
other was but the figure of his own amorous love. Then entered the Field
Bellizar, the Son of the Prince Belcar, very bravely Armed, before him was
carried the Picture of his Lady, the fair Dionisia, Daughter to the king of
Sparta, and in his own Shield he bare for his devise, a Scithian Artcher with
his bow and quiver of Arrows. But albeit he was a strong and hardy Knight, at
the second meeting he was dismounted, and Albayzar forced out of one of his
Stirrops, which he recovered again quickly.

After Bellizart, came Don Rosuel his brother, presenting his Shield, bearing
the Portraite of Dramaciana, the handmayde to the Princess Polinarda, but he
was likewise dismounted at the second Just. Whereat the Emperor was greatly
grieved, and sorry that he had granted the field to the Prince Albayzar, for the
Knights of the Court were almost dishartened, because the two noble Brethren
was overcome so soon, and their Shieldes placed among the vanquished Knights.

CHAP. LXXXIIII.
What happened on the sixth day of the Just.
ALbayzar stayed very long the sixth day, before any came to present themselves
at the Tilt, wherefore the Emperor went to the chamber of the Princess
Gridonia, where he leaned in the window, beholding Albayzar to sit in the gate
of his Tent, using many amorous cogitations to the Picture of Targiana, as
concerning the travails he had attempted, only for her love and favor. But
while he was busying his eyes and mind on this beautiful prospect, a knight
entered the field armed in black, whereon was dispearsed little flames of
fire, bearing in his Shield the like show, which he presented to the Judges,
and couched his Lance to do his duty. But Albayzar seeing he wanted the Image
of his Lady, refused to enter the Just with him, which the knight seeing to be
denied for so small a matter, came to Albayzar with these words.

Sir knight, you ask much of him, who wants to answer that which you seem
to crave, for if the shield I have presented lack that you would have, and I
as much wish, it is only to continue it in resemblance to him, that has borne
it many a day with grief, but never a hour of joy or gladness. Yet have I seen
the time, I could have presented you a picture which could have enforced you to
a great marvel, and my self very little to esteem of your might, but so
unhappily has Fortune frowued, and my present hope sequestered from any good
hap, that I can present you with nothing, but this doleful appearance, which in
midst of my misfortunes, I bear with an afflicted mind, the only image of
him, that sometime has had, and yet in time may, a joyful countenance of his
Lady and Mistress, desiring you to excuse me, for this is the best auailes,
that Fortune has left me.

Sir Knight (answered Albayzar) I willingly would, that the picture wherewith
you threaten me, were at this present in your government, for then would I make
you know, that I bear another, whereto all Ladies living ought, and must give
place. Nevertheless, seeing the Emperor has stayed so long in regarding your
honest speeches, and the extremity of grief which you have reported,
constrains me to break my promise, I francke and freely permit you the Just.
Then couching their Spears, they passed the first course very gallantly, but
at the second, the Knight was sent to the earth with his heels upward, and
Albayzar so greatly terrified with the stroke, that he lost both his Stirrops,
and was constrained to hold by the mane of his Horse, or else himself had
borne him company. But when he perceived the Knight ready to charge him with
his Sword, he leaped from his Horse, advancing his Shield to bear of the
hardy blows of the Knight, so that between them began such a dangerous
Combat, that the regardants hardly knew, to whom to impute the most
advantage. But Albayzar, to whom Fortune had been always friendly, suffered
him to charge the Knight with such mighty blows, that by little and little he
perceived him to faint, wherefore at last, scant able to hold out any longer,
he retired himself, entering into this discourse.

I know right well, that weapons were invented to maintain honor, as also to
discharge any perilous adventure, wherefore, it had beed much better for me,
to have past my life without frequenting them, then to abide the mischance
wherein I remain at this present. Alas poor wretch, I think to vanquish
Fortune, but in the end I find my self vanquished, I knew well enough, that
he which keeps himself from falling in her snares, has little cause to
doubt any perverse or froward chance, but fond soole that I am to complain
in this manner, being the Author of mine evil, and wilfully seek mine own
damage. Whereupon he valiantly assaulted Albayzar again, who in short time
subdued him, and laid him at his foot: and being unarmed, was found to be
Floraman the Prince of Sardignia, which made the Emperor somewhat offended,
fearing that Albayzar would vanquish all the Knights of his Court. Then was
Floraman carried into the Palace, the Ladies greatly lamenting for him,
because of his inuiolate and faithful constancy, but albeit Albayzar remained
victor, he was very sore hurt, and brought into great weakness and danger.

CHAP. LXXXV.
How after Albayzar was healed of his wounds, he returned to the field, and
continuing the Ioust, vanquished diverse Knights.
FLoraman remained sore hurt for the space of two months, only through the
grief he sustained for his mishap, which was a cause, that the medicines
presented to him were bestowed al in uaine: wherefore the Emperor accompanied
him diverse times, because his behavior was so virtuous and honest, it made
every one desirous to bear him company.

But all the honorable visitations, and friendly good well bestowed upon him,
had not power to appease his extreme grief, for that he rather desired the
death then any other comfort, so that no sollace was so sweet to him, as the
remembrance and often desiring of death. When time had brought him to his
former strong estate, the Emperor desired him not to leave the Court, to whose
will he would not show himself disobedient, but stayed there for Palmerin of
England, and the renowned Florendos thinking Albayzar not able to resist
against them.

But Albayzar in his pride thought the contrary, for not contenting himself
with his victories paste, he was no sooner in disposition to bear Armor, but
he presented himself again in the Field, persuading himself to be Lord over
all those, that durst conceive the courage to deal with him. For such is the
nature of a proud and arrogant mind, that speeding a while well to his
content, he thinking always to remain in that good Fortune, but we having an
ancient Proverb. Desire has no rest, till it lie in the dust. In this
prodigal opinion, he put on a singular fair Armor, not regarding the mishap
that might chance unto him, because Fortune as now, had placed him on the top
of her wheel, whereon to wise man will repose a seat of assurance, for that
her variable and mutable condition, does always bring her most favored to
greatest misery. The first day after his health, in the morning he Iusted with
Flauian, Rotandor, Ariagnonel, Claribal of Hungaria, Ar^ruando and Tragandor,
who were all foiled, and the shieldes of their Ladies placed among the
conquered. After dinner, he ran with Luyman of Burgondie, for his Lady Altuena:
Dridan the secret friend of Princess Polinarda, Dramian, for his fair
Florian, Gracian, for his fair Claritia, Francian, for his Bernarda, Berolde,
for his Onis^alda, Blandidon, Pompides, and Platir, with diverse other, against
whom he prevailed to his great honor and praise, and the advancement of the
fair Targiana, having all the honor given to her Shield, which was so
honorably placed in the midst of all the other, that the Grecian knights
seeing the hauty valor of Albayzar, quite forgot all the courage they would
use in such an honorable attempt.

Primaleon armed himself diverse times, desirous to chastise the pride of the
Prince Albayzar, but the Emperor would not suffer him to proceed, because he
bare great affection to the Soldane Olorieque, which he would not seem to
change to his valiant Son.

Albayzar soiournied very long in Constantinople, without finding any to Just
withal, wherefore heperswaded himself, to attain as great credit by not
finding any to deal with him, as he did in vanquishing those that came to the
Tournament. But Palmerin, Florendos, and the Giant Dramusiand, would not have
stayed so long from thence, if it had not been for diverse adventures, which
constrained their determination, so that their absence was the cause Albaizar
was so much esteemed, and in every Princes Court, nothing at this present was
talked of, but the expert valiantness of this noble Moore Albayzar. Whom the
history wills us to leave a while, because we have forgot the Prince Florian
too long.

CHAP. LXXXVI.
What happened to Don Florian of the Desert, remaining in the Court of the
great Turk.
LOng time soiourned Don Florian in the great Turks Court, highly esteemed
among the hardy Knights, and most honored and beloved of the Princess
Targiana, whose amorous company made him forget his martial enterprises, in so
much, as he wholly shaped himself to please her fantasy.

Their love took such deep persuasion on either part, y^ Florian burst his
lance in y^ face of Venus, and Targiana yielded her chiefest Jewel, under the
obeisance and conquest of Cupid, being both of such an indifferent opinion
together, that Love was the only Mistress of all their actions.

During the time that Florian remained in this state, and Targiana busied her
mind on their wonted amorous devises, report blazed the great victories of
Albayzar in the Turks court, which news were accounted of so great estimation,
that the behavior of the Prince Florian was almost forgotten, a thing which
was very unwelcome to him. Wherefore, one night talking with the Princess
Targiana, she began to recount the duty, wherein the deeds of Albayzar had
bound her by courtesy, and how she could hardly fulfill the promise, she made
him at his departure. On the other side, she thought that Fortune would allure
Florian to some dangerous enterprise, and then should she abide in sorrow,
thinking on the hard mishap, that might estrange the remainder of her days.

Florian perceiving the cause of her heaviness, and yet dissembling as though he
knew it not, thought now time to play his part, whereupon he began to her in
this manner. My good Lady, if in your opinion, the deeds of Albayzar are of
such account, that in thinking on them, you forget mine, you offer me an
ungentle reward of great discourtesie, seeing I receive no other content, but
only in your company. And he maintaining the honor of your beauty, against
which I know none is able to contend, I know assuredly if the task were mine,
I should make both men and monsters offer you reverence. As for the victories
Albayzar has attained, they ought of right to be given to you, seeing the
noble are vanquished by your beauty, rather then by the courage and sword of
Albayzar, to whom you attribute so large commendation. But would you grant me
leave to go and seek him, and to fight under the sovereign favor of your
name, you should then see to which of us you are most bound, who should best
deserve to be admitted in your service.

Targiana standing still aprettie while, at last she took Florian by the hand,
and began in this order. I desired (worthy sir) one thing long since, and now
I am of the opinion, that my desire will enforce me to accomplish the same,
wherein your request may be satisfied, and mine own will sufficiently
contented, and thus it is. I mean in the habit of a travailing gentlewoman,
accompanied with your self, two Damsels, and four Esquires, to journey from
hence, to the Court of the Emperor Palmerin: and the better to win my
Fathers consent in this case, I will desire of him, that I may visste mine Aunt
the Queen of Assyria, which request I know he will not deny me, so that by
this mean I shall have opportunity, to proceed in this, to content both your
and mine own desire. But first I mean to send a messenger to the Prince
Albayzar, that he shall not depart from Constantinople, till such time as he
have further tidings from me, through which mean, we shall be in the more
assurance to find him, at such time as we arrive at Constantinople, assuring
my self, that he which has so great desire to pleasure me, shall not refuse
to grant so small a request.

Florian, who always desired to escape the hands of these Infidels, and
seeing the time to present him with a fit occasion, began greatly to commend
the enterprise of Targiana, saying to her, that she ought presently to put her
devise in execution, else, her desire might happen to catch a sudden death.
Because it is the natural property of some women to think a thing speedily,
and to forget it presently, yet often times they are hasty to such things, as
in the end prove hurtful to themselves: for example let suffice the Princess
Targiana.

Who on the next morning, came into the chamber of her father, and therewith
tears (which is great pity to see in a woman) she began to rehearse, how she
had been advertised, that the Queen of Assyria, her Aunt, by misaduenture was
fallen into a sudden sickness, for which cause she humbly desired him, that
he would permit her the leave to go and visit her. The great Turk, who had
not other joy, then his fair Daughter Targiana, as loath to displease her,
granted her request: but he could persuade her to take no other company, the^
the two Damsels, the four Esquires, and Florian, who was usually called in
the Court, the Christian knight. They departed on their journey, very bravely
and gallantly appointed, arrived in short time within y^ Dominion of
Constantinople, where riding through a pleasant valley thick beset with Trees,
the Princess desired to stay a while, till the heat of the day were somewhat
passed. Not long had they rested them, but they espied four knights come
riding toward them, who seeing the Princess Targiana, and being lately come
from Constantinople, where they had bin vanquished by Albayzar, in whose Shield
was her picture so naturally drawn, that the knights have bin overmuch blind if
they had mistaken her: wherefore knowing, and persuading themselves it was she,
one of them offered her these salutations. Fair Lady, we esteem it as lawful
and honorable, that they to whom your beauty has been a cause of great loss
and damage, should have the advantage in recompense of their mishappe, to
bring you to their Ladies, before whom your self may manifest, the great
difference that is between you in beauty.

Florian arose up in an anger, and gave them this answer: Gentlemen, if you be
well, follow your way, if you have received any mischance, impute it to your
folly, and not any occasion proceeding by your Ladies: as for this Lady, she
is not so fond as to go with you, nor I so foolish as to accomplish your will
in such a vain request. You answer so bravely (said) one of the Knights)
that now we are fully determined she shall go with us: and if you seem, or
dare offer to offend her, we shall quickly cool your courage, because you are
disposed so suddenly to chafe.

Then Florian mounted on horsbacke presently, and came unto the^ with these
speeches. Now am I determined, to try if your worthiness will prove according to
your words, you may come to me one after another, or all four at once and if
you please: for disloyalty can never show it self, but where it is continually
resident. Tush (said one of the knights) do not hold such a proud opinion with
your self, for one of us alone will find you work enough and that is my
self, who will be so bold as to stay your hastiness: as for my follows, I
judge they would think it dishonor to them, if they should deal with such a
one as you. Florian not able to abide these words, ran with such courage
against this craking companion, y^ his spear passing clean through him, he
threw him dead to the ground: then the other coming violently upon him, he
served them in such sort, that two more of them were slain, the other was glad
to save his life by flight. Florian being discharged of these four knights,
alighted from his Horse, and came before his lady Targiana: who was so well
contented with the victory of her knight, as she would have been displeased, if
Fortune had allotted him the contrary. And in this pleasure, seeing the night
approach so fast upon them, she commanded the Esquires, to plate their three
Tents in the bottom of the Valley, near to a green bancke, whereby there ran
a pleasant little Brook: thinkiug to find more pleasure, then to remain all
night by the dead Knights. In quiet rest they passed there the night, because
the tediousness of their journey, did gladly wish them to enjoy some ease.

CHAP. LXXXII.
Of that which happened to Don Florian, departing out of the Valley, where he
vanquished the four Knights.
WHen the clear morning had awaked, the Princess Targiana and her company,
they packed up their provision, and departed on their journey, greatly desiring
to be in the Court of the Emperor Palmerin. In the afternoon they came into a
goodly forest, where stood an excellent fair fountain very ingeniously
framed, and it was reported, that the Emperor Marcellus (who in his time, was
curious to cause rare edifices and brave inventions to be framed) had erected
this fair fountain in the forest. Which seemed to be true for two causes: the
first, that this Emperor was very much affectioned to have his dwelling in a
solitary place, near to some pleasant spring, or some such fair and costly
Fountain: and the second, because the name of Marcellus was in many places
about the Fountain, near whereunto was two Knights, who suffered their Steeds
to receive the water.

Targiana seeing such a singular prospect, in a place so convenient for repose,
desired the Prince Florian to pause there a while, whereto he presently agreed:
when the Princess taking off her Mask, the two Knights, who very well
regarded her, affirmed that it was she, for whom Albayzar maintained his
valiant Iouste. Wherefore, they consented between themselves, to take her with
them to their Ladies, through whom their shame might be the better covered,
which they had attained, by receiving the unfortunate foil in the Just: so
putting their Helmets on their heads, they approached nearer to the Princess,
when one of them began as thus. Madam, you ought not to wish ill to chose, who
receiving a sharp repulse by your beauty, conceive the courage of mind to
seek a remedy: for you shall understand, that a Knight has vanquished us at
Constantinople, who maintaining the excellent state of your beauty, has won
the shields whereon were figured our Ladies, and has honored you, with
placing them at your feet. Wherefore to let our fault pass with the more meek
penance, it behooves you to depart with us: so shall our offense be the less
esteemed of those, that both may and must command us.

Me thinks sir (quoth Florian) that you should not blame the innocent, but
the little defense in your selves to keep your Shieldes, without further
presuming on Fortune, who may happen to provide you a far worsse
inconvenience. I perceive then (said the Knight again) that this Ladies
beauty, causes you to use your terms so bluntly, which I doubt you are not
able to maintain, albeit you may make good account of your manhood.

That shall you try sir (quoth Florian,) and so closing his Helmet, he charged
them in such order, as thy were both ashamed (against the duty of Knighthoode)
to assail him, whose stoutnesse still detained Targiana, with the death of one
of the^, which the other seeing, fell on his knees before the Princess with
these words. Madame I desire you to appease your anger with the death of my
fellow, and the grievous wounds that I hand received, and let mercy plead my
cause, though I be unworthy, yet think I, that my life would but little
pleasure you.

Targiana beholding his repentance, desired Florian that he would forgive him:
who presently granted, commanding him that the dead body should bo carried away,
whereto the Knight not daring to gainsay, willed his esquire, to lay him
overthwart before him upon his Horse, and so they departed together, the Knight
more grieved with himself, then he was before he had seen Targiana. Who
walking on with Florian said, that she thought there was no place of assurance
in all the Country. Trust me, said Florian, I never before saw it in this
order, but yet it ought not to be maruailed at, for one the one side the shield
of Albayzar, and the other side your beauty, causes these adventures to happen
as they do. For those that have bin vanquished, gaining the sight of your
excellent feature, cannot choose but threaten themselves with greater danger,
for Nature framed you only, to bring all those to extremity, that dare
conceive the hardiness to behold you. Targiana seeing Florian so deep in his
praises of her, stayed him with a Conge over the lips, and seeing a very
fair Tree not far from them, she took him by the hand, saying. Let us go
walk a while under yonder fair (...), for my mind assures me, that things
will happen more strange, then any we have yet seen. Madame (quoth Florian) I
would wish to come where is the greatest danger, that you might know how little
I esteem ^^neritie, being accompanied with her, who is the only shield of my
safety. And if Albayzar having but your picture, overcomes the most puissant
knights in the world, what might I do, having the seemly person? which makes
me to desire, that Fortune would send a hazard, above all other, then should
you see the forceable magnanimity of your beauty engraned in this heart of
mine, with such a hauty disposition, that death, no, nor a thousand deaths is
able to withstand him, who prefers the title of your excellency* as the
chiefest honor upon my Knightly Sword.

These two Lovers thus walking and talking, found the words of the Princess
Targiana to be true indeed, for at the foot of this Tree, they espied a
goodly knight laid along, and no company with him, for his Esquire was
accompanied to depart from him, that his Master might the better report the
amorous complaints which were always resident in his pensive mind, and this
knight had one very fair blew Armor, his helmet serving under his head the
office of a Pillow, where he lay without receiving any rest, but gave forth
sighs and complaints in very doleful manner. Which Targiana and Florian
desirous to hear, and loath to disturb him being so seriously busied,
withdrew themselves a little so closely as they could, when the knight, not
thinking any to be so near him, began to unfold his grief after this order.

My Lady, how have I been offensive to you, that you should offer me so great
ungentleness? leaving me alive to wish daily for death, and yet you are so
obstinate, that you will not suffer me die, only that I might pass my time,
in inestimable opinion of endless torments. And to my greater grief, I often
wish to prolong my life in doing you service, whereto you use such unfriendly
means, that you will not permit me to be employed therein, but as the only
Author of mine evil, and daily occasion of my merciless Passions, forget the
extremity I abide for your love, and in a never dying death, compel me to
wast (...) course of my life. Which trust me serves very strange, for that I
never saw affliction in any man, but there was some mean whereby to tolerate
it, as for mine, it keeps at one certain stay, and when it comes to the
best change, it falls from an Ague Quartaine, to a Quotidian, as if all
mishap were only meant to me. Other men sustain their grief in hope of a
short end, but my Fortune is such, that mine extremes will never take end,
which urges me to this belief, that you triumph to see me tormented, and
judge me unworthy to live in your service, in which vexation, I content my
self so well as I may.

But me thinks you should remember, that rigor is not to be shown to him, who
has not deserved it: which having considered as you ought, you shall find,
that you have given too rash a recompense to him that has deserved a better
reward, and that your ungentleness has bin more, then either custom can bold
you, or courtesy bear you in. And thus he ended her complaint with such a
grievous sigh, as though he had fetchht h^s latter gasp. Florian attached
with grief, to hear the heavy tale of this distressed knight, took his Lady
Targiana by the hand to return: but the Knight hearing the noise, which the
Silk apparel of the Princess made in the Bushes, started up, and putting his
Helmet on his head, came to the Prince Florian with these words.

Abide Sir Knight, and because against another time, you shall learn more
manners and discretion, defend your self, for I trust you shall report my
Prowess, where you take occasion to rehearse my complaints. Seeing Sir (quoth
Florian) you are so minded, it were folly for me to offer any excuse, and
therefore proceed in your determination. So drawing their Swords, they
began a very brave fight, charging one another in such dangerous manner, that
Targiana commended this exployt above all that she had seen before. While they
were thus animated against one another, a Knight in green and white Armor
chanced to arrive there: in his Shield he bare for his devise a Spear, which
was pierced in many places, with blows that he had received he had two
Esquires attending on him, and was desirous to know the cause, why these two
Knights endured the Combat so cruelly. Wherefore, he came to the Princess
Targiana, to know of her: but when he had beheld her a while, he quite forgot
what he should demand: and because he was one of the knights that Albayzar had
vanquished, he had knowledge of her presently, wherefore, he set her up behind
one of his Esquires, and riding away with her, gave her these speeches. Fair
Lady, seeing these Knight are not able to bear you company, I know none so
worthy as my self to keep you, for through you. I shall recompense all the
dishonor I have gotten.

Targiana seeing, that neither her fair entreaty, nor resistance by her small
strength could pacify him, and that Florian maintained the Combat so
fiercely, he could not hear her cry, began in this order to persuade him. I
know not, Sir Knight, how you dare presume to make entrance upon an others
possession, seeing that although you have the power to carry me away with you,
yet my good will and affection, shall always be estranged to you. And seeing
there is no remedy, I pray you suffer me to go on foot to yonder Fountain,
where abide mine attendance, who shall go with me: assuring you, that they
have no weapons, wherewith to assist against you, or defend me. I am content
(said the Knight) to satisfy your desire, as he that most desires to honor
you in service: so they walked down to the fountain, where at this time we
mind to leave them.

Don Florian and the Knight were so earnest in their enterprise, that they
never perceived when Targiana was carried away: but if they had seen her they
were brought to such weakness that they could not have rescued her. In which
dangerous estate, Fortune was so friendly unto them, that Dramusiande
(travailing toward Constantinople, to recover the shield of the fair
Miragarda) arrived there: where seeing the extremity that these two Knights
were in, and knowing by the Arms the Knight of the Dragon, as also beholding
another Knight to endure the Combat so well, he was greatly abashed, and
fearing to lose the man he most loved, he gave his horse the spurs, and ran
between them with these words.

Gentlemen, I desire you at my request to end your debate, for that your
weakness rather requires rest, then to continue your discord in so extreme
danger: at least* Sir Palmerin (speaking to the Knight of the Dragon) you
should not refuse to grant my desire, for in so doing, this other knight I hope
shall have occasion to thank me. When Florian heard the name of Palmerin, he
conceived such grief, that throwing his sword from him, he fell to the ground
in manner as he had been dead: wherefore Palmerin, seeing so great debilitie
in him, that he had found so virtuous and valiant, commanded Siluian to unloose
his Helmet, that he might receive the air. But when he knew that it was
Florian of the Desert his brother, he was ready to fall to the ground
himself, had not Dramusiande used diligence to stay him. Florian rising, and
seeing his brother Palmerin so ill entreated, began to him in these words. How
might I recompense the great offense I have committed, that forgetfulness
should so much govern my senses, as not to know the hardy blows of my noble
Lord? My noble brother (answered Palmerin) seem not on your part to take any
thing amiss that has happened, but rather let us bethink with our selves,
howto requite the courtesy we have found in our dear triend Dramusiande.

Florian contented himself with his Brothers answer, but when his Esquire had
given him to understand* how a Knight had carried away his Lady Targiana, he
was ouercharged with grie^e beyond all measure, and in this great heaviness,
he determined to make pursuit after him. But Palmerin would not agree thereto:
and moreover Dramusiande showed him the danger wherein he was at that present,
making him faithful promise, that so soon as his wounds were brought into
better estate himself would undertake the travail, as earnestly as he did
the Shield of Miragarda. Yet for all this, the grief of the Prince Florian was
so great, that neither counsel nor friendly entreaty could persuade him. But
Dramusiande having accomplished the mean, to set both the Princes on
Horseback, departed with them from out the forest, when Florian casting his
eye toward the Fouutaine, and thinking on her he had lost by such misfortune,
the tears standing in his eyes, he began as thus.

Thou Valley, whose ent^ance seemed so pleasant to me, I know that the issue
will value my mishap too dear: for never will I cease to travail, and yield
my life among all mischances, till I have found the sweet content I have lost,
which by no mean I know I can ever forget. When they departed the Forest,
they came to a Monastery, where their wounds were cured with great facility:
and Dramusiande so soon as he had brought them to the place, went back to
the Valley, purposing to fulfill that he had promised to Florian. And here the
Hystory leaves these three Knights: returned to him that had carried Targiana
away, persuading himself in her company, to attain the title of immortal
praise.

CHAP. LXXXVIII.
Here shall be rehearsed, who the knight was that carried Targiana away, and
what happened to him in her company.
REmembrance is made in the History, how the King of Denmark had three Sons,
al of them proved to be noble and valiant knights, especially the eldest, who
was called Albanis of Freze, so renowned through his fathers Kingdom, that there
was no knight durst encounter with him. He being come to the age of five and
twenty years, and hearing the brave report of the Princess Miragarda, he
became so affectionat to her, that leaving his Fathers Court, he travailed to
the Castle of Almarol, accomplishing many notable deeds by the way, and arrived
there at such time, as Albayzar had carried the shield thence.

When he saw he could not attain his will to enter the combat he stayed till
fortune would suffer him to see the princess Miragarda, at whose view he
became so severely vanquished, that he vowed if it were possible to bring her
sheeld again, and if Fortune did stand his friend so much, he purposed to make
her greatly beholding to him: but she was of such a strange condition, as I
have told you, that she rejoiced to receive every one, without making show of
their welcome. Albanis prevailing in diverse adventures, came to the City of
Constantinople, where seeing the number of shields this valiant Moore had won,
and the great renown was held every where of his valor, he purposed to
manifest his courage against him. But albeit his worthiness was very great,
and that he brake three Spears on the valiant Albayzar, yet was Fortune so
much against him, that he received the foil, and his Shield was placed among
the conquered Knights. Being departed from thence, out of opinion ever after to
serve Miragarda, he arrived in the valley where Florian and Palmerin fought:
where beholding Targiana, he esteemed her the fairest Creature that ever he had
seen, and knew it was she, on whose behalf Albayzar sped so happily.
Whereupon, he concluded to bring her with him to Constantinople, to try if
Fortune would favor him better against Albayzar, having in his presence the
fair Targiana, to whom he offered great honor and courtesy, which was not of
power, to altar the faithful affection she bare to the Prince Florian.

Well, on they rid, and drawing near to Constantinople, in an evening they met
a Knight in black Armor, riding very sad and heavily, to whom Albanis gave
speech of friendly salutation: but the Black Knieht rid on without making any
answer, whereat Albanis was somewhat displeased, and desirous to show some
courage before Targiana, he turned to the Black Knight in this manner. Sir,
albeit my words are so little esteemed of you, that you have made no show of a
courteous answer, yet do I think it had been your duty, to offer some
friendly motion to this Lady: whereto the Black Knight made this reply.

Good Sir, if I have been obliuious of my self toward this Lady, I am ready
to recompense the same in what she shall command: but if you seem so
discourteous in speech, because I have not saluted you, trust me you are very
far from reason, for my mind was so busied with other affairs, that I
neither saw you before me, much less did I hear you. I would feign know,
said Albanis, from whence arises the cause of your doubt, to see if it be
sufficient, to excuse your uncivil behavior. Sir (quoth the Black Knight) I
would wish you to keep on in your journey, for to tell the cause of my grief
to you, would gladly pleasure me, and but little profit you. Albanis being
desirous to know what he had demanded* was so importune on the Black Knight,
that he took the Field at his pleasure, and encountered Albanis with such
force, that the horse fell down with his shoulder broken, and before Albanis
could recover himself, the Black Knight alighted, and forced him to abide his
mercy, which done* he was riding away, but Targiana came and stayed him thus.

Sir Knight, I desire you, even as you make hazard of your person in many
dangers and magnanimity does accompany you against all adversity, that you
will not abandon those who live in affliction, but bear the gentleness of mind
to keep them c^mpany. And if so be you travail to the Emperors Court, suffer
me to be a partner in your journey, for that my business lies in that place,
to expect a Knight* who conducted me in my travails hither. Lady (answered the
Black Knight) I thought this knight had undertook to conduct you, but now
perceiving the contrary, and that you are minded to go thither, where of force
I must be: I will pleasure you in so small a request, albeit the extremity of
my li^e stood thereon.

And thus they departed together, leaving Albanis more sorrowful then ever he
had bin. The Black Knight by the way, requested of her, wherefore the Knight
had enforced her to go with him, to who^ Targiana ripped up the whole matter,
wherefore the Black knight gave her greater honor, then he had done before,
for he knew it was she, in whose cause Albayzar kept the Shield of Miragarda,
which made him somewhat to excuse the deed of Albayzar, for that the beauty of
Targiana, would have urged any Knight to adventure the hardiest exployt.

They arrived at Constantinople, when Albeyzar was appointed to depart from
thence, and to carry the Shields away with him, because none durst adventure
to recover the^, which made the Emperor greatly agrieued, esteeming this y^
greatest shame that ever happened in any Princes Court. On the other side,
Primaleon was so chafed, because his Father would not grant him to Combat with
Albayzar, that he was minded to stay his coming four miles without the City,
and to bear in his Shield the Image of Gridonia, which he had secretly caused
to be made, to see if he might vanquish Albayzar, and bring back the Shields
to the ladies that had lost them. But Fortune so hindered him, that his purpose
took not effect: and also would not suffer Albayzar to depart thence with so
great glory.

CHAP. LXXXIX.
How the Black Knight entered the Combat with Albayzar.
THe Black Knight lodged that night without the City, in the house of an
ancient Gentleman, because he would not be known, and the next morning,
Targiana attyred her self very sumptuously, in a Gown of the Turkish fashion,
of Crimson Satin, adorned with brave bi^laments of gold and precious stones,
and mounted on a Palfray as white as a Swan, her Damsels and Esquires likewise
very brave in apparel, and atte^ding on her in seemly order, in this manner
she came into y^ city, accompanied with the Black Knight, and arrived at the
Iusting place, when Albayzar had even then conquered an English knight, and
placed his shield among the other. The Emperor with all his Courtly company,
behelding the brave gesture of the Black Knight, with the noble company he
brought with him, had good opinion that he should end the Just: which made the
Ladies and the knights, to throng to the best places of sight, because now they
looked for some notable exploit: but that which caused the greatest amazement,
was the beauty of the Princess Tagiana, with the rich and sumptuous show of
her apparel, which made the people run on hea^pes, with very great murmuring:
whereat Albayzar somewhat abashed, cast his head aside, and seeing his Lady
Targiana, he could hardly sustain himself from falling to the ground. The
Black Knight staide a good while beholding the shields Albayzar had conquered:
but when he saw the portrait of the fair Miragarda, the tears ran down his
cheeks, and he began in this manner.

Madame, how is it possible, that the thing wherein Nature has shown all her
skill to make it surpassing fair, should be in the power of him, that might
be glad to be vanquished by you? for my self, I would triumph to be found so
Fortunate at this present, because I desire to die to maintain the truth, and
I hope to discover the deceit of Albayzar, in such sort, that his recompense
shall return what he has justly deserved. Albayzar greatly rejoiced to see
his Lady Targiana, for whose love she had attained such estimation of honor,
whereby he had so far ouershot himself in his prodigal pleasure, that he
stood in a maze, whether it was she or no. The Black Knight having ended his
complaint, and seeing Albayzar so far distracted, put himself a little
nearer, and awaked him with these words. Albayzar, whereon do thou use thy
mind so mutely? I advertise thee, that the Princess in my company is called
Targiana, the daughter of the great Turk, who has taken the pains to come
hither to see thy valor, which is so much blazed and commended through the
world. Albayzar at these words alighted from his horse, and having taken off
his helmet, he came and kissed the hand of Targiana, with this manner of
salutation. Madame, I know not how I may requite my self to you, having
honored me so highly above my desert. Targiana received him very graciously,
giving him hearty thanks for his noble service, whereof she made such
estimation, that Florians deeds were presently forgotten, yea, and so far
bannished out of memory, as though she had never seen him in all her life,
manifesting rightly the inconstancy of such as regard their servants,
according as they are raised in authority. Albayzar having done his duty to
the Princess Targiana, mounted on horseback, and began thus to the Black
Knight. Sir Knight, I would feign know, what moved you to bring my Lady hither,
as also if you have desire to enter the Just, for upon the presenting your
shield, you shall be received.

Sir (quoth the Black Knight) after the strife is concluded between us, she
shall discourse the certainty thereof her self. But as concerning the shield,
which you say I must present, to be allowed the Iouste, I am at this time
unprovided thereof, because thou have disloyally stolen it, which else I might
have worn here to honor my Lady. Wherefore I have thus determined by my
puissance, to cause thee confess the same, before this honorable assembly:
and if Fortune favors thee so much, as to suffer me be vanquiwed at thy
hands, fail not to revenge thy self on me, as on the greatest enemy that ever
thou had: but if I vanquish thee, I desire no greater victory, in
recompense of the traiterous wrong thou have offered me, then to carry back
the Shield of my Lady Miragarda, to the place where it has always been
accustomed to remain. I am content (answered Albayzar) that if Fortune permit
thee conqueror over me, thou enjoy all these Shields she has suffered me to
vanquish, and that thou bring me to the Castle of Miragarda where she shall
ordain for my life as pleases her: and the like shall my Lady Targiana deal
with thee, if mine accustomed good happen return me the Victory. Sir (quoth
the Black Knight) my will is thereto as ready as thine: albeit thou shall
find no more friendship at my hands, then I will offer to my greatest enemy.

The Emperor with all the company, were suddenly strooken into a great
marvel, when they had heard the words of the Black Knight, especially
Primaleon, who desired greatly to have knowledge of him, whereupon, the Judges
commanded them the Field, and Targiana entered with them, according as Albayzar
requested.

The Trumpets sounded, and the Knights met so courageously with each other,
that Albayzar was thrown to the ground his heels upward, and the Black Knight
was dismounted with the Saddle between his legs, because the girtes of his
horse were broken, or else he had kept on horseback still, which made the
Emperor to judge, that Albayzar should not depart with such honor as he
thought for. When they had drawn their Swords, they laid at each other in
such terrible manner, that Albayzar thought he had never met with a stronger
knight and the Black Knight very well esteemed the strength of Albayzar: so
that the general verdict was, never had been seen a more hauty combat. For
Albayzar was encouraged by his Lady Targiana, and the Black Knight so animated
with the picture of Miragarda, that between them was declared the deeds of
incredible prowess.

At last, Albayzar seeing his Armor so bedewed with his blood, and himself
brought into such extremity, he retired to take breath, and began thus to
complain. What do the noble victories which I have attained against many noble
minds, prevail me now in any thing? seeing that at this instant, I must lose
all the glory I have gotten. Oh my Lady Targiana, if I have had the power to
vanquish the best Knights in all the world in your absence, why suffer you one
Knight to prevail so much against me in your presence? to loose my former
honor, is more dear to me then life, which falling out so contrary as it does,
makes me to think, that you are more affectionate to some other then you are
to me, which is the only cause the victory will not fall on my side. But yet*
what Princess is there in all the world, more brave in bounty, beyond you in
beauty, or better deserves the title above all titles then you? truly, I may
lose the victory of this Combat, through defect of my weakness, but not by
any fault that is in your excellency, whereto the fairest alive may not seem to
aspi^e.

The Black Knight on the other side, seeing his dangerous estate, and that he
could not assure himself any good success, silently to the picture of
Miragarda, he entered into these speeches. Madame, seeing it has pleased you,
to use me in affairs that have greatly touched me, I desire you not to forsake
me in this enterprise, which is wholly yours, wherein, though Alba^zar has
vanquished many Knights to his honor, and praise of Targiana, who excels
all these figured Ladies in beauty, yet show you your self excelling all other
in that singular gift, to overcome him that has conquered so many. For I
persuade my self, you will not favor him that has done you such wrong, as
disloyally to bear the Shield from your Castle: but let me that am your true
and faithful servant, give you the honor of this hautie attempt, and
afterward deal with this cursed carkase of mine, even as it shall stand with
your gracious pleasure. After this they fell to to the combat a fresh, when
the Emperor seeing the small defense they had for themselves, supposed they
could not long continue the fight, and Primaleon through opinion which came by
nature, in grief of mind received perfectly the cruel wounds of the Black
knight, as though he had felt them upon his own body, because he supposed him
to be of his lineage. And by the cruel behavior they used to each other, the
Empres and Gridonia departed, as not able to abide the grievous sight of these
two champions, who after they had griped one an other by the closing their
arms, Albayzar, ^s too weak to resist any longer, fell to the ground, whereat
the Black knight rejoiced and unclosed his helmet to have smiten off his head,
but the Emperor called to him to use more mercy, yet he makking as though he
heard not, lifted up his sword, when the Princess Targiana fell before him on
her knees, with these speeches. Sir Knight, first I desire you to strike off my
head, and afterward proceed in what shall please you, for loath would I be to
see him die that has ventured his life in danger, to do me such honorable
service. The Black Knight seeing the modesty of the Princess, was moved with
pity, wherewith he granted Albayzar his li^e, and then the judges came into
the field to have the Black Knight honored, according as became a victorious
conqueror. But he would not depart out of the Field before the Portrait of the
fair Miragarda was placed in the midst, where, against all reason, the
Princess Targiana supplied the room, whom he led with him, to be honored
according as her hie estate did deserve. The Emperor commanded Albayzar
should be led into his Tent, mean whiles the Black knight kissing his
highness hand, upon his knee began in this manner. Most dread and mighty
Emperor, I desire that this Princes may be regarded above all in your Court,
for you ought to show more honor to her, then to any other person that I know.
When the Emperor knew that the Black knight was his noble nephew Florendos,
his heart was supprised with an unspeakable joy: and chiefly his Father the
Prince Primaleon, who caused Albayzar to be brought into the Palace, and
understanding that Targiana was the daughter of the great Turk, lodged her
with the fair Princess Polinarda his daughter, who greatly desired it at the
hands of the Emperor, and there was we as honorably served, as had she been
in the Court of the great Turk her Father the Prince Florendos and Albayzar,
had great care used to their dangerous wounds: and the shield of the Princess
Miragarda, was now held in chiefest estimation.

CHAP. XC.
How a Damsel of Thrace brought a strange adventure to the Court of the
Emperor Palmerin.
WHile Florendos and Albayzar remained at the cure of their wounds, the
Empress and Gridonia, as glad that the victory chanced to Florendos would
often come and visit him, reporting their judgments on the singular form of
Miragarda, which talk partly wrought as much for his health, as the medicines
that were applied to his wounds. Likewise, the Emperor and Primaleon, would
often visit Albayzar, using comfortable speeches, whereby he might forget the
grief he sustained, because he was vanquished: but Albayzar dissembled with a
good countenance, devised with himself how he might work injury to Florendos,
which afterward he did, as you shall perceive at large in the second volume of
this History. In the mean while, the Court of the Emperor, was stored with
the most renowned knights, and Ladies of incomparable state of beauty in all
the world: so that there wanted no other thing there, the^ the two renowned
Knights of England, whose presence in the Court, made the Emperor to think, y^
then no force might prevail against him. While they were in their triumphing,
the Empress, Gridonia, Targiana and Polinarda, sitting under the Cipresse
Trees near a very fair Fountain, a Lady of a marvelous and mighty stature
presented her self before them, whose seemly iestures and sumptuous show in
apparel, made them believe she was of great authority. Her attire was of
Satin, cut and laid out with cloth of silver, a purple Robe compassing her
body, whereon was placed a number of rich and costly precious stones, her long
sleeves hanging down^, were thick beset with Birds, Hearts, and other brave
devises of Fowls and Beasts of gold, that the eye could never be wearied,
beholding a thing of such inestimable value: there attended on her two Knights,
the one having in his arms a very fair coffer, which was closed with little
Locks of Gold, and bravely garnished with Pearls and precious stones of
marvelous cost and reputation.

When the Emperor and all were placed, to regard the cause of her arrival,
she received the Coffer of the Knight, and with a little Key of Gold that hung
about her neck, she opened it: whereout she took a curious and costly Cup,
which was so artificialle composed, that beholding the outside, might easily be
discerned what was within, which was nothing but water, so hard congealed and
frozen, that it was impossible to move any moity thereof. After she had held it
a while in her hand, she delivered the Coffer again to the Knight, whereon she
set the Cup, and looking wishly upon all the company, at last she began to
utter these speeches.

Most noble Emperor, I have been in so many Princes Courts, to make trial of
the strange adventure contained in this Cup, that, not finding any to end
the same, I am weary to seek auy further, as also out of opinion of any good
hap. Except that now in your Highness Court, which is most honored and
esteemed upon the whole earth, I may find such expected Fortune, as of long
time I have failed in, which does encourage me somewhat, considering there is
not the like. But first before the trial be attempted, I will discourse the
cause of this rare adventure, because each one of these noble gentlemen, may be
the better affectioned to her, who holds his heart as chief Mistress of his
thoughts. There was sometime ruling in Thrace, a king who was name Sardamant,
so excellent well seen in the Art of Magique, that for the quality of that
gift, he surpassed all other living in his time. This King had a daughter, of
no less beauty then Courtly behavior, who was greatly beloved of two knights,
the one called Brandimar, the other Artibel, but they kept close their secreat
love from each other, til fortune, the enemy to their good hap, discovered
their good liking to the displeas^re of both. It chanced that this Princess,
being named Brandisia, esteemed chiefly the service of Artibel, which her
Father misdoubting, kept her close in a Tower: but Love had won such a
perfection between them, that Artibel accomplished a devise without suspicion,
as oftentimes to visit and sollace with his fair Brandisia, for by a Ladder
of Ropes, he climed so often to the window of the Princess, that time
converted the issue of their delights, to vna bellae figliola. Brandimar
passing oftentimes by the tower of Brandisia, desirous to see his delight,
which these walls enclosed, one night by chance, saw when Artibel came down
by his accustomed Ladder of ropes, which made him so offended, that forgetting
the league of amity between the^, he set upon him, where with their cloaks
wrapped about their arms, and their rapie^s drawn, after a few words, they fell
to strokes, which by fortune the king heard, and coming thither with his guard,
he found Brandimar almost slain. Whereupon Artibell was committed to prison,
and Brandimar having declared all to the King, shortly after yielded his life.
The king knowing that his daughter was conceived with child, kept Artibell in
prison till time of her deliverance, upon which day he caused him to be
beheaded, and in this Cup, he sent her the heart of her beloved Artibell. The
Princess perceiving the cruel revenge of her father, and desirous to
accompany her dear friend in death, took the Cup, and making a thousand
complaints over the heart of Artibel, she continued mourning so long, till she
had filled this Cup with her tears. Afterward thinking this not sufficient, to
manifest the faithful love she bare to the knight, she took the Cup and sent
it to her Father, uttering to the Messenger these speeches. Tell my Father,
that it may be, he has sent me this true and faithful token, of my most
affectionate and loyal friend, only that I should show in the massaring of
mine own life, my heart was jointly united, with this harmless heart of my
dear Artibell, whom since I loved in life, I will not forsake in death, neither
for my Fathers rigor to him, and cruelty to me, but will honor his death with
loss of my life, my Father being the Author of all this evil. So taking out
the heart, and the messenger departed with the Cup, she tricked her self in
her brauest apparel, and putting the heart of her friend Artibel between her
breasts, with these words. Oh Artibel, receive thine own Brandisia, she cast her
self headlong out of the chamber window, where death took his due of this
faithful and constant Princess. The king sorrowful for his Daughters death,
solemnized her Funerals with great honor and dignity, and taking the Child,
whom he has named Leonarda, he put her in the self same tower, accom^anied
with Ladies and gentlewomen, where she was nourished for the space of four
years. At the end whereof, he made an Enchantment half a mile from his place
in a Valley, wherein he likewise Enchaunted the young princess Leonarda, which
Enchantment he had used in such order, that none might see her, nor yet come
near unto her, for a far off might be discerned a goodly Fortress, but when
any endeavored to come near it, it vanished away, and nothing could be seen.
When he had so done, he took this Cup, wherein he had congealed and frozen the
tears, using his Art so upon them, that he has brought them into this ougly
blackness which you now behold. And at the hour of his death (seeing his
kingdom should remain destitute of an heir to succeed him) he commanded this
Cup should be carried into all Princess Courts in the world, to pass the
hands of many noble Knights, until the tears came to the first estate and
condition. So should the knight be found, that surpasses al other in
worthiness and constancy of Love, as also that is able to expel and end the
enchauntment of the princess Leonarda, who joining marriage with her, shall
govern the scepter and Diadem of Thrace. But if so be, the Knight* who has
the power to accomplish this adventure, shall have vowed his faith to some
other, so that the princess cannot marry with him, the commandment of the
king is such, that the Princess Leonarda, shall join in Marriage with him,
that this aforesaid Knight shall command.

And one thing more you shall understand, that if any knight may equal himself
in faith and loyalty, with him that has the power to molifie these tears, the
adventure is such, as they will turn to their former obscure estate again, but
if such a one come, as may not in that excellent gift be comparable to the
Knight, then is there nothing can cause them to to change their color. So that
if any knight advance himself to this cup, and is not a faithful and constant
Lover, the tears shall remain as dark as you see them at this present.
Likewise, after the Enchantment shall be fully finished, that the Lady and the
Knight, may beheld themselves in the tears, they shall see the perfect form
of those persons, who are their dearest friends, and their greatest enemies.
And if any will know those that are least in favor, upon the taking of this
Cup, they shall feel a savor so strong, that they shall hardly be able to
endure it, and to the contrary, he that is more beloved then his fellow, by
higher degree in affection, shall cause a greater brightness to be in the
Cup. Wherefore most redoubted Emperor, I desire you that your Knights may
try this adventure, and your self to give the first attempt, because you may
the better declare the love you bear to your gracious Lady the Empress.

Lady (quoth the Emperor) you desire me to fall into troublesome extremes, by
desiring me to adventure so great a matter. Nevertheless, I will once hazard
upon Fortune, to please them that cannot finish this hard accident, albeit I
think my self not able to do it. For the like matter have I enterprised,
trying my self with the Glass of the King Tarnaes, being the like adventure
as this, and ended by the virtuous and noble Prince Don Edward, and ^s I think
not to end this, so shall the Empress excuse me, considering my ancient time.
Then arose a great noise among the Knights, who desired to try the Cup, beause
their Ladies should be the better assured of their constant Love.

CHAP. XCI.
Of those that came to try the adventure of the Cup, and of that which
happened unto them.
GReat affection had the Emperor, to show somewhat his constant loyalty in
the adventure of his Cup: wherefore receiving it at the hands of the Damosel,
he turned him toward the Empress, and said. Trust me Madame, if it be true,
that faithful love may convert these tears, then I persuade my self to have
some title in it. So holding the Cup a great while, and perceiving that it
changed not the color, he began to be somewhat offended with himself:
wherefore the Damsel received it again of him, and to move him from
sadness, gave him these speeches. My gracious Lord, I see that age has
decayed the force of your affection: but had this adventure been delivered you
when time was, I know it could not have remained thus at this present.
Primaleon presently came and took the Cup, but his Fortune was no more
favored, then the Emperor his Father: which urged him to some cause of anger,
fearing that Gridonia would have given him but slender thanks. Then came the
Prince Vernar, and in his hand the Cup received a little brightness: whereby
the Ladies knew, that the Damsel had reported nothing but the truth. After
Vernar, came the King Polendos, and in his hand the Cup became as black again
as ever it was: whereat the Ladies began to laugh, and the Damsel of Thrace
spoke to him in this order. Sir Polendos, if the love you bear your Lady, be
of no more effect then it seems at this present, I judge she has cause to be
but little beholding to you. Gentlewoman, answered Polendos, it is so long time
since amorous thoughts have let me, that it is no marvel, if Fortune seem so
adverse to me now. Then arose the prince Gratian, thinking to end the
adventure, by the faithful love he bare to his fair Claritia, and in his hand
the Cup received more brightness then it did when the Prince Vernar had it,
whereat his heart was ravished with unspeakable joy, and giving the Cup to his
brother Guerin, it became as black again as ever it was. The ladies greatly
delighted to see the variable quality contained in the cup: so that they had an
assured mean, to see which of their knights might excel in loyalty of love.
Berolde P. of Spain, the only beloved of the fair Onistalda, advanced
himself to take the cup, using this silent opinion to himself. Madame, I have
ever desired your help in all mine affairs, but at this present I crave no
succor at your hands, for that the merit of my constancy, promises me a large
title in this honorable adventure. Then taking the cup, it seemed brighter
then ever it had been, and the frozen tears began somewhat to melt, which
moved the Princess Onestalda to so great pleasure, that she could not
conceal it, but the Ladies sitting by did perceive it. After him came the P.
Platir, the knight of Fidelia, daughter to the king Tarnaes: but albeit he bare
her great good will, the Cup was not so bright in the hands of Berolde, but
while he held it, it became as black. Then came Bellizart, servant to the fair
Denisia, and Dramian the knight of Florian: but both of them sped alike in
their enterprise. Francian, who loved the fair Bernard, took his turn next
to try the Cup, but he sped so ill, that he wished himself out of the place:
for in his hand the cup lost all the brightness, that the other knights had
brought it into, whereat he was greatly agrieued, and the Emperor laughing a
good at him, began merrily in these words. Sir Francian, you may commend your
fortune to be in such liberty, for the Ladies will not receive any hasty
occasion, whereby they may think good to fall in love with you, and you may
shape your self of like disposition, at no time to be hasty in trusting them.
After him came Frisol, Onestalde, Estrellant, Tenebrant Luyman of Burgondy,
Pompides, Bla didon, German of Orleance, Dridan, Polinarde, Tremoran,
Baromont, and Albanis of Freeze: amongst which company, the best favored were
Polinarde, Beromont, and German of Orleance, yet none of them might be
compared to the Prince Berolde. The Damosel of Thrace was in great despair,
thinking the adventure would not be ended in the Emperors Court, when
presently came the sorrowful prince Floraman, and at the Emperors request he
took the cap, saying: My Lady, remember the danger wherein you see me, as also
the grief I sustain for your sake: wherout you may deliver me if you please,
and set me once again in my joyful state. When he had ended his speeches, the
Cup received such a marvelous brightness, and the congealed tears melted so
suddenly, that the whole assembly, thought the adventure to be fully finished:
but the Damsel knowing the contrary, went to the Emperor, who, in her
presence, spoke thus to the Prince of Sardignia. I know well Sir Floraman, that
this adventure was reserved for you, because the firmness of your faith, gave
me a great deal more assurance, then the experience I have to report this
enterprise: and trust me I am very glad it is so fallen out, because now, all
other will hold you in the estimation, that my self of long time reposed in
you. The ladies, who ever bare good affection to Florama, were now a great deal
more urged toward him: which y^ damsel perceiving, and that every one
supposed the adventure to be ended, to the Emperor she began in this manner. My
gracious Lord, I desire you that all y^ knights may abide in this place, for
albeit the cup is brought into this good effect, yet is not y^ brought to pass
which must be finished. I know said Floraman, that fortune is wont to cause me
begin every enterprise with joy, but at the conclusion thereof, she threatens
my death. Then Don Rosuel and diverse knights assaied the Cup, some speeding
well, and some ill, eue^ as their constancy did differ in quality. At last,
when the whole company were minded to retire for y^ time, they espied a knight
in green Armor, to present himself before him, whose stoutnes of behauior
caused al to fear that took occasion to behold him, there was none y^ knew
him but Primaleo^ who presently said, that it was the giant Dramusiand,
wherefore he desired the Emperor to stay a while, when advancing himself to meet
him, Dramusiand came and embraced him with very great reverence. When he had
opened his helmet, Primaleon brought him before the Emperor: where humbly upon
his knee, he began in this manner. I desire you my gracious Lord and Father,
that you will receive this knight with your accustomed honor, for that his
valiant and noble behauior, has made him as much renowned as any on the earth.
The Emperor knowing that it was Dramusiande, would not suffer him to kiss his
hand, but embracing him in his arms, began as follows. Albeit your friendly
dealing, did long time detain my life in an unexpected danger, yet the good
report of your Prowess, and noble behavior since that time, has urged me to
forget all, vowing my self your friend to command, and so I pray you for ever
to use me. Dramusiande very often thanked the Emperor, and Primaleon presented
him to the Empress and Gridonia, who albeit they made a show of a friendly
welcome, yet could they not do it heartily, considering the grief they
sustained for the imprisonment of Primaleon. For they say, it is the nature of
women, not to forget and forgive their injuries, but to seek reuengement, when
they are thought to be out of all remembrance. The Emperor took Dramusiande
by the hand, and reported to him, how they were gathered together, to see who
could finish the adventure of the Cup, wherefore he desired him to make trial
thereof, to see if he were so happy as to end it. I shall (quoth Dramusiand) do
what pleases your Grace to command me, and if Fortune stand so much my
friend, that I may prevail above al in this enterprise, I shall manifest the
sovereign duty, wherein love has bound me: but if I fail therein, I shall have
the less cause of marvel, because it is not the first time that fortune has
forgotten me. So receiving the cup of the damosel, it became almost as clear,
as it did in the hand of the Prince Florian, whose hap was as yet supposed for
the most perfect, and then the Emperor commended Dramusiande, to think that a
person so strong and valiant, should have such faithful countenance and honor
in love. The day was so far spent, that they al returned to the Palace, the
Emperor desiring the damosel not to depart as yet, because he would have
Albaizar and Florendos, should make their trial likewise, for he verily
thought, that one of them should have the power to end it. The Damsel
promised to accomplish his pleasure, wherefore she walked with them, and made
her abiding in the Emperors Palace.

CHAP. XCII.
How Florendos and Albayzar proved the Adventure of the Cup, and how Palmerin
and Florian arrived at the Court.
DRamusiande (as the History reports) having left Palmerin and Florian, to
follow the Princess Targiana, was advertised, that the Knight that carried
her away, had been conquered by one, who conducted her with him to
Constantinople, and that it was the Prince Florendos, who likewise had
conquered the valiant Albayzar: whereat he was somewhat displeased, because he
thought none so worthy to restore her shield, as himself, seeing it was
taken thence, at the time when he kept it. Yet seeing that Florendos had gotten
the advantage he dissembled his grief in the best manner he could: and took
leave of the Damsel (who reported all this unto him and stayed not till he
came to Constantinople, as I have declared already: where, a while I will crave
pardon to leave him. Palmerin of England, and the Prince Florian of the Desert
his Brother, stayed twenty two days in the Monastery, where the Giant
Dramusiande left them: and when they were very well healed, and appointed with
new Armor, which Siluian had caused to made for them, they departed thence,
greatly thanking the Religious, for the good diligence they had used to them,
in their weakness. When they were near to Constantinople, because they
supposed it was not time as yet to enter the City, they alighted from their
horses, to contemplate of diverse accidents that happened in their minds.
Elorian, in who^ the passions of Love could take no certain place, but
dissembling every thing to content his fancy, laid him down under a Tree, to
muse on the adventures, which Fortune should permit him to enterprise: and
Palmerin with many along look toward the City, recounted the great favor he
found in the Emperors Court, as also his gentle departure from the Princess
Polinarda: so that he was determined not to enter the City at all, had not
Siluian used his persuasions to the contrary.

When they had used their conceits about such matters as liked them best, they
mounted on horseback, and rode toward the Court: where they arrived, at such
time as the Emperor was risen from dinner, and the Empress with her Ladies
come into the great Hall, to see a farther trial of the Cup, by the Prince
Florendos and Albayzar, who though they were not perfectly healed, came forth
of their Chambers, to manifest the constant love that they always conceived in
their loyal hearts.

Palmerin and Florian went up into the great Hall, leaving Siluian at the Court
gate, least perhaps they should be known: and when they were come before the
Emperor, Albayzar, who lay upon a cloth of black Velvet, beholding the beauty
of the Princess Targiana, arose, and took the Cup in his hand, when it became
as clear as when the prince Floraman held it, whereat Targiana received gread
pleasure, but Albayzar was not satisfied, because he saw the adventure was not
concluded.

Palmerin (who because he would not be known, bare a Dragon for his devise in
his Shield) and his Brother Florian standing with him, seeing the Cup that was
so black, changed into such brightness in the hand of Albayzar, began to
conceive a great occasion of marvel, desirous to know how the chance had
happened.

The Emperor very often beholding them, and judging that they were persons of
some great authority, commanded that they should be placed by him, where he
began to discourse at large of the cup, desirous to know likewise of whence
they were, but they excused themselves so honorably, that the Emperor held
himself contented. While these two English princes held talk with the
Emperor, the Prince Florendos, who was leaning on the lap of his sister the
Princess Polinarda, arose, and musing on the beauty of Miragarda, he began in
his mind to use these speeches madame, now would I, that you might see the
trial of my troth, which might move you hereafter to use me, according as you
prove me loyal in truth. So taking the Cup of the Damsel, it received a
far more brightness then ever it had before, and the tears were brought
into such estate, as though they had not been frozen at all: whereat the
Emperor and Primaleon were very joyful to see such a perfect proof of Amity
in the Prince Florendos, which made them to request of the Damsel, if the
adventure were as yet ended.

Most noble Emperor (quoth she) the Cup and tears are transformed to the
greatest perfection that any yet could bring them: but command them to come
near, who have not as yet made any proof at all, and then if the Cup receive
no change, esteem this Knight the most constant and faithfullest Lover in the
world. But if so be the Cup do alter again, believe assuredly, that that
Knight shall exceed him, either in knightly deeds of Arms, or else in the
Amorous constancy of a Lover.

The Emperor seeing that al his knights had assaied the cup, he desired the
Knight of the Dragon and his fellow to make trial also: but Palmerin was so
busy in beholding his fair Polinarda, that he heard not the Emperors words,
wherefore Florian, who was free from a Lovers passions, albeit he could
dissemble with Ladies indifferently, advanced himself with these words to his
Lady Targiana. My Lady, I defi^e your assistance in passing this danger, and to
forsake me in all other, only let me enjoy this in recompense of my desert:
and as for the thing you hold of greater estimation, reserve that for him, to
whom you are in greater affection. Now as these words were far distant from
the loyalty of a lover, so did his holding the Cup manifest the same: for while
he held it, there is nothing in the world can be judged more black or griesly,
then the Cup seemed at that instant. Targiana, who knew him, yet would not be
known thereof, for the grief she conceived at this accident^^ retired into her
Chamber, repenting that ever she had bestowed her love on him, who was
esteemed of so small fidelity. The Damsel of Thrace, receiving the Cup again
of Florian, said. Sir Knight, if Fortune speed you no better in deeds of
Arms, then your actions manifest your faithfulness in love, I would ^ounsell
you, never hereafter to pursue adventures.

Fair Lady (answered Florian) if you recompense your servants according to
desert, it would greatly grieve me to fall into so hard destiny, but your far
distance from reason, makes me to esteem it the less, for if I should pass
on farther, and suffer my self to be inueigled in your snares, I were the
less to be pitied, when I seem to bewail the languishing of my life.

This answer of Florian, albeit it seemed acceptable to many of the knights,
yet the Ladies received it in great contempt: because their natural quality is
such, to yield according to the deeds of those, who submit themselves to
abide their pleasure: and contrariwise, their natural inclination is, to use
such recompense, as their service they have received never deserved.

The Damosel of Thrace came to the Knight of the Dragon, desiring him to try
the Cup, according as diverse other had done before him, persuading him, that of
a person so knightly as he seemed, there was to be expected a very good issue.
Palmerin seeing the matter brought to this extremity, cast his eye on the
Damsel, and his heart on her, whose obstinacy caused him to die with grief,
entering into these speeches. If this adventure be of a truth, then I pray you
my Lady, henceforth to excuse the fearfulness of him, who dares not presume to
think what is in your mind. So receiving the Cup, it contained the same
quallitie, as it did in the hand of the Prince Florendos, because it could not
exceed farther.

The Emperor being very glad, took the Cup to prove the rest of the Damsels
words, and in the bottom of the tears, he beheld the Empress as pleasant as
ever he had seen her, which made him to think the adventure was ended, but
doubting the contrary, he requested of the Damsel, if the Cup should always
remain in that state, whereto the Damsel answered thus. It must (...) be
tried, if it will turn again to the former blacknes, but I desire you that
this Knight (meaning the prince Florian) make trial thereof no more, for he
has so little desire, to keep his love faithful to any Lady, that the Cup in
his hand will stand in great danger, at which pretty triump, the Ladies
conceived good occasion of laughter.

Then the Emperor commanded, that all the knights should take the Cup again,
but their labor was in vain, for it never seemed to alter the color,
wherefore the Empress took it, and beheld the Emperor so perfectly in it, as
if she had verily seen his face. After the Empress, came Gridonia and
Bazilia, wherein they saw them that they chiefly esteemed, but when the
Princess Polinarda took it, she perceived the noble Palmerin of England in
such heaviness, that (not able to endure his extreme grievous countenance) she
delivered the Cup from her, fearing to let it fall, her hand shaked so
maruelously. But none knew what was the cause thereof, except the Emperor,
whose amorous youthful time gave him occasion to think, that she had seen
some one in the Cup, who greatly desired to do her service which made him to
round her in the ear, saying: Fair Daughter, you make me judge that you want
a servant. At which words she began so sweetly to blush, that with her rare
beauty it gave her an excellent color, whereat the Knight of the Dragon became
more and more afflicted.

The cup passed from hand to hand, till it came again to the Prince Palmeriu,
who beholding in it the sweet face of his fair Polinarda, took occasion to
speak in this manner to himself. My gracious Lady, I very well perceive by
your countenance, that you have not forgotten him, who was only borne to do you
service, yet does the misery of his time, constrain him to live without hope,
desiring nothing else but to accomplish your pleasure. Then he delivered the
Cup to his Brother Florian, who beheld in the bottom of the tears, the
Princes Araalte of Navarre, and the fair Targiana, as also many other Ladies,
who were as greatly offended with him, as were these twain whom he had
deceived, wherefore the Damsel taking the Cup from him, said. Do you now
(Sir Knight) behold the issue of your unfaithful Love (whereto he presently
shaped this answer. It seems that your sex canno heartily favor the Knights
that owes them most affection, which makes many not force of their constancy
to you, but yet thus much I dare assure you, that Ladies, both have and shall
be a great deal better secured of me, then of diverse that have tried the
adventure of this Cup, and to whom it has shown more favor then to me.

The damsel making him no answer, turned to the Emperor, saying: I desire
your highness, that n^w the proof may be made, of those that are most and
chiefest beloved: wherein (credit me) you will receive great pleasure. Agreed
(quoth the Emperor) and I intend my self to make trial first, for so shall I
perceive, that being but slenderly favored of the Empress, I have lost the
power to end the adventure. So holding the Cup, it remained in the same order
still, without any change or appearance of heat: wherefore the Damsel said.
My Lord, you must confess your self, that your time is past, and therefore
deliver the Cup to the Empress, who has so truly and faithfully loved you.

In the Empress hand it continued to still, wherefore Primaleon and the King
Polendos, who being faithfully beloved of their Ladies, made the cup still to
contain the chief brightness. After these two Princes, Don Rosuell advanced
himself to make trial at his Love, which was so little, that the heat the
Cup contained, urged him to deliver it to the Prince Platir, who found it not
altogether so hot, as when Don Rosuell had it. It passed the hands of them all,
some with good hap, and some with ill, till it came again to the Prince
Florian, but he passed it as lightly as the other, because his heart was
exempted free from any Lovers grief. From him Albayzar took it, whom Love
favored so much, that he held it a great while. Then came the turn of the
Knight of the Dragon, whose hap proved worse then all the rest: for the Cup was
so enflamed round about him, that it seethed even as water does upon the fire,
which caused great fear to all that beh^ld it, but more grief to him that he
had the patience to abide it. For now he verily thought to consumate his days,
and that the vexation of his life, should end by this supportable mean, which
made him that he would not let go the Cup, but kept it so constantly, that
every one thought there was no remedy but death.

Trust me (said the Damsel) the unfeigned love of so true a knight, deserves
not to be rewarded with so sharp a recompense: and with these words she offered
to take the Cup from him, but he gave back, answering her thus. Fair Lady, I
desire you to suffer me abide the doom, which my mishap has always ordained
for me, and wherein I may end the troubles that are incident to a mourning and
continual dispairing life. The Emperor not able to abide so great cruelty
executed in his presence, arose and caught the cup from him, which was
immediately quenched, as though it had never bin so violent, whereat he received
no small cause of amazemen. Then the prince Florendos, albeit he was weak, yet
desirous to be partner in constancy with the Knight of the Dragon, received the
Cup from the hand of the Emperor, when presently the rigor that the Princes
Miragarda used toward him, caused him to suffer the self same torment, as did
the noble Prince Palmerin. For the flame which arose out of the cup, had so
environed the body of the prince, that he was seen sighing and lamenting in
the midst thereof, which moved all the Ladies to shed abundance of tears,
and to use many extreme words against the cruelty of Miragarda, which
Florendos (though he were in the midst of the flame) could hardly suffer to
hear her blamed, for whose sake he was ready to make a sacrifice of himself.
The Emperor seeing many means applied to quench the flame, yet none of them
all had the power to prevail, put himself in the midst thereof, and took the
Cup from Florendos, thinking that then it would presently bequenched: but all
their labor was to no effect, for the flame continued about him as it did
before. The Empress Gridonia, with all the lad^es and knights, fell into such
rufull complaints, that it was maruailous to hear the noise that was made: at
which grievous spectacle, Polendos the king of Thessalie, came to the Damsel
of Thrace with these words. I desire you, fair Lady, seeing you have found the
thing you sought for, that you would vouchsafe the courtesy, to succor the
dangerous case of the Prince Florendos, I am so agrieued (quoth the damosel) at
this great tumult which is made, wherein they will not vouchsafe to hear me,
that I know not what to say: but do you give order to appease this murmuring,
and I will work the mean to deliver the Prince from danger. By the Emperors
commandment the disturbance was quieted: when the Damsel presented her
self before the Emperor, saying. I advertise you most dread and gracious
Emperor, that the adventure of the Cup is already past and finished: but the
flame which does compass the prince Florendos, can no way be extinguished, but
only by the virtue that consists in the tears, which by the hand of the
Knight, who has ended the Enchantment of the Cup, must be sprinkled on the
flame wherein he is enclosed, and then I dare assure you the prince shall be
brought into his former estate. For the fire being engendered, by such a cruel
woman as he loves, cannot be any way quenched, but only by the tears of such
a pitiful Lady, as was this constant and faithful Brandisia. Then she
delivered the Cup to the Knight of the Dragon, who put his fingers therein, and
sprinkled a few of the tears upon Florendos: when presently the fire vanished
away, leaving Florendos (whom all men thought verily to be dead) alive and in
good estate, to the great content of the Emperor and all the company.

CHAP. XCIII.
Of another adventure that happened in the Court of the Emperor Palmerin, and
of that which after followed.
FLorendos, being thus happily delivered (to the great joy of the Courtty
company,) wished that she, who entreated his faithful Love with so great
cruelty, had been in place, when she might have seen the trial of his
inuiolate faith. The Emperor being desirous to know the Knight, whose spotless
loyalty had ended this Enchantment (but misdoubting that it was y^ noble
Palmerin of England) desired very earnestly, that he would make himself known
unto him: when Palmerin putting his hand to his Helmet, to discover himself,
he was hindered by the adventure which hereafter follows.

On a sudden there entered the Hal a Lady, accompanied with three mighty and
ougly Giants, whose Armor was of on color and fashion, their Helmets being
carried after them by three men, so that their swart and evil favored faces,
caused the Ladies to tremble, as also many of the Knights to change their
color. These proud and stately Giants thronged through the midst of the
Knights, advancing themselves before the Emperor, without showing any
courtesy or reverence, where they stayed, for that the Damsel had in charge
to declare: who seeing so great Nobility about the Emperor, was somewhat
offended, yet notwithstanding, she seized her fury, and began in this order.

I perceive right noble Emperor, that the renown which is blazed all the
world our, of your Princely Court, is too little, respecting the honorable
company I see at this present, which urges me to enter into due land thereof,
as it has rightly and justly deserves: so that I am of the opinion, you might
subdue and govern the whole world, if you would distribute your force, which as
I judge, is no way able to be matched. But yet fortune who in all your affairs
has hitherto prospered you, may now ungently (as envious at your long quiet
and peaceable felicity) turn her back toward you, and so suddenly in her
fury ouerturne your good Fortune, that the glory you have gained in the prime
of your years, may now be defaced, when your aged estate forbids you to
follow the travail of Arms, and your long happiness, unwilling to enter the
wars, wherewith I come to summon you, from the Soldane of Persia, principal
Captain of the Law of Mahomet, as also from the great Turk, and y^ noble
Governors of the Country belonging to the Soldane of Babylon, named Albayzar,
who in strange adventures, has put himself to make trial of his valor, upon
hope of long expected good Fortune. From all these before named, I am to let
you understand, that when time was, there were certain Heathen Princes, here
slain before the walls of Constantinople, whose death has urged them to great
impatience, and to seek revenge for the great wrong you have offered them. But
the Gods, the protectors and defendor of your welfare, favoring you beyond
their expectation, have heretofore hindered the determination of these Princes:
for when they were prepared to the ruin of your kingdoms, and utterly to race
out your fame and memory, there has such quarrels and seditions sprung up
amongst them, that they have murdered one another, which happening many and
sundry times, has not suffered them to put their pretense in execution.
Wherefore, to avoid any more such mischance, as also to favor you in the evil
which may happen: they have sent us to your Highness with certain conditions,
the performing whereof, shall end all hatred, and jointly join them as your
continual friends.

The first is, that you shall send Polinarda, Daughter to the Prince Primaleon
your son, to the Soldane of Persia, aged about xxv, years: a Prince as much
renowned, as he is puissant and incomparable in riches, to whom she shall be
espoused as beseems such a noble Prince. The second, that Florandos his
Son, shall promise to marry with Armenia, Daughter to the Soldane before
named, who is a Princess of such singular heauty, that she is thought to
excel all Ladies living on the earth. To her Dowry, the Soldane will give all
the title he has in these parts about your Empire, without desiring any other
recompense, on the behalf of the fair Polinarda: but only that it might
stand with your pleasure, to send to the great Turk a Christian Knight, who as
I remember is named Florian of the Desert, for that by his deceit, he has
brought his Daughter Tragiana from thence into your Court: whose marriage he
has already provided, to the Prince Albayzar, now Sultan of Babylon, because
the Soldane his Father is lately deceased. Thus have I reported the whole sum
of my Embassage, attending how your Highness shall answer the same: and if
you will not agree with the Heathen princes, these Giant have in charge to tell
you that, which perhaps may enforce you to a greater marvel.

The Emperor having noted the words of the Damsel, smiling thereat, began to
say. Truly Lady, I desire to hear what the Giants must report, because
perhaps I shall have a better opinion of their words, then of those which
here you have spoken. As concerning the amity which your Princess request
with me, the conditions are lincked to so many contraries, that I rather choose
perpetual war, wherein my self, my friends and subjects will more
willingly die, then to hold league with them in any such order. And for the
Knight whom you request to have, I am altogether ignorant where he abides: but
if he were here present in my Court, I would not suffer him to receive any
injury, and I persuade my self, as the Princess Targiana, is rather come
hither with her will, then by any compulsion that has been used to her. No
other answer have I determined to give you: wherefore, let your knights
declare what they have in commission.

With that, one of the Giants advanced himself before the Emperor, and very
irreverently entered into these speeches. The Heathen Princes, whose just and
law full request you think scorn to grant: by me do send defiance to thee,
and to all that dare undertake, by any mean or motion to offer thee succor.

Yea, I pronounce open war against thee, and on their behalf call my gods
for my record: that we not only intend thy death, but all those who dare
presume to bear Armor against us. The places of most renown in thine Empire,
shall be changed to a wast and desolate wilderness, as thou shall well
perceive, when thou see thy men to be murdered. thy women cruelly spoiled,
thy Virgins violated, thy Children martired: yea, and the Infant torn from
the mothers breast, and gored on the tops of our Lances, in witness of our
great, grievous, and unspeakable fury.

The Channels of thy streets, shall power forth the blood of thy murdered
subjects, thy City which now stands abounding in wealth, excessive in pride,
and surpassing in prodigality, shall with fire be utterly consumed, thy whole
kingdoms and signories raced and ruinated: so that they which shall escape
this bloody tyranny, may sit down, and sighing say; Here sometime stood the
city of Constantinople, there, and in th^se places were sometime fair cities,
brave buildings, and incomparable habitations for riches and prospect: now are
they equalled with the ground, not one stone left on another, in witness of any
ancient Monument, but bu^ned, consumed, and all in general defaced and
spoiled, thy self being the only cause of this cruel and horrible judgment,
wherein they will be sufficiently satisfied, of their injury received before
this thy city. Thus have I manifested the charge, which I received from the
Soldane of Persia, and in refusing pis pr^ffer, I say thou show not the duty
of a Prince: and if thy Knight es dare presume to maintain the contrary, my
Companions and I will undertake, to enter the Combat with seven of the
stoutest of them, and will urge them to confess the fault thou have made, or
seal the pledge of our endeavor, with delivering thee their heads, in
recompense of the folly thou have showen, in refusing to enter leag^e with the
Soldane of Persia. The Giant here breaking off his speech, one of the other
Giants named Berocant, delivered the scrole of the def^ance to the hand of the
Emperor: who seeing the stearne countenances they made, began to smile, and
answered them thus.

I see (Gentlemen) such a choleric humor arise in you, that I stand in doubt
to grant what you demand. Beside, I judge if I should grant to come in league
with the Soldane of Persia, that my Niece Polinarda would not consent to go
with you: but as concerning the Combat you have enterprised against my
knights, I would wish you to use your selves with more discretion, and not to
shame your selves utterly with them, who think it shame to enter the fight
with you you. While the Emperor continued these speeches, the Knight of the
Dragon was so incensed with anger, that he could not content himself to rest
in any place: wherefore, diverse knights arose, being fully resolved to accept
the challenge, but the Giant Dramusiande hinderes them all, turning to the
Emperor on this wise.

Most high and mighty Emperor, the great benignity and courtesy of Princes,
is often an occasion to encourage a wilful offender: even so, the lenity of
your noble heart, with the gracious patience that governs all your actions,
has caused these presumptuous Pagans to conceive such boldness, that they
neither respect the place nor the person, the rigor of a Prince, nor the foll^
of their own rediculous usage. Which to punish according to desert, I, as one
at your gracious command, will enter the field with one of them, where I shall
give Berocant to understand, that pride must have punishment in place of
Justice, And if none of these other knights, will enter the fight with the
other, my self will defy them all, coming one by one: thus desiring your
highness not to think amiss of me, my hand is ready to perform, which my
heart has suffered me to pronounce.

The knight of the Dragon, and Florain of the Desert, approached presently to
Dramusiande, desiring him that he would suffer them to assist him, as defending
the challenge of the other two giants. Dramusiande. seeing them so well
provided, would not refuse their knightly offer: whereat Gracian, Berolde,
Pompides, and Floraman were somewhat offended, because there was none of them
al, but would gladly have taken part with the Giant Dramusiande. The Giants,
named Arbusar, Albaroco, and Berocant, refused the offer which was made them:
answering, that if there were no Giants for them to deal withal, they
disdained to take arms against men of no more might.

Elorian hearing them speak so arrogantly, in a chafe took Arbusar by the
arm, saying. Thou counterfeit Monster, some not to excuse thy self so fondly
from entering the Combat: for in recompense of thy deserts, I will present the
Emperor with thy head from thy shoulders. And to give thee the better occasion
to fight, thou shall understand, that I am the Knight, who brought the
princess Targiana into this Country: and for this Knight thou see with me,
I know his hardiness will su^^er him to deal with Albaroco, now refuse the
combat i^ you dare. The Giants hearing him to confess, that he had brought the
Princess Targiana from her country, became so full of choler, that they
desired the place might be assigned, where they presently determined to hazard
the fight.

The Emperor commanded the place should be showen them, whereabout he caused
such good regard to be placed, as in such dangerous affairs he was wont to
do: but it was somewhat displeasant to him, that ^orian should venture on such
ougly follows, and judging the other knight to be Palmerin of England he was in
great fear, least now he should chance to lose them both. At such time the
knights were entering the Field, the Damosel of Thrace taking Florian aside,
secretly used these words unto him. Sir knight, if Fortune bend her self
against you, that in this dangerous attempt your strength do fail you,
commend your self to the clemency of some lady, and doubt you not but to
escape the hazard luckily. God forbid, said Florian, that I should trust in
them, who have not the power to help themselves, much less can they any way
send me succor: or that I should prostrate my self to de^ice their favor,
whose greatest liberty, is continual thraldom to an aduenturous mind. With
these words, they all mounted on horseback, and rode into the field, the
Emperor with all the Ladies and Knights, hied themselves to the windows to
see this hautie exployt: and Albayzar likewise desirous to see it, came to one
of the windows, desiring that the victory might fall to the Giants, as he had
good hope, beholding their valiant and noble courage.

CHAP. XCIIII.
What happened in the fight against the Giants.
AFter that the Judges were placed to discern the fight, the Trumpets sounded,
and they encountered one an other very courageously: every one dealing so
roughly with his enemy, that this was supposed the most dangerous Combat that
ever was seen. The Emperor was still affectionate to behold the marvelous
courage of the Knights of the Dragon, as for Dramusiande and Florian, they
behaved themselves with such deliver behavior, that Primaleon, Florendos, and
all the Knights, gave great praise to the hautie valor of them all.

The Empress and Gridonia departed from the window, greatly pitying the
danger on either part: but the Princess Polinarda stayed to see the end,
accompanied with Targiana, who was as much grieved to see the boldness of
Florian, as she was pleased in beholding the courage of the giants: by whose
help she thought to have revenged the great inconstancy she found in the
prince Florian. And then he gave the damosel of Thrace to understand, that it
was not for want of strength he preuaild no better in the trial of the cup:
for albeit the giant Arbusar, desended himself well, he could not resist
against Florian, who saluted him with many mighty and cruel strokes, driving
him into such weariness, that he could hardly endure to stand on his feet. At
last faintness and weariness constrained them to retire: when Berocant seeing
his fellows so dangerously wounded, began to rage with himself in this manner.
O gods, is it possible, that the force of Berocant, Arbusar, and Albaroco, so
highly esteemd throughout the whole world, should be brought into subjection by
one only giant and two knights? why grant you not us our accustomed strength,
but in our greatest need leave us destitute of all succor? How happy might I
esteem my self, if I might vanquish him, who sometime conquered Dramusiand,
and delivered the number of knights he kept as Prisoners? If you will not
suffer me to have advantage over him, then would I, that here were with him
four of the best knights on the earth, so losing my life on them, I might the
better broke this my hard fortune. The Knight of the Dragon, had no other
recourse for his amorous thoughts, but only to the beautiful face of his Lady
and Mist^es, whose ungentle words at his departure from Constantinople, armd
him with greater patience to abide the death if his froward hap should now
provide it for him. As for the prince he had no body to apply his thoughts
unto, but only committed himself to the government of Fortune, whom he only
kept for his Lady and Mistress. Every one using some pretty fancy to himself,
during the time they remained breathing, assalted one another again very
valiantly, when the knight of the Dragon having brought Albaroco to his foot,
to honor his mistress with his conquest: he opened his helmet, and before her
part his head from his shoulders, as glad of the victory, as before he stood in
doubt how to obtain it. Then he advanced himself to assist Dramusiand against
Berocant, at whom he fiercely let fly a st^oke, but their often traversing the
ground, caused the blow unfortunately to fall on Dramusiande, giving him a
greater wound on the shoulder, then any he had received at the hands of
Berocant: wherefore Dramusiand turned to him with these words. Trust me sir
knight, I esteem the succor you give me, to be oppression and no friendship,
wherefore I pray you suffer me to end this cause my self: and if perhaps you
see me vanquished, then put your valor in trial, to kill him who shall
remain victorious over me: for the death I rather choose, then the shame which
may fall to me, by this ungentle manner of aid. The knight of the Dragon
having thus against his will iniuried his friend Dramusiande, retired greatly
displeased with himself, and A^busar was reduced into such weakness that
Florian quickly gave him his payment, so sore wounded himself that the Judges
would have had him carried out of the field: but he would not consent thereto,
before he had seen the issue of the fight, which was so displeasant to
Albayzar and Targiana, because the giants were so cruelly used, that they went
from thence, as not able to suffer such a grievous sight.

The Emperor, Primaleon, and the king Polendos, seeing the knight of the Dragon
had wounded Dramusiand so sore, greatly doubted lest Berocant should now
overcome him, but suddenly Dramusiand caused them to change their opinion, for
he followed his enemy with so great courage, that he forced him to fall down
dead at his feet. Then came the Judges, and with great honor conducted the
three Conquerors forth of the field, where the Emperor with his royal train
met them: when Palmerin and Florian having opened their helmets, came to the
Emperor, and with very great reverence kissed his hand* who received them with
marvelous princely courtesy. The Empress, Gridonia, Bazilia, and Polinarda,
attended the coming of the Emperor, because they understood that he brought
with him the two English knights: who when they came before them, were received
according to their knightly bounty.

When Palmerin came to humble himself before the princess Polinarda, such a
sudden fear did ouercharge him, that he could not withhold himself from
falling to the ground: and the Emperor supposing, that it was caused through
less of his blood, commanded Primaleon, Polendos, Vernar and Berolde, to carry
him presently into a Chamber, where he was respected with great diligence for
his health. Dramusiande and Florian, were likewise honored with very Princely
usage: the Emperor remaining as joyful for this good hap, as Albayzar was
sorrowful, to see the three Giants speed so ill.

CHAP. XCV.
What happened in the Court of the Emperor, after the combat of the Giants.
Certain days after this cruel Combat, the prince Florendos seeing
Dramnsiande and the English Princes out of any danger, determined to restore
the Shield of Miragarda, in the place from whence the Prince Albayzar took it,
and to present him to her, where he should abide the doom of her judgment.
When he had well provided himself of Armor and other necessaries, he advanced
himself before the Emperor and his Father, to desire their sufferance in this
attempt: but they were very loath he should go, least any danger should happen
to him by the way, through some treacherous mean devised by Albayzar, wherefore
they gained of him, to stay yet for eight days longer. In the mean time, the
Emperor had concluded, through advise of his Council, to send the Princess
Targiana home again to her Father, accompanied with the King Polendes, and
diverse other Princes and Knights: but first he would content the desire of her
love, wherefore with great royalty, he married her to the Prince Albayzar, and
to honor them the more, he held open Court, and caused many Triumphs and brave
devises to be accomplished, to gratify these honorable personages.

The Emperor led Targiana into the Chapel, where he gave her to the Prince
Albayzar, whose heart greatly rejoiced, to receive the sweet content he had so
long desired: but the chiefest grief that eclipsed his joy, was because the
Prince Florendos should present him to the fair Miragarda, which thought, made
him not so pleasant with his beloved, as otherwise he would have been.

When time came for their departure, Targiana humbly submitted himself to the
princess Gridonia, and all the ladies, but especially to the princess
Polinarda, who had used her very graciously, during the time of her abiding
there. The Emperor with all his Knights, rode with her two miles from the
City, committing her to the charge of Polendos, and the other Princes, who
could not persuade Florendos, but he would needs present Albayzar at the
castle of Almarol, to witness his unfeigned faith to his Lady and Mistress
Miragarda. The Emperor taking leave of Targiana, returned with his train to
the City, endeavoring himself to change the mind of Florendos, but all was
in vain, for two days after he departed from Constantinople, accompanied with
Albayzar, whom he would not suffer to wear Armor, but permitted him one of
the Esquires belonging to Targiana, and himself took twain, one to carry
the Shields of Miragarda, which was covered, and the other to carry his own,
thus in their journey we intend to leave them.

The Damosel of Thrace, seeing the Prince Palmerin in good disposition of
health, in the presence of the Emperor, she spoke to him thus. Worthy Sir, I
think you are sufficiently certified, that I cannot depart from hence without
your company, seeing you have finished that, which of many years have been
thought impossible: wherefore, most humbly I beseech you, that you would employ
your self, to end likewise the miserable estate, of the distressed and most
unfortunate princess of Thrace whose enchantment can no way be be expelled,
but only by you whose renown shall be more then I can speak of, for you that
shall join in marriage with her, and so make your self king over all Thrace.
But if perchance, the desire you have to follow adventures, will not suffer you
to ioyn with her in this honorable estate, then shall she stand at your
appointment to marry with such a one as you shall think meetest for her,
wherefore I desire you to set a part all excuses, and to enter upon this
journey, so soon as possible you may.

Fair Lady (answered Palmerin) I am so much used to travail, that I know the
better how to continue it, and never did I refuse to aid any person, whose
intent might be no prejudice to her, whom I am always bound to obey: and
therefore assure your self, that so soon as I shall be provided of Armor,
(because Albaroco has so disappointed me) I will not stay to accomplish your
desire. The Damsel was very well pleased with this answer of Palmerin, but
the Emperor (who wished more good to him, then any other of his Nephews)
conceived great grief to leave his company so soon* wherefore, he went to the
chamber of the Empress, who also was very sorry when she heard these news.

Likewise the Princes Polinarda hearing that Palmerin should so soon leave the
Court, went to her chamber amated with great grief, and many passions of the
mind: which Dramaciana perceiving, and knowing well the cause of her heaviness,
caine to persuade her in this manner. Fair mistress I never thought that any
misfortune could deprive you of discretion, which you have always used: but if
your grief be grounded on the departure of Palmerin, why do you not consider
y^ his desire is, ever to be where he may behold you^ and (though in truth) he
deserves to enjoy the most excellent princes on y^ earth, yet dare I assure
you, that your beauty is sufficient, to yield the heart of him under your
obeisance, who only desires to be your sweet friend in love. And without good
hope in this desire, I know he could not long enjoy his life, but that he
persuades himself to enjoy that gladsom and long expected felicity: wherefore.
I desire you, to use such courteous favor toward him, as may urge him the
sooner to return to the Court.

Folinarda having received some content by the words of Dramaciana, made her
answer in this manner. How can I well brook the sudden voyage of Palmerin,
whom above all I love, and in heart give most honor? yet will I not make him
so privy to my thoughts, albeit I sustained the hazard of death, because,
perhaps the beauty of Leo^arna Princess of Thrace, may alter the affection he
has vowed to me.

I believe (quoth Dramaciana) that inconstancy cannot harbor in the heart of
him, who proved himself so loyal in the adventure of the cup: but to prevent
the worst, if you will vouchsafe me the leave, I will in private talk use such
means with him, as I shall quickly sound the depth of his intent. Polinarda
esteeming this deui^e, returned presently this answer. I think so well
Dramiciana of this pretty invention, that I am very well content that you
proceed therein: but of all Loves I pray you, use the circumstance of your
matter in such sort, that he perceive nothing therein to be done with my will.

Polinarda thus concluding her speeches, went and sat down by the Princess
Gridonia her mother: mean while, the English Prince remembering his hasty
journey, as also the small kindness he perceived in his Lady, passed all the
day in many silent thoughts. But whe^^ the evening came, he went to the Empres
Chamber, where the Knights and Ladies danced: and doing his duty to them all,
he came and sat down by Dramaciana, with whom being very familiar, he entered
into these speeches. Sweet friend, if I either might, or could utter my
complaints to any, by whom I had opinion to receive redress, with very glad
consent I would: but seeing my sorrows grow to a greater extreme, and to none
but you I dare bewray them, I will request so much courtesy at your hands, as
to resolve me in one or two questions: and thus they are. What is the cause my
Lady Polinarda deals so hardly with me, as to drive me to the utter despair
and contempt of my life? if she think me to deserve no greater favor, trust
me, I may judge her overmuch unkind, for that all my care is, by what mean or
motion, to lay my heart at her foot in loyal serucice.

But she sees full well my grief, and covers her self with such a close
conceit, that she will not seem to know it: only because she is either
dainty of her courtesy, or else thinks scorn to recompense my travel. I
desire you to bear witness with my faith, which neither forces pain,
torment, or any misery, so that she would not forget the knight who suffers
al for her sake, and cannot express what he would suffer, so that it might but
please her to esteem thereof. And trust me, sweet friend, I never in all my
life entered so far in speech hereof to any person, nor would I have gone so
far at this present, but that the proof of your fidelity, has constrained
me to speak what you have heard, knowing very well, that with a trusty
friend, a secret is buried in the bottom of the sea.

Sir Palmerin (answered Dramaciana) the long time you have absented your self
from hence, has moved me to think, that your mind was addicted to some other
purpose: so that I judge, you rather complain for custom then cause, as you
are al wont to do, when you hold the fish with the baire, which you greatly
^are not for, whether you were best to take it, or let it go. And now I am
advertised, that you go to end the Enchantment of Leonarda, the heir and
princes of Thrace, whose love (I fear me) will cause you forget your old
friends, wherefore you may with greater ease bear so small a burden.

Trust me, answered Palmerin, the beauty of Leonarda, nor all the rich
proffers of preferment in the world, shall have power to alter any quality in
me, by which I might be judged, either inconstant of faith, or negligent in
promise: for which cause I have the greater desire to speak with the princess
Polinarda, that she may be assured of the loyalty, which this poor heart of
mine shall continue to her to the death.

Well, quoth she, if your constancy be such as you report, I think in so
small a matter, it will not be changed. But as for speaking with my Lady, I
know at this time it is impossible: wherefore, for a further trial of your
truth, prepare your self to depart with the Damsel of Thrace, and in your
absence I will so manifest your constancy, that at your return you shall speak
with her at your pleasure. So that in y^ mean time you will promise me, that no
occasion be moved to offend so good a Princes. To these words Palmerin thought
to have made answer, but the Dancing being done, he was hindered of his
purpose, so that Dramaciana and he were constrained to part company, he being
very glad that he had disclosed part of his grief, to her that would solicit
his suit in ample manner, and this night he took better rest, then he had done
since his departure out of England.

The next morning he rose very early, when a fair new armor was presented
him, and in his shield he bare a man torn in pieces by a Tiger. Then went he
with the Damosel to take leave of the Emperor, who brought him to the Empress
chamber, to whom he humbly did his duty, as also to Gridonia, Bazilia, and all
the Ladies, but such was his heavy farewell, to the Princess Polinarda, as all the Ladies present could not refrain from tears. Thu^ left he the Emperor in
great sorrow, Primaleon, Dramusiande and his brother Florian, were very sorry
to leave them whom he most loved, but notwithstanding all entreaty, he departed
with the Damsel and Siluian toward the kingdom of Thrace.

Soon after, two Allemaigne Ambassadors arrived at the Court, yielding the
seat and government, of the ancient Emperor Trineus deceassed, to the Prince
Vernar his son, these news were great grief to the Emperor, as also the
Prince Vernar who left the Court, accompanied with his Lady Bazilia, being
great with child, and soon after delivered of a goodly young Prince named
Trineus after his Grandfather.

To accompany these princes, there went Florian of the desert Floraman,
Dramusiand, Albanis of Freece, Gracian, Po^pides and many other, and when they
came to the City of Cullen, there was the prince Vernar chosen Emperor, with
such magnificiall Triumphs as never were seen the like in the days of ^is
Predecessors. Then sent he for his Brother Polinard, to enjoy such titles as
were fallen unto him, and Florian, with the other Princes and Knights, stayed a
while in the Court of the Emperor Vernar, when soon after they departed to
seek adventures, as you shall at large perceive in the second Volum of this
History.

CHAP. XCVI.
Of the dangers which the King Polendos and the Princes passed, conueying the
Princess Targiana by Sea: And what happened to the Prince Florendos, in the
Fort of Astribor.
THe King Polendos, and the hundred knights that bare him company, to conduct
the princess Targiana home again, sailing at their pleasure, Fortune was so
adverse to them, that they took the Coast of Africa, where they were assaulted
by ten Galleyes, belonging to the King of Mamercos, chief Governor of Cenia,
who as then had all the Country under his subjection.

The K. Polendos, seeing himself on the point of so extreme danger, dealt
with them in such brave and forceable manner, that he suncke them all, and
took their Captain, who was the Couzin to the Knight of Tunis, not loosing
one of his Knights in this noble skirmish. With the glory of this Conquest, he
came to the Princess Targiana, who was glad to see her self delivered from so
great danger, and honored in such worthy wise by the King Polendos, who with
this noble Prisoner set forward their voyage to Turkey, the wind serving them
so well, that in short time they arrived at the city, where the great Turk
was resident. When to witness the honorable company there under Sail, they
discharge their Ordinance in such a brave peale, that the people, not
accustomed to so sudden a greeting, came running on heaps to the Haven, to
know the cause of such a brave warning.

The great Turk himself, desirous likewise to understand these news, came
ryding with his courtly attendants toward the Haven, whom Polendos espying,
took the fair Targiana by the hand, and accompanied with his noble train of
princes and Knights, armed in very rich and sumptuous order, presented her
before her Father, when falling on her knees and bedewing her face with a few
tears, she humbled her self to kiss his feet. The great Turk moved with
natural remorse and pity, embraced her very lovingly in his arms, and came
to the king Polendos and his company, using them with marvelous Princely and
gracious favor, lodging them in his own palace, and feasting them in such
noble wise, that the Emperors court, they thought themselves at no time better
used. Thus continued they in all possible pleasure, till the day came of their
departure, when the Turk used such entreaty to the^, that he persuaded them to
stay one day longer. And then he prepared such a privily Feast, as in all the
time of their being there, they never had the like, passing their dinner time,
in talk of the Emperor Palmerin, as also the honorable usage of his daughter
at Constantinople. The tables were no sooner withdrawn, but there entered
fifty armed and well appointed knights, each one having his sword drawn in
his hand, commanding not one should offer resistance, except he would presently
loose his life. The great Turk entered at a false or secret door, giving to
the^ these speeches. Yield Polendos, and grant thy self and thy company to be
my prisoners, otherwise, you shall all presently loose your heads. Polendos
with all his Knights, took one corner of the Hall, keeping their Swords in
their hands, and then himself spoke to the Turk in this order. I would gladly
know, for what cause you offer us this great discourtesie, considering how
well your Daughter has been used at Constantinople, as also the honor we
have done you, to conduct her safely to your Court. Polendos (answered the
Turk) to the Emperor thy lord, thy self and these thy friends, I mean no
harm, but I am so offended with the knight, who took my Daughter hence with
him into Greece, that I promise, you shall not depart from hence, till the
Emperor deliver that Knight into my hands.

Trust me (quoth Polendos) our hope would stand in hard suspense, if we should
stay here on this condition, wherefore we esteem it more honor, to end our
lives in the face of our enemies, then to be thy vassailes here in continual
Prison. And hereupon assure thy self, that the Emperor would more gladly
leave all the knights in his Court, then to satisfy thy desire with him, who
is one of the most hardy and noblest knights on the earth, to whom likewise I
wish as much good, as to mine own soul. Well, said the Turk, then must you
resolve your selves, either presently to abide the death, or submit your selves
to remain my Prisoners.

At these words, the Princess Targiana cast her self on her knees before her
Father, desiring him not to use such cruelty to them, who had done her so much
honor in the Emperors court, as also delivered her in the peril of her life,
being dangerously assaulted as they came in the voyage. The Turk seeing how
imporunate his Daughter was on him, in a great anger conuayed himself forth
again, because he would not see the slaughter of so many good knights. Then
Targiana seeing her Father gone, entreated the king Polendos and his company,
that they would suffer themselves to remain as Prisoners, and not to abide the
danger, if they should offer resistance, being naked, and having nothing to
defend them withal. And during the time they were in prison, she would either
devise or accomplish such means, as she had no doubt but to purchase their
liberty. Upon this good persuasion they yielded themselves, when they were
presently carried into a deep dungeon in a strong tower, and there were laded
with as many irons as they could possible bear, whereat Targiana received
great grief, clothing her self in mourning apparel, and would never show
any merry countenance, during the time the Knights were in Prison, where they
remained a long time, as you shall read in the second part of this Book.

The Turk commanded the Christian Galleys to be kept in safe and sure
protection, and presently sent word to the Soldane of Persia with all the other
Princes, how he had diverse of the Emperors knights prisoners, on whom he
determined sharp revenge, for the great injury which Florian of the Desert had
done him. These news they esteemed very strange, nevertheless, being very
fearful any way to displease him, they made resemblance of a good opinion in
this matter, giving him counsel to keep them, until the Prince Albayzar were
returned, whom else the Emperor might cause to be slain.

The great Turk trusted very much on their devise, suffering the captive
Princes, that they might send their Esquires to the Emperor Palmerin, to
advertise him of the misery wherein they remained, but the Esquires by no
means would forsake their Masters, desiring, as they had accompanied them in
prosperity, so not to leave them now in this great mischance.

Which when Belcar perceived, he commanded his Esquire, to go and certerfie the
Emperor, what great mishap had befollen unto them. When the Esquire was come
to Constantinople, these news were nothing welcome to the Emperor, nether to
Primaleon, who before him entered into these words. My gracious Lord and father,
this mischance is only procured by your means, for that you dealt so
courteously with them, who had neither quality nor any motion of desert in
them. But now I would gladly see, what thing you can accomplish any way to
pleasure them, for I judge, that all your power is not sufficient to deliver
them from the bondage wherein they are. Wherefore I think it best, that you
send with all speed to seek the prince Albayzar, through whom you may recover
the king Polendos and your knights, other way I cannot perceive, that may
pleasure them or profit you.

My Son (answered the Emperor) if the imprisonment of Polendos and my
knights were perpetual, I would not seek to set them at liberty by this
mean, for I had rather they should enjoy the death, then to accomplish that
which might be my continual reproach, for this difference I always crave,
between me and all the world that the good may be perfectly discerned from the
evil. Albayzer is not guilty in the injury which the Turk does seem to
offer my Knights: therefore it were against honor, that he should suffer for
another offense, but this is it whereat I am most amazed, that Targiana will
suffer this great discourtesie, considering the honor she received in our
Court.

My dear Sovereign (quoth the Esquire) there is no cause to complain of her,
for her entreaty could no way prevail with ^er Father, whereupon he rehearsed
the whole discourse and manner of their imprisonment, which the Emperor ha^ing
heard, departed with the Empress into his Chamber very ^rie, where we must
forsake him, and return to the Prince ^lorendos.

He travailed so long, accompanied with the noble Albayzar, ^^at being in the
Dominions of Spain, they came to a fair ^astell, which Albayzar knowing very
well, began thus to open his intent. Sir Florendos, I have heretofore passed
this place, in the greatest danger that ever I was in, fror through giving aid
to a Damsel, whom bloody minded wretches sought to dishonest, I slew them
with ten more, as also their Lord named Dramorant the Cruel, who kept this
Castle, at which exployte, the noble Palmerin of England, Florian and Pompides
his Brethren, were present, and can testify what I have spoken. Therefore I
pray you let us go to the Castle, for that I assure my self, the Lady to
whom I gave it, at such time as I delivered her out of danger, will receive us
with a courteous and friendly welcome. I am content (quoth Florendos) seeing we
have no other place to lodge in this night, that I can see near here about.

Thus breaking off their talk, they had not rid two stones cast, but they
beheld four armed Knights come toward them, and an Esquire who came before
them, uttering these words to the Prince Florendos. Sir Knight, the great
Astribor sends strait commandment, that you and your companious, do
presentle yield your Armor under his obeisance, the denial whereof shall cause
him use more cruelty toward you, then he would willingly offer to any good
knight.

No other thing does he request of you, except you can report to him tidings,
of a knight who has s^aine Dramorant his Brother, sometime Lord and rightful
possessor of this castle, which was given by that Knight to a Damsel, whom he
keeps in prison, till Fortune send the Knight hither, to sacrifice them both
to his Gods, for revenge of his brothers death.

Albayzar advanced himself to make answer, but because he was unarmed,
Florendos thus replied to the Esquire. Go tell my Lord Astribor, that I am not
the Knight he would so gladly find, but I am well acquainted with him, and am
sure that he has slain his Knights deservedly, as for mine Armor, because
I cannot very well spare it, I am c^ntent he shall go without it at this time,
except I had more knowledge of him, how to have it when I shall return. Well,
said the Esquire, since you will not yield it by gentle means, you must
prepare your self against these Knights, who are here appointed by sufficient
authority, to take their Armor away perforce, who refused to yield it
according to custom.

Florendos seeing the Knights provided to Ioust, he encountered with them, and
sent two courageously to measure their length on the ground, the one being
slain outright, the other so sore wounded, that he was not able to rec^uer
himself.

Then came forth Astribor himself, very bravely mounted, and seeing Florendos
destitute of a Lance, he gave his Horse the spurs, and ran against him with
such force. that Florendos was constrained to fall to the ground, but
recovering himself, he dealt with Astribor in such courageous manner, that
bringing him under his obeisance, he cut off his head in recompense of his
disloyal acts.

Certain Knights that were in the Castle, and had seen their Lord and Master
so conquered, let their Armor, coming toward the Prince Florendos, to whom
in reverent manner they yielded themselves.

But he would not enter the Castle, before the Lady might come soorth of
Prison, whereupon Albayzar entered, and found her in a Dungeon, very cruelly
used, so that a great while she could not remember him, but at last she fell
on her knees, and to reward his gentleness, submitted her self to kiss his
hand, who would not suffer her, but sustained her courteously in his arms:
willing her to thank the Prince Florendos and not him, because he was not
suffered to bear Armor.

The Lady at these words fell into a great rage, and as though she were
distraight of her wits, began thus to say. Cursed be he that has so
dishonored yon, for credit me, knightly Arms were better bestowed on you,
then on him, or any of his lineage: wherefore, I am thus persuaded, that Ladies
shall have loss of so good a knight as you, whose heart and hand was ever
ready to aid them.

Albayzar not suffering her to run so far in his praise, framed his talk
to another purpose: desirous to know, in what manner Astribor had happened
thither. Sir (quoth she) you shall understand, that this Astribor was brother to
Dramorant the Cruel, a man of more malicious nature, then ever was the Giant
his brother: he was no sooner advertised of his death, but with ten knights he
came unto this Fortress, where finding small force to resist him, he entered,
cau^ing all he found here to be put to the sword, reserving me in prison, till
he might chance to have knowledge of you, when then he intended to burn us
both together: and till he might come by you, he ordained this custom, which
is so worthily finished.

Albayzar being certified of every thing at his pleasure, caused the Prince
Florendos to be unarmed: and his wounds were very carefully respected by the
Lady, who had good knowledge in the Art of Chirugery. There they stayed longer,
then the Prince Florendos willingly would: for no place were it never so
pleasant, could satisfy his fancy, but only the place where remained his best
beloved.

CHAP. XCVII.
Of that which happened to Palmrin of England, in the company of the Damsel
of Thrace.
SVch speed the noble Palmerin of England made, in the company of the Damosel,
with whom he travailed, that without any adventure to hinder them, they quietly
entered the kingdom of Thrace: whereat the Damsel was very joyful, seeing
every thing fell so fit as she desired, and the labor she had spent so many
years, began as now so happily to prosper. This Damsel being very well
known, and highly honored through all the kingdom, great resort of people
came from many Cities and Towns, to receive her joyfully, who had been so
long time absent.

The people beholding the prince Palmerin, gave forth these speeches to one
another. Behold our gracious Lord and Sovereign, happy shall his subjects be,
to be under the government of such a noble Prince, in whom remains both
courage and clemency: who shall finish the enchanted estate of our Princess,
enjoy her as his only Queen and Lady, and govern the Scepter over us,
according as our deceased Prince did appoint it.

But Palmerin applied his whole cogitations, how he might manifest his loyalty
to the Princess Polinarda, more then he respected the honor which was done
unto him: and though he had good hope to end his enterprise, his intent was
presently to return to his Lady and mistress. In this opinion they rode on
together, til they came to the city of Limorsana, where the principal lords
and rulers, came to receive him with all triumphs possible: conducting him to
the royal Palace. and in all respects using him as their king and Emperor.
Then came he to the chamber of the Queen Carmelia, who was Aunt to the
princess Leonarda, where doing his duty unto her, she received him as nobly,
as had he been her own son, because she verily thought he should marry with
the Princess.

But she was far from the intent of the English Priuce, who seeing them so
verily to believe, that he should be their Governor of Thrace, was somewhat
offended, remembering his promise to his Lady Polinarda. Wherefore he took
leave of them, courteously bowing himself to the Queen Carmelia, and went to
his chamber, where he was unarmed by Siluian, and the Damsel that came all
the way in his company.

At supper he was accompanied with the Queen Carmelia, many Lords and noble
Gentlemen of that country, who showed great courtesy to the English Prince,
till the hour of rest came, when every one departed to their chambers, and
Palmerin to his lodging, where he could take no rest, because he desired so
much the delivery of the princess Leonarda. In the morning Siluian armed him
very early, so that when the Lords came to his chamber, they found him ready to
depart thence: wherefore they accompanied him to the Chapel, where service was
solemnized very royally by the Archbishop of the city, and then they rode
with him, near the place where the Princess was Enchanted, reporting to him
the dangers and fear, that in this adventure should chance unto him.

CHAP. XCVIII.
How Palmerin took his way to the Enchaunted Princess, and of that which
happened to him.
IN short time, the Lords had brought the prince to the place where Leonarda
remained enchanted, where he beheld in a pleasant valley, a company of brave
and stauely Towers among the green trees: the buildings seeming so excellent
to the eye, that nature could not have invented them more gallant: so that he
thought them to be framed by the Celestial powers, rather then by any earthly
creatures.

Palmerin was glad to see a thing so pleasant, though he were sorrowful to be
absent from his Lady Polinarda: and comparing the great felicity of him, who
should enjoy the Princess Leonarda, with the mournful thoughts that
frequented his mind, he could make choice of nothing, but only the hope he
had to be favored of his lady: whose remembrance, caused this adventure to
promise him more pleasure, then the hazard of such a doubt could move him to
fear. A thing, which truly is a great grace in a discreet man, because that
diverse tunes we see, the doubtfullest things to have the pleasantest issue: and
that which seems most pleasant at the beginning, does prove to be the
sharpest danger in the ending. Even so this noble Prince Palmerin contained
such a courage and magnanimity of mind, that no fear or dismaying had power to
supplant his thoughts, because good fortune suffered him, to return from every
attempt with honor.

One of the chief knights that kept him company, presented himself to him in
this manner. Most worthy Sir, to whom Fortune has always been so great a
Friend, that no danger or distress could offer to dismay you, seem not now to
discourage your self in this adventure, for your accustomed prosperity, can
not forsake you at this present. Yet sometime a raw proceeding returns an
unexpected and undeserved punishment: but as this case stands, your noble
self accompanied with so great advised care, cannot move a foot further then
virtue shall warrant your safety. Pardon me good Sir, if I have been over
lavish in my speech, which I intended to no other issue, but only to advertise
you, that this adventure is perilous, and therefore craves the more heed, and
that a friendly admonishment, is better then too late repentance?

Sir, answered Palmerin, your counsel, showing so great gravity and
foresight, I esteem a great deal more then at this time I will utter: for if
Fortune speed me in this enterprise, I will not be unmindful of your friendly
good will. This promise presented with so great humanity, enflamed a sudden
envy in the hearts of some there present, who for the hope they had to see him
king, began to enter into more dissembling praises, then any true or faithful
subject would seem to offer. For they began to persuade him, that no
adventure, how dangerous soever it proved, might attain the power to astonish
his person: but he declining from such vainglorious praises, as was the daily
gifts and works of flatterers, courteoussy took his leave of them all, and
set spurs to his Horse, riding toward his determination.

An example surely worthy of great praise to all Princes and rulers living on
the earth, that they should not incline and lean to such, who only study with
sweet words, flattering tales, and false reportss, to rest and bring them
asleep in so vile an exercise. Which painted faces if they would suppress,
their Subjects, Friends, and Servants, should be equally regarded, their
renown plentifully increased, and accordingly honored, yea, the virtuous
should be richly rewarded, and the vicious rightfully for ever reproched, then
would not the plain dealer, be governed by such as have been noted, but the
good should be openly discerned from the evil, and all enjoy one hope for a
continual quiet: but to our matter, Palmerin being come somewhat near the
place, the light began to darken, the Air to be maruellously troubled, and
mistie, so that the Lords of Thrace were overcome with such fear, that some
fell beside their Horses, some hurt themselves very sore, and they all made
have to the City as fast as they could, where tho darkness likewise was very
terrible.

Siluian, whom Palmerin had willed to stay behind him, seeing this sudden
fear, took such courage that he would follow his Master, but the Enchantment
would not suffer any to enter there, save only the Knight, who had the power
to end it: that Siluian was forced to return to the City, where he found
the people in a great astonishment, at that which happened since the departure
of Palmerin. Who remembering the words of the ancient Knight, began to
dislike the enstance of sharp an evil, for he thought easily to find the way
of this adventure, but he was greatly deceived, when he felt such pain, as he
supposed would have rent him asunder. Likewise he thought not to find any in
this place, who had the power to torment him, beyond the love he bare to his
lady: but he found his expectation altered, when an invisible motion dismounted
him from his Horse, whereupon in an anger he drew his Sword, thinking to
prevail against him that overthrew him, but seeing his blows to be smitten
against the wind, he thought to mount on Horseback again, and then to ride
forward.

But all his labor was in vain, it was not possible for him to find his
Horse, but that which was more to his disadvantage, not only his Sword was
taken from him, but likewise all his Armor was caught away on a sudden, and
the darkness was so violent, that he had not the commodity to go forward,
nor yet to go back again, to the place where he commanded Siluian to tarry.

CHAP. XCIX.
What happened to the Prince Palmerin, in this dangerous adventure.
PAlmerin having lost his Horse and Armor, as you have heard already, became
full of heaviness, because he was in respect naked, and so hard an adventure
required better provision: his strength on a sudden began to fail him, his
arms and legs denied their wonted nimblenesse, and on a sudden he heard a
mighty and terrible thundering, that still he expected when the earth would
have opened under him.

Upon this he heard a fearful hollow voice, but looking about him, he could
perceive no body, and then was he snatched up such a mighty height, that he
still looked when he should be violently thrown down again. This fear had
not the power to hurt him, but to his greater comfort, the light excluded the
darkness away, when he found himself to be in the midst of a little Island
enclosed round about with a Lake so black and ouglie, that he thought it to
be one of the floods of Hell.

Near to him he espied an old withered Tree, and underneath it stood a
Knight armed with the Armor of Palmerin, with his Swoorde like wise in his
hand, whereupon he began to the Prince in this order. I desire (Sir Knight) to
see at this present, by what means thou can defend thy self from me, who
with this Swoorde will mangle thy flesh and bones, whereon the wild Beasts of
the Country shall feed: so that thy renown famed over all the whole earth,
shall here take full end, where none can approach to bear witness of thy
death.

The Prince, who was never accustomed to any feate, was now surprised in
maruaylous manner, whereat no marvel ought to be used, in that he was
destitute of any thing for his defense, and to strive by the arms with such an
enemy, he found it altogether insufficient: yet notwithstanding, the
extremity which Fortune had allotted him, he approached to the Knights,
offering to adventure so upon him.

But as they thought to close together, a dark Cloud suddenly ouershadowed
them, so that Palmerin could no way discern the Knight, but thinking as it
were to gripe him, his Sword was suddenly put into his hand, and his Armor
he perceived under the Tree, but the Knight was gone he knew not which way.

Palmerin heereat was somewhat abashed, but seeing this adventure so
replenished with fearful assaults, and that the end of all would be changed
into rigor, he armed himself again with such a courage, that not only his
strength was increased, but also his mind nobly addicted, to accomplish that
which he so mucgh desired.

The light began to be cheerful again, when Palmerin discerned the fair
Castle, whereto he could not attain, without crossing that ougly Lake, which
to pass he could devise no means, but it would stand on the hazard of his
life.

Beside, the Bank on the other side, was so steep approaching down to the
water, that he could not judge with himself how to get up, because (...)
w^ight of his Armor, would (...) a great hinderaunce to him, to (...) on the
side where he would be: yet more to hinder his determination, he espied there
a company of mo^^^ous and misshapen Beasts, who on a sudden fought so
furiously together, that in the end they had utterly spoyld and killed one
another.

Their grievous fight being thus ended, he went about the Island, to see where
he might have passage to the other side, at last he espied a Boat, having
four Ores in it, which were handled and governed by four Apes, each one tied
with a mighty Chain, and at the one end of the Boat sat a mighty Lion, all
embrued in blood, as though he were Master and conducter of the Passage, who
fed himself with nothing else, but the flesh of his Passengers.

While Palmerin took occasion to behold this sight, he espied a man on the
farther side, crying to the Beasts to carry him over with them, whereat, he
became very much amazed, and thought no man to be so foolish, as to hazard
himself under such a Pilote.

The man was no sooner entered the Boat, but the Lion straight way rent him in
pieces, giving part of him to his companions, to sustain their life.

The Prince who stood and behold all this, knew not how to determine with
himself, for he saw no way to pass, but the terror of death was both before
and behind him, wherefore seeing there was no remedy, he concluded to put
himself to the rigor of the Beasts, and to shift with them by strength of his
arms, for he saw himself wholly destitute of any other hope.

Hereupon he looked how he might discende down, for the Rock was so
slipperie and steep, that he thought there was no other way, but to break
his neck, in this extremity he committed himself to God, and afterward to
his Mistress he began in this manner. Madame, it is not the loss of life
which appaleth me, but the hope of your favor that sustaineth me in doubt,
but if I well consider with my self, the ending of my life in this adventure,
will be the greatest good that ever may happen to me because then my
insupportable pains shall attain a perfect and full conclusion. Yet knowing
the grief which mollesteth me, proceeds from none but only you, I fix my
joy and comfort to this end, that your help in this and all other extremes,
is the only advancement of my good fortune.

Here taking occasion to stay, he suffered himself to slide softly down the
Rock, and attained the River side without any harm: whereupon, the Lion and
his fellows came to receive him into the Boat, but he perceiving all this
was Enchauntment, drew his sword and offered resistance, when presently the
beasts vanished, he knew not which way.

Then Palmerin leaped into the Boat, and with all diligence rowed himself to
y^ farther side, but when he was landed there, he had more cause of marvel,
because now he saw no way how to get up upon that Rock.

Walking a little aside, he beheld a Rope that reached to the ground from the
top, which was so slender and rotten, that he thought it not able to abide the
weight of his Armor, wherefore, to make himself the lighter, he determined to
leave his Armor there, yet not knowing what occasion he should have to use it,
when he should come to the top of the Rock, he bound himself about the middle
with the Rope, when presently he was pulde up with maruailous speed, and when
he was at the top, he could not perceive them that had drawn him up. Then he
knew he was in the Field where the beasts were slain, and that every thing the
Enchauntment presented to him, was for no other cause but to abate his courage:
where fore, he addicted himself so aduenturous, that all the fear in the
world, had not the power to dismay him.

CHAP. C.
How Palmerin ended the Enchantment, of the Princess Leonarda.
FOr all that night, Palmerin rested himself under a Tree, and in the morning
he beheld the Towers very bravely: wherefore he walked on, and at last espied
his Horse tied to a Tree, in no worse case then when he left him. So mounting
upon him, he rode a little further, where he met with two Knights, who without
any words, couched their spears against him: the first received upon his
Shield, and the Knights presently vanished away: the second burst his Lance
upon him, whereupon Palmerin followed him, to requite him with a blow of his
sword, but he lost the sight of him, in like manner as he did of the other
knight.

Then Palmerin looking about, espied a man ready to draw a Bridge, which was
the passage over a water, which made him to gallop thither apace, so that he
entered the gate before he had the power to lock it. When he-sawe himself in
so fair a Castle, he advanced himself to see the bravery of the Chambers:
but two Giants came and laid at him with their Maces, so that he was enforced
to fall on the ground, but recovering himself, and thinking to fasten half a
good blows on them, they were gone, nothing remaining before him but a great
smoke.

This caused him, to make the less estimation of any thing that chanced, and
whatsoever resisted him, he would but little force of, so coming into the
Court of the Castle, he perceived a little gate on high in the wall, whereto
he must ascend by a pair of stairs, so narrow and dangerous, that a man would
have hardly trusted himself on them.

Palmerin, desirous to see the end of his labors, adventured to go up upon
them, and when he was on the middle step, all the walls about him began to
shake very vehemently, so that Palmerin doubted the whole Castle would fall
upon him, and till came to the top of the stairs the Enchantment lasted, where
he was no sooner come, but a general terror did show the Enchantment to be
fully ended.

Palmerin entering through that little door, came into a dark entry, where
there was a great gate, made fast with great Locks and boltes of Iron, and
hard by the gate lay a mighty Serpent, whose horrible bigness and oughly
form, made the Prince to be greatly amazed, about whose neck upon a Chain,
was hanged the Keys that should open the gate.

The Prince knew not how to pass this gate, except he might winns the Keys
from so terrible a Porter, whom he charged with many noble strokes, and the
Serpent breathed such horrible veneme and smoke, having the Princes Sword in
one of his nostrilles: that with a terrible ^ore he slew through one of the
windows. The people seeing it fly over the City, which made them judge,
that Palmerin as then was in some painful travail, for whose good success
they prayed very often.

When he saw the Serpent was gone, he found the Keys on the ground, wherewith
he unlocked and opened the gate, entering into so fair a Hall, that the
Perilous Isle, where Eutropa cast her self into the Lake, nor the sumptuous
Castle of the Sage Aliart Obscure Valley, might compare with this rare and
excellent Monument, which was so engeniously devised by the King of Thrace.

He walked all about, and found all things new to be in perfect estate, for
that the Enchantment was fully finished, but at last he came to a Chamber,
where he perceived certain Damsels talking, and by them stood an armed man,
who likewise took pleasure to confer with the Damsels.

The Prince loath to trouble them, entered into a very fair Garden, where on a
green bank, by a fair Fountain, he beheld diverse Ladies of excellent
beauty, but especially, the fair young Princess Leonarda, who had no sooner
espied him but she came to him very courteously in this manner. Credit me Sir
Knight, I find my self so largely beholding to you, that I cannot recompense
you so nobly as you have deserved, but in time I shall endeavor my self to
requite the honorable bounty received at your hands, mean while, I shall
request you, to accept my good will in satisfaction of your noble deeds, which
are imprinted so deep in my heart, that I shall not fail to accomplish, what
your Prowess has bound me in.

My gracious Lady (answered Palmerin) the beauty which Nature has abundantly
adorned you withal, is sufficient to content the greatest travails, attempted
by the hardyest Knight in the world: if so be Fortune had allowed him the
liberty to receive so great a benefit of such a gracious Lady. But seeing the
adventure here so wonderful, that these present, put them past into dark
oblivion, I shall entreat you to tell me, if I have any greater danger to
pass, then this which it pleases you to present before me, for trust me I
shall despair to accomplish them, knowing right well, that the hope of so rich
a Treasure, as is your beauty, ought to be reserved for the Knight who is
indewed with greater Prewesse then my self.

These words procured a sweet blushing in the Princess face, whereof to be
resoued, she replied thus. I know not, Sir Knight, what danger you sustain at
this present, because all the dangers and hazards of the Castle, took end at
such tune as you came into this Garden. But then to break off their talk,
there came in the Lords and Governors of the City, who seeing the Serpent fly
over the City, which they knew very well to be the end of the Enchantment,
they came with great Majesty riding to the Castle, where coming into the
Garden, they humbled themselves on their knees before the Princess Leonarda,
offering likewise to kiss the hand of the noble Palmerin, which he would not
suffer: but received them courteously as his friends and companions. The Queen
Carmelia sent a Coach to the Castle, wherein the Princess. Leonarda was
brought to the Palace of her Uncle, who received her as became her high
estate and dignity: and the Prince Palmerin likewise they used great honor and
Princely obeisance, but when he came to the Camber, he found there Siluian who
was not a little glad to see his Lord so sauely returned.

CHAP. CI.
Of that which Palmerin did, while he remaineded in the Court of Thrace.
NOw at the request of the Queen Carmelia, Palmerin granted to stay in the
court of Thrace for eight days, in which time, the Lords to fulfill the
commandment of their deceassed King, went to the Camber of the Queen
Carmelia, in whose presence they charged the Duke Rialdo, to give the English
Prince to understand what their King Sardamant had commanded to be fulfilled.

On this they all came to the Princes Chamber, where they found him talking
with Siluian, as concerning his speedy departure from thence: which they knew
he had appointed as the next day following, but they making themselves ignorant
thereof, at last the Duke Rialdo entered into these speeches.

My Lord, as I think you have not forgotten, what commandment our deceassed
king Sardamant, left to be performed in the marriage of the Princess Leonarda
his Niece.

So it is, that willing to accomplish his straight and heavy charge, as also
not to suffer such a noble Prince, who has merited so graciously, to be
ingratefully recompensed, likewise on our parts, that we cannot esteem for
ourselves a more happy felicity, then such a King to rule us, whose deeds
rightly deserve to be Monarch of the whole world: these causes considered and
nominated, we humbly desire you, to accept your own by right, and our duty to
see faithfully accomplished, which is, to be our gracious King and Seueraigne,
so that our happy and tranquil estate, remain feared of the stranger, and
beloved of our friends and neighbors. Except the increase of wealth, do alter
the noble mind, which had always hitherto continued upright, as to some it
happens: but falling into so great mishap, your estimation would be the less
accounted of, So that the honorable pains you have bestowed, to restore us the
princess Leonarda our Queen, should be blotted with such obliuous reports, as
though they had been never seen or done.

I assure you Sir, answered Palmerin, the refuse which I make, to accept a
reward so happy and fortunate, is only because I verily judge, the Princess
Leonarda ought to be kept for such a one, as may better my estate in wealth and
worthiness.

The Damosel of Thrace, who had brought him thither, standing by and hearing
the answer he made, came unto him in this manner.

Sir Palmerin, I know right well, that love hinders you to enjoy what your
deeds has deserved, and causes you to muse on such a one, as peradventure
thinks not so well of you, which is the only cause, that you refuse the
recompense of your honorable and famous labors.

The words of the Damsel, seemed very reason able to the Duke and his
company, but seeing they could obtain no other answer of Palmerin, they
returned again to the Queen Carmelia, concluding, that he should give a noble
Lord to enjoy the Princess Leonarda; according as the King Sardamant had so
ordained: whereto Palmerin gladly agreed, saying.

I account this honor (worthy Gentlemen) the greatest that ever fortune could
sent me, in suffering your Princess to join in Marriage according to my
mind: and therefore thus assure yourselues, that I shall bestew such a Prince
upon her, as both she and you shall be contented to receive.

The Lords of Thrace gave him very hearty thanks, reporting his answer to the
Queen Carmelia, who made such acceptance thereof, as it worthily deserved:
but Leonarda was somewhat offended, and would have fallen into anger, had not
the Damsel of Thrace used these words unto her.

Fair Princess, me thinks you should not think so ill, of the constant
faith and loyalty of the Prince Palmerin, who will keep his vow he has made
to her, which perhaps is nothing inferior to you in beauty and wealth: and this
I can assure you, that Palmerin has a brother, a Prince so saire and virtuous
in all his deeds, as if he join you in marriage with him, I know you will
gladly held your self content.

The Damsel used her persuasions so well, that the Princess Leonarda was
very well pleased: of whom Palmerin took his leave that night, because he
would be gone somewhat early in the morning, which the Queen Carmelia seeing,
she took him aside, and thus charged him.

I pray you Sir to remember my Couzin Leonarda, and to send her such a Lord, as
her birth and worthiness has continually deserved.

And if you think it good, that I might cause her to be brought to the Court
of the Emperor Palmerin, I should esteem it the greatest honor that in all
my life time might happen unto me. For that I persuade me, he would so well
entertain her, as the fair Polinarda, who is his Niece, with whom she would
likewise greatly delight her self.

Furthermore, because all the chief knights of the world, be at the Court of
Constantinople, I would gladly this kingdom should be ruled by such a Prince,
as has bin trained up by that famous Emperor.

Madame said Palmerin, I assure you, the Emperor will esteem this honor
highly, and entertain her according as she does deserve: therefore I wish you
to send her so soon as may be, because the sooner she comes, the better
shall she be welcome.

I pray you (quoth the Queen) how esteem you of the Damsel, that brought
the Cup thither?

Truly answered Palmerin, I know no one so convenient, by reason of the good
spirit and wit she has, which does greatly grace her in reporting her message.

Presently the Queen called for the Damsel, giving her to understand what
was determined. Whereupon there were letters of credit made for her: which
done, Palmerin took leave of the Queen and the Princess Leonarda, being
accompanied with most of the nobles forth of the City, where after many
circumstances of friendly departing, they left him, and returned again to the
City.

Palmerin being very well armed, still using his Shield, to be called the
Knight of the Tiger, travailed on in his journey accompanied with Siluian,
yielding his body to travail, and his heart to his Lady and Mistress, as in
the second part you shall see very gallantly discoursed.

FINIS.
THus Gentlemen, you have heard the first part of our English Princes labors,
wherein, if you find the Translation altered, or the true sense in some place of
a matter impaired, let this excuse answer his default in that case. A work so
large, is sufficient to tire so simple a workman as himself: and beside, the
Printer may in some place let an error escape. So between these two reasons,
let the Author pass vncontrowled, which will hasten him the sooner to send you
the second part: wherein he dares promise you, such plentiful variety of
choice conceits, as cannot be so long expected, as they will be thought worthy
of a welcome, Mean while, he reposeth himself on your wonted courtesies:
desiring to hear nothing, that may disharten him from his intent, or hinder
you from the end of so brave a History.

FINIS.
Anthony Monday.
Patere aut abstine.
THE SECOND PART, OF THE NO LESS RARE, THEN excellent and stately History, of
the famous and fortunate Prince Palmerin of England. and Florian du Desert his
brother.

CONTAINING THEIR KNIGHTLY deeds of Chiualry, success in their loves pursuit,
and other admirable fortunes.

Wherein Gentlemen may find choice of sweet inventions, and Gentlewomen be
satisfied in Courtly expectations.

Translated out of French, by A. M. one of the Messengers of her Majesty's
Chamber.

Patere aut abstine.

LONDON Printed by Thomas Creed, and Bernard Alsop 1616.

TO THE WORSHIPFUL MASTER FRANCIS YOUNG OF BRENT PELham, in the County of
Hertford Esquire, and to Mistress Susan Young, his Wife, and my kind
Mistress, he^lth, and happiness entirely wished.
ALPHONSVS king of Naples, (Right Worshipful) a King renowned in sundry
volumes of Antiquity, for his wisdom, Bounty, and Affablilitie of Nature,
lying very sore sick in the City of Capua, having tried the very uttermost
cunning his Physicians could use on him, yet all would not help to recover his
health, determined with himself to take no more Medicines: but for his
recreation caused the Story of Quintus Curtius (concerning the deeds of
Alexander the Great) to be read before him, at the hearing whereof he
conceived such wonderful pleasure, as Nature gathered strength by it, and
chased away the frowardnes of his disease.

Whereupon in some sort, having soon recovered his health, he discharged his
Physicians, with these words: Feast me no more with Galene, and Hyppocrates,
since all their skill would not serve to assuage my sickness: but well fare
Quintius Curtius that help me so soon to my health.

By this example may be gathered (right worshipful) how necessary it is
(oftentimes) to read Histories, which in the judgment of the wise are
esteemed as healthful to the mind, as Physic is accounted wholesome for the
body: yea, oftentimes more, for that the sudden inward conceit of delight
(wherewith Histories are plentifully enriched) may sooner break and qualify
the extremity of a painful disease, then the long and laboursome applying of
Physical receipts. Yet, not to condemn the one, nor extol the other more
then it deserves, I allow of both very well: but I must needs thus confess
with Aristotle, that History is the Schoolemistresse of Princes, and the only
Trumpet that sounds in the ears of all noble personages, the famous deeds of
their worthy progenitors.

Plato likewise affirms, that the name of History was given to this end, that
by recording matters of antiquity, our fleeting memories might be stayed, which
otherwise would soon be lost and retain little.

Seeing then (right worshipful) that Histories carry such credit among the
learned sort, and have not been a little esteemed of both Emperors, kings, and
famous Potentates? as a testimony of my unfeigned affection and duty to your
worship: I offer you the second part of this excellent and famous History,
which how bad the rude translation thereof may seem to the dainty ears, I
know: but how singular it is of it self, no better description then the
reading over can be made.

I presume therefore, master Young, as the Romans did, who were wont to
place the pictures of their most especial friends, at the very entrance into
their stately Palaces, thereby to declare their zealous and unspotted affection
to him. In like manner have I stamped your worships name in the face of this
history, as well to countenance the Book with such a worshipful personage, as
to credit my self with your woonted and favorable good liking: for I account
my self, and my labors free from the reproach of wounding tongues, being
allowed but the least moitie of your gentle judgment. It shall be needless
for me to wade into tedious circumstances, when to the wise and learned a word
is sufficient: wherefore Palmerin reposeth himself on your kind conceit, and
wishes such happy continuance to you, your wife my gentle Mistress, and whole
issue, as the world being partaker of your virtues, my self acquainted with
your favorable opinion, and my Book defended by your worthy self, you may
remain, as in years, so in happiness: and the longer your course, the larger
your comfort.

Your worships at command, A. Mundy.

To the Reader.
ACcording to my promise, I have finished the second part of Palmerins famous
history: how ple^tifully it is enriched with singular conceit, sweet
invention, and commendable purposes, leave to thy judgment, not doubting but
that thou (...) censnr^ thereof impartially. And least thou should ^^^edge,
that this second part broakes off abruptly, not showing what become of the
Princes, after they were conuayed by the Sage Aliart to the Perilous Isle:
understand, that the third part shall acquaint thee therewith, as also the full
conclusion of every matter herein handled, which if thou be desirous to have,
give these two former Books the friendlier welcome, and it will hasten the
translation of the other with the greater speed.

Thy unfeigned friend to his power. A. Monday.

THE SECOND PART OF the famous History, of the noble and valiant Prince
Palmerin of England, containing other most sing^lar and knightly deeds by him
achieved, and worthily finished.
CHAP. I.
Of that which happened to the Prince Florendos, after that he had left the
Castle of Dramorant the Cruel, where he vanquished Astribor.
I Have made rehearsal unto you in the first part of this History, how the
valiant Prince Palmerin of England, who caused himself to be called the Knight
of the Tiger happily brought to the end the cruel enchantment, wherein the
fair Leonarda Princess of Thrace, was long time detained, and having stayed
long in that realm, he concluded to take his leave of the Queen Carmelia, and
the young Lady, desiring them humbly, that they would not seem to hinder him
from his voyage to Constantinople, within whose walls was enclosed the
inestimable treasure of his knightly and loyal mind, which indeed was the
fair Princess Polinarda, the sovereignty of whose beauty was of such power,
as made him refuse the Crown of Thrace, which was presented unto him,
(according as the Sage Aliart made rehearsal before these famous adventures)
by the principal noble Gentlemen throughout the realm of Thrace, who heartily
desired if it might be possible, that the noble Palmerin of England, (whose
honesty, valor and Knightly courtesy was agreeable together) should fulfill
the commandment of their King Sardament, which they would have been very loath
to contrary, had he thereto consented. But Palmerin made known his mind and
secret intent, as well unto them as also to the Princess, both what he
intended, and what he would see especially performed, whereon his honor should
stand for a warrant, which they in the end gratefully accepting, humbled
themselves, to take their farewell of him, and he framing the like toward the
Queen, the Princess, and them all, departed with a princely conge, and rode
on in a thousand thoughts toward Constantinople, bearing his aforenamed devise
of the Tiger in his shield, where, to his prosperous journey we will leave him
a while, and return to the Prince Florendos, son to the noble Primaleon, who
having slain Astribor, and given liberty to the Lady that was prisoner in his
Castle, departed on his journey with Albayzar, in whose company he passed the
Realm of France, without any desire to approach the Court, because he doubted
if the King and the Queen Melicia, knew of his being there, they would stay
him longer then he willingly would.

Therefore continuing on his way, he entered the kingdom of Navarre, wherein
when these two worthy Knights had travailed two days, at length they entered
into a fair and goodly Valley, through the midst whereof there ran a
pleasant River, which had diverse sorts of trees planted about it, very
pleasant to the beholders. The sight hereof greatly revived the pensive mind
of the Prince Florendos, who could not bridle his thoughts from the remembrance
of the Castle of the Giant Almaroll, wherein the Jewel of his happiness
remained, and before whose walls he had spent some part of his youthful time
i^ knightly trial.

They had not long travailed in this pleasant Valley, but within a while (to
their greater delight) they espied by the River side, a strong and well
fortified Castle, whereto as they were about to advance themselves, they
beheld a Damsel (accompanied with two Esquiers who were on foot) preparing
herself toward them, to meet them: which Florendos perceiving, and knowing
himself to be armed if the worst should happen, he gave forth himself nobly
to meet them, to whom the Damsel spoke after this sort.

Sir knight, the fair Arnalte, Princess of Navarre my Lady and Mistress,
commands you, in respect of the danger that may happen unto you by this
adventure, that you fail not to accomplish one of these three conditions
wherewith I shall present you. The first is, that you must return unto the
place from whence you now came, where you shall swear, that she is the only
Princess of beauty in the whole world. Secondly, that you must enter Combat
all the way as you ride, with any that dare maintain the contrary. Or if you
will not accept of these two conditions, you shall then make promise, that you
will never bear Arms in any cause, wherein knighthood may be witnessed, or
you merit renown by any such enterprise, neither on the behalf of any
distressed Lady, or in trial of your knightly loyalty.

Thus Gentlemen, if you cannot put on the minds to satisfy my Ladies will, you
must hazard your selves to endure the manifold perils contained within this
Valley: wherein, if either your cunning fail you, or the sufficiency of her
noble demand foil you, you must content your selves to abide perpetual
imprisonment, wherein nothing will be so bitter unto you as life, and nothing
better unto you then present death: this is here provided for those, who dare
endue themselves with the hardiness, to refuse to obey the conditions I have
told you. Wherefore Gentlemen, if you will follow my advise, I would counsel
you to take your oath in maintenance of her beauty, which can no way impeach
you of dishonor, or diminish any jot of your knightly valor, considering you
shall justify nothing but a truth, wherein you can never fail, and rid your
selves of a great deal of trouble, which surely to knights is an infamous
blot: for I assure you, such as fall into the danger through their own folly,
may well sit and repent their extreme mishaps (...) ^et no power to remedy
their great misfortunes.

Fair Damsel (answered Florendos) I take in very great disdain what your
Mistress commands me, in respect of her vain glorious request, and for
that my Knighthood stands upon better regard: and this I assure you, that I
take less pleasure in your counsel, then I dread the peril in confounding
your Ladies claim: this always considered, that her conditions are such, as
she may neither demand, nor I defend. Yet to advantage me the more, I would
request, if you would do me so much favor as to declare, to what end this
stately enterprise of your Lady tends: for it seems immodest in her to will
so much, and I should show my self very unmannerly to thrust my self into
such vnreuerent service.

I promise you sir Knight (answered the Damsel) the enterprise is so full of
doubt unto the hardiest Knights, as it is convenient that first we should
receive their oaths, before we discover to them the will of the Princess
Arnalte, whereof if they should be acquainted before hand, they would not
advance themselves to promise any thing. And if it chance that my Lady compel
them to yield by mere constraint, they shall bear but bad estates when they
depart out of her hands, because she was so gentle to y^quest, and they so
dainty in making promise.

Damsel (quoth Florendos) I very well perceive the scope of your meaning, how
with threatening words of ensuing danger, you would bring me like a young Nouice
to that, which your Lady would have me so gladly perform: but surely I am not
so childish as to satisfy her mind, by promising any one of the conditions
you have rehearsed, for I rather desire to be acquainted with ye most difficult
dangers, wherewith you seem so much to menace me, and whereto I very willingly
give my consent, rather then I will be so base minded as to accomplish her
commandment, and so you may depart and tell her. The Damosel with this
answer returned to the Castle of her Lady, from whence in short space
after, came forth six knights very gallantly mounted and armed, and bearing
their Lances downward, approached to ye prince Florendos, to whom they
delivered forth these speeches. Sir knight, it is thought good by our lady and
mistres, y^ you should understand at this present, the danger which the ancient
custom used in this place, does bring all Knights into, that dare seem to
deny it, and for that our Lady has been so courteous as to demand, and thou
so impudent as thou will needs deny, thou shall well know that we may, can,
and will compel thee. Few words and sweet (answered Florendos) your Lady may do
much, but not command: you as much, but not compel, and for my self, I will
neither command nor compel, but bid you heartily welcome to what you dare do.
At these words they gave the spurs to their Horses, and all six fetched
their carire against the good and hardy Knight Florendos, who likewise prepared
himself to receive them courageously, which in sooth he did with such knightly
prowess, as at the first he deprived one of them of his life, and in short
space the other were left destitute of their Lances. Then he began to take heart
a fresh, and settled himself manfully toward the other five, to endure the
sharp charges wherewith they assaulted him. The fight hereof moved Albayzar
to immeasurable grief, who wished that he were then so happy as to maintain
the cause of that good Knight, for that he would revenge the injury which the
other discourteously offered him, and which he perceived to be so great, as he
wished rather to be presently void of life, then to want his Armor in such an
extremity.

Florendos environed on every side with his enemies, knew not well which way to
shun the perril, but the most unhappiest thing of all, one of the Horses of one
of the Knights, gave him such a cruel stroke, as he was constrained to fall
to the earth. But it was not long before he recovered his feet again, when
presently he took himself to a Tree, to rescew himself a little from their
malice, which when the Knights perceived, they delivered unto him these
speeches. Sir Knight, this Tree neither can nor shall defend you from our
power, and therefore it is very slender help for you to trust unto, wherefore
we judge it far better to render your self to the prison of our Lady and
Mistress, then to suffer so great danger, as we see you in by the great effuse
of your blood. I had much rather (answered Florendos) endure the death, making
an ample proof of a noble mind, then to render my self into the hands of
such cruel and discourteous persons as you are. Wherefore if you be Gentlemen,
ordare conceive so good an opinion of hardines in your selves, do me the
knightly favor, as to let me deal with you one after another, which is
honesty in me to request, and honor in you to grant. Otherwise, if you be so
faint hearted of your selves, as you dare not fight but altogether, then
dismount from your horses, and I will show you how much the virtue and honor
of a good knight is esteemed, above the brutish manners of the cowardly mind:
whereunto one of the Knights presently thus replied.

I see no reason sir, why you should so much presume on your self, in that
there is no one of us, but thinks himself able enough, to compel you to
submit your self. But so little account do we make of the vanquishing you, as
we deal with you altogether, rather to please the humor of the Princess
Arnalte, the^ for any dishability in our selves to quite you man for man.
Nevertheless, seeing you have such a desire as we should come to you on foot,
we are content to give over our horses. Whereupon they presently alighted and
came together to assail Florendos, who received them very gladly, and behaved
himself toward them so bravely, as in short time they reputed that they left
their horses. For Florendos had not long fought with the^, but he discharged
one of them of his life quickly, and continued his deuoir so gallantly with his
sword toward the other four, as one after another, he sent three more to keep
the other company. At length when Florendos had brought the last of them into
subjection, and was about to part his head from his shoulders, the Princess
Arnalte suddenly came, accompan^ed with her domosels, desirous to save the life
of the knight, whereupon she spoke to Florendos after this manner.

Sir knight to the end that this great victory which you have atcheeued, may
not call your name into dishonor, by murdring him who has no power to defend
himself, I beseech you that you would give me the life of this knight. And for
the discourtesie you have suffered by him and his fellows, amends may be made in
other manner, for I will put my self by way of duty, to acomplish any thing
that it shall like you to ordain, provided always, that my honor and
authority be no way impeached thereby. Madam (answered Florendos) why should
life be granted, when a finger is not to be given to such persons, as so much
forget their own honor, to employ themselves in such unnatural attempts:
nevertheless, your virtuous and honest iesture has gained so much power over
me, that I will not refuse to grant you any thing, conditionally, that you
will do me so much honor, as to tell me the reason why you cause to be
maintained this so bad custom.

Sir knight, answered the Princess Arnalte, fearing that by long staying in
this place, your wounds may turn you to greater danger then you expect, I
pray you do me so much favor as to go with me into my Castle, where, having
provided to redress your wounds, as also those which my knight has received,
I will not fail to answer in what you please. Florendos having need to succor
himself, by reason of his dangerous fight, would not refuse to agree to the
will of the Princess Arnalte, who caused one of her Damoselles to see the
curing of his wounds, which in sooth were in no greater danger, then that he
might easily travel the day following. After that the Princess had caused
those to be buried that were slain, she took Florendos by the hand, and
walked with him very cheerfully and pleasantly disposed, which courtesy he
held in great reputation, having made his prowess so nobly known against her
Knights. But then as she walked, she began to contemplate the beauty of the
Prince Florendos, with very great admiration, whereupon presently came to her
remembrance the Prince Florian of the Forest, which caused a crimson color to
a mount into her cheeks, so that all her face delivered an amiable blush,
which Florendos well noted at the beginning, whereupon he was donducted by the
Princess to the side of a window, the prospect whereof was over a fair
running river, when she received the hardiness to sprake to him in this manner.

I know well, sir knight, that the custom of my Castle seems unto you, to be
ordained against all reasonable regard: but having understood for what occasion
I maintain it in this order, you will not be any ways offended thereat. It is
so Sir, that my Lord my Father leaving me in the custody of sundry noble
Gentlemen of this Realm of Nanarre, he desired them at the very hour of his
death, that they would see I should be married to mine own pleasure and
contentment. Attending which time, I withdrew my self (to avoid popular
frequentation) into this my Castles, where having by Fortune soiourned a while
there chanced to arrive here a comely Knight, a most brave, gallant and an
honest Gentleman, and and so worthily accompanied with virtue and prowess,
that my good liking coupled with equal love, I desired above all other to
match with him, holding opinion also, in him I should justly satisfy my Lord
and Fathers commandment, joining hereunto that I should greatly grace my
self, and such in sooth was this brave Knight. But he being come from the
Castle of the Grant Almorall, was so altered in nature, that he never made
account of my freendship, refusing altogether mine honest offer, and casting
the remembrance of my great good will, into contemptuous and unkind
forgetfulness. Whereupon I caused him to be taken and laid in prison, which I
did with very kind and tender regard, because I saw he was unarmed, which could
promise no security to himself, if I should have shown my extremest rigor.

For Fortune was so happy a friend to him, as she sent an other Knight unto
this place called Florian of the Forest, whom you do very much resemble, whose
behavior gained such power over me, as not only made me set at liberty this
first knight, but that which grieved me far more, he made me so forgetful of
my self, as I suffered him to gather the fruit of my garden, which my honor
commanded me to keep with better regard. Furthermore, beside all this, he so
far delighted me with his flattery of purpose, as I permitted him to depart,
for that he made me a faithful promise to return so speedily as it was
possible, and then he would not fayl to come and marry me. But after that I
had attended him a very long time, and saw him not return according to
promise, I conconcluded my self to come into this pleasant valley to make
those swear which professed arms, that they should not break spear, nor put
armor on their backs against any other knight, then this only one, who has
offered me this great despite. And I held this opinion, that any valiant
knight happening into this place, whom I could get to maintain, that the beauty
of Miragarda, in no respect might be equalled with mine, would cause Florian
(who is curious in searching such hauty adventures) to take the hardines, to
come prove against the knight, the contrary, by the aid of whom, I might
chance to recover my long desired Florian of the Forest. And if that easily my
knights might conquer any other knights, they should make them also swear to
maintain the conditions, which my damsel declared unto you at your first
coming.

Many knights fearing the peril, wherein they might fall by coming this way,
and not daring to take so hardy an oath upon them, have been glad to return and
not stay here, when as my knights have come forth, and presented themselves to
defend my beauty.

Madame (answered Florendos) I know very well the knight of whom you speak,
and assure your self that very hardly shall you bring him into this place,
without he list himself, in that he is so noble and valiant a knight of Arms,
as you can hardly join him with any equal: therefore I pray you, do not
grieve your self, although, he be forgetful in satisfying his promise, for I
can assure you, that it is not his custom to affect greatly the service of
Ladies, especially in any amourous opinion, or queint conceit of love. As for
your knights, I cannot but yield their honest attempt very great commendation,
and esteem likewise very much of them, who advanced themselves to maintain
your beauty, which in sooth is sufficient to bind in serviceable duty, all
those that have desired to render you sembleable good will and liking.
Nevertheless, I would persuade you, that hereafter you would not mainetaine
this custom, and likewise I would desire you, that you would destow on me such
knights as you with hole by imprisonment, who shall be able to honor you more by
their knightly service, being at liberty, then you shall advantage your self by
keeping them in such servitude. Sir answered Arnalte, the great honesty
wherewith you are accompanied, has gained such power over me, that I cannot see
how I should reefose, but that I must needs grant what you desire. But I find my
self brought into sundry maruailous extreme passions, for that by your words,
you make me altogether out of hope, that I shall recover again my Knight: for
whose sake I will that the imprisoned knights be delivered you, and for that
you shall be the more certain of my words, I deliver into your own hands the
keys of the prison, which I would not give into any knights hands in the whole
world, but only to you. The prince Florendos had no sooner received the keys,
but he delivered them to y^ Prince Albayzar who was very desirous to see the
prisoners, wherefore he stayed not long, but took his way down into the
Castle, with a lighted torch in his hand, for that the dungeon was very deep,
and opening a little Tower, there he found many prisoners, whereof he knew
diverse incontinent, whom he failed not to salute, for that he knew them among
the knights at Constantinople, when he fought the combat there, in mainteuance
of the beauty of the fair Princess Targiana, by means whereof, they seeing
themselves delivered by him, they knew not well what to think. But when they
were come up into the Castle, and that they perceived they enjoyed their
liberty by the means of the Prince Florendos, they failed not to come and
humble the^ selves at the feet of the young Prince, who knew them all
incontinent: to wit, Blandidon, Floraman, Reccamon, and Tenebrant, the presence
of who^ so greatly rejoice him, as he held it for especial good fortune, that
he came so luckily unto the castle of the Princes Arnalte, who seeing that the
day gave place unto the night, and that it was time to have some refection,
commanded her Attendants to cover for supper, for Florendos and the knights who
were come forth of prison, to whom the Princess used very stately
entertainment, in respect of the honest behavior of the Princes Florendos,
which was very deeply imprinted in her heart, considered also, that his great
courtesy had bound her to use such liberality.

CHAP. II.
Of that which happened to the Prince Florendos, after that he departed from
the Castle of the Princess Arnalte.
NOw Florendos stayed all this night in the Castle of the Princess Arnalte,
more at her importunate suit, then upon his own voluntary pleasure, for that
he well knew, the little coals of envy kindled on her stomach, which she
covered with shamefastness and modesty, was far disagreeable to his
courteous nature, by reason whereof, he no sooner discovered the clear and
bright day, but he arose and put on his Armor which was much defaced, by reason
of his sore fight, and after he was ready to travel and follow his enterprise,
he stayed not, but came to take his farewell of the Princess Arnalte, as also
of Blandidon, Tenebrant, and Reccamon, but in no case would he leave the
company of Floraman the prince of Sardignia, because they two lived marvelous
affectionate the one of ye other, since the time that Armello, the Esquier of
Florendos, came and found their solitary kind of life, so nigh unto the Castle
of the Giant Almaroll. The Princess Arnalte remained so greatly passionate,
for the sudden departure of the Prince Florendos, that she could not admit any
thing into mind, but still she received thereat very much displeasure: without
using any remembrance at all of the Prince Florian of the ^esart, whom she had
now altogether thrust into forgetfulness, and was so sore troubled for want of
the presence of the Prince Florendos, as she took her farewell of the restored
prisoners, to whom (for grief, she could not use such gracious behauior, as
she had done the day before. Florendos rid certain days in the company of
Albayzar and Floraman, when he concluded to travel to the Castle of Almaroll,
to see what entertainment the fair Miragarda would make to the Prince
Albayzar, and whether she could now ^nde (contrary to her former custom) his
noble employed service agreeable to her curious nature. These three knights
following their enterprise, they perceived (after they were entered somewhat
within the Realm of Spain, at the foot of a mountain, a knight, standing
very sadly between two great Oaks, he was armed in black Armor, and bare in
his Shield a white Bull, in a field of Sable, and mounted on a very gallant
Courser, so that these three Knights conceived very good opinion of him, and to
him they would have approached, but that suddenly an Esquier stepped before them,
who having saluted them very courteously, delivered his mind after this order.

Gentlemen, the knight (which stands by these Dakes) gives you to
understand, that he has enterprised to guarde this passage, in that he has
kept it a long time against many knights: not for that he has desire to offer
any knight discourtesie, but only to satisfy the will of a Lady, to whom he
remains affectionate, loyal, and obedient. Therefore if it may stand with your
liking, to grant such things as he will demand, the passage shall be at
liberty for you: but if you enterprise to do the contrary, he will put in
trial to make you confess perforce, that which you cannot reasonably deny or
refuse to grant.

Declare unto us (quoth the Prince Florendos,) first the will of thy Master, and
soon after we will make thee answer: because very hardly can we determine of
the matter whereof we are ignorant, by reason that thou concealest it so
closely.

He will cause you to confess (answered the Esquier) that Arnalce the
Princess of Navarre, is the fairest creature under heaven, and most worthy of
knightly service. It seems to me said Albayzar, that we shall find this same
knight, who (to shun the Combat at her Castle) has accorded and promised to
fulfill her impecious conditions. Therefore I judge it in mine opinion, and for
good cause I know it assuredly, that his enterprise is very dangerous, and
ought no longer to be maintained. Let it happen what pleases Fortune (said
Florendos) and afterward turning to the Esquire, he answered him in this order.
My friend, you may go and assure your master of the Iouste. While the Esquire
was busy in speech to the Prince Florendos, Floraman, no sooner perceived him
to return to his master, but he desired Florendos, that he would grant him
the Combat, against the Knight that kept the passage, which request he would
not deny him: whereupon Floraman gave the spurs to his horse, and ran
courageously against the Knight of the princess Arnalte, they both encountering
together with such great force, that they were both dismounted to the earth,
with their heels upward, but they recovered themselves promptly, and like good
knights set their hands to their swords, wherewith they began to strike one
another very daungerously, using such knightly dexterity, as Florendos and
Albayzar greatly delighted to behold them.

And for that Floraman was reputed for a good Knight, they were abashed
greatly, that any advantage should happen to the Knight of the Princess
Arnalte, for the love of whom he fought very bravely. But that which was most
displeasant to Floraman, (who did his duty like a good and virtuous knight)
was, least the Princess Florendos and Albayzar, should take any evil opinion
of him. On the other side, the Knight of the passage thought on the bond,
wherein the love of the Princess Arnalte, had tied him, which did the more
harten and encourage him.

These two knights continued Combat so long, that being overcome with extreme
travail, they were constrained to retire to take breath, the strange knight
rejoicing thereat, began to use this language toward Floraman. I know Sir
knight, that you might better break your will and save your life, then be
deprived of them both: for when you shall come to confess, that the Princess
Arnalte, is the fairest Lady alive, you shall not be any jot spared by favor,
always considered, that you shall but confess the truth. If I did consent to
thy will (answered Floraman) I should maintain a thing far beyond any duty:
for in how much Arnalte is fair and worthy to be served, by so much the
rather thou make me to think, that the world enjoys some such, to whom she
is not in any thing to be compared, for that divine beauty has made them so
singular fair, as the Princess of Navarre may in no wise be equalled with
them. And on the other side, I have in time past loved a Lady my self, in
respect of whom, (the whole world being filled with the report of her praise) I
will rather die, then accord to the presumption thou would have me confess.

Floraman had no sooner concluded his speech, but they returned a fresh to y^
Combat, charging one another more suriously then they had done before, so that
it could not be judged, whether the one had any advantage of the other, or who
was likelyest to win the victory, they maintained the sight so bravely. But in
the end, the Knight that kept the passage, began by a little and a little to
feel that feebleness somewhat assailed him, and that stroke by stroke his
word turned in his hand, and his Armor was broken in many places, and likewise
the Armor of Floraman was in no better case then his enemies, but he followed
his strokes more wisely, and dealt so gallantly at this second charge, that
once again they were constrained to retire.

Floraman, who was accompanied with such gracious gifts, as imbraceth the heart
of a virtuous Prince, would prove if he might possible change the Knight from
his fond opinion: Whereupon he spoke to the Knight in this manner.

Sir Knight, you see very well that your enterprise is not truth, according as
you have judged it in conceit, wherefore I pray you to confess, that there are
many Ladies in the world, whose beauty the Princess Arnalte may no way
paragon. I know well Sir, (said the Knight of the passage) that the weakness
where into you see me brought, gives you the hardiness to use me with such
persuasions of reproof: but so it is, that I am so greatly affectionate
toward the Princess Arnalte, as I have deliberated with my self to sustain
y^ death, before I will grant to that which you say. When he had delivered the
end of his purpose, he charged Floraman afresh, who in short time laid him
along on the ground, whereat Florendos and Albayzar was somewhat afraid, to see
him brought into to such danger, wherefore quickly they opened his Helmet, but
when they had beheld him a while, they knew him to be Sir Albanis of Frise,
the Prince of Denmarcke, the sight of whom made Floraman very pensive, for that
he bare him marvelous good will.

Florendos and Albayzar conducted these two Combattants, into the house of a
knight, whose abode was near to the mountain, and as they walked together,
they demanded of Albanis of Frise, upon what occasion he enterprised to guard
the passage. Worthy Gentlemen (answered Albanis) I will not defer to tell you
the sum of your desire, aduertising you, that Fortune guided me one day into
the Valley, where the Princess Arnalte makes her present abode, and I was so
ravished in beholding her beauty, that I remained her vowed servant in good
will, whereupon she put to me three conditions, how I should approve against
all wandering Knights, and maintain it by my prowess, that she was the
fairest Princess in the world, assuring you that I came into this place,
rather for the desire I had to do service to the princess of Navarre, then
for any fear I had of her six Knights.

But now my desteny is so far unfortunate, that I am fallen into the hands of
Sir Floraman, which has made me loose the hope, that till this hour I
entertained. They which make profession of Arms (said Florendos) ought not to
be abashed when any misfortune befalles them, and I assure you that Arnalte is
a Princess which merriteth very much, yet not so much as many others have
deserved, who are far aduantaged above her, therefore I wish you Sir Albanis,
to thank God, who caused you to fall into the hands of your friends,
persuading yourselfe, that we would be loath to see you any way injured.

Continuing this talk, they arrived at the house of the Knight, who received
them very gladly, for that he was accustomed to lodge all wandering Knights,
and such diligent attendance was used, that in short time the wounds of
Albanis were meetly healed, and certain days he was accompanied by the Prince
Florendos, who was attached with vnmeasuraable grief, for the desire he had to
find the Castle of Almarol. Yet he dissembled his grief as much as he could
possible, and forced himself to mirth to gratify his friends, as it is a
wise man's part, to forget his sad and melancholic affections, to content those
persons with whom he is joined in friendship.

CHAP. III.
How the Damsel of the Princess of Thrace, arrived at the Court of the
Emperor Palmerin. And of that which happened to the Knight of the Tiger.
THis History makes mention, how the Emperor was in the Empress chamber,
accompanied with the worthiest lords of his Empire, when as the Damsel of
Thrace chanced to enter the Court, which seemed to her much changed, because
she saw not the Knights which were accustomed to be about the Emperor, at
whose feet she failed not to humble her self incontinent, but he caused her
to be taken up presently, and to be entertained with very gracious behavior,
then he desired to understand how all things happened to his Nephew Palmerin
of England, in the adventure he undertook for Leonarda the Princess of
Thrace, the naming of whom, caused the Princess Polinarda to give a most sweet
and delicate blush in her face, in whose presence the Damsel of Thrace began
to use her language after this manner.

If I should rehearse to your Majesty; the most Knightly prowess of your
noble Nephew, I should find my self overthrown in a great perplexity, for
that I know his worthy deeds are reserved to be delivered, by one of more
prompt and discreet memory then my self. Nevertheless, to discharge the
great bond of Friendship, wherein his Princely courtesy has so straightly bound
me, I will report what I have seen, during the time he was in my company,
which when he took occasion to leave, he went to the place where the
Princess Leonarda was Enchaunted: and where he witnessed such Knightly
valor, as will render to his Name perpetual honor, having finished an
adventure so strange and admirable. The whole discourse whereof, the Damsel
delivered in circumstance to the Emperor, giving him to understand, the hard
causes of distress, eftsoons offered to the knight of the Tiger. But when she
came to report the manner of his passing the Lake, wherewith the Isle was
compassed about, the danger of the Boat, and the fashion how it was drawn
with the Cord, the Ladies that were present, remained so mightily overcome with
grief, as the sweet and delicate color, wherewith their divine Faces were
most plentifully endued, began very sadly to alter, thinking on the great
perils which the Noble Palmerin of England had passed, putting his life to
such extreme points of hazard, for the delivery of the Princess Leonarda.

I have heard reported (said the Emperor) many strange Adventures, and have
known some worthily achieved in my time, but I never heard in all my life of
any so perilous as this: for I know well that the imagination of the King
Sardamant, was very far different to any other Kings. But well I perceive,
that the Prowess of Palmerin, excels very far the valor of all other
Knights: for I assure you, that as yet I never saw the Knight that might be
equalled with him, without great impeachment, or that could find the mean to
discharge so great dangers.

After that the Damsel had sufficiently set to sale, the praise of the thrice
noble Palmerin, in the ears of so many gracious personages, she changed her
talk after this manner. To him that has thus woorthily deserved, I did
bestow my uttermost endeavor, to bring him within the compass of affection to
the princess Leonarda, whose good mind was altogether placed on the
entertainment into her Princely Favor, the Knight of such a hautie
disposition. But as it seems to me, he is either altogether blinded in his
own conceit, or else his heart of affectionately placed on some other person:
for I assure you, he made no account of the Crown of Thrace, bnt did flatly
refuse it, as also to espouse the Princess Leonarda, who was brought into his
presence, by the principal noble Gentlemen of the Court, according as it was
ordained by the Testament of King Sardamant her Grandfather. By reason whereof,
the Lords requested the Queen Carmelia, that she would send to your highness
their Princess, to remain in the company of the Princess Polinarda, (your
Niece, and the Daughter of the prince Primaleon) as also of other noble ladies,
wherewith your renowned Court is plentifully enriched, whose gracious
conversation may not only entertain the heart of Leonarda, with the precious
dignity of unspotted virtue, but also by imitating their honorable examples,
she may the more highly be esteemed in the acceptable favor of such noble
personages, as prefer the renown of Ladies, with the felicity of their own
life.

The Prince Palmerin very well liked of the intent of the Queen Caemelia, by
means whereof she does humbly desire, that it might so stand with your
Highness pleasure, as not to make denial of this request to her, seeing you
have not hitherto re^^^ed the entertainment of any, in the fulfilling whereof,
she shall esteem herself and her whole Kingdom, perpetually bound to your
excellency. And because your highness may esteem of the greater truth, what I
have made report of, she commanded me to present your Majesty with this her
letter of credit, wherein full well you shall perceive the residue of her
pleasure: may it like your highness to pardon this blunt discourse of an
vneloquent maiden.

The Emperor very graciously received the letter, which when he had perused,
he thus framed his answer to the Damsel. Virtuous and sage Lady, I not only
pity the great paiue you have suffered in traveling thus far, but also
give you thanks for such a good endeavor, not forgetting to honor you with
bountiful courtesy, for the good news you have brought me of my Nephew
Palmerin, in regard of whom, both his Princely deserts, and my uttermost
requital, which is but his duty, I desire of God my power may stretch so
far, to requite you according as you have worthily merited.

And for the Lady, the regard of whom caused my nephew, to hold so small
estimation of the Princess Leonarda, I know her care is beyond judgment, in
devising by what means she might gain the power, to requite a cause of so
great honor. And where you desire I would yield my consent, that the princess
Leonarda, might come to remain in my Court, assure your self, that I am well
contented, and think my self highly honored by such a request. And the
better to declare how grateful I accept her coming hither, and how thankful
I would be for your great travail, I give to you the county of Salin, which
by reason of the death of the county Arlae, remains vacant, he not having
left any heirs to repossesse the same. The Damsel presently threw her self
at the Emperors feet, offering to kiss his hand, in sign of her thankful
mind, but he sustained her in his arms very graciously, which he was not
accustomed to do to any stranger, yet such was the estimation he had of her.

The damsel behaved her self in the same manner of duty to the Empress, as
also toward the Prince Primaleon, and Gridonia, but they (to witness their
beneuolent minds, and the honor wherewith they would entertain such a
freendly guest) by their great entreaty and courtesy made stay of her humble
offer, whereupon she returned to the Emperor, and delivered her mind these
words.

I can hardly withhold my self at this instant (my gracious Lord) being so
desirous as I am, to understand of the courageous mind of the Prince Palmerin,
both in dealing, and escaping from a Tiger so hideous and fearful, as also
being so happy to end such an adventure: but your gracious favor is so
agreeable to my desirous thoughts, and so plentiful in measure beyond my poor
demerits, that I shall leave the report thereof in your highness memory, till
such time as I return with the Princess Leonarda: for I assure your Majesty,
that my heart is unspeakably satisfied with pleasure, in that I shall speed
so well, as to be resolved by your excellency, in the thing I have so long
time wished for. Wherefore most humbly I desire you that I may depart, for the
desire I have, to inform the Princess Leonarda, of your gracious favor,
causes me to judge every day a year, till I have in this cause fulfilled my
duty.

Fair Damsel (answered the Emperor) it should like me very well, if you
made your abode here still with me in my Court: but for that I perceive your
great desire, to return with answer of your thankful message, I wish to you:
as to my self, in the whole course of your journey. The Damsel humbly took
her leave of the Emperor, and all his company, and came to the Chamber of the
Princess Polinarda, who had secretly withdrawn her self, to reveal to
Dramaciana her waiting Gentlewoman, the good opinion her heart had suddenly
conceived of those joyful tidings: so then with her a while the damsel kept
company, when presently she began to conjecture, that it was the beauty of
this Princess which had caused the Prince Palmerin, to refuse the government
of Thrace.

The Princess Polinarda, very modestly began to question with the Damsel of
every particular chance that had happened to the knight of the Tiger, for whose
sake she honored the Damosel with very Princely courtesy, and she desired her
that she would be the Messenger of her unfeigned good will to the Princess
Leonarda, whom she would not willingly should stay, but come unto the Court
presently. The Damsel made promise to perform every thing to the uttermost,
so, departing from the Princess, she went through the palace to her ledging,
where she locked up the honorable Presents, which the Empress and Gridonia
had (since her coming) sent unto her: so having all things in readiness, she
departed, far more Rich and more joyful then she was before.

The Damsel we intend to leave in her journey, because we will return to
the Noble and renowned Knight of the Tiger, who after he departed from the
kingdom of Thrace, took the straightest way that he could possibly choose, to
bring him unto Constantinople, whereto when he drew somewhat near, by chance
one day he arrived in a very great Forest, which was far from any houses or
resort of people, and likewise the Trees much defaced and spoiled, so that it
seemed a wast and desolate wilderness. Ryding along very sad and pensive in
mind, he heard the trampling of a great many horses, and casting his eye that
way where he heard the noise, he espied ten or twelve Knights very well armed,
crossing overthwart the Forest. Whereupon, he gave his horse the spurs
(being desirous to do them service, if so be they had need to use his aid)
and followed them that way they rode, when in short time he ouertooke one of
their company, who could not so speedily journey as the other did, by reason
that his horse had received an attaint in one of his legs, with this Knight,
Palmerin desired friendly to confer, which made him use his speeches in this
manner.

I desire you Sir, if I may demand so bold a request of you, as to report unto
me the cause, why these Knights journey so speedily, and whither they go
through this unfrequented Forest. I know well Sir (answeeed the strange
Knight) that their enterprise does not concern you in any thing, therefore is
it as needelesse to tell you, as you have small occasion to demand of their
purpose, but for that I see your acquaintance with the cause, can neither
impeach them with your malice, nor pleasure them with your aid, I am content
to resolve you in what you request.

You shall understand Sir, that three leagues distance from this place, there
is a Lady, a very courteous creature, remaining in a strong and well fortefied
Castle, who has a daughter of most exquisite perfection in beauty, with whom
a Knight of this Country, named Felistor, is very desirous to marry, but her
Lady mother will not suffer to be so bestowed, having already given her to be
espoused, to another rich Gentleman of this Country, named Radimar, wherefore
the Lady and her daughter have consented with this Gentleman, to go unto a
Castle of his own, where they will secretly knit up their determinate
purpose, and deceive the long and laboursome expectation of Felistor. But being
advertised of their close intent, has determined to hazard his Fortune in the
extremest danger, either to hinder them, and help himself, or to leave the
conquest in a doubtful estate. And he that may the better prevail, if fortune
darken not the Sunshine of his good hap, he has placed a secret ambushment in
a little wood, by which, the Lady and her daughter must of necessity pass,
and having given strait charge to them in ambush, that the life of Radimar be
put to the sword, as soon as they may lay hands on him, for that the
countenance of him is a blemish to his earnest intent, he will then marry the
Damsel, in despite of any dare say the contrary. And because this marriage
may be the better accomplished, I am to assist him with my company, only for
the good will which I unfeignedly bear him, but Fortune is very contrary in
favor to me, for that my horse bath taken suddenly an attaint, whereby I
shall hazard the breach of my promise, which would no more dislike my friend,
then it will be grievous to me, if so it would happen.

To prevent the worst therefore, I pray you Sir to think so well of me, as to
lend me your horse, and to content your self in mean time, with that whereon
your Esquire rides, and he I judge will take mine in good part, which
courtesy will cause me (in place where I have power answerable to my will) not
to forget such a favorable pleasure.

Truly Sir (answered Palmerin) I see well if I should do you so great a
pleasure, you are bent to use my gift in a deed of greater dishonor, for that
it better stands with your credit, to defend the cause of a distressed Lady,
then to be an instrument whereby her honor may receive such disgrace, and
therefore as I found you, I leave you, being so desirous to be with your
companions, as I cannot at this time stay to make you any other answer, and so
he poasted to overtake Felistor, which the strange Knight perceiving, presently
entered into these speeches.

Alas fond fool, thou make over much have to entertain thine own
misfortune, in that the simplest of them before thee, is able sufficient to
teach thee and thy fellow your duties, but I wish that so soon as my
companions, have given due chastisement to she pride wherewith thou art fondly
accompanied, thy horse may fall to my share, as well to teach thee what thou
ought have done at my courteous request, as also that I may discharge my
promise made to my friend.

The knight of the Tiger had attained such length of ground, that he vndestood,
not the presumptuous language of the strange knight, but yet he once looked
back, whereby he gave him to know, that ye hauty disposition of an aduenturous
mind, is not to be moved at the fearful foreshew of supposed danger, where
contrariwise, the cowardldy wretch esteems every flaw a tempest, and a little
motion of mischance, the utter overthrow of all his sovereignty.

The noble Palmerin of England pursued these Knights so long, that he was
ouercharged with the gloomy fogge of night, so that he could not perceive how
to follow them any further by the trackes of their horses, by reason whereof he
was constrained to alight, when he gave his horse to his Esquire, entending to
repose himself so well as he could in this desolate place, until Aurora
faluted him with her beautiful countenance. But in vain did he bestow his
labor, to take his rest in the destined hours of sleep, for the earnest
desire he had to defend the cause of the iniuryed Lady, would not suffer him
so much as to close his eyes.

Wherefore the day began no sooner to peep, but he caused Siluian to bridle
the horses, when presently he took the way which Felistor and his company had
passed before but when he could set no eye on them, he began to be very
grievously moved, imitating them, which can enjoy no quietness of mind till
they have delivered the innocent from their cruel oppressors, which among all
the deeds of knighthood, bears the largest title of honor.

CHAP. IIII.
Of that which happened to the knight of the Tiger, against those that were in
ambush to take the Damsel.
THe valiant knight of the Tiger so long pursued the search of the knights,
that he had almost spent one half of the day, in the mean while Felistor had
knowledge given him by his secret spies, that the Lady and her daughter were
set forth on their way, and in their company four good knights with whom when
Felistor met, so cruel was the conflict between them, as in the short time
the four kuights were al slain, and he having taken the Lady and her
daughter, returned that way from whence they came, and Palmerin seeing he could
not have a sight of them, turned again, and met with the knight whom he had
talked with all before, who to the Prince delivered these words.

I see well sir knight, that either you have great desire to meet with my
companions, or else such sudden kindness is come upon you, that you return
to lend me your horse, which I will not now receive, because I will not be so
much beholding to you whereto the knight of the Tiger answered.

Trust me sir you do much mistake me, and over fondly deceive your self, I
intend you not so much favor, nor shall you be indebted to me for so much
freendship, but if you had a horse better then mine, I would do my good will to
borrow him of you whether you would or no, because I would follow the intent I
have entreprised, to give aid to those, whose necessity requires my help. I
cannot choose but laugh (said the strange knight) in that I perceive you have
failed of your way, and spent the whole night to no purpose, only for the
desire you have to meet with Felistor, whom now I perceive coming hitherward,
having with him the Lady whom he intended to espouse: now sir shall you have
leisure enough at this present time to fulfill your wish, if your stomach so
serve you.

Palmerin perceiving the knight told the truth, he caused Siluian to gird his
horse well, clasped fast his helmet, and not fearing what danger might happen
to him, prepared himself to salute the troop as they came, the first whereof
was Felistor, who having the Damsel by the arm, made great protestation of
his amorous good will, but she rid weeping very bitterly, and so did the good
Lady her mother. Six knights were in company with Felistor, and four more he
had caused to stay in the Ladies Castle: so when Palmerin had sufficiently
viewed them all, he came to comfort the Ladies in this manner.

Fair Ladies, your tears are so grievous for me to behold, and your present
danger has conquered me with such surpassing pity, as I must adventure my
life for your delivery, when I will either purchase your former quietness, or
leave my life to content your enemies: yet have I often heard, that small force
will serve to chastise those persons, that have no regard to their own honor,
because being confounded in their envious stomach, by their own disloyal
actions, they contain so little manhood, as the report of knightly dignity,
being but laid before them, no brauer conquest, then their own manifest
disgrace.

Felistor hearing the Knight of the Tiger, to use such brave language, became
so offended with himself, as he had not the power to make any answer, but in
the midst of his choler, without remembering to arm his head, he began
fiercely to assail the Knight of the Tiger, who saluted Felistor with such a
friendly blow on the head, as he cleft it down to his shoulders, and
valiantly addressing himself to the other Knights, he behaved himself with
most marvelous prowess. The Damsel seeing the Prince in so great danger,
and fearing he would hardly escape their hands, gave her Palfrey the bridle,
and so rode solitarily musing along the forest, which the knight of the Tiger
perceiving, began very much to grieve at: nevertheless, so valiantly he dealt
with the other knights, as when he had slain three of them, the rest took
themselves presently to flight, whereupon the knight (whose horse was attainted
with travel, and who had so pleasantly iybed with the Prince) came and humbly
yielded himself, desiring that he would not remember what discourteous words
had passed from him, whereupon the knight of the Tiger (according to his
courteous nature) did very gently entertain him.

The Lady seeing her enemies so happily vanquished, received in her heart
unspeakable joy, but when she looked about, and could not see her daughter,
her joy was presently amated with sorrow: wherefore that she might the better
recover her again, she came and fell down before the knight of the Tiger,
giving him most humble thanks for his so noble succor, and desiring if it
might so please him, as to lend her his assistance, till she had found her
daughter, for whose absence she remained more oppressed with grief, then she
was before, being in the danger of her cruel enemies.

Madame (quoth the knight of the Tiger) you should attribute the honor of this
victory, to the misfortune of your unkind adversaries, in that such as they do
always receive recompense, according as the wickedness of their lives
deserves, for divine justice will not suffer them to escape unpunished, who
are careless in committing such heinous offenses. As for your daughter I judge
her to be within this Forest, therefore it is good that we trifle no time in
vain, but hastily besturre our selves in the present search of her: for I
promise you I will not leave you, till I have safely delivered her into your
own security, whereto the Lady replied.

I see well Sir knight, that both virtue and magnanimity shines bravely in
your noble heart, and I would that my poor power were of sufficiency, to
requite your princely bounty: nevertheless, I trust that God will repay your
good deserts, which I am far unable to do at this present, yet will I remain
all my life time dutiful in good will, to show what acceptable thanks I can,
at your noble commandment.

Thus the Lady concluding her speeches, the Knight of the Tiger, Siluian, and
the Lady, rode on which way they judged the Damsel had taken, but they
iourneyed all that day, and most part of the night, yet were they never the
nearer their purpose: and it is not to be maruailed why she should stray so
far, for that the fear she had, least her honor should be impeached, caused
her to take those occasions upon her, which in her judgment might best
preserve it.

They having thus travailed very late, they were constrained to alight to ease
their horses, which Siluian did presently unbridle, that they might refresh
themselves in the Pasture: then gave he to his Lord and the sorrowful Lady,
such provision for their sustenance as he carried with him, wherewith they
sufficed themselves so well as they could, for that they knew in such a
desolate place, it were very strange to look for courtly dainties.

Fair Auba had no sooner delivered the fair morning in sight, but they
presently mounted on horsbacke, and rode about the whole Forest, yet not
finding her they so gladly looked for, which made the Lady conceive so great
grief, as the Knight of the Tiger by no persuasion could appease: wherefore he
desired her to go to her Castle, in that it was unfit for her to take such
unaccustomed pains, wherewith (with much ado) at last she consented: then
they rode to her Castle, where they arrived about the Evening, but the entrance
thereof was guarded with the four knights, which Felistor had given charge to
remain there. This began a fresh to vex the Lady, first to see her daughter
so unhappily lost, and then to be forbidden the entrance into her own house,
these two extremes moving many other passions, caused her to repute her self,
as the unhappiest under the Sun.

The Knight of the Tiger, seeing the Lady in so great affliction, began to
flatter the eyes of the Knights, with shows of most gracious behavior as it
is the custom among aduenturous minds, to dissemble their intents with
devises, of amiable conceit, which sometime prevails more in policy, then
deeds that manifest knightly power. And so it fortuned, that the Knights of
Felistor came to receive them, for they being so many, made them so venturous:
but their chiefest intent was to have murdered the knight of the Tiger, and
then to carry back the Lady with them.

But herein they found themselves greatly deceived, for the Knight of the
Tiger, perceived no sooner the bride to be let down, but he entered thereon,
and began very valiantly to charge these four knights, who settled themselves
altogether against him, and one of them began to use these words. I perceive
well Sir Knight, that your great folly will be an occasion of the present
ending of your life, which seeing you are wilfully come to seek, we will
deliver you answerable payment to your bold enterprise. These words the Knight
of the Tiger, nothing at all regarded, but dealt so roughly with them, as two
of them were quickly dispatched of their lives, and their fellows fearing least
they should be brought into like estate, cast down their weapons, and yielded
themselves.

The Lady seeing this happy success, alighted and entered into her Castle,
greatly abashed at the noble bounty of the Knight of the Tiger, and sorrowful
beside, because she knew not how to recompense so great courtesy. And as she
stood considering the no small danger he sustained, to deliver her out of the
hands of Felistor, and his company, she beheld her daughter coming, conducted
by five Knights, who were in a certain Tent, whereto in her straying she
happened to come. When the Damsel was gone into the Castle to her mother, and
that these Knights beheld the blood of those slain Knights before their
faces, they were attached with such a sudden fear, as they would very gladly
have been further thence.

But the Lady (who perceived the cause of their dismaying) went to them
incontinent, and having embraced them, desired that they would not suffer any
cause of doubt to arise, but that they would show their thankful minds to
the Knight of the Tiger, who had delivered her out of so great danger. Hereupon
they humbly went and saluted the prince, who kept them company there the space
of eight days, at the end whereof he departed thence, taking his iourny toward
the place, where his heart desired to be.

CHAP. V.
Of that which happened to the Knight of the Savage man, after he departed from
the Court of the Emperor Vernar.
BEcause it is a long time since our History has made any mention, of the
noble knight Florian of the Desert, we will now leave the Tiger, in his way to
Costantinople, and return to the Prince Florian, who being departed from the
Court of the Emperor Vernar, in green guilt Armor, and bearing in his shield
a Savage man, leading two Lions in a silver field, even according as he did,
before he was known to be son of the Prince Don Edward, pursued the intent
of his hauty desire, for during the time he carried this strange devise, he
achieved as honorable exploits, as ever did any, even as the first part of
this History has largely made mention.

This brave knight, seeing the places of most famous adventures. Fortune
conducted him into the realm of Ireland, even to the place where he nobly won
the Castles of ^he three Sisters, who were the daughters of the Marquess
Beltamor, but these Castles were now in the custody of others, who were utterly
unknown to the knight of the Savage man, by reason whereof, he was constrained
to lodge in the Cell of an ancient Hermit, who discoursed unto him, how the two
brothers of the Giant Calsurnien, were within those Castles, one of them being
named Brocalon, the other Baleato, that had long time been nourished in the
Profound Isle, with their mother Collambra, and by whom they were given to
understand, what great misfortune had happened to the giants Calfurnien and
Camboldam of Murcela, their brethren, for the loss of whom (contrary to their
will and mother) they armed themselves like good and hardy Knights, vewing to
take vengeance on them, who had so much defaced their noble stock,

And that they might the sooner execute their bloody enterprise they embarked
themselves in a Galley, having in their company other knights of their lineage,
and at length landed on this coast of Ireland, where (long before it was known
to any) they were Lords of the Castles of the three Sisters, as also of that
which belonged to their brother the Giant, putting all to the Sword that they
found within those Castles, and fortified themselves with very great strength,
lest they should chance by any means to be assailed.

The knight of the Savage man, could suffer the Hermit proceed no further in
his tale, but he must needs demand this question of him. I pray you good
Father do so much as resolve me in one thing, do not these Giauts use to come
forth of their Castles, to walk for their delight along this Forest?
Certainly Sir (answered the Hermit) I would be loath to resolve you in this
demand, for such a question seems to me, to manifest an earnest desire in
you, to offer the combat to these Giants, which I would be sorry you should
do, in that the meanest of them is of abilite to resist three of the best
knights in this realm. Therefore I desire you, if your affection be bent that
way, that at my request you would bridle it within limits of regard, and to
remember, that it is dishonor to a noble mind, to adenture his life more
wilfully then wisely, and yet to cover my intent under the title of seeking
renown, and I must judge him altogether void of Knightly regard, which sees
the danger to be beyond his compass, and yet will desperately throw himself
into the hazard: trust me, no pity, if such a one be well corrected.
Wherefore good Sir, to avoid the worst that may happen to you, I desire you to
let no such mind remain in you, but that you would witness your valor in
those occasions, which may represent more hope of victory, and seem of better
equality with your Knightly force, for in doing otherwise, you shall cause any
good mind to think, that desperate hope has rather conducted you hither,
then any careful advise, which way to return victor from these Giants. And it
is their wont to walk abroad in the mornings, when, here they murder one,
there, they villeinously mangle another, having sworn to continue this
cruelty, until they can meet with the two Sons of the Prince Don Edward,
on whom their intents is to be famously revenged, for that their Brethren were
slain by their hands.

I perceive Father (said the Knight of the Savage man) that you make no
conscience in condemning those, who adventure then lives to redeem the
wretches estate, of poor Souls suppressed by such cruel tyranny, for if you
remember your self, Armor ought not to be borne by any, but only such as
employ their pains to succor those, who are no way able to shield themselves,
and the order of Knighthood is given us to this end, not that we should faint
at a shadow, or be conquered by words, before we see the deeds, wherefore
father, persuade your self, that Fortune shall no sooner present me with the
occasion, but I will put my hap in adventure.

At these words the aged Hermit began to shed tears, to see that he could not
remove him from his determination, nevertheless, he labored still in
persuasion, but his pains was bestowen to small purpose, for he was not so
full of entreaty, as the other was resolutely bent, so, they passed away the
night in friendly communication. In the morning Florian was preparing himself
to depart, at what time he heard a great noise without the Cell, when going to
the door, he espied a Damosel came hastily riding, and she seeing the Knight
of the Savage man, came unto him for succor, in that she was egerly pursued by
the Giant Brocalon, who was in same white Armor, and well mounted on a lusty
Courser, from which he alighted, speaking thus to the Damsel.

I see well Damsel, that you have taken a place of small assurance to your
self, for that your knight will deliver you into my hands, which if he should
not do, he should presently perceive the estate of my displeasure, whereto the
knight of the Savage man thus answered. Trust me Sir, you are deceived as far
as I can perceive, for here is none that owes you duty, much less any that
will stand in fear of you: and I doubt not, but the disloyal tyranny which
thou use, shall well enough be tempered, ere thou and I part. These words
caused a sore Combat between them, the bravery whereof much delighted the
aged Hermit, who still prayed for good success to happen to the Knight of the
Savage man, but so gallantly did he continue the fight, that the Giant was
enforced to take a breathing, which was very acceptable to the Prince, in that
his Shield was greatly defaced, and himself surcharged with very much
travail, but yet he was in far better state then the Giant, who seeing his
blood trickle down his Armor so fast, began to use these speeches.

How comes it to pass, that one Knight has the power to prevail so much
against me? Certainly I fear me, that the hope I have always had, to vanquish
those Knights that slew my Brethren, by this one Knight will be brought into
some doubt, yet if I must needs end my life, I had rather it might be at one
of their hands, for that their valor carries so large commendation, then by
this Knight, who is utterly unknown to me.

Thus concluding, he began to charge the Knight of the Savage man with very
rough and forcible strokes, who notwithstanding, so duly awaited his
opportunity, as at length he brought his enemy under his subjection, when
taking off his Helmet, he presently parted his head from his shoulders, the
sight hereof was no small joy to the aged Hermit, as also to the Damsel, who
came and humbled her self to the Prince in this manner.

It is impossible for me Sir Knight, to render you thanks according to your
worthy deserts, nevertheless, I will report such laudable language of your
Knightly deeds, in the Court of Vernar the Emperor of Allameigne (whither at
this present I direct my course) as your Fame shall remain in continual
memory. And very gladly would I be acquainted with your name, which I the more
earnestly desire for two causes, the one, that I might the more exactly
discourse your noble valor, to the amazement of all other that cannot deserve
so well, the other, that I might know the noble Gentleman, whose gracious
bounty I might repay with my contiuuall prayers.

Fair Damsel (quoth the Prince) if you desire to know my name, that I may
do you service to the uttermost of my power, I will declare it unto you,
rather for that cause then any other, but I assure you, my deeds are of so
small estimation, as credit me, you may more worthily cast into
discountenance, then give them any such praise as it has pleased you to utter.
And let it not seem in your ears, as an unadvised speech, which at this
present of necessity I must disclose, because mine eye and my heart have
tasted both on fiery Plannet, but rather let it obtain such an acceptable
opinion of belief in your modest thoughts, as, I remaining captive, and at
your mercy, may find you as ready to pity me, as your beauty was to wound
me, upon these speeches the Hermit took occasion to begin thus.

Sir Knight, it is a deep point of wisdom to flee the subtle temptation of
beauty, which is not so glorious in the eye, as it is grievous in the heart,
nor so sweet in conceit, as it is sower in trial, the reason is, for that
iealouzie, frenzy, beggerie, murder, with many other mischiefs, are always
waiting on her as yokfellowes. You have already escaped one extreme danger,
and now are like to fall into a more greater, for the one could have been but
hnrtfull to the body, the other hangs more waity on the soul, remember this
my son, for thy fall will be as grievous to me, as to thy self.

Father (said the Prince) Beauty is so familiarly welcome into the eyes of all
men, as you see they have no power to escape from her, and her delights so
agreeable in their hearts likewise, as were they of flint, she would move
affection, even so, if you did but contemplate the heavenly grace of this
beautiful Damsel, you could not otherwise choose, but offer your self as her
humble servant, which if you did refuse to do, I should persuade my self,
that good nature had altogether forsaken you, as also I might judge him very
cold in kindness, that could not be moved by such a forcible motion.

I see well (quoth the Hermit) that the pleasure of the flesh, makes thee
forgetful of the health of thy soul, wherefore, I will pray that thou may
be converted in time, least thou feel the punishment of thy folly, when it
will be too late for thee to help thy self: whereto the Prince answered thus.

I pray you Father tell me, can you conquer these earthly delights, when you
sit wresting many matters in your Study? Or will the looking on your book,
abate the secret inflammations of your heart? I have heard of many of your
calling and profession, that have labored to kill that in other, which (for
all their learning) has quickened in themselves, and by seeking to draw a
throne out of another heel, have pricked themselves therewith to the very
heart: tush father, be religious in reason, I have seen an old Billet burn
fresher, then a young Bauen, and you (for all your holiness) if I should
inueigh against the secret delight of Love, would take me for an heretic: but
it is good that I argue, to show my folly, and that you allow not, to declare
your wisdom. Well (quoth the Hermit) I will betake my self to my Oratorie,
and you to your youthful and worldly pleasure, the desert whereof will (no
doubt) in the end reward you. And so he went into his Cel, making such speed,
til he had shut the door after him, as if the Giant Brocalon had been alive
again, and had followed him: whereat the knight of the Sauageman laughed
heartily, then coming unto the Damsel, he began to salute her in these
terms.

I could wish (fair Lady) to be servant to so kiude a Mistress, if it might
as shall like you to allow me your service: in sooth I judge you would like of
my behavior, if you do not, I will be content to avoid, when it is your
pleasure. Worthy Sir (answered the Damsel) I cannot be so much ungrateful
for your great good will, in defending me, when I was in greatest distress,
but that (to my power) I must witness some show of a thankful mind: in mean
time, I desire to have your company for these two or three days, till I be out
of these places of so great danger, and then shall I account my self then more
highly beholding to you.

Lady (quoth he) I receive so great pleasure in your courteous answer, as I
think my self the happiest man a live to attain such bounty: wherewith he
presently took his horse, causing his Esquire to mount the Damsel, who by
the way recounted to the Prince Florian, how by a tempest of the Sea, she was
cast on the coast of Ireland, coming from Denmark and carrying Letters of
e^edise to Basilia the Empress of Allemaigne. And when I perceived (quoth she)
that I was in this country, where my Couzins (the Daughters of the Marquis
Baltamor) remained, I intended to bestow a little labor in seeing them, but my
^ortune was so hard, as I met with the Giant Brocalon, who not contented with
the murdering my two Esquires, that bare me company, pursued me to have fulfild
his villainous will on me, so it was your good hap to be my reskew, for which I
think my self more beholding to you, then I can express: the Prince taking
her by the hand, returned this answer.

I promise you fair Lady, I rejoice that it was my fortune to do you such
service, and doubt not but you shall find me so gentle a companion, as will
guard your person from any danger that may happen to you: but I would either I
were so happy, or you so courteous, as to give liberty to the prisoner, whom
your singular beauty has secretly fettered. They continuing these pleasant
purposes of speech, at last they came to a goodly River, the pleasant sight
whereof, invited them to alight from their horses, to ease themselves a little,
where sitting lovingly together, the Prince began amor^usly to dispose
himself, toward the sober and chasle Damsel: in the mean while, his Esquire
went to a Castle near at hand, to provide some viands for his Master, who had
fasted since he came to Hermits Cell, which he refused, to have the Damsels
sweet company.

Many affable speeches the Prince spent, that the Damsel might the better
entertain him into his favor, at length he was so bold as to give her a
green gown, when I fear me she lost the flower of her chastity, but whether
it were so or no, I know not, but mine Author says, that the Esquire at his
departing left her a Maiden, and at his coming again, he found her a woman.

CHAP. VI.
What happened to the knight of the Savage man, before he had taken his
farewell of the Damsel.
SVch and so great was the pleasure, which the knight of the Savage man
conceived by the presence of the Damsel, as all that night they passed the
time away, by the rivers side, till at length the Prince began to wax heavy a
sleep, like unto those that entertain Love, but for the present time, rather
to suffice their appetite, then any thing else, for he made so small account of
a Lovers passions, as his humor once satisfied, he had presently forgotten it.
The Damsel seeing the Prince to use no more regard unto her, fell into
extreme conceit of grief, in that she had so lightly bestowne her honorable
chastity on the knight, who (she feared) would commit her courtesy to utter
oblivion, which if it should happen so unkindly (quoth she) I (being unworthy to
show my face among persons of credit) wish, that the present loss of my life,
might falue up the stain and blemish of my former riches. A heavy and
pitiful discourse she continued, during the time, the knight of the Savage
man slept soundly, at last she looked about, and espied two Esquires, attending
on a Knight of such huge stature, as he seemed to her to exeede the Giant
Brocalon. And as he walked, many times would he stand still and muse with
himself, then pull and rent his hair, as one would have judged him deprived
of his wits: at last in his extreme passions) he called his Esquiers, and
commanded them to wait there near unto him, for that he would repose himself
under the Trees.

Hereat the Damsel was greatly abashed, so that (standing in some fear) she
awaked the Knight of the Sauageman, with these words: Good Knight forsake this
drow sines, for danger is nearer thee then thou art beware of, here is another
Brocalon, come to iniure us, and therefore help now or never to defend us.

At these words the Prince suddenly started up, and when he had put himself in
good regard for his enemy, he advanced himself nearer unto him, and seeing
his Esquires walking their horses, and their Master lying under a Tree in
great grief of mind, he stayed himself in secret a while, when he heard him
break forth into these speeches.

I see it is great folly for me to repose any credit in the Gods, who either
want power, or else are wilfully bent, to euerthrow him that has most trusted
them, and good cause have I to think so, for that my Brethren being vanquished
by one only Knight, they make so small estimation of me in their favor, as
they will not suffer me to meet with him, that I might either bear my
Brethren company, or take that revenge, which both my grief, and nature
compels me. For how can I choose but blaspheme your names, and deny to give
you the honor I have done, in that you suffer the knight so much to dishonor
us? If you have altogether cast me into oblivion, I will honor your Altars with
no more testimonies of my affection, but that trust I had in you, I will repose
in my self, and so for ever henceforth I despise you.

These heavy complaints caused the Prince to judge, that he was Baleato, The
Brother to the Giant Brocalon, who having intelligence of his Brothers death,
sought to find him that had done the deed, this good hap was very acceptable
to the Prince, in that he found him without any of his knights to aid him, so
walking aside, Baleato at the last had espied him, who made him to arise with
these speeches. What is he that dare imagine himself so hardy, as to trouble
me in my silent purposes? I assure thee, that thou art but little beholding to
fortune, who is thy utter enemy in conducting thee hither, especially in the
time of my fury, which thou will find more grievous then thou art able to
endure. And for the Damsel that keeps thee company, as I have good occasion
(receiving part of my g^eefe by means of such a one as she) I will appear the
anger of my Gods, in offering her as a Sacrifice to them: and so will I deal
with all of that Sex that I can meet, for that Brocalon (the best knight in
the world) was slain in following such another as she is.

Baleato (answered the Prince) reserve these threatenings for those that are
affraide of thee, and prepare thy self to deal with him, whom neither the
words nor weapon can terrify, as for the Damsel, assure thy self, that I
will not only defend her, but I will also humble that proud min^e, which makes
thee think none so good as thy self, so shall thou learn how to use thy
betters, and deal more courteously with the people of this country. And
because I will move the malice the greater against me, thou shall understand
that I am he, that has slain Dalfurnien and Brocalon thy brethren, and have
good hope to send thee after them: wherefore put thy self in a readiness to
entertain me, for I as much disdain to have any advantage of thee, as thou
proudly think me unable to deal with thee.

The Giant (extremely moved to hear the brave language of the Prince, began
to rage after this manner. Thou cruel destroyer of my blood, thou may assure
thy self to have in thy presence, the greatest enemy unto thee in the world:
and therefore show the uttermost of thy manhood, for I carry that hope with me
to bathe these hands of mine in thy blood, and beside, to rent thy cursed heart
in pieces, and throw it for food to the Fowls of the air.

Then they began a fierce and cruel Combat, wherein the Prince so nobly behave
himself, that the forcible strokes of the Giant were delivered te small
purpose: but at length he perceiving what subtilty the Prince used, began to
strike vere roughly at him, so that his sword was broken in three pieces, and
his body wounded in diverse places, whereat the Damsel was very much
displeased, doubting least she should now see the end of him, who had all this
while so valiantly defended her.

The Prince seeing himself in danger, cast his Shield before him, to receive a
mighty stroke which the giant gave, but the blow lighting on the Shield,
entered so far in, as he could not pull it out again, which the Prince
perceiving, closed with him, and driving him still backward till he came to the
Rivers side, he struck his legs from him, so that he fell over the bancke into
the water, where, with the waightinesse of his fall, and his head going
forward, he brake his neck, to the no small joy of the Damsel, as also of
the Prince, who rejoiced he was rid of such an enemy.

Then mounting on horseback, they rid again to the Cell of the old Hermit,
for that the Princes wounds were somewhat dangerous: in the mean while, the
Esquires of Baleato returned to the Knights which were in the Castles, to give
them understanding of their Masters death, how that he which had slain his
brother Brocalon, had now likewise dispatched him.

When they were come to the Cell, the good old Hermit (albeit he was somewhat
offended with the Prince) yet be received him very lovingly, and on such a
poor bed as he had, he caused him to lie down, using such good regard unto
him, as within few days his dangerous estate was well recovered. Then did he
desire the Prince, that he would suffer the Damsel to depart on her journey,
giving her to understand, how she might now travail without danger, for that
she know her self the Giants were both slain, and also he said, it stood not
with her honest report, that she should so keep company with a Knight at
Arms, whose affairs lay in so many sundry places, as it was not decent for
her, nor honor to him, to be seen after such effeminate order.

The Prince was very well content that she should depart, albeit the Damsel
found her self greatly agreeued, that he did use no more estimation of her,
having sealed the Fort of her maidenly honor, which none had the power to
obtain before, nevertheless, when she saw no remedy, but that she was forced
to make a virtue of necessity, with tears she took her leave of the Prince,
who feigned himself in amourous speeches, very sad and sorrowful for her
departure.

CHAP. VII.
How the knights, which belouged to the Giants Brocalon and Baleato, surrendered
up the Castles, unto the noble knight of the Savage man: And of that which
happened to the Prince Florendos, after he arrived at the Castle of the Giant
Almarol, where remained the fair Princess Miragarda.
ON the next day following, the knights, (which belonged to the Giants) had now
intelligence of the death of their Lords, whereupon, they presently determined
with themselves, to go see if the knight of the Savage man, would entertain
them into his favor, for since they had no refuge or defense left them, wherein
they might repose any hope of assurance, they concluded to surrender up the
castles into his hands knowing themselves far unable to withhold them from
him. In this determination they came to the Hermits Cell where they found the
knight of y^ Savage man lying on his bed, for that he was not very well
disposed, they comparing his young years with the nobleness of his late
exploites, received great cause of admiration, at last, he that judged
himself, to be the hardiest of courage amongst them, suddenly entered into
these speeches.

If I should deny, sir knight, that Fortune has entertained you into especial
regard, I should seem very much forgetful of my self, in that the puissance
of Brocalon and Baleato, two Giants, reputed of no small courage, as (by your
noble hardiness) brought to utter confusion: therefore this remains as a
chosen argument, that she, not only has called you into the dignity of her
favor, but also, that she maintains her affection toward you with
inestimable bounty, let not any then seem so hardy, as to offer a check or
reproof to your valor, for that their best Fortune is unlike to be equal
with yours, but let them rather imagine themselves happy, if they may deserve
the good countenance of so worthy a Champion.

The due consideration hereof, has constrained us to enter into such
hardiness, as to come and present our selves to your noble mercy, this good
opinion guided us, that he which has so worthily overcome, and remains in
the honor of a famous conqueror, will not stain that laudable title, by
offering discourtesie to those, who humble themselves as obedient servants, in
sign whereof, receive at our hands the keys of the Castles, which our Lords
sometime enjoyed, and withal, receive the hearty good will and affection of
them, who remain only at your noble commandment: to which courteous words the
Prince returned this answer.

Your speeches are so honest, and so well repleate shith civil courtesy, as I
am sorry that my present case, will not suffer me to let you understand, how
thankefully I accept your great gentleness: but you shall bear me company to
the Court of England, where I will cause the king my Grandfather to satisfy
that, which my dishablity will not suffer me. Then took he the keys of the
Castles, wherewith he was very much contented, seeing the issue so fortunate,
where the beginning seemed so doubtful.

The knights still kept the Prince company, in respect of the honorable
promise he had made them, whereof they were not a little glad, in that they
hoped to gain good favor in the Court of England, where, the report of this
noble Conquest in short time was so blazed, as it moved a general consent of
gladness, not so much for the recovery of the Castles, as that they were won by
the prowess of the Prince Florian.

The good King Frederick, for joy of this good hap, sent sir Pridos, the
Duke of Galls, in all the speed that might be, to see if he could meet with
his noble Nephew: who taking a Galley presently, in short time arrived in the
Coast of Ireland, not very far from the Hermits Cell. Where finding the
Prince, and declaring the sum of his message, the Prince concluded to depart
thence, notwithstanding his wounds were not thoroughly healed: so taking leave of
the gentle Hermit, and desiring the other Knights to accompany him, they
committed themselves to the Seas, whereon they had not long sailed, but they
arrived at the City of London, through which they were honorably conducted to
the Kings Palace. When tidings being come to the King, that they were arrived
in the Court, accompanied with his Son Don Edward, he came to meet them,
when casting his arms about the neck of the Prince Florian, the tears ran
down his white beard, for the inward joy he conceived in his presence: as for
his Father Don Edward, he would not hide his earnest affection, but welcomed
his son with very great kindness, and his mother the Princess Flerida,
pitying his hurts, but glad of his company, showed her self a loving mother
unto him, and would not depart day nor night from him, till she perceived him
to be thoroughly recovered.

The King of England did very honorably entertain the Knights which came with
his Nephew, and for that he would show he made estimation of them, he accepted
them into offices (according to their degrees) in his Court, for which great
bounty, they witnessed themselves not unthankful, but so behaved themselves,
as they did great credit to the King in his Court.

The Prince Florian being in good estate of health, news came unto the English
Court, of the imprisonment of the king Polendos and his company, in the Court
of the great Turk, which unhappy tidings moooed the king and his whole Court
to great grief, considering withal the state of sorrow, wheren the Emperor
of Constantinople remained: and the more extreme did they take the cause, in
respect of the small hope was to be had of their liberty again, in that the
great Turk had sworn to put them all to death, except the Emperor would send
him the knight, who so boldly carried away his daughter the Princess Targiana.
These news coming to the ears of the Prince Florian, he began to fall into
these speeches. Far better it is for me to go render my self, and suffer the
extrame rigor of that cruel Infidel, then that (for me) so many good knights
should live in danger: for seeing by my occasion the cause did first arise, no
better mean to salve it up again then my self.

I cannot believe (said the Prince Don Edward) that the Turk is so forgetful
of himself, as to seek the death of so many for so small a matter, by reason
Albayzar, (one of his own kindred) should then stand in hazard of his life:
but if it be as the report goes, the Emperor ought to be careful in the
keeping of Albayzer to the end, that the safeguard of his life might redeem the
other their woonted liberty: whereto the Prince Florian thus replied. I am
persuaded good Father, that the Turk will hardly be removed from his
determination, which makes me the greater to misdoubt the safety of those
knights, the absence of whom (I am assure) so grievously offends the good
Emperor, that I am perfectly resolved to go and comfort him: considering it
is a part of duty on my behalf, not to be so far from him at this time,
seeing he is deprived of them that should defend him. The aged king Frederick,
his Father Don Edward, nor his mother the Priucesse Flerida, could dissuade him
from his determination, but contrary to their wills he departed from the Court,
taking his journey toward Constantinople, being armed after his accustomed
manner, and bearing in his Sheeld his usual devise. Thus the happy success
which may fall unto him, at this time we intend to leave him, because we will
return to the Prince Florendos, who by his time is well near the castle of the
giant Almarol, having in his journey done many noble deeds deserving
commendation, but for that they are rehearsed in the English Chronicles, it
would seem impertinent to this place to rehearse them: nevertheless, I must
needs tell ye, that Floraman the Prince of Sardignia, in this journey
achieved very great renown, and so continued, till their arrival at the City
of Rioclaro, which at this present is called Tamar.

Florendos seeing himself so near the place, where he had spent a great time
in languishing afflictions, entered into a thousand imaginations with himself,
first considering the beginning of his love, and then the happy continuance
thereof, enforced him to a number of sad conjectures, wherein he passed that
night as quietly as he could.

In the morning they rid on toward the Castle of Almaroll, when Albayzar
began to use some doubt of his entertainment, for that he judged women were
but slenderly acquainted with pity, especially he looked for small favor of
the Princess Miragarda, who contrariwise was not so cruel toward strangers,
as she was toward her dearest and best beloved friends. Florendos had no
sooner discovered the Trees, which were planted about the River Thesin, and
with all, the walls of the Castle of Almaroll, but his heart was immeasurably
touched with sudden fear, remembering how many storms he had endured, and
the perilles whereto he must now render himself again afresh, a spectacle
certainly of wonderful grief, wherein he somewhat bare the Prince Albayzar
company, who remembering that he was vanquished, knew no other remedy for
himself, but to abide the mercy of Miragarda.

When they were come to the Castle, they found all the gates fast locked,
whereupon they went to the Tree where the Shieldes were hanging, where, well
beholding them all, Florendos at last espied his own, at the sight whereof he
secretly sighed, and imagined how he might be thankful sufficient to his
Esquire Armello, who had (since his departure (so well guarded it: but in sooth
he was not so much beholding to his Esquier, as he did esteem himself,
because Armello was fallen amorous of Lardemia, the Damsel attendant on the
fair Princess Miragarda, and stayed in that place to contemplate the beauty
of his beloved Mistress, rather then for any care he had of his Masters
sheeld and Armor, for he was gone so far over shoes in love, as he had no
other pleasure then the remembrance of the Damsel, who took great delight to
see him so grievously attached for love.

Armello shas so set on fire in affection, as he could not know his Lord and
Master, and some other cause there was to hinder him, for that he was so,
disguised in black Armor, but when he perceived the Prince Floraman, and had
likewise espied the sheeld of the Princess Miragarda, he presently did
conjecture, that the black Knight, was his Lord the Prince Florendos, to whom
he reverently drew near, using these speeches.

I hope (my good Lord) you have no occasion to hide your self from him, who
has such earnest affection to do you service, and specially having recovered
so rare a Jewel, as is the Sheeld of the fair Miragarda, at whose
commandment, you made your departure from this place, and well worthy is she
to be impeached of high ingratitude, if she should not now favorably
entertain you, who has so nobly and worthily deserved.

Florendos being not able to conceal himself any longer, opened his helmet,
and then embraced his Esquire Armello, to whom he delivered the Sheeld of
Miragarda, willing him to set it in the place where it was wont to stand,
before that the Prince Albayzar so discourteously took it away, and bad him
also take the Sheeld of the Princess Targiana, and to set it at the feet of
the portraiture of Miragarda, which did not a little offend the Prince Albayzar
to behold.

At length came forth of the Castle the Giant Almarol, very well Armed, and
gallantly mounted on a white Courser, for he supposed that these three Princes
came to demand the Ioust, but when he beheld the Sheeld of Miragarda, in the
place where it was wont to be, being suddenly abashed, he knew not well what
to say. At last he knew the Prince Florendos, by reason that he had lifted up
the Beuere of his Helmet, whereupon he cast his Lance to the ground, and with
stretched out arms came and embraced the Prince Florendos entertaining him
with these words.

I did always persuade my self (worthy and renowned Prince Florendos) that
you would bring to end that honorable exployte, which I now perceive you have
happily achieved, a desert so laudable and knightly, as the Princess
Miragarda cannot otherwise choose, but requite you with better entertainment,
then she had done heretofore. And if she continue her former obstinacy, and use
not that gracious acceptance toward you, which your nobleness does worthily
merit, and her duty commands she should favor you with all, I will so
shake the honor of her name with speeches of importance, that the world shall be
acquainted with her monstrous unkindness, who I hope will bear me company in
justly condemning her, that can afford such great disloyalty to so good a
Knight.

Thus breaking of his speeches, and without staying to hear the answer of the
Prince, he presently ran into the Castle, where he declared to the Princess
Miragarda, the noble and Knightly return of her loyal Servant Florendos,
which news enflamed her heart with unspeakable joy, nevertheless she
dissembled the matter in such sort, as though she had made no account thereof,
which the Giant perceiving, both how slender estimation she seemed to have of
Florendos, as also of the (...) bringing back again her Sheeld, being not
able to withhold his choler any longer, he began to touch her very highly with
the Princely service of Florendos, how to her universal praise and his own
renown, he had witnessed the true testimony of an invincible mind, which she
countenancing with so small regard, did notoriously impeach herself of
ingratitude, and too injuriously requite him that had deserved so well.

All these words did seem nothing to move her resolute will, but with a hardy
countenance she gave show to the Giant, that she was the Lady and Mistress of
a selfe-willed conceit, albeit within her self, she remained greatly
affectionate of the Princes return, but because her modest shamefastness
should not be discoured to the giant, she made the matter to him of no regard
at all.

The Giant being not a little vexed, in a great fury (...) forth of her
presence, very much accusing her obstinate mind, and coming to the Prince
Florendos, they could not hide the great discourtesie of Miragarda, which the
Prince contented himself withal, because he was wont to have no other
entertainment, but for that he would dispatch the cause of Albayzar he desired
Almaroll to go again to his Lady, and to know her pleasure, as concerning him
that carried away her Shield, and whom he had brought back again.

The Giant presently returned to the princess, giving her to understand, that
the Knight which had carried away the Shield, was brought thither back again
by the noble Prince Florendos, who desired to know her will, what should be
done with him? Miragarda taking a little pause, at last commanded that Albayzar
should be brought into her persence, and that Florendos should abide without.

When Albayzar was come before her, she straitely charged him to go yield
himself prisoner, unto the king Recinde her especial good Lord, and that he
should not fail to go thither, because he should remain there as prisoner,
until the great Turk had set at liberty the king Polendos with all his knights
She receiving his oath, that he would not fail to do as she had commanded
him, willed him to depart, wh^^^ he (giving her humble thanks for favoring him
so much, considering his offense deserved greater punishment) offered gently to
kiss her hand, but she would not suffer him, and so he departed from her.

When he was come forth again from the Castle, to take his leave of the
Prince Florendos, he cast his (...) on the protraiture of the princess
Targiana, not without many a bleeding sigh from his heart* and such countenance
in iesture, as bewrayed the extremity of his sudden pa^^ions.

A great while he stood rehearsing to himself, these amorous conceits
wherewith he was meruailously charged, at last he desired Almaroll to do him
so much favor, as to go and entreat the Princess Miragarda, that it might
stand with her pleasure, not to suffer the shield of his best beloved Targiana,
to hang in the rank among those that were conquered, in respect she had
deserved no such dignity. But in no case would she agree to this request, so
highly did she esteem her self in superiority, above all other Ladies,
whereof Albayzar being certified, he departed in choler and extreme
melancholy, and the thirteenth day after her departure from the Castle of
Almaroll, he arrived in the Court of Recinde King of Spain, who received him
with very Princely Courtesy.

And after he understood who had sent him, and for what cause, he was not a
little pleased thereat, because by him, the King Polendos might have liberty
again, as also his Son, who was prisoner amongst the other Knights: of these
news he presently caused the Emperor of Constantinople to be advertised, that
he should now set his former grief apart and rejoice, in that he had in his
custody such a one, as should bring home again all the Knights that were
prisoners to the Turk. The Emperor greatly commended the policy of the
Princess Miragarda, and wished if it might be possible, to have her company in
his court, as well to regard her with honor equal to her worthy deserts, as
also to mittigate the afflictions of his Nephewe the Prince Florendos, who
desired always to fulfill those occa^^^ns, that might witness to her his
faithful service But when he perceived that his Lady made no account of his
travails, neither regarded the torments he endured for her sake, he determined
to guard her Shield again, until some other Knight did purchase his office,
by trial of his valor, and if his misfortune happened to be so great, as he
should receive the folly in this new attempt, he vowed never more to bear
Arms against any, but even to commit his whole course to the cruelty of
Fortune, seeing that all this while, she would not allow him one favorable
look.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Combats that the Prince Florendos fought, the second day after he had
enterprised to guarde the Shield of the Princess Miragarda.
WHen the Prince Florendos had passed one day before the Castle of Almaroll,
without any friendly countenance of his Lady, or once coming into her
presence, he began to commune with himself of his hard fortune, and what
little hope he had to gain his desired joy, because her frowardnes cast into
contempt his faithful service. On the second day, to expel the heavy
thoughts, wherewith he was so grievously charged, he came to the place before
the Shield of his fair Mistress, which when he had advisedly behold, he
uttered his complains after this manner.

I know certainly (sweet Lady) that he which bestows his time in your
service, receives a very great ^^compence, by having the means to behold your
fair Image in this portraiture, which is of power sufficent to bring into his
subjection, the heart as hard as Adamant, if the Goddess would afford those
favorable words unto it, which sometime she did to the image made by
Pigmaleon, how highly (in so doing) might she manifest her courtesy, and what
a precious Iuell were he enriched withal, that gained so great an honor.

But I see well, that you have prevented such a happy cause, in that this
remains as a Net, to entangle the minds of them, which live free from such
thraldom, in which extreamitie, the party so inueigles desires, as well to be
comforted by your gracious speech, as to be so graciously tormented by your
silent counterfeit, for that it depriueth him of his former felicity As for me,
seeing there is no other remedy, I must feed mine eyes with this entising
shadow, and satisfy my fancy in midst of my shadow, in that I behold the
thing with mine eye, which as a dagger stabbeth me to the heart, and leaves
him deprived of any mean, which might add some ease to my misfortue. But
albeit your portraite is dumb and senseless, and cannot (as I would it could)
perceive my heavy aflictions, yet so fond is my conceit, that it makes me
weary of my wretched life, having played the Mistress thereof so devoutly in
my thoughts, as in stead of th^person, I reverence her picture, think then how
dutiful I would be to your self, that am so forward in esteeming your shadow.

And this foresaid content should be very welcome to me, if I were persuaded
that you took delight therein, which hardly I can believe, in that my long
absence in your service, and my presence now to offer you my duty, is not
worthy to be once looked on, this makes me think, that you have committed me
to forgetfulness: therefore I account it as vain to mourn any longer, seeing
the affection I have always so faithfully borne you, is rewarded with such an
unkind recompense. While the Prince Florendos continued this sad discourse,
the Princess Miragarda secretly beheld him at a ^hinke in the window, for
it was her wont to arise very early in the mornings, to hear the pleasant
noates of the pretty chirping birds, that would come and sing in the Trees
planted by the Rivers side.

And when she perceived that his grievous lamentations proceeded from the
depth of his heart, she was somewhat abashed thereat, but yet in such sort, as
she did never the more pity his dollorous estate: for such a proud opinion
she held of her self, that the greatest desartes in the world were not
sufficient to answer her beauty, neither that Florendos could endure too much
grief for her, such was her merciless judgment of the passions of love. The
careful Prince abiding in his woonted mones, on a sudden heard a great noise
(not far from him) among the Trees, which caused him to break off his
amorous lamentations, and as he advanced himself to see what the matter was, he
espied three knights come riding, attired in very rich and costly Armor. The
first of them was in green Armor, shadowed with silver very beautifully, and
in his Shield he bare for his device, this word written in Greek letters,
Normandy.

The Armor of the second, was white and Azure, mingled together artificially,
with streams of green enterchangeably figured thereon, and in his sheeld in a
field of Sinople, he had lively pictured the God Apollo in his ancient habit.
The Armor of the third was Carnation color, all beset with Crossets of gold
very gallantly, and in his Sheeld in a field G^ules he bare for his devise,
Orpheus wrapped about with the flames of hall, which was so ingeniously made,
as there wanted nothing but life to grace the picture.

The two foremost Knights came singing very pleasantly, that the Prince
Florendos took great delight to hear them, and they accorded in such good
music together, as the Prince Floraman (who was very well seen in that Art)
commended it above all that every he heard in his life, so sweetly did their
voices consent together, beside, the echo of the River, the trees and the
mountains did answer their notes so familiarly, that it was almost as
commendable as an instrument, which the Princess Miragarda (standing in her
window) took great pleasure to hear, and it did very much comfort the sad
mind of the Prince Florendos.

But the Prince of Sardignia, being somewhat acquainted with the Song, took a
knife and engraued the same on the bark of a Tree, that for the worthiness
thereof, it might there remain till time had consumed the Tree, and as the
Tree grew in bigness, so the letters might be seen in more leageable manner,
which when he had finished, as well for his own content, as to mark the
perfectness of the Song, he rehearsed to himself in form following.

The Song which the two knights did sing, as they came riding to the Castle of
the Giant Almarol, and which was engraven on a Tree, by Floraman the Prince of
Sardignia.
Fair Madame, if you can vouchsafe to see,
the lively picture of a careful mind:
For lorne with grief, do you but look on me,
and judge if Fortune be not most unkind,
That he which sues and serves faithfully:
Should be repaide with extreme cruelty.
Wh^t greater torments to a gentle mind,
then to be scorned where he likes most?
What state of refuge can he hope to find,
where each thing does at his misfortune boast?
Condemnd, confounded with, rebuke and blame:
Yet ignorant from whence the causes came.
So heavy is the weighty yoke of Love,
when queintest looks afford discourtesie:
That wise is he that does the passions prove,
and yet can keep himself at liberty.
But he whose wits is ravished by stealth:
Had need of Physic in his greatest health
Some men in love commend their happiness,
their quiet, sweet, and delicate delight:
And I can boast of Fortunes frowardness,
Her extreme rigor and severe despite.
But for the sweetness other men have felt:
I came too late, my part was else where dealt.
Yet can I say, no man has been more just,
nor served his Lady with more due regard:
But she being governed by her own mistrust,
denies her servant his desirde reward.
This my misfortune waxes more and more:
Yet will I suffer, though I die therefore.
FINIS.
THe three Knights had no sooner espied the Prince Florendos, walking before
the Castle of Almaroll, but they presently left their singing, and pulled down
the Beuers of their helmets, because they doubted that they should be known:
and when they came before the Tree where the shields hanged, they began greatly
to commend his valor, whose nobleness had gained such brave prizes, at length
the knight in the green Armor, steadfastly beholding the portrait of the fair
Miragarda, began very bravely to use his language, as thus.

The beauty of that heavenly face which this Picture represents, is of
authority sufficient to bring to her obeisance, the heart that never thought
to love, yea, of the worthiest knight in the whole world, albeit my mind was
far otherwise, before I saw that with mine eye, which has been daily
commended so much in mine ear: Nevertheless, if any of those Knights which has
enterprised to defend so rich a treasure, dare be so hardy as to break a
couple of Lances with me. I will do my endeavor as becomes a good knight, on
condition he provoke me not, to do him more injury then willingly I would:
because I fear that the Lady which owes this fair Picture, would very
severely punish me, for offering offense to any of her Knights, as contrariwise
she will entertain them with especial favor, that take upon them to enter
the Combat for her: to whom the Prince Florendos thus replied.

It were pity Sir, to put you forth of so good a mind, seeing your stomach
serves you so well for the purpose, and because I am ready provided for the
Ioust, I force not greatly to bestow the breaking of a Lance or two on you:
and therefore take the field at your pleasure, for I will sanctify you in this
request.

With these words they parted to fetch their course, and met together with such
force, that their Lances slew up into the air in pieces, and so passed on
bravely, not being any thing shaken at this first encounter. The Giant
Almaroll, seeing them destitute of Lances, caused some to be brought forth of
the Castle, and being delivered to their Esquiers, they went and served their
Lords withal, who valiantly met again to break their Lances the second
time: but their encounter was so forcible, that the Prince Florendos lost one
of his stirroppes, on which side he was in some danger, to have fallen besides
his horse: Nevertheless, the Knight in the green Armor measured his length
on the ground, but he recovered himself again quickly, and being out of
measure displeased at his fall, drew his sword with these words.

Sir Knight, for that I made the means to summon you to the Ioust, albeit the
foil has happened to me, yet am I not offended thereat, so that you will now
so much honor me, as to let us try one another a while with our swords and if
in the end it be your good hap to vanquish me, your valor shall have the
larger estimation. I know not (answered the Prince Florendos) how these
Gentlemen in your company esteem of your request, because I see them preparing
themselves to offer me the Ioust: therefore let my entreaty at this time
persuade you from this desire, in that we shall have time enough to try our
manhood together, when you shall not think your self greatly aduantaged, nor
I find my self overmuch injured.

Thus concluding, he gave his horse the spurs, and ran courageously against
the knight in the white Armor mingled with Azure, who in sooth received him
very brau^ly, breaking their Lances with so great force, as the Prince
Florendos lost both his stirrops, but yet recovered himself well enough from
the fall: as for the other Knight, the stroke of the Prince was (...), that his
Horse and he sells (...) both together, and his horse tumbling upon him did
somewhat hurt one of his legs.

When Florendos had provided himself of another Lance, he gave a sign to y^
third knight to encounter with him, which the Knight perceiving, and being
somewhat moved at the misfortune of his companions, failed not to put himself
upon the adventure, but such was the courteous regard he had of his fellows,
as at the first offer they missed in their meeting, whereupon they took the
second careere so worthily against each other as they brake their Lances
bravely, and passed on for the third encounter. The Prince Floraman and
Almorall, made great estimation of the noble behavior the^e three Knights
used, and likewise the Princess Miragarda did very much commend the noble
exploites, which Florendos and the other knights showed before her presence,
but then the knight being desirous to try the end of his Fortune, began to
advance himself forward and the like did the Prince Florendos, when they met
together (...) courageously, that the knight was dismounted to the earth, the
Prince Florendos being in litte better case, for had he not caught hold on
themane of his horse, he had been forced to bear the knight company, but he
escaped the fall very well, and being well mounted again, the knight with whom
he had first Iousted, came unto him with these words.

Such is my earnest desire (sir knight) to try my fortune once more against
you, as I find my self very much agreeued, till I have felt as much by your
sword, as I have done by your lance, therefore as you are a Gentleman, and one
that has worthily de^erued your knighthood, let me gain so much favor at
your hands, as now presently you would, satisfy my request: the Prince
Florendos shaped him this answer.

Your language is accompanied with such great honesty and cou^te^e, and beside,
I do esteem thereof so well, as it would be a great blemish to mine honor, if
I should deny your knighly desire, and so alighting from his horse, he drew his
Sword to enter the Combat, but the Knight which bare in his Shield the device
of Apollo, stepped between them after this sort.

Noble Florendos, you have good occasion to content your self with this
victory, in so much as you have woone it of those who are your especial
friends, and we would have you know, that we are not offended at our mischance,
being vanquiwed by a Prince of so great and singular prowess. And for that you
may be the better persuaded of my words, you shall understand that he which is
so earnest in provoking you to the Combat, is your dear friend the Prince
Berold, the other is your own brother the Prince Platir, who to their great
pains (I thank them) have honored me in travail with their worthy company,
as for my self, I am your humble Servant the Sage Aliart of the Obscure Valley
who had knowledge of you, so soon as I did see you, yet would not I make any
show thereof (being desirous my self to be unknown) to the end that the fair
Princess Miragarda, might yet once more behold your Knightly valor, and then
to esteem of you according to your noble deserts.

The Prince Florendos took of his Helmet, and coming to the Sage Aliart, did
embrace him very courteously, giving them to understand how he was heartily
sorry that he had iousted against his Brother, and his other two dear friends,
whom he spared not to entertain very graciously, and the like did the Prince
Floraman, for that they had witnessed their friendship to him in (...) places,
so they sitting down all together, passed away the greatest part of the day,
in rehearsing their manifold and Knightly adventures, which they lengthened
with large discourse, because they would gladly get a sight of the Princess
Miragarda, who was so dainty in showing her self, as very seldom would she
come to the open window, but look forth at some privy or secret place, for
that her greatest felicity was, when she might see the fiield died with the
blood of those, who came to contend for the singularity of beauty, in trial
whereof, she was not a little proud that the victory returned always to her,
which made her take the greater deilght, when she perceived the lives of them
that tried the Combats, to stand in danger, which she did oftentimes behold in
the sundry Combats fought before the Castle.

These three knights continued still in talk, at last they were told of the
entertainment which the Princess Miragarda afforded to the Prince Albayzar,
which did the better content them then any thing else, for that they greatly
desirad their liberty, whom the great Turk did hold as prisoners, and whose
cruelty they knew would be severe, if it were not mittigated by this mean.

When they had spent all the day in hope to see the Princess and could not any
way accomplish their desire, knowing beside, that the Princes Florendos, and
Floraman, determined to stay there still at the Castle, they friendly took
their leave of them, taking their journey toward the City of Constantinople,
which was the cause why they left the King of Spaines Court. Thus the Prince
Florendos accompanied with his beloved friend Floraman, concluded still to
guard the Sheeld of his fair Mistress Miragarda, against all those that durst
come to use any controversy therewith: and still he bemoned his hard Fortune,
that his true and faithful service could be no better esteemed.

CHAP. IX.
Of a strange adventure which chanced before the Castle of the Giant Almarol,
and what happened to the Prince Florendos.
NOw our history reports, the three knights which iousted against the Prince
Florendos, did not linger or loyter in any place, til they came into Greece,
and not very far from the city of Constantinople, where by chance as they
travailed, they met with Leonarda the Princess of Thrace, being worthily
guided by many noble Gentlemen, some that employed themselves in knightly
service, to gain the good opinion of Princess, and others that uttered many
amorous conceits, to inueigle her fancy toward them in marriage, and so they
passed away the time till they arrived at Con^stantinople, where the Princess
was entertained with maruailous great honor: but because the History does make
mention hereafter of her royal receiving into the City, I will now speak no
more thereof, but return again to the Prince Florendos, who walking along the
Rivers side to take the fresh air (the next day after the three knights
departed from him) he espied two Boats well furnished with Oars, in the
foremost whereof sat four Damsels, attired in very sumptuous apparel, and
sitting about the poope end of the Boat, sounding and tuning their Lutes,
whereto their voices delivered such pleasant ditties, as they might well have
been compared with the three Knights that had taken their way to
Constantinople, if so be they had stayed still at the Castle of Almaroll, to
have made trial.

When they drew near to the Castle, the men besturred their Oars merrily, and
the Ladies continued their pleasant song, very often making signs of courtesy
toward the other Boat, which was covered with a Tilt of surpassing riches,
and there (under a pauilion of inestimable value) sat a Lady on pillows and
Cushions of Velvet imbrodered (...) with Gold, whose countenance (which in
sooth was marvelous beautiful) showed her to be the Gouernes over all the
other, for she had on a light robe of Carnation Taffata, cut and laid out with
very beautiful Silks, that it seemed of great costlines and value to the
beholders, by reason that there wanted not gold, Pearl, and precious Stones,
to set it forth to the uttermost, and for that she might be the better
discerned, the heat of the day being past, and the Sun declining to the
nether Regions, she gave commandment, that the Mantles of the Pauilion should
be lifted up, when the Princes Florendos, and Floraman, might at will behold
the exquisite perfection of her beauty, and at her feet they might see
sitting on a cloth of black Velvet, two aged Gentlewoman, between whom sat a
very fair Damsel: and by her side lay a seemly Knight in green armor,
bearing in his shield for his device, in a field of Sinople, Cupid fast lincked
in chains of gold, his bow and arrows lying before him broken in pieces, and
the knight himself seemed, as a man altogether vanquished and overcome, for
that the Damsel advanced her self above him.

The Mariners were bravely decked with the colors of their Lady, whereof (I
may say to you) they were not a little proud, for that in behavior they
seemed so pleasant, as no accident what soever could have power to change them:
and in these great shows of delight, they brought their Boats to the side of
the Castle, continuing these sweet harmony, which by the Echo of the water,
gave an acceptable noise to their ears, who at the windows of the Castle
stood to behold them.

The two Princes, Florendos and Floraman, thought the time too long, till they
might have further knowledge of these Ladies but especially the Prince
Florendos, who being earnest in desire to know the Knight in the Boat,
casting his arms together, thus communed with himself. I am of the mind that
the very e^treamest rigor of misfortune is reserved for me, and that it is
adjoined me to lament, when others rejoice, in that I am daily and hourly
tossed in the surges of uncertain chanches, when each one else can have
harbor in the haven of happiness: and if I speak amiss, let the world enter
into judgment on me: first, the whole course of my life in Knightly service,
and the reverent duty I have always borne to my Mistress, yet what I have
gained in the one, I have lost in the other, which is a special argument, that
I am altogether unfortunate. He would have proceeded further in secret
complaint, but Floraman stayed him with his friendly imbrasing, and so walking
together, they beheld to come from the Boat, where the Lady sat, a very
modest and civil Damosel, and out of the other Boat came two Esquires, who
after they had veiled their bonnets to their Lady and Mistress, went orderly
together before the Damsel.

When they came before the two Princes, the Esquires very reverently did their
duty to them, and the Damsel gave them a very gracious salutation as she
passed by them: at last, they came before the Tree where the Shieldes were
placed, when the Damsel (beholding the portraite of the fair Miragarda)
turned to the Esquires with these words.

This divine motion of unequal beauty, causes me to enter into a hard
opinion, which is that our Lady and Mistress will return as greatly
displeased, as she is arrived here with suppose of pleasure, for that the base
Stone of Saint Vincents Rock, may not presume to paragon it self with a pure
and perfect Diamond. So, she proceeded on toward the Castle, where, in the
window (by reason of this sudden adventure) the Princess Miragarda was very
stately placed, before whom she should have delivered her message, but that she
was maruailously damped by the glimpse of her singular beutie, which was an
occasion of her pausing a while: a thing not strange in women, who are quickly
abashed at a simple cause, and therefore the more worthy of a fanourable
conceit, but after the Damosel had attained more hardiness (yet not without
very maidenly and civil bashfulnesse) she saluted the Princess Miragarda with
these speeches.

Let it not seem (fair Princess) offensive in your gracious eye, that I
thrust my self into your presence after such bold manner, for that country
Maidens are sildome acquainted with courtly qualities, and beside, a messenger
is pardonable, because some audacitie must be used in declaring a message, and
therefore presuming on your noble favor, I omit needelesse and prolixious
phrases, because they are not incident to the matter I have to disclose,
neither is it necessary to offend your cares with long and tedious
protestations.

You shall therefore understand (most gracious Princess) that Arnalte the
Princess of Navarre, my especial good Lady and Mistress, by me kisseth the
hand of your excellency, who for the desire she has to do you service, and
to spend sometime in your so far famed and commended company, has been so
bold to travail thus far, and here she is arrived with such a small train
as attends on her, not daring to enter on land or presume to your Castle,
before she be first resolved, if it stand with your good liking to afford her
entertainment, otherwise being very loath to offend you, she will return from
whence she came: to which words the Princess thus replied.

Fair Damosall, your request is honest and commendable, and for my part I
esteem very well thereof, but yet lies not in me to grant your Ladies
request, which is no small grief unto me: and I assure you, that the coming
of the Princess of Navarre is as acceptable to me, as the greatest good
Fortune in the world beside, that might happen to me: but as concerning her
friendly desire, trust me, the custom of this Castle is flatly against it, in
that the entrance is as well defended against women (whose company is very
strange here) as against men, that daily employ themselnes in deeds of honor.
And if I (for the good affection I bare to your Lady and Mistress) should
presume on my self to break the custom, the Giant Almaroll, whose authority
here stretches further then mine) I am sure would in no wise agree thereto,
and therefore I desire you not to imagine any ill, in that I do not grant to
your Ladies request, for there is great trust committed to those Knights
without, that (on their peril) none must enter into this Castle. And so I pray
you to return my acceptable, thanks to your Lady, excusing me by my allowable
answer and this you may assure her, that my grief is greater then she can
judge, or you imagine, in that I am destitute of the power to accomplish her
courteous will.

Madame (answered the Damsel) I shall not fail to declare at large to the
Princess Arnalte, your gracious pleasure, so that I doubt not, but she will
very well accept of your friendly answer: and the rather, because her danger
will be the greater, if she presume unadvisedly on her own peri^l, so that she
is highly bound to your courteous nature, in sending her such a forewarning.

And so she humbly took her leave of the Princess Miragarda, whose answer she
thoroughly delivered to her Lady and Mistress, whereat she received so great
unkindness, as she would hardly suffer the Damsel to report the allowable
and sufficient excuse of the Princess, and she grew into so great melancholy,
as neither one nor other might speak unto her, which when the knight in the
green Armor perceived he arose, and began thus to pacify her.

Madame, you ought not to take in evil part, that the princess Miragarda
makes refusal of your entry into her Castle, for that perchance she is a
fraide, least your beauty should stain or blemish hers, and then you know
(when such a doubt stands in the way) she should seem very unwise, in
committing he case to so great hazard: wherefore I pray you, let this
persuasion (which I imagine to be the cause of your denial) so quietly content
you, as no further choler remain upon your stomach.

These words which the knight used, were of such force in the ears of the
Princess Arnalte, as she contented her self with the answer the Damsel
brought her: and because she would not presently depart thence, without seeing
some further occasions, she commanded the knight to go to the place where the
Shields hanged, and from thence to bring her the Shield, wherein the Princess
Miragarda was pictured, because she would carry it away with her.

The knight esteemed this commandment very highly, in that the Princess would
employ him in any cause of service, wherefore, without fu^der delay he went on
land accompanied with the damsel that carried the message to the Princess,
to whom when she had made known his intent, she presently went to the two
Princes, Florendos and Floraman, whom she summoned with these words.

Gentlemen, the knight which you see, is come in the company of my Lady and
Mistress, desires you to send him the Princess Miragardaes Sheeld, for that
his Lady would use it in those occasions, which in her judgment she esteems
to be well thought on: and if you should seem so bold as to deny his demand,
and carry such an opinion of your selves, as he may not speed of his purpose by
fair means, know you then, that he shall be constrained to fetch it away
against your wills, yea, in despite of any thing you dare do to the contrary,
which trust me he would be loath to do, such and so great is his gentle nature,
as he would not willingly offer injury to any knight of this Country: upon
these words the Prince Florendos thus answered.

Gentle Damsel, the Knight (as it seems to me) is ignorant of the dangers
which this Shield does promise to him, who cannot content himself to feed
his eyes, with the beholding and contemplating a thing of so rare beauty and
excellency, but he must needs enter into so proud an imagination, as for his
own pleasure or his Ladies, he must carry the Shield away with him, and that
there belongs no more to the matter but so: trust me (fair Damsel) the
Lord has need of him, and he himself has no need of the Shield, if he
have, he may chance go without it at this time, unless he bring a larger
Commission, or get my good will to deliver it him, and commonly I am not
accustomed to send a Shield by a woman, because it is a thing she knows not
how to use, therefore, she will have it, bid him be so good as to fetch it
himself.

And because you shall carry a sound message unto him, I pray you do me so
much favor as to let him understand, that I will at this time, take the matter
so hardily upon me, as to defend the Shield against the uttermost he can
do, when, if his Fortune serve him so well, as to conquer me, the Shield
shall without further trouble, be deliue^ed him: and if he prove so happy, as
to carry away the Shield by his Prowess, I shall esteem my self the most
fortunate man alive, for that when I loose it, I shall loose my life, and then
will my wonderful unfortunate race have a final end.

Nevertheless, you must let him understand, that seeing he does esteem so
well of his Lady, as (for her sake) he will intrude himself into desperate
adventures, it is necessary he bring some witness or testimony of her
gracious favor, which may be placed at the feet of this fair portraite,
least perchance for want thereof, when the victory should chance to him,
Fortune do turn her back, and so his expectation may be utterly deceived:
now you know my mind, you may depart and tell him.

The Damsel returned to the place where the Knight attended, to whom when she
had told the answer of the Prince, Florendos, he took his leave of his Lady,
and accompanied with two Esquires, came bravely marching toward the prince, to
whom when he drew somewhat near, he began very proudly to utter these speeches.

I see well Sir Knight, that good counsel is not to be used toward them, who
are of so small discretion, as they cannot take it when it is offered: it is
meet therefore, that they be taught by discipline the principles of their
duty, when friendly persuasion is yrkesome to their cares. I willed you by a
friendly message, that you should send me the Shield wherein is the Image of
Miragarda, because I would be loath by constraint to come and fetch it from you:
but I perceive you had rather l^se it to your great detrimeut and shame, then
to give it me friendly, whereby you might have gained commendation. And for my
Ladies favor which you demand, wherewith you would honor the feet of this
picture, I promise you here upon my Knighthood, that if it be my ill hap to be
conquered, you shall then be made acquainted with the pledge of my Ladies
favor: therefore do your uttermost endeavor to bring me under your
subjection, for you shall see that I will give you such a lecture, which I
fear me you will very hardly construe.

Trust me Sir (quoth Florendos) your language is very brave and bountiful,
replenished with large circumstance of wo^ds, if your manhood prove answerable
thereto in deeds: whereof I know not how a man might be better resolved, then
to draw his sword (as I do now) and commit the cause to present trial.
Hereupon these two Knights prepared themselves to the Combat, but as they were
offering the one toward the other, they heard the Casement of a wind we in
the Castle suddenly to open: which caused the Prince Florendos to look up,
when he espied the princess Miragarda, whom he had not seen before since his
coming to the Castle, by reason whereof, he remained so inwardly ravished in
delight, with gazing on this delicate spectacle, as the Combat was quite and
clean out of his mind, which the strange Knight perceiving, he took him by
the arm, and thus awaked him.

Sir knight, he that presumes to enter Combat with me, ought not to be so
forgetful of himself, as it seems you are: therefore either provide to
defend me, or I promise you I will go away with your Ladies Shield. The Prince
Florendos seeing that the strange knight had him by the arm, he remembered
himself presently what he had to do: whereupon he withdrew his eyes from the
place where they were so greatly affectioned, and having his heart abundantly
charged with grief, he began thus to frame his answer. It does greatly
displease me sir, to enter the Combat with you, for that you take me in such
a time, which I esteem more, then the conquering you can return m^^
^^^uantage.

Sir, (answered the strange knight) to the end you may perceive, what small
succor your present imaginations does promise you, defend your self so well
as you can, and ere (...) you shall be persuaded of your own folly.

With these words, he struck Florendos such a terri^^^ blow on the Crest of
his Helmet, as the waightines thereof, constrained him to bow down his head,
but he was not slack in the requital thereof, which was so worthily handled,
as the knights shield was broken in two pieces: whereat the knight was offended
without measure, for when he beheld the Image of his Mistress so cruelly
martired, he (...) so extremely to rage with himself, that he fought like
(...) that was void of all reason or judgment, which when the Prince
perceived, he never left following his knightly intent, til he had brought the
knight almost out of breath, yet did he not ouercharge himself with any
extreme labor, but even at his own will and pleasure so continued the fight,
that he was as fresh at the ending as at the beginning, and so worthily did
behave himself, that the knight (who had more desire to rest himself, because
he was out of breath, then to endurr so hot a combat) was brought into such
feeble estate, that he was constrained to fall to the Earth, very greatly
traveled, and sore wounded. The Princess Arnalte (whose inconstancy you have
sufficiently heard heretofore) was so sore displeased when she saw her Knight
conquered, as she commanded her servant presently to row away, forsaking
her Knight, and making no more account or estimation of him, then as if she had
never known or seen him before.

The Prince Florendos, having thus brought his enemy under his obeisance,
opened his Helmet to see if he knew him, then the Knight did humbly yield
himself, desiring (when he had taken what sharp reuengement on him he
pleased) so to deal with him (if his mind were bent to such rigor) as at his
hands he might take his latest breathing, for that he had so fondly thrust
himself into the place, where he had committed so great dishonor: the Prince
returned this answer. (It suffiseth me Sir Knight) that I have conquest of
thee, (...) I will that thou go and present thy self to the Princess
Miragarda, and to suffer the Judgment that it shall please her to assign
^hee, spea^^ to the Giant Almaroll, and he will cause thee to know the
Princess mind.

The Giant (by the entreaty of the Knight) went to know the pleasure of the
Princess, who returned with this answer, that the Princess sent commandment
unto Florendos, to take the Oath of the vanquished Knight, that he should
never serve any other Lady then the Princess Arnalte, and that he should
bear the Devise in his shield after an other m^^ner, in respect she did think
it far vnr^^^^able, that Love should be held captive under the power (...)
Vassal: wherefore he should cause Cupid to be painted in his Shield, holding
a Knight bathed in blood down to his feefe.

Albeit this judgment of the Princess Miragarda was somewhat sharp and
rigorous, yet the Knight would not gainsay her determination: so causing some
regard to be used in his wounds on the next day he departed thence very sad
and sorrowful, to think in what displeasure the Princess Arnalte so
suddenly, went away.

The Prince Florendos remained a while at the Curing of wounds, and in the
mean time the Prince Floraman maintained the custom, accomplishing many hauty
and noble deeds only to move the affection of the Princess Miragarda, in
more amiable and gentle manner to the good and hardy knight Florendos: but she
(for all this) would use no estimation of the great pains which the Prince did
daily suffer for her sake.

CHAP. X.
Here shall be declared, what, and who the Knight was, that came in the company
of the Princess Arnalte, and for what cause he and she traveled to the
Castle of Almarol, and of the great entertainment which was made in the Court
of the Emperor Palmerin, at the arrival of Leonarda, the Princess of Thrace.
HEre it shall not be much amiss to let you understand, who the Knight was,
that came in the company of Arnalte the Princess of Navarre, for that (if
occasion so serve) you may have the better knowledge of him hereafter.

It is reported before in the first part of this History, that Darpos the Duke
of Normandy, the son of Frisoll, king of Hungaria, had to issue two sons,
whereof one was named Frisoll after his Grandfather, of whom mention is made
many times in the History, and the other was called Dragolant, who (for that
it is long time since he was reported a Knight at Arms) is now the farther out
of remembrance. This (...) being a gallant young Gentleman, and meetly endued
with strength to bear Armor, beside, the great fame of the noble exploytes of
his Father and Grandfather, did so imbolden him in courageous desire, as he
loathed to spend his life in ease or slothful idleness, wheruppon he left the
place where he had been nourished and brought up, addicting his mind to the
search of Knightly adventures, forgetting the Court of the Emperor Palmerin,
where first the renown of his deeds, might have given the greater grace to his
person.

In this his hautie desire, accompanied with one Esquire to bear his Shield
and helmet, he took his voyage toward the Realm of Spain, being very
earnest in affection to (...) the Castle of the Giant Almaroll, that he might
approou^^^ valor against the Knight that kept the Princess Miragardaes
Shield, but as he iournied thitherward, he was constrained to pass through the
Realm of Navarre, where by chance he happened to the passage, which was
guarded by the Princess Arnaltaes knight, whereof two were vanquished by his
noble valor.

Princess Arnalte well noting his worthy behavior, as also that he was a
brave and lusty young Gallant, she used such friendly persuasion to him, that
he went with her into the Castle, where she entertained him with such honor,
as she was accustomed to use toward them, who resembled Dragonalt in bounty
and prowess.

This young Prince beholding Arnalte intiched with so great beauty, and
understanding that her dowry was to be Queen of Navarre, began to wax
maruailous amorous of her, being far inueigled with her love, as he judged in
his own opinion that in her consisted the detriment of his his life, and
dignity of his honor.

At length it so fell out, that the Lady and Mistress of his dutiful thoughts,
was maruailous desirous to go see the fair Princess Miragarda, which being a
mean for him to utter his earnest affection, he made a reverent offer to bear
her company in her journey, for that he well knew, the more he did entertain
himself into her company, he might in the more familiar manner proceed in his
love. The Princess Arnalte was not curious in accepting his gentleness, in
that his presence did rather add an estimation of honor of her, then impeach
her of any indecent cause, wherefore all things being in a readiness, with as
much convenient speed as might be, she set forward toward the Castle of
Almaroll, accompanied with the Ladies and Damsels, and six Esquiers, as you
have heard before, as also with this noble and aduenturous prince Dargonalte,
who to witness the entire love he bare to the princess, many times by the way
assayed very knightly occasions, wherein Fortune did still afford him the
victory.

The Princess received no small pleasure at his happy chances, in that she
esteemed so well thereof, as she thought him worthy to possess her love, which
Dragonalt advisedly pondering, frequented the Princess with very amiable
conditions, so that in short time they came to a City, standing on the banks
of the River Thesin, which made two leagues from the Castle of the Giant
Almaroll, where they stayed till they had provided two Boats to pass along
the River, wherein they came to the Castle of Almaroll, and Dragonalte had the
entertainment as you have heard before, by the noble and valiant Prince
Florendos, whose valor did move such a hatred in the Prince Arnalte, toward
her affectionate and loyal friend Dragonalt, that she angerly departed from
the Castle of Almaroll, toward her own place of abode in Navarre, entending
never to see him again.

But it is not to be doubted, but that this sudden choler would take as
sudden a cooling in that, as she could be easily entreated to anger, against
them who had but little offended her, even so could she be as easily won, to
forget her desire of wreakefull vengeance, her vnstayednesse was such, and her
good will to love so great. In this manner it chanced Dragonalt, who
continuing his affection to the Princess Arnalte, in the end was so
fortunate, as he obtaind her good will in marriage, she making him Lord of her
self, and King of Nauar^e: wherefore we ought not to despair of that, which
is in the hand of Fortune to give us, as you may perceive in the course of this
History, which here leaves Dragonalt and his Queen together, returning to
Leonarda the princess of Thrace, who being ready to depart the Realm of
Thrace, for the desire she had to be in the Court of the Emperor Palmerin, the
Queen Carmelia her Grandmother, sent her away worthily accompanied with Ladies
and Gentlewomen, for the better government of her in her journey: beside she
gave charge to the Lords and Gentlemen that went with her, in no case they
should depart from her, until they had presented her to the Emperor.

In this order she set forward toward Constantinople, being met diverse times
on the way by many brave Gallants, who understanding her setting forth, did
honor her with their dutiful attendance, until she came to the Emperors
Court, where was assembled together so many brave Knights, so richly Armed, and
carrying such fine devises, as one would have judged, that they did rather
prepare to incampe themselves for war, then to show knightly disports to
delight the Emperor. Many came thither to behold the bravery others to do the
princess Leonarda service, and some beside, who had good hope to win her in
marriage, each one did strive who should behave himself most gallant, and who
might witness the greatest title of knighthood, as well to please the eye of
the young Princess, as to deserve the estimation of the whole Court, their
honorable estates serving them very well so to do.

The prince Gracian, Berolde, the Sage Aliart, Platir, and diverse other
knights of the Emperors Court, going in the company of the aged Emperor
himself, went to meet the Princess two leagues from the City, who being
advertised of their coming (by reason that the Prince Primaleon with other
Princes, rid somewhat before the rest) did presently leave her Coach, and
mounted on a goodly white Palfray, whose harness was very rich and costly to
behold: the Princess her self, was bravely attired after the Greekish
fashion, that she might the better delight the eyes of them which did behold
her, her Robe was of Carnation Velvet, very fairly imbrodered with pasement
Lace of Gold, her Clock was of Scarlet, closed before with sumptuous Diamonds,
which were placed very thick in manner of buttons, and all the compass of the
Cloak was likewise garnished with Diamonds, having between every Diamond, a
rank of very glorious Orient Pearl, which shined in the Sun so gallantly,
as they did maruailously deck and set forth here costly Vesture, and beside,
the glimpse of them so sweetly dazeled in her face, as the youthful Knights,
whose thoughts were free before from the assaults of love, were now suddenly
entrapped with her singular beauty.

The Emperor, albeit he was far in years, yet he did attire himself very
youthfully, to give the greater grace to the young Princes that bare him
company, so coming to the Princess Leonarda, he entertained her with very
stately and accustomed honor, afterward he gave place to the Prince Primaleon
his Son, who kissed her hand in very gentle manner, and so did all the other
Princes that came with the Emperonr, whose presence witnessing so great estate,
did much content the mind of the young Princess, who was no small deal
abashed at the great honor, which the Emperor did so nobly afford her, as to
grant her license to remain in his Court, in remembrance of which courtesy,
she would have stouped down to kiss y^ Emperors hand, but her remembering how
his court was graciously honored by her presence, would not suffer her to
humble her self so much, giving her to understand in very friendly speech,
that in her coming to abide in his court, he did accept it as a thing of no
small contentation to him. Then setting forward on their way, that they might
the sooner enter the City, the Emperor on a sudden espied an occasion, which
withdrew his mind from thinking on the beauty of the Princess Leonarda, for
he saw a pretty space from the city of Constantinople, under an ^ake
standing near to the Hermitage of S. Lois, which was a little out of the
common way, a knight armed in Carnation colored Armor, so thick beset with
little (...) of Gold, as the whole Armor was gallantly set forth ^erewith, his
Helmit likewise was after the same manner, and in his Sheeld he bare for his
device in a field of Azure, a Cipresse tree, very thick hung with Nuts of Gold.

This Knight was mounted on a lusty bay Courser, having attending on him two
Esquiers, one of them carrying a Shield covered over with cloth, so that the
device thereof could not be discerned, the Knight having espied the Emperor,
sent presently one of his Esquiers unto him, who being come before the
Emperor, rained his Palfrey, and began to salute him in this order.

My gracious Lord, the Knight whom you behold under yonder Oak, is supprised
with a marvelous earnest desire, to try against these Knights of your Court,
the renowned valor, which has been so much reported of them through the
whole world, and he willed me to certify you, that it is a long time since he
bare Armor, or followed any Knightly adventure, therefore he would now gladly
make proof of the good opinion he holds of himself, and because he might
the better speed in his purpose, and not be denied in his honest request, he
is determined this day to guard this passage, not doubting but he shall defend
himself sufficiently, against any that dare judge so great hardiness in
themselves, as to pass by without asking him license. Wherefore he humbly
desires your Majesty, that you would command your Knights to Ioust with him,
for he has promised to refuse none of them, except the Prince Primaleon your
Son, against whom he will never consent to bear Arms.

The Emperor was so joyful at these tidings as might be, and the rather he
would consent to the knights request, for that it was a mean, whereby the
Princess Leonarda might receive some pleasure: considered also, that it did
very well like him, because she should perceive the noble valor and prowess
of the Knights that remained with him in his Court, and having opinion, that
the Knight which had enterprised to guard the passage, was one well seen in
hautie exercises, he returned the Esquier this answer.

My friend, say unto the Knight thy Master from me, that I freely give him
leave to proceed in his honest request, and I am partly sort, that my aged
years will not suffer me to be one in the number of those, who (I am sure)
will hazard their honor, to get liberty of thy Master for the Princess
Leonardaes passage, and in her company I promise thee will I abide, till either
they have woonne it valiantly, or lost it unfortunately. Then came he again to
the Princess Leonarda (the Esquire being departed with this answer to his
Master) and to her he began with these speeches.

Madame, do you think it reasonable, that any one should deny me the way
within mine own dominions and especially at such time as I am in your company?
Certainly, the Knight that has enterprised thus to hinder us, ought to be one
of no small courage: except he does imbolden himself by means of your beauty,
and hoping to move you toward him (...), does offer his person to endure a
doubtful (...)

^^^antly had the Emperor concluded his intent, when Reccamon, who in his
Court was esteemed for a good and hardy Knight, gave the spurs to his Courser
against the strange Knight: but his fortune was so far contrary, as he was
presently dismounted from his horse, having nothing at all moved the knight
that kept the passage: whereupon Frisoll coutched his Lance against the strange
Knight, who caused him to bea^ Reccamon company. Then galloped he his horse to
fetch (...) Lance, for that he had broken his other upon Frisoll, (...)
Grecian being somewhat offended, advanced himself against the Knight, who
meeting him in the midst of the way, gave him such a forcible stroke, as he
was constrained to fall to the earth: by means whereof Berolde put forth
himself, whom the Knight caused to speed as Gracian had done. The Emperor
hereat was greatly abashed, beholding the shame which his Knight received,
whereupon Dramian went to try his fortune, which in sooth was to adverse to
him, as his horse and he fell down both together, which he perceiving, said,
that his enemy ought not refuse to ioust with him once more: the strange
knight hearing his words, gave a sign to Dramian that he should give over and
run no more, but he would not be warned by his friendly motion, when putting
himself upon the second trial, he was again thrown to the earth, very sore
and dangerously wounded. This moved the Emperor to be much agreeued, doubting
lest the issue of this enterprise, would return to the dishonor o^ the
Knights of his Court, then Don Rosuell, seeking to revenge the injury his
companions had received, gave himself forth bravely to meet the strange
Knight, but his entertainment was such, as his fellows had receiueed before
him. When the hardy Prince Platir saw the ill hap of the Princes, he ran
courageously against the strange Knight, and after they had broken their
Lances, they met together very forcibly with their bodies, and their horses
fought together likewise so cruelly, as in the end, Platir and his horse was
compelled to fall down to the ground, but the strange Knight sat still very
gallan^ (...) was not any thing hurt by the rough encounter.

The Emperor was overcome with extreme grief, (...) his knights beaten down
so fast by the valor of one Knight, so that he knew not well what to say, and
the Prince Primaleon was as greatly moved as the Emperor his Father, because
he suspected that the knight unknown, was the noble and valiant prince
Palmerin of England, whose prowess was worthily esteemed in all Princes Courts
in Christendom: but he never remembered or judged this strange Knight to be the
redoubted prince Florian of the For^est, because (...) were given abroad, that
he remained in the king of (...) Court.

In brief, the famous behavior of this unknown knight made them stand in
their dumps, so that they kn^w not well what to think, nevertheless the
Knights continued on the Ioust, to wit, Estrellant, Bellizart, and Francian,
who were one after another placed among the vanquished, so there remained no
more knights to Ioust: but on a sudden, even as Francian was cast forth of his
saddle, Pompides and Blandidon happened to arrive there, which the Emperor
seeing, and knowing them to be such as merited his favor, he afforded them a
gracious welcome, desiring them, that they would do their endeavor to make free
the passage, to the end that the Princess Leonarda might enter into
Constantinople.

We are contented (mighty Emperor) answered Pompides, to make a proof of our
good fortune before you, as well to witness the regard we have of your
excellency, as to try if we may attain to purchase that, which so many good
knights, have sailed in. No sooner had Pompides thus vttred his mind, but he
gave the spurs to his horse against the strange Knight, who in sooth compelled
both him and Blandidon, to speed as the other knights had done before.

Then when he saw, that all the Knights of the Emperors Court were vanquished,
he listed up his Helmet, and came unto the Emperor, before whom he fell on his
knees to kiss his Majesty's hand: but when the Emperor perceived, that the
knight who had so hardly kept the passage, was his Nephew the Prince Florian of
the Forest, he was then as joyful of his happy victory, as before he was
agrieued to see his knights so vanquished: yea, themselves did think it no
dishonor to them, to be overcome by the noble Prince Florian, who having kissed
the hands of the Emperor and Primaleon, offered to do the like to the
Princess Leonarda, but she seeing a Prince of such young years, to be
accompanied with such singular prowess, could not so much account the^eof, as
in her eye she did imagine it worthy her great good will, which suddenly (at
this instant) she gave in secret to the hardy Prince Florian, for that his
virtuous deseruings (in her conceit) did well beseem her favorable
acceptance. And for the Prince Florian, whereas (until this present) his
heart could never faithfully make any certain estimation of love, but even for
the present humor (as you have heard before) now, the singular courtesy of
the Princess Leonarda, as also the sufficency of her equivalent beauty,
caused such a hot skirmish between love and liberty, as he must needs yield
himself subject to affection, being conquered and brought under by his
extreme charges, so that nothing agreed so well with his laboring thoughts,
as when he supposed the Princess to command him service, and he (in good
will) applied his dutiful attendance.

The Emperor Palmerin, seeing such liberty of the passage granted by him who
had now more mind to gaze on the fair Princess, then to remember the
happiness of his obtained victory came in this manner to the Princess of Thrace.
Madame, the knight, who all this while employed himself to hinder our passage,
is now not only contented to grant us liberty, but also will friendly bear
us company: wherefore I am persuaded, that we shall not again be hindered in
our journey, by any knight that dare attempt as much as he has done, for
having my noble Nephew Florian in our company, I imagine it a very hard
adventure, which should in his presence seem to impeach us.

CHAP. XI.
How the Emperor with his noble company, entered the City of Constantinople,
and of the gracious entertainment, which was made to Leonarda Princess of
Thrace, at her arrival there.
AFter the Iousts were ended, which the noble and valiant Prince Florian had
enterprised in guarding the passage, the Emperor desirous to make known to
the princess Leonarda, the magnificent entertainment he could afford her in
his Court, set forwards on his way toward Constantinople, the Princes,
Primaleon and Florian of the Forest, leading the way very bravely, as hardy
Champions to resist any dangerous adventure, that should forbid them the
entrance into the City.

When they were come into the City, they were received by the people
marvelous triumphantly, who had prepared Scaffoldes, and Theaters, (...) was
presented many strange Histories and rare inventions, for the entertainment of
the young Princess of Thrace, as also to delight the aged Emperor, which
albeit he was indifferently contented withal, yet there remained an especial
cause of grief on his stomach, to wit, the imprisonment of the King Polendos,
and the noble Princes in his company. Belcar, and diverse other approved
Knights at Arms, rid on hastily before the Palace, to advertise the
Empress, and the Princesses, Gridonia, and Polinarda, of the coming of
Leonarda the Princess of Thrace, who came on feet a pretty way from the
Palace, where they met the Princess, whom they failed not to entertain with
very gracious courtesy, whereat the Princess received great contentation,
thinking that they which received her with such great estimation at her first
arrival, would continue her in favorable judgment while she stayed there.

After that the Empress and Gridonia, had ended their l^uing salutations, the
Princess Polinarda, did next advance her self, showing very Princely and
amiable gestures of courtesy toward the Princess Leonarda, whose beauty she
judged worthy of great commentation: for I assure you, that whosoever did
indifferently behold these two Ladies together, could hardly judge which of
them surmounted the other in beauty.

The Princess Polinarda, advisedly marking the divine face of the fair
Leonarda, began to grow in great opinion of favor toward the prince
Palmerin, commending maruelloussy his sta^nesse and justness in fidelity, in
that he would not forget (...) loyalty to her, having offered him such an
especial treasure as was the Princess Leonerda, and for whom he had sufe^ed
so great pain and travail, yet could not be persuaded to accept her in choice.

These two fair and beautiful Ladies, holding one another familiarly by the
hand, followed the Empress into her Chamber, where her self, Gridonia, and
all the other Ladies, sat down to contemplate the sweet and delicate faces of
these two Princesses. Florian was no sooner entered into the Chamber, but he
humbled himself to kiss the Gmpresse hand, who embraced him very lovingly a
great many times, for that she had been always more affectionate to his
Mother, the Princess Flerida, then to all the rest of her Children, in respect
of whom, she received marvelous contentment, to behold her Son the Prince
Florian, of the Forest, who (having done his dutia to the Empress (came and
saluted the Princess Gridonia, offering the same manner of honor, as before
he had done unto the Empress, but she would not suffer him to regard her so
much: wherefore she cast her arms about his neck, giving him such worthy
entertainment, as so Noble a Prince deserved to have. From her he went to the
place where the Princess Polinarda sat, before whom he kneeled upon one of
his knees offering her the same manner of courtesy, as he had before used to
the Empress and the Princess Gridonia, but she very maidenly and modestly
did interrupt him, and taking him by the hand, began thus to parley with him.

I see now (Sir Florian) that at this present you come to make satisfaction,
for the offense which you have this day given to the Princess Leonarda, by
hindering her of the liberty of the way, wherefore I my self would adiudge
you first to be punished, for offering such discourtesie, if I did not persuade
my self, that you are able to make her recompense diverse ways, by your
Knightly service, for the insufferable fault which you have this day
committed: To which words, the Prince thus replied.

I would that Fortune would make so good account of me, as that the Princess
of Thrace would abase her self so much, to take in good part my simple
service, if I might attain to so great happiness, that any deed in me, might
deserve the good lyking of such a gracious Princess, I should think my self
the most Fortunate under Heaven, and that no hazard could be so dangerous, as
I should not for her sake easily overcome. Wherefore (fair Madame,) I heartily
desire you, that you should persuade the Princess Leonarda, to accept me as
her Knightly servant, which honor if she do afford me, the estimation I
should account of my self would be such, as (my heart being encouraged by such
a laudable cause) I should worthily finish my adventure, which might like her
to employ me in: the Princess Polinarda, returned him this answer.

Worthy Sir, the Princess Leonarda shall purchase to her self so great
honor (by your Noble Knightly behavior, in entertaining you for her vowed
Servant and Champyon, and I persuade my self, that long circumstance need not
to be used, she will so gladly accept your honest offer: Wherefore if you
doubt that she will not so much ab^^e her self, (...) receive your friendly
motion, I dare take the hazard here upon my self, so that I imagine, she will
not cause me to be deceived. Therefore in sign of your permanent loyalty,
which shall be to her, and none else but her, think not scorn to go kiss
her Princely hands, which shall be as the seal of a perpetual bond, that you
shall bestow your Knightly service on her, and she likewise shall admit you her
continual favor.

The Princess Leonarda sweetly blushing, to bear Polinarda, so pleasant in
discourse, turned to her with this affable answer. Madame, you cannot wish or
command me the thing, that I would be so forgetful of my self, as to make
refusal thereof, and I esteem my (...) honored, to receive the Prince
Florian, for my (...) Champyon, in that I understand, he is brother to the
(...) Palmerin of England, toward whom I am so highly bound and indebted, as
comparing my regard of him, with the good opinion I conceive, (knowing Florian
to be your beloved Kinsman) I will not report the sum of my thought, but
desire I may be able to requite your kindness.

Polynarda contented herself very well, with the gentle answer of the fair
Princess Leonarda, as well to be resolved of the special entertainment, which
she gave to her Noble Couzin Florian, as also to remove the suspicion she
had of her singular Beauty, fearing least her most favored Friend the Prince
Palmerin of England, should fall into any lyking to match with her, because
she reserved him altogether for her seemly self.

The Prince Florian was not a little proud of his good fortune, and the Emperor
would have called him to him, but that he saw how familiar the two princesses
were in talk with him, whereupon he determined (if good hap would so permit) to
make a marriage between him and the Princess of Thrace, whom he gave as bed
fellow to his Nee^e Polinarda, assuring you, that these two virtuous Ladies
lived and loved so entirely together, as the one could never be without the
others company, and what occasions of secret sorrow so ever happened, the one
would not (...) of the other, in revealing their close conceits, for they (...)
of this mind, that it could not be called firm and faithful friendship, when
all kind of such causes should not pass common between them.

At length the Emperor (accompanied with the Prince Florian) withdrew himself
into his Chamber, where he quistioned with him about the prosperous estates, of
the King of England his Grandfather, and his father the Prince Don Edward, not
forgetting his dear daughter, the fair Princess Flerida, whom he desired (if
it might be possible) to see before he dyed: and after he had communed with him
about many matters, he caused the Prince to be brought into his Chamber, where
the good Knight could not ^^sse the night so quietly as he was accustomed, the
(...) princess Leonarda was so earnest in his thoughts, as (...) and tumbled,
but could not enjoy any wished rest.

On the next day in the morning, when the Emperor had been at the Chapel to
hear divine Service, the Table was covered in the Princess Fleridaes Chamber,
where he dined in the company of the Empress, Gridonia, Polinarda, and the
fair Princess of Thrace: but after that the Tables were withdrawn, and they
had ^^tten a pretty while talking together, there entered a Damsel attired
all in black, with two seemly Esquiers attending on her, she humbled herself
before the Emperor, with kissing his hand, and did the like to the Empress,
Gridonia and Polinarda, who very gently embraced the Damsel, for that she
knew her to be one of the waiting Gentlewomen upon the Princess Targiana, at
such time as she was there abiding in the Emperors Court, and before the
Empress she stayed still, when the Emperor having knowledge of her, came and
demanded other, as concerning the welfare of her Lady and Mistress: to which
words she answered in this manner. Dread Prince, and my most gracious Lord, I
desire you that you will not receive any displeasure, for that you see me
rather inclined to the Empress then to your excellency, because the Princesie
Targiana commanded me to address my self unto her highness, as to one whom
she unfeignedly regards: but for your grace desires to understand, how the
Princess my good Lady ^a^eth, it is so, that she never came forth of her
Chamber, since the day that the Prince Polendos your Son, and the other
Princes and Knights were committed to prison, during all which time, she has
not ceased most graciously to weep and lament, insomuch as her fair beauty
is maruellously altered and changed, yet has the Turk her Father labored as
much as may be, to dis^wade her from this mournful kind of life, but all in
vain he wastes his endeavor, for she took her oath in his presence, that she
would never give ever vexing her self with continual waiting, until your
knights enjoyed as free liberty, as they had when they came with her from
Constantinople.

The Turk her father fearing lest her extreme grief, would be a cause of
shortning her youthful time, has promised to restore them for the liberty of
the Prince Albayzar, whom they of Babylon have request of him, that they may
enjoy him among them again: for this cause the great Turk has sent hither an
Ambassador, who will be here either this day, or tomorrow morning, when your
Highness shall understand the sum of the matter.

And for that the Princess Targiana fears least you should deny to grant
what he requires, which may move such an inconvenience, as your Majesty
would repent the great honor you bestowed on her in your Court, she put me
faithfully in trust, to bring these tidings unto the Empress, in whose
presence I have made you acquainted with that I had in charge, because it
te^cheth you more then it does any other person. Moreover, she carefully
pondering every car^e with her self, and doubting least the malice which her
father bears to the Princess of your Court, will seek a secret revenge
some way, as treason intended between him and his Ambassador, toward your
Highness, to prevent the worst that may happen, she desires you to return
her Father good words, but not forgo the Prince Albayzar (whom you know her
lawful husband) before first your Knights be forth of her fathers power, and
that they have attained such a place of assurance, as (al devises
notwithstanding) no harm may come unto them, but if after their liberty, such
misfortune happen them (as she would be very loath) your Majesty may (as you
see cause) find your self agrieued with the offenders.

Fair Damsel (answered the Emperor) I accept very gratefully the good
advice of the Princess Targiana, and I see very well, that the honor she
received in my Court (albeit it was but small) is now double and double
rewarded: and persuade your self, that I am determined to follow her counsel.
The Emperor concluding his mind, the Damsel came again to the Princess
Polinarda, to present her with the gracious commendations of the fair
Targiana: but when she beheld the rare and singular beauty of the Princess
of Thrace, which set by her, the damsel took the hardiness to demand and
if that Lady were not the Princess Miragarda, for whom and by whom, the Prince
Albayzar was vanquished.

In sooth fair Damsel (answered Polinarda) this is not the Princess
Miragarda, but this is Leonarda, the Princess of Thrace, whom the noble
Palmerin of England delivered out of the enchantment, wherein she remained a
long and tedious time: at these words the Damsel took occasion to begin
thus.

By your favor, Madame, I know now who this Lady is, because I have not
forgotten the strange adventure of the Cup, which was brought by a Damosel
into his Court: and I assure you that Palmerin of England was of a very strange
nature, that he could both make so small account of such a fair Princess, as
also in refusing the stately government of the Kingdom of Thrace Polinarda,
desirous to move the Damsel from talking in that matter, willed that she
would report to her the welfare of the Princess Targiana, that had so friendly
given them to understand before, of the tidings which were brought thither by
the Ambassador: who beiug arrived at Constantinople, the Emperor sent the
chiefest Princes and knights of his Court, to receive him with very friendly
and courteous entertainment: but when the Damsel heard that the Ambassador
was come, she presently departed thence toward Spain, to go find out the
Prince Albayzar, promising the Princess Polinarda to return by
Constantinople, before she made her return into Turkey.

The Emperor dessred the Damsel, to present the message of his good will to
the king Recinde, as also to the Prince Albayzar, and after that he had
bestowed diverse rich and costly gifts on her, she betook her self to
travail, being very glad, that she was espied by none of them which came with
the Ambassador, who (as I have already declared) was received in very Princely
order, not as he were an enemy, but as became best the estate of him, to whom
he was sent, who in sooth was of such a noble and virtuous mind, as when he
should deal roughly and extremely with his enemies, he would entertain them
as his vowed and professed friends, and such was his courtesy to this
Ambassador.

To the Emperors palace he was conducted very worthlie, riding among the
chiefest Princes and knights of the Court, and the Emperor himself (to do
him the greater honor) came and received him at the gate of his Palace: but
the proud Turk would not one vouchsafe to veil his bonnet, or offer any
honorable sign to the Emperor, such was his malicious stomach toward him,
who had in no case offended the Turk his Lord.

The Emperor perceived well the small regard he had of him, by the words which
the Princess Targiana had sent him by her Damsel, but yet he suffered him to
do what he thought best, using still so great courtesy unto him, as at last he
was constrained to show more decent iesture, when he presented the Emperor
with a letter from his Lord the Turk, the seal thereof was of pure Gold, and
fastened about with a sumptuous Chain. The Emperor received it at his hands
very graciously, and having viewed the tenor thereof, he desired the Turk to
go take his rest in his Chamber, and the next day he would satisfy him in the
occasion of his Embassage.

I desire your grace (answered the Turk) that it may so stand with your
pleasure, as to make me presently answer, without deser^ing any further time,
which when I have received, I will go ^est my self in mine own Tents, which
I have commanded to be provided for me without the walls of your city, for if
I should do otherwise, the great Turk (my gracious Lord) would find himself
much offended with me: the Emperor replied in this fashion.

You shall do what you imagine convenient in your own conceit, nevertheless,
I should not be any whit agreeued, if my Ambassador did lodge in the Palace
of the great Turk, that he might the better fulfill his duty in the charge
committed to him. I beseech your grace (said the Turk) to let these needless
speeches go, and remember your self of the hundred Knights of your Court,
which are held as prisoners by my Lord the Turk, and see that you make some
provision for them, for my Lord having them in his power (to revenge diverse
injuries, which he has received by some of your Subjects) he determined to put
them to death: but to witness his gracious and noble nature, he is content (at
the earnest intreatis of his daughter, the fair Princess Targiana) to give
them their lives, and to restore them in change for the Prince Albayzar, who is
kept prisoner in the Court of the King of Spain, by the commandment of the
Princess Miragarda.

But trust me, you are to think your self in no small favor with the
Princess Targiana, whose tears were of such power, as to s^ue the lives of
your knights, whom my Lord the Turk had determined you should never see
again, until your Highness had sent him the knight of the Savage man, that
he might revenge the injury which he (too forgetful of himself committed, in
carrying away by Sea his daughter Targiana, a deed truly worthy of sharp
punishment: the Turk there pausing, the Emperor took occasion to begin
thus.

Certainly, I confess my self greatly bound to the Princess Targiana, but
far more to the fair Princess Miragarda, in that (had not her wise
foresight been the greater) my Knights had suffered the extreme rigor of
death: but this I assure you, (that since cruel Fortune had so thrown the
Dyce on me, I rather would have lost twice so many more as they are, then to
send your Lord the Turk my Knight of the Sauadge man, in the presence of
whom, here I faithfully promise to deliver the Prince Albayzar, provided
always, that you make me sufficient assurance of them, whom the Turk holds
in unkind servitude, whereof (how I may be certainly persuaded) I pray you
vouchsafe me the knowledge, how and in what manner the case must be ordered.

The course which you must take in this matter, (answered the Turk) is thus,
your Majesty must send unto my Sovereign and Lord, the Prince Albayzar,
upon his inviolable Oath, which (by me) he voweth to you, and which you may
account of so great and sufficient truth, and he will not fail (by so great a
bond) to send you the prince Polendos your son, with the other Princes and
Knights that are in his company, and this you may be bold of, that my Lord
more willingly would loose his life, then falsify his faith toward your
Excellency.

The Emperor leaning upon his arm, and noting well the words of the
Ambassador, paused a good space, without making any answer, which the Prince
Florian perceiving, being better acquainted with the infidelity of the Turks,
then the Emperor was: and fearing least he would have given credit to this
subtle assurance, presently started up, and began as thus. Most worthy
Emperor, if you but consider the cause why the great Turk detayneth your
Knights in Prison, you shall well perceive the small trust you ought to repose
in him, in that the occasion was so little, and the assurance of his troth is
much less.

Again, if you suffer the Prince Albayzar to escape upon his word, you may
chance (sooner then you would) to repent your self: For if you remember his
unfaithful dealing to the Giant Dramusiande, in the time he kept the Shield
of the Princess Miragarda, how (contrary to his vowed promise) he brought it
from the Castle of Almaroll in the night, and coming with it into the Court,
did bravely give it forth in speeches, that he had won it by his knightly
endeavor, which dishonorable dealing he found in the end too costly.

Therefore it is very necessary, that the King Recinde regard him more
carefully then hitherto he has done, in that the libe^tle of his person, will
be the cause of sending home again your Knights. And if this Ambassador will
take upon him to maintain, that this message which he presents you from the
Turk his sovereign, is only with regard of royal clemency, I will defend
the contrary against him, yea, and I will enforce him to confess, that this
proceeds on the earnest instance made by the subjects of the Prince Alb^yzar,
who are importune in suit, to have their Lord and governor at liberty: for if
it so fall out, that the Turk do not satisfy this their continual request,
he shall be constrained to guard himself from them, who were wont to defend
him with their especial aid. Knight (answered the Ambassador) thou shall
assuredly understand, and I promise thee by the authority of my embassage,
which allows me to enter in arms against thee, that I will not fail to make
thee know, with what reverence thou ought to entertain, the unreprovable
word of my Lord and Sovereign, and I doubt not beside, but to give due
recompense to thy disloyal and unseemly dealing: whereto the Prince Florian
thus replied.

It is the most acceptable thing I make account of, for thee to enter the
Combatte with me, in respect of good encouragement I have thereto, and of the
small honor that will fall to thy share. The Emperor perceiving his Nephew in
so great chollere, touched him with the Scepter which he held in his hand, to
the end he should proceed no further, and he was somewhat inwardly offended,
that he did give so hard and rough speeches: but nevertheless, he esteemed
well of his good Counsel, which to maintain, he came to the Ambassador in
this manner. You ought not to be offended, when my knights assist me with their
good and careful advise, and especially for the Prince Florian my Nephew, who
is not ignorant long since of the custom and manners used in the Turks court.
And for the great Turk himself, I have that opinion of his faith and promise,
as he has himself, believing well, that he would not for all the honor he
professes, violate or break his word in any thing: but yet I dare not build
or assure my self thereon, lest they (who now are prisoners) take occasion to
complain of my fond dealing, remembering the hard usage they have all this
while suffered. Moreover, if I should presume so venture so rashly, the King
Recinde (I know) would not so willingly consent with me, whose son is amongst
the Princes as a prisoner, and til he have him in his own assurance, he will
not grant liberty to the Prince Albayzar: wherefore you may thus give your
Lord to understand, that if he will send me home my prisoned knights, I will
not fail to send him the Prince Albayzar: this request is but lawful, and I
promise on my honor to perform it. But if it so chance, that he doubt of any
faithful dealing herein, I will give him a pledge of assurance, his own
daughter the Princess Targiana, who I am sure will make answer for me, as
well for the perfect knowledge she has of my fidelity, as also for the desire
she has to recover home her husband: the Ambassador standing a while musing,
at last replied thus to the Emperor.

I see well, that by the knowledge of ill doing, men attain to follow that
which is good and lawful, and so I take my leave of your excellency, assuring
you, that the Princess Targiana will adventure her life, only upon your word
and promise: in that you withhold him who is her only felicity, and who has
done such noble service to my Lord her Father. In so doing (said the Emperor)
she shall very highly please me, and for the good will I bear her, I pray you
(on my behalf, and with my hearty commendations) to kiss her Princely hand:
for such is the estimation I have to her, as she has power to dispose of me,
in anything she takes pleasure to employ me.

The Ambassador made promise to fulfill his commandment, when (with a
courteous obeisance) he took his leave, and departed from the Emperor, who
(after his departure) sat and conferred with his Knights, commending greatly
the wisdom of the Princess Miragarda, in sending the Prince Albayzar to the
King Recinde, for whom (it would so come to pass) that he should yet again
recover his Son Polendos, and the other Knights.

CHAP. XII.
Of an Adventure which happened in the Courr of the Emperor Palmerin, and of
that which followed afterward.
THe next Day after the Ambassador from the great Turk was departed the
Emperors Court, the same day in the afternoon, as the Emperor sat
accompanied with diverse and sundry of his Princes, Lords, and Knights, he
perceived to enter the great Hall, a big and goodly Aged man, so much
weakened and ouer-spent with years, as it seemed he was ready to fall to the
Earth. The Emperor judged him a person of some Authority, by reason of his
goodly gray-locks, and his fair long-milk-white beard, for he thought that
such a seemly and Fatherlike man, would not deceive the World with falsehood
and dissembling.

The Princes and others that kept the Emperor company, desired very earnestly
to understand what he would say, oftentimes beholding him very advisedly, who
when he was come before the Emperor, offered to stoop down to kiss his
Highness hand, but he taking pity on him, would not suffer him so to do:
then did he make such humble Salutations as he could, when the Emperor
demanded of him, for what occasion he was come.

My gracious Lord (said this Aged man, with a voice so fainte and low, as very
hardly he could be understood:) for that your Court is always so fortunate, as
to entertain Noble and aduenturous Knights, who are ever ready to succor
them that be destitute of their aid and assistance, I had good hope that they
would not refuse to affoorde me their favorable refuge, in delivering me out
of the great danger, whereinto by misfortune I am suddenly brought. These
heavy and sad speeches, he accompanied with such abundance of tears, as he
moved the heart of the Emperor to great compassion: then pawsing a pretty
space, with a deep and dolourous sigh, he began thus again. I most humbly
beseech your Majesty, that you would at this time comfort me with your
gracious aid, to revenge the injury that is extremely offered me, which in
sooth is so great and grievous, and commenced by such personages, as I cannot
report the sum thereof without exceeding sorrow, which might much offend
your Highness. Wherefore, I pray you to bestow on me such a Knight, on whose
good Fortune I may live in some hope of ease, and I will bring him into the
place where he may atchieue such rare Renown, as in all his life time he can
never attain the like: to which words the Emperor replied thus.

Albeit in such perilous affairs, it is not necessary to send a Knight,
without I were first acquainted with the cause, yet such is the great and
exceeding pity, which I take, to see your grievous sighs and manifold
tears, as I must needs consent to your request: but it were a great discredit
to you, that in a man of such an Ancient and goodly time (as you are) there
should be found Forgerie or deceytfull dealing, which my good opinion will not
suffer me to judge so of you. And this Knight which you see standing by me, is
called the Prince Florian, of the Forest: albeit some name him the hardy
Knight of the Sauadgeman, he is my Nephew, and one in whom I put the greatest
trust, to give aid and succor in a matter of such importance, and I see he
prepares himself to forsake the Court, and to assist you with his Noble and
approved valor, in any cause that you shall have need to use him.

The Aged man, seeing the marvelous courtesy of the Emperor, fell down before
him on his knees, and after he had kissed his hand, spoke as follows. It is
not in vain I see well (most famous Emperor) that both young and old so
thunder your surpassing Bounty, for the occasion which my self receives at
this time, gives me good cause to think, that the uttermost I have heard in
your noble Commendation, has rather been sparing speech, then sufficient to
comprehend your Hero^call deserts, and I shall think my self the most
happiest alive, having seen that with mine Eye, which has been so often
bruted in mine Ear. The Knight of the Sauadge-man advanced himself to kiss
the Emperors hand, in satis^action of the honorable speech he used of him to
the Aged man, who was still so earnest in his suite, as the Prince Florian was
constrained to arm himself presently, and departed from the Court in such
great haste, as he had not the leisure to take leave of the Empress, and his
other Friends.

The Emperor fell into questioning with the Knights of his Court, if any of
them did know that Ancient man, in whose company his Nephew Florian was so
suddenly gone, but not one of them all could report of whence, or what he was.
Primaleon was very much offended, that the Emperor his Father would command
his Nephew Florian, to depart so soon with the aged man, not knowing first
into what place, or to what adventure he would conduct him: whereupon the very
same day, Berolde the Prince of Spain, Platir, Blandidon, Pompides, Gratian,
Polinard, Reccamon, Albanis, Don Resuel, and all the other most renowned
Knights of the Emperors Court, departed to follow the Prince Florian, for that
they feared least any evil should happen to him, under the guilefull dealings
of this Aged man.

When the Emperor saw his Court left desolate (in a manner) of the noble
Knights that was wont to keep his company, he found himself very grievously
perturbed in mind, fearing least some finister chance should happen to his
Nephewe Florian, who rode on still in the company of his Aged Guide, without
resting in any place, til the next day in the morning, when of necessity they
must stay to give refreshing to their Horses, and when they had suffered them
to feed indifferently, they mounted again on Horseback, and rested not all
that day likewise, till they were come within the sight of a fair Castle,
which stood on the top of a fair Rock, a Fortress very del^ctable in the
eyes of them that did behold it, at the foot whereof a goodly River had his
course, so deep and dangerous, as they that went unto the Castle, were
constrained to pass over in a very small Boat, wherein two men could hardly
pass at one time. The Aged man being very weary with ryding, and desirous to
have a little ease, alighted from his Horse, using his language in this manner
to the Prince Florian.

This is the danger (Sir Knight) wherein we must hazard our lives, if we be so
bold as to venture our selves both together in this little Boat: therefore I
pray you that you will alight, and you (for the more security) shall pass
over alone, then your Esquyre and I will come one after another, because we
will bring over with us the Horses. You reason well (answered the Prince Florian)
in respect of your Aged and unwieldy peers, as also in wishing me for my best
avail, therefore I intend to follow your counsel, for that I see necessity
compels us to do as you say. At these words he dismounted from his Horse,
and entered into the little Boat, commanding him that had the charge thereof,
to pass him over, but scantly had he attained the middle of the water, when
suddenly such a black and ougly cloud ouershadowed him, as the Aged man and
the Esquyre (being on land) had lost the sight of him, which when the Esquire
perceived, he was about to leap into the water to follow his Lord, but as he
was in this desperate intent, he espied a great Hill suddenly before him, which
would not suffer him to pass any further.

Upon this, he turned to go to the place where he left the aged man, but he
was so quickly rapt away and gone, as the Esquire could not possiby imagine
which way he had taken, then the Esquire began to judge, that the tears which
the Aged man shed in the presence of the Emperor, was to no other end, but
only shadow the treason which he wretchedly went about, so there he stood
musing a great while, and after he had canuased out a thousand imaginations* a
he concluded to search his Master about all those parts, and if it were not
his fortune to find him, he would then return to y^ Emperors court, to make
known the unfortunate loss of his Lord and Master, to the end that the
Princes (who were his Friends) might take upon them to inquire after him, for
such was the opinion of this loyal Esquyre, that the diligent search of a
great many Knights, might happily recover his Lord again.

The Noble Prince Florian of the Forest, had no sooner gotten the further side
of the River, but the Cloud conveyed away the Boat (wherein he passed) in
such sort, as he could by no means have a sight of it, whereupon, he began
to advance himself toward the Castle that stood upon the Rock, not fearing
any dangers that might happen to him: but because the Rock was high and
troublesome to climb, and the Armor he had on very weighty withal, he was
constrained to rest himself three or four times by the way, so that the Night
had chased away the gladsome Day, before he could arrive at the Castle.

When he came unto the Castle Gate, there came four very gallant Damozells
to receive him, and after they had caused many Torches to be alighted, they
showed themselves very dutiful to entertain him into the Castle: which
courteous offer the Prince would not seem to deny, for that the Beauty of
them did so much blind him, as he had no mind on the Dangers that might
suddenly happen, but he fed his Eyes with beholding them altogether, as one
that had his will free and out of Bonds, because he would never greatly hurt
himself with affecting Ladies. With these Damosells the Prince entered into
the Castle, the Court whereof was paued with fair and goodly Marble Stones,
and when they had passed through this Court, they came into a very great Hall,
which was builded with marvelous Artificial Antique work, at the Entraunes
whereof, the Prince was received by a Damsel, who had three more attending on
her, but she was of so great and huge stature as a Giant, albeeit she was
indeed a Woman, and not past sixteen years of Age, a very gentle and mild
natured person, who took the Prince Florian by the hand, and lead him with her
into an other fair Hall, which was hanged with Tapistry of inestimable value.

The Prince being come into the place where it pleased the Damsel to bring
him, he then took off his helmet, when his beauty seemed so acceptable in the
eyes of the Damsel, as at that very instant she gave her whole affection
unto him, yet was she somewhat abashed, that she should esteem so well of him,
whose dealings was not unknown to her, neither of whence or what he was: the
consideration whereof, turned her sudden good liking into as sudden hatred
and disdain, which she would gladly have dissembled, and therefore thus
began to parley with him.

Sir knight, my heart is at this time greatly supprised with sorrow, for a
grievous injury which is offered me, whereof I have good hope to be revenged, in
yt so courteously you vouchsafed to come into my Castle to succ^ur me,
wherefore I pray you that you will go rest your self for this night, because
your travail does require some ease, and to morrow morning I will recite the
cause, wherein you may do me very much pleasure.

Madame (answered the Knight of the Savage man) I imagine with my self, how
deeply I am indebted for this exceeding favor, and how much I am bound to him
that conducted me to this place, where I rejoice that it is my good fortune to
do you any service, which I account of so great honor, as were my life of
greater value then it is, I would hazard it in any extreme peril, which your
excellency did think well off to command me.

The Damsel (who was not accustomed to be entertained with such Courtly
language) presently returned him this reply. I thank you Sir for your friendly
offer, and I pray you that you would make a good Supper to night, that you may
in the better quietness of mind take your rest, and tomorrow morning we will
discourse of that, which I have occasion to use your aid in, and so for this
time I did you heartily good night, then she took her leave in such sweet and
gracious manner, as her secret intent of treason could be no way discerned.

The knight the Savage man remained greatly ^onten^ed, hoping to speed so well
in the favor of the Damsel, as further causes of friendship should arise
between them, it may be, he thought to speed so well with her, as he did of
the Damsel which the Hermit rebuked him for, but what have I to do with his
secret intent. The Prince is in his chamber, set down to supper, and there is
very worthily served by the Damsels, who gave him entertainment at the gate of
the castle, among them all, he thought best of her which waited of the Cup, for
that in sooth she was very well adorned with perfect beauty, which made him
forget his former affection to the Lady of the Castle, such (you may perceive)
was his constancy in love. Well (in brief) he began very queintly to devise
with this Damsel, and she likewise moved conceit with her companions, the
Prince glanced at her in amorous toying, and she iybed with him in double
construing, but Supper being ended, he was brought by these Damsels into his
bed Chamber, where (after he was in bed) she (who had been so famialiar with
him all his Supper time) came to him with these amiable speeches. Sir knight,
if the time and place were so commodious unto me, as it is not, you should well
perceive the good account I make of you, but seeing Fortune is so adverse to my
determination, and the burning Lamps of affection, must be quenched with a
deep and sorrowful sigh, I^pray you accept of this King, whereof I make no
small estimation, as an earnest penny of further good will.

So concluding, she left the King in his hand, and not attending the Princes
answer, she departed after the other Damosells, and he remained as well pleased
as could be, by the friendly language the Damsel had given him, for the love
of whom, he put the King on one of his fingers on his left hand, but
incontinent the Prince was so deprived of his power, and brought so far out
of course with himself, as he could not move or stir any part of him, for
there was a Stone in the King of such virtue, as he had no sooner put it on his
finger, but presently all natural feeling was taken from him. The Damoselles
were no sooner returned unto their Lady, who was named Arlencea, but presently
(bringing them in her company) she came into the chamber where the Prince
Florian lay, who was so maruailously enchanted, as he had no power at all to
discern them, then spoke she unto her Damsels in this manner. I see now my
friends, that our journey is not employed altogether in vain, and I judge that
my mother Colambia will now live in great contentment, having power to revenge
the death of her sons, Brocalon, Baleato, Calfurnien, and Camboldam, all my
Brethren, but as she pronounced these words, she cast her eyes upon the
Prince, and seeing how young and sweet his countenance was, she entered into
these terms. I am greatly abashed, in thinking how so noble and valiant force
should consist in a knight of so young years, and if all they had not the
power to overcome this one man, surely I must needs think good fortune was on
his side, this matter does move me to a doubtful opinion, and as it seems
to me, his visage is somewhat comfortable unto fortunes favorites, which makes
me repute him, as near allied to her by supernatural affinity, and I assure
you, I could very willingly remit the offenses he has done, if the death of
my brethren did not provoke me to seek sharp reuengement on him, who was the
death of so many good and hardy Knights. Thus, regard of her envy, and his
amiable personage, did move a secret contention within her, willingly she
would have saved him for his Knightly proportion, but the loss of her brethren
was so grievous unto her as all favorable pity did quite and clean forsake
her, so that she was presently minded to cut off his head, but as she was at
the very instant to do the deed, the aged man (who was sent to seek Florian,
and had brought him thither) arrived there before her, who knowing how to fit
her fancy, prevailed so much with her, as he changed her angry mood,
whereupon he began as thus.

You have no accasion (Madame) to fear that the knight will escape from you,
having brought him into such an extreme alteration, wherefore, I pray you to
change this sharp and severe humor, and reserve his life till you have brought
him unto your Mother, who will take pleasure in seeing him die, that has cut
off the flowers of her honorable lineage, and that we may deliver him the
sooner, I think it best that we do imbarque our selves, to go seek the
Island where she remains.

Albeit my mind was otherwise bent (answered Arlencea) yet will I not refuse
to follow your counsel, wherefore I desire you to go to morrow morning very
early to the Port, and there see provided for me a proper Ship, for I cannot
enjoy any quietness, in that I fear to loose this Knight again, So, breaking
off her mind, Arlencea and the Damsels left the Prince Florian in the
Chamber, brought into such unhappy subjection, as to suffer and endure the
sharp sentence of his enemies.

CHAP. XIII.
Here shall be discovered what and who the Damsel was, that thus had gotten
the Prince Florian, and of that which happened to him during the time of his
voyage.
REmembrance is made in this history, that Collambra had no sooner intelligence
of the death of the Giants Brocalon, and Baleato her Sons, whom the Prince
Florian of the Forest had slain, but she concluded to cover her grief, and
practice all the means she could devise, or that fortune would present onto
her, whereby she might be revenged on him that had done the^e mu^ders, for such
was the earnestness of her damnable and wicked mind, as the compassed a
thousand horrible inventions, but the immeasurable rage wherein she was
continually, would not suffer her to determine certainly of any thing.

Hereupon she came into an Island somewhat nearer, where she had good hope to
find succor and aid in her pre^ent purpose, by the means of an ancient
Knight named Alfarnao, who had been nourished long time by her husband, and
made his aboade within that Island, having very great knowledge in the act of
Nigromancy, and a man altogether brought up in subtle and crafty devises: he
hearing the continual complaints that Collambra made, was moved to take
compassion on her, so that he promised to help her in any thing he could
possible, to take reuengement on the knight of the Savage man, whom he knew
by his art to be in the Court of Constantinople, whereupon he came to
Collambra, using to her these speeches.

Madame, if so be it shall like you to follow my counsel, I dare promise to
make you forgo this extreme grief wherewith you are accompanied; whereto
Collambra thus replied. I would not have come to you from so far off, if I
had not persuaded my self on your assured friendship: for the good opinion I
conceived of you, did cause me to address my voyage hither, being altogether
minded to follow your friendly counsel. Since I perceive good Madame (said
Alfernao) that you repose so great assurance on my fidelity, you shall perceive
what a platform I have laid for you. It is so, that the knight of the Savage
man is at this present, in the Court of the Emperor of Greece his grandfather,
where he is grown so amorous in love, that he intends not to depart of a
long time from Constantinople: and he has made himself so aduenturous in
promise, (only for the love of his sweet Saint) as he will not forsake the
greatest danger, wherein any one shall have occasion to use him.

Upon this, I am determined to go to the Court where he now remains, and
there prostrating my self before the emperor in speeches very sad and
pitifully couched, beside, no tears shall want to grace the matter. I will
earnestly request of his Majesty, that it may be his pleasure to succor me in
affairs of great importance, whereout it is impossibly for me to escape, or
also help my self, whereout the aid of one of his best Knights, even he that
is esteemed the hardiest amongst them all, I will desire that I may have no
other but only him. This request I know he will not deny me, shaddowing my
intent with such behavior of virtue, as I can well enough, so that he will
present me his Nephew Florian, in that he is esteemed the most Noble and
valiant amongst you all: and having once gotten him, I will conduct him to a
Castle, which is upon the frontiers of Greeece and Hungary, where abides the
Lady Arlencea, your only Daughter: unto whom I w^ make known the horrible
shame which this Knight has done her, and that she ought to take sharp
vengeance on him, who has offered her so great and famous injury, for without
her aid, I shall not so easily execute the sum of my enterprise.

But you must not forget to deliver me your King, which has the power to
deprive the senses of any man, if once he put the ^ame upon his finger, and
this King will I cause one of the Damsels attendant on your daughter, to put
into the hands of this Knight, which he will presently put on his finger: and
then will not I fail to bring him to you, to receive such due reward as you
shall think your self sufficiently contented withal: Collambra ioyfvlly
returned this answer.

My dear friend Alfernao, I know well that the remedy of my passed trauells,
and the vengeance for my children, lies altogether in you: which if you
accomplish (as I know you can) I shall think my self for ever beholding to
you: and well you may persuade your self, that you do bestow your pains for
her, who will not show her self ungrateful toward you, but as I intend to
follow your advise, so will I compass some mean or other, that may declare my
thankfulness.

Then Collambra did presently prepare a Ship, wherein her Daughter was
embarked, accompanied with four Damosells and as many Knights, the Wind and
Sea serving them so well, as in few days they took Landing on a plain, not
far from the Castle, which the ancient Knight Alfernao had named to the
Damsel Arlencea, wherein he left her with her company, and took his way to
the Court of the Emperor of Greece, from whence (by the subtle means you
have heard before) he brought the Prince Florian of the Forest, whom he
delivered into the Castle, where this Arlencea the Damsel Giant made her
abode, and how he was used there, you have heard declared already. Now come
we to the place where we left, giving to understand, that the Ancient Knight
on the next morning had provided a Coatch, wherein (with as much speed as
could be) they poasted to a Port of the Sea, fearing least by the way, the
Knight of the Sauadge-man would be known of some: but after Arlencea was
imbarqued with this good Knight, the Marryners hoysed their Sails, and having
a pleasant gale of wind, they committed themselves to the mercy of the Seas:
whereon we intend a while to leave them, and return to the Esquyre of the
Knight of the Sauadge-man, who fearing least the Ancient Knight would offer
some injury to his Lord and Master, failed not to take which way he judged
would bring him to Constantinople. He traveled all the first day, and Fortune
was so ungentle to him, as he could not meet any person to demand his way,
but on the next day as he passed overthwart a Forest, he perceived under a
tree Knight very richly Armed, having in his Shield (which was borne by his
Esquire) a golden Tiger in a field of Sinople: whereupon he presently rode to
the Esquyre, whom when he beheld, he knew that it was Syluian, and the Knight
before him, to be the Noble Palmerin of England: whose presence gave the
Esquire more assurance then he had before; nevertheless, with the tears
trickling down his cheeks, he began to the Prince after this manner.

My Lord, albeit the news I have to declare unto you, of my Brother and my
Master the Prince Florian, be not so agreeable to you as I would they were,
yet can I not but I must needs report them, being persuaded, that it is in you
to remedy this misfortune which is chanced to him. Then discoursed he whole
circumstance of the matter to the Prince Palmerin, who commanded the Esquyre,
to bring him presently to the place where his Lord passed the River, to go to
the Castle, which stood on the high Rock: he being very grievously
passionate, as well for the misfortune which had happened to his Brother, as
also breaking his voyage to Constantinople, to which place his earnest
affection called him.

Then he complained greatly on Fortune, who did apply her-selfe (as he
thought) to no other end, but only to break his determined purposes, in
daily presenting him with continual perils, wherewith he could by no means
escape without great loss of his blood and danger of his life: in these
grievous agonies he fellowed the Esquire, using as speedy diligence as might
be, least some should offer his brother discourtesie, and they arrived at the
Castle on the next day about the evening tide, when the Esquire showed the
Prince the River which he could not pass, speaking to him in this sort.

You may now (my Lord) behold the dangerous passage, where I lost the knight of
the Savage man my noble Master: to which words the Prince made this answer.
Cursed may they be, that were the first inuenters of these cruel
enchauntments, the extremity whereof, has been the overthrow of many a good
and hardy Knight, and has made wretches and ^owards to triumph in their
misfortune.

Then came they down to the river, where the Prince Palmerin and the Esquire
could not find any Beat for prssage, nor yet the man that had conuyed the
Prince over, by reason whereof, they went along by the Rivers side, till they
came to a place where the water parted in twain, and an entrance there was
into a little Isle, whereto the Prince prepared himself to go, as he sounded
the depth of the Foord: but a Knight (who had covered his armor with the
Skin of a wild Beast, which he had slain) cried aloud to the Prince in this
manner.

Noble Palmerin, be not so hardy I desire you as to pass over for the water is
far more deep then it seems, and you may suddenly fall into unrecoverable
danger: which to prevent, I counsel you to go down a little further along by
the River side, and I will not fail to show you the place, where you may
goouer in most security.

Palmerin well noting the words of the Knight that spoke to him, presently
stayed his horse, and maruailing who this Knight should be, at last he knew him
to be his brother the Sage Aliart, whereupon he came to his brother Florians
Esquire, and commanded him to go to Constantinople, and stay there, for that
his presence did hinder him, when he was disposed to confer with Siluian
about the fair Polinarda, and he told him, that he should sooner hear
tidings of his Master at the Court, then in any other place.

The Esquier would have gladly kept the Prince Palmerin company, but he would
in no wise suffer him, but commanded him to go to those places, where he
might soonest have understanding of his Lord, and so the Prince departed from
him, when, in small time he came to a place of the river, which was more broad
and less deep, then the knight ^ried again unto him, that he might there
venture hardly, because it was the surest place of passage.

The Prince stayed not, but on the assurance he had in the Knights word, he
entered the River, which was not so deep, but they passed over very easily, the
rigor of the water having not the power to hurt the Prince, so they recovered
the other side safe and soundly, which the Knight perceiving, he came and
offered himself to take the Princess horse, but he would not suffer him, then
he alighting, came and embraced the Knight with these words.

What should I think my Lord and Brother, that you so friendly come to succor
me in my greatest need? certainly I may assure my self, that Florian my
Brother, shall be delivered from his present danger, by your means, which is
of so great authority, and furnished with so high and singular knowledge. My
gracious Lord (answered the Sage Aliart) is it your custom, not to make any
account of any mischance that may happen, because you imagine that your
knightly prowess is able to advantage you in every attempt, but I pray you at
this time to forsake such opinion of your self, and be persuaded, that Florian
your brother is in great danger of loosing his life, for which I am very
heartily sorry, in that Fortune would not suffer me to find him in this place.
But so it is (as I have gained the knowledge by perusing my Books) that a
Knight did cause him to forsake the Emperors Court, to bring him hither to this
Castle, rendering him into the hands of a Damsel Giant, the Daughter of
Collambra, who is mother to the Giants, Calfurnien, Camboldam, Brocalon, and
Baleato, whom you and your brother Florian have slain.

It seems to me (said the Prince Palmerin) that we should forsake this Castle,
and prepare our selves toward the Profound Isle, to embarque our selves, to
try if Fortune will so much favor us, as to permit us his recovery: but I
fear me some misfortune is come to him already, the fear whereof confounds
me in extreme grief: whereto the Sage Aliart thus replied.

My Lord, it is not necessary that we should go trifle the time in the
Profound Isle, for if Florian be lost, this will be the greatest hazard that
can come unto us, wherefore I think it most convenient, that you do your
endeavor to seek him forth, not sparing day and night to travail: and I will
take my course another way, wherein I will use such diligence, as I will
adventure my life for him.

I believe well (answered the Prince) that you will not spare any advice, which
may in any thing profit my Brother, and therefore I am determined to follow
your counsel: whereupon they rid away very speedily, until they came where
two sundry ways caused them to part from one another, when they ceased not to
travel earnestly, for that the loss of the Prince Florian was so grievous to
them.

CHAP. XIII.
Of that which happened to the knight of the Tiger, following the search of the
Prince Florian of the Forest his brother.
PAlmerin and the Sage Aliart, having taken their farewell one of another, rode
on which way Fortune conducted them, the Prince himself travailed all that
night, for the desire he had to help his brother would not suffer him to take
any rest, but this horse began to waxt very strackt and feeble, by reason of
his exceeding great labor, so that the Prince was constrained to use this
speech to Siluian.

Thou see well (my trusty friend and servant) that Fortune has set her self
directly against me, yet if I should give over my present enterprise, I should
blemish my credit with perpetual infamy: therefore I intend to take the
horse whereon thou ridest, and send thee away with mine (for that he is not
able to hold out long,) unto the nearest Port of the Sea thou can find,
where thou may take shipping to the Profound Isle, which in times past
belonged to the giant Brauorant, who was the Father to the Giant Calfurnien,
and there will I not fail to send and advertise thee, of the whole estate of
my journey, if the time do not afford me contrary success. But if my travail
fall out so unfortunate, as my news shall seem grievous and irksome to thee,
then I desire thee to go to Constantinople, and give my Lady and Mistress
Polinarda to understand, that I cannot make any account of my self, loosing
the lamp and loadstone of my life, for, in that I am deprived of the same, I
must needs knit up and conclude my travails.

Moreover, thou shall assure her, that the sum of my felicity, consists in
no other thing, then in the remembrance of her gatious self, and contentment
I did always receive, in thinking how long I have lived in languishing for her
love, which was so deeply imprinted in my soul, as I was able to put to
flight all those fears, which the earnestnes of my desire, with the compass
of the time did present unto me.

But now that death has deprived me of the mean, whereby my life was always
sustained, I have no other remedy, whereby to comfort my afflicted heart, but
only the contentment I receive in my passions, having in remembrance that
sweet she, for whose sake I live to suffer. And if it come so to pass, as the
hurtful Plannets be displaced, and I remembered in the acceptable opinion of my
Lady, I shall commit to forgetfulness all the angry storms, which hitherto
has (even) weather beaten my fainting spirit, and given course to a thousand
calamities to fall upon me: for I assure thee, that no accident whatsoever can
have power to endamage me, so long as my very souleis set at work, to
contemplate the rare singularities wherewith her divine spirit is associated.

Then if these spirits are resecued to join together in familiarity, mine
shall not a little triumph, being thought wr^thy to offer service to her, whom,
who so takes occasion to behold, shall find his wits superficially
metamorphised. But it is so, that attending this long expected honor of
felicity, I know not how it can be possible for me to live, being absent from
her heavenly presence. For when I remember how in times past, I have often used
to behold her delicate Face, now (being fo far from that happy mean) my
grief increases so abundantly, as me thinks Death did me a good pleasuce,
if he would bring me forth of the Laborinth of my restless desires. Therefore
I desire thee Siluian, to present her my unspotted faith, and assure her of my
firm and steadfast loyalty, which considered in truth, will moon her to
pity my ceaselesse travails, which for none alive (but only her) I endure:
yea, and endure it with such extreamitie, as is beyond the judgment of any to
perceive. And because the danger is so doubtful which I now have enterprised,
as neither have I any assurance to trust unto, or hope to return from such a
troublesome adventure, I desire thee to be as faithful a servant to my Lady,
as thou have been to him that loved her so dearly, for in so doing, thou may
happen upon a more honorable recompense, then either I, or my uttermost power
can give thee: which (coming so to pass,) will not a little content me, in
that he which has proved so loyal and just of faith, ought not to be
respected with such an uncertain reward, as to be left the inheritour of my
tea^es and torments, in satisfaction of so honest and trusty service. And I
cannot think, but when my Lady Polinarda shall consider the honorable
obeisance, wherewith I have daily and hourly regarded her, and thy unfeigned
service to him, who has thought so well on her, she will show her self
gracious and respective to thee, as well to witness her own princely nature,
as also in remembering thy virtuous and loyal deserts. But if thy angry Stars
do so much repine at thy happy welfare, as she seems dainty in the knowledge
of thee: good Siluian let it not seem strange to thee, in that thou bear a
part with thy Master in misfortune, for she never favoring me, must of
necessity frown on thee^ and this unkind dealing may move thee thus to
judge, that she is wedded in affection to some other, who must join that happy
content, which I deserved to have by my unhappy travails.

Thus breaking off his dolorous complaints, he remained so grievously afflicted
in his spirit, as the tears which abundantly trickled down his cheeks,
rendered a certain testimony of his troubled heart, which he being willing to
dissemble (lest Siluian should perceive it) he gave his horse the spurs, and
without any more words departed thence, leaving Siluian so mightily overcome
with heaviness, as he was constrained to the earth: but when he had somewhat
pacified himself, he mounted on his Masters horse, which he doubted would not
bring him to the Profound Isle, because he had been so sore travailed already
by his Lord and Master.

This good Esquire riding on very sad and pensiuely, at last spyed two Knights,
whom he knew by their devices in their Sheelds and their Armor, to be the
Princes, Berold, and Platir to them he called, and desired that it might please
them to stay a little: whereupon, the Knight (who knew him presently) stayed,
being abashed to see him so badly horsed, but when they perceived the tears
run down his cheeks, then they began to doubt some further harm, which made
them demand of him for his master, as also what happened to him, to be in that
case.

My Lords (answered Siluian) I know well how to resolve you to your demand,
though the report be not so agreeable to you as I could wish: then he
discovered to them the misfortune of the Prince Florian, and how his Lord was
ridden after him, to give him succor. But the adventure is so dangerdus (said
Siluian) wherein my Lord must assist his brother, as his life will stand to
extreme hazard, before he can help him according as he would: and beside, it
is doubtful he shall come too late, because his horse will hardly hold out: to
which words Platir thus replied.

Siluian your Lord is so fortunate, and has finished such rare and incredible
adventures, as I will not be persuaded, but that he will deliver out of danger
his brother, the hardy Florian of the Forest: and therefore content thy self,
for he which had the power to end such noble exploits as he has done, I am
sure cannot fail this present occasion. But for the departure of the Prince
Florian, trust me, it did not a little offend me, and being now by you
advertised, that (without present aid) he is in danger to be lost, both I and
my companion will not fail to follow him, because it were against reason to
loose so good a Knight: and go you to the place (which you tell us) the Prince
Palmerin has commanded you, and there shall you likewise hear tidings of us,
so soon as we shall possibly have the commodity to send to you.

The Prince Platir upon these words took his leave of Siluian, when he and his
companion rid away very hastily, where (to the success of their journey) we
will leave them, remembering we forget the knight of the Tiger, who (after he
departed from Siluian) made such dispatch of way, as at length he came to a
little Village by the Seacoast, where he entered a Venetian Gally, to pass by
Sea to the Island of Collambra, which was very much famed abroad, by reason of
the Giant which possessed the same: assuring you, that no Vessel whatsoever
might take landing there, during the time these Giants lived, because their
cruelty was so insupportable, to them which durst arrive in that Isle. When
this Galley came near unto the Island, they were constrained to row close to
the shore, because the wind was so sore upon them, as for two days they were
greatly hindered, and on the third day likewise the wind arose so extreme and
violent, as the Mariners judged, in the midst of winter it could (...) be
more rigorous: so that they were driven into a certain place, where diverse
other Ships (being glad to avoid that troublesome tempest) had taken Anchor, in
one of these Ships was the Sage Aliart, being very sore passionate, least some
misfortune should happen to Florian of the Forest his Brother. Nevertheless
he received some comfort in beholding the other vessels, hoping that fortune
might be so favorable to them, albeit the wind were so contrary to their
Navigations, they might yet happen upon some coast or other, as might happily
bring them together to the Island of Collambra.

The knight of the Tiger understanding that the Sage Aliart was there, and also
being acquainted with his advise, received great contentation in his mind, and
because the tempest endured all that day, he left the Galley, contenting the
Master thereof for his pains, and came into one of those ships which were in
the Haven: but he would not go into that Vessel where the Sage Aliart was,
for that he doubted least their being together, would be a hinderance to their
several determinations, which while he was considering how far different
they were, the Princes, Berolde and Platir, likewise arrived there, entending
to bear Palmerin and the Sage Aliart company in their voyage. But when they
understood, how the Prince Palmerin desired to travail without their company,
they embarked themselves with the Sage Aliart, and setting forth of the haven
together, they kept company with the sight of one another, until the dark
night did separate them asunder: for the wind rising again, kept them (in
short time) so far aloof the one from the other, as they had clean lost the
fight of any land, yet they sailed on courageously, not dreading the fury of
any wind nor rough billows of the water, to the mercy whereof we intend to
commit them.

The course of our History wills us now to return to the redoubted Knight of
the Savage man, who was conducted to Collambra, in the order as I have told you
before, by the commandment of Ailencea, the Damsel Giant, who sailed with
such a speedy pace on the Sea, as her pleasure was greater then I can speak
of, for that she had in her custody the Knight of the Savage man, with whom
she (and those that bare her company) in four days, and sour nights (being
so favored of the wind and weather) came within the sight of the Island,
where the proud Giantesse Colambra made her residence: into whose hands,
Fortune would not suffer to fall the Knight of the Savage man, but raised
suddenly such a mighty tempest, as they were all in doubt to be cast away, and
in little more then an hour, they were cast so far from the Island, as the
Pilot could not judge into what country the wind had driven them, by reason
whereof, both he and the Mariners remained so far out of quietness, as they
could not tell to what Saint they should commend themselves for present succor.

When Arleneea perceived this sudden alteration, she was likewise so inwardly
vexed, as she wished that she had never seen the Prince Florian, for she had
none in her company that could promise her any aid, except it were Alfernao,
and he was so worn with age, as he could less help then any of the other:
then she began to encourage the Pilot to defend her in causing the mariners
to make expedition, but al was in vain, for their hearts did so faint, and
their stomachs so failed them (seeing so great danger and trouble toward
them) as the aid which they should have given to remedy this doubtful
trouble, was not of any account at all, and their understanding did forsake
them so amazedly, as they knew no way to help the perils extant before their
eyes.

Alfernao seeing the Mariners so out of heart, came to Arlencea with these
words. Madame, I desire you not to abash your self, for in the assurance of
your excellency consists all our lives: and for this misfortune which has
come upon us, it happens to them customably which frequent the seas, and though
now you see the waters so rough and impatient, in a moment you shall see them
calm enough again. Wherefore, I pray you come forth of your Chamber, to the
end the Pilot and the Mariners may behold you, for I am persuaded that in
seeing you, they will receive a fresh encouragement.

In this order as I tell ye, Alfernao did endeavor himself by friendly
counsel (as much as in him lay) to cause her forget this fearful motion, and
Arlencea (at the request of Alfernao) came presently out of her Chamber: but
when she beheld y^ furiousness of the water, sometime listing the Ship up, as
it were to heaven, and then throwing it down again to the depth of hell, the
water likewise beating in abundantly, her heart would not serve her, to keep
the Mariners any longer company, but she went in again to her Chamber, so full
of despair and fearful frightings, as (being not able to sustain her self)
she laid her down upon a pillow between two of her Damsels, when, weeping
very bitterly, she entered into these speeches.

I see well Alfernao, the small recompense they shall receive, which enterprise
such deeds as are dishonorable and far from duty, and I believe certainly,
that the Divine powers are determined to punish us, for the great injury and
disloyalty we offer, in seeking the death of this good and hardy knight, who
slew my brethren one after another in plain fight, not offering or taking any
advantage of them: which hautie derds, albeit I cannot let them pass without
great marvel, yet do they make me verily think, that he fought in a good and
a lawful cause, in that he despised the exceeding cruelty and tyranny,
wherein my proud and presumptuous brethren lived, which disorder of life, being
rightly chastised by the prowess of this Knight, we set our selves against all
reasonable regard (in my judgment) to practice his death for well doing. And
we being forgetful to sift the justness of the cause, go about to deprive
this good Knight of his life, in the revenge of whose innocence, the wrathful
anger of the Heavens is fallen upon us: wherefore, to avoid and fly the
extremity betime, least we fall into a worse inconvenience, I am resolved to
change my angry mood, thinking it better to take the Ring from him, which
caused him to sleep so soundly, then thus to abide the sharp countenance of
the wreakefull powers, whom (whether I will or no) I must obey.

Arlencea having spoken what pleased her, commanded the Chamber door to be
opened, where the knight of the Sauadge-man lay, and when she had taken the
Ring from him, he was in as good estate as he was before, yet not without
great marvel in himself, when he perceived he was in a ship on the Sea, and
so compassed about with fair Damosells, who wept very grievously, to see
themselves in so great danger. The Prince in this amazement, came forth of
his Chamber, when he saw how the furious waves of the Water did toss and
turmoyle their Bark, and how the Pilot, the Mariners, and every one in the
Ship, their hearts were dead, because ^hey knew no way how to help themselves:
Whereupon he began with noble words to cheer and encourage them, but the
extreme fear they had generally conceived, caused them to make small
estimation of his words.

Then was he more and more abashed, but especially to see himself in such a
place, where it was the least part of his thought to have come, and how he
came so Embarked from the Castle, where the Damosells came and entertained him
so exceeding friendly at the Gate thereof. This strange aduenturs made him
oftentimes desirous to demund how and after what sort he chanced thither, but
the danger which he saw imminent before his eyes, would not afford him so
much leisure, but compelled him to settle his thoughts on that which was more
necessary. The Mariners by the often int^eaty, and friendly behavior of the
Prince, began somewhat to comfort themselves, which when as he beheld, he went
into the Chamber to Arlencea, where sitting down by her, he began his
speeches after this order.

Madame, I would I might entreat you to forsake those fearful passions, and
to regard him who esteems marvelous well of your divine Beauty, the
tempest begins by little and little to loose his force, and therefore let my
persuasion somewhat appease you, for these tears wherewith you offend your
gracious countenance, is as grievous for me to behold, as it is bootlesse for
you so much to hurt your self.

Arlencea hearing the courteous language of the Prince, and noting withal his
seemly countenance, rejoiced that she had so spared his life at the entreaty
of Alfernao, and the malicious revenge which she sought before, was now changed
again into good opinion of Love, whereat the Knight of the Sauadge-man was
very well pleased, but Alfernao remained most grievously passionate, knowing
well that his enterprise could come to no good end.

The Night being spent, at the break of day the tempest calmed, when the
Pilote gave them to understand, that they were arrived on the Coast of Spain,
which words displeased Alfernao in the hearing, and while he sat uttering
silent complaints to himself, the Pilote discovered the City of Malaga,
which then was held and kept by the Turks: then the Prince took Arlencea by
the hand, and led her forth on the hatches to show her the land, when causing
her to sit down, he desired her that she would report unto him, after what
manner he was brought into the Ship, wherein he had slept so long, without
knowledge of himself.

Worthy Sir (answered Arlencea) so that it shall please you to let all former
angry occasions pass, and pardon what I say in your Knightly courtesy, you
shall be resolved in your earnest desire, and therewith assuring you, that Love
has brought me into such estate, and has moved such a forcible affection in
me toward you, so as I will not conceal any jot of the truth from you.
Then she recounted at large the whole enterprise of Collambra, and the aged
Knight Alfernao, whose treason did so astonish the Prince, as he brake forth
into these speeches.

Madame, the desire wherewith I came to do you service, did not deserve the
unkind dealing wherewith you have used me, but since it is so, that my
travail has been employed in vain, I desire you to afford me so much
favor, as to report the guile whereby Alfarnao brought me hither, who I know
was persuaded to commit me to the cruelty of your Mother, which should be so
great toward me, as nothing would content her but my death. And let it not
offend you, that I go into my chamber to arm my self, because I will compel
all these in your company under my obeisance: and this you may persuade your
self, that I will not forget your gentleness in any travail whatsoever, but
will maintain your excellency, being so bound by your good deserts, whereto
Arlencea thus replied.

My Lord, I desire you to consider, that your singular courtesy joined with
the unfeigned good will I bear you, caused me to discover this damnable
treason intended against you, which I thought too unkind for him, to whom I
could find in my heart to submit my self: in recompense whereof, I desire you
would remember, that I shall not only loose the presence of Collambra my
Mother, and likewise my patrimony, but also I shall receive such a common
brute of ill report, as every one will wound me with malicious speech, in
yielding my self into your hands, who have so cruelly slain my Brethren.

Madame (answered Florian) I pray you forget the remembrance of loosing your
Mothers favor, or any other such opinion, in regard of the good may happen to
you, for if Fortune favor me no worse then she has done, I will not fail to
make a double requit all of your kindness: and that you may repose the better
assurance on my words, I here protest my self at your commandment.

In the mean time, while Florian spent the time in this talk, he understood
how they in the Ship went about some enterprise against him, by means
whereof he left Arlencea, but she followed him into his Chamber to help to
arm him, and ere he had girded himself in his Mayle coat, Alfernao, with
four other in his company, came to the Chamber door to lay hands on him, but
they missed of their purpose, for Florian coming to them, by maine strength
thrust them forth of the Chamber, with these words. The time is now come
Alfernao, wherein thy traitorous dealings shall be worthily recompensed.

Then lifting up his sword to have smitten him, the other five stepped before
and defended him, wherewith the Prince was so much moved, and he besturd
himself so among them, as two of them quickly tumbled at his feet, the other
two seeing that, and knowing the small pity Florian would show them, took
heart afresh, and came to the Prince, assailing him courageously, but he laying
before them the treason of old Alfernao, gave them such cruel and terrible
strokes, as he cut off the arm of one of them hard by the shoulder, and the
fourth (for fear) was glad to leap into the Sea.

Then Alfernao seeing his life brought into so great danger, came and humbled
himself before Arlencea, in this manner. Madame, if the unfeigned love I have
always used, in doing service to your mother and your self, deserves any
gracious respect, then is it necessary that you afford it me, and if that
loyalty ought to be recompensed as it has worthily merited, then I desire you
to entreat for me the favor of this Knight, for your word (I know) may
prevail so much with him, as his anger will be pacified, and my life saved.

The Damsel Giant was so amazed at the noble prowess of the Prince, as she
knew not how to address her self to him to move intreatance, but being (as
it were) in a quandarie, had not power to answer Alfernao, nor yet to fulfill
what he had requested: neither would Florian deal extremely wish him, seeing
him on his knees before Arlencea, for whose sake he thus began.

Trust me, Madame, Alfernao had good Fortune to render himself to you, for
that you have the power to preserve his life, contrary to his deserts, if I
should go to the uttermost. Arlencea did maruellously esteem the great
humanity, which the Prince used to Alfernao, who (at her commandment) was
put in sure guard, fearing least he should practice any more treason, and the
Prince began to esteem very well of Arlencea (according as her honest and
virtuous nature deserved) as well for the laudable bounty of her gentle mind,
as also for using him so kindly as she had done: but albeit he was subject to
voluptuous pleasure, yet beholding the chaste regard this Damsel had of her
self, she bridled her affection, and determined to bestow her as wife on his
great friend the Giant ant Dramusiande, for he judged it the part of a friend,
to wish such an one to his friend, as he knew to be acquainted with virtue and
chastity, and to subdue that wicked desire in himself, which should move him
to violate his faith to his friend.

And for the Damsel her self, albeit she preferred the noble behavior of
the Knight of the Savage man, worthy the uttermost strain of her ability, yet
had she an especial regard of her honor, knowing it to be the chiefest
ornament to make her esteemed of: and therefore she behaved her self
discreetely and wisely, gayning the good commendation of all that knew her as
the History hereafter will declare unto you.

CHAP. XV.
Of that which happened to the Knight of the Savage man, after he was come on
land.
WHeu the Noble Prince Florian, had thus vanquished Alfernao, and his
companions, being so near the shore, he determined to go on land, whereupon
he commanded the Pilote to draw to the shore, which he presently did, landing
them in a haven belonging to Recinde the King of Spain, where they rested
themselves certain days, because Arlencea and her Damsels were somewhat
sickly with their trauile, and Alfernao desired the knight of the Savage man,
that he would give him leave to return into his own country, seeing he was
arrived in a place of assurance, and where he little needed to fear any
danger: to which demand the Prince shaped this answer.

I am well assured Alfernao, that the Court of Constantinople is greatly
troubled by your means, therefore I intend you shall depart no whither else,
before you have sworn to me to go to the Emperor again, to let him
understand what has happened to me, from the time that your false tears made
me forsake the Court, even until the infrant that we came hither, which you
may do well enough, without any fear of punishment that the Emperor will lay
on you, because his clemency is far greater then thy evil deserts, which in
sooth shall never be laid to thy charge, in respect of the great good will I
bear to Madame Arlencea, whose friendly pity has deeply bound me, in
delivering me out of the peril, wherein your malice has craftily caught me,
even as you may at large declare unto the Emperor.

My Lord (said Alfernao) libertio is so highly esteemed, and so greatly desired
by them who are well acquainted with it, as sometimes the desire to recouerit,
by him that was so wilful to forgo it, makes him for to put his life in great
ieopardie: then, seeing himself brought into such mishappe, that he comes in
such sort to repen thimselfe, as he wishes rather continual servitude, then
to have liberty once, and then to loose it.

In this order it fares with me at this time, who being desirous to live out
of thraldom, am content to obey your noble commandment, yet not without fear
of some inconvenience: but such is the hope I have in the Emperors bounty, as
I trust to be pardoned for the heinous offense, wherein I have displeased his
imperial Majesty, then coming to Arlencea, he said.

Madame, bethink your self in what it shall please you to command me to your
mother, if so be it fall out, y^ I happen to the place where she is, to which
words Arlencea replied thus. You may give her to understand from me, that I
think it necessary she become friends with the Knight of the Savage man, if
she desire that I should remain her obedient daughter, and I request that she
would forget the death of my Brethren, in that seeking to revenge their loss,
she cannot otherwise do but cut off her daughters life: and this you may very
well assure her, that if she refuse to grant my request, she shall from
henceforth never more see me, for I have yielded my self to obey the
commandment of the Knight of the Savage man, who does me such honor, as I
esteem the greatest good fortune that ever could come to me, in conducting me
to the Emperors Court, where I shall be acquainted with the gracious behavior
of diverse noble and virtuous Princes, and likewise I shall learn to amend my
uncivil conditions, seeing the rare qualities used in that renowned Court.

Madame (answered the Knight of the Savage man) to see you in this good and
virtuous mind, I cannot choose but conceive great contentment, and when it
shall be my fortune to come to the Court, you shall perceive how well I think
of you in the mean time, to render you some assurance of that which I say, I
pray thee Alfarnao, report to the Emperor, in what good mind thru did
leave the Lady Arlencea, and that I humbly request his Majesty, that she may
lawfully receive Baptism, to the end, that the Empress may bestow such a
Lordly care on her, as her virtuous qurlities does well deserve.

Alfernao promised to fulfill his whole commandment, and so he took his leave
of them, not able to endure the sight of the amiable courtesy, which Arlencea
used to the knight of the Savage man, who soiourned there a pretty space, while
he had provided him of necessary things for travail, because he intented to
ride about the country there, to show the estate thereon to Arlencea, and her
Damsels.

When all things were in readiness, he set forward with his fair company, and
the first day, somewhat toward the evening, they arrived within a fair and
goodly valley, well furnished with Trees, where, coming near to a pleasant
Fountain, they espied where two several Tents were pitched, and not far
from them, they beheld four Damoselles walking for their recreation under the
green trees, to shroud themselves from the parching heat of the Sun: upon
which occasion, Arlencea thus spoke to the Prince.

If I judge (amiss good Sir) these Damsels I conjecture receine far greater
pleasure then I, in that they are free to their contentation, and I have put my
liberty into his hands, who makes but small account thereof. The prince made
show as though he understood not what Arlencea said, wherefore to change her
present fantasy, which proceeded of the entire love she bare to him, in other
familiar talk he passed away the time until they came somewhat near to the
Tents, which were as rich and fair as could be devised: and while Florian
stood still taking pleasure to behold them, a Damsel came and used this
conference with him.

Me thinks it is a thing very strange (Sir Knight) that one man should take
upon him to conduct five Damoselles, in that it cannot choose but be a very
great charge, whereof I will something ease you, if so be it shall like you to
follow my counsel, which shall not be to your disadvantage: whereto the prince
thus answered.

Albeit I cannot think ill of your courteous speeches, wherewith you kindly
come to salute me, yet shall you not persuade me to any thing, except it be
accompanied with virtue and honesty: therefore I desire you to satissfie me
of your opinion, which standing with reason, I shall not fail to follow, as
one that would not willingly disobey any good counsel. I am content (said the
Damsel) to an were your demand, wherefore you shall understand, that we are
four Damolles, and are guarded here by four knights, who will not be long
before they come hither, with whom (if you please, you may try the I oust, and
which of them shall hap to be vanquished, must of necessity deliver you his
Lady, and you must be content to do the like, if Fortune deny you the favor
of victory: but if she respect you with her friendly eye, and allow you for
her happy conqueror, all we four shall be delivered to you, which cannot be
greater hinderance unto you, in conducting nine ladies, then these five. On the
other side, if Fortune throw you in discountenance, and commit you to our
knights as vanquished, four of these Ladies must be taken from you, but the
fifth you shall be suffered to enjoy still: thus you see the I oust cannot be
any way disagreeable to you, for which way so ever it happens, you cannot lack
both pleasure and profit.

Gentlewoman (answered the Knight of the Savage man) you seem so well
acquainted with gentle behauior, as to gain you, I will ieopard the adventure
to loose my self: and I promise you I think the time too long, until I have
made a conquest of you: whereto the Damsel made this answer. I pray you sir,
do not think you shall purchase us so lightly, in that the desire you have to
defend those Ladies which you conduct, will hardly permit you to speed so
soon, such hardy valor you shall find in those Knights, which have attempted
to defend us.

The Damsel had no sooner ended her words, but a Dwarf (being near at hand
underneath a tree) began to sound a trumpet, which he did with so high a note,
as it brought a gallant Echo from the whole valley: then the Prince looking
aside, espied four knights come prauncing along the valley, armed in white and
green Armor, their helmets very richly gilded, and upon them they had fair
garlands of flowers, and in their Shields (which their Esquires brought after
them) was portraited silver Swannes in a field of Sinoble. When they were come
to the place, where the Damsel talked with the Prince, she rehearsed unto
them what communication had passed: whereupon one of them thus answered her.

Madame, so it may be your pleasure, I will not fear to adventure any danger,
but I would be loath to be so unhappy as to loose you, without I might expect
greater profit to happen for I would more willingly be deprived of my life,
then to abide such a hard and irksome extremity, as to be forced to commit you
into the custody of another, being more desirous to keep you my self.

Trust me sir (answered the Damsel) if you seek thus to excuse your self
with words, that you would not wlllingly endure the Ioust, then will you prove
me false in my words to the Knight, to whom the Ladies (which bear him
company) are greatly beholding, in seeing him to adventure the trial so
worthily himself, against us that have each one a knight to defend her. Madame
(said the knight) this Gentleman esteems it a great trouble to him, to be
burdened with so many Ladies, and therefore he would willingly be vanquished,
to the and he might be discharged of them: so, in seeking to shun small
occasions of harm, he steppeth into a maze of greater danger: whereto the
Prince gave this answer.

Truly sir, you are very far from my meaning, and so far as I give you to
understand, as I do not only entend to guard these Damsels which are in my
compnny, but that which is more, I will disburden you of those four Ladies
which you presume to defend, and carry them away with me. And if you do not
manfully behave your self on their behalf, truly I shall be much displeased
with you, for I am wont to make no account of the victory, except I may
atchieue it with great loss of my blood. Well then sir (answered the knight)
seeing you desire to make your valor seen to these Ladies, prepare your self
to entertaiue me: with which words he clapped down the Beuer of his Helmet, and
having couched his Lance, he fetched his course against the knight of the Savage
man, who welcomed him very bravely: and albeit the knight brak his lance
worthily, yet such was the rough charge the Prince gave him, as he was
constrained to measure his length on the earth, being so greatly amazed with
his fall, as he lay a good space without moving himself, in the mean while,
the knight of the Savage man came to the Damsel, with whom he had talked
before, speaking to her in this manner. I perceive Madame, his Knight is not
able to keep her, whom he has enterprised to defend, wherefore I pray you
discharge your self of the promise, which you said I should enjoy, by reason
of your custom here appointed: to which words the Damsel framed this reply.
You have done your dnty so well, and like an approved knight at Arms, as I
might be worthily apprehended of ingratitude, if I should withhold that from
you, which you have so well descrusd: therefore since the lot has first fallen
on me, whom this knight did enterprise to defend, I submit my self to you,
desiring you, that you would entertain me among these other Ladies, which
request I make in requital of his misfortune, who has thus unluckily lost me.

The Prince very favorably respected the Damsel, and would have made her
answer, but the second knight cried to him, that he should prepare himself,
whereupon they set the spurs to their horses, and encountered with such
valor, as the trunchions of their spears flew up gallantly into the air:
then coming again to their second trial, the Prince gave the knight such a
forcible stroke, as he threw him to the earth, with one of his legs broken.

The other two Knights, seeing the great dishonor their fellows had received,
and doubting they should speed no better themselves, they ran both together
against the Knight of the Savage man, and dealt very discourteously with him,
yet had they not the power to unhorse him, but so soon as he could gain the
opportunity (being loath to trust too much to their gentleness) he alighted
from his horse, and drawing his sword, he came to them with these words. Indeed
Gentleman, you have gotten the advantage of me now, in that you two so
dishonourably assail one only Knight: yet cannot all this discourage me in
purchasing the Ladies, whom I will have from you before I depart, or you shall
have the best blood in my helly: to which words, one of the Knights made him
this answer.

I cannot tell how things may fall out, but before you have these Ladies, you
shall buy them at our hands so dearly, as while you live you shall know the
price. And so they alighted from their horses, running very furiously on the
knight of the Savage man, who entertained them with such brave and ingenious
sleights of fight, as in short time one of the Knights (being not able to hold
out any longer) was constrained to fall at the Princess feet: which when the
other knight perceived, and saw his life was brought into such extremity, put
forth himself nobly to defend the strokes wherewith the knight of the Savage
man charged him, who doing his deuoire to bring him under his obeisance, the
knight (which began the ioust, and had sitten all this while in great anger)
seeing his fellows Maistred, by the prowess of the hardy Knight of the Savage
man, and the great danger wherein he was that endured the Combat, came with
his sword drawn to assist him.

The Prince seeing that, and how he which was ready to yield, took heart a
fresh by his fellows company, redoubled his strokes upon them, and said. I
would gladly that more succor would come and help this knight, to the end that
the victory which I shall obtain, might yield me the larger estimation of
renown: and that I might likewise make known to these Ladies, how their
beantie ought to be reserved for those Knights who are more virtuous, and can
better defend them. In brief, such was the prewesse of the Prince toward
them, as one of the Knights, (being very sore wounned) fell down to the earth,
the sight whereof so grieved the other, as he ran and fell down before the
Ladies, desiring them to shield him from the surie of the Prince, who smiling
to see the behavior of the knight, entered into these speeches.

Sir knight, you have taken up your Hostage in a place of good assurance,
otherwise, I would give thee such a recompense as thy malicious and difloyall
stomach deserves: then coming to the Ladies, he began in this order. Fair
Ladies, I desire that you would mount your selves upon your Palfrays, for I
would willingly be out of this place, lest the remembrance of the ill hap of
these Knights cause you to be forgetful of the honest promise, which you made
me before I began the Ioust.

In sooth worthy Sir (answered one of the Damsels) it is very hard to put out
our memory, their slender and unhappy fortune, that could not withstand the
force of one Knight, but because you have deserved so well, we submit our
selves most willingly to your worthy self to dispose of us as it shall seem
best in your judgment, humbly desiring, that virtue be not blemished by any
inordinate mean, which oftentimes happens to a Ladies great dishonor, being
too late to recover it again, when such an especial jewel is lost.

Ladies (answered the knight of the Savage man) I am not accustomed to use
discourtesie to any your sex, especially, not to them of whom I make account,
but such is my misfortune as when I have well deserved, my due recompense is
far enough from me. Then taking one of the horses of the vanquished Knights,
he rid away with the Ladies, leaving the knights in the Tents, to remember the
great loss they had sustained: being thus deprived of their gracious ladies,
who with their Esquires rid on merrily, rejoicing that they werein the Custody
of the noble and aduenterous knight of the Sauage-man.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the adventures, which chanced to the Knight of the Savage man, conducting
these Ladies to the King of Spaines Court: and of that which happened to the
Knight of the Tiger, in his voyage to the Profound Isle.
AFter the Knight of the Savage man, had left the Valley, where he vanquished
the four Knights, he determined to journey through the Realm of Spain, being
very glad that he was so worthily accompanied with Ladies, and intending to let
them understand, what estimation he made of their singular beauty, which indeed
was so pleasing in his eyes, as willingly he could have afforded them a point
of his courtesy: but for the Damsel Giant Arlencea, the regard he had of
her, and the promise wherein he had bound himself, beside caused him to
qualify his amorous humor, because his friend Dramusiande was of such account
with him, as made him he would not level at her so pleasant, as perhaps he
did at the other.

In their company he showed himself merry and iocond, so that at last he
took off his Helmette, and gave it to his Esquier, when, the Damoselles
beholding his fair usage, and how youthful and comely he was withal, they
severally fell into so good opinion of him (the dapper boy of the Goddess
Citherea, having somewhat touched them) as they repented the words they spoke,
when they first humbled themselves unto him.

The Prince behaved himself to all of them very graciously, because he would
not have malice to grow on either side, and to the Damsels he brought forth
of the Valley, he proceeded in earnest conference, to wit, of whence they were,
and wherefore they remained in the company of those Knights whom he had so
nobly vanquished: then on of the Damsels, with a very modest countenance
returned the Prince this answer.

Most worthy sir, to witness the regard we have of you, and the dutiful
affection wherewith we honor you, I will presume (on the behalf of all the
rest) to satisfy your present demand. You shall therefore understand, that
the first of these Damsels is named Armelia, the second Iulianda, the third
Sabelia, and my self am called Artisia, we being all of one City, not far
from the Valley called Arseda, wherein those four Knights (whereof two were
Brethren, and so were the other twain, yet being so allied together, as they
were all Couzins one to another) made their abode, being all desirons to do us
service, that they might thereby in time marry us.

And because we should not miss so great an honor as marriage is, by the
license of our Mother, we came oftentimes to recreate our selves by this
Fountain, which you perceived near the Tents where you found us, and there
would the Knights usually take delight, to feed our eyes with such pleasant
iestes deeds, as they could daily attempt in the Forest.

Moreover, that we might the better persuaded of their love, they would offer
the Ioust to any Knight that passed through the valley, summoning them thereto
by the Dwarffe which sounded the Trumpet, assuring you, that they were always
the Conquerours, until this time, which fortune made unhappy to them, by your
noble and valliant prowess.

Ladies (answered the Knight of the Savage man) it were great shame for me to
loose them, whom Fortune (by my happy victory) has delivered into my hands,
wherefore, I promise not to forsake you, until some other knight bring me into
such extremity, as I shall be destitue of power sufficient to defend you: but
I believe he will very bardly vanquish him, who submits himself so
earnestly to your direction. And thus much will I do for you beside, I will
conduct you to the King of Spaines Court, and bring you likewise to see the
Castle of the Giant Almaroll: afterward, if you shall find it so convenient
for you, to leave my company, I am content to let you depart at your own
pleasure.

All the Damoselles (upon this motion) desired him earnestly, that he would
bring them into those places which he had promised, for that it is the nature
of women, to desire to see novelties, and Arlencea, who was inflamed with the
selfsame desire, was as forward in moving the request as any of them, yet she
feared least the company of these other Damoselles, would alter the Princes
former determination to her, but she needed not to cast any such doubt, for
the Princes will was as resolute as she could wish it.

Thus they iourneyed on till night came upon them, when, they went to a Castle
near at hand, where they were all very friendly entertained, and the Prince
caused good attendance to be used to the Ladies: so hear we will leave him
and them together, and will (as our History wills us) proceed to tell you, how
the knight of the Tiger, the fifteen day after he was imbarqued, came within
the sight of the Profound Isle, which the Pilot knew very well, and so gave the
Prince Palmerin to understand, whom he set a shore in the most convenient
place he could find, committing him to God and good fortune.

The knight of the Tiger rode about to vifite the Profound Isle, which seemed
to him very pleasant and fertile: but the night suddenly hindering him, he was
constrained to alight at the foot of a mountain, where he suffered his horse
to refresh himself, and began to mourn, for lack of the company of his
approved friend Siluian, whose presence was agreeable to him, as well for the
remembrance that he was nourished with him, as also for the fweete and loving
counsel he would give him, when he was in extreme grief and heaviness,
because he knew best how comfort him.

Thus for want of his company, he was constrained to pass that night among the
green leaves, using his Helmet as a pillow under his head, and there he tossed
and tumbled very unquietly all night, until the clear morning had chased away
the uncomfortable darkness: then he arose, and mounting on horseback, rode
on very heavy and pensive, yet somewhat comforted by the pleasantness of the
Isle, which he judged more worthy to be peopled, then to ly wast and desolate.
About the evening tide, he came where was a little Island, which was compassed
about with very strong walls: into this Island he entered, and took up his
lodging in the house of an ancient Knight, who was accustomed to give
entertainment to such Knights, as bestowed their time in seeking aduentures-and
because he saw the Knight of the Tiger, without an Esquire attending on him, he
came and took his horse himself, and afterward he helped to unarm him, using
him with so great humanity as was possible.

The knight of the Tiger was glad of this friendly entertainment, and desired
to be informed by his Host, of the customs and manners of that Country: so,
when he was risen from Supper, and had reposed himself a little, he requested
his host to tell him, to whom ihat Island belonged, and what were the manners
and customs thereof, that he might report it in other places where he came: to
which demand, the ancient Knight his Host made this answer.

My Lord, you came now in good time to be resolved of that, which I perceive
you are ignorant in, for if it had been your fortune to come hither a little
sooner (being in your sweetest times of years) your life would have been in
very great danger, For you shall vnderstaud, that it is not long time since a
Giant named Brauorant the Cruel, was the Lord and possessor of this Island,
who delighted to set spies at all his Ports, to inform him when any Knights or
Damsels did arrive in this Island, and when any such happened to come, he
would use them extreme cruelly, the Knights he would deprive of their lives,
and the Damsels he would villanously force, and afterward send them away
stark naked, dispoyled of all their rich and costly clothing.

And for this purpose he kept a great company of vassayles, who did nothing
else but employ themselves in following his wicked humor, and when as any
Merchants (by fortune) came to cast Anchor into this Isle, his vassailes would
compel them, to ransom themselves with great extremity, before they would
suffer them to depart hence: but if they chanced to find fault with his
tyranny, and refused to pay their ransom, which they knew to be laid on them
without all right or reason, then would he murder them, or put them to some
villainous death or other. But the heavenly powers seeing the great oppression
and cruelty, which this bloody minded hel-hound continually used, and chiefly
toward them that never offended him, in their divine providence, they thought
good to cut off such a tyrant, and so it fortuned this Giant died, whose soul
I think was carried to the place, where his unnatural deeds deserved to have
recompense, for that he could employ his life no better. He thus dying, left
behind him four sons which he had in issue, who were in all things to be
compared to the Giant their father, the two eldest of his sons were named,
Calfurnien and Combaldam, who being not content to live on so small teuenues as
this Island yielded, went to inhabit another country: but albeit they were thus
departed hence, the supreme authority would not long suffer them, to live in
their unsupportable cruelty and tyranny, but made a dispatch of their cursed
lives, and that by the hand of one only knight, who was called (as report has
here blazed) the Knight of the Savage man, so named, for that he bears
figured in his shield a Savage man. It may be, you have better knowledge of
this Knight, then I have, for that such a one as you seem to be, cannot choose
but be acquainted with those noble minds, as employ themselves in seeking
hautie adventures, whereby their fame is thundered through the whole world. As
for the two other Brethren, they were nourished in this Island under their
mothers wing, against whose will (after they judged themselves able to endure
armor) they determined to depart hence, to revenge the death of their brethren,
Calfurnien and Camboldam. The earnest desire they had to be gone, would not
suffer them to tarry longer here, but taking shipping, away they went, and after
they had spent a great time in the bloody and horrible life their predecessors
spent before them, and in seeking the aforenamed knight of the Savage man, it
so fell out, that the good and hardy knight himself, chanced to come where
they were, with them he entered the Combat, and behaved himself so worthily
against them, as he likewise ended the lives of the other two Giants, whose
death delivered the inhabitants of the country (where they dwelled) out of a
great deal of fear and trouble, so that it is to be judged, that the Knight
was ordained to be the only mean, to defend the miserable afflicted people,
out of the life of flauish servitude, wherein they had remained long time by
their cruel Giants. The mother of these merciles hell hounds before named, who
is called Collambra, could not long endure the sorrow she suffered for the
death of her children, wherefore she practiced, and compassed all devises she
could, whereby to get the knight of the Savage man into her custody, and that
she might speed the better in her close intent, she joined with a Magitian a
friend of hers, one whom he loved well, named Alfernao, who is gone to the
Emperors court of Constantinople, having ten days allowed him to accomplish
his intent, and to work so craftily (as well he can (y^ the knight of the
Savage man must be brought hither.

And because no occasion shall want that may help any way, a Damsel Giant
named Arlencea, who is the Daughter to this Collambra, accompanied with a
certain number of knights and Damsels, is joined in company with this
Enchauntor, upon whose promises such assurance is made here, as the Knight of
the Savage man shall be brought hither. In this great hope which the cruel
Collambra has, to revenge her deuillish will on this good knight, she is gone
to a City four leagues distance hence, being accompanied with a great many of
her friends, as also with one of her brethren, who (though he be young) yet is
he maruailous bloody and cruel, and reputed for an especial Knight at Arms,
who is also a Giant, and named Esponuautable, who has converted his country
into as great cruelty, as when it was governed by the Giant Brauorant the
Cruel: and to speak uprightly, Brauorant was not altogether so terrible, as
he is whom I lately named to you, wherefore I heartily pray, that the good
Knight of the Savage man fall not into the hands of this Giant, neither that
the treason may prevail which is laid for him: the ancient Knight knitting up
his tale with a sigh, the Knight of the Tiger thus began.

My good friend, it is hard for him to escape the danger, whom fortune has
determined to fall into it, and seeing it is so, I could wish that she would
suffer the Brother to Colambra, to seek revenge on me for the death of his
Nephews: perhaps he might fall into his hands, who has a good will to
punish his wicked life, and make him know the desert of cruelty, as well as
his kindred has tasted it before him. And for the Knight of the Savage man,
he is one that I know very well, and I hope he will escape the hands of his
enemies, as one that is reserved to bring to an end many worthy and hauty
adventures: wherefore, in respect that he is my especial good friend, I
desire to know the certainty of that you have rehearsed, for if he speed ill,
I cannot take it quietly, and therefore because I will satisfy my mind, I am
determined to morrow morning to go seek this Giant, not doubting, but if
Fortune favor me, to repay his wicked and evil deserts, with such recompense
as is meet for such an offender, I see well Sir (answered the ancient Knight)
that you are ignorant of the Giants force, in presuming so to combat with him:
alas Sir, he will not make any account of the enterprise, if ten such as you
came and waged the fight with him: therefore I cannot choose but mislike your
judgment, in that any one will repute your enterprise, rather for want of
discretion, then upon any good or sound advise.

The Knight of the Tiger took in good part, the council which his host
labored to have him follow, but yet he did not intend to be ruled by him: so,
after he and his host had talked an indifferent space, he withdrew himself
into his Chamber, where he took his rest better then he had done the night
before, and he rejoiced greatly, that his brother Florian was not as yet
arrived there, as also that himself was there ready to help him, if so be he
were brought to this cruel Collambra.

In the morning, after he had taken leave of his courteous Host, he departed
to follow what he had intended, and coming into a Forest, where through he
should travail to the City, where Collambra made her aboade, he heard the
roaring noise which the Sea made, whereto he would needs go to see if he
could espy any vessel, wherein the knight of the Savage man his brother might
be imbarqued: but as he rode toward the Sea coast, he heard a great bruit or
noise somewhat near him, and riding forward to see what it might be, he
espied a Ship lying at Anchor, and hard by it was ten Knights (belonging to
Collambra the Mother of Arlencea) maintaining a firce Combat against three
other Knights, which he (so soon as he had seen them (knew them to be
Platir, Berolde: and the Sage Aliard of the Obscure Valley, who had put their
lives in hazard, only to give succor to the Knight of the Savage man.

This sight moved him somewhat to rejoice, till suddenly he was astonished
again, beholding not past twenty paces from these Knights that fought the
Combat, a Giant of a marvelous stature, and Armed in rich and costly Armor,
who cried to kill and murder those three Knights, that presumed to make such
resistaunce, and so hacked and hewed their enemies, as now one tumbled on this
side, then another on that side, and the most of them being very dangerously
wounded.

The Giant seeing this, began to wax marvelous worth with himself, when,
mounting on horseback, he came to give aid to his Knights, which the Knight
of the Tiger perceiving, and fearing least his arrival would be hurtful to his
three dear friends, he poasted till he came before them, when, he saluted the
Giant with these words.

Art thou not ashamed Espouuantable, to offer thy self against them whom thou
see sore wounded, and have scantly power to defend themselves? let them alone
and address thy self to me, who as my mortal enemy) came now to seek thee,
for that I would deliver that unfortunate Isle, out of thy cruel and bloody
tyranny. The Giant stayed a while to behold him, who had summoned him to the
Combat in such brave manner, and perceiving that he bare a golden Tiger in his
Shield, he knew presently that this was the Knight, whom the world did hold
in so great estimation, for he thought no other durst be so bold as to speak
so proudly: nevertheless, regarding not the presence of the Knight of the
Tiger, but in seeing his Knights so vanquished, he fell into these speeches.

I see well that the valor of these strange knights, is far different to them
of this country, which makes me the more desirous to hazard my Fortune, for
that my happy conquest will yield me the more contentment, then coming to the
Knight of the Tiger, he began again thus.

I desire you Sir Knight to do me so much favor, as to tell me, if any of
you belong to the Emperors Court of Constantinople, or if you be the Sons,
or of the lineage, of the noble Prince Don Edward, you might greatly content
me, if you would resolve me herein, for I am persuaded, that you could not
thus long maintain y^ fight against my knights, without you be some of them
which I have named.

I am content (answered the Knight of the Tiger) to satisfy thee in that thou
desire, wherefore I give thee to understand that these Knights were brought
up in the Court of the Emperor of Constantinople, in the company of my self,
who am the Son of the Prince Don Edward, and brother to the renowned knight
of the Savage man, on whose behalf, I earnestly desire to requite the treason,
which thou and other of thy kindred have practiced, to bring him under your
subjection in this Island.

Art thou Palmerin (said the Giant) the eldest son to the Prince Don Edward,
who vanquished Dramusiand and Camboldam, and did win the Islle which no man
else could, thrusting all them forth which kept the same?

For what cause desire thou to know (answered the knight of the Tiger?) Marry
for that I greatly desire said Espouuantable to enter the Combat with thee in
the presence of my sister Collambra who would receive unspeakable contentment,
in seeing thee severely tormented, for the dishonor thou have done to her
kindred: to which words the Prince replyet thus.

I am even the selfsame man whom thou have so great desire to knew, and I am
glad to see thee so willing to fight the Combat, although it be in the place
which thou thy self have appointed, because I will make known publicly to
all, how the heavenly powers have sent me to chastise thy wicked life, as also
the cruelty of thy Sister Collambra. Well then (said the Giant) to the end
thou may the better follow thy enterprise, fail not to prepare thy self
against the morning, and this night will I cause the Field to be provided,
wherein we entend to fight the Combat: and if those thy companions would be
likewise set to work, I have three Couzins, which shall maintain the Combat
against them, and I will furnish them with Armor out of the Armoury of my
brother Bravorant, because I see their Armor is greatly out of order, having
fought so long against my knights: upon which words, Berolde took occasion to
speak th^s.

Thou shall do us great pleasure, to lend us Armor that have need of it, and
so we will not refuse the Combat: as well to accompany and do service to the
Prince Palmerin, as to destroy and abolish the memory of them, who have kept
the people here in such tirannous servitude. I see then (quoth the knight of
the Tiger) that the combat between the Giant and me, must be ended first.

Noble Palmerin (said the Sage Aliart) we desire you to suffer us the Combat
first, for it may so fall out, as you having obtained the victory, against the
Giant, fear will make his Couzins to forsake the field the day following:
wherefore, to shun the misfortune that may happen to us, we desire you to
cause the Giant to agree to this request, which if you do, you shall endue your
self with perpetual renown, and do us a great pleasure, who are your humble
servants at commandment.

Seeing it is your earnest desire (answered the Knight of the Tiger) I am
content that it shall be so, according as your selves think best to order it.
The Giant went away as joyful as might be, for he promised himself the
victory, and did verily make account to kill the knight of the Tiger, before
the knight of the Savage man arrived there, and in this joy he came to his
sister, who sat weeping and wringing her hands, because her knights were so
vanquished, as also for the long tarryance of her daughter Arlencea, fearing
least some mischance should hinder them, because they stayed so long: the
consideration hereof, made her heart overwhelmed in extreme passions, yet was
she somewhat contented by her brothers presence, who provided such necessaries
for himself, as he should use in the Combat in the day following against
Palmerin of England.

The Giant being thus gone about his business, the Prince Palmerin demanded of
his friend, for what cause the Giants Knights did enter fight with them?
whereto the Sage Aliart thus replied. My Lord, this Giant causes a number of
Spies for to luck about this Country, who seeing but any strangers to come on
the land here, or that any Ship do but once lie here at Anchor, they set upon
them with maine force presently: in like manner chanced this misfortune to us,
who coming on land in this place, were no sooner offering to mount on
horseback, but we were assaulted with these knights from the Giant, who came
himself to encourage and animate them against us, we being ready to fall into
extreme danger, had not you so happily arrived, being sent (doubtless) to
succor us, that our enterprise might not come to an unfortunate end, which
could not otherwise be, in that the knight of the Savage man is not yet brought
hither.

Here making a pawse, they went to seek somewhat to sup withal, and to provide
something to lay to a little wound, which Berolde had received on his arm, for
which cause Palmerin desired him, that he would not adventure the Combat the
day following, but Berolde would by no means be persuaded.

The Sage Aliarts Esquier, took the Prince Palmerins horse, he staying there
all that day in his friends company, all of them watching very diligently for
the sight of any Ship, wherein the Prince Florian should be brought captive
into his enemies hands: but when the dark night would not suffer them to look
any longer, they entered all into the Ship which had brought them thither, for
that they judged themselves in more assurance there, then to tarry on the land
all the dark night, accounting them rather governed by arrogance and folly,
then any wisdom or discretion, that would trust them, who made no account of
their faith, especially, being their professed and sworn enemies.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the Combat between the Giant Espouuantable, and the noble knight of the
Tiger: and of the battle between Berolde, Platir, and Sage Aliart, and the
three Couzins of the Giant.
Clear Phoebus had no sooner showed his golden face on the earth the next
morning, but these four Knights departed from the ship, three of them being
armed but badly, by reason their armor had been mangled very cruelly the day
before: but yet though they were so slenderly provided, they would not forsake
the Combat against the Giants Couzins: so leaving the Ship in the custody
of the Mariners, they rid on, accompanied with their Esquiers, who bare their
Lances and their Shields, until they came to the place where the Giant
remained. Being come thither, they beheld before the Castle, the place
appointed for the combat, which was paled round about very handsomely, and
scaffolds made of very great height, whereon was assembled an innumerable
company of people, who came only to see the Combat, for that they judged it
would be the most famous that ever was fought in y^ Country, wherein they
heartily desired that the giant might be deprived of life, for that he used the
people with such extreme rigor, and yet they durst not speak against him, no
not the chief nobles and gentlemen of the Country, but they stood in awe of
him for his cruel dealing, being glad to honor him to his face, though they
scorned and disdained him behind his back. And thus he lived Lordly over every
one, using all alike as slauishly as might be, so that none durst displease or
offend his rascal vassails, least they should raise such a scandal among
them, as the tyrants punishment would be too hard for them to suffer, so that
many times they practiced the death of the Giant, that they might be discharged
of his cruel oppressions: but let us come again to the former matter.

The knights entered into this place, which they knew was ordained for the
combat, and there they stood attending for the Giant, who in short time after
came to one of the windows of the castle, accompanied with his sister
Collambra, he being armed as he was the day before. At last the Giant lifted up
the Beuer of his Helmet, to the end the Christian knights might be dismayed,
beholding his stern and vigorous countenance, and I assure you, albeit he was
young, yet was he so mighty and tall of stature, having such an ugly and
fearful face, as was sufficient to terrify the hearts of them, who were not
accustomed to see such a hideous proportion. For his face was always bitterly
frowning, the skin whereof swart and wrinkled, his lips big and boisterous,
and gaping so far asunder, as his teeth were seen very monstrously, so that
the Anatomy agreed well with his name, he being called the Fearful Giant.
The Giant stood leaning on a Cushion of black Velvet in the window, and showed
to his sister the Knight of the Tiger, desiring her to comfort her self, for
that he intended to revenge y^ death of her sons on him, because he that had
slain them was not as yet come: this he spoke because he would not let her
know what talk had passed on the day before, between him and the knight of
the Tiger, lest she should chance to discorage her self, or doubt of the
sufficiency of his strength, which both he and she esteemed equal to deal
with ten good and hardy Knights. In the mean while the Giant stayed in the
window, there came an Esquire of his, with men with him laden with armor, into
the place where the Combat should be fought, and they coming before the
prince and his company, after that the Esquire had saluted them, he entered into
these speeches.

Gentlemen, my Lord the giant willed me to let you understand, that he is not
accustomed to make a conquest of those knights, who shall afterward excuse
themselves, that their misfortune was for want of armor: and because he will
avoid such an impeachment, he has sent you here choice of armor, willing you
to take them, which you shall think most convenient for you. And he willed me
to bring him word, whether you will rather yield to the mercy of his Sister
Collambra, or abide the trial of himself and his Couzins: the Prince Platir
answered the Esquire thus.

Trust me (my friend) I cannot think it meet to receive thy Masters armor,
which we thank him for, that he would so courteously send us, because I carry
this mind with me, that it is better for us to loose our lives without his aid,
them having his armor to fall into his hands vanquished, for our armor his
not so much spoiled, but we may very well endure the trial of this Combat:
wherefore, we will try our Fortune in this armor we have, considering, skill
must be used as well as defense, which if we employ as we ought, there is no
doubt but we shall have the victory.

I am content to follow the advice of Platir (said Berolde.) And since you find
it so convenient (quoth the Sage Aliart) me thinkt it were good the messenger
returned back to his Master, and let him understand, that he may come when
please him into the field. I rejoice greatly (said the Esquire) in the
counsel of this young knight, that you will not take this Armor, which my Lord
the Giant sends you: therefore let him that has the aduantagr boast of his
winning in the end.

Thus the Esquire departed into the Castle of Collambra again, giving the
Giant to understand, what the Knights had said, whereat he fumed and fretted
greaely, to see what disdain these Christian knights made of him: whereupon,
he took his leave of his Sister in this manner. Madame, I pray you abide at
this window all the while the Combat endures, for I shall be greatly iniuried
if I want your presence.

So departing, he went unto his Couzins, who were all in black armor,
conformable to their grief and sorrow, and bearing for their devices in their
sheelds, the portraitures of Brocalon and Baleato, their Couzins, figured in a
field of Sable they promising never to change their devises, until they had
revenged the death of the Giants the sons of Collambra, who were dearly
beloved of their uncle the Giant Espouuantable. With them he took his way to
the place appointed for the combat, the people rejoicing when they saw him
coming with his Couzins, who were in stature able to deal with six such as
the three knights were: which made the Giant to ride very merrily, persuading
himself, that the knight of the Tiger and his companions, should loose their
lives in the field that day: then coming somewhat near them, he began to use
these words. In sooth my friends, it were better for you to yield your selves,
then to abide the terror of my combat. Not so sir (answered the Knight of the
Tiger) but albeit thy arcogant pride should seem to fray us, in these peoples
judgments, we are content to abide the uttermost: not doubting (God aiding us)
but to bring down thy haughty stomach, and these likewise that bear thee
company.

Upon these words the Giant ran against the knight of the Tiger and his Cozins
against the other knights, that the trampling of the horses made the earth to
groan, and they were not so quick and speedy in their course, but the knight
of the Tiger and his companions were as nimble as they, meeting so bravely in
the midst of the Carrire, where the Giant broke his lance on the Prince
Palmerins sheeld with so great force, as he was constrained to catch hold on
the mane of his horse, otherwise he had fallen beside him: nevertheless the
Giant was cast out of his Saddle with great violence against the ground,
whereat he was maruailously offended, but the knight of the Tiger rejoiced that
he had broken his lance so well.

The other six knights were all likewise dismounted, except the Prince Flatir,
who kept his Saddle still: yet was the charge so rough upon him, as he had
almost borne his fellows company, but that he recovered himself gallantly,
having lost both his stirreps. The knight of the Tiger seeing the Giant coming
toward him, cast himself beside his horse quickly, because he feared the
Giant would have kiled his horse: then being on his feet, he spoke to the
Giant thus.

Content thy self a while thou counterfeit Monster, and let thy Cozins
proceed in that they have enterprised, for they that deal with him are such,
as they shall find sufficient to abate their lofty minds: and after they have
tried their fortune (because we will not hinder them, neither do they the like
to us) thou and I will quickly decide our controversy, when, do not doubt but
thou shall perceive, the little regard I have of thee, and the uttermost thou
can do.

I see well (answered the Giant) that because thou had so good fortune to
dismount me, it makes thee so bold to speak thus bravely: but I receive
greater contentment the^ thou can devise, to see thee here in this place,
where at mine own pleasure I shall give thee punishment, and with my sword
repay the shame of my fall. Then drew he his sword forth of the scabbard,
saying to the Prince, that he had caused that weapon to be made, only to take
revenge therewithal, for the death of his Couzins Brocalon, and Baleato: with
these words he ran fiercely on the Knight of the Tiger, and gave him such
cruel and forcible strokes, as had he not defended them worthily, his life
would have been in great danger.

Very rigorous was the blows the Giant gave the prince, so that most part of
his shield was cut in pieces, and he had very little left to award his enemy,
and a great while it was before he could wound the Giant, yet at length he
gained such opportunity, as he wounded him grievously in three or four
places: which made the Giant to faint and wax somewhat weary, both with the
great loss of his blood, and also with his extreme sweating and chafing, to
see himself so hardly matched by one knight, but all his fretting the prince
regarded not, he followed his intent so worthily, and redoubled stroke after
stroke so roughly upon him, as the Giant was constrained to retire, to take
breathing awhile.

The knight of the Tiger was not sorry thereat, for that he as gladly desired
rest of the giant, though not by any such extreme occasion, considering also,
he desired to see how his three friends continued the fight, with the giants
three Couzins, who in sooth were brought to such a narrow point, as they had
not the power to defend their enemies, for they both had and did charge them so
worthily, as the Prince did much delight himself in beholding them, they being
so courageous, nimble and quick, as they were at the beginning of the Combat.
But the Prince Platir dealt so gallantly with him that was his enemy, as he had
the general praise, and was judged worthy the honor of that day, above his
other two companions.

The Giant beholding his Couzins in such danger, and himself to have lost the
most part of his blood, likewise that he had such a strong and puissant enemy:
his heart began to faint, but because he would not have them know, in what
great fear and debilitie he was, he came again as lustily (as he could) to
the Combat.

As for the Knight of the Tiger, he was ready and willing to entertain him,
which was more rough and sharply given to the Giant, then the first encounter
was: and in the mean time they tried thus hardly together, the Knight which
fought against Platir was so faint and feeble, as he fell down to the ground
before him, when Platir taking his Helmet from him, struck off his head, and
showed it to Collambra, as she sat in the window.

When she saw that Fortune was thus fully bent against her, she presentle shut
the window, and weeping bitterly for this pittious sight, she pulled and rent
her hair very cruelly, which the Giant beholding, that she dispaired of his
victory, and would not vouchsafe him any longer her countenance, he determined
to sell his life as dearly as he could, to him that labored to take it from
him, and then began to assail the Prince very furiously: but he perceiving
the Giants force could not endure long, so hackte and hewed his Armor in
preces, as at last he cut out great collops of his flesh, and dyed all the
grass with the blood of the Giant Espouuantable.

And the Knight of the Tiger looking aside, espied the Couzins of the Giants
all subdued, and their heads presented (as the first was) by the other two
Knights, every one then expecting the end of the Combat, between him and
the Giant: and truly he marvelled much that the Giant held out so long,
wherefore he laid such cruel strokes upon him, as at the length he (being
not able to sustain himself) fell down flat to the ground upon his back,
committing his soul into the hands of them, who strengthened him in his wicked
and abominable deeds.

Then the Knight of the Tiger took off his Helmet, to see whether he were
alive or dead, but when he saw no life was left in him, he took his sword by
the point, and beat him with the hills so about his head, as he made his eyes
and his teeth to fall out, and then he cut off his legs by the knees, which
being done, he thanked God of his happy victory, and the people for joy gave
such a general shoute, as the earth did seem to tremble there withal, they
were so glad of their delivery from the monstrous cruelty, wherein these Giants
had so long time kept them.

And in this great joy, they concluded altogether to go and beset the Castle
where Collambra was, that none of that bloody linnage might be left alive: for
except she were likewise dispatched, the people feared their former servitude.
In the mean while Collambras knights guarded the peoples entrance into the
Castle, one of her Damsels came and humbled herself at the Prince Palmerins
feet, with these speeches.

I desire you Sir Knight, that you would take pity on my Lady Collambra, and
on us that are her Damsels attedant on her, for we have no other defense for
our selves, then the three Knights, who labor to keep the people forth of
the Castle, in that they would put my Lady to death, whom I pray you vouchsafe
to defend from their exueltie: for more willingly would she receive
chastisement at your hands for her offenses, then to fall into the peoples
power, who are void of reason in their revenge.

The knight of the Tiger (fearing he should not come time enough to give her
succor) spoke to his three friends in this manner. I desire you my brethren
and friends, to go and assist Collambra, because the people seek to put her
to death. These three knights willing to satisfy the Princes request, began to
thrust through the preasse, and prevailed so much by their strength, that at
last they attained the Castle, gate, which was defended by Collambraes Knights,
one of them being slain, and the other two ready to yield themselves, at what
time the Knight of the Tiger and his companions, were come to the place where
this great hurly burly was: which he being desirous to pacify, thrust into the
Castle Collambraes knights, and turning his face to the people, desired them to
depart to their houses, and to assure themselves, that he would not fail to
set them in such a sure state of liberty, as they should not be molested with
such cruel tyranny, as they had bin too long a time.

The people conceived such contentment by the words of the Prince Palmerin, as
they presently departed thence, crying all in this manner: that the Island
ought to be given to the knight of the Tiger, for that it was his own by
right, and they did heartily desire that he would accept it, they being content
to humble themselves as his vassailes and subjects, so that he would not be
persuaded by the flattering words of Collambra whose malice was not inferior
to the cruel Giants.

Palmerin made them promise to deal in such sort, as they should be all
contented to their own wills: so, giving them a courteous farewell, he went
into the great Hall to rest himself a while, and afterward he came to
Collambra, who sat among her Damsels, her hair all dispersed about her
shoulders, hanging her head down to the ground, and making such pitiful
lamentation, as her Damsels could not choose but bedeaw their cheeks with
tears, beholding the extreme heaviness of their Lady and Mistress, who at
this instant remembered the death of her husband, the loss of her Sons, and
destruction of her house, and the death of her Brother, who came only for her
sake thither, as well to defend her, as also to see the death of the Knight of
the Savage man, but now, being past all hope to have him, and fearing lest by
him, she had likewise lost her daughter Arlencea, of whom she made most high
and especial account: all those occassions considered together, compelled her
to immoderate mourning.

The knight of the Tiger hearing the great complaints of Collambra, was diverse
times to offering comfort her, but he judging his words would rather more vex
her, then pacify her, let her alone to comfort her self to well as she could:
but the prince Platir seeing how Collambra howled and made such a pitiful and
heavy noise, began thus to speak un to the knight of the Tiger.

I think it good, and so do my two friends and companions that this Castle
remain unto us as our own for ever, and to chase hence this cruel woman, or
cause her to be brought into some such place, where her malice may have no
power to endanger us, or put any other good mind in fear. Friend Platir
(answered Palmerin) I will agree to whatsoever you think expedient, but I pray
you do not provoke me to do Collambra any outrage, nor yet to brinn her into my
company, for I cannot endure to behold one so full of grief as she is.

These three knights perceiving that the sight of this cruel Giantnesse, did
much offend the Prince Palmerin, they concluded to have her brought where their
ship lay at Anchor, to carry her with them to Constantinople, because the
Emperor should dispose of her as he thought meet: and they stayed not long to
put their intent in execution, but caused her to be conveyed in a Chariot, to
the Port where their ship rode, leaving her there in the company of the Sage
Aliart, until they had determined further for the state of the Island.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of that which happened to the noble Prince Palmerin, of England, before he
departed from the Profound Isle.
IT so fell out out (as the History reports) that Collambra) overcome with
exceeding grief and anguish of mind) was brought into such a weak and feeble
estate, as she fell on the ground in a trance, being no otherwise reputed the^
for a dead body. Then the Prince Platir, who desired the ruin of her whole
progeny, commanded his Esquire to take her up, but she was so heavy and
weighty, as they (having no other help) could scantly lift her, so bringing
her down the stairs, conveyed her into a Chariot, with certain Damoselles
that attended on her, and so she was carried away from her Castle to the ship,
being followed all the way by a number of men and women on foot, who made such
woeful and bitter lamentations, as it moved them to pity, who had been
greatly injured by her cruelty.

When they were come to the ship, they conveyed her thereinto, with two
damsels of hers, who would by no means depart from her, but determined to
bear her company, and take part of the ill fortune that might happen to her,
such and so great was the amity they bare unto Collambra, who seeing her self
in the ship, and in the custody of them that were her enemies, being deprived
of al hope to come back again, she determined to cast her self into the sea,
judging that to be the only way to end her sorrows, and so to be free from
the practices of her foes. Berolde, Platir, and the Sage Aliart, being in y^
ship with her (but Palmerin by no means would come where she was (endeavored
to comfort her as much as they could come where she was) endeavored to comfort
her as much as they could, but she made no account of their persuasions, for
she said, without he might see her daughter Arlencea again, she should never
give ever her sorrowful wailing, which she continued in the company of those
Knights, who knew very well, that nothing was such a sovereign remedy to
desperate folks, as death it self: wherefore they concluded to leave her in
the company of the Sage Aliart, to prevent any cruelty she might offer on her
self, as for Platir and Berolde, they went on shore, and coming aga^ne to
the City, they found the Prince Palmerin among the people, who desired him to
accept their faithful homage, as to their only Prince and sovereign, in
respect of the great and insupportable tryanny, from which they were delivered
by his noble prowess.

Palmerin received their courtesy in very gracious and gentle manner, but in
no case would he accept the government of the Isle, for that (quoth he) it
appertains to my brother Florian, of the Forest, otherwise called the Knight
of the Savage man, he having adventured his life to destroy those tyrannous
Rulers, which sometime did possess the same, as for me, and these my friends,
we came hither only but to find him.

But if so be my brother Florian refused to be your governor, I will not fail
to satisfy your just and reasonable request, whereto reason commands me to
condescend, and till the time I understand my brothers mind, in his name I
will receive and make account of your homage, and assure your selves, I will
see you have a governor that shall like you all: in the mean time, I pray you
makes account of me, and behave your selves as good and obedient subjects to
him, who with great danger of his life, and loss of his blood, has bought and
redeemed your quiet liberty.

The principal Lords of the Island (who were there present before the prince)
made answer, that they would in all things fulfill his commandment, as those
that honored him with unfeigned reverence, in sight whereof, they resigned up
to him all their Castles and Fortresses, the keys whereof they humbly
delivered him.

Palmerin in having visited their Castles, and set all things in due and
necessary order, for the better encouragement of the inhabitants of the
Island: he gave the Forts and Castles into their hands again, who had the
custody of them before, commanding them to be very careful and respective in
the well guarding and ordering them, until such time as his brother arrived
there.

The Prince Palmerin was entertained by the people of this Isle very
honorably, and he caused the treasure which belonged to Collambra, to be
locked up within her Castle, that it might be delivered to his Brother
Florian: but as he was about to appoint a Porter, at the place of most
assurance in this Castle, he perceived Siluian to enter, accompanied with the
ancient Knight, who had been the Host to the Prince at his first arrival in
the Isle, for he being informed of the victory, which Palmerin had achieved
against the Giant Espouuantable, would needs come with Siluian to the City,
the sight of whom did not a little rejoice the heart of the Prince Palmerin.

The ancient Knight being come into his presence, humbled himself at his
feet, with these words. My gracious Lord, in that I have not used you with
such entertainment as your nobility deserved, I humbly desire, that you would
vouchsafe to pardon me. Palmerin arose and took him up, and embracing him very
graciously, spoke thus unto him.

I have not forgotten the exceeding friendship, wherewith you used me when I
was in your house, for the which I account my self greatly beholding to you:
and for that at this present, my power will not stretch to make you any
sufficient amends, I pray you to accept the government of this Island, the Lord
thereof I know will be very well contented therewithal, for if Fortune
vouchsafe to call me to any dignity, I will not fail to remember your great
kindness.

Do you think my Lord (answered Argentao, which was the name of this ancient
Knight) that the people here, will admit any other governor then your self?
Yea truly (answered Palmerin) for that he which is the Lord hereof, is my
brother, to whom this Island does appertain by duty. I fear me my Lord (said
Argentao) that some harm has happened to him, by them of the stock and Image
of the Giant Brauorant, but since it stands so with your gracious pleasure,
to call me (unworthy wretch) to so great credit and honor (which I know it
is your will I should not refuse,) I esteem my self the most happiest man
alive, desiring you to understand the will of the people, for if they do not
imagine well of me preferment, it were better for me to content my self with
mine own poor house, where it liked you to accept a lodging, and whereof I
pray you to dispose, as your own always at commandment, and to think of
me, who (during my life time) vow my self your humble vassaile and obedient
Subject.

The people hearing the words of Argentao, who was a Christian Knight, one of
very good life, and always a great enemy to the Giants, did very well allow to
accept him for their governor, promising generatly before the Prince, that
they would honor him with dutiful love and obedience.

The Prince Palmerin sent to call the Sage Aliart, commanding Siluian to stay
the mean while in the Ship, who being come thither, and entered into the
Ship, he was presently taken with exceeding fear, when he beheld the ougly
frowning countenance of Collambra, which he judged as ill favored, as the
report went of Espouuantable her Brother, whom the people of that country
thought to be invincible, before they saw him so nobly conquered by the valiant
Palmerin of England.

Siluian having declared the pleasure of his Lord, the Sage Aliart presently
departed to the City, and being come to the Princes his friends, he found
them determining to send to Constantinople the Esqurer of the Prince Berolde,
who was named Albanis, willing him to depart thence with the Ship, and to
present the Emperor of Greece with the news of this happy victory in that
Island, also to deliver to his Majesty the Giantesse Collambra.

When they had concluded on the Esquiers message, he departed from them to the
Ship to Collambra, when, the Pilot hoysing his Sails, and the wind serving
them very gallantly, they rode on at pleasure, and cut the Seas with
marvelous expedition. But the Prince Palmerin peceiuing, that his three
friends had written their minds to them they best thought on, he was sorry
that he had done as much, nevertheless, he thought it not fit he should
venture so boldly, to commit his secrets to any one else, saving his friend
Siluian.

Then to drive fancies out of his mind, he desired his friends to bear him
company in visiting the Isle, whereto they willingly consented, and Argentao
caused two of the Giants Foists to be put in a readiness, wherein he and the
principal Lords of the Island bare them company, in riding about the Island.

After they had seen the most part of the Profound Isle, they came to another,
which was called the Perilous Isle, being very well peopled, and fortified
with a number of goodly Towers and Castles of no small riches, that the noblest
Prince in the world could not wish for a more stately government. Argentao, who
was very well acquainted with the customs and manners of that Island, gave them
to understand the rare singularities thereof, desiring them not to think it
strange, that they saw the people so scant, and they that were there, so
fearful, for it was the extreme cruelty of the Giant Brauorant, that made
them forsake their houses, looking every hour when they should be put to the
Sword.

These knights received great pleasure in beholding these two Islandes, and so
they rowed about until it was the next day in the morning, when, then came
they to the place (as you may read in the first part of this History) where
Palmerin went on shore to end a strange adventure, there they landed, and
mounted on their Horses to get up on the high Rock, but the way was so narrow,
and the Rock so steep, as they were feign to alight again, and giving their
horses to their Esquires they went up the Rock on foot after one another.

But before they were come to the place where Palmerin found the Monument, with
these letters engraven thereon. Take heed thou pass no further: they were so
weary, as they were glad to mount on their Horses again, and so in short time
they attained the top of the rock, where they rested themselves, being abashed
to see such a huge mountain. But when Argentao and the three knights were come
to the Fountain, they had then a greater cause of astonishment, then any they
had seen as yet, for their they saw monstrous huge Beasts, like unto them
which Palmerin flew, when they would not suffer him to drink of the water: and
I assure you, that these Beasts were so cunningly and artificially framed, as
one would have judged them to be alive, they made such a vigorons and fearful
show, being chained by the necks with the self same chains as they were,
whom Palmerin (by his noble valor discomfited. This rare and ingenious figure
declared, what great study and practice Vrganda compassed, to leave such a
strange edifice in remembrance of her knowledge.

Palmerin seeing this rare monument to surpass all that ever he had seen
before, suspected that the Sage Aliart had done it by his Art, to cause them
wonder at it. Wherefore he desired that he would satisfy him whether it be so
or no, the Sage Aliart made this answer.

My Lord, she which invented the adventure of this fountain, did will, that he
which was so happy to atchieue the honor thereof, should be recompeuced
according to his worthy deserts: and to leave to all postericies a perpetual
remembrance of him, she ordained that these cruel beasts, which are framed in
the natural shapes of them which you slew, should remain still in this place,
to the end that they which chance to come into this Island, may render
continual laud and commendation to your worthy prowess. Yet thinking this not
sufficient enough to your praise, she caused to be erected the portraitures of
those knights which belonged to the Enchantnesse Eutropa, and whom you worthily
brought under your obeisance, they being lively carved in marble, of the same
height and proportion as they were: and here they are figured defending their
shields which you may yet see hanging on their several Pillars, even in the
same manner as they were, when you fought for them before this Island was
conquered.

And for the Isle it self, it sometime belonged to the Sage Vrganda, to whom
you must think your self greatly beholding, seeing that by her means, your
noble deeds remain registered for perpetual memory.

Certainly (answered Berolde) I cannot deny, but he must needs judge himself
well favored of her, yet ought we to regard him the more, who had the power to
end such a perilous adventure: and I may say to you, that some would make them
as fearful as these Beasts made by Art, because they give show of such
ravenous cruelty, as they would of them which were one here alive.

Do you not see (said Platir) the poesy engraven on this Pillar, which does
inuit us to drink at this Fountain: And then the letters which are within,
commands us to defend our selves? trust me, since the danger is awarranted
by the Prince Palmerin, I will yet see further into this adventure. With these
words he approached to the Fountain, and having drunk of the water, commended
the sweetness thereof above all other waters.

Argentao, and they of the Profound Isle, did greatly marvel to see strange
sights: in like manner did Platir, and Berolde, albeit they were good and hardy
knights, yet did they admire with the other for company, extolling his hauty
and noble prowess, who (by his famous conquest) brought the Island to be
inhabited.

After they had a long time discoursed on the singularity of this Fountain,
they took their way to the Castle, where hard by the rivers side, stood four
fair Jasper pillars, whereon hanged four shieldes, like unto them which
Palmerin won from the four Knights, and there stood the images of the Knights
in Columbs of Marble, having the like Armor and Shields as the living knights
had, and standing as though they used regard to their sheeldes, whereon their
several names were written in letters of Gold.

Palmerin was as greatly amazed at ye fight hereof, as he was the same day he
approved the adventure, and while the kuights took pleasure to behold this
strange monument, he perceived to come over the Bridge an Esquire, who was sent
thither by Satrafort the governor of the Castle: the Esquire had no sooner seen
the knight of the Tiger, but he presently returned into the Castle, to give his
Master to understand, that the Lord of the Island was arrived there:
whereupon, Satrafort come forth to receive him, and with humility conducted
him into the Castle, wherein they were no sooner entered, but Platir began after
this manner.

Me thinks the strange fights of this Country, is far contrary to them in
all other parts of the world, in that these motions show the great danger of
the adventures passed, and the bravery of this castle does evidently witness,
that the skull and knowledge of the Sage Vrganda, ought to be esteemed above
all other. The Prince Platir could not choose but marvel very much, seeing the
sundry rare monuments, which the Sage Vrganda had erected in that place, where
she made her continual abiding, because she would always aid those whom she
made account of for her so special friends, as you may read at large in the
book of the valiant Amadis of Gaul. But to come again to our former purpose,
these Knights having seen the lower parts of the Castle, at last came to the
place where Palmerin of England (in times past) found the Giant Demetail, the
fight hereof caused them to pass on further, and after they came to the black
river, wherein the malicious Eutropa cast her self, when the Prince Palmerin
took her by the hand, being ou the plancke, which was so dangerous, the sight
of this perilous adventure, made them forget all the bravery they had seen
before. Siluian began to think on his masters fortunate success, in
atchieuing such a worthy and famous adventure, and the conceit of the manifold
troubles he had passed, was of such force in the gentle Esquiers mind, as he
began to shed tears: but the Knight of the Tiger perceiving how Siluian wept,
while his other friends were busied in beholding the occasions there present,
he came and embraced Siluian, using these words.

I would have thee think (my good friend Siluian) that the knight, who has
the rare beauty of the princess Polinarda, imprinted in his heart, could not
fail to accomplish these adventures, how dangerous so ever they were at first
to him, and I assure thee, that the unfeigned leave I bear to her, made me to
try the hazard of this uncouth place, from whence (in the sovereignty of her
name) I returned victor: wherefore, I pray thee refrain thy tears, and
persuade thy self assuredly, that the earnest desire I have to do service to
my Lady, encouraged me in all my travails.

Then he left Siluian, and came again to his friends and companions, speaking
to them in this order I pray you my friends to forsake this place, which does
nothing else but trouble your thoughts with silent vexations of grief,
thinking on things of so small importance: for me thinks Satrafort says, it is
time that we go to supper. At these words the knights departed thence,
commending highly the valor of the knight of the Tiger, and Satrafort brought
them into a fair great chamber, the windows thereof being over a fair Garden
very thick beset with trees, and a pretty small river taking his course
through it. In this place the knights were set to supper, being served with such
great pomp and state, as there wanted nothing that could be devised, and
Satrafort being desirous to witness their great welcome into the Perilous
Isle, showed himself surpassing bountiful, and beside, he was so glad of the
presence of the noble Palmerin of England, as he spared no travail to purchase
those things that might yield him contentation.

All Supper time, they delighted themselves in pleasant discourses, until the
tables being withdrawn, they arose, with courtesy one to another, and then
Satrafort brought each of the^ into his chamber, which were hanged with rich
clothes of tapistrie, that the Enchantresse Eutropa, and the Giant Dramusiande
had left there, because the house should be decked at all times, that when any
of his friends came, they might have the better entertainment: as for them whom
he thought not well on, they durst not be so bold as to presume thither,
because as he used his friends with courtesy, so did he his enemies with
cruelty.

CHAP. XIX.
Here is yet continued what happened to Palmerin of England in the Perilous
Isle.
THese four knights were no sooner risen on the next morning, but they walked
into fields about the Castle, which were very fair and fragrant to behold, in
that the Sage Vrganda did take great delight in her life time to be very busy
there, during the time the Spring lashed, in planting and setting young and
tender grafts, which were done in the manner of walks and Arbours, having kept
such just proportion and measure in setting them, as surely they would content
any friendly eye. The walks were paued with large stones, of color of white
and green, and the trees about them were so bravely branched, as in the Summer
time the Sun could not offend any with heat, there was such a delicate
shadow, and in the winter, the cold and sharp wind could not come at them,
by reason the trees were so thick and high. In the Garden there stood a goodly
Cesterne, to receive the water that fell when it rained, and from it by pipes
and other devises, the water was ronueyed into all the necessary rooms in the
Castle: this cestern was enclosed round about with Crystal, and bound with
bars of silver maruailous beautifully. These knights could not sufficiently
content their eyes, with the diversity of brave devises about the Castle, and
so long they walked till a messenger came and called them to dinner, when,
though they were loath to go so soon in again, yet (remembering their
courteous Host) they went presently. The rest of the day they spent in their
former exercise, until the night came stealing on them, and every man being in
his loding, could not entend to sleep, they were so busy in praising the
deeds of the Sage Vrganda.

When Aurora had saluted the knights with her amiable countenance at their
windows, Satrafort came into their chambers, to give them the mornings
courtesy, and coming to the Prince Palmerin, she began to use these speeches.
As it seems to me (worthy Sir) the novelties of this Island is continually
changing, and they appear more strange every hour then other, for in the
Gareen where you were yesternight, at this instant is standing a goodly
Lodging, invented and builded (me thinks) very ingeniously, and as it comes to
pass, it exceeds all the occasions you have yet seen: for as I made an
offer to enter into it, I was forcibly kept back by two monstrous Giants, who
will not suffer any to come in at the door. Wherefore I think it good that
you try their courtesy, for I am persuaded, that the reward which is due to
your Knightly travails, bestowed in the conquering of this Isle, undoubtedly
is within that place.

These news did so greatly amaze the Knights, as they started up presently, and
armed themselves, and coming into the Garden, they found in the midst
thereof, the stately Lodging which Satrafort had declared to them. The
workmanship whereof, seemed miraculous strange, the walls being of Marble,
and so ingeniously built, as it is impossible to find the like.

The couerture of the house was of Azure stone, which with the glimpse of the
Sun did shine so bravely, as it greatly delighted the Knights to behold. On
the top of all the house, stood a Pillar of Silver of a great bigness, and
there leaned against it a fair Table, compassed with exquisite devises of
Art: on the highest part thereof was figured the heavens, and the seven
Planets in lively Images pictured therein, Mercury being Lord as then, who was
attired in the ancient habit, which they of ancient time did report him to
wear: in the midst of the table was pictured Hercules, tearing in pieces the
thief Cacus.

At the four corners of this house was four goodly trees, who were just of
the height of the house, and their branches spreading bravely all abroad: and
round about the house was glass windows of maruailous costlinesse, which gave
light plentifully into all places of the same, the glass having such ancient
Histories figured in gold on it, as the Knights could not look so much as they
liked: which made Platir to speak thus. It should seem if Vrganda made this
her Study, and delighted to deck it so bravely without, no doubt but she would
make it far more sumptuous within, wherefore, I think it good that we try
the cruelty of the Giants: and if fortune do accept us in her favor, we
shall speed of the treasure enclosed within this house, and I desire that I may
be the first in proving the adventure, if so be the Prince Palmerin like well
of it, for I would be loath to go against his will in any thing.

Why do you not proceed in your determination? (answered Palmerin) I promise
you I cannot mislike of any thing you allow, and therefore I pray you get us
liberty of the gaints to enter: but if it be so, that you cannot speed as you
would, we will assist you if we see any danger. The Prince Platir hearing the
words of Palmerin, would not trifie any longer time, but haulng drawn his
sword, and buckled on his sheeld, he went on nobly against the Giants, who
taking their Maces in their hands prepared themselves to receive the Prince
Platir: and when he had set his seete on the first step, which was not past the
height of one Cubite, one of the Giants cast his Mace to the ground: and
coming two paces froward (as though he had been a living body (he took the
Prince Platir in his arms, and having thrown him down the two steps to the
groued, returued again to his companion.

Platir being greatly offended to see himself so used, came and made a second
assault: but he was served again as he was before. Which when the Prince
Berolde perceived, he went and tried his fortune: but he sped according as
Platir did.

Palmerin being agreeued to see his friends so abused, desired to revenge this
spightfull injury, and so advanced himself to try the adventure, not knowing
whether the Sage Aliart would hazard himself or no: but because he would be
one, he stepped before the Prince, knowing the adventure was not reserved for
him, and making no account to bear his friends company in their foil,
therefore he went to it smyling, but the giants showed him so much favor, as
they did but thrust him forth again, because an Image of gold (which stood
at the door within) cried out aloude thus: Take heed you suffer not the
Sorcerer to enter the Chamber, where my Treasure lies, because he is not worthy.

Then suddenly these two Giants took Palmerin by the arm, and thrust him
down one of the stairs, which made Palmerin have an ill opinion of this
adventure, and then he remembered all his good fortunes passed, thinking now he
should make a conclusion of all, seeing he could not atchieue the conquest of
this, which seemed to him less then any other he had attempted.

In the mean while his thoughts were occupied in this conceit, the Sage
Aliart, (who knew well his inward afflictions) came to the gate again, more to
be partaker with his friends in their foil, then for any opinion he had
himself to end the adventure, and he no sooner offered to charge the Giants,
but without making any show of resistance, they humbled themselves at his
feet, granting him free liberty to enter at his pleasure.

The sight hereof pleased well the Sage Aliart, and as he stood beholding the
workmanship of the door, the Image of gold (which stood thereas the watchman)
opened in the presence of them all, a little Chest, which she held upon her
knees, and having taken a key of gold out of it, threw it down before them on
the ground.

The Sage Aliart stouped and took it up, and without any further delay
opened the door, when, Palmerin, Platir, and Berolde, coming to him, did all
enter with him, they attributing the cause of their repulse as thus, that
Vrganda had not left the adventure to be discovered by them, in that her
wisdom was discovered by so strange a mean, this first chamber being her
library, and wherein she was always wont to study: the sight hereof did very
much delight their eyes, more then any thing else they had seen in the whole
Island. This Library was round about garnished with books, which this Sage
Lady was always wont to contemplate on, the books lying upon very sumptuous
Deskes of Gold, and the Deskes being supported with beasts of Antique work,
being all of the self metal. The couerings of these books were of cloth of
Gold, having at every corner placed precious stones of incredible value: but
the riches of this Chamber might not compare with the next to it, the walls
whereof was round about decked with costly pictures of ladies, manifesting most
rare and singular beauty, they being all in such rich Robes and devises of
apparel, as one would have judged them living creatures, such was the rare
invention of erte, bestowed on these Images of Goddesses, and diverse other
beautiful Ladies. The Princes gazing on these delicate figures, attributed to
them marvelous commendation, wishing that their ladies were there present, to
see such brave and sumptuous momuments: and they judged that the sight of these
beautiful Pictures did as well content their eyes, as though they had seen
their best beloved Ladies, being the bett rupt in mind of them by these
seemly shadows. All along one part of this chamber, was the portraits of such
kings and Queens, as lived in ye time of this Sage Magitian Vrganda, her own
picture likewise being in the midst of the^, she sitting in a chair of gold,
having her book lying before her, whereon she made semblance as though she
read. On the right side of her counterfeit was placed Oriana, the daughter of
king Lisuart, king of great Britain, and on the other side was Briolania, the
Queen of Sobradisa: then Leonorina, the Princess of Constantinople, and with
her the two fair princesses Melicia, and Olenda, each of them having their
names impozed under them in letters of gold. And such was the rare beauty of
these ladies which I have here named, as not one of the^ was etalted above the
other, but all of them equal together: which makes me to think, that they
which reigned, and had the commendation of beauty in the time of the valiant
King Amadis, had worthily the praise is used of them, and their knights gained
immortal renown in aduenturing for them. In another place was to be seen
Yseul the fair, Geneuera the Queen to king Arthur, and friend to sir
Lancelot du Lake: Yseul with the white hands, was accompanied with many
beautiful ladies, which sometime flourished in great Britain, and of her
Bracando was studious to leave most worthy report, because she was highly
esteemed of him. In another place stood the Empress Polinarda, and Agriola the
Empress of Allemain, Gridonia, Flerida, and Francelina, figured so near their
just proportions, as there wanted nothing but life it self: all of them worthy
high praise for their delicate sweet faces, but Flerida was supposed to exceed
them all. In another place of the Chamber was placed their shadows, who (in
the court of the Emperor of Greece) caused many knights to take aduenturous
trauails on them: the first was Polinarda, the Daughter of the virtuous and
magnanimous prince Primaleon, accompanied with the fair Miragarda, Leonarda ye
princess of Thrace, Altea, Sidelia, daughter to the king Tarnaes of
Lacedemonia, and Arnalte the princess of Navarre: as chiefest of these was
placed the Princess Polinarda who seemed in beauty to be aduantaged above the
other. And there was the prince Florendos pointed, to see if fortune would
respect him any more in that place, and to speak indifferently, such was the
workmanship bestowed like wise on Miragarda, as one could hardly judge whether
Polinarda did excel her or no. Oriana and Briolania were of such equality
together, as it would have tried a sharp wit to say, which of the^ was
fairest: but yet the portrait of the fair Oriana, was set forth with more show
of gravity, as well beseemed the daughter of such a famous king, assuring you
that her civil and gracious countenance, was able to have woone the victory of
the precisest eye.

But what if upon these beautiful motions, each one of these knights should
have fallen from affecting his best beloved? for I promise you, that nether
Oriana, Briolania, Polinarda, Flerida, nor Miragarda, was not to be compared to
Yseul the fair: yet notwithstanding, no one of them could be moved to that
opinion, for each of them was so deceitful in regard to his Saint, as all
other beside did but offend their eyes. For thus they persuaded themselves,
that true and faithful hope being grounded in the heart, and firmly fixed in
the eyes of any man, could not be removed by any sinister occasion, in that
their thoughts were settled, and their liking satisfied: but they that are
changed with every countenance, and every face likes them, but none contenteth
them, they are such recreants from Love, as they are not worthy to come within
his court.

The Princes commended the beauty of Yseul, as it worthily descrued, but yet
they thought their own Ladies fairer then she, and so they stood maruailing at
these delectable inventions, whereon they could not gaze sufficient, their
desires were coursing in such an endless Laborinth. Beyond them all, the
Prince Palmerin was ravished in affection, seeing the counterfeite of her that
did so much torment him, she being attired in the same manner, as she was when
he took his farewell of her: whereupon he fell into such an arrogant conceit,
as though it were his Lady Polinarda indeed, and fearing he had moved her to
any offense, he began in this manner to speak to the Picture.

Madame, I know you are she who only has the power to command me, but what
profit do I receive in using such speeches to her, who makes her self deaf,
and will not hear me? And yet do I covet y^ you would but respect my words,
which favor would but strengthen my love, and lengthen my life. But I see well
madam, you make no account of the words which may and can prevent my unhappy
destiny: wherefore, by how much I utter them to my great detriment and grief,
by so much the sooner shall I knit up my small lamentations, and this I assure
you, that I am he who only lives to die for your sake. Platir used the like
language toward Sidelia, the Daughter to king Tarnaes of Lacedemonia, to whom
he was shortly after espoused. Berolde the Prince of Spain finding not his
Lady and Mistres in this place, failed not to praise her, as though she had
been in presence: for it is the custom of a true and faithful lover, who
delights in her he made his choice of, whether she be absent or present, yet
to commend and extol his only felicity, and so did the Prince Berolde think
it a great injury, that any should commend their Ladies, above his best
beloved Onistalda, who in sooth did well deserve her place among the other.

And if the Sage Vrganda forgot to place her in her Study, it was for no other
occasion, then because the place was so furnished with them, who were esteemed
the most sovereign in beauty through the whole world, When they had
sufficiently contented their eyes with these brave shows, the Sage Aliart
spoke unto them in this manner. I perceive my Lords, that these images have
deprived you of natural understanding, in that they cause you to forget them,
whom your duty commands you to use with honor: wherefore, I pray you do not
seem so fond in praising these figures, which are no other but shapes without
substance, for in the beholding these, you do but mispend your time, looking
for that recompense which they have not the power to give you. And therefore it
shall be more necessary for you, to go to them whom the Pictures represent,
who in time will more sufficiently content your hearts, then your eyes receive
pleasure in looking on these toys, which Vrganda gives you to see at this
prefent, by her Enchauntment.

Palmerin hearing the words of his Brother the Sage Aliart, returned to him
with this answer. Do you marvel (Sir Aliart) if they which behold the
lively presentations, of so fair and beautiful Goddesses, find good cause to
busy their brains, and receive their memories? Credit me, I think no man
but would be ravished in delight, to see things of so rare and excellent
importance.

Palmerin spoke in this manner, because he would not have his friends suspect
his amorous thoughts, so departing thence, they went again to the Castle,
where (provision being made) they sat down to dinner, which being ended, they
concluded to depart from the Island: whereupon, Palmerin caused Satrafort to be
called into his presence, with the other Gentlemen that came in his company,
when, Palmerin speaking to his Brother the Sage Aliart, began to use his
speeches thus.

If I should not consider with my self (my noble friend and Brother) which way
Fortune might advance me to such estate, as I should be able to recompense the
manifold courtesies I have received at your hands, you might repute me of a
most base and ignoble mind: wherefore to witness to you the great fear I
have, least I should be condemned amongst the unthankful, I here frankely and
freely give you the Perilous Isle, which I have conquered with great travail
and loss of my blood, desiring that you would accept thereof, in that it ought
rather to be under your government, then any other that I know.

Wherefore, I pray you not refuse my gentle gift, and I would it were of such
estimation, as I could find in my heart to bestow upon you, for I persuade my
self, that it was the will of Vrganda, it should be reserved for you. And for
Satrafort, I perceive he is as willing hereto as my self, desiring you, that
you would account of him as his nobleness and virtue requires, that you may
discharge the duty wherein I am greatly bound to him.

My Lord (answered the Sage Aliart) they of this Island have good occasion to
be offended, seeing you will commit it into the hands of him, who is not
worthy to come within it: nevertheless, the earnest desire I have to do you
service, wills me not to make refusal of your gracious offer, and I accept
Satrafort, not as my fubiect, but as my loving friend and companion, as well
for the valor of his person, as likewise to let you perfectly understand, that
I am he who vows himself always at your commandment.

Thus concluding his speeches, he offered to take she Prince Palmerins hand to
kiss it, but the courteous Prince would not permit him, then taking the Sage
Aliart in his arms, he began again as follows. My loving Brother, if
Fortune raise me to any such preferment, as I may find somewhat worthy your
good deserts, you shall well peceiue the affection I bear you: in the mean
while, imagiae the best of me.

The Prince Berolde and Platir, commended marueilously the liberality of
Palmerin, whose presence was more acceptable to Satrafort, then the Sage
Aliart, so that he would gladly have changed his master: nevertheless, he
concealed his mind closely to himself, doubting least he should purchase the
displeasure of his new Lord, to whom he advanced himself to give him his
faith for his dutiful obedience, praying the Knight of the Tiger, that he
would continue him in his woonted noble favor. Palmerin used such friendly
behavior toward him, as he remained well content withal, and having left the
Sage Aliart to give order about the customs of the Isle, he imbarqued himself
in the ship with Argentao, being desirous to go on firm land so soon as he
could possible, considered also, that he would have Arganto return to his
government.

And because he would the more commodiously rip up his secret grief to
Siluian, he took his leave of the princes Berolde and Platir, giving the^ to
understand, that he must of necessity go alone by himself, for that he had
an adventure assigned him, where he promised to be on the day ensuing.

These three thus parting, Platir and Berolde being glad to please the Prince
Palmerin in any thing he thought meet, they entered the same Foyst, wherein
they were brought thither, and so humbly taking their farewell of Palmerin,
they sailed toward Constantinople, the wind and weather serving them so
commodious, as in few days they attained the firm land.

In like manner did the Prince Palmerin in another Country, after he had taken
his leave of Argentao, who likewise returned into the Profound Isle, where his
Subjects received him very ^^atiously, accounting them highly bound to the
Prince Palmerin, in ordaining them such a Governor, who would in no case
suffer the people of that Island to be so cruelly dealt withal, as they had
been before of the bloody Giants.

CHAP. XX.
How Alfernao arrived at the Emperors Court of Constantinople, and of that
which happened to him.
NOt many days after the Knight of the Savage man, was departed from the City
of Constantinople, the Emperor was advertised of his loss, by the Prince
Florians Esquire, which caused no small grief through the whole Court: but it
came so to pass, that Alfernao arrived there upon the sudden, even as the
Emperor sat leaving on the Table, lamenting for the want of his Nephew
Florian, and when he had caused him to come before him, Alfernao fell down at
his feet with these words.

Illustrious and most gracious Emperor, I humbly desire your majesty, that you
would think of me in your woonted favor and clemency, not remembering my
passed transgressions, for if your Grace look into the depth of them, I shall
be found worthy of most grievous punishment, which your royal clemency has
power to moderate, in that you are accustomed to use mercy to them, whose
offenses deserve rigorous entreating. I am (dread Prince) that ancient man, who
came and requested your highness assistance, and dissembling with tears and
faint speeches, (which were nothing else but mere deceit) that I had great
need of the aid of one of your Knights: whereupon you granted license to
your noble Nephew, that he should leave your Court and go in my company, but I
intending deceit, was deceived my self, and could not execute on him what I
had determined.

Then began Alfernao to discourse to the emperor, the whole success of his
Nephewe Florian of the Forest, who had sent him to inform his Majesty of all
that happened to him, that the report of the Esquire might be the better
believed: whereto the Emperor thus answered.

Certainly Alfernao, you have brought my dear Friend and Nephew, into the
greatest danger that ever could happen to him, and albeit I have good reason to
the contrary, yet not for thine own deserts I pardon thee, but for bringing
me so good tidings of him, whom the Heavens would not suffer to fall into the
hands of the cruel Collambra: but trust me Alfernao, your dealing shall
remain to me for a sufficient example, how I give credit hereafter, either to
tears or fair speeches, especially coming from such a one as you seem to
be. As for Arlencea, I esteem marvelous well of her courteous dealings
toward my Nephew: and if it fortune that she come into my Court, I witness my
good will to requite her honest and virtuous deserts: in the mean time you may
go to your Chamber, and rest your self, and if you please to stay the coming
of my Nephew and Arlencea, you shall bear record of their entertainment, in
hope of which, I remit all that is past.

I would gladly (answered Alfernao) go where the Empress is, that the fear
which she has conceived by the Knight of the Sauadge-ma^s Esquire, may be
persuaded in hearing the truth. While he was thus speaking, the Empress
(accompanied with her Ladies, came to the Emperors presence, whereof he was
very glad, which made him begin thus.

Madame, I perceive that the desire you have to understand what is become of my
Nephew Florian, has caused you to come so suddenly hither, which has saved
this man a labor, for that he was coming to you.

The Empress and their Ladies, being all in their accustomed places, he
commanded the Nigromancer Alfernao, to express again unto the Empress his
former discourse, that she might likewise be acquainted with his deceytfull
treason: but the report displeased her very much, as also all her Ladies and
Gentle-women, raising such a hatred in themselves against Alfernao, as they
desired the Emperor they might depart the place.

The Prince Primaleon seeing the great choler of the Ladies began very
pleasantly to smile at them, all the Princes in the Hall likewise bearing him
company: and in the meanetime this laughter lasted, they heard a great noise
without in the Palace, diverse running to know the occasion, they beheld
Albanis the Esquire to the Prince Berolde of Spain, to come leading by the hand
the Giantesse Collambra, the sight of whom, made the people to flock on heaps
exceedingly, and such wondering, as all the Palace sounded with the Echo of
their noise.

Albanis entered the great hall holding Collambra by the hand, her face being so
fearful, as moved the Emperor to start suddenly. Alfarnao had no sooner
espied her, but his heart came in a manner dead, nevertheless, he covered his
grief so cunningly as he could, and having embraced her, began in this manner.

Madame, it should appear, that the same misfortune which has brought me
hither, has had the like authority over you: wherefore I desire you to take
all patiently, and commit our unhappiness to Fortunes vnstedinesse. When the
cruel Collambra, (who had all this while eyed the Emperor) heard the words of
Alfernao, she began to cry aloud, (suspecting that she was betrayed) as though
with her voice, she would have shaken the Hall in pieces: and after she had
wept bitterly a pretty space, she spoke as follows.

O Alfernao, I see at this instant, thy monstrous and disloyal dealing, in
that thou have forgotten the good and kind affection, which my husband
Brauorant in his life time did always bear thee, in that thou have delivered
me into their hands, to whom thou have also betrayed my daughter, thou having
used the matter so, as I shall never see her again.

Madame (said Alfernao) I know well the doubt you make of my loyalty, and I see
I must be constrained to satisfy you, by rehearsing my manifold and extreme
mifortunes, as well to qualify your anger toward me, as to cause you see how
equal our unhappiness is, in that one unhappy Planet has stricken us both.
Then he began to rip up the whole circumstance, of that which had happened
since his departure from her, and at the end of his discourse, he gave her to
understand, that Arlencea her daughter willed her to forget the death of her
children, and the envy she bare to him that had killed them, which if she did
not agree unto, she should be in danger never to see her again: Collambra
returned him this answer. Credit me Alfernao, I am not so much offended at my
present misfortune, as at these thy words, wherefore to knitte up the matter,
I give thee this assurance, that I die, in thinking Arlencea my daughter is so
forgetful of her self, as to endure the courtesy of him that has murdered
her brethren, and the death of them is the more yrkesome unto me, in that she
honoreth him, who has so much dishonored me. With these words she cast her
self down on the ground so furiously, as if was a good whi^^^ she would use
any more talk: so, during y^ time she was in this rage, Albanis, the Prince
Beroldes Esquire, advanced himself to make known to the Emperor his message,
not forgetting to declare the whole circumstance, of that which happened in the
Perilous Isle, both how Palmerin had slain the Giant Espouuantable, and how
his three Couzins were deprived of their lives, by the prowess of his Lord
Berolde, Platir, and the Sage Aliart.

These news did greatly satisfy the Prince Primaleon, and Gridonia: then
further proeeding in rehearsing the dangers, which moved them all to great
admiration. Upon this Alfernao declared how the people of the Profound Isle,
had chosen the Knight of the Savage man for their head and Governor, and
because he was absent, Palmerin had placed Argentao to rule the Isle. More
(quoth he) the Knights have left this Island, and are gone into the Perilous
Isle, where they are determined to soiourne for a while, and then afterward
they will come hither unto your highness Court: to this the Emperor answered
thus.

I perceive that the most noble and knightly adventures, are reserved for my
Nephew Palmerin, of whose welfare I doubt, if he be deprived of the company of
the Sage Aliart, therefore, I would both he and the Prince Florian were here
together, for that (I promise you) I do even long for their company. Then
breaking from the ma^ter, he desired Alfernao to tell him, if the Prince
Florian did intend to tarry long in the Realm of Spain.

My gracious Lord (answered Alfernao) he is not determined as yet to return
unto your Court, before he have first shown to A^lencea, the Castle of
Almaroll. These words were not welcome to Leonarda the Princes of Thrace, she
having already given entertainment to the Prince Florian in the chiefest place
of her heart, for she doubted least the sight of the Princess Miragarda, would
quite extinguish the remembrance of her: but when she thought that the Knight
of the Savage man, would enter Combat against him that kept the Shield of
Miragarda, she quite and clean forsook her former opinion, and lauded
Fortune, in sending her so good (...) for her servant.

Polinarda perceiving the troublesome thoughts of her especial friend, very
softly gave her this comfort. Madame, and my sweet friend, suffer your Knight
to frequent those places where his own affection serves him, for I dare assure
you, that the beauty of never a Princess in the world, can attain the power
to change his fancy, and therefore I pray you be not discouraged by the beauty
of the Princess Miragarda, your own being so sufficient, as I am persuaded,
she will not be hired to contend with you.

Madame (answered Leonarda) I am not able to judge how much I am indebted for
your gracious favor, and seeing loyal friendship commands nothing should be
concealed between us, I will let you understand thus much, that your present
comfortable words, has brought me out of a tedious conceit, wherein my spirit
was grievously passioned.

The Emperor commanded the Magitian Alfernao, to comfort Collambra, and to
assure her, that for her daughter Arlenceas sake, he did afford her his
favorable welcome into his Court: and if she would consent to be baptized,
every one would so greatly honor her, as she should quickly forget the death
of her Children. Collambra seeing Alfernao coming, could not suffer him to
declare what the Emperor had assigned him, but as a woman mad and desperate,
spoke unto him in this order. How do thou (Alfernao) recompense the good
deeds thou have received at my husbands hands, to render thy self so willingly
on my enemies side? and by the persuasion of them, thou come to will me
forsake the law, wherein I have been nourished and brought up all my life time:
I promise thee, I will both finish my life, and thy treasons together, to the
end it may be an example to them, who enterprise things against their duty,
and specially dealing with me, who rested my hope the fidelity, whereof thou
made me assurance by promise. With these words she ran to one of the great
open windows of the hall, and before any one could get to her to succor her,
she threw her self headlong down into the Court, and Alfernao coming (as
though he would have hindered her) threw himself likewise down after her,
Collambra sell so waightily on the stones which were sharp, as she was bruised
all in pieces, not having the remembrance to speak one word afterward, but
Alfernao lived until the next morning.

The Emperor and Primaleon were sorry to see such a desperate murder, but the
Emperor and the other Princesses rejoiced, that they were so well delivered of
the cruel Collambra: yet did they grieve to see such a bloody stratagem, and
being not able to endure this pitiful sight, they withdrew themselves into
their Chambers. The two young Princesses Leonarda and Polinarda, passed away the
time, in discoursing severally the valiant prowess of their knights, until
such time as they were called to Supper.

CHAP. XXI.
How the Princes and Knights which were Prisoners to the great Turk, arrived at
the Court of Constantinople, whereupon the King Recinde delivered out of prison
the Prince Albayzar.
ON the next day the bodies of Collambra and Alfernao were buried, and the
Emperor sitting conferring with Albanis, the Prince Beroldes Esquire, about
many matters of the Profound Isle, an ancient Knight (whom his Majesty had
given charge to guard the Port of Constantinople,) entered the great Hall, and
being come into the Emperors presence he kneeled down, and spoke as follows.

Invincible Emperor, if these news which has been rehearsed of your noble
Nephews, did move content, amid your manifolds discontents, the tidings which
I bring you at this present, will be no less welcome to you then the former:
for I advertise your Highness, that within your haven is entered four Galleys
from the great Turk, wherein are Polendos, Belcar, and all the other Princes
and Knights of our Court, which have been kept thus long in prison by the
Princess Targianaes Father, I came to let your Majesty understand hereof
before they were landed, because it is m^ete you should be acquainted
therewith, before any other.

The Emperor remained so joyful of these tidings as possible might be, and
without making any answer, he departed forth of the Hall so ravished inwardly
with joy and gladness, as he could not tell (for a pretty while) whither to
go: in like manner it happened oftentimes to them, who have news brought them
of those things which they are most desir^us to have. At length he came down
the stairs into the open court, where he sat down in a chair, until he
might see them come in at the gates: in the mean while, many knights of his
Court came to tell him of the arrival of his son Polendos, but he did not
make them any answer, for that his mind was busied, in remembering how many
misfortunes had come to him one in another neck, and yet (notwithstanding)
they have all come to a prosperous end, whereupon he humbly desired the
heavenly Powers to continue him still in their woonted favorable protection,
for it is the nature of men of good judgment, to doubt of danger after they
have once received good success, for that it has been evermore seen, that
felicity and misery do not equally happen, but a dram of pleasure, has
commonly a pound of pain. In this manner the good Emperor discoursed secretly
with himself, and comparing every cause jointly together, the tears did
plentifully run down his white beard, thinking how Fortune favored him in his
Age, when he was worst able to witness his duty to her: Nevertheless, he
feared he should not long enjoy the company of his Knights, their imprisonment
had gone so near his heart, as he feared between two extremes to be
suddenly rapt away.

While the Emperor was thus winding up the endless bottom of uncertain
thoughts, the prince Primaleon his son came and kneeled before him, giving
him to understand how the Galleys whre arrived: whereupon he commanded his
Horse should be brought him, and so presently he took his way to the Port,
accompanied with his son, all the Princes of the Court, and the chiefest
inhabitants of the City, each one greatly desiring to see the prisoners. When
the Emperor came to the port, he saw on land, Polendos, Belcar, Onistalde, with
diverse others, and that he might the better welcome them, he alighted from his
Horse, being very much abashed to see his Knights in such order, their Faces
pale and black, their strength weakened, and their boards and hair grown so
long, as they which saw them when they departed from Constantinople, in the
company of the Princess Targiana, began now scantly to know them: when they
were all come on shore, the Emperor contained them with the self same
courtesy, and his mild nature did daily afford toward his especial friends.

The Prince Belcar presented himself to the Emperor, offering to kiss his
highness hand, but he received him in his arms, embracing him very lovingly,
and used such gracious courtesy toward him, as he did unto the Prince
Primaleon his son, as well for that he had bin brought up in his Court, as also
because he was the son of his own sister, and the hardy Frisoll king of
Hungaria his brother and especial good friend As he continued this favorable
usage to Belcar, Onistalde, son to the King Recinde, and his own son
Polendos, came and kneeled down before him, then leaving Belcar he returned to
them very graciously, declaring in the sight of every one his incomparable
beauty: so departing from the Port, he walked with them on foot toward the
palace, refusing to mount on horseback, his mind was busied with such
exceeding joy, as well for the recovery of them, as for the Princely
commendations Targiana had sent him, who^ he had now proved his special
friend. The Prince Primaleon went in the midst between Belcar and Onistalde,
and the other Prince and knights came lovingly, co^muning with their friends,
in which order they all followed the Emperor: who being no sooner come to the
Palace, but there he found the Empress accompanied with her ladies, attending
their coming at the outtermost Gate, she having given the knights her amiable
welcome, the Emperor commanded they should be brought to their chambers, for
that their great travail on the Seas required some rest.

The Princes were conducted into the Emperors chamber, according as it was the
custom for those whom he esteemed, at their arrival, and they were scant out
of the great hall, when, they perceived to enter a Turkish Esquire, who coming
before the Emperor, began to salute him with these words. My gracious Lord,
Almaneor Ambassador from the great Turk, commanded me to let your majesty
understand, that he is loath as yet to take landing, fearing lest he should
hinder the pleasure your highness conceiueth, seeing your knights so safely
returned, he being come with them, and has here sent them unto your majesty:
wherefore, he desires you would not judge amiss of him, in that he has done,
and if so be he have in ought moved offense to your Highness, he will to
morrow morning come and be sorry for it, when he will make you acquainted with
the sum of his embassage, which will cause you to loose part of the
contentment, which at this present your knights has animated you withal.

Certainly my friend (answered the Emperor) I am sorry that I did not make
more remembrance of him, but let him commit the fault to my knights with whom I
will enjoin in making amends again to morrow, because I shall see him to day,
he being willing to rest himself this night in his galley. The esquire
departed with this courteous answer of the Emperor, who taking the Empress by
the hand, withdrew themselves into their chamber, where they passed the night
with greater contentment, then they had done of many days before.

But when fair Phoebus in the morning had displayed his golden face on the
earth, the Empress walked to the Chapel to hear service, the Emperor and
the knights being far behind her, and service being ended, they all dined
with the Empress in her chamber, for that she had determined to feast
Polendos, Belcar, Onistalde, and the other Princes, who were served at dinner
with marvelous great state.

The Tables being withdrawn, the Emperor commanded the principal knights of
his court, to go welcome on land the great Turks Ambassador, to whom he
would show himself honorable, as well for that he would not be thought
vngreatefull, having recovered home again his knights, as also to understand
the will of the great Turk.

Polendos, Belcar, and the rest of them that had been prisoners, went foremost
to receive him on shore, because they would not have him think, that they had
forgotten the kindness he showed them on the Seas: where Primaleon was
somewhat displeased, because his nature could not suffer him to use such
kindness, toward them he knew his professed enemies.

Polendos with his company being come to the Port, (he with such as he thought
good (took a Barge, and went aboard the Galley to the Ambassador, and brought
them on shore with them very nobly, with such a noise of drums, phifes,
trumpets, and clarians, as the Turks wondered at this royal entertainment. The
Ambassador nothing the great courtesy of Polendos, who was diligent in showing
him the greatest honor might be, knew very well, that this exceeding humanity
came from him that was their Lord and governor: whereupon he considered, that a
Prince so well beloved of all, as the Emperor Palmerin was, should find more
friends to aid him in his necessity, then enemies to molest him.

All this while, the Emperor attended the Ambassadors coming to the Empress
chamber, accompanied with his son Primaleon, and many Princes and Knights of
his Court, and the Ambassador (who was the same man that came before, to
request in the great Turks name, the freedom of Albayzar, in change of those
Princes that were prisoners in Turkey) being in the Presence of the Emperor,
made him such humble reverence as his Majesty well deserved, and not using any
such proud behavior, as he did at his first coming to Constantinople.

The emperor welcomed him very graciously, desiring him not to be offended,
because he did not accept of him y^ day before according as willingly he would
have done. Most worthy Emperor (said the Ambassador) I am not of so small
discretion, but I knew well how busy you were yesterstay, in receiving home
them, who^ you have so long looked for: but letting these needless matters
pass, I must request to know your highness mind, as concerning the liberty of
the prince Albayzar, whom you would not send to the great Turk my Lord, for
that you doubted he would not send home them, whom he kept as prisoners. As
touching the deliverance of them, my Lord has bin so hardy as to trust to your
gentleness, only at the entreaty of his daughter Targiana, he having no
assurance for the Prince Albayzar his daughters husband, but only the word of
her who is your great friend: and desires that you would now send home her
beloved Lord Albayzar, of whom the great Turk himself willed not me to use
any speech, having joined me to speak of those things, which will but little
please you in the hearing them: the Emperor returned him this answer.

I know not what the great Turk your Lord has determined to make me
acquainted withal, but I am so accustomed to doubtful occasions, as let his
malice stretch never so far, and his devises purchase what scope he can, yet
have they no power to make me fear. But for the Princess Targiana, I am to
think my self highly in her debt, in that her earnest entreaty won the
liberty of knights, and surely it greeueth me, that her father would be so
envious toward me, who would with all my heart, have his daughter again in my
Court, that I might recompense some part of her gentleness she has used to
me, and for that she would so kindly pledge her self upon the assurance she
reposeth in my fidelity.

Moreover, I promise you Sir, I have written to the King Recinde, that he
should not fail to send me the Prince Albayzar, and I believe certainly it
will not belong before he come hither: wherefore, I pray you to stay here till
he come, and in the mean time I will use the matter so, as the Turk your Lord
shall be rid of his doubt, and the Princess Targian a satisfied to her own
contentment.

I am of the opinion (said the Ambassador) that the Prince Albayzar will be
here, and that quickly, for the Damosel (who was sometime sent in secret to
your mistress, was dispatched with her message twenty days before my setting
forth, that she should let the King Recinde and the Prince Albayzar understand
of my coming, and certify them likewise of the liberty of our knights: by
means whereof, they will not fail to come hither to your Court, until which
time I am determined (by your license) to soiourne here, but I will not declare
my Lord the Turks mind, before I see the Prince Albayzar, nevertheless, I
here present you with his gracious letter, and after you have well understood
the contents thereof, I will declare what I have in charge.

There pausing, he took forth of his bosom a letter written in p^rchment, and
sealed with the Arms of the great Turk, the which he humbly presented unto
the Emperor, who presently caused it to be opened, and perceiving thereby,
that the Turk willed him to give faithful credit to what the Ambassador said,
he desired him to report the cause of his arrival: whereto the Ambassador thus
replied.

My gracious Lord, I know you have not forgotten the day, when the Princess
Targiana came unto your Court, neither the subtlety wherewith she was entised,
and brought forth of her Fathers Court, by the guilefull dealings of your
Nephew, the Knight of the Sauadge-man, who was hindered in such sort in his
journey, as he could not bring the Princess Targiana unto your Court: but she
being here, was entertained by your Excellency, the Empress, and the
Princess Polinarda, in such gracious manner, as she esteems her self
(during life) bound to you for your manifold courtesies. And my Lord the
Turk (in regard of your Noble favor toward his Daughter) would gladly (in any
thing he could) witness his beneuolent mind to you, forgetting all iniuryes
past, for his fair Daughter Targianaes sake: but with this condition by the
way, that your Majesty offer him nothing against right or reason, for if you
do^, he shall be constrained by forcible strength, to revenge the shame and
injury he has received by the Knight of the Sauadge-man.

And for the substance of his mind, it is thus in brief, he desires you to
send unto him the Knight your Nephew, because he would chastise him for his
heinous offense. And if you refuse to satisfy his request, he commands me
to let you understand, he is your enemy, and will so revenge that Knights
abuse, as all the world shall take example by him.

I cannot believe (said the Emperor) that the Turk your lord will seem to
threaten him, at whose hands he requires nothing but Justice, the which I
being very willing to do, cannot think well of your present proceedings, for
that in sooth you demand no Justice. Besides, it is not reasonable to grant
what your lord requires, for if Florian be accused for bringing away his
Daughter, I answer, that he did it at the earnest entreaty and desire of her
self: So that your lord (I perceive trauelleth in vain after my Nephew, the
Knight of the Sauadge-man whom I will not send unto him, if I wist he should be
as welcome to him as to my self. And if I should seem to content the will of
your lord, I cannot send my Nephew except he please himself, and I am
persuaded he will not consent unto it, much less his Father, who is a Prince
of great authority.

If this reason I have made you, will not content the will of your lord the
Turk, I am willing to receive whatsoever he please, either to bring or send
me, but I am sorry I am so far spent with years, that I cannot show him
what I have been sometime. Nevertheless, for a sufficient witness of my
self, I will send him the Knight whom he demands, that he may tell him
what I would do my self, and let him be bold, that Knight will do his
errand to the uttermost. As for other answer I wish you not to look for at
my hands, wherefore I think it good you go to rest your self, and when the
Prince Albayzar comes, if you ^inde the time so convenient for you, you may
depart when you please: and in the mean time, I will honor you with such
courteous entertainment, as you shall think well off.

I was assured before (answered the Ambassador) of the answer you would make
me: wherefore having fulfilled my charge, I need not for this matter
henceforward use any more words.

When the Ambassador had thus concluded, P^lendos desired the Emperor, that
he would suffer him to entertain the Turkish Infidel, while he stayed there,
whereunto the Emperor gladly consented, and Polendos bringing him into his
Lodging, failed not to let him see, that enemies were better welcomed in the
Emperors Court, then Friends were to his lord the great Turk.

Primaleon remained very well contented, having heard the answer of the Emperor
his father, as also for that he had so def^ded the cause of the Knight of the
Savage man, for the love of whom the Princess Leonarda was diuersely moved,
fearing least he should fall into the great Turks hands, who would appease the
anger of his stomach, in sacrificing the good and hardy Knight to his Gods.

The sudden dumps of this young Princess, was well perceived by her sweet
friend Polinarda, who hid her knowledge thereof for the present time, until
they had brought the Empress to her chamber: then they two walking together to
their Lodging, Polinarda demanded the cause of her grief, whereupon the
Princess Leonarda, being ignorant that Targiana had been brought to
Canstantinople by the noble Florian of the Forest, or how else the matter
stood, but she desired Polinarda (if so it were her pleasure) to declare how
these occasions had happened.

When the Princess had herein satisfied her mind, she remained in sorrow
without measure, as well by occasion of suspecting the beauty of Targiana, as
also to think on the ingratitude of the Knight of the Savage man, so that at
that very instant she reputed him as a man without faith, love, or regard of
loyalty, and she would gladly have devised the mean, whereby to banish the
remembrance of him forth of her heart. Which the Princess Polinarda
perceiving, and willing to prevent any mischance, that should happen to her
Couzin, she began to use her talk in this manner.

Madame, think you the Prince Florian will be the same man to you, as he was
to the Princess Targiana? You must not think so, for their love (as it was
then) was not to be allowed among persons of honor, and that which made him so
ready to think well on her, was for no other occasion, but that he might find
the means to get out of the hands of the great Turk her Father: and from that
Court he could never have escaped, had it not been by the aid of the
princess Targiana, so that to satisfy her will, and help his own necessity,
he made himself so hardy to bring her into Greece, where being arrived, he
left her, knowing that it was no honorable sign, that a christian Knight
should make love to an Infidel Moore. Now therefore it is not for you to ground
your judgment on that which is done and past, for that your beauty far
excels the black hew of the Princess Targiana, and you being accounted as
one of the most renowned Ladies through the whole world, must judge thus with
your self, that he will not a little boast of his good fortune, being
entertained into your gracious service.

And on my word you may assuredly build, the Knight of the Savage man is only
yours, and he would not follow the adventures he has enterprised, but only in
hope to gain your favorable acceptance: wherefore I pray you let the
consideration of that I have spoken, cause you to forsake the conceit you have
of my Couzin.

Madame, (answered Leonarda) you have won such power over me by your friendly
words, as I am forced to forget my former imaginations: but yet it is to be
doubted that your Couzin will be inueigled, seeing be has the conducting of so
many Ladies through the Realm of Spain.

Good sweet Lady (said Polinarda) I pray you let not your spirits be troubled
with these suspicious passions, for your Knight is not of so weak judgment,
as any other should make him to forget you, for such adventures happen commonly
to traveling Knights, to meet in many places with Ladies and Damoselles, the
company of whom makes them to have the better remembrance of those, who rules
their thoughts by the sovereignty of love: as for my Couzin, I dare give you
my faith that he is none but yours, and thereof (on my word) you may assure
your self.

These speeches that Polinarda used, did so persuade the young Princess of
Thrace, as she quite forsook her jealous thoughts, which before was carried
with so many contraries, as there was hardly any place for reason to harbor.
As it often happens to them, who play the wantons with the little blind boy
of the Goddess Cytherea.

CHAP. XXII.
How the Knight of the Savage man (accompanied with the Damsels) arrived in
the King of Spaines Court, and of that which happened to him there, against the
Prince Albayzar.
THe Ambassador from the great Turk, stayed certain days in the Court of the
Emperor, in the company of the Prince Polendos, who made better account of him
there, then his entertainment in Turkey deserved, and many along look made
the Ambassador, waighting the coming of the Prince Albayzar, the Emperor and
Primaleon could not sufficiently commend the courtesy of the Princess
Targiana; in that her tears ransommed the Christian prisoners forth of their
trouble.

Here we must come again to the Knight of the Savage man, who iournied so
speedily (after he had vanquished the four Knights in the Valley, and gotten
the Damsels) as he arrived in the City of Brusia, which at this time is
called Tolledo, where the King Recinde as then made his abode, who was not a
little glad, when tidings came to him of the liberty of his son, and the
other Knights, which were held in captivity by the great Turk.

So seen as Florian was come to the kings Palace, he called his Esquire to
him, desiring him to go let the Queen and her Ladies understand, that a
strange Knight was come thither, who enterprised (if her majesty thought it so
convenient) to approve himself against the King Recindes Knights. The Esquire
being acquainted with the will of his Lord, presently went into the Palace,
where he was brought to the Queens Chamber, the King himself being there, for
that he had dyned there in the company of the Queen and her Ladies, whom the
Esquire beholding, judged them very fair and beautiful, marry he found a
great difference between them, and the Ladies he had seen in the Court of the
Emperor Palmerin.

The Esquire advancing himself into their presence, went first and humbled
himself to the king Recinde, then coming to the Queen, he kneeled down and
spoke as follows.

Madame, a strange knight, in whose company I came unto your Court, having
passed through your Realm, is now desirous to try himself in Arms, against
the Knights of your royal Court, for the great desire he had to do service to
the King your husband, but such is your intent, as he proceeds on the request
of certain Ladies he has brought in his company, which prevails so much
with this good knight, as (if your Majesty so accept of it) he would venture
the Ioust with the Knights of your Court, who will maintain the beauty of their
Ladies, to excel them he has brought with him. And that he might proceed in
his enterprise, he rather intended to ask leave of you then of the King,
because he knows he shall not any way offend his excellency. The King and the
Queen were very glad of these news, in that Fortune had sent them the trial
of those matters they most desired, which was in a manner very dainty there,
for that the Emperors Court of Greece carried such a brave report, as all the
noble Knights in the world went thither to try their valor. Beside, if any
adventure were approved in the Realm of Spain, they were altogether done at
the Castle of Almaroll: so that these two aforenamed places, had the general
trial of famous knights. The King of Spain seeing the Queen returned the
Esquire no answer, he spoke to her in this manner. Trust me Madame, you ought
not to refuse the gentle offer of the knight as well to satisfy their minds,
which have desired to see such hauty exployts, as also to avoid the secret hard
judgment of your ladies, who (I am sure) would gladly see y^ courage of their
favored knights, the Queen mildly returned this answer. Since it likes you
so well my gracious Lord) that the request is to be allowed, thou may (Esquire)
say unto the knight, that the King and I do^ think very well of his coming to
our Court, and that we do^ permit him the liberty of the Ioust, against any
that will enter the field with him, whether it be for the Ioust or Combat,
that is as the occasions shall happen, but howsoever it be, the King allows
him the freedom of the field, and if the Knight desire to resist himself,
he shall be most heartily welcome, then to morrow morning he may put his intent
in execution.

The greatest rest or quiet (answered the Esquier) which the Knight my Master
desires to have, is that he may find such Knights, on whom he may bestow the
breaking of some Lances, but since your Majesty has so freely granted him the
Ioust I will not fail to let him understand your gracious pleasure: in the
mean while, I hope your Knights will put themselves in a readiness.

The Esquier was no sooner departed, but the King went and looked forth at one
of the windows, and seeing the Knight in the field, among so many Ladies, he
said to the Queen: Madame, come hither, and you shall see the strangest
adventure, that ever you did in all your life. Certainly (said the Queen,
when she had well beheld the Knight and the Damoselles) it should seem they
have a good opinion of the Knight, they behave themselves so amiably in his
company, and one of the ladies appears in stature, as it were a Giantesse.
Indeed said the King, her strangeness makes me to eye her the more, and for
the Knight, I judge either he is very foolish, or else he is compelled by the
commandment of some great Princess, to lead about with him these Damsels.

While the King and the Queen stood thus ieasting on the Knight and the
Damsels, the Prince Albayzar (who was given to understand of this adventure)
came forth of his Chamber, and when he came to the Palace gate, he mounted on
Horseback, and came to the window where the King and Queen looked forth, and
having given them the salutation of the day, and questioned somewhat about the
enterprise of the Knight, he determined to try the Combat with him. But his
hasty intent was stayed at this time, for that a Knight very well armed came
into the field, monnted on a lusty Coursar, and bearing for his devise in his
Shield, a white Heart, in a field of Sable. The knight being in the place where
the Ioust was determined, the Esquire (who had been before sent with the
message to the Queen) spoke unto him in this order.

Sir, the Damsels knight, says that he is not accustomed to Ioust, without
that which shall be his recompense if he remain victor.

Wherefore I pray you let him understand, what shall be his desert if he
chance to conquer you: for if the victory fall on your side, he will yield the
Damsel unto you, which you shall think best on in all the company: the
Spanish Knight replied thus.

The knight (my friend) as it seems to me, is far beyond the scope of my
mind, in that he would trouble other folks, with them that he would be gladly
rid of himself: wherefore you may say unto him, that I am such a Ladies
servant, toward whom I have dot yet so well deserved, as (if I were
vanquished) to yield her up into his custody. And I come for no other cause
into this place, but to let him well and truly understand, that the beauty of
those Damsels, may not compare with the heavenly face of my Lady. And if my
fortune prove so good, as my trial will prevail. I shall content my self
without expecting any other recompense at the Knights hands: therefore till him
I would gladly know, for whom he presumes to hazard the Ioust.

The Esquire having brought the Spanish Knights answer to his Lord, he did
content himself very well therewith: Marry tell him (quoth he) that I have not
the leisure to name the Lady, in whose cause I fight, but if he be so happy
as to conquer me, I will withal my heart satisfy his request. The Esquire
went to him again with his Masters mind, which when the Spaniard heard, he
presently entered into these words. I perceive that thy masters proud and hauty
stomach, which made him so bold to enter the field, causes him now to be so
brave in speeches: wherefore I must take pains to assuage his courage, because
I will help him away with one of his Damsels.

The King Recinde and Albayzar, who marked well their large language, desired
to see if their deeds would counteruaile their words, especially if the
Damsels knight were such a one as he made himself to be. At last they
broached their horses with their spurs, and ran together with so great force,
as the Spanish knight, who was the servant to Policia, the daughter to Duke
Ladislart, received such a pleasant stroke, (the Damsel Knight having broken
his staff so just upon him) ^as his Shield was rared through the midst, and
himself thrown to the ground with his heels upward: but he recovered
himself quickly like a good Knight, and drawing his sword, came to revenge the
foil he sustained in the Ioust, which the Damoselles Knight beholding, he
stayed him with these speeches.

Sir knight, I came not to crave license for the combat with the sword,
wherefore I pray you pacify your self, and let me Ioust with these five
Knights, who I see attend for me, and if I be so happy to escape out of their
hands not disaduantaged, I shall be content to pleasure you in your own desire.

The Spanish knight was so offended at this mishap, as he cared not if he had
dyed there presently, but that the king commanded him to avoid the place.

Then one of the five knights entered the field, but he was welcomed like the
first, and so in brief did they all bear one another company: which Albayzar
seeing, said, that the Damoseles might not be won without good pains were
bestowne, they having such a good and hardy Knight to defend them. The Damsels
Knight having broken four Lances, withdrewe himself, attending when his
Esquire should bring him another. Then Albayzar (seeing the Knights necessity)
sent him one of his own Lances, which was black, and the head was of pure
Gold, but the Damoselles Knight would not receive it, speaking to him that
brought it in this manner.

Thou may say unto Albayzar, that the little love and good will I bear him,
makes me disdain to receive any thing he sends. Aduauncing himself
toward, he took a Lance that was sent him by the King, wherewith he charged
another knight that came against him, in such sort, as he was cast out of his
Saddle so boisterously, that for a good while he remained senseless. In the
mean while the Damosells Knight gallopped on to the end of the course, because
he could hardly stay his horse* the vanquished Knight arose and departed out of
the field and then the Prince returned back again to the place, where
Albayzar sat to behold the ioust, who came and took him by the arm, using
these speeches to him. Sir knight, I judge that the little knowledge you have
of me, has made you to despise and contemn the Lance I sent you, but yet I
parden your folly in so doing.

I desire (said the Damsels Knight) to believe the words I sent you by your
Esquire, and persuade your self, that I know you to be Albayzar the Souldan of
Babylon, with who^ I would willingly enter the Combat: Albayzar hearing these
words, answered him thus.

I am content (because you know me so well) that you shall not take a surfeit
by loosing your desire, and if you will stay till my (...) be brought hither, I
will break this Lance on you, because you presumed to refuse it: and
afterward, I will entertain you with the Combat, when, I doubt not but to
give severe chasticement, to your proud and mallapart stomach.

I would with all my heart, answered the Damoselles Knight, that thou went
armed, for my malice is such against thee, as I cannot tell it, but thou shall
feel it. Albayzar presently sent for his Armor, and the King seeing their
fury, and noting the high words that had passed between them, came down into
the field to them, to the end he would not that Albayzar should fall into any
misfortune, before he had been first in the ^^perours Court, to which place the
Turk had sent the imprisoned knights, because he would recover home again
Albayzar (...): for which cause the king Recinde would not permit them to try
the combat, and scantly would he suffer them to ioust together, so greatly he
feared lest the Damoselles Knight, would endaunger the person of the Prince
Albayzar.

The Queen was very well pleased, in that by the means of the Damsels
knight, she perceived the valor of the knights of the Spanish Court, and the
Damsels (albeit they rejoiced not in their ill fortune which were unhorsed)
yet they greatly commended the prowess of their knight, that had defended them
so well. And still they looked for the coming of the Spanish Ladies to them,
delighting that they had no better servants to venture for them, but the Ladies
themselves grieved, to see their good friends so unfortunately foiled.

CHAP. XXIII.
How the Damsels Knight and Albayzar Iousted together.
NOt long it was before the Prince Albayzars esquires returned with their
masters armor, which was black, and streamed all over with little strokes
of Gold, and when the Prince of Babylon was armed, and had taken the same Lance
which Florian refused he came before the king, speaking to him in this manner.
I desire you (my gracious Lord) that you would not dissuade me from my
enterprise, because I know my self able to reprove this Knight, that showed
himself so disdainful toward him, whom I am sure you would not have receive
any shame in your Court: to which words the king thus replied.

Albayzar, I am so earnest in regard of your well doing, as I would be sorry
any thing should happen to you here but well, wherefore, to grant you the
Combat against the strange knight, trust me, I neither dare, nor will consent
to it, as well for the care I have of your person, as for that I will give no
occasion to the Emperor Palmerin, whereby he may think any ill by me.

Well then (quoth Albayzar) I hope this Lance shall do so much as I would have
it, but if it do not, I may well complain on your highness, in that you will
not suffer me to punish the pride of this knight. Good Sir (said the Damsels
knight) do not thus waste the time in needelesse words, it were good you
prepared your self to the Ioust, and if I be prouder then you would have me,
punish me as you see occasion: but yet do no more then you dare do, for if
fortune so friend you, as you remain victor over me, let my payment be such as
you shall please and there is an end.

I pray you (quoth Albayzar) do me so much favor, as to tell me who you are,
for I assure you, I would gladly know for two causes: the first, that I might
not be ignorant of the knight whom I shall vanquish: the second, if so be I
speed not according to my desire, that I may the better enquire after you as I
travail abroad: the answer of the Damsels Knight was this.

It is not my will to satisfy thy honor so much, but persuade thy self, that I
am the greatest enemy that ever thou had in all thy life, and I grieve that I
may not have liberty of the Combat against thee, because I long have wished
to have my fill on thee: but since it is the pleasure of the King it shall not
be, I will not presume to exceed his highest will, nevertheless I will awaite
the time, when I may deal with thee according to my desire.

If I be not deceived (answered Albayzar) I think I know know you, for I think
I have seen you sometime in the Castle of Dramorant the Cruel, where you made
your self so bold to use such language, as I have not yet forgotten: wherefore
assure your self, that the speeches thou did use there, and the bravery
thou seem to have at this present, shall be the destruction of all such, as
dare afford their aid in the injury I have received. But for that I may a
little ease my stomach, both in taking revenge, and quailing thy usurping
boldness, which I cannot so deal with all as I would, till fitter time serve:
or my purpose: I desire that thou would break one Staff with me, under the
name of some ^word Lady, that I may see whether she deserve better in praise
then my Lady whom I run for, the ^aire Princess Targiana.

I will take her (said the Damsels Knight) which is the s^mplest in beauty of
all these in my company, for my favorite at this time, and in her service I am
determined to ioust against you. I would wish (quoth Albayzar) because the Lady
I have named (is the gracious Mistress of my fight* is known to be of great
and high authority, that you would name your most favored to be such a one,
as may be thought worthy to equal her.

You press me overmuch (answered the Damsels knight) in that you would have
me reveal that which I will not, but this I advertise you, that Fortune has
made me servant of a Lady, in whose gracious favor I (...) and will not let
the sovereignty of her name be sh^wen in any (...), but only such as are of
great importance: yet since I see you af^ect so much, I am content to break
one Lance with you for her sake. And because your thoughts may be the better
satisfied, I assure you, that she is tar more excellent in beauty then the
Princess Targiana, and so singular above her, as her name is not worthy to be
talked on, in respect of my royal and incomparable Mistress. And I desire
that you would not request to know her name, because I have vowed to keep it
in secret, that I may the better make others marvel, what and who she should
be. I cannot suffer (said Albayzar) thy reproachful speeches, especially when
thou seem to dispraise her, whose beauty no Lady living can any way equal.

Then these two Knights departed to fetch their car^ire, and ran together
with singular courage, Albayzar having before his eyes the love of his Lady
Targiana, and the mi^^ie that his enemy had offered him, and the Damoselles
Knight was accompanied with the secret good will of the Princess Leonarda: in
brief, these two Knights were so greatly affectionate toward their Ladies,
that they encountered together with such force, as their Lances flew up into
the air in pieces, and so they passed on, not being shaken any thing at all.
When they were come to the end of the race, they failed not to take new
staves, which were broken again like as the first were, and yet no further
advantage on either side.

The King of Spain made great estimation of the noble valor which he perceived
in the Damsels Knight, and devised how he might accomplish the means to know
who he was: for he doubted not but Albayzar would discharge his duty well
enough, because the Shield of the Princess Miragarda, had made his valiancy
well known the Court of the Emperor Palmerin.

These two Princes were very much amazed, seeing they could have no more
advantage over one another, whereupon they tried the third Lance, wherewith
they met together so forcibly, as the Damolles Knight lost one of his
Stirroppes, and was cast upon the croupper of his Horse: in like manner,
Albayzar forsook both his stirropes, and was constrained to catch hold about
the neck of his Horse, and greatly offended they were both of them, having
Iousted so many times, and yet could not speed of that which they seuearely
desired, wherefore, they determined not to depart then, before one of them
should be cast beside his Saddle.

Then these two redoubted Knights, went to prove their fourth Lance, which
having in their hands, Albayzar spoke to the Damsels knight thus.

I pray you Sir favor me, in doing that which I must demand of you: the
Damsels Knight would pass no further, before he had returned him this answer.

Of truth Sir, I am thus intended, not to depart hence before I see you on the
ground, therefore I pray you travail not your self, in desirig any other
thing of me.

Certainly Sir (said Albayzar) I would not have thought you had been so
discourteous, nevertheless, I will yet entreat you once more, that you would
go present your self before the giant Almaroll, (if so be I prove so
fortunate as to foil you) and say to him, that by your means I have acquitted
the bond, wherein the Princess Miragarda so straitely tied me, in that she may
see the Knight, that Iousted against the beauty of my Lady Targiana: and if it
happen that fortune favor you with the victory, I will do any thing you shall
command me.

You offer me so fair play (said the Damsels Knight, as I cannot otherwise
choose but consent to your request. Thus they pointed to fetch their course,
and they met together so directly, as their Lances being broken, they buckled
together mightily with their bodies, having given each other such a rough
greeting, as the Damsels knight was compelled to forgo both his stirrops
greatly amazed: but Albayzar measured his length on the ground, so sore shaken,
as he lay in study a pretty while. The Damsels knight seeing him so astonished*
said unto him: You may know what advantage you have gotten, in that you have
not leave to try the Combat with me. Then he caused his Helmet to be opened,
that he might receive some air, and when he had sitten a good space, grieuing
at his misfortune, especially in the presence of the King Recinde, he arose,
being helped up by Gentlemen, whom the King commanded to honor him so much:
whereupon the Damsels Knight began thus again.

Albayzar you may perceive how little fortune favors you, and what advantage I
have won, maintaining the beauty of my gracious Mistres the princess of
Thrace, to whom I pray you present your self, when you shall arrive in the
Emperor Palmerins Court, and there you shall say to her thus: That a strange
Knight, who calls himself the Damsels Knight, hoth vanquished you, and
commanded you to submit your felfe to her excellency. And when thou have seen
her, let thine own eyes be judge, whether the beauty of Targiana may presume to
compare with hers, when it thou be not too deeply drowned in thine own
conceit, thou will recant thy former blasphemous error, and thou may assure
her, how I am greatly grieved, that this present service is of no more
importance, being the first that she has received of me as yet: Albayzar in a
rage made this answer.

I will not fail in keeping my promise to thee, and if the gods vouchsafe me
live so long, I will present thy head to my Lady the Princess Targiana, in
revenge of the shame I have this day received at thy hands. I would be sorry
(said the Damsels Knight) that thou should die in this mind: then
returning his face to the King Recinde, he said. I desire your Grace that you
would suffer me to depart, and that you would not be offended because I declare
not who I am: but this you may persuade your self, that there is no one Knight
in the world, that does more wish your good, and is readier to do you service
then my self: to which words the King thus replied.

Since it is not your will (Sir Knight) then you would be known, I will not be
he that shall move you to the contrary: but if at any time you pass this way,
I desire you to visit me, for in sooth you shall be welcome. I thank your
Grace most humbly (answered the Damsels Knight) and the great honor and
courtesy I have found at your hands, shall not be forgotten so long as I live.
Then taking one of the Lances that were left, he gave a reverent show of
obeisance to the King, the Queen, and all the Ladies (who took great delight
in him, beholding his knightly behavior) and so he departed with his company.

The King returned into his Castle, accompanied with the Prince Albayzar, whose
heart was so intruailously overcome with grief, as he would not speak to any,
nor suffer any to speak to him. The queen and her ladies were sorry, they
had no further knowledge of the Damsels Knight, and beside they were offended
at the Prince Albayzars foil, as well because his gentle behavior was such,
as for the reputation he gained when he carried away the Princes Miragardaes
Shield.

The Damsels Knight was not very far from the City, but the dark night
drew on, and they being in a Forest, and near to a fair Fountain, concluded
there to rest themselves for that night: so, after they had refreshed
themselves, they laid them down among the green leaves: the Prince himself,
he went and lay a pretty space from the Damsels, and laying his head on the
root of a Tree, the beauty of Leonarda the Princess of Thrace, presented it
self in his amorous thoughts, charging him with so many contrary Passions, as
all that night he could not lay his eye lids together, yet was his love so
irresolute, as the lest thing in the world could have made him forget all quite.

While the Prince Florian lay thus busied with a thousand imaginations,
Arlencea, who was marnailously affected toward him, seeing her companions were
all fast asleep, went to the place where the Prince Florian was laid, where,
sitting down by his side, she began to fall into these speeches. It seems to
me (most worthy knight of the Savage man) that the injury which I heretofore
have done you, does as yet remain fresh in your memory, in that you make no
account of her, who lives and dies only for your love. And that I speak the
truth, you may be perfectly resolved, in that (without regard of mine own
honor) I come to seek you out, the cause being this, that my entreaty might
move you pity her, who prefers the love of none alive but you: which
courtesy, if you shall seem to refuse, my conceit of grief will be so
extreme, as I must needs give entertainment to my latest enemy, who will set
both soul and body in quietness, when you (that might have comfort of both)
remain dease, and will make no account of me.

So breaking off, she laid her head, on the Princes breast, fetching so many
grievous sighs and groans, as though the life would have forsaken her body,
whereupon the Prince took her in his arms, and with very amiable speeches
(though not such as she gladly looked for, he began to comfort her thus.

Madame Arlencea, I do not so little esteem of you, that I would willingly
consent to do the thing, which should seem displeasant or offensive to your
honor, desiring you to think, that before I was so much bound to you as now I
am, I intended to accomplish that which your self desires: but since the time
that your great favor, delivered me out of the danger whereinto Alfernao
brought me, I forsook altogether the folly of so vain a humor, being loath to
reward her so ungently, whose courtesy, neither time nor death can make me
forget. And thus persuade your self, that I have provided a husband for you,
according as your noble bounty does well deserve: yea, he is so good a Knight,
as you will refuse to make choice of the Knight of the Savage man, whom you may
at all times use, as your friend and servant.

There pausing, he kissed her hand, and brought her again to the place where
the other Ladies sleyt, and he departing again to his own lodging, she began
to be ashamed of her folly, noting well the witty words of the Knight of the
Savage man: for whose love she was so extremely passioned, as she was
constrained to discover the flame that did so torment her, to one of her
Damoselles, the very same that gave the fatal ring to the prince. To her she
ripped up her whole discourse of the words which had passed that night,
desiring her earnestly, with the tears trickling down her cheeks, that she
would give her such assistance, as she might enjoy the love of the Knight of
the Savage man: the Damsel answered her Lady thus.

Trust me Madame, you have not any occasion to find your self agreeued, for
by good reason the Knight ought not to satisfy your will, in that such a
Prince as he is, ought not to travel himself for Damoselles, and then to
receive shame and dishonor by them: but yet to content your mind, and because
you think me willing to do you what pleasure I can, I will go to the knight,
and use such friendly persuasions with him, as I will understand the depth of
his intent. Arlencea embraced the Damsel for this genile answer, and spoke
to her again in this manner.

I know well, my sweet wench, that if I shall have any remedy in this case, I
must enjoy it by thy means, wherefore I pray thee go, and fortune be with
thee. But if it come so to pass, as neither persuasion, nor any thing else
will move him to love me, I pray thee entreat him, that he would pardon the
fault I committed, in disturbing him of his quiet ease.

Madame (said the Damsel) repose yourselfe altogether on me, and so she went
to the Knight of the Savage man, whom she found in a slumber, when sitting
down by him, she began in this manner. Me thinks that he which enforces
Ladies to live in sorrow, because he will use no more regard unto them, ought
not so easily to take his rest. The Knight of the Savage man hearing the voice
of a woman, opened his eyes, and seeing it was not Arlencea, but the Damsel
whom he loved best amongst them all, he began friendly to embrace her, giving
her better words then he did to the Giantesse her Lady: whereupon, the Damsel
began to him thus again. Sir Knight, I desire that you would vouchsafe to
tell me, what is the cause you make no more account of my Ladies love, seeing
she has (for your sake) forsaken her mother, forgotten the cruel murdering
her Brother, and likewise has lost the liberty of her self?

Madame (answered the prince) I fear I shall not have time enough to discourse
the whole matter to you, because it is now upon this point of day, wherefore I
intend to set Madame Arlencea a part a while, and demand of you, for what
occasion you have forgotten me, seeing I remain yours in affection, since the
day that Alfernao delivered me into the power of your Lady Arlencea?

I pray you Sir (said the Damosel) that you would not be offended at my
niceness all this while, it was but only to avoid the malice of my Lady: in
her abscence, I pray you think so well on me, as you may be pleased for my
displeasing you, and I have the better will to come to move my Ladies suit
again. The Knight of the Savage man hearing her courteous answer, and that he
might now break a Lance in the face of Venus, he took her in his arms: but
because the day came on apace, and they unwilling that any should see their
secret pleasure, I durst not see what they did, for fear I should be shent for
my labor.

CHAP. XXIIII.
Of that which happened to the Damsels Knight, in going to the Castle of
Almaroll.
Upon the point of day breaking, the Damsel gave her Lady Arlencea to
understand the answer of the K. of the Savage man, and the prince seeing the
Ladies walking, came and gave them all the mornings courtesy, afterward, when
they were all mounted on horseback, they began to set forward on their
journey: and because Arlencea was somewhat moved with her evil Fortune that
night past (which the P. perceived very well) he came unto her, and used such
kind and gentle language to her, as in a while she forgot the cares which had
troubled her so much.

The Prince began to devise pleasantly, with the four Damsels he woonne in
the Forest, and iested with them in such merry conceits, as the journey
seemed nothing troublesome unto them: but this pleased not Polyphemia, (who was
the Damsel that Arlencea sent, to move her suit to the Prince) for she
thought that she deserved better countenance at his hands, then all the other.

The Knight of the Savage man knew well by the countenance of Polyphemia, that
she grieved to see him use such pastime with the other Damsels whereupon, he
began to smile to himself, and because he would vex her the more, he would
now embrace one Damosel, and come to another and kiss her, and one after
another he would be very familiar withal, and that with very much pleasure,
Poliphemia seeing the dealings of the Knight of the Savage man, went on the
further side behind all the Damsels, dissembling (so much as she could
possible) the extreme afflictions of her amorous thoughts, for that the regard
of her honor commanded her to keep secret, what had passed between the
Prince and her: but he making as though he saw her not, continued on his
pleasure with the other Damsels. And when for recreations sake, they took
delight to walk on foot a while, he would give each of them (one after
another) a green Gown, and jest and iybe with them so pleasantly, that poor
Polyphemia knew not well how to take it: yet hoping to have some of them
partners with her in her misfortune (as indeed she had) before they came to
the Castle of Almaroll.

It chanced five days after their departure from the Spanish Court, that they
came into a fair green field, which was gallantly decked with Natures
tapistry, and there the Ladies took delight to stay a while, because they
would make them Nosegayes and garlands of the flowers: when they had disported
themselves so long as they thought meet, they put their Garlands on their
heads, and mounted on their horses again, being very merry and pleasantly
disposed. But to change their iocund humor, they beheld to come from a rank of
trees, a big tall Knight, in manner of a Giant, mounted on a horse meet to
carry such a mighty person: his Armor was all azure color, spotted very
thick with little silver flowers, and in his Shield he carried for his devise,
Hidra the serpent with seven heads, in a field of Sinople. This big knight had
two Esquiers attending on him, one of them carried his Lance, and the other a
battel-Axe, the knife there of being of gold: and when he was come to the place
where the Knight of the Savage man and the Damsels stayed, he began his
language in this manner.

I advertise thee (knight) that it is a long time since I desired to go to the
castle of Almarol, where my heart became affectionate to the fair Princess
Miragarda, and in such good lyking did I grow of her, as I determined to try
my fortune against the Knight that keeps her shield, being in good hope to
vanquish him, that I might afterward take both his office, and his place. But
it happened to me far contrary to my desire, and I am persuaded, that her
favor makes him more victorious, then his own force is able: the
consideration hereof does not a little offend me, so that I am determined to
revenge my self by other means. Wherefore advise thee well of these two
conditions I shall put to thee, which of them thou shall best like of, either
to enter combat with me, or to surrender these damsels which bear thee
company.

My friend (answered the knight of the Savage man) I assure thee, that I am not
the man thou think me, neither shall thou find such a one, as is wont to be
vanquished by thy hauty words: and because thou shall not be deceived in me, I
give thee to understand, that I am not accustomed to fear such fellows, as
speak with such a glorious pride in themselves, neither can the huge stature
of a Giant dismay me, for if thou durst presume to take the worst Garland from
any of these Ladies heads, I would sell thee my life, but I would make thee
restore it again.

The affection (said the knight) which thou bear to some of these, makes
thee not to esteem the danger wherein thou may fall: but seeing thou will be
so lusty, I am content, for courtesies sake, to offer thee this condition,
that he which shall be dismounted of us swain, may have for his pains four
of these Damoselles, as for the other four, they shall still attend upon
their Lady, whom I see likewise in thy company: to which words the Knight of
the Savage man thus replied.

I could wish thou had as many Damsels in thy power, as thou see here in
name, to the end that either thou might win these which I conduct, or I might
be the master of thine. But except thou intendest to take these ladies from me
by force, for otherwise thou shall not have them, I pray thee get thee going
about thy business. I see well, said the knight, that our contention cannot be
ended without laying hands to our weapons, and so to try the conclusion: then
he called his esquire, who brought him his Lance, which when he had couched, he
ran courageously against the Damsels knight, who met him bravely in the mid
way, and encountered with him so worthily, as the pe^ces of their lances flew
whistling in the air, and in this encounter the knight lost both his stirrops,
and meeting together with their bodies, their horses began fiercely to fight
one with another, so that the strange knight was cast to the ground, and the
damsels knight had almost borne him company, because his horse was slain by
the other knights horse. Arlencea and the Ladies did greatly fear, least the
knight would overcome the Prince Florian, who leaping from his horse, that
tumbled with him on the ground, drew his sword, and stood still to hear what
the knight would say: but he seeing the Damsels knight so ready to the
combat, began to be somewhat offended with himself for the rough stroke of the
Lance, made him more to fear the knight then he did before. When he had stood
a pretty space, he buckled his Shield, and drew his sword out of the sheath,
coming to the Prince with these words. If thou art (Knight) so much a friend
to thine own life, as to agree to the condition I made she before we iousted,
thou shall see that I will keep my promise to thee. I pray thee (said the
Damsels knight) use no such frivolous speeches to me, for I am thus
determined, to make thee bear me company on foot, because thou see my horse
is slain: and so without wasting any more time in words, he began to charge
the Knight very fiercely, which when the Knight both saw and felt, he likewise
laid on with huge and weighty strokes, till in the end he received so many
wounds, as what with the loss of his blood, and faintness of his body, he was
constrained to fall down to the ground: when, the damsels knight set his
foot on him, and taking off his helmet, made show as though he would have
smitten off his head, but the Knight yielded himself to his mercy, desiring
that it might please him to save dis life: whereto the damsels knight thus
answered.

I am content to give thee thy life, on condition thou will fulfill what I
command thee. I know no adventure (said the Knight) so perilous, which I would
make any account off, for sauegard of my life. Thou shall first then (quoth the
Damsels Knight) tell me what and who thou art, and afterward, thou shall take
one of the Horses, whereon thy Esquires rides, and take thy way presently to
the Court of the King Recinde, and there (before the Queen) thou shall say on
my behalf, that the Damsels knight, who Iousted in their presence against the
prince Albayzar, saluteth them with his humble duty, and desires such favor
at the kings hands, that he will think no ill because I made not my self
known to him, but thou may assure his Highness, that I will not fail to
make my self known, at my return from the Castle of the Giant Almarol. And
because I may get thither the sooner, I will take thy horse, in recompense of
mine which I have lost in iousting against thee: the knight arose, and made
this answer.

Worthy Sir, since Fortunes great vnkindes has brought me iato this
extremity, I shall not fail to obey whatsoever you command me, and for my
name, I am called Trofolant the Fearful, of whom you have heard sometime, if
you remember. Very true (quoth the damsels knight) but I pray you not to make
me known in any case, but declare what I have said to you, and so you may now
depart on your way to accomplish your promise.

Then the Prince mounted on Trofolants horse, and so took his leave of him,
setting forward on his journey with the damsels, till he came to the end of
his pleasant Valley, where he leaned himself against the stump of a tree,
because he espied before him three knights very richly Armed, and one of them
cried aloude to him, that he should stay till they came to him. The Damsels
knight hearing these words, would go no further, but stayed to hear what they
had to say to him. When they were come nearer, the same knight spoke again in
this manner.

Sir knight, I would gladly have one of the ladies which are in your company,
wherefore, I pray you bestow her on me, to whom you bear most affection your
self. Trust me Sir (answered the Damsels knight) they do all like me so
well, as he which dare be so bold to take one of them from me, I judge will
put his life in great danger. My fancy (said the second knight) does best
esteem her that exceeds them all in stature (meaning Arlencea.) And I will
content my self (quoth the third knight) with her that rides next the tall
Lady (meaning Polyphemia) because me thinks her beauty exceeds all the
other: wherefore I pray you sir knight, content your self with the other
Ladies, and stick not with us for these three, for we will so well behave our
selves to them, as they shall have no occasion to complain on us.

I perceive then (answered the Damsels Knight) that you would gladly have
these Ladies, whom I am determined to defend against you: if any of you
therefore have such mind to them, there is but a little River between us,
which you may easily pass, and if your Fortune be so good, you shall carry
them with you when you go back again. With a good will (answered the first
knight) and seeing your stomach serves you so well, I will show you the small
advantage you shall get in dealing with us.

Upon these words he passed the River, and having placed his Lance in his
rest, ran valiantly against the Damoselles knight, who entertained him with
such a puissant stroke, as he was compeld to fetch an errant in the dust,
being so greatly amazed with the fall, as he had not the power to stir himself
a great while. When the other two Knights saw their fellow foiled, they came
over the river together, and being abashed at the valor of the Damsels
knight, they durst not venture to try it one after another, but ran both
together against him, who (though they offered him wrong) would not refuse
them: but breaking his staff nobly upon one of them, he ^ent him to keep the
first knight company, having his arm broken by the force of his fall. Then
drew he forth his sword, and welcomed the third so friendly, as in a little
while he tumbles down before him.

The Damsels Knight after this victory, commanded his Esquier to alight, and
took off the knights helmet, that he might take air, and when they were all
before him, he commanded them to show obeisance to the three Damoselles, whom
they would needs have had, before they knew the price of them and if they did
not as he willed them, he swear they should all loose their lives.

The Knights perceiving they had reckoned with a wrong Host, promised they
would not do any thing contrary to his will: whereupon one of them came to
Arlencea, with these words. Madame, in that you are she whom I make most
account of, I beseech you command me, in any thing my poor power can do you
service.

I have so little need (said Arlencea) of your service, as it would grieve me
to use your assistance in any thing whatsoever: nevertheless, that you may be
an example to such, who (following your qualities) commit many outrageous facts
to Damsels, and to increase his renown who has now nobly vanquished you, and
delivered me and my company from you, I command you to go to the King of
Spaines Court, and there on my behalf, let all the Ladies understand, what
desert is come to you for your wretched dealing: and say, that I advertise
them, no one of them presume to travail abroad, without the company of some
such knight, as is able to defend them against all unlawful actions.

And you Madame (said the second knight to Polyphemia) what shall it like you
for to command me? Marie (quoth she) that you take the same course that your
commpanion does, not forgetting to tell the Ladies, that I pray they may live
in safety, without having affiance in any Knight whatsoever: for that such as
enterprise to conduct them in their trauails, whom they put in trust with their
honorable love, and even bow their souls to them in loyal affection, yet
have they most need to shun their company, rather then any other, and let
them not doubt of it, for if they prove they shall find my words true.

The Damsels knight understood well enough, the covert speeches of Polyphemia,
but yet he dissembled, as though he knew not what they meant.

And you Lady, said the third knight, will you be so cruel, as to commit a
greater task to me, then these two Ladies before you have done to my
companion? I am (quoth she) so cruel, as I would have thee banished the
company of thy very dearest friends: then the Damoselles Knight himself began
thus to them again.

Since it is the will of these three Ladies, that you shall carry these
messages of the King of Spaines Court. I pray you tell the Ladies there, that I
desire them to repose their trust in me, if they shall imagine themselves in
any danger, and let them be well assured, that I will adventure what hazard
soever, if my help may yield them any assistance: notwithstanding, one of
these three Ladies is desirous to have them think the contrary but as for her
counsel, I desire them humbly to make no account thereof. And because I may
know who you are, I pray you tell me your names before you depart, for that I
may demand another day, whether you have fulfilled your promises or no. My Lord
(quoth the first Knight) we are all three of the same Court whereto you send
us, by means whereof, we grieve more to go show our misfortunes there, then in
any court whatsoever it might like you to send us. And for our names, you shall
understand, that I am called Grouanell, and this other knight is my brother
named Brabosan, we twain being the sons of the County Loban, and the third
knight (who is our Couzin) he is called Claribard, a knight greatly renowned in
the Court of Spain.

Truly Gentlemen (said the Damsels knight) you ought not to thrust your
selves into such dishonorable actions: nevertheless, I must excuse you, for
that the beauty of women, has sometime inueigled the wisest heads, but I
would wish you to be better advised albeit I my self do often feel the heat
of the same fire. So ending, he rode on with his charge of Ladies, being very
glad that he had sped so well of these knights in their presence, and they
likewise commended his high good fortune.

CHAP. XXV.
How Trofolant and these other three Knights yielded themselves in the Spanish
Court. And how the damsels knight arrived at the Castle of the Giant Almaroll.
IT was long before the Damoseis Knight could reach to the Castle of the Giant
Almaroll, because he was hindered in his way by many knights, who ventured
themselves to take the Damsels from him, which he had taken charge of, in
conducting them. But it chanced as the King Recinde stood pleasantly talking in
his window with the Queen, and many Knights in the Chamber with him beside, he
beheld to enter a goodly tall Knight, his face being covered with his Helmet,
his armor broken in many places, and so besprent with blood, as the fine
devises thereon could hardly be discerned. His sheeld which was carried after
him by his esquire, was shiuered in the self same manner, and because his
devise therein could not well be seen, every one was in great admiration of
him: but he went with such proud iestures, as he made estimation of never a
knight there (who came to entertain him at the Palace gate) but passed on
till he came into y^ Chamber where the King was, to whom when he had made
obeisance, he returned to the Queen with these words.

Madame, I have Combatted with a Knight, who not long since was in this Court,
and Iousted against the Prince Albayzar, he has in his company nine Damsels,
and I desired him to bestow the one half of them on me, whereto he would by no
means consent, but made me answer, that he could wish I had as many Ladies in
conduct as he had, for then would he take mine from me, bear his Ladies
company in travail. Upon this proud answer, I intended to take them from him
perforce, which he would not suffer, but made such resistance against me, as in
the end I was not only conquer^d, but in great danger to loose my life, had
not this valiant and redoubted knight granted me mercy, upon condition I should
perform what he did command me. But such was his great humanity, as he would
adioyne me no other punishment then this, that I should come and present my
self to your majesty, to crave pardon (on his behalf) that he would not let
himself to be known when he was in your court, but at his return, he will
not fail to come in better acquaintance with your highness: in the mean
while, he craves that you would pardon him for his offense past.

I know not (said the king) how I should remit this injury, in that he hid
himself from me, who most of all desired to know him, and more earnest I am
now, seeing your Armor so much defaced. My good Lord (answered the Queen) I
desire you would not be offended at that which is past, for I cannot think
that such a Knight as he is, would desire to pass unknown to your grace,
without he were compelled so to do by some earnest occasion.

Then said the King to the knight, I pray you Sir tell me who you are? Those
that know me (said the Knight) call me Trofalont the Fearful. I have
(answered the King) oftentimes heard much talk of you, and the Knightly deeds
which you have achieved: and for this cause would I the more gladly have
knowledge of the Damoselles Knight, wherefore I pray you tell me if you know
him, or can judge of whence he should be?

My Lord said Trofolant, I promise you I never saw him in all my life till now,
but I judge him to be one of the sons of the Prince Don Edward, for I am
persuaded that no one Knight else could have conquered me, whereof I am not a
little ashamed, yea, and so much grieved thereat, as I take my leave of your
highness, now that I have discharged his commandment.

Quoth the Queen, I give you license to depart at your own leisure. And I
would no other thing with you, said the King, but that you would take a better
Armor at my hands, because your own is not in case to do you service:
beside, I would not that any of the Knights which serve the Emperor should
depart my court destitute of horse or Armor.

My Lord, answered Trofolant, I think my self highly bound to your majesty,
for the Princely offer you have made me: but I am determined to go even as you
see me, because I will deride Fortune to her face, and so he departed. The King
gave the Queen to understand, that Trofolant was reputed as good a Knight as
any other: but he would not believe, that any of the Sons of the Prince Don
Edward would come into his Court, and depart again without his knowledge.

While the King was commending the valor of the Damoselles Knight, Grouanell,
Brabosan, and Claribard entered into the Chamber, who having made reverence to
the King and the Queen, came and presented themselves before the Ladies: to
whom they rehearsed their great misfortune, and that which the Damoselles
Knight and Poliphemia had commanded them.

The Ladies knew well that Poliphemia had received some injury by the knight,
whose noblenes made the king to speak thus. Gentlemen, I promise you I greatly
desire to know the knight who has thus vanquished you, and I intend to send
some of my knights after him, that they may bring him hither once more.

If it shall like your highness (answered one of the Knights) he, whose good
fortune served him to overcome us, your grace must well think, that it will be
hard to bring him hither, except he list himself.

Trust me (said the King) it makes me marvel very much, that he is accompanied
with so many Damsels, in that one Knight cannot long endure to be patient,
being in the conversation of but one woman.

With these words the King departed from them, and the knights withdrew
themselves into their chambers, being not offended that the Damsels knight had
vanquished them, because he had shown such incredible prowess in that Court,
against the Prince Albayzar.

But return we to the Damoselles knight, who made such expedition in his
journey, as he came near to the Castle of the Giant Almaroll, wherefore he
stayed a while by the River Thesin, speaking to the Damoselles in this manner.
We are now arrived at the place (fair Ladies) where it is convenient to
display the force of your beauty, in favoring him that will enterprise the
Combatte on your behalf, for I assure you, the picture of the Princess
Miragarda is here at the Castle, which is of such excellency, as the knight who
has the keeping thereof, cannot (as yet) be vanquished, the cause is (as I
judge) rather by the singularity of this fair Princess, then the force or
valor that is in the knight, against whom I intend to try my self. Wherefore
I pray you (fair Ladies) to separate your selves asunder, and bethink your
selves under whose name I shall enter the Combat, and be you all present by,
for I know I shall purchase some advantage by your company.

Poliphemia (who had the greatest opinion of beauty in her self amongst them
all) spoke to the Prince in this order. I know very well (Sir knight) that the
victory which they gain, that enter the Combat for the Princess Miragarda,
proceeds of their force and loyal friendship, which truly is very far off
from you: wherefore, if Fortune chance to forsake you in the Combat, she does
no more then you deserve, seeing the great inconstancy of you toward them, on
whose behalf you seem to enter the Combat.

The other Damoselles were somewhat abashed, hearing Poliphemia spoke so
plainly, whereupon the Prince Florian returned her this answer. I perceive
Lady, that you are very injurious toward me, without any great occasion, and
you offer truly great discourtesie, to conceive so bad an opinion of me:
wherefore, to put you out of such an ill suspicion, I am determined to enter
the Combat, under the favor of your beauty, when you shall well perceive,
that you were in a very contrary judgment.

So riding on, they came at last to the Castle, at what time Miragarda and her
Ladies came forth, to recreate her self upon the water, being accompanied with
the Giant Almoral. The Damsels knight no sooner beheld the beauty of th^^
fair Princess, but his heart was presently deprived of liberty: yet had he a
good quality, for the passions that tormented him by the beauty of Ladies,
was of no longer continuance then while they were before him.

After that Miragarda was gone a pretty distance off, he said to the Damsels:
What say you to the beauty of this gallant Princess? We say (answered
Poliphemia) that you should not dismay your self any jot: in that each of us
conceiueth this opinion of our selves, that we may equal her in beauty.
Miragarda was no sooner returned again, but she sat down a while at the
Castle gate, greatly delighting her self to behold so fair a company.

Florendos (who was not far off) being Armed for all assailes, was somewhat
moved, seeing her that made him live in continual langout: and the Giant
Almorall beholding him, beside, knowing well that Miragarda did greatly
delight, to see him Combat with strange Knights, called to him with these
words. Sir Florendos, do that which your duty commands you, for the
Princess Miragarda stays only to behold you.

Florendos taking good view of the Damsels, and seeing the Knight prepare
himself to the ioust, he presently mounted on his horse back, and coming to
the Knight, he began in this manner to salute him, I pray you Sir Knight to
tell me, upon what occasion you are come hither? if so be you are compelled to
bring these Damsels to this place as your penance, and would be gladly
delivered of them, peradventure I may fortune to do you such a pleasure.

I promise you Sir Florendos (answered the Damoselles Knight) I came not hither
to enterprise to take the guard from you, whereof you make so great estimation:
but only to see, if these Ladies did repose any trust in the prowess of him,
who has conducted them through many countries.

I cannot tell (said Florendos) what answer I should make him, that has so
good knowledge of me, nevertheless, I would desire you break a couple of
Lances with me, that we may give a little pleasure to the Princess Miragarda.
And if it so fall out, that the ioust be more hindrance to the one then to the
other, it shall be lawful for him to enter the combat: the Damsels knight
answered thus.

Sir Florendos, I would be loath to Combat against you, although I dare be so
bold to just a little, as well to satisfy your desire, to the Princess
Miragarda, as to delight these Damsels that bear me company: for whose sakes,
I will likewise break two Lances with Sir Almaroll himself, and force not
greatly to enter the Combat with him afterward. I know very well (said
Florendos) that the assurance you have in your own deeds, makes you use such
hardy language: Therefore I agree to whatsoever you judge reasonable, and you
may assure your self, that Almaroll will not fail to accomplish your own
desire.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of the Iousts which were enterprised between the Damsels Knight, and he that
kept the Shield of the Princess Miragarda: And of the Combat which the
Damoselles Knight had with the Giant Almaroll.
WHile these knights were preparing themselves to the ioust, Almaroll steppee
between them, desiting them to stay a little, till the Princess Miragarda
(who was beneath on the ground) might go up into the Castle, and take her
place at the window. The Knights (who were ready to Ioust (set their staves to
the ground, and stayed till the Princess Miragarda was come to the window,
Florendos contemplated her face a while, and having taken his leave on her,
gave his horse the spurs against the Damsels Knight: who met him in the
midst of the Carrire, with such great force, as the trunchions of their
lances flew up into the air, and they passed on nothing shaken at all. Then
their Esquiers brought them new Lances, wherewith they ran together again
courageously, and burst their staves as nobly as they did before, whereupon
they prepared for the third trial.

Florendos was somewhat agrieued, having felt the prowess of his adversary,
and feared least any misfortune should happen to him, in the presence of his
Lady. And the Damoselles Knight was in great doubt whether it was Florendos or
no, beside, he was somewhat offended that he had begun the Ioust, perceiving
well the mind of the Prince his couzin, if Fortune should discountenance him
in the presence of his beautiful Mistres: which to prevent, he came to him
with these words. Me thinks it were necessary, Sir Florendos, that you and I
should content our selves, seeing that neither of us can boast of the advantage
of the Ioust, beside, you cannot purchase any great renown, in conquering one
of your affectionate servants, who verily would be sorry, that you should
receive any misfortune at his hands, in that it might hinder you in place of
most hope. Wherefore, I pray you give me leave, to break two or three Lances
with Sir Almaroll, which will yield some contentment to these Ladies that
bear me company.

Florendos returned him this answer, I perceive, sir knight, you have so
little desire to deals with me, as you fear nothing that may happen to you,
you witness so well your knightly behavior, wherefore I pray you do not forsake
me in this order, before you tell me of whence and what you are. To tell you my
name, said the Damsels Knight, and afterward to Ioust against you, is much
against my will, so that I cannot resolve my self, upon which of these two
points I should rest: nevertheless, because I would gladly content you, I am
well pleased to venture again with you.

Then these two Princes ran together with such force, as they burst their
staves to their hands, whereupon, their horses hurt each other so cruelly, as
both they and their Masters fell to the ground: the Damsels Knight having the
shoulder of his horse broken, but Florendos his horse was slain outright,
which did so greatly vex him, as he drew forth his sword, being very willing
to enter the Combat, which the Damsels Knight perceiving, he stayed him with
this friendly language.

Sir Knight, I would gladly entreat you to forbear so much resistance against
your friend, who desires (in any thing he may to do you service, I bear so
much good will unto you, and loath I am to enter the Combat with you, not for
any fear I have of your valor, but because the duty of frienship forbids
me such ungentleness. And this persuade your self, that I am of no less
courage then your self, and could make as good assurance of the victory, but
that it would grieve me to see you injured: wherefore, that no discourtesie may
happen on either side, I pray you sheath your Sword again, and reserve the
trial therewith, till such a one come, as shall seek you with a more
mallicious intent, then I do.

The Princess Miragarda, who had heard the whole discourse that passed the
Damsels Knight, could have been content (for the boldness she saw in him) to
see the Combat tried between them: then Florendos spoke to him again in this
manner. I can very hardly content my self (sir knight) without I might see the
one of us dismounted, or else that you would tell me who yoe are: to which
words Artesia (one of the Damsels) made this answer.

I will tell ye Sir Knight, this order was he wont to use with such knights,
as he knew to be less governed by discretion then himself, with them would
he never end the fight, making his excuse by us, as your self may behold at
this time: for seeing the Princess Miragarda does not favor him, he is
content to knit up thus, without passing any further trial, thinking us
unworthy of his good will.

Truly my friend (answered Poliphemia) you have said that which is most
certain, and I believe our knight is of the same opinion himself: Florian
smiling, made him this answer. I see very well now (fair Ladies) that the
pains I have taken in conducting you, is made of no account at all:
nevertheless, I have this advantage, that your entising words want power to
deceive me, for I am, and will be master of my self.

These words albeit he spoke them somewhat softly, yet the Princess Miragarda
did well understand them, by reason whereof, she took him presently to be one
of slender fidelity: but she judged Florendos to be one at liberty, and that
love had no power over him. But he himself desired not to live in such
liberty, if he could have compassed any remedy for so great a torment, as the
beauty of his fair Mistress enforced him to endure.

And now to return to Florendos he could not be so well persuaded by the
Damsels Knight, but that he desired to enter the Combat with him, which the
giant Almaroll perceiving, he caused to be brought forth a goodly bay Courser,
and sent it to the Damsels knight, with this request. That he would put
himself in a readiness, to the end they two might try themselves together,
which would give some delight to the princess Miragarda: and because she
should have the better will to the Combat, he was content some reward should
be ordained, in requital of his pains that remained the conqueror: upon
which motion the Damsels knight made this reply.

Look (Sir Almaroll) what it shall please you to appoint, you shall not find
me contrary thereto. If so be then (quoth Almaroll) that the victory happen on
your side, I pray you to give me (as my reward) this Lady named Arlence^, whom
I will not fail to esteem as chief mistress of my affection: and if it come
to pass that Fortune make her choice of you, you shall receive for your
recompense, the horse whereon you are mounted, which I warrant will be as good
as any in the world.

Trust me (said the Damsels Knight) I have already determined with my self,
to bestow her upon such a Knight as I make good account of: yet will I accept
this horse, if so be the victory fall on my side: and if it come to pass that
I am vanquished, if the Lady her self can find in her heart to satisfy your
request, you shall not find me to hinder it any thing. I am content (answered
Almaroll) hearing you speak so reasonably, for I presume, that she will not
refuse the knight who is so willing to do her service.

So (without any more words) they placed their Lances in their restes, and
being covered with their Shieldes, gave their horses the Spurs, and encountered
together so bravely, as the Damsels Knight forsook both his Stirrops, but
Almaroll was cast to the ground with his Sable between his legs, who was not a
little offended to have such a disgrace, especially in the presence of his new
chosen friend.

The Damoselles commended greatly this gallant beginning, but chiefly they
whom Florian won from the Knights that kept the Valley. Almaroll having
recovered his feet, drew forth his sword, and came marching toward the
Damsels Knight, who presently alighted, left the Giant should offer any harm
to his horse: and then they charged one another with such cruel strokes, as
moved great admiration to all there present. And the more courageous was the
prince Florian, as well to delight the Damsels, as to declare his nobleness
in fight to the Prince Florendos, not forgetting withal, that Miragarda should
well perceive, he stood in no fear of her knight, by refusing the Combat.

On the other side, Almarol behaved himself very gallantly, for the desire he
had to gain Arlencea, and such was the regard of her love with him, as in all
his life he never fought more bravely.

These two champions continued such notable courage, as in short time their
armor was broken in many places, and their bodies so grievously wounded, that
the blood ran from them very pitifully: but Almaroll (being not so nimble and
quick as his adversary) was brought into the greatest danger, by means
whereof, he was glad to break square a little, to take breathing.

But the damsels knight would not to suffer him, for he followed his intent so
fast upon him, as he was constrained to fall to the earth, seeming rather to be
dead then alive: the sight whereof did grieve the Prince Florendos out of
measure, and was so much offensive to the Princess Miragarda, as she departed
from the window, commanding that Almaroll should be brought into the Castle,
which was presently done, and Florendos went with him into his Chamber, to see
some provision might be made for his wounds, which in sooth were very dangerous.

Then was the Damsels knight brought somewhat aside, where the damsels
unarmed him to dress his wounds, which were not in any great danger, whereupon
he caused himself to be armed again, and mounted on horseback, intending to
depart thence. But as he was about to set forward on the way, two Knights of
some strange country) arrived at the Castle, who came desirous to try the
adventure. One of these knights was in Carnation colloured Armor, very thick
beset with Griffins of silver, and in his sheeld was figured a white Heart, in a
field of Sinople: the other knight was in black armor, and bearing in his
shield the same devise his fellow had.

These two Knights no sooner beheld the Damsels knight, but he in the
carnation Armor spoke thus to his Companion. It seems to me Sir, that we are
come unto the place, where we shall have no accasion to use our armor, if he
which keeps the shield of Miragarda, be not in case to endure the Combat:
this knight should seem to be he, wherefore, because it shall not be said, we
came hither in vain, I will go disburden him of one of his Ladies, she will
be as meet for my company, as for his.

Certainly (answered the other knight) I cannot content my self with things
of so base estimation, having before mine eyes the Shield, wherein is pictured
the beauty of the fair Princess, the regard whereof, makes me account
nothing more worthy. At these words, his companion cast his eyes on the Image
of Miragarda, which hung in the seemeliest place of the Pillar, whereupon he
entered into these speeches.

I see now (my good friend) that they which have adventured to this place, have
not bestowed their labor in vain: for more willingly would I loose my life
for her, whose heavenly visage this Shield represents, then to content my self
with hope of any further glory. I assure you (said the first knight) I intend
not to depart from this place, without I carry this Shield with me: yet would I
(if it were possible) first make trial of my worthiness, against him that
durst deny me to take it hence. So, advancing himself to the tree where the
Shields were placed, he offered to take down the Shield.

The Damsels knight perceiving his intent, and knowing that Florendos was
busy about the hurts of the Giant Almaroll, he would not suffer that in his
presence any one should offer so great wrong to the Prince Florendos: wherefore
in regard of the good will he bare him, he broched his horse with the spurs,
and when he came to the place where the Shield of Miragarda hanged, he look
the knight ^y the arm, and pulled him backward with so great strength, as he
^ell beside his Horse headlong to the ground, and withal spoke to him in this
manner. I may well persuade my self (sir knight) that you desire not to try
your fortune in this adventure, being so forgetful of your honor, as to
proceed so cowardly, not attending the presence of him, who has the
authority to defend this Shield: in his absence therefore, I will try if you
be such a gentle companion as dare presume to carry it hence by your manhood.

Miragarda (who was come again to the window, to take better advise of the
Damsels knight) understanding the brave words he had given the knight, did
greatly content her self in his presenc^, in that he took upon him so
worthily to defend her sheeld, against the knight that offered to take it away:
who, when he had gotten himself on foot again, he dr^w forth his sword, and
in a phrenzie or a madness, (as it were) he came to assault the Damsels
knight, which his companion perceiving he came between them with these words.

I pray you Sir to amount upon your horse, and in the mean time, I will try if
the valor of this knight, may answer the proud attempt he made to you. Upon
this, he adua^^ted himself against the Damoselles Knight, who for the great
desire he had, to witness his courage to the princess Miragarda, prepared
himself bravely to meet his adversary, which he discharged so nobly (having
his full desire at him) as neither his shield, armor, nor maile-coat could
defend the push of the Lance, but it passed clean through his body, so that the
strange knight tumbled beside his horse to the ground, being altogether
deprived of his life.

When the Damsels Knight had gotten his Lance out of the Knights body, he
praunced till he came under the window where the Princess Miragarda stood,
expecting the coming of the other Knight, who meeting him in the midst of
the course, brake his Lance on the Prince: but when they came together, the
Damoselles Knight caught hold on his enemies Shield, which he pulde from him
with so great force, as he brought his head on the neck of his horse, where
(not permitting him the leisure to recover himself) he gave him with his own
Shield such a cruel stroke on the Crest of his Helmet, as the knight was so
giddy therewith, he could hardly tell how to recover himself. In the mean
while the knight was thus amazed, the prince took off his helmet, and gave him
such another heavy stroke, as he fell beside his Horse, foming forth blood
out of his mouth abundantly.

Florendos (being in the Chamber with the Giant Almaroll) was greatly abashed,
seeing a combat fought at his Ladies Shield in his absence: wherefore, fearing
least any displeasure should come thereby to him, he forsook all other
occasions, and went presently thither, where (having well viewed the two
Knights) he received no small admiration at this adventure, which when the
Damsels knight perceived, he spoke to him in this order.

Sir Florendos, see here the deeds wherein I have employed my self, only
because I would do you service, I am as yet ignorant (answered Florendos)
wherein I shall think my self beholding to you, for I see two Knights here
brought into very badde estates, yet I know not upon what occasion. You shall
Sir Florendos (said the Damoselles knight) be resolved hereof. This knight
which you see here slain, would have carried away the shield of the princess
Miragarda, and he which is yet living (but in very slender ability) was the
favorer and aider of the others attempt: but I have given them to understand,
that a thing of so high estimation, might not be woonne without some labor.

Thus in regard of the offense they were about to offer you, and to witness
the good will I unfeignedly bear you, I took upon me to hinder them in such a
disloyal enterprise, for proof of my words, you may behold whether they be
true or no.

I pray you Sir (quoth Florendos) tell me who you are for I desire to know the
name of him, whose prowess has so deeply indebted me to him? Sir (Florendos
answered the Damsels Knight) I will satisfy you, because I see you are so
desirous: wherefore I advertise you, that I am Florian of the Forest, your
Couzin and obedient service, who will not suffer you to receive injury, in any
place where he shall be present: Florendos in great joy replied thus.

Now is my mind (which has been troubled a good while) very well eased, in
both knowing and seeing the prowess that is in you: wherefore I humbly desire
you to think so well of me, that you would spend a little time here with me,
that I may commune with you about matters of some importance. Beside you shall
cause the wounds of the Giant Almaroll to be the sooner healed, in that he will
not grieve so much, having received the foil at so noble a knights hands.

I do not think (answered the Damsels Knight) that you would wish me to
tarry here, in that I have promised to visit other places, which if I should
fail to do, I should gain the ill reports of a number: wherefore I desire
you suffer me depart hence, and that you would take the oath of this last
knight which I conquered, that he shall make you faithful promise (after you
have knowledge of his name) to travel to the court of the King Recinde, where
he shall declare to the Queen for what occasion I did combat with his fellow
and himself, and I desire you again, not to receive any ill opinion by my
sudden departure.

Florendos labored to dissuade him from his journey, but he would by no means
be moved from his determination: wherefore, after a friendly embracing, he set
forward on his way, accompanied with the Damsels, who held him in greater
reputation then they had done before: but he began to wax contrary to them, in
that he esteemed of them every day worse then other.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of that which happened to the Damsels Knight, as he returned to the Court of
Recinde, King of Spain.
EArly on the next morning, the Damsels knight set forward in his journey to
the Court of the King Recinde, intending when he came thither, to discharge
himself of some of the Damsels, because he would have none in his company but
Arlencea, and the Gentlewoman that attended on her, to do her service: being
loath to forsake her, tiil he had brought her to the place, where she might be
married, according as her honest behavior deserved, and to the end she should
not think him to be unmindful of her.

As he rode on thus musing with himself, he heard the voice of a Woman crying
very pitifully, in a Wood, which was hard by the way: and because the cry was
so lamentable, he gave his Horse the Spurs, and rid till he came where he
heard the noise. He then looking a side, beheld on the bank of a goodly River,
a knight, whose armor was of Azure color, very richly wrought all over with
little fillets of Gold, in his shield was pictured a golden Lion, in a Silver
field, and at his feet he held a Damsel by the hair of the head, whose
beauty deserved not such despightfull usage, as the Knight showed to her, for
he held his Sword drawn in his hand, and made show to cut off her head, if she
refused to obey his lust.

Not far of, he espied another knight tumbling among the green leaves, who
laughed at this pitiful sight so heartily, that he was ready to fall in a
sown, beholding what hard shift the Damsel made to help her self: and
after he had laughed a good while, he spoke these words. It does me good to see
that fortune enforces you to take such great pains, for by this means I shall
be eased of such busy labor, when I come to take my pleasure on the Damsel.

The Damsels Knight perceiving the shame which these knights endeavored to
offer to the Damsel, he cried to them aloude, that they should forbear their
villainy, or else he would cause them to buy their pleasure dearly. The Knight
which had the Damsel by the hair of the head, seeing the Knight that spoke
so boldly to him, returned him presently this answer. Are you offended Sir, to
see me use the Damsel in this manner? Trust me, were not the water so broad
which is between you and me, I would quickly make you know the price of your
boldness. Nouerthelesse, if thou dare tarry long, I will not fail but come
to thee, when thou shall well understand, that thou meetest with such a knight,
as will soon allay thy bravery. I pray you my companion (said the other knight
that lay by) do not offend your self with fretting, or raging, for I judge it
best that we go to this Knight, who has so many Damsels in his company, where
we may take our choice, and that without trouble.

I desire you my friends (answered the Damsels Knight) that you would tell me
where the ford for passage is, to the end I may make trial of your valors. If
you have so great desire to come to us (said the first knight) you must swim
over, for I know no other way for you. Then began he again to pull and hale
the Damsel very cruelly, because he would move the Damsels knight to more
anger: who being earnest in revenging great shame and villainy, and making no
account of the danger in passage, he alighted from his horse and lept into the
river, which he passed very well, and recovering the further side, the knight
that lay among the green leaves said to his companion. Do not trouble your
self from your determination, for I will quickly quail the lustiness of this
Knight: whereto the Prince thus answered. It is hard for me to say how things
may come to pass, but I intend to hinder the pleasure you make such account of.

So, without any more words, he settled himself close to the knight, and gave
him such friendly entertainment, as he tumbled to the ground, with his left
arm broken in shiuers. The other knight seeing the misfortune of his fellow,
left the Damsel to defend himself from the weighty strokes of the Damsels
Knight: who handled him in such sort, as he was constrained to crave aid at her
hands, whom he sought to have abused, with these word. I beseech you fair
Damsel, to forget the injury I have done you, and entreat this knight to
save my life. The Damsels knight held his hand and would not strike, because
he expected what the Damsel would say: then she (beholding the amiable
countenance of him that would have forced her) was supprised with exceeding
grief, so that she pitied more to see him so near his death, then she
required revenge for his dishonest enterprise: whereupon she spoke to the
Damsels knight in this manner.

Let me entreat you (my Lord) to save the life of this wicked man, it may be,
hereafter he will be warned from falling in the like offense. I promise you
fair Damsel (said Florian) you cannot command me the thing that I would not
willingly consent unto, but because the knight has deserved greater
punishment, then as yet he has suffered, I give him his life upon this
condition: that he shall take his companion with him in the best manner he can
devise, and they both shall travail to the King of Spaines Court, where they
shall declare to the Ladies, what shame they would have offered you, and they
shall promise never to wear armor again, without it be their pleasures to
suffer them.

The Knights promised in all respects to accomplish his will: whereupon, their
Esquires provided a knighly Beer, whereon the Knight was laid, that had his
arm broken, and so he was carried with his companion to the court of the king
Recinde.

The Damsels knight walked along by the Rivers side, holding the Damsel by
the hand, who by reason of her exreeding sear, had forgotten her Esquire, whom
the knights that would have ravished her, had bound fast to a tree, and they
had put a gagge of wood in his mouth, because they would not be prevented of
their purpose by his crying.

But it was not long before the Damsel embraced him, when she desired the
Prince that he would return again, to deliver the Esquire out of this
miserable vexation: and when they came to him, there they found their two
Palfrayes, upon on of them, the Prince caused the Esquire to mount, commanding
him to ride along the Rivers side, till he could find some place to get over
on the other side, to bring him his horse.

In the mean while, the Esquire went about that he was commanded, the Prince
unarmed himself, to dry his garments, which were full of water, and then he
questioned with the Damsel, how she happened into that place, and upon what
occasion the Knights so sought to distdnest her: to which words she made this
answer,

You shall understand (sir Knight) that I was borne in this Country, and do
belong to the Princess Miragarda, I know not whether you have heard of her
before or no. Yes indeed have I (said the Prince) for the name of the Lady is
so much renowned through the whole world, as many Knights (by means of her
beauty) have wrought themselves much dishonor.

So it is then (said the Damsel) that I took occasion to travail a little
the Country, but Fortune was so unhappy to me, as I chanced to meet with
these two Knights, who demanded of me, into what place my journey lay: I then
misdoubting no harm, because their behavior seemed very honest to me,
declared unto them the whole state of my journey, whereupon, one of these
Knights spoke thus unto his companion.

I think it good, in revenge of the shame we have received at the Castle of
the Giant Almaroll, that we should ease ou^ anger on this Damsel, who is one
of them attendant on the Princess Miragarda: in respect that her beauty will
render us sufficient pleasure, to forget the foil we took at the push of the
Lance.

The other Knight being equal with his fellow in this ungracious intent, did
presently allow of the others judgment: So they cast lots which of them should
abuse me first, and it fortuned to fall on him, whom you saw pulling me so
cruelly by the hair of the head. Then because my Esquire (grieuing to see me
so ill entreated) cried aldude that some might come succor me, they dealt with
him so discourteously as you have seen: and had it not been for your gracious
assistaunce, God knows the sorrow that I poor soul should have endured.

Truly Madame, (answered the Prince) I rejoice that it was my chanc^ to be
your reskewe, yet had it been better for me not to have come hither at all,
such a secret wound have I received by your singular beauty: but if you
consider my good deserts, and withal the readiness you shall find in me to
your welfare, I judge you may bestow that on me by gentleness, which the
discourteous Knights would have taken from you perforce.

The Damsel noting his words, regarding his sweet countenance, remembering his
noble behavior and Princely courtesy, made him answer, but I knew not how:
if it were incident to his purpose, he is best able to to answer it, if not,
then there was no harm (...). A new (...) wills me to let them alone, and
hearken to the Damoselles Esquire, who being returned, cried to the prince,
that he should presently mount on his horse, to give assistance to the other
Damsels, who a Knight in black Armor sought to lead away perforce.

The Prince hearing the words of the Esquire, was incensed with such a sudden
fury, as not tarrying till he was all armed, he ran to the river, and did
swim over in very great have, willing the Damsel to come after him, and
pass over the Foord, which the Esquire could show her, and bring her likewise
into the company of the other Damsels. So soon as Florian had passed the
river, he perceived Poliphemia come riding toward him, crying and tearing her
hair very pitifully, that he should make have to succor her mistress: which
he being very desirous to do, was glad to follow after her on foot, because
the knight that carried her away, had grievously wounded the legs of his
horse.

But Fortune so much favored Arlencea, as she spied the Damsels Knight
coming, who ouer-tooke them before they had gotten half a miles distance from
the river: and then he perceived how the knight had set up Arlencea behind
him, and his Esquire could very hardly cause her to sit still on the horse, she
strove so often to get the ground, wherefore he rid by, to hold her on the horse.

The Damsels knight, seeing the knight in black Armor had clapped his Helmet
on his head, and would have dismounted to defend himself, he advanced himself
toward him, and Arlencea held him fast on his horse, till the Damoselles
knight had stricken him such a blow between the neck and the shoulders, as he
fell to the ground like a dead man: and taking off his helmet, he would have
parted his head from his shoulders, but yet he pacified his fury, because he
would send him likewise to the Ladies in the Spanish Court.

Then he caused the Esquire to be unarmed, who held Arlencea on the horse
behind his Master, but he wept very bitterly, desiring the Prince to have
compassion on him: and coming again to the knight (who was all this while on
his knees) he commanded him to declare what was his name. I am called Rocamor
(said the knight) a friend to those two Knights which you did lately vanquish,
and in reuengement of their injury, I intended to carry away this Lady.

Well then (quoth the Damsels knight) this is my will, that you fail not to
accomplish the charge I shall commit to you, for if you do, I swear you shall
presently loose your life: the Knight answered thus. Good Sir, to the end I may
escape so great danger, I vow my self obedient to whatsouer you command me.

I will then (said the Damsels knight) that you presently take your way to the
king of Spaines Court, and there present your self to the Ladies attendant on
the Queen, reporting to them what has passed between you and me, beside you
shall never while you live bear arms again, without it shall please them to
license you. The like charge I have given thy two companions, and they have
promised me they will fulfill it.

I beseech you Sir (answered the knight) to tell me who you are, to the end I
may declare his name, that command me thus to submit my self in the King of
Spaines Court. You shall say (quoth the Prince) that the Damsels knight
enjoined you this penance, and I will so bold as to borrow your Horse, because
you have dealt so discourteously with mine. So causing Arlencea to mount on
horseback, he left the knight, and returned to the place where the other
Damsel stayed his coming: by the way he conferred with Arlencea, how
dishonourably the knights of that Country, behaved themselves to wandering
Damsels.

And when he was come to the rest of his company, he saw amongst them Siluiana
(which was the name of her whom the Knights would have ravished) to her he
af^oorded a gentle welcome, and the Damsels were not a little glad, at the
return of their Lady Arlencea, whom they feared they should never have seen
again.

The night drew on a pace, and there thiy concluded to pass that night,
because they knew of no other provision near at hand, every one took a
modicum of their small refection, and afterward they laid them down to their
rest: but Siluiana could no suffer any sleep to enter her eyes, such was her
good opinion of the Prince, and so far in love was she with him, as she
rather took delight to discourse all the night thereon, then to entertain such
quiet rest as her fellows did.

CHAP. XXVIII.
What the Princes Florendos did to the vanquished knight and how those knights
whom the Prince Florian had conquered, arrived at the King of Spains Court.
AFter that she Damsels knight was departed from the Castle of the Giant
Almaroll, the Prince Florendos being desirous to execute the charge was left
with him, came to the vanquished knight, desiring that he would satisfy him,
of whence and what they were, and to what end they came thither, whereto the
knight thus answered.

You shall understand (worthy Sir) that we were borne in the Realm of Spain,
and have been held of good account in the king Recindes Court, as for our
names, you shall know that I am called Brandamor, and my companion had to name
Sigerall. We two being desirous to seek knightly adventures, among many other
which we passed with honor, we concluded ^o make trial of the conquest of
this sheeld, wherein is figured the heavenly face of the Princess Miragarda.

But Fortune not, minding the former regard she had of us, caused us to be
conquered by the Damoselles Knight, before we could accomplish the mean to
enter the Combat with him, whose charge was only to defend the Shield. I
assure you my friend (answered the Prince Florendos) the bold and discourteous
enterprise you took in hand, deserved greater chastisement then you have as
yet received, for one cannot deal severely enough with those, who put forth
themselves in such actions, as does reproach them with high dishonor.

Wherefore, that you may purge your self of this notorious crime, you shall
here faithfully protest unto me, that you will go submit your self to the
King Recindes Court: and if so be your presume to contrary what I have adjoined
you, I shall enforce more grievous affliction on you, then these wounds can do
which you have on your body.

The Knight (being not as yet thoroughly received out of the fear, which the
Damsels Knight had frighted him withal) vowed faithfully to Florendos, that
he would execute to the uttermost what he had commanded him: wherefore having
his wounds dressed, he presently betook himself to his journey, leaving the
burial of his companion to the Prince.

In few days after, he arrived at the king of Spaines Court, being very loath
to enter in, because he was so well known to the King, and the chief noble
men of his Court, but notwithstanding his great unwillingness, the regard of
his oath so much prevailed with him, as he entered the Palace.

The Ladies which beheld him, did not repute him amongst the number of those
vanquished by the Damsels Knight, because his Armor was so fair and
unbroken, nor blemished in any place: beside his Shield was no whit impaired,
but the devise thereof to be seen at pleasure, so that the Ladies delighted
greatly to behold him.

Brandamor being come into the Chamber of presence, the King and the Queen
being there both together, he opened his Helmet, and kneeling down before the
Queen, rehearsed the the whole circumstance of his charge, as concerning the
behavior of the Damsels Knight.

In the reporting of this his great misfortune, seeing so many of his friends
present, the color arose so read in his face, as neither the King nor the
Queen knew him, no, not they that had been daily conversant in his company,
but generally they reputed him for some strange Knight: so that the Queen
demanded of him, what he was, and for what occasion he enterprised to Combat
with the Damsels Knight, Brandamor, then gave her to understand, how the
Damoselles Knight had slain his companion Sigerall, and how before he had
vanquished them, he Iousted against the Knight that guarded the Princess
Miragardaes Shield, likewise that he Combatted with the Giant Almaroll, and had
brought him in very great danger of his life. Whereupon, the King entered into
these speeches.

Certainly, I cannot choose but wonder, hearing the noble prowess of this
unknown Knight* and I promise thee knight, thou deseruest to have the same
punishment which has happened to thy companion, and I assure thee, I would see
it executed on thee my self, if I did not persuade my self, that the beauty
of the Princess Miragarda has ravished the minds of other Knights, who might
boast of better assurance in themselves then he could.

At these words, Brandamor came and kissed the Kings hand, by which occasion
the king knew him, which made him to judge the more worthily of the Damoselles
Knight, and he commanded his Chirurgions should use good respect unto
Brandamor, because he had well deserved by his valor in times past. But
scantly was he departed their presence, when the two Knights that (would have
ravished Siluian) arrived at the Court, they being so feeble and weak, as they
were constrained to lean on their Esquiers shoulders, till they came into the
Kings presence, where he that had the least hurt, began to use his language in
this manner.

My gracious Lord, the Damsels knight, whose renown is so highly commended in
this Court, having vanquished us in the open field, commanded us to come and
submit our selves to your excellency, to be judged according as our deeds
have deserved: in respect whereof, we come to present our selves to the Ladies
of this Court, whom we entreat so to work on our behalf with your Majesty,
as the offense may be pardoned, which our fleshly wills procured us to commit.
Then these two knights discoursed at large, how every thing had happened to
them, upon which occasion the King thus spoke.

Surely, it does not a little content me, that God has suffered you to receive
punishment for your misdeedes, by the hands of the renowned Damsels knight, on
whose behalf, and for the love I bear him, I will proceed against you,
according as your heinous offenses have worthily deserved: and I assure you,
the more I hear the noble valor of this knight, the more desirous I am to
have knowledge of him.

My Lord (said the knight) you have very great occasion to esteem of him, for
I am of the opinion, that all the worthiness which ought to be in a knight, is
in him: for his sake therefore, we humbly entreat your majesty, to use such
persuasion with the Ladies, as they will suffer my companion and me to bear
Arms, which were forbidden by the Damsels knight, until the Ladies of your
Court have pardoned the injury, which we offered to the Damsel, whom this
Knight by his hardiness took from us.

I promise you my friends (said the King) my good will is so slender in this
case, as you shall receive no favor by my aid. The Knight noting the Kings
answer, desired the Queen that it might stand with her pleasure to command
her Ladies, to entertain them into their favorable judgments: and they would
so witness their good affections toward them, that so long as they lived,
they would be ready to spend their lives for them.

The Queen had not the leisure to make them any answer, because the Knight
that would have carried away Arlencea, came and humbled himself on his knees
before the Ladies, declaring to them how the Damoselles knight had commanded
him, to come and render himself to their mercy, without which, he would not
permit that he should wear armor any more, the conceit thereof was so
grievous to him, as he took the hardiness to entreat the Queen to assist
him in his suit: whereto she returned this answer.

It seems to me, that the Ladies of my Court remain greatly indebted to the
Damsels Knight, for whose sake I will not seem to hinder you, but commit you
all three to their discretions, to whom you are sent. The knight which had last
of all delivered his message, no sooner beheld the other two, but he presently
knew them: the one was called Ferrobreque, and the other Gentafort, they being
both descended of a giants race, the sight of them caused him not to take his
misfortune so heavily, as he did all the while before.

The Ladies understanding the pleasure of the Queen, concluded to give them
leave to wear their Armor, warning them on peril of their lives, not to use
them in any places, where Ladies or Damsels should be injured, but to pass on
and let them alone, whether the cause were just or unjust, they should not
intermeddle withal.

This charge seemed very unfriendly to the knights, but they durst not seem to
dislike thereof: whereupon they were constrained to allow of their sentence,
afterward they took leave and departed from the Court.

A good space it was, before any more tidings came to the Spanish Court of the
Damoselles Knight, but at length three Knights armed very bravely, arrived at
the Palace, about the Evening tide, the King, the Queen, and the Ladies,
being walking in a fair Gallerie, the prospect whereof was out into the Court,
where they might behold these three Knights, who sent an Esquire, to declare
their wills to the King Recinde.

The arrival of the Esquire, caused many to assemble into the Gallery, where
the Esquire being come before the King, he humbled himself on his knees with
these words. Renowned Prince, these three strange Knights, commanded me to
let your Highness understand, that they have travailed a long time, in the
service of the three Daughters of Galiaster, Duke of Arragon, who were judged
fair in the eyes of these three Knights, albeit they were found very false
in their love. For they (after they had long time entertained these Knights as
chief of their affections) were married unto three other Gentlemen, who were
brought up in their fathers Court, and with these received great contentment,
not considering the offense they have committed, in beiug so forgetful of
their own honor, as to marry with such as beseemed not their degrees.

These three Knights are so highly offended hereat, as they have concluded
never to espouse any other Damsels, but only such, as being weary of their
own servants, will vouchsaf^ to admit them entertainment. But if any such as
are foresaken of their Ladies, shall allege, that this change is not equal,
these three knights will justify the trial thereof against them by Combat.

And because these Ladies may favor them in their demands, without any
prejudice to the renown: I will declare to you the estates of these knights.
The first is named Lustramar, the eldest son to the Marquess Astramor. The
second is called Arpian, son to the Duke of Archeste. The third is Gradian,
the County of Artasia: who do altogether humbly desire these Ladies (by your
Highness license) that they would show their good wills unto them, because
they are so desirous to make known to them, the hauty valor of their
invincible stomachs: for here will they abide all this day, in the same manner
as you see, to make proof of Arms against their amourous servants.

But if it so fall out, that they find the Ladies of this Court more desirous
to keep their old Servants, then to entertain these so newly come, they will
be content to depart hence, even as they came hither, and being once gone from
hence, they will visit most of the Princes Courts in Christendom, to try if
Fortune will be so favorable to them, as to knit up their earnest desires to
their contentment. The king Recinde was greatly abashed at these sudden news,
and the knights were moved much at this adventure, especially, regarding the
estates of them that would Combat for their Ladies: and for them thus much I
can say, that there were many among them, who would gladly have forsaken their
old favored servants, on condition they might marry with these three noble
Princes.

The King and the Queen allowing well their worthy enterprise, they stayed a
great while, looking when some one knight or other of the court, would be so
venterous as to deal with them: but seeing none would come, they prepared
themselves to depart, at the very instant as the Damsels Knight arrived there.

This valiant and renowned Knight was no sooner espied, but they that knew him,
came and met him, letting him understand the enterprise of the three strange
Knights: which being rehearsed to him, the Damsels received very much joy
thereat, for that they being weary of him, and hope to depart with these three
knights, and the Prince understanding their intens, said unto them. You shall
now do what your selves imagine expedient, and I will recempence my self by
these means on these three knights, for the great travail I have taken daily
in your service. I have been so greatly deceived in your love (said Artesia)
as I am content to change your company. And we are of the same mind (said
they, whom he had woone from the Knights in the Forest) upon this, he sent
them to the three knights, (who were preparing themsel^es to the Ioust) and
willed them to come and deliver them out of his hands, who would compel them
to stay in his company.

I ^^are me (quoth the King) that these Knights will not attain the chief of
their enterprise, against the hardy Damo^sels Knight. Artesia and her
companions forsook the company of Arlencea, and put themselves apart from
them: which the Ladies of the Court perceiving, they could not choose but
marvel thereat, knowing very well the prowess of the knight that had conducted
them. Some judged the occasion, to be the Damsels desire of themselves, that
they might be at their own liberty: others reputed the cause to some
unfaithfulness they had found in their Knight.

Gradian seeing the day wast apace, took the hardiness to advance himself
forth first, making show of the Ioust: which the Damsels Knight beholding, he
gave his horse the spurs, and encountered Gradian with so great force, as he
made him fetch an errand on the ground: then he came to Artesia with these
words.

It is necessary that once again you come and obey that I shall command you.
Then he received another Lance, which one of the Kings Pages brought him, and
with it he unhorsed Arpian, because he had not learned to sit fast in his
Sadle. Lustramar was very angry at the misfortune of his friends wherefore he
encountered the Damsels Knight so nobly, as he caused him to forsake one of his
Stirrops, but himself was sent to keep his fellows company.

These three knights, seeing the dishonor they had received in the Ioust,
offered to try the Combat with the Sword, and chiefly Lustramar did seem
most desirous of it: but the Damsels knight excused himself, seeing the day
departing so speedily, and the dark night ready to ouercharge them, yet would
not Lustramar be content with his answer, which when Poliphemia perceived, she
came unto him with these words.

I pray you (Sir knight) content your self, and seek no ^urther occasions at
this time, for I assure you, that our guide is so little wont to be conquered,
as they that deal with him, are very well contented (having felt him indeed)
to put up the soil of a fall. I have found so small assurance (answered
Lustramar) in Women's words, as (for your counsel) I will not forbear to
follow my enterprise. Then I promise you (said Artesia) you will not boast of
your bargain in the end.

While these two knights prepared themselves to the Combat, the king Recinde
(who was desirous to know the Damoselles knight) came himself to the place,
where these two knights were offering to charge one another, when he ca^sed
them to be parted, and they all ^oure were very honorably brought into the
Palace.

The Damoselles Knight humbly saluted the Queen, and having taken off his
Helmet, he kneeled down to kiss her hand: but the King (who knew him
presently) embraced him very lovingly, speaking thus to the Queen. Madame, I
pray you to make good account of the deeds of honor you have received by this
Knight, for he has finished as rare adventures as ever did any: assuring you
that he is the prince Florian of the Forest, otherwise called the knight of
the Savage man, Son to the Prince Don Edward, and the Princess Flerida your
great friends. The Queen hearing these words, took him up in her arms, and
embracing him very graciously, charged him with his great discourtesie, when he
passed by the Court, and would not suffer himself to be known.

Lustramar and his companions, knowing that he which had vanquished them, was
the noble knight of the Savage man, they made no account of the foil they had
received: but on the next morning when they had departed thence, they desired
the Prince to esteem of them as his unfeigned friends.

Two days after, the Knight of the Savage man, was desirous to leave the Court
of Spain, whereupon he took his leave of the King and the Queen, leaving
Siluian there in the court, because she was well known, as also Artesia, and
her companions, who wept at their parting, for the loss of that they could not
recover again. The Queen took her leave friendly of the Giantesse Arlencea,
because the Prince Florian did make so good account of her, and the King
Recinde brought them forth of the City, where taking a courteous farewell on
all sides, with charging him to do his commendations to the Emperor, and his
children in the Emperors Court, the King returned again into the City, and
the Prince rode on his journey.

CHAP. XXIX.
Of that which happened to the knight of the Savage man, when he came to the
Castle, where Arnalte the Princess of Navarre made her abode.
FLorian of the Forest, not forgetting to take new armor, when he departed
from the King of Spaines Court, yet keeping his devise in his shield of the
Savage man still, because he had greater delight therein, then in any other: in
this manner he traveled, atchieuing many rare and singular adventures, which
(for breuities sake) I let pass, because they were not of such importance, as
to be placed among his other knightly deeds. After he had coasted along through
diverse Countries, it was his fortune at length to arrive in a very pleasant
valley, even there where the Castle of the Princess Arnalte stood: she being
rid abroad on hunting, as also to see a Combat fought between Dragonlat, the
son of Drapos, and another Knight, who would not confess the Princess
Arnalte to be the fairest Lady on the earth. And I assure you, that the
presence of Arnalte gave such encouragement to Dragonalt, as he vanquished his
adversary, without any great endamagement of person or armor: which was of
Azure color, and bearing in his shield the same devise which Miragarda had
enjoined him, when he came with the Princess to the Castle of Almaroll, where
he left the honor of the day, and upon which occasion Arnalte did greatly
stomach him. But the Knight being beautiful, gracious, and often fortunate in
trial of adventures, continued in such earnest affection of service to her, as
she in the end began to favor his courteous deeds, with more regard then she
had done before.

But returning to the knight of the Savage man, whom the Princess (being in
company with her Damsels) had espied coming a far off: whereupon she came to
Draganolt, and after she had very graciously saluted him, she said, Behold,
here comes the only man in the world, who is my cruel enemy, and of whom I
desire to be severely revenged: wherefore, (my especial good friend) I desire
now to see the very uttermost of your redoubted behavior. And if fortune
regard you with such happiness, as you enjoy no danger in the fight, I will not
fail to recompense you in such sort, as you shall be thoroughly satisfied and
contented.

The promise which you make me (answered Dragonalt) is of such estimation in my
thoughts, as your words is only able to assure me the victory, albeit fortune
should seen to set her self against me. And persuade yourselfe, that it is
impossible for me to be vanquished, if you continue me in your acceptable
favor: in hope whereof, I will not only enter the Combat with the Knight
(for the desire I have to revenge your wrong) but I will likewise deprive him
of his Ladies, yea, and of his life, if it shall like you so to command me.

While Dragonalt spent other amorous speeches, with the Lady and Mistress of
his conquered thoughts, the Knight of the Savage man and his company, came to
the place where they stayed: then Dragonalt (to content the honor of the
princess, advanced himself forward with these words.

Sir Knight, I am to let you know, how you arre arrived in the place, where it
is thought meet that you make trial of my valor, which you shall find of
such authority, as will enforce you to obey the commandment of this
Princess: whom I will cause you to confess, that she is the fairest Lady
living on the earth, and is best worthy of knightly service. And when I have
dispoyled you of your armor, you shall go and submit yourselfe to this my
Lady and Mistress Arnalte, the Princess of Navarre, who shall accept into her
service those Damsels in your company, because we pity to see you so
ouercharged: whereto the Prince Florian thus replied.

If the Princess of Navarre (my friend) be so desirous to be served with my
Damoselles, it is very great shame to you, that you have not sought me before
this present, for you might have found me better acquainted with Damoselles,
then I am now, and by whom the Princess Arnalte might have received far more
honoour: but as for those which are with me, I think I shall defend them well
enough from coming in her service. Moreover, if I should be so impudent, as to
confess the large title you have made of her, I should imagine my self
deprived of my wits: for I am (my self) the servant of such a gracious
Lady, as the Princess Arnalte may no way equal in beauty, and that I shall
make you confess before I depart.

Dragonalt being offended to hear the words of the knight of the Sanage men,
took a strong Lance from his Esquire, and bowing himself to the Princess to
assist him with her favor, he broched his horse against the prince, who
likewise prepared himself to the Ioust: and they encountered together so
valiantly, as Dragonalt breaking his Lance on the Knight of the Savage man's
Sheelde, lifted him upon the croupher of his horse, but Dragonalt himself was
cast forth of his Saddle. Upon this the Prince Florian cast himself from his
horse, and Dragonalt having recovered his feet, they began to charge one
another very furiously, for Dragonalt intended to accomplish his promise, or he
would fight till the Knight of the Savage man were deprived of his life.

But he found himself greatly deceived, for the noble Florian handled him in
such sort, as the Prindesse Arnalte well perceived, that the strength of her
knight began to fail, and no marvel, for he was grievously wounded in many
places: whereat the knight of the Savage man was greatly offended. And fearing
he should kill him outright, he paused awhile, because he would suffer him to
take breath, when, he desired him to give over the Combat, and return to the
Passage which he had enterprised to guard: but Dragonalt gave him this answer.
Your counsel (S^r knight) were necessary to be followed, if I made more
account of my life, then the honor of the fight: therefore I let you
understand, that I intend not to give over the Combat. Then began they the
Combat a fresh, wounding one another so cruelly, as Arnalte and the Damsels
did greatly pity to see the Knight so cruelly bent, that their blood altered
the color of the grass where they fought: in the end Dragonalt not able to
endure any longer, fell down at the knight of the Savage man's feet, to whom
the Princess presently, and fearing he would cut off the head of her friend,
she spoke to him in this manner.

I pray you (sir knight) do not take his life from him, considering, the
victory is sufficient for an honorable mind. I promise you Madame (answered
the knight of the Savage man) I will not hold my hands, without he recant his
former words, or you promise me a gift that I intend to demand of you. I pray
you (said Arnalte) let him rise, for I am content to grant what ever you
request, provided always, that you seem not to impeach mine honor. Then the
Knight of the Savage man, gave Dragonalt into the hands of the Princess
Arnaltaes damoselles, who presently unarmed him, and conveyed him into the
Castle, to have his wounds dressed, the danger whereof was not so grievous to
him, as the conceyt of his mind, because he was again conquered in the
presence of his Lady.

The knight of the Savage man lodged without the castle (Arnalte now thinking,
that she should never be revenged on him) and there he soiourned three days,
at the end whereof, he came to take his farewell of her: and finding her in the
Prince Dragonalts Chamber, he fell in conference with her, the reproving him,
for the small account he seemed to have of her, whereupon he made her this
answer.

Madame, if you were as firm and constant, as you are both kind and
beautiful (which is a thing most necessary in you) I durst awarrant you, that
your Knights could not be convicted in this manner: beside, there is no knight,
but would willingly join with them in doing you service: and I assure you,
that had you not offered to compel me against my will, I would willingly have
granted your own desire, so desirous I am to do fair Ladies service,
remembering always, that such as you are, ought to be well esteemed and not
forgotten. And you shall understand, that I have been both in the Court of
England and Spain, which are not a little renowned by the beauty of the fair
Ladies, that there are nourished. Likewise I have seen Florenda, daughter to
Arnedes the king of France, whose beauty is honored of a great many: but
she whom your Champion named, and those that I have rehearsed to you my self,
may not compare with the Ladies of the Emperor Palmerins Court.

There have I seen Gridonia, Polinarda, Leonarda the princess of Thrace, and
Sidelia, Daughter to the King Tarnaes, of Lacedemonia. I have seen also the
Princess Targiana, daughter to the great Turk, for whose love, Albayzar the
Soldane of Babylon, has suffered very dangerous travails: all these (in my
judgment) are highly advanced in beauty beyond you, and so it will be granted
of any, that is not wedded in affection toward you.

But let it not offend you that I speak more plainly, it is your cruelty and
pride together, that does much deface your title of beauty, which you cannot
deny your self, making so light account as you do of sir Dragonalt, not
remembering that he is a worthy Knight, and Son to one of the most valiant
Princes on the earth.

And if this trial is not sufficient to cause you love him faithfully, trust
me I must needs say, that he has put himself in danger for an unfaithful
person, whom neither knightly bounty, nor regard of her own duty has power
to move. In respect therefore that you made me promise to grant what I
requested, my desire is, that in recompense of his noble deserts, you would
accept of him as your Lord and Husband: so shall you both fulfill your promise
to me, and accomplish the commandment, which the King your Father charged you
should fulfill: I now respect your answer, to see if a man should build any
assurance of your word. Sir Knight (answered Arnalte) do me the favor to tell
me first who you are, and afterward I will do my good will to satisfy your
request.

The knowledge of me fair Lady (said the Knight of the Savage man) shall be
no hinderance to the matter, wherefore I advertise you, that I am called
Florian of the Forest, Son to Don Edward the English Prince, and Flerida,
the Daughter to the Emperor Palmerin: D^agonalt hearing these words, spoke thus.

If in the victory you have obtained (Sir Knight) I should loose nothing else,
but the reputation of a good Knight, I could not be any jot offended, being
vanquished at his hands, who always returns from the Combat conqueror: but
seeing I am frustrate of the hope that should yield me content, I cannot choose
but complain on Fortune, who has caused me fall into so great perplexity.

Arnalte, understanding that the knight of the Savage man, was the Son of the
noble Prince Don Edward, she began to blush, remembering what had passed
between her and him, and very desirous she was to match with him in marriage,
but seeing she might not do as she would, she contented her self with his
request, declaring her mind in this manner. I did not think (Sir Knight) that
he which could so nobly vanquish the enterprise of knights, would study and
practice how to deceive poor simple women, nevertheless the behavior of the
Prince Dragonalt enforces me to obey your desire. Upon this condition, that
within one year, you and he shall bring me to the Court of the Emperor
Palmerin, as well for the unfeigned reverence I bear to his Majesty, as also
to be acquainted with those gracious Ladies which you have named.

God forbid Madame (said the Knight of the Savage man) but I should agree to
this lawful request, and the rather, because I know your presence will
greatly honor the Emper^urs Court. Then Florian offered to kiss the Princess
Arnaltes hand, but she embraced him very courteously, and Dragonalt would have
humbled himself at his feet, but he would not suffer him to rise from his
bed, for he made such estimation of him, as he sent for the chief governors
of the Realm: who having knowledge of the Knight of the Savage man, judged the
marriage of Dragonalt and the Princess to be according as it ought, and to do
them the greater honor, the Prince Florian caused the marriage to be
solemnized presently in the Castle.

On the next morning, he came to take his leave of the prince Dragonalt, and
the Queen Arnalte, to whom having made promise, that he would not fail to
accompany them to the Emperors Court, he took his way on his journey, where
we will forsake him a while, and speak somewhat of the Prince Albayzar.

CHAP. XXX.
How the Prince Albayzar embarked himself, to sail into Turkey, after that
he had presented himself to the Princes of Thrace.
ALbayzar the Soldane of Babylon, was desirous to leave the King of Spaines
court, three days after he had tried the Ioust against the noble Prince
Florian of the Forest, and taking his farewell of the King, the Queen, the
Ladies, and those knights of the Court who were his friends, he set forward on
his way, accompanied with two Esquires, making such speedy haste, as it was not
long before he attained to the City of Constantinople.

Then coming to the Palace, with a very proud and stately iesture, he entered
the Chamber of Presence, where he found the Emperor, the Empress and her
Ladies, beside the chief Princes and Knights of Court: he making no reverence
to any, stood viewing among the Ladies (whom he had seen before) which of them
he might repute for the Princess of Thrace. At last, judging her to be the
Princes, that sat next unto the fair Polinarda, he came before her, and
kneeling down saluted her with these speeches.

Madame, at the very instant I was about to depart from the King of Spaines
court, a knight arrived there, being accompanied with nine Damsels, and he
trying the Iousts with the most redoubted Knight of the Court, unhorsed them
bravely one after another. The sight hereof made me desirous to hazard my
fortune, but such was my ill hap, that he served me as he had done the other
knights: and having thus conquered me, he enforced me to make my faithful
promise, that I would come and submit my self before you, and declare the
message he would command me, for the condition was so made on either part when
we began the Ioust. This Knight charged me to say unto you, that it was no
small grief unto him, since fortune would not present him with any especial
occasion, whereby he might declare the good will he bare you: nevertheless, he
desired you very humbly, that you would make acceptance of this his first
service: though it be not of so great estimation as your singularity deserves.
And now I remain to know, in what cause it shall like you to employ me, that I
may do you service. Albayzar being well known in the Emperors court, great
joy was made on all side for his arriual, and the Emperor himself was very
well pleased, to see him come in so good disposition, for the good regard he
had of the Princess Targiana his Lady, whose virtuous deserts had bound him to
be very careful of Albayzars health, prosperity, and safe deliverance.

The Princess of Thrace arose, and taking Albayzar by the hand, spoke thus
unto him. I pray you (Sir Albayzar) to do what it shall please the Emperor to
command you, which I judge will be nothing hurtful unto you, seeing the great
desire he has to rejoice the Princess Targiana, with your presence.

Albayzar took in very good part the gentleness which the Princess of Thrace
used toward him, and having given her hearty thanks for her courtesy, he
came and saluted the Empress, and the Princess Gridonia, afterward he came to
the Emperor, who taking him in his arms, entered into these speeches.

I assured am (Sir Albayzar) that the Soldane Olorique, your Father, received
more great contentment when I embraced him, then I can do: yet am I desirous
to do you all the honor you can, as well from the friendship I bear to your
father, as to recompense some part of the great courtesy, which I have
received by the Princess Targiana, your espoused Lady, who may command any
thing she shall think good in my court, and I am sorry that you cannot persuade
your self, how you may do as much.

My gracious Lord (answered Albayzar) I am not of so simple understanding, but
I can well perceive what great honor you have always offoorded me: but yet I
cannot forget the shame I received here in your Court, when I was vanquished,
and likewise, how you have not done Justice to the Prince Florian, for the
injury he offered the Princess Targiana, albeit the great Turk her Father
requested it at your hands, which is no more but right and Justice, and which
you daily permit to every one, but kindred prevails so in you toward him,
as you will not hear what Justice calls for.

I see well then (said the Emperor) that reason cannot prevail with you, I
certify you once more yet, that the princess Targiana came hither more on her
own good will, then compelled or enforced thereto by Florian of the Forest, my
Nephew But referring this talk, because it is not to be used among friends, I
pray you imagine your self welcome, and go rest your self in your Chamber,
while the Galleys be provided, which have expected here your coming, since my
son Polendos and the other Knights arrived at Constantinople. My Lord (said
Albayzar) I take the time so commodious for me now to sail, as I will not use
so good opportunity, and therefore I intend to stay no longer in this
Country. Eeuen as please you for that (answered the Emperor) it is not meet
that I should dissuade him that is so resolute.

The ambassador (who had stayed there all this while) came very reverently to
the Prince Albayzar, and to hold that the Galleys were ready, the Sea in good
case, and the wind very well for their voyage. The Prince Albayzar took his
leave of the Emperor, the Empress and her Ladies, and being accompanied with
the princes, Primaleon, Polendos, Belcar, the Giant Dramusiande, and others,
they came to the Port where the Galleys lay: but the Giant Dramusiande, seeing
the small account Albayzar made of the Princes that bare him company, he spoke
unto him in this manner. I see well Albayzar, that the Emperor is worthy to be
blamed, for showing honor to such an unthankful person as you are, who
seems not to regard the Prince Primaleon, he (at his Fathers request) coming
to grace you with his company, albeit he needed not to abase himself so much.

Tush Sir (answered Albayzar) it is long since I knew the small good will thou
could allow me, but this I tell thee, that a noble mind disdaineth
familiarity to them, whom he accou^teth for his better enemies, and thus thou
may persuade thy self, that I am an enemy to all of the Emperors Court, and
so thou may tell him from me: wherefore then should I use any courtesy to
the Prince Primaleon, to whom I will show the very worst I can. Wherefore (sir
Dramusiande) grieve not to see me behave my self as I do, among mine enemies,
for I promise you, I will return with as much expeditions as I can, to
witness before the walls of his City, that which I have at this hour in my
mind.

I could wish (said Dramusiande) that thou have been there where thou would
be, and were returned hither again, that I might revenge the injury thou
did me, when thou wast so bold, as to carry away the shield of the princess
Miragarda. Albayzar was about to make him answer, but the Prince Primaleon
took Dramusia^de by the hant, and with the other knights returned to the
palace, where they gave the Emperor to understand, what good will the Prince
Albayzar bare him. The Galleys being launced into the deep, the Mariners
hoy^ed their sails, having their wind so at will, as in short time they
reached the great Caire, where the great Turk made his abode, who judged that
the Emperor Palmerin would be offended, for the had entertainment he gave his
Knights.

But when he had knowledge of the arrival of the Galleys, he was so joyful,
as he came himself to receive the Prince at the haven, being not desirous to
question of the Emperors honest usage toward him, for then he feared least his
own intent of treason would reprove him.

Albayzar remained a certain time in the great Turks Court, attending the
coming of the principal estates of Babylon, whom he would have there
presented at the second solemnizing of his marriage, which was honored with
the presence of the Soldane of Persia, the King of Bythinia, the King of
Gasplia, the King of Terbifonde, beside many other Princes and Knights, who
concluded all together to pass the Seas, and lay siege to the city of
Constantinople, and because they would the more suddenly execute their
intent, they severely returned into their dominions, to make preparation for
their traitorous enterprise.

CHAP. XXXI.
Of that which happened to the Knight of the Tiger, after he was departed from
the Perilous Isle, taking his journey toward the City of Constantinople.
THe Knight of the Tiger, (of whom our History has been silent along time)
entered the Foyst with Argentao, the Governor of the Profou^d Isle, at what
time the wind was so contrary, as he was feign to take landing in the same
Isle, where he soiourned for certain days, at the earnest importunity of the
inhabitants, who could think themselves never enough satisfied with his
company: but yet the long desire he had to see the City of Constantinople,
made him imagine the time too tedious till he came thither. At length (with
much a do) he departed thence in a Galley, accompanied with his friend
Siluian, being in a uew Armor which he caused to be made in the Profound
Isle, but keeping his devise of the golden Tiger, which was renowned through all
countries in Christendom: having sailed a long time, he came at last to the
Coast of Scotland, where his mind served him well to go on shore.

And after he had traveled three days in that Country, he came into a goodly
Valley, along the midst thereof was a great river, and not far off, he beheld
a fair house standing on the river side, having a bride for passage to it, the
which was kept by a Knight in green Armor, who bare in his Shield a white
Bull, which devise made him suspect that it should be his brother Pompides.

On the other side the bridge, which crossed over another part of the river, he
espied another Knight, who seemed as hardy a man as the knight of the Bull,
being in very rich Armor, and he might not pass the bride, without he did
first Combat with him that defended it: as for him that would not endure the
fight, he must yield himself to Armisia the King of Scots daughter, to whom
the house belonged. This strange Knight attending while the other got on
horseback, he put his fortune in trial to set at liberty the passage, but he
failed in his intent as you shall hear hereafter, and rendered himself to the
mercy of Armisia: who ordained the custom to this end, that she might have
her house furnished with Kings of good courage, whereof she knew she should
get a number, because this passage was one of the chiefest in all Scotland, and
none could get to the other side of the river, without they passed at this
bridge, which was so large, as four Knights might easily combat thereon, and
it was so well fenced on either side, as they could not be in danger of the
River while they fought the Combat.

The Knight of the Tiger stayed a while, to see the end of the Combat
between these Knights, and viewing well the Knight of the Bull, who had lifted
up the Feuere of his Helmet, to speak to a Damsel which stood looking forth
at a window) he was then perfectly persuaded, that it was his Brother Pompides,
who having concluded his familiar talk with the Damsel, took his Lance, and
came further forth upon the Bridge, whereupon the strange Knight spoke to him
in this manner.

I fear me (Sir knight) that we shall be hindered by the night which draws
fast upon us, before we can make an end of our Combat, whereto I see you
prepare your self, only to witness your service to the Damsel in the
window. What is that material to you Sir? (answered the Knight of the Bull) if
for her sake I enterprise the fight, doubt you not but I will be as good as my
promise.

So without any more words, they ran together very courageously, and after
they had broken their Lances, they met so fiercely with their bodies, as they
fell both beside their horses, to the ground.

When they had recovered themselves, they drew their swords, wherewith they
fought a very doubtful and dangerous Combat, the advantage whereof fell to
the Knight of the Bull, yet not so easily, but he was glad for to rest himself
as his enemy: which when he perceived, he leaned himself against the wall,
giving these speeches to the strange knight.

How say you now Sir? do you not persuade your self now, that I have power
sufficiently to accomplish what I have promised? Wherefore I would counsel you
to reserve your manhood for other occasions, better then to lose your life
here, and therefore be ruled by my advise, go submit your self to the
Princess Armisia, who will not deal discourteously with them, that will so
render their service unto her willingly: the strange Knight returned him this
answer.

Sir knight, I know as well as you, what profit or danger can come to me, if I
should do as you persuade me, therefore I pray you let this talk pass and
let us end what we have begun.

And so without attending any answer, he began to charge the Knight of the Bull
again, who entertained him in such sort, as in short time he felt himself to
feeble, to re resist the hardy strokes his enemy gave him, so that in the end,
being unable to continue any longer, he had lost so much blood, yt he fell
down before the knight of the Bull, who taking off his helmet spoke unto him
in this manner.

You shall understand now (Sir knight) that be cause you scorned to follow my
counsel, you shall now* whether you will or no) go submit your self to the
Princess Armisia, and if you refuse to do it, I will not fail to part your
head from your shoulders. I know not Sir (answered the strange Knight) which
of these two conditions I should choose, wherewith you present me, so dangerous
they both seem to me, for I would more willingly receive my death at your
hand, then go submit my self to her, who can be pleased with nothing else,
but adjoining me a most shameful death.

The knight of the Bull being ignorant of the reason, why he feared so much to
go render himself to the Princess Armisia, desired that he would tell him
his name. Truly Sir (said the strange knight) I intend not so much to satisfy
your will: for it is yet some contentment to him that is vanquished* when the
conqueror has no knowledge of him.

The knight of the Bull seeing him so obstinate, sent his Esquire to the
Princess Armisia, desiring her, (if so it were her pleasure) to grant this
Knight his life. Armisia, who was always very courteous to them that had any
preferment in her favor, commanded one of her Damoselles to go to the knight
of the Bull, and tell him that he should give the knight his life, after he had
knowledge who he was.

The Damsel was no sooner come to the Bridge, but she presently knew the
vanquished knight to be Adraspe, son to the duke of Sizana, who had slain
the Prince Doriell, brother to her Lady and Mistress Armisia, for the revenge
of whose death, the guarding of that passage was first ordained. Upon this, the
Damsel began to cry aloude and tear her hair very pitifully, saying he
was now come that had slain the Prince Doriell, which her Lady hearing, she
came down immediately, with her Damsels waiting on her, both she and they
weeping very bitterly, when she spoke to the Knight of the Bull in this manner.

I pray you Sir Knight let me have your assistance, to be delivered out of the
grievous passions wherein I have long time remained: for you shall understand,
that the Knight whom you have conquered, is the very same that flew my brother
Doriell, for whose death the King my father lives in extreme heaviness.

The knight of the Tiger marking her words, spoke in this order to his friend
Siluian: I see well it is more dangerous to fall into the hands of a woman, who
is desirous of vengeance, then to deal with a hundred good and hardy knights.
Wherefore I pray thee take my horse a while, and I will go see, if by my
entreatance his life may be saved. Then came he to the Bridge, and desired the
Knight of the Bull, that would not offer the knight any more cruelty: and
turning to the Princess Armisia, he saluted her with these speeches.

Madame, if any anciant enmity causes you to desire the death of this Knight,
I pray you admit to memory, that a Lady of so great calling as you are, ought
not to be void of lenity and pity, and chiefly at such a time, when you
have most power to execute the extremity of your will. And if my reasons be
not sufficient to appease your anger. I pray you yet consider with your self,
that no persons use cruelty where they may show pity, but they repent
themselves afterward when their collericke mood is ouerblowne and past.

The honest and virtuous language of the knight of the Tiger, had not the power
to move any pity in the Princess Armisia: but she commanded the knight of
the Bull, that he should cut off the head of her enemy, then the Prince gave
her these words. I promise you Madame, if neither pity nor persuasion may
prevail with you, I will stand such an eyesore in your way my self, as you
shall not execute your malicious humor. I would with all my heart (said the
Knight of the Bull) that it might please the Princess to grant this knight his
life: but since you presume so boldly to defend him, I will not refuse (albeit
I am so sore wounded) to let you understand that you neither can nor shall
hinder me, in fulfilling what my Lady has commanded.

The knight of the Tiger did not use these words, to the end that he would
enter the Combat with Pompides, but only to change the rigorous humor of
Armisia, and because he saw the Knight in such danger. But such was the cruel
mind of the Princess, as she continued still in one song, calling for the
head of the vanquished knight Adraspe, who with the great expense of his blood,
and grief to see the wreakefull will of Armisia, ended his life while the
knight of the Tiger and Pompides were preparing themselves to the Combat:
Armisia seeing Adraspes was dead, could not be yet contented therewith, because
his head was not smitten off as she commanded. Wherefore, because Pompides did
not accomplish what she willed him, she flang away in a fury, and went into
her Chamber.

Pompides, who was brought into great extremity for her love, did so grieve at
her departure, as he was constrained to set him down upon the bridge: but the
knight of the Tiger perceiving his heaviness, took pity on him, and came to
comfort him, which Pompides seemed to disdain, because he judged that his
presence procured his misfortune. Siluian seeing his master not return, came
walking with his horse before the bridge, whom Pompides having espied, he knew
presently that the knight of the Tiger, was the renowed Palmerin of England, in
which persuasion, for the great joy he conceived, he came to him with these
words.

I am well assured my gracious Lord, that the comfort I received at this
present instant, will deface and extinguish all my former mishaps. Palmerin
took off his Helmet, and having embraced Pompides, began to persuade him in
good hope of his Lady, who had no sooner forgotten her anger, but she
reproved her self of great unkindness, and then she sent to entreat
Pompides that he would pardon her, and if so it were his pleasure, to bring the
knight into her house with him, whoo^ she saw so familiar with him.

Pompides understanding the will of the Princess, took his brother by the hand
and walked into his Chamber, where, when they were unarmed, the Princess came
her self to visit them, entering into these speeches to the knight of the
Tiger. I beseech you Sir knight to excuse me, in that I made no more account of
your honest and courteous words: for I assure you, the great danger wherein I
was at that instant, would not suffer me to regard any persuasion whatsoever,
but only to revenge my self on my cruel enemy. And because you shall not
conceive any ill opinion of me, I will tell you for what cause I envied the
Knight so much.

You shall understand Sir, that I am the daughter of Meliadus the king of
Scots, in whose Court Adraspe the eldest son to the Duke of Sizana (whom
Pompides has slain)* began to wax very amourous of me, but because I knew
him to be one of very bad conditions, I made no regard of his earnest suite.
Nevertheless he was so importunate and void of reason, as he would not be
answered. Whereupon I was constrained to complain to the Prince Doriell my
Brother, of whom when Adraspe perceived himself to be hated and despised, he
practiced which way he might best be revenged on him, and following his secret
traiterous intent, it was not long after before he had the opportunity for to
execute his mallicious stomach.

It so chanced, that one day my brother and he had appointed to walk abroad
together, when, Adraspe being privily armed, and having at hand such as
provided for his purpose, he slew my Brother, whose death the King my father
could not accomplish to revenge, because he should then deal with one of the
cheifest Princes of his Realm, and his best assured friend.

Yet was not his heart free from continual vexation, in respect that nature
could not otherwise choose, which I pitying, and willing to assist my father to
the uttermost I could, I left the Court, and caused this house to be erected in
this place, which being the chiefest passage in all this Realm, I enterprised
to have some valiant Knight defend this Birdge, promising to marry with him, if
he could be so happy as to kill Adraspe. And he (as he was always accustomed)
bearing a proud and lofty mind, would oftentimes come to show himself here,
only to vex me with the remembrance of my Brothers death: and still he would
Combatte with my Knights, being evermore so fortunate as to vanquish and kill
them.

But after the knight of the Bull took this charge upon him, Adraspe (who had
heard of his noble prowess) remained two months before he could come hither
again: yet at the last, came to try his Fortune against the Knight of the
Bull, who has deprived him of his life as you see, and satisfied my will that
made me to ordain this custom,

Madamy (answered the knight of the Tiger) you should have had my help in
taking his life from him, if you had told me at the first what great wrong he
had done you, for the very earth will open to swallow those, that intend or
practice any treason against their Prince, yea and the Prince himself cannot
be free from such secret conspirators, when favor shall stand in steed of
Justice to such wicked offenders: wherefore, if they be sharply punished, the
rest will be the better warned by their tran^gression.

And I assure you Madame, you have done as well beseemed a virtuous Princess,
in cutting off that branch, when fortune made the instrument of your
unhappiness: beside, the duty wherein you are bound to the knight your
father, did command you should see so good a deed executed.

Now therefore let me humbly entreat you, that you would keep your promise to
Sir Pompides, who is my Brother, the nephew to king Frederick of England, and
son to the prince Don Edward, who is father to him and me, and friend to you.

I see well (said Armisia) that I have wrought the contentment of the Knight
my father, and taken vengeance for the death of the Prince Doriel my brother,
by the prowess of him, whose presence is no small honor to me: nevertheless,
I may think my self little beholding to him, in that he has concealed
himself so long from me, who would have allowed him more honorable
entertainment. And I pray you Sir, let it not offend you, that I desire to
know, whether yon be the prince Palmerin, or Florian of the Forest, his
Brother: not that I am affectioned more to the one then the other, but because
I would know, which of them Fortune has made me so happy to see: the Prince
returned her this answer.

Florian of the Forest (Madame) is so far off this place, as very hardly can
one tell where to meet with him: wherefore, you may persuade your self that I
am Palmerin, whom (if you please) you may command as your servant. The
Princess Armisia embraced him very graciously, rejoicing that she might any
way accomplish the means to honor him, because the king Meliadus her father,
was brother to the Queen of England, the Prince Don Edwards mother.

The death of the proud Adraspe, was reported the same day in the king of
Scots Court (which was but four leagues from this place) and the name of the
Knight that had slain him: whereupon the king upon the next meaning took his
Coatch, and being accompanied with many worthy knights, he came to see the
Prince Palmerin of England: and having given him many gracious salutations, he
took Pompides by the hand, promising to make as good estimation of him, as he
did of the Prince his son while he lived. While the aged king sat familiarly
talking with Armisia his Daughter, the Archbishop of Esbreque arrived there, by
whom, Pompides and Armisia, were presently married together, and then departing
thence, they went very strongly to seek to the Duke of Sizana, Father to the
proud Adraspe, whom the king vowed to put to death, or keep him prisoner: but
he reckoned without his Host, for the Duke being advertised of his intent,
fled i^to Ireland, whereupon his goods and living fell into the Kings hands.
They in England having knowledge of Pompides marriage, made Triumphs and
Bonfires, for the good fortune that had happened to Pompides, who was very well
beloved of every one, as well for being the Son of the Prince Don Edward, as
for his virtuous bounty and knightly courage.

CHAP. XXXII.
How the knight of the Tiger, took his leave of Meliadus the king of Scots,
and of the Princess Armisia his Daughter and what happened unto him during his
voyage.
WHen the Nuptials of Pompides were solomnized, to the great contentment of the
King of Scots, and his whole Realm, the Knight of the Tiger took his leave of
the King, and the Princess Armisia, accompanied with his brother Pompides, to
whom (before he was embarked) he gave to understand, the charge wherein all
Princes were bound that received royal dignity, desiring him very earnestly,
since fortune had brought him to so great felicity, that he would use himself
modestly and wisely, because Fortune was so uncertain in her self, that
sometime she put those persons in greatest fear, whom she had placed in most
assurance, whereby she lets them understand, that she can quickly
dispossess them of their happiness, at such time as they little look for any
such alteration.

But to the end you may enjoy your dignity with most assurance, I counsel you
to entertain your subjects with amity, administering Justice rightly unto
them, which let be done with so good zeal, as it be not converted in rigor
and cruelty, whereby you shall cause them to say, that their Governor is become
tyrannous and unmerciful to them.

My Lord (answered Pompides) your words sauouring of so good judgment, as
they are worthy of most high commendation, I cannot but think my self much
bound to you, for this your noble and friendly counsel, assuring you that I
will lodge them faithfully in my heart, and accomplish them according to your
gracious commandment, for in doing otherwise, I shall judge my self unworthy
to be named your Brother.

After many such like speeches had past between them, they embraced one
another, Pompides returning to the City, and Palmerin entering the Ship,
caused the sails to be hoysed, when the wind serving them so well, as (after
they had spent such time as is meet for so great a journey) the Prince took
landing in Hungaria. When he had past through diverse places of the Country,
it was his chance to arrive in a goodly Forest, where at length he came to a
very fair Fountain, which was covered with an Arc of marvelous ingenious
workmanship: and because the weather was exceeding hot, he alighted to refresh
himself at this Fountain. In the mean while Siluian suffered the horses to
grase in the pasture, and when the Prince had washed his hands and his face, he
espied a little from him down further in the Forest, a Damosel running very
speedily, with her hair hanging about her shoulders, and tearing her fair
visage with her nails, crying and weeping out of measure: at last she espied
the Knight of the Tiger, to whom she came running a great pace, and casting her
self at his feet, she remained fearfully looking about her a good while,
having not the power to speak one word.

The Knight of the Tiger seeing her perplexed case, began to pity her very
much, and doubted lest he that had feared her, would make pursuit after her,
he called for his Helmet, which he had no sooner clasped on his head, but he
beheld coming the way that the Damsel came, a giant very strongly armed,
carrying in his hand a huge Mace, who seeing the Damsel, had demanded succor
of the Knight of the Tiger, spoke unto her in this manner. Trust me Damsel,
you betake your self to very simple assurance, in that this knight wants
strength to defend you against me.

So without any more words, he struck at the Prince with his Mace, who put his
Shield before him to resist the stroke, which was so rigorous, as his Shield
flewe in two pieces: the Prince was somewhat offended hereat, wherefore
(drawing his sword) he gave the Giant such a blow on the arm, as afterward he
could hardly strike to any great purpose. The Damsel remaining still in
extreme fear, by the cruel intreatance the Gigant had used to her, would
have departed to hide her self in the Forest, because she judged the Knight
of the Tiger unable to subdue her enemy: which Siluian perceiving, came unto
her, and counseled her to see the end of the Combat, whereupon she gave him
these words. I pray you gentle esquier and my friend, that you would not seem
to hinder me, for this Giant, nay rather a Devil (whose force none is found
able to resist) will assuredly put me to death, after that he has slain your
master. I would yet (said Siluian) that you would stay to see the end of the
fight: for peradventure it may happen otherwise then you expect.

The knight of the Tiger (who was destitute of a Shield, to avoid the cruel
strokes of his strong enemy) behaved himself so politiquely and nimbly, as he
lent the Giant many sore blows, who was constrained because he could not lift
his mace in his right hand) to use his left, thinking yet to deal well enough
with the Knight of the Tiger: but the Prince was so fierce upon him (having
given him many grievous and mortal wounds) as his heart began to fail him, so
that he retired, not able to resist so many weighty strokes, nevertheless, the
prince seeing he had almost brought him to buy, let fly still so fiercely on
him, as he could not have the mean to charge him again. The Giant perceiving
himself in such extremity, leaned his back against a Tree, when he defended
himself a great while so well, that the Prince could hardly reach to hurt him,
he waged fight every way so precisely with his Mace, which he held in both
his hands, watching the time when he might give the Prince such a stroke as he
willingly would.

The knight of the Tiger, he might not prevail against the Giant, without
hazarding his person in great danger, he went and rested himself against a
Tree like wise, which when the Giant beheld, he spoke unto him in this order. I
pray thee Sir Knight, let me find so much friendship at thy hands, as to let me
understand what is thy name, because I have evermore thought that no ten of the
best knights on the earth, could not do as much as thou have done, neither that
they could have been able to resist me half this while.

I am content (answered the knight of the Tiger) to satisfy thy will so much,
on condition thou will promise to tell me thy name, and the cause why thou
do pursue this Damsel. So much (quoth the Giant) thou shall command at my
hands, wherefore, thou shall understand that I am called Vascalion of Ocrance,
Son to the Giant Lucran, who was slain at Constantinople by the hands of
Primaleon, with who^ he was so hardy as to enter the Combat, to revenge the
death of Don Perrequin of Duas, and to have in marriage Gridonia, the duchess
of Ormeda, who was afterward espoused to Primaleon. At what time my father was
slain, he left me in the keeping of one of my Brethren, named Dramoque, who is
likewise slain be one of the sons of the Prince Don Edward of England, and
this Knight is yet in the search of Knightly adventures. But I assure you, I am
not a little agreeued to see my self in this case, becanse I am almost
deprived of any hope, to revenge the Death of my Father and his Brother, before
I dye.

And for this Damsel, it is so, that fortune caused me to meet with her to
day, and as I understood by her, she is going to the Court of the Emperor
Palmerin, to visit Leonarda the Princess of Thrace: now, for that I am
desirous to do all the injury that I may, to any of that Emperors Court, I
endeavored my self to ravish this Damsel. But at the time I was about to
fulfill my pleasure on her, an Esquire of hers (who had escaped my hands) came
and hindered me with the aid of five Knights, whom I have left to hold Combat
with ten of my Knights* because I would follow this Damosel, who took her
self to flight, so soon as the five Knights began to charge me. Thus have I
told you the whole circumstance of my mind, now it remains that you reveal
your self to me, according as at first you promised.

Believe me Vascalion (answered the Knight of the Tiger) it is necessary that
thou should receive sharp chastisement, for using thy life in such wicked
actions, the proof hereof thou may now behold thy self: for thou being not
content with the death of thy Father and his Brother, seek to revenge thy
villainous will on this innocent Damsel. I let thee know therefore, that I am
a kinseman to Primaleon, and the same man that slew thy Fathers Brother, which
made me be called Palmeran of England, Son to prince Edward and fair Flerida
the Sister of Primaleon, for whose sake, I intend to take thy life from thee
before I depart.

Vascalion (at these words) began greatly to dismay himself, for he knew well
that his strength was not sufficient to hold out long against him, but yet he
presently advanced himself, to show what desire he had to be revenged on him
that had slain his Vuckle.

Palmerin being very glad, when he perceived the Gianc had forsaken the Tree,
which served him all the while as a Rampire of defense, assailed him with such
furious strokes, as the Giant would gladly have rested himself again: but the
Prince followed him still so earnestly, as at length he tumbled on the ground
before him, when (not content to see him so conquered) he set his foot upon
him, and when he had taken off his Helmet, he presently parted his head from
his shoulders. The sight hereof made the Damsel so glad, as she had now
forgotten the fear wherein she was when the Giant pursued her, and then came
the Knight of the Tiger to her with these words.

Fair Damsel, I judge that the five Knights who are in Combat for your
occasion, cannot otherwise choose but be in great danger: wherefore, I will go
seek them forth to succor them, in the mean while you may come fair and
softly after with my Esquire, who (for your better ease) shall take you up
behind him on his horse. Then took he that way which he saw the Giant come,
when he pursued the Damsel, and it was not long before he heard the clanching
of the Swords, whereupon he gave his horse the spurs, and never left
gallopping till he came to them, where he saw they had slain four of the
Giants knights, and of the other six, there were but two that could defend
themselves to any purpose.

The knight of the Tiger knew Dramian the king Recind^s son, by his Armor
and the devise he bare in his Shield, then alighting from his horse, he put
himself among his friends, charging one of them that fought so stoutly, as he
tumbled reeling to the ground: which the other five perceiving, they were so
greatly dismayed, as in short time, the knight of the Tiger and his companions
made an end of their wretched lives.

The Damsel arrived there very soon after, when the sight of Siluian made
the knight of the Tiger presently known to these five knights, who were not a
little glad of his company, being all his known and approved friends.

The first was Dramian, son to the king Recinde, the other were Frisoll,
son to the Duke Drapos of Normandy, Luyman of Burgundy, Tremoran, and
Brandedon: al these five knights were conducted by their Esquers, to a little
village not far from the Forest, where they were carefully attended till
their wounds were healed.

The Knight of the Tiger kept them company two or three days, when afterward
he took his leave of them, setting forward the next way he could devise, to
bring him to Constantinople, where the Emperor was presently given to
understand, of the death of Vascalion and his ten knights, which news were
highly welcome to all in the Emperors Court.

CHAP. XXXIII.
How the Knight of the Tiger, arrived at the Emperors court of Constantinople,
and of an Adventure which was offered to him at his arrival.
BEcause the Prince Palmerin was desirous to be at Constantinople, he left the
company of the Damsel and the five knights of the Emperors Court, continuing
so long in travail, as at length he came into the Empire of Constantinople,
without the finishing any adventure worthy the rehearsal: for I assure you the
devise of the Tiger he bare in his shield, made such report of him in all
places abroad, as very few or none would willingly meddle with him. But the
nearer the Prince approached to Constantinople, the more he found himself
passioned for the love of his Lady, remembering her unkind speeches, and the
sharp entreatance she used to him, when he departed from the Court, which were
now so earnest in his thoughts, as he durst hardly now offer to come again in
her presence. Siluian laboring as much as he could possible, to cause him
forsake that fond humor, persuading him that the Princess fury could not
choose but be now thoroughly forgotten, and he durst awarrant, that she had
repented her self many times since that she had used him so ungently.

The Knight of the Tiger hearing the words of Siluian, began to comfort
himself indifferently, and riding on, they came at last to have the city in
their sight, which the Prince stood and and beheld a great while, with the
tears running down his cheeks, and many a scalding sigh sent from his heart,
beholding the Chamber wherein his Lady and Mistress lay.

When he had passed this cogitation so well as he could, he clasped on his
Helmet, and taking his Shield and his Lance, he commanded Siluian to go
before into the city, and provide some place where he might alight, because
he would come unknown, if so be any adventure might be presented to him when
he arrived at the Court. And so it came to pass, that a knight came to the
Emperors Court, the day before the arrival of Palmerin, having two Esquires
attending on him, who carried his Helmet, Shield, and Lance: and coming very
proudly into the Emperors presence, he used his language in this manner.

I give thee to understand (most redoubted and famous Emperor) that I Arnolte,
the Lord of Astronomicall Isle, and the giant Brauorant, were very great
friends together, for that our governments were somewhat near one another, and
to confirm this friendship long continued between them, my Father concluded,
that I should marry with Arlencea, Daughter to the Giant Brauorant: but because
both my years and discretion served not as then, they prolonged our marriage
for the space of five years. In which time Brauorant departed this life, so
likewise Camboldam, Calfurnien, Brocalont, and Baleato, who were slain by the
two sons of prince Edward of England, your nephews. And to abolish altogether
the house of Brauorant, Collambra his wife (by the counsel of the Magitian
Alfernao) sent Lady Arlencea her Daughter into this Country, to the end that
by their deceit, they might cause the Knight of the Savage man to forsake this
Court, that revenge might be taken on him for the death of her Sons, which
would remedy her inward sorrows, seeing him brought into her subjection.

But now it is thought impossible to help this misfortune, for Alfernao is
slain by Collambraes means, who threw her self headlong down in the
presence of her enemies: thus are they not only deprived of their lives, but
that which is worst of all, Arlencea is utterly lost, being in his keeping that
has slain her whole lineage. ^^d because I have desire to find her, I
enterprised to travel hither, being minded to deal with the knight of the
Savage man, and not doubting but to discharge him of his life: but he is not
now in this Court, whereat I am not a little offended, for if Fortune refuse
me, I shall not account it any injury to be vanquished at his hands, who is
daily wont to remain victor in all places where he comes.

Beside, if I be deprived of my life, I shall make an end of those careful
thoughts, which makes me desirous to be dissolved: and for this purpose I
intend to wait his coming. Now if in the mean will, your Majesty will give
me leave to make some trial at Arms, against the Knights of your Court, I
shall count my self highly pleasured: the Emperor returned him this answer.

Trust me (my friend) you have enterprised to seek your own ruin, wherefore
I would counsel you to give your mind to such things, the fruit whereof may
yield you more commodity then this is like to you. And I assure you, that
neither Florian, nor Palmerin his Brother, is at this instant in my court, whom
I would wish to be hear: nevertheless, if in the time you expect their
coming, you be so desirous to make known your valor, I grant you the
liberty of the field, where the Knights of my Court shall not sail to visit
you.

I desire nothing more (answered Arnolfe:) And so without any more words he
entered the Field, where he Iousted against three Knights, two of them being
unhorsed, and the third vanquished in the Combat with the sword: then the day
declining, they gave over for that time.

On the next morning he entered the Field again, being in black Armor and
having painted in his Shield little flames of fire in a Field of Sable. The
Knight of the Tiger stayed not long, before he came and showed himself in the
Field, armed as he was wont to be, but very much disguised with shadows,
least he should be known, and his devise of the Tiger was so defaced, as one
could not judge what proportion it should be.

As he passed along by the Empress Chamber window, he chanced to see his Lady
Polinarda, whereat he was somewhat abashed: but seeing that Arnolfe was so
ready to Ioust, he let pass all fond conceits, and praunced into the Lists to
know the state of the enterprise, which was presently declared to him by one of
the Judges of the Feeld, whereupon the prince advanced himself to the Giant
Arnolfe, speaking unto him in this manner.

Thou shall understand Arnolfe, that thou art now to deal with a kinseman to
the knight of the Savage man, wherefore if thou have any thing to say unto him,
revenge it on me, who is one of his lineage. Arnolfe was so iocound when he
heard these words, as he presently gave his horse the spurs against the knight
of the Tiger, they encountered together with so great force, as the Prince
forsook one of his Stirrups, but Arnolfe was sent to the earth with his heels
upward.

This brave beginning caused the Emperor and Primaleon to rejoice, they judging
the strength of Arnolfe unequal to be compared with the knight of the Tiger,
who alighting from his horse, came and received Arnolfe at the point of the
sword, he being not a little moved at his sore fall, especially, having
received such a foil at his hands, who was allied to the knight of the Savage
man. The Combat began and continued with great fury, which moved the
Emperor to these words. I perceive now, that Arnolfe might have used less
boasting of his prowes, because he seems far unable to make resistance
against the knight that fights with him. It is reason good Father (answered
Primaleon) that evil persons should be punished, that example may remain to
others, to beware how they meddle in such vnduttfull attempts. Arnolfe and the
Knight of the Tiger so hacked one another, as their Armor witnessed their
cruel rage and fury, especially the Giant, whose flesh was so cut and mangled
in many places* that the blood tricked apace down his armor, the great loss
whereof caused him give over to take breath awhile, when he desired the knight
of the Tiger to tell him his name: whereto he returned him this answer.

I tell thee Alnofe (said the Prince) I am a very near kinsman to the knight
of the Savage man, having no less desire to end thy cursed life, then I have
to do the like to all such as thou art: Arnolfe replied thus. I am in the place
where of long I desired to be, and I assure thee, I receive no small
c^ntentment in dealing with thee: for if I be so happy as to deprive thee of
life, I shall persuade my self to be revenged on my greatest enemy. But if
Fortune give thee the power to vanquish me, I shall be likewise well content,
because I shall the sooner visit Brauorant and his sons: to revenge whose
death, I will either end thy days with my sword, or offer up my spirit here at
thy feet.

The knight of the Tiger perceiving him so obstinate, began to charge him more
roughly then as yet he had done, following his intent so gallantly, as he never
left him, till he tumbled on the ground before him stark dead: when, taking
off his Helmet, and seeing he had no life left in him, he kneeled down, and
thanked God for his victory.

Then came Primaleon, and other Princes, who conducted the Knight of the Tiger
into the Empress Chamber, where taking off his Helmet, he kneeled down before
the Emperor, who weeping for joy to see him, embraced him in his arms very
graciously. Afterward he came and humbled himself before the Empress, with
kissing her hand, doing the like to Gridonia, and to the other Ladies: but when
he came to his ^ady and mistress, such was his speech and behavior, as it
caused suspicion of their love, to all then present.

CHAP. XXXIIII.
Of the talk which the Prince Palmerin had, with the Princess Polinarda his
Lady.
SO greatly bus^ed was the Prince Palmerin for certain days, in visiting his
friends, as he could not attain the felicity his heart desired, which
tormented him secretly, though he bare it forth with a good countenance: for
neither could he find the means to speak with his Lady, nor with Dramuciana
her Gentlewoman, that he might discover his grief to her. To the end therefore,
that he might somewhat remedy his affections, he made his case known to
Siluian, who entering the Empress Chamber, desired Dramaciana to speak a word
or two with her: and so well did Siluian handle the matter, that Dramaciana
came to speak with the prince Palmerin, at her chamber window, which was
underneath her Ladies Chamber, and so shadowed by the Arches of stone toward
the Garden, that one might very hardly perceive him.

Palmerin received no less contentment, in speaking with Dramaciana, then he
would if it had been to his own Lady, who made her Gentlewoman acquainted
with all her secret passions: whereupon he judging that the hour of his good
fortune could never come to pass, without the assistance of his Damsel,
opened his whole mind unto her, whereon when she had sufficiently scanned,
very modestly she gave him this answer.

You may well thinks (most famous and renowned Prince) that she who is so
willing (as you perceive me) to do you service, would be loath to hide any
thing from you, which might return your benefit: and this you may persuade
your self, that the dutiful good will I bear you, makes me so hardy at this
time, not knowing whether I shall be deceived, or if you intend otherwise then I
make account of. It is not meet my friend Dramaciana (answered Palmerin)
neither does the time so permit, that I should be such a shameless person, as
to render inturie for courtesy, neither would I wish you to judge me such a
one: wherefore (setting all such doubts aside) I desire you to certefie me,
what end (as you think) will my long service come unto: for the hope I have
received by your means, has evermore sustained me until this present, from
the cruel extremities, which else had been sufficient to kill me.

He that knows so well (said Dramaciana) how to declare his grief, shall
never make me believe that he can be deprived of good hape, considered also,
that your noble behavior cannot be blemished by fogetfulnesse. And this you
may build upon, that the Princess Polinarda, has been as grievously
passioned during the time of your long absence, as you have been daily
tormented with fearful and displeasant thoughts, as you say you have
suffered. If these news (answered Palmerin) ought to be sufficient to content
me, that I pray you to wast no more time, but acquit your self of the promise
it has pleased you oftentimes to make me: for it is not convenient that these
words (whereby you do so highly please me) should be changed into flattery and
deceit, which might grow to such a severe cause, as might be both the loss
of me and my Lady: Well then (quoth Dramaciana) I have already provided the
place where you may speak your mind to the Princess my Ladd, which shall be at
a close and secret window, whereto you may come, as you enter the chamber by
the Princess Fleridaes garden. And I pray you behave to your self in such
order, as you shall not need to speak together again so secretly, because
the place and the honor of the Princess cannot agree together, without
occasion of your great danger. I may now perfectly behold (answered Palmorin)
of what account your good will has been always to me, which when I call to
remembrance, it causes me to abandon all ye unhappy occasions, wherewith I have
bin too long acquainted, and envious despite can no more molest me, having your
favorable furtherance on my side. But when I consider ye sweet contentation I
shall receive, having the means to speak with my gracious mistress, I find my
self thrown into many doubtful perplexities, in respect of my unworthiness and
her honorable dignity: so that I shall be abashed, and fear yt her displeasure
will withhold me, from discoursing my long and tedous travails for her sake.
Certainly sir Palmerin (answered Dramaciana) it were fond you should conceal
the Princely deeds, wherewith so many renowned Potentates have bin acquainted:
for if you have been so valiant and hardy, as to spend your time hitherto in
travails of exceeding danger, and yet have finished them all worthily, it is
needless you should now dismay your self, presenting your person in the place,
which is free from any hazard or misfortune, And if you will tell me, how this
fear and affliction was so coupled together, I will tell you what remedy I can
for it, but I would have you to strive with your self, yt all fear may be out
of your mind, when you come to reveal your secret thoughts to my Lady and
mistres. Palmerin well noting the friendly words of Dramaciana, made known
unto her the very depth of his amorous afflictions: but ye knight drawing on a
pace, and the talk of the prince (in a manner endless), they brake off their
conference at that time, she showing him the place, and appointing him the
hour to speak with his Lady. Palmerin taking leave of Dramaciana, went to his
chamber, where he spent the night in thinking on the talk had passed between ye
gentlewoman and himself: so the good hope he had through her means made his
heart not so sorrowful as it was wont to be, but somewhat he behaved himself
pleasantly remembering the heure of his felicity drew near. The time being
come, which Dramaciana had charged him to respect, he took his way to the
appointed place, and passing so covertly as he could through the garden, he
entered the princess Fleridaes chamber, leaving Siluian without, to give him
knowledge if any came to trouble him.

Palmerin walking up and down the chamber alone, admitting many cogitations to
his present attempt, he began to think on the greatest detriment that might
happen to him, for he knew very well, that he came to Combat amorously with
him, who had the power to deprive him of his wonted courage, and could drive
him to so strait a point, as no refuge he might have to fly unto, but her
Princely and favorable bounty, which if he did not afford him, he could not
make account of any conquest. Then offering to approach the window, he espied
the Princess coming, whose sight abashed him with such sudden fear, as he
found his voice too faint to speak, and the judgment wherewith he had been
always acquainted, was now so weak and simple, as one would have taken him
rather for a Ghost then a living man: the which she perceiving and greatly
pitying, withdrew her self a little from the window, remembering the good
counsel that Dramaciana had given him. At last he stepped to the window, which
the princess seeing, advanced her self to him, when, after a little pausing,
he entered into these speeches.

Madame, if this hour of good fortune would allow me the recompense, to end my
long and laborsome travails, I should have no occasion to find my self
agreeued, for well I assure my self, that your presence has the power to make
me forget all the pains I have suffered, during the time I have borne the
yoke of love, to whom I have always remained faithful and ab^dient, in
regard of her favor that brought me to this place, where I receive
unspeakable content, in requital of my passed afflictions in travail, which
I esteem of no importance, in comparison of the dignity now present before
mine eyes, which is of so high and honorable authority, as I esteem my
fortune to exceed all others. But I could wish, that his golden face of
beauty, which is so splendant to my drouping thoughts might never be shadowed
with any cloud of misfortune, in that my joy, honor, and felicity has
evermore been, in making especial account of my excellency, who I judge will
pit to see me live in continual servitude. And since the extremity of
grief has compelled me to take this boldness on me, I would desire you to
think, I come yet with this regard: as well to avoid any impeachment that
might happen to blemish your renown, as for the desire I have that your
gracious favor might end my careful and continual verations, which you must
judge to be great, if you consider all things past advisedly. For such has
been my dutiful remembrance of you, as my conceit did imagine any thing to
your honor, I neither forsook grief, danger, trouble, or any misfortune
whatsoever, (these having been always the familiars of my life) that I might
eternize your name for time of memory, reposing so good hope in your noble
self, that the eud of my travails shall agree with your gentle acceptance,
which I am enforced earnestly to request. But albeit my labors have been great
and greeuons in your service, yet am I not so forgetful of my self, but I
repute this present gracious favor of your excellency, to be far beyond
that I have done, and the rather, because I know your sweet and amiable
nature, will not seem altogether left unrewarded. Then if it come pass, that
you make a friendly account of me, I shall find my self so dutiful toward
you, and my desire will be so comformable to yours, as look what likes you,
will content me, and how you dispose of me, I caunot but accept gratefully,
such and so great is the content I receive in the travails I have done for
your sake, as no wind can blast me, if your bounty shaddowe me, nor any fear
foil me, if your favor stand by me: to which words the Princess thus
answered.

I did not think (Sir Palmerin) that you would cause me to come into this
place, to hold me with these frivolous and needelesse words, and I promise you
but for reason, I should think my self so deceived, as I could hardly
withhold my self from leaving your company. The first is, because you were
nourished and brought up in this Court, being likewise my kinseman friend,
which has made me the more willing to regard your travails. The other to
satisfy the earnest entreaty of Dramaciana, to whom I perceive you are a
greater friend then to me: but seeing the fault is in me, I will rather blame
mine own timeritie then you, though you seek to satisfy your desire, without
any consideration of my honor, whereby you let me sufficiently understand,
what small regard you have of the danger, wherein you may fall sooner then you
think for, only through your unadvisedness. I cannot deny, but I am greatly
indebted to you, yet in no such deep sum, but I can easily come forth of it,
without any prejudice to my renown: for I do not esteem it reasonable, to
recompense your noble service with mine own disadvantage, because the good
fame and commendation you have gotten, may content you, if you have no other
reward. But if your good will be so great toward me, as by your speeches you
seem to make it, it is meet for you to make it known to the Emperor your
Grandfather and mine, as also to the Prince Primaleon my Father, not doubting
but they will be very willing to match us both together, as for me, I shall
esteem it the greatest good fortune that may happen to me, having gained the
love and liking of you, whose prowess and Princely deserts, are worthy most
gracious estimation. Thus if consent knit up the long desire of us both, we may
join in one agreement of gladness: and this I prgy you to accept as my
answer, for without their good wills, I neither may nor can accord unto you.

I promise you Madame (answered Palmerin) it is very hard for me to receive
contentment in their commending my deeds, whom I cannot regard or make any
account off, and if I should seem to refuse to go to the Emperor and the
Prince Primaleon, I might be thought very unwise: but first I would be
persuaded thoroughly of your good will, which is the principal in this action.
And if it so fall out, that they will not consent upon the words I shall use to
them: yet when I am resolved of your acceptance, I shall take the boldness on
me (seeing time and place so serving) to let them understand our sure and
inui^lable consent and loyalty together.

And albeit my fond timeritie used toward you, may cause you judge me far
unable to speak with such a^dacitie in this cause, I would have you yet this
to think on me now that the faithful affection, wherewith I have continually
served you, will compel me enter in this boldness to them, as tell you. And
if they do ^oi seem to lean me to be contented, by such laudable recompense
as I may receive at others hands, it is the regard they have of my travails
and adventures, daily used in the honor of your name, and no other, makes me
think to deserve this great favor. But if your nature cannot then agree, when
they would be loath I should be any otherwise rewarded, I must and will content
my self to obey your pleasure, yet shall I find my self deceived in the
opinion I have hitherto conceived, in that to be deprived of the presence of
his Lady, is the chiefest misfortune that can happen to a faithful Lover.

What then is left to comfort such a careful mind? None but this, that the
absent friend has this commodity, to fit and rip up many sad and sorrowful
discourses, wherewith he may chase away the remembrace of their deceytes, whose
presence was dearer to him then life it self. But yet such is the custom of
Love, to mingle among the sharpest conflicts some hope: If it be but only to
sweeten their mouths a little with some delightful taste, who waste their
time in jest and dalliance, under his amorous Ensign. And with this gay
foil, he graceth his Copper for curant Gold, being the only mean to shadow
his deceitful dealings: yet a number that spend their lives in his service,
gain such knowledge of his trumperie, as in the end they are glad to forsake
him. Which I dare not take the hardiness on me to do, for that I am so surely
bound to him as when I shall leave him, I desire to be loved of none but you,
in regard of whose good will, I have thrust my self into all dangers,
whatsoever returning victor rather by the aid of your incomparable beauty,
then by the force or valor that remain^^^ in my self: there pausing, she
replied in this manner. I did nor think (Sir Palmerin) to receive any such
answer for the words I gave you, wherefore you make me judge that they are of
no estimation at all with you.

But since I perceive that love has so fondly blinded you, as he will not
suffer you to see, the more then modest readiness in me to pleasure you, I am
content to give you yet a further and greater assurance of me: for* I would not
that such a noble and renowned Prince as you are, should depart from me
offended or injured, persuading my self that you will not seem to enterprise
any thing, whereby but a motion of impeachment may come to mine honor, for if
you did, I should think very hardly of the diligent service you have done to
me all this while.

Therefore once again I humbly entreat you, to speak to the Emperor, and
Primaleon my Father, to know the estate of their good wills, whereof if you
should fail, I give you perfect assurance of mine: if this answer (which
truly duty accounts but bad obedience to my superiors) will not suffice
you, I will verily persuade my self, that the love you seem to bear me, is
rather to disgrace, then preserve my honor.

If now sweet Madame (answered Palmerin) I refuse to do as you advise me, it
were but reason you should thrust me forth of your service, knowing (as I do)
that the overthrow of my bliss, and erecting me to happiness, consists
duly in my gracious Mistress. Thus concluding, he took her by the hand,
which he kissed a number of times together, not without the expense of many a
salt tear and reking sighs, which made the Princess blush and grieve at
inwardly, pitying to see the great humility of the Prince Palmerin, to whom
she betrothed her self in the presence of the Princess of Thrace and
Dramaciana (who gave him counsel to use the matter in that order, and by whose
means Polinarda so soon contented.) They being altogether at the window, the
matter was knit fast for the more assurance, and there did Palmerin keep them
company all that day, and must part of the night, till pitying to see (...)
lady stand so long, compelled him to take his leave for that time.

CHAP. XXXV.
How certain Knights arrived at the Court of the Emperor Palmerin, who were
advertised how the Turks had provided a great Army, to come and besiege
Constantinople.
DVring the the time this great joy was in the Court of Constantinople, for the
coming of the prince Palmerin, the Emperor had tidings brought him, how the
Prince Albayzar had levied a great and mighty Army, to come and besiege the
City, and assure the Messenger, that the Lord (who was the Soldane Bellagris)
was preparing himself in a readiness to come and aid him.

The Emperor being at this time ouercharged with age, found himself far
unable to deal in these affairs, the consideration whereof did not a little
displease him. Nevertheless he failed not to make provision (as wisdom
willed) to entertain the enemy, whereupon, he writ to the Soldane Bellagris,
sending him hearty thanks for the good forwardness h^ saw in him, especially
in a time so needful, and when the messenger to the Soldane was dispatched,
the Emperor sent presently to inform of these news, Arnedes the King of
France his Son in law, Recinde the king of Spain, Don Edward the Prince of
England, the Emperor Vernar of Allemaigne, Maiortes, and many others.

The Army of the Turks was no sooner heard of, but the Knights who followed
their noble adventures) returned to Constantinople, knowing they should make
better trial of their valor there, then in any other places: and such was the
rumor spread abroad to the Turks intention, as in short time the City of
Constantinople was furnished with many noble and redoubted knights, where
adventures was presented to them day by day: but the Emperor would not suffer
them to pursue after such occasions, (because they were nothing else but
deceit and villainy) waiting still for the time when he should be assaulted by
Albayzar, who was now setting forward on the Seas, being accompanied with
diverse approved knights at arms, as also a number of cruel and bloody minded
Giants, intending to make a general spoil of all the Emperors Dominions.

But till we have better occassion, we will leave them a while, and return to
the Prince Palmerin, who (during the brute of the Turks Army) was advertised
of the death of Satrafort, the governor of the Perilous Isle, being taken by
Trofolant the Fearful, who was descended to the giants kindred. And as it is
rehearsed in the first volume of this History, that Trafolant was vanquished in
the Tournament by the Prince Florendos, and had the like mishap the day
following, by the prowess of the Knight of the Savage man, who guarded the
sheeld of the Palm Tree, in the forest of the Clear Fountain which the
Damsel from the Sage Aliart brought to the Emperor Palmerin, that he might
deliver it to the Knight his Nephew, who had woone the honor of the day in the
Tournament.

It was likewise his fortune after, when he travailed to the Castle of the
Giant Almaroll, to be vanquished there by the Prince Florendos, who guarded the
sheeld of the fair Miragarda: and returning thence, he met with the Damoselles
Knight, when, offering to take one of his Ladies from him, they fell to the
Combat, and in the end was likewise vanquished. The conceit of his so many and
sundry foyles, and all by the Knights of the Emperors Court, caused him to
devise by what means he might work some injury to them that belonged to the
Emperor, in respect he was so severely bent against them, as he would take
upon him to revenge the death of Calfurnien and his brethren.

But to the end he might the better execute his treacherous enterprise, he
took his way to the Profound Isle, thinking there to invent some treason by
the aid of Collambra: but his intent was there disapointed, for it was told
him, that she was brought to the Emperors Court of Greece. Then he determined
to go visit the Perilous Isle, being accompanied with two Knights that were
his kinsemen, with whom he knew well how to dissemble the treason on his
stomach: and Satrafort thinking them to be of the Emperors Court of
Constantinople, entertained them very lovingly into his Castle, where when they
had soiourned for certain days, they murdered Satrafort and all his household.

But the pleasure of this victory was very short to them, for Argentao the
governor of the Profound Isle, came by a secret wile suddenly on them with his
power, and taking Trofolant in the Forest, sent him presently to the Emperors
Court: where was no little joy of his coming, in that he saved Palmerin a
journey, who was taking his leave of his friends, because he would go to take
the Traitors that had done such villainy.

Trofolant was condemned by the law, and publiely executed, according as his
treacherous dealings deserved: and Argentao was honorably recompensed, that he
might have the better occasion to be careful and circumspect in his office. So
soon as Trofolant was put to death, the Sage Aliart arrived at the Court of
Constantinople, whose presence gave greater assurance to the Emperor and his
Knights, and he gave them hearty thanks, in that they were so ready to go
recover the Perilous Isle. After the Sage Aliart, there came to the Court, the
Prince Floraman, Albanis of Frieze, Reccamon, Leyman of Burgunuy, beside many
other princes and knights, who had every one forsaken their several countries,
to assist the Emperor of Constantinople with their aid, because they had
heard of the Turks preparation.

The very same day was tidings brought to the Court, how Frederick the king of
England was dead, which news caused ^o small grief among the Princes,
especially to the Emperor himself, who being as aged as King Frederick, was
judged himself not of long continuance behind him, in that this was a special
president for him to regard, King Frederick being one he made most chief and
high account of. Prince Edward was then crowned King of England, to the great
joy of all his subjects, he being such a virtuous and magnanimous Prince: and
the funerals of king Frederick was solemnized in Greece, with very great state,
their Beacons burning, and Bonfires made through the whole Empire, according as
it was the custom in that Country.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Of an adventure which happened (during the troubles at Constantinople) in the
Realm of France, and after what manner it chanced.
THe History reports that certain Ladies in the Realm of France, envying
the renowned of Polinarda of Greece, Miragarda of Spain, and Leonarda of
Thrace, (whose beauties defaced greatly the Ladies in all other Countries)
began to complain very much on the French knights, that either by the want of
courage, or their little regard of love, their beauties remained unknown in
other Realms, Countries, and Provinces.

Upon this occasion they found themselves somewhat agreeued, and to the end
they would remedy the cause, four Ladies of the king of France his Court
(thinking to excel all other in beauties) enterprised to establish an
adventure, to move the minds of many Knights to come endure their trial,
against such as would maintain their beauties. The first of these Ladies was
called Mansia, the second Telanfia, the third Latrania, and tge fourth Torsia,
each of them having a Castle called after their own names, to the end that
those knights who desired to see them, should come to the Castles where they
remained.

Many and sundry strange knights travailed to these Castles, and showed such
rare and incredible prowess, that the renown of these four Castles shall
never be forgotten: as you may at this day yet behold in France, where the
Castles of these four Ladies are yet honored with most special estimation.

These four Ladies being covetous of their own glory, would know which of
them was aduantaged in beauty above the other. Telansia served the Princess
Graciana, the second, daughter to Arnedes king of France, having such an
opinion in her self, as she thought she exceeded all the Ladies in the world
in beauty, Mansia, Latrania, and Torsia, who served the Queen, were forged in
the same stamp with Telansia: but Mansia held her self of greater reputation
then all the other, because she was higher in the kings favor.

It came so to pass, that three of these Ladies were married so soon as they
began this adventure, which nevertheless, they would have continue still,
fearing least any other Ladies should take the pre-eminence above them. Torsia,
who remained unmarried, persuaded her self to exceed the other three: in
brief, these Ladies were so earnest in their intents, and so willing to see
the issue thereof, as they concluded to entertain no knight into their
service, before his fortune served him to see them all, for then afterward he
might the better submit himself in obeisance to her, whom he judged the
cheifest in his affection.

Moreover, they ordained that the knight should first of all bind himself, to
endure the Combatte against four servants to any other Lady, the one after
the other: and if he proved so fortunate as to vanquish them, he should then
be called her Knight, for whom he had fought the combat. Beside, this knight
should not be licenced to go seek adventures afterward in any strange
Country, because his Lady remainned the victoresse, carrying the true title of
supreme beauty. These four Ladies were agreed to establish this adventure,
in the same manner I have told you, that their beauty might purchase like
commendation as the princess Miragardaes did, by the noble trial of her
shield, which was kept at the Castle of Almaroll.

The King of France his Sons (who were accounted the most puissant at Arms
in all that realm) because their affections were placed else where, made no
account of this adventure, neither German of Orleance, because his mind was
likewise at Constantinople. The other French knights remained doubtful to
prove this adventure, remembering with what conditions these Ladies would be
served. As for them that were so hardy to venture, they having seen the
beauty of the first, were so caught captive, that they promised to endure the
hardest peril in obtaining her love. But when they had seen the second Lady,
they presently committed the first to forgetfulness, making the same promise,
that they would loose them selves to purchase her: then looking on the third,
their wits were so busied, and their thoughts were so labored, as then none
but she was fair in their judgments. At length, when they came to see the
fourth sweet and delicate face, all the other three were counterfeit in
respect of her, and they served but as foyles to set her beauties out to sale:
so that from the first to the last, their opinions were so variable, and their
minds so ravished in contemplating them all, as not forcing what might happen
to them, either trouble, misery, danger, or death it self, they threw
themselves into the face of Fortune. And many Knights that had been
vanquished by his prowess, who defended so nobly the Shield of Miragarda, did
yet adventure boldly to try this enterprise: but they could not vanquish the
four Knights these Ladies presented them, who took upon them to be the
servants of any Lady, so that this adventure continued a long time, before that
any of these Ladies could vaunt of the conquest.

And I assure you, the renown of this famous enterprise, was so blazed abroad
in all places, as the Knights travailed to this place early, and labored very
earnestly to deserve the favor of these four Ladies.

The Prince Floraman of Sardignia travailing through the Realm of France,
intending to go offer his aid to the Emperor of Constantinople, met with a
damosel, as he entered into a Forest, she having in her company two other
Damsels, and because she was desirous, that the Prince of Sardignia, should
behold her beauty, she took off her mask, and gave it to one of the
Damoselles. Floroman who travailed continually mourning in his spirit, for the
loss of fair Altea, his Lady, passed on giving them no salutation: which when
they perceived, one of them followed him, and spoke unto him in this manner.

I would know (sir knight) what you mean, to pass so by these Ladies,
offering no sign of courtesy or salutation? perhaps you did not see my Lady
as you passed by, which may at this time well serve to excuse you. And because
your sadness makes my Lady to think, that your heart is passioned or moved by
some occasion, she desires you to take your lodging ^or this night: in one of
her Castles not far hence, where she will not fail to entertain you, in the
most gracious manner she can devise: to which words the Prince Floraman thus
answered. Fair Damsel, if I have bin any thing forgetful toward your Lady,
I humbly desire her to pardon me: for she may persuade her self, that not
seeing her, I passed by, without using any courtesy, rather then by any other
occasion.

So turning his horse, he rid with the Damsel after her Lady, who was
entered into her Castle, before Floraman had the power to overtake her, whereat
he was greatly agreeued: and coming to the Damsel that brought him thither,
he presently entered into these speeches.

I pray you (fair Gentlewoman) tell me the name of this Castle, which in my
judgment seems one of the fairest that I have seen in all my li^e: and I
pray you, what Lady was that, which entered in ere I could show her my duty?

The Castle (answered the Damsel) is far more beautiful within, then this
sumptuous building which you see without, and I assure you, the knight has
good occasion to rejoice, that can pass by here without some adventure happen
to him. But because you may account my words of truth, and that it is
impossible for you to depart hence without trial of your prowess, I epsy
three knights under the green trees on your left hand, who will not presume so
near this Castle, but they have some further meaning. As for the Castle, it is
called the Castle of Latrinia, which is the Ladies name whom you saw to enter,
on whose behalf many knights put themselves in danger, agtinst them that
de^end three other Ladies of the French Court, only being in contention for
their beauttie. But to the end you may give the sounder judgment in this case,
and be the more earnest in trying the Combat, on the behalf of the beauty of
my Lady Latriana, I will work the means that you shall see her: and if it
come to pass that you be afterward vanquished, you may the better know,
whether it be by your own imbecilitie, or the imperfection of her beauty for
whom you enter the Combat: Floraman returned her this answer.

I have been always so unfortunate (fair Damsel) in maintaining the like
enterprises, that I will not now make it dainty inhazarding the inconstance of
flattering Fortune. I have often heard of Madame Latrinia, and I take her to be
one of the four Ladies of this Realm, who exceed all the other in
sovereignty of beauty: I could wish (i^^ti were possible so good hap might
come to me) to be entertained into her gracious service, but the greater part
who are given on the other side, makes me to be doubtful herein, according as
it is permitted to the freedom of a man's will.

As the Damsel and Floraman continued this talk, they came before the
Castle, an as they offered to pass on, these three knights stepped before them,
using these words to the Prince Floraman. We would know Sir knight, if you be
determined to employ your self on the behalf of any of the four French
Ladies, because that each of us, being no servant to her whose cause you
maintain, shall then be constrained to enter the Combat with you. Sir
(answered Floraman) I may not lawfully refuse the Combat, because I have not
seen any of these four Ladies: one of the three Knights replied to him again
thus.

If it be so Sir, that as yet you have not seen these Ladies, you shall be
suffered to enter the Castle, where you may contemplate the beauty of Latrania:
and if it chance you to remain affectionate to her, as many other have done
before you, we desire you not to enter her service, because you may so shun the
danger of the Combat. The Knight laying his hand upon one of his companions,
spoke thus to Floraman. Her whom I hold my honor by, they that have the sight
of them all four, would choose my Lady Mansia for his Mistress: then another
of them said. And my self with this Knight, we are altogether addicted to
the service of Telansia, and for this cause we abide in this place, to see if
any Knight that holds on the other part, dare be so bold as to come into this
place, that we may try our fortunes, in gaining the recompense the Ladies have
ordained for him, who shall be so happy as to remain victor.

Floraman (who was greatly enflamed toward these Ladies, remembering still the
loss of his fuire Altea) entered the castle, where Latrania received him very
graciously, he excusing himself toward her, because he did not his duty to
her as she passed by him in the Forest: and I assure you, Floraman judged the
Lady of the Castle so fair, as he could willingly have offered himself to
sustain her quarrel, but that he feared least he should be reputed
unfaithful, unto his best beloved Altea.

There he stayed in the Castle till the morning, when he would have departed
thence, the Lady unwilling to see him, she was so much offended that he had not
offered to maintain her beauty. Upon this, Floraman went forth to the three
Knights, when one of them came unto him, and demanded if the beauty of Madame
Latrania, had ^^onne any power over him: to whom he answered, No.

Certainly, said the Knight, I greatly desire to deal with thee, that I may
give due correction to thy proud ingratitude. Gentlemen (answer Floraman) I
pray you put your selves in a readiness, to revenge the shame, which you say I
have done to Madame Latrania, whom I may as well serve as you, because I have
better knowledge of her deserts then you have: nevertheless, such is my humor
at this present, as I dare not adventure my self on her behalf.

Then I entend (said the Knight) to make you know the offense you have done
unto her. And so he gave his horse the spurs against Floraman, who (albeit in
the Ioust he lost one of his Stirroppes) encountered the Knight so valiantly, as
he sent him to the ground headlong, so astonished, as he could not tell where
he was. Which the other two perceiving, they desired him likewise to run with
them: Since my Lance is yet whole and sound (answered Floraman) I am content to
do you so much favor. Then he ran against the second Knight, serving him like
as he had done the first, and the third came after to keep them company.

The first knight being offended that he was so unhorsed, desired Floraman to
strike half a dozen blows with him, to the end he might amend the foil he
received in the Ioust. The Prince of Sardignia seeing no excuse would persuade
the knight, alighted from his horse, and having drawn his sword, he dealt so
nobly with him, as in short time he perceived what great dishonr he gained, in
proving his valor against him: for he continued so roughly in the fight, as
the knight was compelled to step aside to take a breathing, which made Floraman
give him these words.

I believe sir knight, you judge me as sufficient to serve Latrania as your
self is. No truly (said the Knight) for it is not your force, but the
beauty of the other, to whom she may no way equal her self, that has
brought me into this dangerous estate. I am very well content (answered
Floraman) to hear you say so much, but the greater advantage should I have, if
your Lady were present to hear you: and I assure you, she has good occasion
to accept well of you, for that you have spoken as became a man greatly
affected to her.

Then beginning afresh again, the Knight (though very faintly) defended
himself so well as he could. Latrania leaning in one of the windows of the
Castle, seeing the great danger whereinto the Knight was brought, came down
to the place where they fought the Combat: and being come before the Prince
Floraman, she desired him to save the Knights life, whereto (at her request)
he willingly consented, speaking to her in this manner.

I would gladly to honor you the more, end the Combat, but because you think
it not so convenient, the Knight may think himself highly beholding to you,
for that you have saved his life, which I was thoroughly intended he should
loose, seeing the small regard he made of you, as your self did hear, when I
let him rest himself.

Latrania gave him very honorable thanks, and returning into her Castle, she
grieved exceedingly, that this good and hardy Knight could not think so well
of her, as to be her Champion in her cause.

Floraman willed the Knight to tell him his name. I promise you (answered the
Knight) I entend nothing less, for our Combat was hindered by the Lady, to
whom you have given greater advantage thereof then to me. Thou have reason
(said Floraman) to use thy self thus, for that one ought not to be known in
these affairs, especially, having received his shame in the presence of one of
these Ladies. So, taking his leave of the other Knights, he rid away presently,
they being very desirous to have known what and who he was.

CHAP. XXXVII.
Of that which happened to certain other knights, who would prove the adventure
of these four Ladies.
IN the mean while the French Court kept at the City of Parris, many knights
took pleasure to come thither, the most part whereof, were the affectionate
servants of these four Ladies, and there they would practice Iousts, combats,
and other honest pastimes such as amorous persons are wont to take delight in.
But I assure you, the French men themselves were not so forward in affection,
for that they were daily in the presence of these Ladies: nevertheless, the
strange knights) whom love conducted thither to see them) felt those secret and
sundry assaults, which he enforces them to endure, who yield themselves
obedient to his laws.

These four Ladies were not a little proud, to see themselves so esteemed,
but the knights gave themselves most on Torsiaes side, because she was not in
the Company of the other, who used with their beauty, very gracious
entertainment toward their knights, that they might use them with the greater
regard. But Torsia (who judged her self more worthy then the other) she was
very squemish and disdainefull, not making account of the travails which the
Knights endured for her sake, thereby to make her beauty the more honored
and extolled: for her self made so great estimation thereof, as she judged
that those knights, who adventured on her behalf, were greatly honored by
making proof of their valor, in defense of her beauty, and this was the cause
she was less served of the French knights, then of other.

But the strange knights, they gave themselves altogether to her service,
desiring to try fortune, and knowing there was no victory more noble, then
that which was most doubtful in the obtaining. While the knights of the French
Court delighted themselves to behold, these newcome lovers, Albayzar (who came
to the castle of Almaroll, where he robbed Dramusiande of the Princess
Miragardaes sheeld) passed by Paris, desiring to soiorne there for the space of
two days, at the end whereof he departed thence, for he would not enter the
Combat with such, as would praise these Ladies above the Princess of
Targiana. Yet he returned again to the Court, and would see these four Ladies
before she went, he not esteeming the knights two Daughters, Florenda and
Graciana, whose courtesy did well deserve, that the knight should enterprise
something to their honor, for they were as beautiful as these other four
Ladies, among whom Albayzar gave the praise to Torsia, so that her beauty best
contented him, which was the cause, that in all places where he came, he
praised her above the other three.

Albeit seeing the French knight were so affected to these ladies, as they made
no occount of his sweet friend Targiana, he travailed thence to
Constantinople: where he enterprised to maintain against the knights of the
Emperors Court, that tge Princess Targiana excelled in beauty, all the
Ladyep and Damsels in the world.

At the same time Palmerin of England, and the prince Florendos, passed by the
French Court, and staying there, they had so great desire to approve
themselves against Albayzar. Dramusiande likewise passed by soon after, being
very willing to see these four Ladies i but the intent he had against
Albayzar, would not suffer him to go hither. And I assure you, had it not
been for the enterprise of Albayzar, this adventure in France had been as
worthy of commendation, as the noble prowess shown at the Castle of
Dramusiande in England, and that of Miragarda in Spain.

While many Knight travailed to see the Prince Albayzar, Pompides, and
Blandidon (who judged themselves to be Brethren) came to the Court of France,
where they thought so well of the beauty of these Ladies, as (setting all
other remembrance of love aside) they t^ied the Combat, wherein their lives
were brought to great danger.

These two knights renowned among them that stayed in the French Court, were
both of them so inueigled with the beauty of Torsia, as they discoursed to
each other their intents* began to malice one another cruelly: whereby they
showed the small judgment of them, who called Love by the (...), seeing that
so many misfortunes took their original by him.

Pompides conquered with the only regard of Torsia, seeing that Blandidon
would not give him place by entreatance, concluded to try the Combat with
him: agreeing thus between themselves that he that was the conqueror, should
remain there to defend the Ladies beauty. Blandidon, who was as desirous as
he could, to purchase the acceptable favor of Torsia, agreed to enter the
Combat, under the same condition which Pompides opposed: and that these two
Knights might the sooner execute their wills, they came and humbled themselves
before the Queen, in whose presence Pompides spoke in this manner to Torsia.

Madame, this knight and I who are brethren, and so conquered by the grace and
beauty wherewith you are accompanied, as notwithstanding, both nature and
friendship) we intend to make proof at arms, which of us twain shall be
judged worthy to be received in your service: desiring you humbly not to be
offended at what we have enterprised, and that you would vouchsafe to
entertain him for your servant, whom fortune shall favor in atchieuing the
victory.

Great and sudden admiration was among them all, hearing the brave attempts of
these two Knights, but especially, the other three Ladies, who seeing Torsia so
highly preferred, began to be dismayed and changed their color: which Torsia
dissembling, although she had no knowledge of their secret envy, was iocond
and pleasant to her self as could be, then casting her eyes on the Queen, to
whom she made sign as though she would answer, she spoke to Pompides and
Blandidon in this manner.

It may be seen by you (Gentlemen) that the merits of these three Ladies, has
not as yet gained any knowledge of your valor, seeing you enterprise to hazard
your selves together for one selfe-thing: wherefore I admonish you, that it is
meet you should defend the cause one after another, for otherwise you go
contrary to our determinations, and then he that can be so happy to vanquish
the knights, that come on the behalf of these other Ladies, shall be judged
worthy of that honorable reward, meet for such a famous and noble conqueror.

These two Knights were indifferently satisfied with the answer of Torsi^,
whereupon many knights that desired to see her, went and presented themselves
in the field. The first of them was Rupert Rosselin, a knight of good
estimation, who maintained the quarrel of Telancia: Brician of Rochfort, who
loved Mansia, and the County Brialte, the affectionate servant to Latrania.

Pomdides and Blandidon came no sooner into the Park, but they entered both
together, because Torsia had not declared which of them should enter first, to
maintain her beauty against the other Knights: therefore they desired the
Queen, that it might please her to understand the will of Torsia, who ordained
that he which was first disclosed to his companion, should enter first into the
field. Then Blandidon (who was discovered at the beginning to Pompides) had the
mean to try himself first: wherefore, without any more tarying, he entered
the midst of the field, at the entrance whereof, the Ladies were placed very
stately. Florenda and Graciana showed themselves marvelous rich in beauty:
but they were nothing pleasant, because never a knight would esteem of them in
his prowess. Brician of Rochfort, who prepared himself first to encounter
with Blandidon, regarding Mansia (whom he judged worthy of the chiefest
victory (spoke somewhat anangrily to himself thus.

Fair mistres, I may think this enterprise not worthy to be presented before
you: yet somewhat do I content my self, who remaining victor, you will not
disdain to call me your servant: Blandidon who earnestly desired to witness
his bounty in the presence of Torsia, contemplated her in his spirit thus.

I do not demand (Madome) any favor at your hands for receiving now such a
benefit of you, I shall not purchase any glory in conquering my enemy. Then ran
he courageously against Brician of Rochfort, and encounted with him so bravely,
as their Lances flew up in pieces, yet neither of them in danger to be
unhorsed: which Brician perceiuig (who was reputed for a good Knight at arms,
he desired Blandidon to break once more with him, to which request he made no
refusal, but ran the second time, and met Brician with such force, as he was
constrained to forsake his stirrops, and cast his arms about the neck of his
horse, to save himself from falling to the ground, and Blandidon was cast on
the croupper of his horse. After these two knights had taken their seats
again, they prepared themselves with the third Staff, which was discharged by
Brician so strongly, as his horse and himself tumbled on the ground and
Blandidon was in danger to have borne him company. But he seeing his enemy had
drawn his sword, alighted from his horse to receive him: and I assure you
their Combat was esteemed one of the most dangerous that ever was seen in
that Country.

Brician of Rochfort, desirous that his mistress Mansia should perceive how
willing he was to purchase her love, and Blandidon, vanquished with the beauty
of her, who caused him to hazard so great danger: redoubled their strokes so
fiercely upon one another, as at length Brician, sore weakened in fight, and
deprived of the beauty of his Lady, fell down to the ground. Blandidon
presently took off his Helet, and made offer to part his head from his
shoulders, except he would confess Torsia to excel the other three in beauty:
but while Brician lay in this extremity, one of the Maidens of honor cried to
Blandidon, that the Ladies adjudged him the victory ever Brician of Rochfort,
who was carried to his lodging, and Blandidon having lost very much blood by the
wounds he received, was compelled to withdraw himself, having not the power to
endure what he had attempted. For he that should remain victor, ought to
maintain the combat for the space of one day, against the other knight that
came, and the vanquisher (if they were so fortunate) they should be bound
(being in any likely disposition) to begin the Combat afresh against the
other three Knights whom he should subdue, before he might have the praise of
the victory.

Pompides being sorry to see Blandidon so wounded, was (nevertheless) glad,
that the honor of the day happened to his side, and upon this he persuaded
himself, that the Ladies service would fall to his share. The next day
following, he failed not to present himself in the field, where he had not
long stayed, before Rupert Rasselin entered, being in black armor cross
strickt with little fillets of Gold, and his Shield (which was of the Indian
color) the God was figured, who brought all other under his obeisance. This
knight was mounted on a goodly roane Courser, and so soon as he heheld
Telansia, who was very fair, and of whom he was greatly affectionate, he spoke
to himself in this manner.

Who is he that either can or may injury me, having your seemly self
before me? Therefore I pray you good Madame, that you would vouchsafe to accept
his loyal heart, who will never reefuse to do you service, especially, if he
may know in what to pleasure you: and persuade your self, that I will soon
discountenance this Knight, who maintained the beauty of Torsia, to excel
yours. Pompides knowing well by the behavior of Rupert Rosselin, the little
content this poor Lover received beholding the beauty of Telansia: but he was
somewhat offended, that Torsia was not as yet come to the place where the
combat should be fought, and being passioned for this cause, he spoke to
Rosselin in this order

Thou must remember knight, that thou art not come hither to waste the time in
conte^plating of her beauty, who transformeth thee from all sense and reason.
I perceive well (answered Rosselin) that Torsia reposeth but little hope in
your valor, because she disdaineth to honor you with his presence. You are so
full of words (said Pompides) that if I should spend the time in giving ear to
you, the day would soon be gone, without trying either the Ioust or combat.
So, without any more words, he ran against Rosselin, encountering him in the
midst of the carrire, so worthily, and very hardly he recovered himself from
falling, Pompides being nothing at all moved. Rosselin took a new staff,
wherewith he tried his Fortune the second time, when, Pompides meeting him
directly, brake his staff nobly on him, and coming together, their Horses
fought so one with another, as Pompides Horse (which was not of such strength
as the other) fell down in under his master: which Rosselin perceiving, advanced
himself to him, but he had recovered himself, and stood ready to receive him
at the point of the sword. Then they buckled together, and the combat was so
cruel between them, as in short time the flesh was seen through Rosselins
armor: but he made semblance as though he were nothing moved, because he would
not have his Ladies make any doubt of his prowess, and so earnestly he
followed his intent, that Pompides had as small advantage as himself.
Nevertheless, his heart was more lively, and himself more nimble and quick
then Rossolin, who had suffered so many sharp strokes, and was so weak and
weary, as he was enforced to entreat Pompides to let him take a little rest,
I am content (answered Pompides) to let you pause a while, to the end you may
the better travail your self, in beholding the beauty of Telansia:
considered also, the small favor that Torsia bestows on me, cannot hinder me
from vanquishing of you. It is moreover seen (said Rosselin) that it is great
danger to fight against men deprived of hope, but when one remains conqueror
over such persons, the honor of the victory gives them the larger
contentment. When he had spoken what pleased him, Pompides and he began to
combat again, hacking and hewing one another so cruelly, as within a while
Rosselin was so sore labored, as he was altogether unable to harm his enemy.
Pompides seeing himself in but little better estate then Rosselin, and
doubting least the Combat would endure too long, he caught him in his arms,
and threw him violently against the ground, being hardly able to sustain
himself from falling on him: but the remembrance of the victory made him take
the more courage, whereupon he made proffer to cut off the head of Rosselin,
which the Ladies would not agree unto. Then was Rosselin carried forth of the
field very dangerously wounded, and Pompides (for the greater honor) was
conducted to the Chamber where Blandidon lay, where Chirugions looked
dillingently to their wounds, they being now as great friends as ever they
were, having the one of them as good assurance of Torsiaes favor, as the other.

The King himself came very lovingly to visit them, and after he had
knowledge of them, he was greatly offended that they had not been known
before him in his Court: but the Knights excused themselves by their Ladies,
whose beauties caused them to travail thither, always desiring to be
unknown: The Queen was very careful to have them well regarded, during the
time they remained there in the Court: but after they were in good state of
health, they humbly took their leave of the King, the Queen, and Madame
Torsia, Blandidon taking his way to Constantinople, and Pompides into Scotland,
where he espoused the Princess Armisia, according as I have declared already
to you. For you shall understand that this French adventure continued, from the
time that Albayzar showed his prowess in Constantinople, having in his custody
the Princess Miragardaes Shield, until the instant that the Knight of the
Savage man (accompanied with Arlencea and the damsels) returned from the king
of Spaines court, and passing through the Realm of France, was the first that
by his noble prowess attained this adventure, as you shall hereafter hear:
whereupon many secretly envied him, whereof he made no account at all, because
he had so well made his Knightly behavior known to the Ladies of the French
Court.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Of that which happened to the Knight of the Savage man, in proouing the
adventure these four Ladies had ordained.
AS the Knight of the Savage man was conducting Arlencea toward
Constantinople, to show her his lady Leonarda, the fair Princess of Thrace,
he was advertised by the Queen of Navarre and Dragonalt, of the adventure
which the four French Ladies had ordained. And for that the report went of
them, to be maruellously endued with beauty, he took his way into the French
Court, which as then lay in Burgandie, and drawing near to the City of Sonier
(now called Digeon (somewhat toward the evening he entered a forest, wherein
was a Monastery of Nuns, which had a goodly river passing a long by it, upon
the bank whereof he perceived certain tents erected, and by them sat
diverse Ladies and Damsels, making Garlands of flowers under the green trees,
whereon were hanged many shieldes, which were defended by certain Knights
that were near at hand, reposing themselves within the tents. It seems (said
the Knight of the Savage man to Arlencea) that we shall not pass here so
easily as we did make account.

When he had so said, he espied near him an ancient Knight, of whom he
requested to know, what honorable personages they were that recreated
themselves in that place: Sir (answered the ancient Knight) it is the Queen,
who came abroad to sollace her self with the King, he being somewhat higher
in the Forest with his Courtly attendants, hunting the wild Heart. I pray you
then tell me (quoth the Knight of the Savage man) for what occasion are the
Knights armed that keep her company. You shall understand Sir (said the
ancient Knight, that they are servants unto four Ladies, who keep themselves
in this manner, to adventure the Combat with him* that dare advance himself
to prove the adventure: but I pray you Sir be not offended that I part so
soon from you, for I see I must away, and so the ancient knight left him.

I see well (quoth the knight of the Savage man) that I must prepare my self
for the Ioust. Whereupon, because he would not be known, he commanded the
Esquire to cover his shield with somewhat, and in the mean while he ran his
horse up and down, finding him nimble and quick enough. After his Shield was
covered, he rode on toward the Tetes: but when the Ladies saw him come, and a
Damsel of such a streat stature with him, they began all to laugh heartely.
The Knight of the Savage man had no sooner beheld them, but not willing to
serve them all, then staying his horse, that he might the better contemplate
their divine faces, a French Damsel (by the commandment of the other Ladies)
approached to the Prince with these words.

You give sufficient example Sir Knight) of the small affection you bear to
Ladies, in maintaining of whose sweet and delicate complexions, these Knights
have placed their Shields on this Tree, to defend the passage, if you dare be
so bold as to try the adventure. I pray you fair Damsel (answered the
Knight of the Savage man) to let me know the conditions which these Knights
observe in garding this Valley: for if so be I judge them any thing dangerous,
it were better for me to depart, then trouble them, for I assure you the Lady
you see in my company, would be very loath to see me in any pe^ill. I perceive
then (said the Damsel) you are one of those Knights, who caries their Armor
rather to make a show, then to hazard your person in any doubtful adventure,
nevertheless, I will let you understand the custom used in this place. It is
so Sir, that the Queen of France, (who is within these Tents) has four
Ladies in her company, who are reputed to excel all others in Beauty, and they
are destrous to know, which of them may best make claim of this Title above
the other three. For the trial hereof they have ordained, that the Knight,
who will ieopard himself in the Adventure, shall take a view of them one
after another, and having made his choice of one of these four, he must enter
the Combat with the three Knights, who are servants to the other Ladies: if so
be his Fortune be so good to conquer them, he shall be called her Knight, on
whose behalf he entered the Combat: which honor (I tell you) is highly
esteemed in this Country, because each of the ladies deserve most especial
preferme^t. Now Sir, if your stomach be so good, you may have liberty to see
them, and they will not disdain to behold the prowess wherewith you are
accompanied. I promise you Damsel (said the knight of the Sauadge-man) I
would not hazard my person for these 4. only, but as well for all the rest
that are in y^ Queens company: Marry first I will go do my duty to her
Majesty, and after I have seen the Ladies, I will so behave my self, as I
doubt not but to be well esteemed of all before I depart. Then he alighted
from his Horse, and showed himself so reverent to the Queen, and her Ladies,
as they remained greatly contented. Then the Damsel showed him the four
Ladies, and after he had well viewed them all, she desired him to tell her his
mind. The Knight of the Sauadge man casting his eyes first on Ma^sia, her
Beauty so well contented him, as he thought to rest there, but the Decree of
the Adventure commanded him to pass further, and look on Telansia, whose
presence did so abash him, that he knew not to which of those twain be should
submit himself. When Latrania came before him, his affection did so iuggle
with his judgment, as he could not tell well what to say, yet were they all
forgotten. Upon the sight of Torsia, for her beauty so enflamed him in every
vain, that he gave her the title of Beauty above them all. But he had such
slender stabilitie in his Love, as look how forgetful he was of them, one
after another, even so he failed not to be the like in judgment: so, having
been a long while ere he made his answer, at last he spoke to the Damsel in
this manner.

Fair Damsel, you have brought me into so great perplexity, as I am almost
willing to forsake an adventure so dangerous: nevertheless, I am content to
enter the Combat for the honor of Mansia, and if Fortune favor me with the
victory, I will attend other three on the behalf of Telansia, with whose
favor I will enterprise with three more, for Latrania: then turning to Torsia,
he said.

And if I escape the danger for all these on your just quarrel I will approve
my self, not only against three, but against all that dare come against me,
to let you understand, what little account I make of my life, being thus
honored, to employ my self in your service.

Those Ladies were greatly abashed, hearing the brave offer the knight of the
Savage man had made, and such brute was presently spread here of abroad, as
the king left the Chase, and returned to the Tents, where the Ladies rehearsed
to him the intent of the knight. Arnodes, who was a very wise and discrete
Prince, knowing the enterprise to be very dangerous, labored to have him
perform the promise he had made to the Ladies.

The Knight of the Savage man made his humble reverence to the king, afterward
he mounted on horseback, speaking thus again to the Damsel that brought him
thither. If these four Ladies be contented that I shall serve them, I will let
them see, how willingly I will venture my life for their sakes, but since you
have told the recompense for him, that shall be so happy to end the
adventure, I will not pass any further before I declare to you, with what
condition I will enter the Combat against their servants, which is, that they
shall grant me but one gift, if so be the victory happen on my side.

And to the end you shall not be ignorant of my intent, I will take the pains
to discourse it to you. You shall understand, that I am determined to guard the
passage in this Valley, against all knights that dare presume to pass by,
during the space of eight days, and if Fortune allow me favorable
countenance in the victory against their Knighes, that none of the Ladies
shall depart hence, but if my mishappe chance otherwise, they may depart at
their own pleasure: Latrania upon this, spoke thns to the other Ladies.

This Knight (me thinks) is desirous to deal as the knight of the Savage man
did, who not long since conducted nine Ladies in his company through the Realm
of Spalne. By my faith (said Telansia) we ought to grant what he demands,
because we shall have the better knowledge of his valor. I am content
(answered Mansia) upon this condition, that he bring us to the Castle of
Almaroll, and enter the Combat with him that keeps the princess Miragardaes
Shield, on the behalf of one of us four: this I force not to do, if so be he
prevail in the Combat against o^r knights. I pray you (said Torsia) change
this fond humor, for he is more liberal to promise* then all you are or can
best grant.

Truly it contenteth me very much (answered the Knight of the Savage man) that
you know my mind so well, but me thinks Madame Torsia, it is more then reason
that you should refuse any thing, yet would I be loath to turn again to the
Castle of Almaroll. I pray you Sir (quoth the Damsel to whom he spoke first)
have you seen the Princess Miragarda, and conquered the Knight that k^pt her
Shield? Surely Lady (answered the Knight of the Savage man) I have seen
Miragarda, and Combated against the Knight that kept her Shield, but I was not
so fortunate in power, as to overcome him. How then (said the Damsel) dare
you take the hardiness upon you, to make such a large promise to these Ladies,
that you would not fail to vanquish their Knights, and could not prevail
against that one knight? Marcy (quoth he) for that the presence of these
Ladies, and the affection I bear them, shall be sufficient for me to enter the
Combat, and conquer all the Knights that dare meddle with me. I see well
(said the Damsel) your love is too full of incertaintie: then turning to the
Ladies, she said, they might well agree to his request, and for the great
desire she had to see the knight of the Savage man's behavior, she desired the
king to give his consent.

Mansia was so highly favored of the King Arnedes, and he, beside, so willing
to see the pastime, gave them all frank and free license: whereupon the four
Ladies granted him to keep the passage, and they would accompany him during
the eight days: then came the Damsel to the knight of the Savage man, with
these words. I have so much prevailed, Sir knight, as these four Ladies have
given consent fo your request: wherefore, I greatly desire to see, if your
deeds will prove conformable to your brave words.

The knight of the Savage man hearing what the Damsel said, came Arlencea,
desiring her not to reveal who he was, and coming back again, he set down
his order thus. The first Ioust, quoth he, shall be for Mansia: the second for
Telansia: the third for Latrania: and the fourth shall be for the honor of
Torsia. I perceive then, said the king Arnedes, the knight is willing to
accomplish his promise. Then the County Girarde, desirous to make known the
good will he bare Telansia, would needs take the field first, and encountering
the knight of the Savage man, he met him with such force, as he was sent to the
earth with his heels upward, so far out of remembrance with himself, as he
was feign to be carried forth of the field: at which sight the king was
maruellously abashed, in that the County Gerard was reputed on of the best
Knights of his Court. Mansia began to think, that in her name all the three
knights should be vanquished, and the honor of the day should be adjudged to
her, because the Prince would be so ouerlaboured, as he could not have the
power to vanquish the other three knights that came after.

The County Gerard was no sooner carried out of the field, but Brialte the
servant of Latrania, gave his horse the spurs, and burst his Lance bravely
one the Prince, but he gave him such a friendly welcome, as he was constrained
to fall to the ground, with one of his arms broken, whereupon, he was carried
forth of the field to the County of Gerard. Mansia was so glad of this, as she
could not hide it, but they that sat against her did easily perceive her
secret rejoicing: but the King Arnedes seeing the dangerous hurt Brialte had
received, began to doubt, that the strange knight would injury all the
other.

Then Aliart of Normandy (being servant to Torsia) ran and brake his Lance
gallantly on the strange knights Shield, but he was sent to keep his fellow
company: whereas he was so offended, as he started up again presently, and
drawing his sword, came marching to his enemy, who fearing least the knight
would have slain his horse, lept beside him, casting his eyes upon Torsia,
making show that he was very sorry for the foil the knight had received under
her name. But yet to acquit himself of his promise, he charged Aliart so
roughly, as in short time he tumbled at his feet, yet would not he offer to
take his life from him: when the Damsel came to him, granting him the victory
for the three days.

I am sorry (said the strange Knight) that you should take such pains Lady. I
see well (answered the Damsel) that you witness in your deeds, what you
promised in words at the beginning. The knight of the Savage man (who counted
himself to be called the strange knight) mounted on his horse again, and
taking a Lance, he came to the place where the Ladies sat, entering into these
speeches.

You see me now ready Ladies, to enter the Field under the name of Madame
Telansia, whose beauty is sufficient to make me remain victor over all the
Knights that dare speak against her: and you Lady Mansia, do not you forget
what you have promised me, since you see me willing to discharge the bond
wherein I have tied my self.

The king Arnedes, well noting the valor of the strange knight, devised how he
might have knowledge of him: for he did not think him to be one of the Prince
Don Edwardes Sons, because then he judged, he would not have concealed
himself from the Queen: beside, he was advertised, that Palmerin of England
had given over following such adventures, and that the knight of the Savage
man, was in the realm of Spain.

While he was thus imagining who this strange knight should be, Brian of
Burgundy, servant to Mansia, came into the field, very gallantly armed, and
bearing for his devise in his shield, Hope crowned with a garland of flowers,
in a Field of Azure: he pausing a little, and looking steadfastly on his Lady
Mansia, parled to himself in this manner. I pray you Madame, not to make any
doubt of the great prowess of this strange knight, in that he could not fail
of the victory, maintaining your singular and heavenly beauty, but now that he
presumes to change you for another, I doubt not to make him loose, what he
seeks so gladly to purchase, so that the victory shall be adjudged only to
you, and he that has the power to win it, will remain yours in duty while
he lives: the strange knight came to him with these speeches.

Have you done sir knight your secret fancies? I perceive you are one of them,
that seeks to content your self with silent discourses, but I trust to send
you after your companions, by the mean of Telansia.

I kn^w not (said Brian of Burgandie) what the end will be: so couching his
Lance, add giving a sign to the strange Knight, they ran together
courageously, and brake their Lances with such force, as Brian of Burgundy was
unhorsed, and very sors hurt, yet would he have dissembled it, and entered the
combat with the sword, but the four Ladies were so afraid that the strange
knight would have slain him, as they caused him to proceed no further.

The king was very much displeased, seeing the knights of his court so handled,
yet were they themselves willing to continue the Ioust: whereupon Monsier of
Artois servant to Latrania, (who would not wast the time in needless words)
called to the strange knight to defend himself. I would judge, said the strange
knight, that the beauty of your Lady should cause you to regard her somewhat:
but since I see you repose more assurance in your own strength, then her
beauty, whereby you might enjoy most hope, come on and welcome. Then setting
their lances in their rests, they encountered together bravely, and albeit they
failed for to break their staves, Monsieuer of Artois; received such a
forcible arrant, as he was thrown in the dust, so sore shaken that he could
scantly move himself. The strange knight caught hold on his Helmet, and
pausing a while, he spoke to Mansia in this manner.

Behold Lady, I give you this Knight, desiring you to let him be carrryed
forth of the Field: Mansia caused two Knights to conduct him to his Lodging,
but Brian of Burgundy, being very much offended, he would not depart before he
had fought the Combat: whereto the Ladies would not consent: Beside, the King
began to be angry with him, by whose commandment he was reputed among the
vanquished. After that Brian was departed the place, Brisar of Gennes the
servant of Torsia, presented himself very richly Armed, not making show of
any speech toward his Lady, for that the deeds of the strange knight (whom he
thought long to deal withal) made him so moved as he would not speak: which
the strange knight perceiving, he spoke to him as follows.

I pray you Sir to contemplate her beauty a little, for whose sake you are so
bold to enter the Combat: to the end her countenance may cause you to imagine
the grief less, if fortune direct herself against you. I know well (answered
Brisar of Gennes) that you would gladly see in me some show of fear or
fainting, because you would thereby magnify your deeds the more: but provide
your self for me, and assure your self, that such is the hope I repose in my
Ladies favor, as I doubt not ere I go, but to unhorse you.

Upon this, these two Knights met together with such force, as Brisar of Gennes
brake his staff, though not able to remove his adversary, who encountered him
so bravely, as he was sent to the ground with his Saddle between his legs:
and as he offered to strike him with his Sword, the Damsel came and stepped
between them, so that the strange knight could not execute his intent.

The King Arnedes was extremely grieved, seeing the victory come so fast to
the disadvantage of his Knights, and the strange Knight being very glad, to
see Fortune favor him so well, praunced till he came before Latiania, to whom
he used this Language. He that has the power to perform what he promises
to your Companions, has no less force to quite himself to you, whom I judge
as beautyfull as any of them.

Then cast he his eyes on Madame Mansia, whose grief he might easily
perceive, because she saw her victory equal with Lady Telansia: and Latrania
could not assure her self on their s^rength that followed, because she feared
that overmuch travel, would weaken the strength of the strange Knight.

CHAP. XXXIX.
How the strange Knight entered the Field, to Ioust under the name of Latrania.
WHen the strange Knight was entered the field again, he came to Arlencea, and
talked with her: but Gomer of Benoit stayed him, letting him understand that
the Day passed apace, wherefore on the behalf of his Mistress Telansia, he
bade the Ioust to the strange Knight, who entertained him in the midst of the
way so gallantly, as he was ^aine to keep the other Knights company. But
because he was a Knight of good courage, he recovered himself quickly, and
drew his Sword, which when the strange Knight beheld, he forsook his Horse,
and saluted him with such cruel strokes, as that the Ladies were glad to send
the Damsel to separate them asunder, fearing least the strange Knight would
have slain them.

The Damsel having sent Gomer away, seeing the strange Knight so pleasant and
iocond, as though he had not labored himself at all, demanded of him, when
he would think himself to have traveled enough. Marry quoth he) when these
Ladies (for whom I commit my self to the danger) think themselves to have
never a Knight left to do them service. I pray you then (said the Damsel)
that you would tell me who you are, that I may make report of you to the King,
who cannot be quiet, for the desire he has to know you.

My name Lady (quoth he) is of so small estimation, that I am much ashamed a
Knight so inexpert at Arms as my self, should be discovered to his Highness.
Not so (answered the Damsel) for your valor is such, as may well abash the
best Knight that we have seen.

After the Damsel was gone forth of the Lysts, the strange Knight mounted on
his ^squyres horse, because his own was very much traveled: but the King
rejoicing to see him so victorious, and pitying he should be destitute of a
Horse, commanded one of his Esquiers to bring him the best and most assured
Horse in his sight.

The strange knight humbly thanking the King for his gift, mounting on his
back, attending the knight that should next enter, which was Benteier of
Berlande, the servant of Mansia: but such was his misfortune, as he was
unhorsed likewise, very sore hurt in the fall. And because he was unable to
help himself, the king commanded he should be carried out of the field, still
practicing how he might know the strange knight: who rid on to the end of the
race, and seeing never a knight ready to Ioust, he sat still in a great study.

Then came Arlencea to him, and willed him to remember his business, for there
was a Knight ready to try him. You have done me a great pleasure madame
(answered the strange knight) for I was in such a mauellous conceit, as I
little regard what affairrs I had in hand. Then gave he his Horse the spurs
against Bertrand of Beaumont, the amorous servant of Torsia, who sped according
as his fellows did, and was likewise carried forth of the field, afterward he
came before the Ladies, speaking to them in this manner.

You may see (saire Ladies) the great afftction I have in you in that I
sustain the quarrel of you all together, and I remain conqueror over your
servants, for that their good will is not of such good estimation to you, as
the loyal and unfeigned love I bear to you, which makes me so forward in you
service: nevertheless, I see you so displeasant for the misfortune of your
friend, as I judge I shall have but slender recompense for my labor. Then came
he to madame Torsia, saluting her with these speeches. If I had acquitted my
self (Madame) toward these Ladies, what think you sweet mistress I would
do for you? I promise you, I will behave my self in such sort, as you shall
say your self, I exceed my promise.

So concluding, he returned to the Ioust, wherein he had so good fortune, as
he unhorsed five Knights together: their names were Alteo of Frieze, Dirdell
of Bordeaux, Gualter of Dordonne, Danes of Picardie, Richard of Tolose. The
King Arnedes knew now what to say, seeing the best knights of his Court so
discomfited, therefore he would have had the strange knight proceed no
further: whereat he was somewhat offended, and fearing the King would not
suffer the Ladies to accomplish what they had promised, he entered into these
speechees. Your Highness is already acquainted with the conditions, whereon I
presume to enter the Ioust, therefore me thinks it is more then reason to deny
me justice, especially I being a stranger: considering I have fulfilled what I
promised the Ladies, whom I desire you to command to satisfy my pains. I
perceive (said the King) you will not forget what is your right to have: but I
would know with what intent you seek to accompany those ladies, who^ I can
hardly afford to be sent from my Court. If it please your Majesty (answered
the strange Knight) there was no such doubts made to me before I tried the
Ioust, therefore I take it very unkindly, that your highness should deprive me
of my right, seeing it is your office to let every one have his desert. I pray
you, said the king, tell me who you are? for your noble behavior makes me the
more earnest in desire to know you: and content your self, for I will not
hinder you of any thing the Ladies have promised you.

I beseech your grace humbly (answered the strange Knight) that you would not
be offended, considering I am loath to be known as yet, until I have
revenged an injury which one has dome me: but I promise you faithfully, your
highness shall know who I am, ere I depart your Realm, for I will not fail
to declare my name to these Ladies, because they have him in remembrance, that
suffered so great travail for their sakes. I see well then (quoth the King)
you will not now ease my troubled thoughts: well, I will therefore build upon
your promise: Then the day declining apace, the king set forward on his way to
Digeon, thinking the strange knight would come to take his lodging there, but
his will was far contrary, wherefore these few Ladies took their leave of
the company, tarying there with the strange knight: who seeing them somewhat
sad, because they had lost the Queens company, took off his Helmet, which made
the Ladies greatly abashed, so that one could hardly judge, which of the four
was most affectionate to him. The strange Knight durst not be too familiar with
them in speeches, because he feared to disturb their patience: so after he had
brought them to the Monastery (which was near at hand in the valley) the
Abbatesse brought them into a fair Chamber, the windows whereof over a goodly
Oratorie, where the strange Knight himself was lodged, and there he labored
his thoughts so extremely all the night, as he had done his body all the day
before.

CHAP. XL.
Of that which happened to the strange knight, the first day he enterprised to
guard the passage of the Valley.
Fair Aurora saluting the Ladies at their Chamber Windows, they put themselves
in a readiness, because they desired to see more of their Knights prowess:
so, they went with him to the field, not using any great favor toward him,
because they thought he would leave them the sooner; and Mansia requested of
him, into what places he intended to conduct them.

Madame, answered the strange Knight) I am so extremely passioned, as I
cannot at this time report whither I shall travail. Dare you not be so bold
said Mansia, to bring us to the Castle of the Giant Almaroll, and enter the
Combat for our sakes, with the knight that keeps the Princess Miragardaes
Shield, as the Knight of the Savage man did for certain Damsels that kept him
company? I know no danger so great answered the strange Knight, which I would
refuse to hazard, if I might be used with gracious behavior, for that inciteth
a noble mind most to the fight. If any of us, said Latrania, were desirous
you should approve the Combat against the Princess Miragardaes Knight, for
which of us four would you adventure most willingly? It is greater trouble for
me, quoth he, to answer your present demand, then to hazard the Combat
against any knight whatsoever. Yet quoth she, admit the necessity were such,
as we would feign know, which of us should make best account of her^selfe in
this case? Trust me Madame, answered the strange Knight, it is impossible for
me to make you any direct resolution in this matter: for mine eyes are so
equal in judgment on you all four, as I cannot either love or affectione
more then another.

Have you sir, said Torsia, at any time seen the princess Miragarda? Yea
Madame that I have, answered the strange Knight: I pray you then good Sir,
quoth she, that you would vouchsafe to tell me, is she so exceeding fair, as
the common brute is blazed abroad of her? Madame said the strange knight, you
may well assure your self, that your singular beauty has so dazeled my
judgment, as I never saw any that liked me better then you do.

Ah ha, quoth Mansia, have we taken you at last? We may now very well persuade
our selves, that Torsia is she whom you make most account of, for you never
gave so good words to any of us: wherefore seeing she has the most power
over you, and that you prefer her beauty above all ours, I am determined to
depart hence with these two Knights, which I see coming hitherward, for I
know them to be such, as will carry me away in the despite of you. And I
pray you Latrania and Telansia to bear me company, seeing the knight has
revealed himself, how simply we are esteemed in his favor.

The strange knight thought to excuse himself, but before he had the
commodity so to do, the knights of whom Mansia spoke) were there arrived: the
one of them being called Sir Menelao of Clermont, the other Monsieur Arnar: who
being abashed to see these Ladies in the power of a stranger, came to
understand the occasion. Sir Clermont (said Mansia) since Fortune has so
luckily brought you hither, I pray you to deliver me from this strange knight,
who says, that in despite of all the knights in France he will carry us into
Spain with him and there make us give attendance on his Lady.

Clermont, who was the servant to Latrania, giving credit presently to
Mansiaes words, took his lance from his Esquier, and coming to the strange
knight, he entered into these speeches. Since you have (Sir) received the order
of knighthood, to offer injury and displeasure to Ladies: I wish he may be
ac^ursed that bestowed it on you, and my self too, if I should not attempt to
chastise your folly. You are wrong informed Sir (answered the strange knight)
and I perceive Mansia would gladly see you brought into danger, as she would
afford me the like favor, if it lay in her power: and I think you shall
gain more in going about your business, then by tarrying long in this company.

Clermont seeing himself so lightly esteemed, grew into such melancholy, as he
ran against the strange knight, before he would suffer him to take his
Lance: but he slipping by the pu^h of the Lance, caught him in the carrire
by one of his arms, and pulling him beside his horse, threw him to the ground
with great violence. His Esquire then delivering him a Lance, he rode against
Arnar, who prepared himself to revenge the shame his fellow Clermont had
received, as also to desire the favor of Torsia, because he had good hope to
espouse her: but the strange knight being ignorant of his affection, met so
justly with him, as he sent him to keep Clermont company.

And to the end the Ladies might perceive, how he deserved be^ter account them
they made of him, he alighted from his Horse, and having drawn his Sword, he
dealt with them so bravely both together, as he made them know they went
against those orders, which a good Knight ought carefully to keep and esteem.
The strange Knight desiring to delight them, whose kindness was very mean and
slender to him, brought the knights into so bad estates, as they would very
willingly have had a little rest, if so be their enemy would have suffered
them. Mansia seeing the Knights in so great danger, she desired the strange
Knight, that it might please him to hear her one word: the^ in the mean while
he stayed to hear what she would with him, Clermont and Arnar had the leisure
to breathe a while, whereof they were not a little glad, and Mansia began thus
to the strange Knight, I am highly contented sir, in that you have witnessed
your noble valor upon these two Knights, whom I desire you to remit, seeing
they are not able to purchase any advantage over you: For I persuade my self,
that both Sir Arnar and Clermont will not refuse your gentleness in so doing,
and I my self shall have cause to thank you for it. These two French knights
were as glad as might be, that their Combat ended in so good order:
nevertheless, because their Ladies should not judge them to be so fainte heart
to, they made as though they gave over very unwillingly. Which the strange
Knight beholding, he desired Mansia to suffer him to begin again, for he
doubted not to make them better contented, when he brought the^ into a little
more danger. Such is the pride (answered Torsia) as you will not be contented
till some knight may have the power to qualify your lustiness. Your beauty
faira Madam (said the strange knight) does so torment me, as you cannot wish
me any greater punishment: yet will I take it thankfully, coming from no
bodies hand but yours. Arnar was so sore wounded, as the Ladies were
const^ained to unarm him to dress his wounds, which were very dangerous, and
Torsia took pain to bind them up with his shyrt sleeves. The strange knight
seeing the gracious courtesy these Ladies used to Arnar, began to pity him
very much, especially, beholding Torsia to show tears: but they were not very
many, for French Ladies do not use to weep much.

while these Ladies were thus busy about Arnar, a Knight arrived in the place
where the Combat was fought, bearing in his shield in a field of silver, a
Spear broken in pieces, whereby was to be understood, that his hope was
altogether lost: after the knight a pretty space beheld the beauty of these
Ladies, he made his rest upon Latrania, and being very desirous to do her
service, he came to her with these speeches.

You shall understand Madame, that I have sometime stayed my hope in the place,
where I could purchase but slender advantage, as you may behold by the devise I
bear in my shield: and I assure you, I will once again venture my fortune on
your behalf, for I persuade my self, I shall not endure any great torment for
your sake, having the favor of your divine beauty before mine eyes.

Menelao of Clermont, being so amorous of Latrania, as he judged none ought to
love her but himself, could not suffer the words of the Knight of the Spear,
but returned him this answer. If you do attempt (sir knight) to fight on
foot against me, albeit you see me sore wounded: yet will I give you to
understand, that the favor of this Lady is reserved for him, that has
suffered thus much in her service, and thinks himself worthy of her gracious
recompense. I perceive Sir (said the K. of the Spear) that you are ignorant of
me, who could wish (for the love I bear this Lady) and you were in good
estate, end armed double against me: for as you be now, I judge you far
unable to make resiastance against me. The strange knight hearing the proud
words of the knight of the Spear, mounted on horseback, and taking a Lance
from his Esquire, came unto him with theses words.

Sir Knight, I have promised these four Ladies, to guarde the passage of this
Valley for eight days space: the two first days in the service of Mansia, the
Lady that sits on your left hand: the third and fourth for Telansia: the
fifth and sixth for the Lady whom you like, called Latrania: and the two last
days shall be altogether employed, in the honorable service of Madame Torsia.
And I assure you, I am as greatly affectionate to the one as the other, except
the especial opinion I have of Torsia, for that I saw her weep for the harm
of her knight, yet will she not pity the ceaseless grief I endure for her
sake. Notwithstanding all this (sir knight) if you can think so well of your
self as to try the Adventure, you shall find me very willing to entertain
you.

It is ten days since (answered the knight of the Sphere) that I did arrive
in any place, where I could be more desirous to try my valor then I am this
present: but seeing these days are limited by course, I will awaite till they
come, which are appointed for the honor of Latrania, for on her behalf I mean
to adventure my self. In troth (said Clermont,) I see the Knight begins to
dismay himself, and can find no better means to excuse himself, then to put
off the trial of his manhood. If you think so (answered the Knight of the
Sphere,) make your return hither at the appointed time, and I will not fail
to let you know what small account I make of your Choler.

So leaving Clermont, he approached to the Ladies, who demanded of him, if he
had been at the Castle of the Giant Almaroll. He being willing to show
himself obedient to them, courteously shaped them this answer. I have been
not long since (fair Ladies) at the aforenamed Castle, and I have seen the
Princess Miragarda, yet not entering the Combat with him that keeps the
Shield, for that Albayzar set himself against me, and vanquished me. Think
you (said Mansia) any more beauty to consist in Miragarda, then in Madam
Latrania? You drive me to a hard point Lady (quoth the Knight of the Sphere)
for I judge him of simple understanding, that will reprove them absent, to
content the humors of them present: and I think it expedient, that each of
you should be content with your several Gifts, not grudging nor repining at
that which is in another.

Sir (said the strange knight) you witness very well your badde
entertainment at the Castle of Almorall, which hinders your judgment of the
beauty of Miragarda and these four Ladies: in whose defense I will stand,
that no Ladies beauty may compare with theirs. The knight of the Sphere
suspected, that it should be the Knight of the Savage man, whereupon he behold
his shield, which he could not perceive because it was covered: but he knew his
Esquire, so that he was assured with whom he would deal. Nevertheless, the
affection he bare to Latrania, made him forget the friendship of the knight of
the Savage man: so he took his leave of the Ladies, intending to lodge not
far from the Forest, until the days came for him to adventure with the
strange knight, on the behalf of his beloved Latrania. Clermont and Arnar
departed heavily, and the strange knight went with the Ladies to the Monastery
again, where he caused Arlen^ea to remain, till he and the knight of the
Sphere had Iousted together, fearing least in her company he should be known,
and because he reserved her to be married to his friend Dramusiande.

CHAP. XLI.
The complaints which the strange knight made in the night time, under the
window of the Chamber where the four Ladies were lodged.
THese ladies were brought again into their Chamber, where out at the windows
(because the knights were quiet, calm, and fair) they might discern the
most part of the Valley. The strange knight was so vehemently surprised with
their love, as the great travail he had sustained that day, was not of force
sufficient to cause him give his mind to rest: for it is evermore seen, when
the spirit is troubled with new imaginations, the heart must needs be
tormented with infinite passions. Even so was he molested with so many new
cares, as he was constrained to come forth under the Ladies Chamber window,
hoping that seem of them would take pity on him: then laying him down among
the green leaves, and folding his arms cross overthwart his stomach, he
entered into these discourses.

I know well that love is envious at my liberty, for that I have seen the
Dames of England, of Greece, of Spain, and of Navarre, without remaining
affectionate to any of them: but now being in France, I am suddenly inneigled
by four Ladies, who only delight to deprive me of life. And that which
tormenteth me most, is this, I love them all, and am as much affected to one of
them, as I am to all the other three: for when I regard the one, my heart
bids me forsake all to yield to her: and beholding the second, I find my
self in the same alteration. So that when I would forgette such uncertain
assaults, I see them the more readier to be extant before me, which makes me
think it cannot be true love, that does toss and turmoyle in so many
sorrows: and yet do I imagine my grief the less, remembering that I endure
it for their sakes.

But me thinks the case is very hard, when no one of them will seem to make
account of me: wherefore, I see well, I shall be charged with more extreme
cares, then as yet I am. O unfortunate knights, that under their names prepare
your selves to give me the Combat.

The Ladies who were at the window, heard very well the complaints of the
strange knight, whereupon, Mansia, spoke the rest in this manner. I think it
good (my friends) that we go unto him, and spend a little conference with
himfor seeing the night is long and troublesome, I judge we cannot better drive
it away. How dare you (said Torsia) be so hardy to go visit the man, who
makes no account to kill them that come in his presence? It is not for you
(answered Telansia) to make any show of fearfulness now: for if any
mischance happen to us, you are the first that shall be void of it.

This discoursing to one another, at last they departed all together, being in
their Petticoates, and their Mantells wrapped about them, to shield the Deawe
from falling on them. After these four Ladies were come to the place where the
strange Knight lay lamenting, they having saluted him, Mansia began thus.

It is so Sir Knight, that we are desirous to know who you are, and upon what
occasion you utter these complaints? and if you seem to hide these demands
from us, we shall be enforced to cause you loose that without Arms, which you
have obtained of other by Arms. Indeed Lady (answered the strange Knight,)
one of you has power sufficient to vanquish me: then shall you offer me great
injury, to address your selves all four against me. Trust me Sir (said
Telansia) we repute you so good a Knight, having seen sufficient occasion to
cause us think so, as that some of us remain yet in doubt, by reason of the
knowledge we have of your Noble deeds. If my deeds fair Lady (the strange
Knight replied) were accompanied with any show of estimation, it proceeded only
by being employed in your service, which seeing they are so agreeable to you, I
shall attempt to Conquer all the Knights in the French Court under your
names: but I see you deny your favor, and I am out of hope ever to purchase
it. I pray you Sir (said Torsia) let me ask you one question: Have you been
in Love heretofore, or no? Certainly Madam (answered the strange Knight) I
have been many times practicing to follow the will of the little god of love,
who compels (by his envenomed shafts) both Gods and men to love. And have
you been (quoth Torsia) so greatly tormented then, as you seem to be at this
present? No Madam (quoth. he) for that I gave my self to the service of one,
whose love I hope to enjoy (in time) by my Travels: but now that I have
adventured to love four, one of them seems to forsake me, to the end the
other may deal with me in the same sort. And I assure you Madame, I never
loved in any place, where I seemed to be deprived of my life: but now I desire
to be consumated, being fallen into so extreme occasions.

I pray you Sir (said Torsia) do not molest your self so, for he that is
accustomed to travail countries can shake off these passions well enough I
warrant ye. I think it good that you grant to satisfy Madame Latraniaes
desire, which is, that you would conduct her to the Castle of Almaroll, where
you must enter the Combat under her favor, against the knight that keeps
the portraiture of Miragarda: or else that your tra^a^^e to seek the Knight of
the Savage man, from whom you must take by force of Arms, the Damoselles that
are in his company.

You will me Lady, a charge against all duty, for I advertise you, he that
gardeth the Princess Miragardaes Shield is not now at the Castle of Almaroll:
but I am well content to search the Knight of the Savage man, and to enter the
Combat with him, under the favor of Madame Latrania, who shall bear me
company, and you all likewise, for I cannot live, being deprived of your
presence.

I perce^ue, said Latrania, you can excuse your self well enough: but I hope
the Knight of the Sphere will revenge the squemishnesse you use toward me.
Latrania thus breaking off her purpose, they al four took their leave of the
strange knight, because the desire of sleep compelled them so to do, and
being entered their Chamber, they discoursed among themselves sometimes
commending the knights noble valor, and then again his gracious and Princely
behavior, whereupon they determined to show him better countenance then as yet
they had done.

The strange Knight remained in extreme passions, because they departed from
him so suddenly, and ^earing he had uttered somewhat that they could not like
off, he passed the night in many melancholy conceits, until in the morning,
his Esquire brought him some refection. And during the time he was at
breakefast, the Knight of the Sphere came secretly to the Monastery where
these Ladies were, who by reason of their late watching, kept their beds as
yet: but because the strange knight should not e^py him, he went and sat down
at the foot of a (...). And having taken off his Helmette, he began to
recount his manifold misfortunes he had endured, which when he had advisedly
considered, he found them not to be compared to the violent afflictions that he
suffered for the love of Latrania, whose beauty was of no small estimation with
him, in that he had promised for her sake to enter the Combat against the
Knight of the Savage man, the Son to Prince Edward his Lord and especial
good friend.

CHAP. XLII.
What happened to the strange Knight, the second day he guarded the passage of
the Valley.
Until it was two hours after midday, the strange Knight kept within his
Tent, not having any occasion to arm himself: which the Ladies perceiving,
they were desirous to be gone, Mansia aduansing her self as chiefest of them,
setting forth her countenance to the uttermost: and because that day was
ordained for her honor, she behaved her self most bravely in the presence of
the other Ladies.

The strange Knight knew well the intent of Mansia, how glad she was to see the
trial of her beauty that day, whereupon he framed his language to her in this
manner. I would willingly (Madame) discern some kind of imperfection in your
Courtly bravery, that thereby you might receive occasion to respect somewhat
with pity, the man that is extremely afflicted in thinking how he may
compass the means to win you^ good opinion: for you being adorned with such
rare and exquisite beauty, do even lengthen their lives, who take pleasure to
behold you. But I good Madame cannot be so happy as to be one of those, in that
I am he, to whom you take delight to conceal your self: but this day I desire
you to prepare your self, as gallant as may be, for your beauty may happen to
win the estimation above all these other Ladies, because it is unknown what
knights will come.

These words of the strange Knight did not so well please Mansia as he judged
they would have done, for she took them very disdainfully, and gave the knight
to understand, that she was not reserved for him.

Latrania seeing him so earnest in contemplating the beauty of Mansia, spoke
unto him in this manner. I see well Sir, that the regard you have of Mansia,
causes you to be forgetful of all the rest. Not so Lady (answered the
strange knight) and if you will do me the honor to hear me speak, you
shall soon perceive you are in a wrong opinion. You will not gainesay (said
Latrania) but her beauty is honored as your own this day. If the day (quoth
he) whereon I lost my liberty, both for her and you, were as yet to come, you
should have some reason for to conceive this opinion. But if you be desirous to
know the state, wherein Love has bound his Subjects to his Law, the Knight of
the Sphere (whom I perceive is coming hitherward) will satisfy you therein:
and you may demand, if as yet he contains the same mind, wherewith he
presented himself to do you service.

While the strange knight used these and such other like speeches to Latrania,
the Knight of the Sphere lifting up his Helmet, came to the Tents, and
saluted the Ladies very graciously: and as he stood earnestly beholding
Latrania, the Ladies perceiving three Knights coming toward them, being all
armed after one manner, as if they were all three the Servants of Mansia, the
first of them was an English man, called Brauor: the second, Alter of Amiens:
and the third Gualter of Amboise: they being all three of the King Arnedes
Court.

And because they had not the mean, to make trial of their valor in the
Forest against the strange knight, when he behaved himself so bravely in the
Kings presence, they concluded this day to hazard their renown, which was the
last day the strange knight enterprised to show his puissance for the honor
of their Mistress. These three knights being come before their sweet Saint
and Lady, were in a manner deprived of their wits, her beauty was of such
stately preferment in their eyes: which the Knight of the Sphere beholding, and
noting well their amorous passiens, he spoke to Mansia in this manner.

You cannot deny fair madame, but you are more beholding to this strange
Knight, which has kept you company for certain days, then to these knights
which are come to seek you: for that in my judgment they rather seem to
yield themselves conquered by your present sight, then any desire I can
perceive in them to the Combat, but it may be, your brave apparel has more
dazeled their eyes, then your singular beauty, which is of sufficiency to set
the whole world to work.

Sir (answered Brauor) if you are so busy to descant on our meanings, and that
you will seem to judge of our inward thoughts, prepare your self to the
Ioust, and I will not fail to give due chastisement to your lavish speeches.
Trust me Sir (answered the the Knight of the Sphere) I am content to satisfy
your desire, on condition this knight shall think it so convenient.

I pray you (Sir said the strange Knight) that you would not seem to hinder me
in my enterprise, which being once achieved, you may afterward make trial of
this knights courage, which to lay, I judge you shall not need to travail
your self much. I perceive (answered Brauor) what the intent of your speeches
is, nevertheless, I hope the gallant bravery, wherein I have this day beheld
my Mistress Mansia, will not only grant me the conquest over you, but also
be sufficient for me, to correct the pride of this other Knight. I perceive now
very well (said the strange knight) that your affection was only upon her
gay clothing, but mine is on her sweet self, that wears them: then casting
his eyes upon Mansia, he entered in to these speeches. Fair Madame, since the
honor of this Day is dedicated to your praise, I desire you to allow me so
much favor, as to behold the entertainment of this newcome Ghost: for I
fear me, my blows will yield him greater Disadvantage, then he received
content in beholding your Beauty.

Upon this they ran together courageously, and Brauor brake his Lance
worthly, but the strange Knight encountered him with such force, as he pierced
him quite through the body, so that he fell beside his Horse to the ground
dead: his companinions being as greatly abashed, as the Ladies did take it
heavily seeing the misfortune of Brauor, whose body was carried to the
Monastery to be buried.

Alter of Amiens, and Gualter of Amboyse, notwithstanding the death of their
Friend and companion, determined to hazard their honor in this Adventure: but
Gualter of Amboyse was the first that presented himself to Ioust, using this
Language toward his Lady. I desire you heartily (good Madame) that you would
not suffer him to dye at a strangers hand* who only lives to do you service:
but so well I desire you to think of me, as in the extremest occasion you
will not forsake me. These words uttered by Gualter of Amboyse, were spoken
after such manner, as the Knight of the Sphere easily understood them,
whereupon he spoke to Madame Latrania, in this manner. This Knight in my
judgment (fair Mistress) is unworthy the Love of any gracious Lady, that
disdaineth of his enterprise before he begin it.

While he stood thus communing with his Lady, the two Knights encountered
together, but Gualter of Amboyse was cast forth of his Saddle, being unable
to move the Strange Knight: he having broken his Lance, addressed himself
to Alter of Amiens, who being very timorous and fearful, yet to show some
good countenance to his Lady, gave his Horse the spurs against the strange
Knight, who could not meet with him according as he would. Nevertheless,
Alter of Amiens brake his Lance in such sort, as the pieces flewe about the
strange Knights horse head, whereat the horse so fumed as he gallopped with his
master violently through the field, whereupon the strange Knight cast himself
beside him, commanding his Esquire to ride after, to take him again. Alter of
Armiens, seeing that Fortune more faudured him then his other companions, was
very desirous to enter the combat with the sword, for which cause he alighted
from his horse, then Gualter put himself before him, because he had Iousted
first: but the strange knight handled him in such order, as in short time his
companion was glad to come help him, whereupon, the strange knight entered into
these words.

You come (sir) even as well as heart can wish, for I am determined to lay
claim to your horse, because mine is run away from me. Then he charged him
so furiously, as the knight of the Sphere was constraided (pitying the estate
wherein they were brought) to desire Mansia to give them some succor: but
before she could well persuade her self to do so, these two knights came and
rendered themselves at her feet, desiring her to pity their present case, not
doubting but they would apply their lives many other ways in her service. The
strange knight desirous to see what estimation Mansia would make of them, came
unto them with these words. You shall understand (sir knights) that I am not
determined to give you over, without the Lady entreat on your behalf her
self: or else she shall promise to grant me one request, which I entend to
utter to her.

I assure you sir knight (answered Mansia) I do not intend to make you any
such promise, giving you to understand, that you ought to beware how you pass
any further your self, for the hope which you have in me, who by this means
shall have perfect knowledge, of the love and good will you seem to bear me.
I see well (quoth the strange knight) that you are desirous to let me know, how
your nature is bent toward them, that adventure themselves in your service:
which is: that they shall receive better entertainment, then that which you use
toward me: whereat, I have some occasion to grieve, for I would be he, that
should only receive your favor: in that I practice all means possible to
please you. But I see your intent is to use me with rigor, which I would wish
you should use to these knights, whose lives are of so little profit to you,
so that I count my self happy, because my life is far from your power.

When he had thus said, he offered to mount on Gualters horse, but the Ladies
gave him to understand, that he did much abuse the knight to offer him such
injury, by which means, these two knights rid presently away to the King of
France his Court, where they made known the misfortune that had happened unto
them.

The knight of the Sphere, took his way unto his lodging, and the Ladies to
their Monastery: Mansia being greatly contented, that the strange knight had so
well acquitted himself toward her, as the other three did very much marvel,
at the noble behavior of this brave Champion.

CHAP. XLIII.
Of that which happened to the strange Knight the third and fourth day.
AFter the sight of these Iousts, the Ladies having withdrawn themselves into
the Monastery, the strange knight entered into his Tent, where he refreshed
himself with such viands as the Nuns had sent him. And for that he was
somewhat sore travailed, he was the more desirous to rest: in the mean time
his Esquire returned from the search of his horse, which he could hardly take
all that day, but his master was ^^ad when he saw him.

Then the strange Knight, thinking the Ladies would walk abroad, as they had
done the Night before, he took his way to the green Trees again: but they
came not abroad until the Morning: when, being mounted on their Palfrayes,
Mansia rid foremost, having a Garland of Flowers on her head, in sign of
Victory: Telansia followed next her, being in good hope to attain the self
same honor. Latrania and Torsia came somewhat behind, using such a majesty
in their countenance, as the Knight was more and more enflamed toward them.
When Mansia was come somewhat near the strange knight, she spoke unto him in
this manner. Trust me Sir, we are so weary of your company, as we have
concluded to return^ to the kings Court, not doubting but we shall be
advertised, what things happen to you in our absence: whereto the strange
knight thus replied.

These words (good Madame) which you use to me, cannot be thought welcome to
me, and I am persuaded that the law which these Ladies of France has set
down, being first begun by their own good wills, cannot be thus broken,
without their great impeachment. Good Sir (answered Torsia) do not thus grieve
and offend your self, for Mansia did speak but only to try you, and she
will not be gone so soon from you, I warrant you: as for us we will not break
our promise to you, till the eight days be fully complete, except some other
knight come, whose power shall be sufficient to cut off your determination.

Me think Lady, said the strange knight, you should not wish him more
misfortune, who endures too much already for your sweet sakes: but me
thinks you should rather wish the victory to fall on my side, then on any
others, for the laudable commendation you shall get thereby. While the strange
Knight behaved himself amiably, in the entertaining these gallant Ladies, the
Knight of the Spear arrived there on a sudden, who showing his obeisance to
Madame Latrania, spoke to her as follows.

Fair Mistress, never were any days so troublesome unto me, as these which
I endure at this present, earnestly thirsting and desiring for the time, when
your sweet self may allow me some favor: Nevertheless, I am very well
persuaded, that the Knight who honors you with his service, cannot be easily
vanquished, for that he bears as great good will to you as I do, adjoining
hereto, that he imagines himself worthy your love. But you may assure your
self, that I am so highly affected to you, as this Knight may no way equal:
Nevertheless, I cannot choose but take it heavily, fearing you will allow the
like ingratitude, which I perceive you use to him: To these words Latrania
replied thus:

Your speech (Sir Knight) is far different from the offer you made me, when
you first arrived in this place, when you were so liberal in promise, that you
would not stick (for my sake) to conquer the whole World. The strange Knight
being desirous to make one with them, offered to advance himself to them: but
he was hindered by a Damsel, who arrived there at that very instant, who
desired him to show her the knight that guarded the Passage of the Valley: Then
disclosing himself to the Damsel, she saluted him with these speeches;

Having understood (Sir Knight) how you are of the opinion, that these four
Ladies are the fairest in all the World, I was somewhat desirous to travel
hither, accompanied with these four Knights, which you see under this Tree:
and they (to honor me with their service) have concluded to Ioust with you,
not doubting but their pains will return greater profit unto them on my
behalf, then that which you bestow for these Ladies. And this you must
understand beside, that these knights come not to enter the Combat with the
sword, in that I reserve them for especial affairs, which are to me of
greater importance then this.

When the strange Knight had well advised himself on the Damsels words (who
bare her face covered) he answered her in this manner. I would I were* in as
great estimation with these Ladies, who keep me here captive, as these
Knights (in your company) are to you. And for that you use them with such
favor, I desire that Madam Telansia may speed no worse then Mansia has done,
for whose sake I have already Conquered three Knights. I pray you Sir (said the
Damsel) to show me which of these four Ladies you ca^^ Telansia? After the
strange knight had satisfied her request, she entered into these words.

In sooth (Sir) her beauty is sufficient for you to enterprise great matters,
yet I imagine, my knights shall not be any thing more discouraged thereby, to
do me service. This Damsel was the very same, that came to succor the
vanquished Knights, which were conquered by the strange Knight in the King and
Queens presence: and because the strange Knight sped always so fortunately,
many knights sought severely to injury him: which the Queen would prevent as
much as she could, causing this Damsel to entice them to try their valor
against the strange Knight, for her sak^.

Thereto they willingly consented, nevertheless, the King had forbidden them
to enter the Combat with the Sword: for which cause the Damsel entreated the
strange Knight, that he would hazard the breaking of one Lance, against one
of her champions. After that the damsel had thus concluded, these four
Knights (who bare for their several devises in their sheelds, the Globe of the
world, figured in a silver field) began to advance themselves forward, which
the strange knight perceiving, he coasted Telansia with these speeches. If the
world (fair Madam) were of no bigger quantity then this which the Knight
bears in his sheeld, I judge I might with easy travail overcome it, and
make you the only Queen of the world. Without any more words, he ga^e the
spurs to his horse, and encountered the knight in the midst of the carreer, so
bravely, as both horse and man went to the ground: then turning to the Damsel
that conducted them thither, he spoke to her as follows. You cannot deny now
fair Damosel, but you have seen me throw the world to the ground, only by
the favor of Madame Telansia. Oh Sir (answered the Damsel) you do but as
yet begin, these other three knights knew very well the prowess of this
knight, to be far greater then they thought for: but since such great
misfortune has befallen him, you see the second Knight desires to revenge his
companions wrong, and if he fail likewise, these other two Knights will bear
them company. But I perceive well (said the Damsel) they must be tried
knights, which shall live in hope to conquer you: yet may I say thus much
without offense, that your courage is the more emboldened by the presence of
these four Ladies. Then taking off her mask, the strange ^night presently
knew her, which made him begin in this manner. I am very glad (fair
Damsel) that you can now witness my justness and stabilitie: but I do
greatly abash my self, of the hope you reposed in these four knights, who
(for any thing I can see) bear no greater affection to you, then to me. These
knights desired the Damsel to suffer them to depart, for they were afraid,
least they should be so handled as their companion was. The king Arnedes
commanded that night, that a great dancing should be kept in the Queens
Chamber, whereat he was advertised of the sundry and high good hope of the
strange knights: which moved many Ladies to entreat their amorous servants,
that they would bring them to the place where this knight kept the passage.

These four ladies entered the field, accompanied with their champion, and the
knight of the Sphere, whom the Ladies desired that the king should not be
offended, by his entering the Combat with the strange knight: As for the
residue of their servants that were in the Tents, to encourage them to be
earnest in desiring to enter the Ioust, each of them promised unto her knight a
garland of flowers, if the victory chanced on his side. Baldwin of Nainnis, who
was the affectionate servant to the fair Albania, was the first that presented
himself to Just against the strange knight, who would not suffer him to run
before he had first craved leave of the ladies, that it might be their wills to
^rowne him with the garlands of flowers that remained victor: the ladies
contented themselves greatly with this request, whereupon the strange knight
spoke thus to Telansia. Madame, for that it is pity your golden locks, so
gallantly garnished with these fragarant flowers should be injured by any, or
these garlands worn by any other tho^ your sweet self: I desire you to lay
these garlands by the tree before you, and doubt not but I will have more
companions to them presently. So saying, he ran against Baldwin with such
force, as he sent both horse and man to the ground on a heap. The Lady Albanis
garland was presently sent to the strange knight, which he immediately presented
to Telansia, using this language. If (sweet Mistress) you will do me so much
honor, as to receive in worth this present I offer unto you: I will not fail
to enterprise in your gracious service, to deck this tree with flowers of
surpassing beauty.

Next to Baldwin, was dismounted Bameran, the amorous servant of Lady Brisa:
whose garland of flowers was set next to Lady Albaniaes. Rion of Belze, servant
to Madame Vertuosa, being discomfited, her garland was a companion to Lady
Brisaes. The fourth was called Lusaman, servant to Lady Zapella, he was
likewise sent to keep his fellows company: next to him was Riant, the servant
unto fair Blas. And Altar of Bayonne, servant to Manansina, who seeking to
revenge his friends injury, was cast forth of his Saddle, with his arm
broken. Garland of Beziers, servant to Montpensier: Forsian of Granoble,
servant to the Lady of Jury, Brisar, servant to the Lady of Bur, sister to
Telansia: beside many other knights, who were all vanquished by the strange
Knight.

These garlands were hanged on the bows of the tree, the sight whereof,
yielded no small contentment to Telansia: but the other Ladies found themselves
greatly discontented, thinking on this honor, and what had passed before,
especially Mansia, who endued this day far more triumphant, then those which
the strange knight maintained under her favor. Latrania and Torsia, were out
of hope to attain such honor as Telansia had done: so these vanquished
knights departed presently thence to the Court at Digeon. The knight of the
Spear was greatly abashed, noting the noble deeds of the strange knight,
whereupon he took his leave, and went to his accustomed lodging, to pass that
night away: rejoicing greatly that the day was come at last, when he should
witness to Latrania his prowess and affection: the strange knight was so
transformed in the Love of these Ladies, as he thought never to leave their
company, and contemplating them very earnestly, his Esquyre came, and told him
his Supper was ready: remembering him also, that on the next day he must enter
the Combat with the Knight of the Sphere, whom he judged to be one of good and
hardy courage. I pray thee answered the strange Knight, let me alone, for the
hope I repose in these Lays, is sufficient to make me break both the Sphere,
and the hope likewise of the knight thou namest to me.

The Ladies understanding the words of their Champyon, gave no small
commendations to their knightly deeds, in the mean while, the Knight laid
him to rest: but so unquiet was his sleep, as he did not contain the same
mind he was wont, to go walk under the Ladies Chamber window, to
understand if they would come into the Field again. And I assure you, these
Ladies being parted but a little thence, they imagined amongst themselves, by
casting of Lottes, which of them that Night should go to him: the lotte fell
unto Latrania, who departed as bravely garnished, as she did the first night.

CHAP. XLIIII.
Of that which happened this night to the strange Knight: and how the knight
of the Sphere entered the Combat the day following.
IN the mean while the strange Knight slept at the foot of a Tree, Latrania
came to him, being in a wastcoate of white Taffatey, all the breast whereof was
embrodered with silver twists, and hanged very thick with Aglets of Gold, the
bravery whereof did not a little grace her, being likewise covered with a green
silk mantle, because the dew should not hurt her. In this order as I have told
you, Latrania came down and sat b^ him, not speaking one word to him, because
the thought he should speak first. The strange Knight, who was not wont to be
abashed at any thing, presently caught hold on her Mantle* and for that she had
her face covered, he spoke to her in this manner.

I desire you (sweet soul) not to be offended, if I request to see your ^ace,
whereby you may in some sort assure the doubt which as yet I remain in.
Latrania put by her Mask, and being accompanied with a mild and affable
countenance, she spoke unto him as follows. You shall not now refuse (Sir
Knight) to grant me the request I have continually desired at your hand. Alas
(fair Mistress) you lay such hot assaults but* my daunted Spirit (answered
the strange Knight) I must be same to yield, because the victory shall be
the more famous. And it does not a little rejoice me, that you have thus taken
the pains to come alone to comfort me, for that you may persuade your self,
my power is far too weak to make resistaunce against all you four: To which
words Latrania thus replied.

You have oftentimes said to me (Sir knight) that there is no one upon the
Earth, has greater desire to do me service then your seek: but I cannot
conceive the same opinion, if you will not at this instant let me know who you
are. Madame (said the strange Knight) if I were in the service of any other,
then might I easily grant your request: but I will leave you to think, what I
will do tomorrow when I must be employed (...). But ^^ward it does not a
little displease, that you are so unwilling to regard me in your favor* which
I esteem ^he most especial Fortune that can happen to me if I could attain
the hour to rejoice in her presence whom (love as the only pillar and stay of
my life: as I have already witnessed to your companio^s, who may not presume to
equal themselves with you, albeit their Beauties deserve good (...), yet you
being so worthy to be served, I intend to reveal my name to you, to the end
you may have knowledge (...), whom you have enforced to end^re so great travel.

These word gave occasion of Latrania, to take him at the advantage, because
she might the better attain her desire, and he likewise triumph in this great
favor, so that he declared his name to her: which when she understood, her
mind was indifferently ^ased, for Latrania had (in times past) heard of his
inconstant and unfaithful dealings, and seating least her honor likewise
might happen to be impeached, she failed not presently to depart thence,
promising not to discover him to the other Ladies.

After that Latrania was thus departed from him, he devised which way he might
exclude her out of his remembrance: but so great was the affection he had
vowed to her, and the conceyte of her delicate affections so pleasing to him,
as they would not suffer him to forget her, but did so vehemently vex and
torment him, as it was impossible for him to (...) any quietness.

But Latrania sustained no such unruly passions, for she slept soundly till
the morning, not making the other Ladies acquainted with that the strange
Knight had told her: whereupon Mansia spoke to her in this manner. I know well
Latrania, that you will make us believe, how the Knight has not discovered his
name unto you: wherefore I intend to go prove to morrow morning when it
shall be seen which of us has the most power over him. And if it so fall out,
that he will not reveal himself to none of us four, I shall repute his
passions not so troublesome, as his complaints to seem to witness.

Upon this determination the Ladies rested, and so soon as the Sun had
shown his golden countenance on the earth, certain of the Kings Court arrived
in the field, who caused tents and pauilions to be presently ^et up, because
the king and the Queen would come to see the Iousts that day. The Ladies would
not as yet come ^oorth o^ their chamber, because it was too carely, and for
that the Iousts should not be begun before the King came: but it was not long
before the King and Queen came to their Tents, accompanied with many
honorable personages, as also Ladies and Damsels of great calling.

The Judges of the Field caused Tables to be set up in the Valley, which were
covered with clothes of marvelous estimation, and there the King and Queen
refreshed themselves, inuyting into their company the four Ladies, who were
so stately Apparelled this day, as their beauty seemed to excel all the
Ladies that were come with the Queen. The strange Knight went forth of his
Tent, that he might the better behold this sudden assembly, and sitting down
at the root of a Tree, his Esquyre brought him victuals to break his fast
withal. After that the King was risen from the Table, these four Ladies
(according to their wont) mounted on their Steedes, and took their way to the
place where the strange knight remained, who even then was ready to fall to
his daily exercise: they courteously saluting him, went with the Queen to her
Tent, and by the kings Tents the strange Knight stood, expecting who should
first begin the Iouste. And the King himself, was greatly delighted in
beholding the Garlandes, which for that they were the favors of the Ladies,
and lost by the Knights that were foiled, he began highly to commend the
Prowess of the strange knight: who being ieasting with the four Ladies, he
espied at last to come along the Valley, the knight of the Sphere, Armed as he
was the day before, and bearing his Ladies Garland on his Creast, which he had
good hope to keep well enough.

When the King Arnedes had espied him, he entered into these speeches. I
desire greatly to see that Garland of Flowers brought vanquished unto these
other: whereby I may be the better assured, whether he that prevails in
these Conquests so happily, may find his Peer else^where, or n^. The Knight of
the Sphere, coming into the Kings presence, saluted him with humble
obeysaunce, afterward taking his Garland from his Helmet, he desired him to
wear it: and if he defended it not according to the merit of her Beauty, he
desired it might be placed among the other vanquished. But if the victory
happen on his side, he would not seek any other recompense at her hands, but
that those other Garlands might be given to bestow on his Friends.

Of this request Latrania was very glad, and desirous to reach so high
felicity, where of thoroughly persuading her self, and likewise to satisfy
the knight of the Spheres will, she put the garland on her head: then earnestly
beholding the strange knight, she entered into these speeches. You see (Sir) the
day, when I have the mean to make known your knightly deeds, as also the
desire you have to do me service. I will Madame so behave my self (answered
the strange Knight) as you shall be persuaded no other knight can injury me,
so great is my desire to accomplish such service, as may be agreeable to your
gracious nature. And if afterward you make such regard of me, as you do of
those whom you are wont to thrust into forgetfulness, I must then comfort my
self with this, that I am not alone in misfortune, but bear my cross with
others for company.

The knight of the Sphere having understood, how Latrania made no more regard
of them that did her service, and seeing the Dice Fortunes hand, either to his
continual honor, or present disgrace, yet ignorant which of them should be
his chance, ran courageously against she strange Knight, they encountering
together so worthily, as they were both compelled to forsake their stirrops.
Upon this gallant beginning, they took new staves, wherewith they met again
together so strongly, as the pieces flew whistling in the air: and passing
forward, these Knights met so furiously with their bodies, as they were
constrained to tumble to the ground. At this sight the King was greatly
abashed: but Latrania contented her self very well, seeing the noble and
valiant behavior of her Knight, who she thought as good in all points as the
stranger. These two Knights had no sooner recovered themselves, but they drew
their swords, wherewith they hacked and hewed one another very pitifully. The
strange knight being desirous us to pass this day, with as great renown as
he had all the other before, followed his intent with singular agillitie: and
the knight of the Sphere, to witness his earnest affection to Madame Latrania,
did behave himself likewise so worthily, as each allowed him the name of a
good and hardy Knight. And such was the difficulty of this Combat, promising
hope to neither side, but very doubtful on both: as the King esteemed it of no
less danger, then that between Don Edward of England his son, end
Dramusiande and his Giants, when he was prisoner in the custody of the
Enchauntresse Eutropa. And the King was extremely passioned, fearing least two
such noble champions should die in his presence: so fiercely they continued the
fight, as they were both constrained to withdraw themselves to breath a while.
The Knight of the Sphere, seeing his arm so mangled, began to think his
estate in some hazard: but afterward remembering the beauty of her, for whose
sake he thrust himself into danger, he co^muned thus privately with himself.
What greater good can happen to me in all the world, then to be allowed in her
service* whose beauty none in all the French Court may match? In the mean
while these two knights thus paused, the Damsel that was wont to come so
often into the field, addressed her self now again to the strange knight,
using unto him this language.

I desire now to see (Sir Knight) how you will justify the large promises you
have made to me, for that I persuade my self, the Knight of the Sphere will
restore these Ladies with the loss of your life: and he being earnest the
victory should fall on his side in revenge of the offense you have offered
unto them, will yield your Tree decked with these Garlands of flowers into
their hands that best deserve them, to which words the strange knight thus
answered.

It is t^^e long enough (fair Damsel) since I perceived the small good will
you bare me, but since I now perceive that my misfortune is so agreeable unto
you, I desire you to make known unto the Ladies, that I make no account of
their favoring me, being well assured, that they are wont to use such
recompense toward them who adventure their lives in their service.

Wherefore, that they shall well understand that my force took his nature in
times past, by the gracious regard of one most singular Lady: I desire them to
keep their woonted covetousness of their beauty. And I shall decen^^^^ that
Latrania use her favor toward him, whom it pleases her to make most account
off.

When he had thus said, he returned to the Combat* which held between them a
long while: but when they perceived their Armor defaced, their flesh martyred,
and themselves very greatly feebled, they once again withdrewe themselves to
rest a little.

The King Arnedes was loath two such hardy knights should end their lives in so
desperate manner, the quarrel being of so small estimation, there he would have
had them them parted asunder. And the strange Knight, thinking on the
discourteous entertainment Latrania affoorded him, disdainedence to look on
her: but the Knight of the Sphere made such account of her beauty, as in his
silent thoughts he uttered these words. I would I were as fortunate, and my
deeds as worthy, as I see you coye in accepting of those, who render their
very souls subject unto you.

So breaking off, he closed again with the strange Knight, who in troth was
not slow in receiving him: and I assure you their lives had been in very
great danger at this third trial, if it had not been for the arrival of a
damsel, who being mounted on a white Palfray, and her hair hanging over both
her shoulders, came to the strange Knight crying so loud, as her voice brought
an Echo of the whole Forest. At this sight every one was suddenly abashed,
and chiefly these two knights, who separated themselves, to know^th cause of
the Damsels lamentations, which she came to utter before the seure Ladies
desiring them to let us understand, for what reason these two knights entered
the Combat.

Mansia told her, how they fought for Madame Latrania: whereupon the Damsel
approached to her, ent^ing into these speeches. Madam, if life and honor ought
to be preferred before uncertain appetites and afflictions, I desire you
humbly to allow aid and ^uccor to two distressed Damsels, who not far from
this place are in great danger to loose their honor, which they esteem of
greater price then their lives: out of which trouble they shall be soon
delivered, if it may please you to let me have one of these Knights, who
endure a hot Combatte for your Love. When she had thus spoken, she shed such
abundance of tears, and delivered forth so many scalding sighs, as Latrania
was enforced to miss of her desire, thinking to see the end of the Combat
between these Knights: on which behalf, the King (seeing Latrania make no
answer,) spoke unto the Damsel in this manner.

Which of these two Knights (fair Damsel) do you desire to have with you?
because you shall perceive my willingness to entreat for you. If it please your
Majesty (answered the Damosel) they are both so good Knights, as I know not
well which of them I should request: nevertheless, I will make choice of the
Knight that bears his sheeld covered.

Latrania had no sooner heard the Damsells words, but she presently came
between the two Knights, giving in show, that the Strange Knight should not
suffer any refusal, and whereupon she spoke to him thus, Sir Knight, if for
the succor of the afflicted, Arms were first invented, I pray you, that the
tears of Damsel, and the love you say you bear me, may cause you to forsake
this Combat, and move you to go help the oppressed Ladies.

Madame (said the strange Knight) for me to obey you in this cause, were very
fond and unadvised, yet would I do it, if I were not busied about especial
matters, for you may persuade your self, that the Bond wherein I have tied my
self, does defend me from satisfying your commandment: considered also.
Madame Torsia may find her self offended, that I should now in this manner
slip from her, and not give her her due, her Beauty worthily deserving it.

I pray you sir (quoth Torsia) that you would witness your Service for my
Love, in the place where this Damsel will conduct you. I am content to obey
your commandment, (answered the strange Knight,) if you likewife will go in
our company: for I have taken this condition of you, not to be deprived of
your company, during my limited time of guarding this Valley.

Madame (said the damosel to Latrania) the knight does perfectly let you
understand, that he is an obedient servant to love, as your self may well
perceive, seeing he prefers his pleasure before your will. Wherefore I
desire you to entreat the other Knights to go with me, for I am of the
opinion, you shall find him more affectionate to you, then he whom yo^ have
reposed so much hope in. Latrania being willing to pleasure the Damsel,
began to entreat the Knight of the Sphere, that it might stand with his
pleasure to give over the Combat, and assist them with his aid, who were in
great hazard.

Madame (answered the knight of the Sphere) I know it is no great harm for me
to let alone the Combat, mine enemy being such a noble and redoubted Knight:
yet would I not have any one to think, that in respect of fear or dismaying
in my self I let this pass thus, for that I know my self, sufficient enough
for a greater matter. Marry, as concerning your request, the earnest love I
bear you is such and so great, as I am content to suffer whatsoever you will
lay upon me, only to satisfy and content your will.

Then turning to the strange Knight, he began again in this manner, I pray
you (Sir) thus to imagine and think, that my earnest desire to purchase the
love of Madame Latrania, has been some hinderance to you of the victory,
albeit you made some assurance thereof in your own conceit. Indeed (answered
the strange Knight) I see it is very hard for a man to get any advantage of
you, without putting his own life in great danger: for I assure, your strokes
have been so well laid on me, as they have made me to conceive so good opinion
of your valor, whereof since I am so well assured, it does not a little please
me, that so good a knight shall go in this Damsels cause. But ere you depart,
I would very gladly understand your name, to the end Latrania may have
knowledge of him, to whom (of necessity) she must account her self greatly
indebted. The king himself (who was no less desirous to know him, then the
strange knight) desired him earnestly to reveal himself to him.

The knight of the Sphere, seeing the kings great importunity, took off his
Helmet, and kneeled down to kiss his Majesty's hand, but he perceiving him to
be his friend Dramusiande would not so permit him, but casting his arms about
his neck, embraced him with marvelous gracious courtesy, being very sorry
that his sudden departure, would not suffer him to regard him as he willingly
would. And he would not let him part, before he had made him known to the
Queen and and the other Ladies, who declare to the king, what a benefit the
knowledge of the strange knight would be to them. Alas (quoth the King) I
would as willingly know him as any of you all, and I am much out of quiet with
my self, that I have not known him all this while.

Oh Sir (said Dramusiande) I beseech you to expectt yet a little longer,
until his enterprise shall be ended: for I am of the opinion that he will not
then seek to depart hence, before he make himself first known to your Grace.

The Damsel presented her self before him, declaring it was high t^^e they
should be gone, whereupon he took his leave of Latrania, who esteemed her
self above all the other Ladies, in that she had the power to bring into her
obeisance so good a knight as was Dramusiande. After his departure, the King
and Queen rode to the City, where they daily commended the singular prowess
of the strange Knight, in that he kept his charge so well.

The Ladies of the Court would not depart thence, before they first might have
the Garlands their servants had lost, whereupon, they came all together to the
tree, and caught them all away violently, the strange Knight not daring to
resist them.

CHAP. XLV.
Of that which the strange Knight did the day following, garding the Valley.
WHen the King and all his Courtly attendants were thus departed, the four
Ladies took their way to the Monastery, and the strange Knight went into his
tent, where he sat down to rest himself: afterward, as he kept it for his
custom, he went and walked under the green Trees, and the Ladies determined,
who should this night go visit this amorous Lover.

Mansia, who this night must go parley with the knight, had put on a wastcoate
of blew Taffata, wrought all over the body with net^worke of Gold, wherein were
composed diverse ranckes o^ very rich Orient Pearls, and by them were placed
Stones of inestimable value. Her hair was wound in fine plats about her head,
being covered with an imbrodered Garland of blewe Velvet, wherein was set a
fair Plume of white Feathers, very beautifully adorned with spangles of Gold.

In this order as I have declared to you, Mansia came and sat down by the
strange Knight, and to avoid suspicion, she took off her Garland, not
fearing to be hurt or impeached by the Serena, or else for the desire she had
to be the perfecter seen. Then laying her hand upon his head, she began as
follows. I will (Sir) at this time forbid any manner of complaint, in that
your self shall not deny, how all the pains past are to be forgotten, and all
services are to be recompensed by gracious visitation, especially, seeing I
take pleasure to favor you so much at this time.

The strange knight was supprised with such exceeding joy, as he could not
possibly make her any answer, for the beauty of Mansia had so ravished his
understanding, as he was not mindful in using any gracious language, wherewith
he ought to have entertained her: but after this sudden joy was somewhat
calmed, he then failed not to account of her marvelous honorably, wherewith
she remained very well contented, and to give her further occasson of speech,
he began to court her in this manner.

Madame, I know well that your good nature is: to see the deserts of doubtful
travails requited, and he that should judge otherwise, were unworthy the
gracious visitation you have afforded me: assuring you, that this is the most
especial recompense can happen to me, having the means to contemplate your
excellent beauty, which no other may presume to paragon. And if you your self
have not the same opinion, trust me, you show your self very ungrateful to
Nature, who has framed you such an one, as may justly be called the Phoenix of
beauty: whom I have so deeply imprinted in my heart, as I shall be extremely
tormented, when I shall be deprived of your sweet company. Yet I am greatly
abashed, how you digest it so well, to see him suffer such pain and grief, who
deserves to be better esteemed of you, you having the power to cause him live
contentedly, or die presently. I pray you Sir (said Mansia) before you pass
any further, tell me if you use these speeches to Latrania or no? Trust me Lady
(quoth he) her curiosity was so much, as I did not make any great account of
her when she was with me, and then perhaps I might be forgetful of many things,
especially, to her whom so many Knights are bound to: for when the mind is else
where grounded, all amorous representations are thrust in oblivion which is not
so madame toward you, who may altogether dispose of my servitude, even as she
that has the only power over me. Then seeing it is so, I pray you humbly (good
Lady to judge, to which of you four I am most affectionate, and after you have
well advised your self, on the several perfectio^s of the other ladies you
cannot yet deny, but you are aduantaged above them all in beauty, grace and
authority: so that I esteem my self most fortunate being deprived of my
liberty, and altogether vowed to obey you.

Mansia being not able to withhold her self, from giving credit to the
strange knights golden words, and not thinking how he had used Latrania in the
same manner: she began to come more near him, and laying her hand on his
shoulder, she shaped him this answer. If this matter be so (Sir) as you seem
to make it, I humbly desire you to tell me who you are: to the end I may with
the greater assurance join my belief to your persuasions. I perceive then
(answered the strange knight) the small assurance you repose in me: so saying,
he took her by the hand, which she suffered very quietly. And so amorous he
was in words, as at last he bewrayed himself unto her: and persuaded her, that
the griping one another by the hand, was a certain beginning of love. So that
this little favor made him somewhat more bold, and further he would have
proceeded, but the Lady left him and departed: being as glad that she knew who
he was, as she had left him without hope to purchase his intent.

The strange knight was extremely passioned, seeing that her quicknes, and the
light regard of love wherewith she was accompanied, made him so scornefully
entertained: yet could he not blame her alone, for that he was so used of them
all. In many sad conceits he passed away the night, ripping up the intricate
sorrows he ^as bound to suffer: but when the day appeared, he mounted on
horseback, vowing to revenge the injury he had received that night, on any
Knight he should happen to deal withal. But he found himself far deceived
in his intent, for the knights of the French Court had given over, for coming
any more to trouble him, whereat he was somewhat offended: nevertheless he
dissembled his grief that the Ladies might behold his wonted passions.

Latrania was very much displeased, because the Iousts were not continued as
they were wont: again, she doubted least the Knight of the Sphere had
sustained the foil in the Damoselles cause, by reason he was so ouercharged
with travail before he went. The which she would be very sorry should so fall
out, for that by his prowess he had given the advantage over her companieos,
for which cause she remained continually affectionate toward Dramusiande. As
concerning the adventure he followed, the history makes no other mantion of
it, but this: that the Damsel was sent by the Sage Aliarts means, only to
succor the lives of these two knights, to be employed in ayding the Emperor
of Constantinople, to which place the Damsel had caused Dramusiande to take
his way, albeit he was very loath to forsake Latrania.

After that these six days were thus past, which were dedicated to the honor
of Mansia, Telansia and Latrania, the two days reserved for Torsia were come
at last: whereof the strange knight was glad, in that he intended to do more
for her, then he had done for all the rest. All the first day it was not his
chance to have any adventure, because no one knight presented himself in the
Valley, wherefore he passed away the time till night, when he went to his
accustomed place, where he had not stayed long, but Telansia came to him, being
in a Taffata wastcoate of Indian color, very richly spangled over the body,
and on her head were Jewels of great estimation. Thus she came to the strange
Knight, desiring him to certify her who he was: whereto he made her this
answer.

I perceive Madame, how Love altogether entendeth to deprive them of life, who
are desirous to do him service, and the more extremely to plague and punish
me, that the pains of the other oppressed souls may not compare with mine:
for he has made me thus to understand, that your several visitations are to
no other end, but only to gain the knowledge of me, without any will or
desire in you, to pity my continual dying spirit, or to regard my dangerous
travails, wherein you seek to prolong my loathed life, though I daily desire
to breathe my last.

If you judge my words to savor of any forgerie, you may compare my continual
justness with my present behavior, and you shall find your own, judgment a
witness against your self: how you ought not so to disdain his kindness,
who has guarded this passage under she honor of your name, whereby you may
triumph with perpetual renown. All these causes considered, me thinks you
should not use such ingratitude to the knight, who has been the occasion you
are so much esteemed, and is also affectionate toward you.

Sir knight (answered Telansia) I know not whether your words are forged or
no, albeit the custom of such as you is, to mingle many deceits among your
complaints: but if you would persuade me to believe what you say, grant me that
you have refused to my companions, that is, to tell me what and who you are?

Fair Lady (answered the strange Knight) to tell you who I am, I shall not
greatly make dainty: assuring you, that I durst not reveal it to any of the
other, for that my special service is to honor you. And you shall understand
that I am called the Knight of the Savage man, from which name truly you may
change me, doing me the honor to be called your servant.

Sir Florian (answered Telansia) one of the signs whereby I know the small
love you bear be, is in revealing your name to me, the other, for that I know
you more account of the other Ladies then of me: and no doubt you have fained
to them all, as you have done to me, therefore I pray you be not offended, for
you and I must needs part company.

So rising by she departed thence, promising not to discover him to the end his
enterprise might not be hindered. The day following, which was the last he had
to try his valor on Torsiaes behalf, he entered the ^ielde, hoping this day
to purchase immortal renown.

CHAP. XVI.
Of that which happened to the strange knight, the last day he guarded the
passage, under the name of madame Torsia
THe strange Knight stayed till it was after noone forth of his Tent, yet not
one knight entered the Valley, which made him report to the Ladies, that the
fear their servants had of him, in guarding the^, had now caused them to
forget the affection they were wont in words to bear them: whereof they four
agreeued: so that they mounted on their Palfrays, were al and came to commune
with their knights, who used them with less pleasant behauiourr then they had
done before.

Whilst these Ladies were thus conferring with the strange knight, they espied
coming three knights, their armor being in colors, white, black and scarlet,
and each one had figured in his sheeld, a Swan in a field of Sable. One of
these knights was named Alemant, the other two were Italians, and Alemant
called himself Lambort of Saxony: he travailing to Constantinople, met with
these two Italians, who persuaded him to travail with them to the Castle of
Almaroll willing likewise to approve the adventure, was soon entreated to
bear them company, and their complections being very different, they fell out
of their way: then hearing of the adventure of these four French L^dies, they
addicted their journey presently to the French Court, persuading themselves to
end the adventure, wherein so many good and hardy knights had failed. And being
thus armed all after* one manner, they arrived in the valley now on the last
day of the Ladies adventure. I know well (said the strange knight so soon as
he had espied them) that fortune did not intend to suffer me this day, without
showing you (fair Lady) the great desire I have, to be accepted among the
number of your best favored servants: for you may persuade your self, that no
Knight whatsoever has power to resist against me, when I have you sweet Lady
in my presence.

While the strange Knight this reposed with Torsia, the three Knights were
arrived in the field, and after they had advisedly beheld the beauty of these
four Ladies, they could not judge which of them did most excel in beauty.
But so it was that their affections were contrary, for the two Italians
enterprised the Combat for Latrania, and Alemant was altogether inueigled with
the beauty of Mansia.

These Ladies were so well pleased as possible could be, that they should be
served by Kinghts of strange Nations, which made them use such great courtesy
and favor toward them, as they had not done the like to any of the King
Arnedes court: whereat the strange knight was so moved, as he presently
prepared himself to the Ioust. Brucie of Verona one of the Italians, was the
first that began the pastime: but the strange knight met with him in such
sort, as he was sent to the ground with his heels upward.

Which the other Italian perceiving, who was named Trucie of Beroze* he gave
his horse the spurs: but in the encounter he was sent to keep his fellow
company. This much displeased Lambrot of Saxony, who was esteemed a good
knight, when setting his Lance in a rest, the two knights met together so
bravely, as Lambrot was unhorsed with his Saddle between his legs, and the
strange knight was forced to forsake both his stirrops.

Then Alemant calling to the Combat with the sword, the strange Knight
alighted from his horse, but the two Italians would not suffer Alemant to enter
the Combat, for they said the advantage belonged to them, because they were
first dismounted, Upon this they fell at much variance among themselves, which
was incontinently appeased by the four Ladies, who ordained, that Brucian of
Verona should begin the Combat first: but he was so entertained by the strange
Knight, as Trucie of Beroze was constrained to come help him. Whereat the
strange Knight was so moved, as in short time he laid Brucie of Verona at his
feet: and Trucie of Beroze was sore hurt, as he was glad to fly to the Ladies
for refuge, who desired the strange knight to save his life.

Alemont desirous to revenge the injury his two friends had received, drew his
sword, and buckling on his Sheeld, came very fiercely to assail the strange
knight: but he dealt so roughly with him, and followed his intent with such
nimble and brave behavior, as Alemant found he dealt with one stronger then
himself. Yet was he of this mind, that he rather desired to die at his hands,
then to demand any succor of the Ladies: who were so greatly moved with
pity, fearing to see him die before them, as they came and desired the
strange knight to give over the Combat.

At their request he was contented being very glad he had so well accomplished
his promise, giving them to understand, that to do them service he could be
persuaded easily to enterprise any other adventure: but for that it was night,
they courteously took their leave of him, and went again to the Monastery,
leaving him now in as great extremity of grief, as they had done any of the
days passed before. And I must not forget to tell you how the Ladies likewise
gave the three knights a friendly farewell, who withdrewe themselves also to
their Lodging, and the day following took their way whither* Fortune guided
them: being unwilling to go visit the Court again, much less to return to
their Ladies, for whose sakes they had received so great shame.

The strange Knight remembering himself how Torsiaes turn came to visit him,
made no account of his passed travail, but went to his accustomed place, where
he long looked for the presence of Torsia. And albeit he thought to conceal
himself from her, yet was it not possible for him so to do: for he not only
bewrayed his name unto her, but he would have discoursed his whole life to her
likewise, if she had bin disposed to have given the hearing. Not long it was
before Totsia took her way to the place, where the other Ladies had been
before, being in her night apparel, a wastcoate of black Taffata, the bodies
all richly wrought ever with pasement lace of gold, ^oure fingers bread, and
between curry lace were costly pearls and stones, which did set her forth in
such a bravery, as would have amazed the ^reest knight in the world.

Her mantle was of blew Velvet, wrought round about with ^^cures of gold very
sumptvously, and in this manner she came and sat down by the knight: but he
being fearful to move effence any way, durst not take the hardiness to
speak to her, whereupon she spoke thus. I did not think (Sir) that my coming
would be of so ^^ender estimation to you, as I perceive you make it: but I did
always misdoubt you, and therefore I am now deceived.

Madame (answered the strange knight) the pleasure I receive by your arrival,
is so great, as it deprined me of the use of my speech, whereat I see you are
offended, and reputed me otherwise then a loyal servant, for that I did not
advance my self to entertain you with such graciers behavior, as your
excellency well deserves. But you do not remember (sweet mistress) that if
I had spoken to you, my talk (...) nothing else but the woonted grievous
complaints, (...) which I am afraid to commit to light (albeit I have just
occasion) such was and is my doubt (fair Madam) of displeasing you. I am not
ignorant (answered Torsia) that he never wants excuses, who knows how to shift
for himself. You have given forth your self daily under the name of an
obedient servant to me, which I cannot believe, much less abide to accept any
Knight in my service, who will not or dare not reveal his name, the only
thing truly wherefore I am come hither at this time. Madame (said the strange
knight) I know not whether I should declare my name unto you^, and remain
passionate to understand of you, who is the Knight to whom you bear most
favor: or conceal my self to your excellency, continuing my self still
afflicted, and leaving you discontented.

I assure you, I can make slender choice of either of these two extremes, not
knowing which of them may hurt me most, yet must I put it in adventure, since
my good hap is tied to the heels of Mercury.

Therefore you shall understand Madame, that I am called the Knight of the
Savage man in all Princes Courts, where I have received greater favor at the
Ladies hands, then I have done here in the French Court: albeit I have done my
duty in service toward them that bear the prize in beauty, especially to
you, whom I honor in affection above all other.

And seeing I have thus discoursed my name unto you, I desire you to think,
that my complaints are on just occasion: but if it be true, that Love is wont
to enforce them suffer, who travail and serve him with fidelity, I shall rest
content to be so well recompensed. For such is the especial good will I bear
you, that I desire my life may be prolonged only to pleasure you: not
regarding my often banishent from hope to despair, nor the sundry unsavory
sweetes wherewith I must feed my self, only by the froward and rigorous
storms, which daily and hourly come from you.

Therefore I desire you good Madame, somewhat to regard him in pity, who has
no other will, but only to suffer what ever you lay on him, and would refuse
no torment, so he knew you did fancy it, or think well on it.

Sir Knight (answered Torsia) if I should be deceived by such fair and
plausible speeches, it were impossible for me to ^hunne any misfortune, for I
should accompany the two princesses Targiana and Arnalte: but because I know
you so well, and would be loath to bear a part in their complaints, I am
content at this time to leave you.

When she had thus said, she presently rose and departed, accounting* her
assurance small in his company, because every one knew of the sundry prankes
of the Knight of the Savage man: but he was maruellously offended at the
sudden departure of Torsia, and brake forth in complaints still, as though she
were in his company. Albeit Lady (quoth he) the remembrance of your
ungentleness makes me despair, yet your presence has power to help my
dolor, in rejoicing my troubled sight, giving comfort to my afflicted soul,
and knitting up all complaints with your sweet company: but being deprived of
you, these fainting arms fold up the dying coarse, and so with many a deadly
sigh accompany their Master to their latter home,

After he had moned a pretty space in this manner, he concluded with himself
to forget these Ladies, and entering into conceit of their cruelty, he slept
soundly till the next morning. Then so soon as he was armed, he caused
Arlencea and the Damsels to be sent for, who had all this while remained in
the monastery with the Nuns: they giving them most hearty thanks for their
friends usage, set forward on their way with the Knight of the Savage man, who
now would have his Shield no longer covered.

The four Ladies bare them company a little way on their Palfreys, being glad
they could let the King know what he was, and very feign they would have had
him with them to the Court: but when they perceived their labor was all in
vain, Torsia smiling, spoke to him thus. Trust me sir, by the te^tes which
fall from mine eyes, me thinks you take your parting heau^ly, or every tear
is as big as a Millstone. Lady (quoth he) the fire that is kindled in my
stomach by your love, is of such nature as the water cannot quench.

But seeing you make so light account of him, who has humbled himself (...)
much to you, I will despise Love, who is the occasion of such a misfortune. And
this you may assure your self, I will gage the heart (which once did present
it self to you in another place, to try if I shall be better entertained, then
I have been at your hands. So parting from them, he set forward on his
journey, desiring to attain the City of Constantinople.

CHAP. XLVII.
How the Knight of the Sauge man, arrived at the Court of Constantinople: And
how Dragonalt and Arnalte the Queen of Navarre, came likewise to the Emperors
Court.
LOng travailed the Knight of the Savage man, till at last he came into a
Forest somewhat near the City of Constantinople, where he espied a number of
Knights, Ladies and Damsels, which made him presently suspect the Emperor to
be in their company, as he was indeed: for he had been abroad with them to see
his falcons fly, and for that age would not suffer him to ride on horseback,
he was in a Coach, accompanied with the Empress and other Princess of the
Court, who peroeiuing the knight of the Savage man coming, and five Damsels
in his company, they knew him so soon as they beheld the devise his Shield.

Then came they together to meet him in such a troop, as the Knight of the
Savage man was very joyful to see himself so welcome to his friends: amongst
them was his Brother Palmerin of England, who came and embraced him with
exceeding humanity.

Arlencea being alighted from her horse, he took her by the hand, and brought
her before the Emperor, and when he had kissed his hand, he desired his
excellency that it might be his pleasure to remember, how much he was
beholding to that lady, who saved him from falling into the hands of cruel
Collambra, her mother. Arlencea humbled her self to the Emperor, her huge
stature being much wondered at of all the Ladies: but the Emperor showed
himself very gracious unto her: in like manner did the Empress and Gridonia.
But Leonarda, the Princess of Thrace, suspecting the Knight of the Savage man's
mind was not on her, entertained Arlencea, but even so.

In the mean while these Ladies were thus joyfully entertaining Arlencea, the
knight of the Savage man was advertised of the death of King Frederick of
England his Grandfather: at which tidings he was so heavy, as he was enforced
to forsake their company, and rode into the City before them. And after he was
come to the Palace, he consumed certain days in mournings, until the time
compelled him to go visit the Princess Leonarda his Lady.

The Emperor caused Arlencea to be mounted on horseback again, making very
especial estimation of her, for as she was endued with exquisite beauty, so
was she adorned with very gracious manners, which liked every one well that
beheld her: especially Dramusiande, who was now so far in love with her, as
he had quite forgotten Latrania.

As the Emperor was about to return into the City, he espied come riding
along the Forest diverse Ladies and Damsels, accompanied with diverse knights,
who were offered the Ioust by them attendant on the Emperor. Which the
principal knight in the company perceiving, and desirous beside to try his
valor before such an assembly, took a strong Lance, and clapping down the
Beuer of his Helmet, came and presented himself to the Lady in the company,
who had the authority to command all the other. And having taken his leave of
her, he gave his horse the spurs, and was so fortunate in the encounter, as he
sent Bellizant out of his saddle.

Afterward with another Lance, which one of the Knights gave him in his hand,
he sent four more good and especial Knights of the Emperors Court to the
ground, whereat the Emperor marvelled, and noting the brave behavior of this
Knight, he caused to be sent him certain Lances, but before they could be
received, a Damsel came and saluted the Emperor from the knight in this
manner. Renowned Emperor, Dragonalt the King of Navarre, being desirous to
content the Princess Arnalte his Queen and wife, has thus presumed to Ioust
with your Knights: but when he understood your Highness was in place, he
commanded me to infourme your Majesty, how he has left his own realm, to
offer his humble duty to your excellency.

The Emperor and the Empress hearing the Damoselles words, were supprised
with unspeakable pleasure, entending to entertain Dragonalt with as much
honor as could be devised: as well for knowing him to be the Son of a
valiant Prince, and Nephew to King Frisoll, as also to move the affection of
his Queen Arnalte, in more ample manner to him, and so without any further stay
they went to meet them. Which when Dragonalt and the Queen Arnalte beheld,
they alighted from their horses, and holding one another by the hand, went to
meet the Empress: who likewise to do them the greater honor, came on feet
accompanied with Gridonia Polinarda, Leonarda, and diverse other Ladies, each of
them embracing them with their humanity, letting them understand, how the
emperors court was highly honored by their presence.

After they had on all sides sufficiently welcomed these princes, Dragonalt and
Arnalte mounted on horseback: but Palmerin alighted, and taking the bridle of
Arnaltes horse in his hand, so walked on til he came to the palace, whereat the
princess Polinarda began to wax somewhat jealous. Arnalte well noting the
beauty of the two Princesses, Polinarda, and the fair Leonarda of Thrace,
began to think, that they which enterprised the Combat in Spain for the
fairest in the world, did witness their manhood in a just occasion: albeit,
next to these two, her self was esteemed the third for beauty in the
Emperors Court, but when the Princess Miragarda came thither, she was
constrained to be the fourth in number. Dragonalt, and the Queen Arnalte were
lodged very near the Empress Chamber, and Arlencea and her Damsels, were
guests to the Duchess of Lubicall, the chief Lady about the Empress.

The Emperor caused daily Iousts and Tournements, to witness the Queen
Arnalte, that her presence was very agreeable to him. Dramusiande was so
conquered with the love Arlencea, as he could rest in no place, neither enjoy
any quietness. Palmerin (who lived now in more content then he had of long
time before) did not yet think all things sound and sure, for that Lone
presents daily some occasions of fear to amorous persons, until such time
as their desires are perfectly contented. In the mean while this great joy
continued, Pompides King of Scotts with his Queen, arrived at the Emperors
Cour, who were received with marvelous great pomp and honor.

The Prince Primaleon desirous to show himself thankful for diverse
occasions had passed between the Prince Don Edward and himself, led the
Queen of Scotts Palfray by the bridle, till she came to the Palace Gate,
notwithstanding, the entreaty of Pompides and her self very often to the
contrary.

The Queen of Scotts was lodged with the princess Polinarda, who held her
self greatly contented, because she was so near in alliance to her most
favored friend. Palmerin and Pomp des went to comfort the Knight of the Savage
man in his chamber, where he kept, and would not as yet go abroad, so heavily
he took the death of King Frederick, his Grandfather. The Court of
Constantinople, was in short time so well furnished with Princes and noble
Knights, as they were judged more then needed, to entertain the whole
puissance of the Pagan Kings.

CHAP. XLVIII.
How Arnedes King of France and his Queen, Recinde King of Spain and his
Queen, accompanied with the Princess Miragarda, and the Giant Almaroll,
arrived at the Emperors Court of Constantinople.
THe Emperor seeing himself brought into the extremity of age, thought good
to enioyn his Nephewe in marriage, and also the other Princes and Knights that
had been nourished in his court: and that he might move a general good
liking by so doing, he imparted his intent to the Empress and his son,
Primaleon. When he understood how well they thought of the matter, he writ
presently to Arnedes King of France, his son in law, that he would do him
so much honor as to come with the Queen to his Court. In like manner his
Majesty dispatched letters to Don Edward, King of England, and Flerida his
daughter: to Recinde king of Spain, desiring him and his Queen to come to his
Court, and bring the Princess Miragarda in their company. The Emperor Vernar
was sent for likewise, and Tarnaes King of Lacedemonia, with his Daughter
Sidelia, whose beauty carried some credit at that time, and the Soldane
Bellagris, with Maiortes, and many others, the Emperor by his Letters invited
to his Court. But the first that came to Constantinople were the Emperor
Vernar, and King Edward of England: soon after came the Soldane Bellagris and
Maiortes, their entertainment being according as their noble estates deserved.
Then came the King Tarnaes with his Queen, Sidelia his Daughter, and the
sorrowful Lady Pandricia, whom the Empress lodged in her own Chamber. The
two Kings, Arnedes and Recinde, arrived with their Ships at the Port of
Constantinople, and sounded their Trumpets and Drums so gallantly as the
people were afraid in the City, fearing left their enemies were come: but
the Princess came to receive them with great joy, where they might behold the
King of France in a sumptuous Galley, covered with cloth of Gold of great
value, wherein was himself, his Queen, Florenda and Graciana his two
Daughters, with many Ladies and Knights beside. In another Galion was the King
Recinde and the Queen, with a number of Knights for his Guarde. Before them in
another Galion, was the fairest Princess Miragarda, the Giant Almaroll, the
Prince Florendos, and many other knights. The King Recinde being advertised,
that the Emperor intended to marry the Princess to his Nephewe Florendos,
with the King Arnedes consent (to do them the more honor) caused their Galion
to march foremost, as the Captain over all the other Vessels. The Emperor
was so glad of these tidings, as he forsook his Coatch, and was brought in a
chair to the place where these Princes should land, and the Empress with the
Queens, Princesses, and Ladies, mounted on their horses, which were clad in
most rich and costly harness, and so they rid to the Port of the City very
stately. There was the Emperor, accompanied with his Son Primaleon, king
Edward of England, the Emperor Vernar of Allemaigne, Soldane Bellagris,
Maiortes, Ternaes the king of Lacedemonia, Polendos, Estrelant, Pompides and
Dragonalt, and no little joy it was to him in his aged years, to see himself
so beloved of the most puissant Princes that were in the whole world: but
albeit the presence of these great personages was very pleasant to him, yet
could he not choose but take it heavily, seeing the preasse so fore upon him,
as long he could not be a companion for them.

The kings Arnedes, and Recinde, and the Prince Florendos, being all come on
land, they kneeled down to kiss the Emperors hand, but he embracing them in
his arms, would not suffer him to honor him so much, then came the Queen of
Spain, and the Queen of France, with her two daughters, whom his Majesty
welcomed very familiarly. And when the Princess Miragarda came into his
presence, he accepted of her marvelous graciously, entering into these speeches
to her.

I am very glad (Madame) that you would vouchsafe to come hither, where I may
requite the great gentleness I have found at your hands, in providing to
detain the Prince Albayzar in so good security.

The Princess Miragarda made no other answer, but with a mild and Princely
courtesy, made show how well she took the Emperors words: and I assure
you, her presence abashed the judgments of a number, in whose eyes she seemed
the faicest creature on the earth.

The Giant Almaroll was likewise very welcome to the Emperor, and when the
Princess Polinarda had courteously saluted Miragarda, she shrunk aside to her
Brother Florendos entertaining him with this language. I perceive new well (my
Lord and Brother) that you have good cause to think your labor well bestowed
in that you have traveled for a Lady of so singular beauty. I would with all
my heart, good Sister (answered Florendo) that I had the due recompense my
labor has deserved, so might I be in the better assurance. Oh Brother (said
Polinarda) the Giant Almaroll has no authority to shut the door against you
here, therefore I promise you, the Princess of Thrace and I will not ^orget to
enterprise the means, whereby you shall (no doubt) find favor.

The Emperor would delay the time no longer, but to the Palace they rode
altogether, the Prince Primalcon leading the Queen of Spaines horse by the
bridle, albeit the King Recinde was very loath to suffer him. The King Polendos
did as much honor to the Queen of France, and King Edward of England
afforded the like to the fair Princess Miragarda, as well to content the aged
Emperor, as to honor his kinseman the Prince Florendos: Palmerin of England,
did the like to the fair Florenda and Florian of the Forest, to the Princess
Gracia^a, in brief, the Princess and Knights, led all the Lades Palfra^es
till they came to the Palace. The Emperor was carried in his Chair by four
Knights, communing with the Princess Miragarda all the way, desiring her to
favor his Nephew Florendos, and to think of him, as one that had well
deserved at her hands.

CHAP. XLIX.
Of the Conference which the Emperor had with the Princes. And how the
Marriages that he appointed, were now accomplished in effect.
WHen the Princes, that were thus arrived Constantinople, had rested themselves
for certain days, the Emperor desirous to content every one before he died,
who had bestowed their service in honoring him, revealed his intent to the
Emperor Vernar king Edward, Arnedes. Recinde and Primaleon, how he would gladly
see his Nephews married, and the other Princes that had been nourished in his
court, whom he would see all matched according as their affections served them.
The Princes liked maruaellously the Emperors intent whereupon, he caused the
Sunday following a great feast to be ordained in the Queen Fleridaes Chamber,
which place was the most convenient in all the Palace for their courtly
disports and there the Ladies were every one regarded in their degrees, being
more pleasant in the Ladies of their sauoured servants, then all the costly
iunckets provided for the banquet.

Palmerin was so earnest in affection toward his Lady, as he judged her to
surpass all the other in beauty. Florendos held the same opinion to the fair
Miragarda, and Florian made such estimation of the Princess of Thrace, as he
feared not to Combat against any whatsoever, that her beauty might carry the
credit above all the rest: and the Prince Platir was not behind him in
conceit, toward his sweet Lady Sidelia, daughter to the King Tarnaes. The
Empress Bazilia, Gridonia, Fl^rida, and Francellina, because of their high
estates, were chief next the Empress (...) the Queen Flerida bare the price
of beauty amongst them all, because she was in the most sweet and delicate
time of her years. After the Tables were wishdra^e, and all the (...) departed
the place, the Emperor (being weak and sickely) (...) King Edward to express
before all the company, what he had given him in charge. King Edward willing to
obey the Emperors commandment, arose from the Table, the^^ taking off his Hat,
and kissing the Emperors hand, he saluted all there present, and began thus.

Most gracious Empres, as each of us for his benefit and honor has received
such Ladies in marriage, as the Emperor from his own Court has pleased to
bestow on us, some that are allied to his Excellency, and others to the Princes
and lords of his Empire, whereby the renown of Christendom is worthyly
maintained, and all causes expressing good nature continued in their flourishing
estate. It may therefore seem good to you at this present, that I publickely
open his gracious and Princely determination, whereby may be known, if your
Highness with these Queens and Princesses in your company, shall think well
of that, which by the advice of his honorable council he seeks to put in
practice. It is so, that his Majesty has set it down for a decree, that these
young Princes and knights shall join in marriage (in ^ecompence of all their
noble travels) with those to whom they are most affectionate. And as for the^
that are as yet unprovided of Ladies, his Majesty will allow them continuance
in his Court: whereby no (...) shall grew on any side, but every one shall be
contented to their own desires. Here pausing a while, he attended what the
Empress with the other Queens and Ladies would say, as also ^o bethink
himself on the names of the persons, whom the Emperor had appointed to many:
but the young Princes and knights were somewhat abashed, doubting whether they
might give credit to the kings words, for their was not any of them, but
judged his labors sufficiently rewarded, if he might enjoy his sweet Saint and
Mistress.

The Ladies that were in presence, began to blush and change their amiable
countenance, whereby they bewrayed the secret sudden joy of their hearts, which
they received by the speeches King Edward had uttered. Polinarda very often
cast her eyes on the Prince Palmerin, being in as great fear as the offender
that awaiteth the sentence of the Judge, for she doubted least her Grandfather
would bestow on her some other, and not let her enjoy him whom her heart
desired. And Palmerin was afflicted in the same manner, such and so great was
the vehemence of his sundry passions, which between hope and fear he was
constrained to suffer: but while his thoughts were in this infinite deal of
trouble; his Father King Edward following his former intent, began again in
this manner.

You shall understand. Sir Florendos, that my gracious Lord the Emperor (with
the consent of the King Recinde) enioyneth you to espowse the Princess
Miragarda, who (in my judgment) will not be any thing offended to be so
matched: and so shall you Sir Florendos think your self fully satisfied, for
all the travails you have endured for her sake.

All the prince there present looked on Florendos, when they might well
perceive, that the words of king Edward had given him more joy, then if the
richest Realm in the world were in his own possession: but the princess
Miragarda kept her countenance so demurely, as one could hardly judge, whether
the love of Florendos were acceptable to him or no.

And for thee my son Palmerin, (said king Edward the emperor and the prince
Primaleon, being very willing thou should know the love they bear thee,
do give thee to wife the Princess Polinarda, not doubting but thou shall
imagine all thy passed travails, to be fully recompensed in so sweet a reward.
The Princess Polinarda no sooner heard these words, but the delicate Rosiall
color that dyed her dainty countenance, witnessed the love and good will she
bare to the Prince Palmerin of England, who likewise now abandoned all his
former fear, seeing he should enjoy the felicity he had so long wished for.

Which when his Father King Edward perceived, he made as though he did not
epsy, and proceeded on with his former determination, giving the Prince
Gracian (Son to the king of France) to understand, that the Emperor did
bestow on him his Niece Claricias, the Daughter to the King Polendos. And you
Sir Berolde, for your virtuous behavior, must enjoy the Jewel of your heart,
the fair Onistalda, Daughter to the Duke Drapos of Normandy, and Niece to the
renowned King Frisoll, whereof your Father (I am sure) will be very well
contented. And you sir Francian, shall match with Bernada, Daughter to the
valiant. Prince Belcar. And you noble Prince Platir, in that your deeds are
worthy of perpetual memory, you shall possess the fair Sidelia, Daughter to
the King Tarnaes of Lacedemoni^, who will willingly bestow her upon you for
that your noble behavior has well deserved her. And you Don Rosuel, the true
inheriter of the Prince Belcar your Father, shall be honored with Dramaciana,
Daughter to the Duke Tirendos, and for that you have served her faithfully so
long, you shall enjoy her at last as the desert of your labors. And for
Bellizant your Brother, his Prize is the Lady Denisa, Daughter to the Duke of
Sparta: who is now content to requite him with her love, because he has
endured so many sharp showers under her name. Dramian shall have for his
guardon, the Princess Clariana, Daughter to Di^ea the Princess of Hungaria:
and you Frisoll, because it is your right to succeed the Duke your Father,
shall be joined in marriage with Leonarda, Daughter to the Duke of Pera. And
for this cause (noble Gentlemen) did the Emperor and his Council call you
into this place, to the end you might perceive the good zeal and love he
bears to you all. But let me not forget what his Majesty has ordained, as
concerning you noble Sir Dramusiande, it is his will that you shall espouse
Madame Arlencea, as well to content the desire of her love, as also to show
himself thankful, for her bewraying the treason of Alfernao: and his
excellency has concluded to bestow the Profound Isle on you, which sometime
belonged to her ^ather Brauorant, and is now in the custody of my son Florian
your friend. Darmusiande was supprised with such exceeding joy at these words,
as he had not the power to attend till king Edward had finished his discourse,
but came and humbled him self before the Emperor, yielding him a thousand
thanks for his gracious courtesy king Edward took him up in his arms,
desiring him to have patience a little while, till he had ended his charge, and
coming to the Princess of Thrace he entered into these speeches. To you most
excellent Princess, whom nature has plentifully endued with beauty and
courtesy, the Emperor, which these Kings and noble Lords in his company, do
earnestly desire to give in marriage my son Florian, if so be his deeds might
deserve so well your good liking: it is likewise wished by my son Palmerin,
to whom you are tied in some point of obedience, according as king Sardamant
your Grandfather appointed it in his will. Palmerin who all this while had kept
himself silent) humbly desired the king his father to vouchsafe him a word or
twain: which being granted him, he came before the princess of Thrace and
setting on of his knees to the ground, he began to her as follows.

I durst not (Madam) take the hardness on me, to present you my Brother Florian
the first time you saw him, fearing least you would think, that I was inclined
more to regard his pr^fit, then your honor: but I was the more willing to
drive it off till this present, that you might have some knowledge of his
knightly deeds, wherein if I perceived you to take any delight, I might be the
bolder in presenting him for your husband, and you the easier to entertain
him. Let it then I pray you seem acceptable in your judgment, what the
Emperor and his counsel has determined on, in that I am persuaded the
heavenly powers do think well it should be so. Sir Palmerin (answered the
Princess) I am she, who always covet the means, whereby I might show my
self dutiful unto you, and if I should seem to use my self otherwise, I
were unworthy to receive the royal preferment, which the King my Grandfather
has appointed me: beside, my subjects might well examine on me, if I should
go contrary to his will who has the hour over me: therefore resolve your
self, that I shall be content to grant to any thing, which you imagine for
the fulfilling of your promise, and mine honor. Palmerin kissing her hand,
arose immediately, being not a little glad of the courteous answer the
princess of Thrace had made him then King Edward turned to the Knights, and
began again in this manner. You shall understand noble Gentlemen, that it is
the Emperors will you should reveal to him, how you accept of his opinion, and
the Princesses and Ladies shall bewray their intents to the Empress, because
his excellency would not enterprise any thing, but he will have all parties
well contented therewith. These marriages were so well thought on by every one
present, as the Knights and Ladies told the Emperor they were all contented,
especially the Knights, who advanced themselves one after another to kiss the
Emperors hand: the like they did to the Emperor Vernar, Bazilia, Gridonia, and
the Kings and Queens there present, and the Emperor embraced them every one,
but when Palmerin came to him, he h^ld him in his arms, and spoke thus.

My son, I have continually imagined with my self, how I might worthily
recompense your deeds of so high estimation: but now I persuade my self, that
both my desire and yours shall be sufficiently contented, in giving you the
Jewel of my bliss, and the honor of my travails, my Niece the Princess
Polinarda, whose name I pray the heavens to imprint so deep in your heart, as
the Empress both has been, and is (...), to the end that you and I bearing
one name, may be alike in happiness and good fortune. I never thought my
gracious Lord (answered Palmerin) that my deeds should purchase such a high
and happy felicity, as this which your Majesty has (...) on me: but I see it
is your goodness, and not my defects, for which I am bound in duty during
life. Primaleon and Gridonia embraced him very lovingly, being glad their
Daughter was bestowed so honorably.

After these joyful motions, both on the one side and the other, were somewhat
pacified, the Emperor returned to counsel again, with the Emperor Vernar,
King Edward, Primaleon, and the other Kings, letting them understand, that he
did not intend to forget the Lady Pandritia: whereupon the Soldane Bellagris
was called, to whom King Edward bewrayed all matters passed, how Bellagris
under his name entered Pandriciaes. Chamber, and begot of her Sir Blandidon,
whom every one thought, and she her self, to be King Edwards Son, as you
may read in the first Volume of this History.

The Soldane Bellagris knowing thy great error of his faith, and being assured
withal, that Blandidon was his son, removed his Turkish opiuion, wherein he
had lived so long time: and to remain in the friendship of these worthy
Princes, he concluded to espouse Pandritia, to the great contentment of many
Princes his friends, who likewise (by his conversion) came to know the law of
the living God. Of this good hap, the Emperor and all the other Christian
Princes were very glad, and to continue Bellagris in this good mind, the
Emperor presently arose from counsel, and went into the princess chamber
accompanied with King Edward, where his Majesty declared to Pandritia, what
had passed between them and the Solean Bellagris, causing her to forget her
former opinion, that Blandidon was the son of King Edward, and certifying her
likewise, how the Sultan had received his Heathenish faith, to make her amends
by marriage, which she ought not to refuse, as well considering the valor and
riches of the Soldane, who was a mighty and renowned Prince, as also that her
son might know his noble father. Pandritia heavily looking about her, was so
sore troubled, as it was a great while ere she spoke a word: but after she had
better remembered her self, she earnestly beheld king Edward, speaking to him
in this manner. My hard destiny (worthy Prince) has concealed this so long,
which you at last have vouchsafed to bewray, that my life may be hereafter
more pleasant then it has been: and this you may assure your self, that if I
had known of this before, I had given due chastisement to my ignorant
misfortune. But since it is come to light at this time, both the love of my
son, the salvation of the Soldane and his Subjects, compels me to forget
all matters past, considered also, that the force of love made him deceive in
this manner.

The Emperor liked well of that she had said, and the Empress embraced he
many times, being so glad as could be possible, that all things came to such a
happy end. Blandidon was then called into presence, who was very sorry when he
knew king Edward was not his father: but the hope to be preferred by the
Soldanes dignity, made him to forget all former occasions, and take content in
that present before him.

(...) L.
How the Sultan Bellagris was baptized: and how afterward the Emperor caused
him to be married to Pandritia, and how the other Princes of his court were
married also.
AFter that these marriages were thus agreed upon, the Emperor commanded the
day following, that all things for the solemnizing these honorable rites,
should be prepared in the most decent manner, because he would have them all
married in the great Hall of his Palace, and there the Archbishop of
Constantinople said divine service, afterward he made a learned Sermon, to give
the Soldane Bellagris earnest affection to the law of Jesus Christ, publishing
likewise openly, what had passed between him and the Lady Pandritia, because
no suspicion should arise by them, who were apt enough to conceine an evil
opinion. When the Archbishop had concluded his sermon, be baptized the Soldane.
The Emperor and king Edward of England were his Godfathers, and the two
Empresses his Godmothers. And to honor him the more, the Emperor would have
him first married: so the Soldane Bellagris, and Pandritia being thus knit
together in Matrimony, Blandidon humbled himself before them in sign of
obedience, but the Soldane embracing him, took him up, rejoicing greatly that
he had so good a knight to his son, and that he should leave to his subjects
such a worthy Governor. After that Pandritia was thus espoused to the Soldane,
the Empress and her Ladies walked with her, because the Emperor would have
Florendos and Miragarda matched next: which being done, his heart abandoned all
woonted care, and taking her by the hand, gave place to other, the Queens of
England and Spain, walking with them along the Hall, to comfort these new
married folks with their good counsel. Next entered the Prince Polinarda, led
between the Empress of Allemaigne and the Queen of France, Palmerin going
before her accompanied with the Emperor Vernar, and the King Tarnes of
Lacedemonia: and next them came the fair Princess of Thrace, between the
Queen Francelina of Thessalie, and the Queen Flerida of England, they being
glad to see her matched with the Prince Florian of the Forest. After these two
noble English Princes had wedded their sweet friends, the Princes Gracian,
Berold, Platir, and all the other Prince and Knights, were espoused unto their
Ladies.

Then the new Queen of Thrace and the Princess Polinarda entered, leading
Arlencea between them, whose beauty showed very stately, being set forth by
the presence of these two Princesses: the Prince Primaleon and King Edward
accompanied the Giant Dramusiande, who was married to Arlencea with great
royalty. When they were departed the place, the Princess Miragarda humbly
entreated the Emperor, that he would give Cordigea, daughter to the Giant
Gatarin (she remaining in her service) in marriage to the Giant Almaroll:
whereto his master presently agreed, after he had understood the good will of
Cordigea, so he gave her himself (to honor the Princess Miragarda the more,)
to the Giant Almaroll. Of this Cordigea, you may read more at large, in the
second Book of the notable History of Don Edward of Britain.

The Giant Almaroll was Lord of another Fortress, not far from thence where
he had kept the Princess Miragarda, this Fortress being called Beauties
Bulwark: whereof he made a present to his espoused Lady Cordigea, on
condition she should call the Castle after her own name, but return we again
to our History.

As soon as the Archbishop had ended all these Ceremonies of these marriages,
the Emperor went into the Queen Flerides Chamber, where the dinner was
provided to honor these princes withal, and with the Ladies came in Florenda
and Graciana, the daughters of the king Arnede^: but German of Orleaunce,
being the affectionate servant of Florenda, thought himself unworthy to come
in presence, because he was counted but a subject to the king of France, yet
did the Emperor make such commendation of the knightly deeds of German of
Orleaunce, as the King granted him to marry with his Daughter Florenda, albeit
his Daughter Graciana found her self discontented, that she could not get a
husband, to joy with them for company. The feast was served with most
magnificall honor, and the new married Prince made such high account off, as it
was thought a heavenly life to be a married man: for Florendos, Palmerin,
Florian, Platir, and the other princes, were respected in the favor of the
Emperors and the Kings exceedingly, in like manner was Miragarda, Leonarda,
Polinarda, Sidelia, and all other Princesses, honored by the Empresses and the
Queens, most stately to behold. Oftentimes they would recreate themselves
thorough the City, to the no small delight and content of the Emperor: who
marking all his frien^s, and seeing the Prince Floraman absent from their
company, he demanded what was become of him? Some made answer, that he was a
little from the Palace, sitting mourning under a Tree.

Which when Florendos understood, he left the company and went to him, and
persuaded him to come and rejoice with them, Floraman returned him this
answer. Why do you travel your self so, Sir Florendos, to have him be
partners of the pleasures you enjoy, who has for ever lost his comfort? The
great good will I unfeignedly bear you, does not deserve you should so deal
with me, in that my sorrows would be ten times more, if I should do as you
would have me: therefore I desire you let me bear my grief quietly, seeing I
am he whom Fortune delights to torment continually. Florendos devised all
means possible, to change him from this conceit, but seeing his labor was
bestowed in vain, he returned to the Emperor, certifying him of the grief
wherein he had left the prince Floraman, at which news both the Emperor and
his friends were heavily passioned, and they continued in commending the
Prince Floraman, till the Gentlman Usher called to supper. When the supper was
ended, and the Tables withdrawn, these new merried Princes began to dance
after the Greekish manner: and when all the maskes and pastimes were done for
that night, each one went to his Chamber, to receive content with them, who had
caused them to endure so long trouble.

CHAP. LI.
How the Queen of Thrace was conveyed away by a strange adventure, while the
Knights continued the pleasure at Constantinople.
EAch of these Princes delighting himself with his sweet Lady, for whose sake
he had endured many sharp travails, at length determined (and so did diners
others, though they had not attained the ^ame felicity, yet to witness their
good will and affection to their friends) to ordain a general Tournament,
whereto came many strange Knights, who labored as much as in them lay, to show
their hardy valor to those Princes that appointed the Triumph. In the mean
while this sport continued, there arrived a Knight armed all in black, bearing
Deadly Hope, figured in his sheeld, his coat Armor black, and his horse and
Lance of the same color: by which sad habit every one coniectured, the small
joy this knight had of himself, nevertheless, such was his great fortune, as
for three days together, he remained victor against all that dealt with him.
At length, because he would not discover his name to the Judges of the field.
Florian and Florendos went to arm themselves, being very desirous to try the
Combat with this Knight. But Dramusiande persuaded them to the contrary,
giving them to understand that it was the Prince Floraman, whom king Edward and
his son Palmerin brought at last to the Emperor, when his excellency began to
comfort him, saying, that it was against reason he should afflict himself in
such sort, especially, for the thing he could not remedy. Moreover, by leading
his life so pensiuely, he should in the end not only shorten his own time,
but also offend the judgments of his especial friends, who would every one
be glad and feign to dissuade him from the greese that did torment: him to
which words the Prince Floraman thus replied.

I know well my gracious Lord, that the honor it pleases you to use me with
all, can never be recompensed by my deeds, much less can any satisfaction be
made in words: but this I beseech your Majesty consider, that the faithful
love I have always borne to my Lady Altea has such sovereign power over me,
as it will not suffer me to change this humor. And albeit I know she is dead,
to my no small grief and continual vexation: yet either shall my tears
revive her again, or bring my ghost to keep her company. Thus am I resolved
to remember my loss: in that my true love ought to remain to the end and in
the end, otherwise it is to be judged, but light and unconstant: therefore I
beseech your Majesty to suffer me in my complaints, for I am so well inured
with them now, as it is impossible for me to live any otherwise.

The Emperor and the Princes saw they travailed in vain, in persuading
Floraman to forsake his sorrowful kind of life, who taking his leave of the
Emperor, accompanied with king Edward, and the Prince Primaleon went to his
Chamber, but they bring not able to endure the sight of such heaviness,
returned presently to the Chamber of presence.

And after these Iousts and triumphs were ended, these Princes would ride
abroad with their Ladies into a Forest near the City, where they might
chase the wild Bore the Heart, and other beasts for their recreation: whereof
the Emperor was very glad, and taking his Coatch, he took his way to the
Forest in their company, where against their coming were set up very fair
Tents, and the Tables being covered, and all things ready for dinner, they sat
down to take their repast before they went to their sport.

Dinner being done, the Hunters came and certified the Emperor, how they had
found the mightiest wild Bore that ever was seen, upon which news the
Princes immediately arose from the Table, and mounting on their horses, they
rode with the Hunters to find the gain: and beginning to follow the Chase of
the Bore, every one liked of the pleasantness of the pastime, but this
sudden delight was mingled with a sudden mischance, as you may read in the
discourse following.

The Prince and Knights earnestly pursuing the (...) the Heavens began on a
sudden to be troubled* and is of darkness came upon them, as they could not
discern o^ other, so that their horses fumed and fretted exceedingly, veing
afraid by the thundering and lightning in the Air, as their Masters were glad
to forsake them and walk on foot.

Beside, in the Emperors Tent was such a marvelous brute and noise, as
Heaven and earth would have gone together: but that which did most of all abash
them in the Tent, was the wailing and pitiful voice of a woman, who was heard
to cry very grievously, calling for aid to the Knight of the Savage man. At
length it was known to be the Queen of Thracc, who could not be succored by
any of the knights present with the Emperor, because the darkness was such as
none could see her.

It was not long before this dark cloud amounted to the Skies again, making
such a noise at the departure, as Florian riding up and down maruailing
hereat, was at length advertised of the loss of the Queen: whereupon he took
his way to the Emperors Tent, finding his Majesty there in great fear and
heaviness, yet would he not give it over so, but rode presently into the
City, and having armed himself, he concluded to search through all Countries,
and not to rest in any place whatsoever, until he might hear some tidings of
her, for whose loss his heart was extremely passioned.

Many of his friends presented themselves to bear him company in travail, but
the Emperor would not agree thereto, fearing least the Turks would visit
Constantinople, before they returned again.

The Knight of the Savage man in as great grief as could be imagined, set
forward in his journey, and stayed not till he was hindered by the dark
night, which he was glad to pass at the root of a Tree in a Forest: but in
the morning he mounted on Horseback, and many days he wandered up and down
in strange Countries, yet not hearing news of her whom he would gladly meet
withal, at which froward chance he was maruellously abashed, so that he
intended to (...) shipping, to try if Fortune would that ways speed him (...)
better.

After he had embarbued himself, putting himself even unto the mercy of the
Seas, and so travailing to any place where the Mariners could wish him for his
best avail, one day above all other, he was assailed with an exceeding
tempest, the waves tossing the vessel in such sort, as sometime one would have
judged it had touched the firmament, and afterward would fall down as it were
to Hell: in which trouble, both the Pilot and Mariners were so disstraughted
of memory, as they could not devise in what parts, they should be, but even
run which way Fortune pleased, for the space of three days, at the end
whereof, they came to a mighty huge mountain, the top thereof seeming to touch
the clouds.

The Knight of the Savage man desirous to know what Country this was, caused
the Mariners to set him on shore, and for that the Mountain was not to be
traveled on Horse back, he went up on foot, coming at last to the other side
of the Mountain, where he entered a goodly fair Field, which was enclosed
round about with huge Rocks, like to that he passed at the entrance.

In the midst of this field was a strong and admirable Castle, both for the
beauty as also the height, being founded of the same Rocks as were about it,
at the gate of this Castle was hanged a Garland of Tryumphe, wherein letters of
Gold was written thus. This is the Palace of the Queen Melia.

The Knight of the Savage man seeing the gate open, took the boldness on him to
enter in: but when he beheld the marvelous height of the Halls and Chambers,
in this Castle belonging to the Queen Melia, he judged it to be the most
stately Mansion that ever he came in.

For I assure you, the Towers, Galleries, and other buildings were so
ingenuously carved out of the same Rock, as one would have thought the whole
Castle to have consisted of one piece, whereupon the knight of the Savage man
was much abashed, that this Fortress was unknown to the Knights of the
Emperors Court of Greece.

At length he thought good to visit this Castle further, because he saw at the
four corners thereof four gates, and the entrance into them was not forbidden
him by any: but he espied an other Gate, which was made fast with two great
stroug Chains of Iron, upon the Gate being engraued many ancient Histories,
which were unknown to the knight of the Savage man, and long he stayed not to
behold this Gate, for that he perceived he traveled iu vain, if he should
offer to enter in thereat. Theu passed he through one of the other Gates, and
came into a goodly great Hall, in the midst whereof was chased in Gold the
picture of an ancient woman, who had devised and caused that Castle to be
builded: this Monument was garnished on either side with goodly marble pillars,
and when he had behold this sufficiently, he passed to view the rest of the
Castle.

But turning him about to go forward, he espied hard by him a mighty Serpent
of Brass, fashioned and made so artificially, as it was a thing most strange
to behold, in that it was of such a monstrous highness, as it reached to the
very rafters that held up the couerture of the Hall.

This Serpent held his neck stretched out along, with his countenance so
vigorous and fearful, as (being made by very singular workmanship and
cunning) it was able to affright them that did behold it. But the Knight of the
Savage man (whose heart no terror or fearful motion could dismay) approached
to this Serpent, and having viewed very circumspectly, espied a key tied about
his neck with a Chain of Gold, the Chain being wound about his neck in a
great many foldes, whereupon he presently imagined, that in this key consisted
the principal adventure of this Castle, which when he had visited in many
places, he returned again to the brazen Serpent, to mark if this key would
serve to further him in his intent.

And as he came to take off the Chain with the key, he perceived in the
Serpents neck a little chinke or creuise, at which sight he began somewhat to
comfort himself, so that he took the key, and having the means to use it at
his own pleasure, he opened therewith a little window, which was made in the
Serpents neck, and looking in, he might discern the hollownesse of the
Serpent round about.

Then did he behold four Tapers of wax, which stood on four Candlestickes of
Silver, two of them placed toward the East, and the other two to the West, and
burning with a marvelous spendant brightness, yet the wax seemed not to
diminish any thing at all. Between these four lights was couched on a pallad,
the fair Leonarda Queen of Thrace, and his wife, and over her head hung a
fair Cannapy of green Velvet: at this sight the Knight of the Savage man was
so abashed, as he doubted whether he might give credit to this motion before
his eyes or no.

But when he had taken good view of her apparel, knowing it to be the very
same she had on when she was carried forth of the Forest, he persuaded
himself that it was she, whereupon he called aloud to her, desiring her to use
more regard unto him: but he was never a jot the nearer his purpose, for she
was enchaunted into such a sound sleep, as she had not the power to understand
him, which when the knight of the Savage man perceived, and being earnest in
the good will he bare her, he spoke to her after this manner.

Madame, what glory or contentment can my victories yield me, or the manifold
perilous adventures which I have happily finished, if you seem now to forsake
me in this present adversity, whereon both my honor and life depends.

Let this (good Madame) enter your courteous mind, how since your strange
departure from the Emperor of Greece. I have not failed to visit many
Provinces to find you out, and even at the very time when I was out of all
hope to find you, I chanced to the place where I may behold you, but yet to my
no small grief, in that I cannot come to you, neither will you vouchsafe to
hear me, in this extreme affliction of my poor heart.

Here pausing a while, he began to wax marvelous angry, when, setting his
hand to his Sword, and snatching it furiously forth of the sheath, he laid
many violent strokes on the Serpent, thinking to destroy it in pieces that he
might come to his Lady: but he was fa^re deceived in his intent, for the
Serpent was converted into a flame of fire, and passed so suddenly away, as the
Knight of the Savage man lost the sight of it clean.

Then fearing least his Lady should abide any cruel torment, because the
Serpent was so changed away into fire, he sat down on the ground in great
heaviness, curssing his ill fortune very bitterly, and intending never to
depart from this Castle, without he might have the company of his lady again.
But while he was in this perplexity, his Brother and friend the Sage Aliart,
(who would not forsake him in so great necessity) entered the Hall, attired
after the English manner, not having any Armor on him, for that he had not the
leisure to arm himself, so greatly he pitied the misfortune of his brother
Florian of the Forest: the Sage Aliart was no sooner come unto him, but he
saluted him with these speeches.

I perceive (Sir Knight) you have altogether forgotten me, and especially in
the place where you have most need of my help.

At these words the Knight of the Savage man presently arose, and embracing the
Sage Aliart in his arms, he returned him this answer. My Lord and Brother, I
am sure it is not unknown unto you, that one occasion of grief thoroughly settled
in the mind, causes the party so vexed to commit all things else to
forgetfulness: therefore me thinks you should not be offended, though you were
not in my remembrance, I being in such a sharp extremity, from which I desire
to be delivered by your aid.

Worthy sir (answered Aliart) he whose knowledge served him to bring the
Queen Leonarda in this place, has done it by such a marvelous means, as it
is impossible to recover her hence so speedily: but Fortune reserving you to
employ your valor, in adventures worthy most high renown, will not suffer his
intent that brought her hither, to be fully executed, but has ordained it in
such sort, as by my Art I shall end this cruel Enchantment: nevertheless, it
shall be necessary, that you keep me company, because your courage and strength
may much help in this case.

When he had thus said, he commanded the knight of the Savage man, to shut
the window, and hang the key in the place whence he took it, but first he
looked in to see the estate of the Queen Leonarda: and Florian, he labored
very bustly to extinguish the light of the Tapers, because he could not
suffer that their extreme shyninge brightness, should dazell his eyes when he
looked on his sweet Queen and wife, so that the light was some hinderance to
him when he thought to guard her excellent beauty: whereupon Aliart spoke thus
unto him.

I perceive well (my Lord) that you are ignorant of the verture of these
Tapers, whose light only maintains the life of your Queen Leonarda: for
look how soon they shall be extinguished or consumed, even so soon shall her
life be fully complete and ended.

After this communication, these two Knights went forth of the Castle, and so
soon as they were come into the open Field, the Air began to be exceeding
troubled, so that for a time a marvelous darkness ouer-shadowed them: yet at
last it cleared again, when the Knight of the Sauage-man was greatly abashed,
seeing himself deprived of the Sage Aliart, and no company with him but a huge
and monsterous Bull, who seemed as he had come to the top of the Rocks, upon
this Bulls neck the Knight of the Savage man cast himself, and he brought
him immediately into a dark and obscure Cave, where the Bull left him and
vanished away. All these fearful motions could not dismay this hardy knight,
for he did imagine them to be but only illusions, sent of purpose to hinder him
in his determination, therefore he would make no further account of them: but
looking about this Cave (the light somewhat increasing) he beheld the figures
and pictures of the most renowned knights that carried arms in the time of the
famous King Amadis.

There he might discern Esplandian among the Moors, a spectacle that
delighted him very much, and in the most hononrable place of all, stood Armato
the noble King of the Persians, having letters of Gold on his left shoulder,
which declared his name and famous progeny. While the Knight of the Savage
man, earnestly beheld these gallant Images, he perc,yued to enter the cave a
very aged woman, so weak and feeble with extremity of age, as she seemed ready
to fall to the earth, but when she looked on the Knight of the Savage man, she
started back in a great amazement, and crying out aloude, very pitifully
demanded aid and succor of the graven pictures, that they would help her to
conquer the Knight, that was come to violate and deface her Palace.

At the cry of the old Encauntresse, the Images began to stir themselves,
and lay hold on their Swoordes and Spears: but when the Knight of the Savage
man made offer to defend himself, they stood silent in their former estate,
and the old woman vanished out of sight. Whereupon the Knight of the Savage
man departed thence, coming to the Hall where the Serpent was, and there he
beheld the same old woman standing by the window, where he looked in and
beheld the Queen of Thrace his wife, which made him presently to conjecture,
how in that place was enclosed the remedy of his travails, whereto he would
very gladly attain, but it grieved him to show his force against a woman, who
thrust with her shoulders so strongly against the window, as at length it
opened and she went in: then turning to close the window again, it was made
fast again so ingeniously, as one could not judge by which way she made her
entrance.

The Knight of the Savage man could not choose but laugh, to see with what a
grace this old woman maintained her enchauntment, and coming to the window
where he judged the entered, he knocked and kept such a bounsing thereat, as
the old woman came and opened the window presenting her self before him,
accompanied with four Knights, who were clad in Armor very costly and
sumptuous and to them she declared, how the knight of the Desert sought to
destroy her ancient Palace.

These four Knights lifted up their Maces: but when the Knight of the Savage
man seemed to defend himself, both they and the old woman vanished away
incontinent. At these strange motions he could not choose but wonder, and
sitting down to view the bravery of the house, he perceived in the midst
of the Hall a Candlestick of Gold set on a Brazen pillar of very costly
workmanship, and in the Candlestick burned a goodly white wax Taper, whose
light showed after such a strange manner, as many wonderful occasions was
presented before his eyes, whereupon he imagined, how that Castle had not been
founded, but only to some marvelous and especial cause. When he had more
narrowly and circumspectly looked about the place, he beheld a number of Cofers
round about him, every Cofer having a key of Gold hanging at it, which made him
to open them one after another: where he found the Library of the Queen Melia,
and very gorgeous apparel belonging to a woman, which Melia had caused to be
made to give to her Couzin, the daughter of King Armato her brother, as the
knight of the Savage man found it set down in writing in the Library, which
when he gad read, he began again his woonted grief, seeing himself out of
hope to recover the Queen of Thrace his wife, in which affliction the Sage
Aliart presented himself before him again, entering into these speeches. My
Lord and brother, since you have done that which was ordained for you, refer
the rest behind to me, for in despite of the person that delights to torment
you thus, I will recover her whom you love so dearly. I know very well
(answered the knight of the Savage man) that you alone can restore me my
felicity: and if I should think otherwise, I were unworthy to have your
furtheraunce in this my extreme trouble.

CHAP. LII.
How by the aid of the Sage Aliart of the obscure Valley, the noble knight of
the Savage man, delivered out of the Enchauntment his wife the Queen of Thrace.
BEfore the Sage Aliart would deliver the Queen of Thrace out of the
Enchauntment, he desired to see all the places in the Castle, which when he had
viewed, he made no account of any thing, but only the Library, and because he
was well worthy of estimation, he made conueyance of all the Books (by his
Art) in the Perilous Isle, where he placed them among the Books of the Sage
Vrganda, of whom somewhat has been discoursed to you already, and all this
while the Knight of the Savage man rested himself, because his great travail
him so to do.

When the Sage Aliart had thus sent the books away, he took the Taper which
stood in the Candlestick of Gold, and spoke to the Knight of the Savage man,
in this manner. You shall understand (my Lord) that the life of the Queen
Leonarda, consists only in the virtue of this light, with which it is
impossible for us to save or redeem it: but in the despite of Targiana (who
is the only cause of this misfortune) I will so order the matter, as your
heart shall ere long receive his contentment, yet shall not the Sage
Enchauntresse (who brought her into this unhappy estate) have any power to
resist me in my determination. Thus concluding, he went unto the Serpent,
holding in one hand the fatal Candle, and in the other a little book, which he
found lying at the foot of a Marble Columbe: and while the Knight of the
Savage man opened the little door with the Key, the Sage Aliart read so
earnestly on his Book, as by the virtue of the words written in the Book,
the Tapers of wax which were in the Belley of the Serpen, begand to letse,
their light. But ^et they did not extinshuish altogether, for if they had been
put all at one instant, the life of the Queen of Thrace had been brought in
great danger for they were framed by such an artificial policy, as she
sweetly flumbred in life by the virtue of their light, yet was she deprived
of her nat^rall senses, but not a jot impeached of her singular beauty. So
soon as one of these Tapers had lost his light, the Sage Aliart lighted it
again with the Candle in his own hand, in which consisted a contrary mean to
help their purpose, for when it had burned to the very place where the
safeguard of her life was contained, the Queen of Thrace stretched out her
arms, as one awaking out of a sound sleep, and the Tapers being extinct and
lighted again, she started up on a sudden, Meruailing to see her self in
such a narrow place, and especially in the company of her Husband, the noble
Knight of the Savage man, who beheld her with the tears trickling down her
cheeks, knowing well, how it was strange to her to be in such a case.

The Sage Aliart seeing the Queen in such extreme heaviness, he rehearsed to
her how all things had happened, assuring her that the Emperors Court was in a
general sadness by her absence: he also certified her, how the knight of the
Savage man departed the same day from Constantinople in her search, whereat she
grieved very much, for she was of the opinion, that what person soever happened
into that place, should be brought into such danger, as he might not easisy get
out of it again. The knight of the Savage man, who could not endure to see his
Lady shut up so long in the serpents belly, desired the Sage Aliart to deliver
her out of that extremity: upon which words the Sage Aliart the candle into
one of the serpents nostrels, which made him to lespe, and cast fire forth of
his mouth so abundantly, as one would have thought the Hall would have shaken
in pieces, so great was the noise the serpent made. The Queen Leonarda was so
amazed with this fearful motion, as she was brought again into her former
perpletitie, at which sight the Knight of the Savage man was moved
exceedingly, so that he came and embraced the Sage Aliart, humbly desiring him
to help now or never. Then Aliart approached to the serpent, and thrusting his
arm in at the little door, he quenched the light of the Tapers, which being
done, the serpent stood indifferently quiet, but the knight of the Savage man
was not pleased with all this wherefore he began afresh to entreat his brother,
that he would pity the distressed case of his Queen and wife: It is not to
be said how well pleased the Sage Aliart was, seeing his Brother Florian so
earnestly affected to the Queen of Thrace, remembering the small estimation he
was wont to make of women, and now that he was become such a faithful and
reverent subject to the God of love. After that he had thoroughly recounted all
these matters to himself, he fell to reading on his look ahaine so devoutly,
as at length the Queen of Thrace came forth of the Serpent, so ravished
inwardly in delight when she beheld her loving lord and husband before her, as
she ran and caught him in her arms marvelous joyfully, thinking thus with her
self, that his valor was sufficient to end any adventure whatsoever: and so
pleasant was the Knight of the Savage man, having his sweet wife and Queen in
his arms, as he thought himself the only happy man of the World. After they
had delighted themselves thus so long as they pleased, the Prince and the Sage
Aliart went to show the singularities of this Castle to the Queen Leonarda,
bringing her where the stately Pillars of Marble were, and likewise the gallant
Library of the Queen Melia, where the rich robes and stately apparel were
presented to her view, which she desired as her own immediately, thinking that
so she should be fully recompensed for her passed misfortunes, if so be these
sumptuous garments might be bestowed on her, that she might carry them with her
to Constantinople.

This earnest motion of hers, provoked the two Knights to depart this place,
the Sage Aliart giving her to understand; that it was not uecessary her mind
should be fulfilled in that request, neither could she carry any thing thence,
albeit we liked it never so well, by reason that these rich vestures were
reserved for one of the Queen Meliaes Daughters, who in beauty should excel
all of her time. The knight of the Savage Man, was somewhat moved with these
words, fearing he should not long enjoy his Queen and Wife: but the Sage
Aliart seeing these two Lovers restored to their liberty, took his leave of
them to travel to Constantinople, where his presence was long desired and
looked for, and he gave charge to the knight of the Savage man, that he would
come thither with all speed possible, because his friends might be greatly
furthered by his company.

But to let you understand by what occasion the Queen of Thrace was thus
enchanted, the History discourses, how the Princess Targiana could not forget
her anger and heavy displeasure toward the knight of the Savage man, but daily
thyrsting and desiring for reuengement, entertained as partner in her purpose
an Enchantresse, whose dwelling was in the Realm of Persia, named Drusia
Velonna. Targiana expecting the time when she might open her intent to this
Enchauntresse, Drusia at length consented to fulfill her mind, and one day when
the Princess was bathing her self at a Fountain, Drusia came suddenly to
her through the window of an high Tower, and presenting her self so straungely
before her, the Princess Targiana was so amazed and frighted thereat, as she
called to her servants to come and help her. But Drusia revealing her self,
the Princess was quickly removed from this fear: whereupon, she rehearsed
her earnest desire to be revenged on the knight of the Savage man, requesting
her favor and furderaunce in the cause. The Enchauntresse being one that loved
the Princess well, and was glad to compass any thing that might yield her
content, spoke unto her in this manner.

Madame, I have well pondered the matter wherewith you have made me acquainted,
and have devised the means to releaue your ouercharged and troubled thoughts,
and very eas^y might we be revenged on the knight of the Savage man, if it were
not for his brother the Sage Aliart of the Obscure Valley, whose great
experience and knowledge may be some hinderance to us: nevertheless, I have
found out one practice, whereby you may bring him into great trouble and
danger. Oh Velon^a (quoth Targiana) it is the only thing I desire, to hinder
or offend him by any way whatsoever. You know well Madame (answered Drusia
Velonna) that he is but slenderly affected to them, who notwithstanding love
him with most especial good will, yet is he so amorous of the Queen of Thrace
his Wife, as it is not possible for any man to be more, wherefore I intend to
convey her into such a secret place, where the Sage Aliart shall have no power
to help her, until the Empire of Greece be all poyled and brought to
confusion, neither shall the knight of the Savage man be able to find her,
but shall spend his time in seeking after her, yet shall his labor be bestowed
to no such end* she would. Targ^ana was very well contented with that the
Enchauntresse had told her, whereupon she enchaunted the Queen of Thrace, in
the manner as I have declared to you already.

Afterward she returned to the Princess Targiana, whom she likewise conducted
by her Art to the Castle of the Queen Melia, at what time Albayzar was gone
unto Babylon: and when Targiana had sufficiently pleased her self, beholding
the rare and strange alteration of the Queen of Thrace, she desired Drusia, to
shut the door, and to hang the Key at the chain about the Serpents neck,
whereupon Targiana departed thence to the place of the Great Turk her Father,
and afterward took her Journey into Persia, being of the opinion, that the
Sage Aliart could not help the pitiful estate of the Queen of Thrace. In the
Castle of Melia, she remained thus Enchaunted, until the Knight of the Sauadge
man, and the Sage Aliart met together and delivered her: But now we will
return to the Prince Albayzar, who is coming to lay Siege to the City of
Constantinople, whither the Knight of the Sauadge man traveled speedily, for
that it were against reason, that such a Noble and redoubted Knight, should be
absent from the place, where his dearest Friends were assembled together.

CHAP. LIII.
Of that which the Christians did in the City of Constantinople, at what time
the Princess Targiana sent tidings to the Court of the Emperor Palmerin, of
the coming of his Enemies.
IT is rehearsed in the Chronicle of the Emperor Palmerin, how the Kings of
England, Spain, France, Lacedemonia, and Thessalia, were desirous to depart to
their several Kingdoms, after the Triumphs and sports for the Marriages of
their Friends were somewhat ouerblowne and past.

And even as they were preparing themselves to their journey, Fortune (who
would make them partners of y^ Emperors dangers toward) presented them with
such occasions, as they were constrained to break off their former
determination, in that the Princess Targiana sent news at the very same
instant to the Emperor, of the huge Navy which Albayzar had prepared to
besiege Constantinople withal.

Moreover, she gave to understand, how the Army of the Great Turk her
Father, was (as then) arrived in the Port of Armenia, and stayed but only for
the Wind: likewise, that the Turk her Father, had appointed Albayzar chief
captain General of his Army, because he surpassed all the other in valor
and courage.

The report of this Army, caused great astonishment in many, and chiefly to
them, who were not able to endure the travel of Arms, and the Emperor
Palmerin himself was so ouercharged with years, as that he could not walk
out of his Chamber, yet was he able to comfort and encourage his dearest
Friends with good Counsel, whereby their troubled minds were greatly cased.

Primaleon, who was naturally given to be courageous and bravely minded, did
not make account of any misfortunes that might happen to him, and the rather
because the valiant Princes and Knights in his company, could not be summoned
at a better time, to witness their Nobility. The Kings Court, sent to ^he
Governors of their Realms and Signories, that they should leuey what power
they could possible, and come thither to them, with all speed to assist them.

CHAP. LIIII.
How the Enemies sent an Ambassador to the Emperors Court, and of the answer
which was made him.
AFter the manner as I have declared to you already, the Emperor provided for
the entertaining of his Enemies, and as his Majesty was aduising himself
about these Affairs, he was advertised, that an Ambassador was arrived at the
Port of the City, who demanded safe conduct, before he would come on
shore. His Majesty (with the counsel of the Kings and Princes) was content to
grant his request: Whereupon the Ambassador took Landing, and being
accompanied with four Knights, he took his way to the Emperors Palace.

The Kings and Princes determined, that the Ambassador should rehearse the
cause of his arrival to the Prince Primaleon, before they would suffer him to
come into the Emperors presence: but diverse of them were of a contrary
opinion, affirming that the presence and noble Answer of the Emperor himself
would more daunte and terrify the Enemy, then all they were able to do.

Upon this determination they were agreede, and the Emperor was brought in his
Chair into the great Hall, where the Ambassador stayed, who having viewed the
strength of the City, knew well they should bestow good labor before they
could conquer it. The Emperor according to his mild and Noble nature,
received the Ambassador from his enemy very graciously, and after the Kings
and Princes were in their due and appointed places, and a general silence
amongst them all, the Ambassador began in these speeches.

Illustrious and most puissant Emperor, I could wish to see thee in the
Flourishing estate of thy years, as well to be a participate of many troubles,
imminent to them that dare take upon them to defend thy Empire, as also to
enlarge the contentment of them, who shall be so happy as to gain the
victory in the field of Battle, which is now presented to thy Majesty.

I am to let thee understand, that Albayzar the great Sultan of Babylon, and
Prince of Turkey, accompanied with other Soldans, Kings, and puissant Princes,
has sent me to thee, to let thee know, that they are determined with their
strength and power to besiege this City, to revenge the death of many their
especial Friends, who received their dishonor before this City.

Nevertheless, the Soldane Albayzar, having not forgotten the gracious
courtesy thou did sometimes use toward Oloricque, Alchidiana, and the
Princess Targiana, has thus concluded (fearing to be noted of ingratitude) to
make thee this offer: either to surrender the City of Constantinople, and the
knight of the Savage man, King of Thrace thy Nephew, into his hands, or depart
and leave thine Empire, subject to his power, without offering any resistance
to his determination.

On this condition he will not bring his Army into thine Empire, and he
thinks it more necessary for thee, rather to loose one City then the whole
Empire, and better it were for thee to deliver one man into his hands, then to
see the death of a number thy especial Friends. To which words the Emperor
thus answered. My Friend, I can hardly endure to let thee pass any further in
speeches, but I must needs answer you thus: that I account it well for my
profit to follow his counsel in this matter, if by the sending him one man, I
may make sure account of the safety of the rest.

But if that one man be found so good a Knight, as his Valor is sufficient to
redeem the Captivity of all the other, I must not be so forgetful of my
honor, as to render a State of assurance to your Lords mercy: Besides, it
were a thing much against reason and duty, to yield that City into the
hands of Heathen Infidells, where the true God is to be worshipped in spirit
and truth.

And truly I cannot but marvel much, that he should offer to come thus into
my Empire, considering what promises has past between him and me: for I was
of the opinion, that I should rather be furthered by his aid and assistance,
then hindered or impeached thus maliciously. But for all this, my trust is in
GOD, that I shall prepare his grave before the Walls of this City, as I have
done already to many of his Predecessors, who without regard of their own
Honor, or my courtesy, have come to assail me in this manner.

I perceive then my Lord (answered the Embassa^our) that because Fortune has
daily favored you to this present, you will not dread the misfortunes
whereinto you may suddenly fall: therefore I intend to return with this
answer to my Lord who sent me.

So taking his leave, he returned to his Galley where it lay at Anckor, being
accompanied with many Princes and Lords of the Emperors Court: and after they
had given him a very friendly Farewell, his Galley set forward with such
expedition, as in short time it came to the rest of the Army.

CHAP. LV.
How the Army of the Great Turk arrived in the Port of Constantinople, and of
the noble and valiant prowess of the Christians, before they would suffer the
Pagans to take Landing.
THe Ambassador from Albayzar, to the Soldane of Babylon, being thus departed,
the Emperor Palmerin called together all the Princes and Nobles in his Court
to give present order to every one, that they should with all the best speed
possible, provide themselves in Arms, to forbid the entrance of the Enemy,
and to have good regard to the affairs of the City, and safety of the same,
which was committed to the Guard of the Emperor Vernar, and the King Polendos,
accompanied with a thousand five hundredth Knights on Horseback, and four
hundredth Footmen. King Edward of England was chosen by General consent,
chief Captain and Governor of the Field, having under his conduct two
thousand Knights, beside the Giant Dramusiande, who by his Noble behavior in
that expedition, won very great estimation.

Maiortes, Pridos, the Duke of Galls, Don Rosiande de la Bronde his Son,
Argolant the Duke of Horten, Pompides, and fifty Knights, that were come in
their company: So dividing their Knights into four parts, they were in number
eight thousand, and to every thousand was a General Captain.

Arnedes King of France, had the ordering of five hundred, being attended on
likewise by his Sons, Gracian, Guerin, and German of Orleance, beside fifty
good and hardy French Knights. A thousand five hundred more were conducted by
Recinde King of Spain, the Princes Berolde and Onstalde his Sons awayting on
him, with the Giant Almaroll, and one hundredth Spanish Knights. The Soldane
Bellagris was Captain over four hundred Knights, being his own Subjects, and
for the guard of his own person, he had provided one hundred of the chiefest
knights of his Court, among whom was his Son Blandidon, whose noble behavior
deserved commendations. To Belcar Duke of Pontus and Durace, was committed the
like charge, as to the Kings Recinde and Arnedes, having for the Guarde of his
own person, Don Rosuell, and Bellizart his Sons.

To the King Tarnaes of Lacedemonia, (who was an Ancient and noble Prince) was
given the Guard of the Palace, and for the more security of the Empress, and
the other Queens and Ladies, he had attending on him two hundred Knights.
Primaleon was chosen Lord General for the City, having in his charge seven
hundred Knights, wherewith he had regard as well to the Field as to the
City.

Palmerin, Florendos, Platir, and diverse other Knights, had the charge of the
utter wings of the Army, as lost children* to give succor where they
perceived most necessity. Thus was the Emperors Court well stored with noble
and renowned Knights, yet his Majesty and King Edward greatly desired the
presence of the Prince Florian of the Forest, in whose absence both the
Horsemen and Footmen, were ordained as I have already declared.

On the next morning* King Edward commanded to strike up Allarum, for he was
given to understand, that the Enemy was within half a league of the City,
and that they prepared themselves to take landing, and the Emperor caused
himself to be carried up into a high Tower of his Palace, because he would
see how Fortune disposed of his happiness.

King Edward was no sooner arrived where the Enemy was, but he placed his
Army on the Sea-shoare, to hinder the Enemy from coming on Land: but therein
he was deceived, for the multitude of the Galleys and Ships were such, as it
was impossible for him to do as he would.

Albayzar, who was accompanied with the most renowned knights of his Army, and
two the most ougly and fearful Giants that ever were seen, made offer to
take Landing first of all: but they of the Emperors Court stepped before them*
and entertained them in such sort, as diverse both of Turks and Christians
were very dangerously wounded.

Albayzar was so offended, because he could not have liberty to get forth of
his Galley, as he commanded the Giants to step into the Water, to whose
commandment they pre^ently obeyed, and with their Ma^es of Iron they began so
to break through the pre^sse, and they which before hindered Albayzar from
coming on shore, began to give place, as it were for his landing. Which when
Dramusiande perceived, he stepped into the water up to the nauill, and covering
himself with his shield, he encountered the Giant that advanced himself
foremost, and king Edward leaped into the Sea, to hinder the other Giant from
dealing with Dramusiande: but while these four were thus encountering together,
the other knights of the Emperors Court seeing their Captain on foot, began
to follow after, so that Albayzar was constrained to come near the Giants,
because they thought he would want his aid.

Palmerin of England being busy on the other side, seeing the Horses round
about the field without their masters, doubted least some misfortune had fallen
to his friends, whereupon he gave his horse the spurs, and galloped to the
place where he saw the greatest bickering: and seeing King Edward his father
standing in the sea, dealing with such an ougly and monsterous Giant, he
presently came to him, and stepping before him, entered into these speeches.

I desire you my gracious Lord and father, to give over this enemy, and give
succor to your friend Dramusiande, for if any misfortune should happen to you,
your loss would be grieved through all Christendom.

King Edward esteeming light the words of his Son, would not leave the Giant,
so greatly he desired to remain victor: but the necessity wherein he
perceived diverse of his friends, caused him to step back, and give place to
the Noble Palmerin of England. Albayzar behaved himself in such brave manner,
as diverse were glad to shun his presence: which when Florendos beheld, he
advanced himself to him, and such knightly prowess was shown on either side,
as between them began a cruel and dangerous combat. Dramusiande prevailed so
well against his enemy the Giant, as he tumbled down dead before him: but
himself was sore wounded, as King Edward commanded him to be carried into the
City.

And Palmerin of England slew the other Giant likewise, which his father left
him fighting withal: but himself was so dealt withal, as in five days after
he could wear no Armor.

Albayzar no sooner perceiving the Giants slain, but he presently retired into
his galley, and so did diverse of the Turks beside, but when Edward saw the
Turks betake themselves to their Galleys again, he mounted on horseback,
giving a sign to his company, to withdraw themselves, desiring the Soldane
Be^lagris, the King Arnedes, the King Recinde, and the Prince Belcar (who were
dealing with another Vessel that sought to take landing) to follow him: but
they gave him to understand how Florendos, Platir, Blandidon, and the Giant
Almaroll, were carried into the City so sore hurt, as they were not able to
sustain themselves.

The King Recinde, Palmerin, and Belcar, were likewise grievously wounded,
which made king Edward desire them to go into the City, and in the mean
while Primaleon entered the field, accompanied with seven hundred knights,
desiring earnestly, that King Edward and his train, would withdraw themselves,
that they might come with a fresh assault on the enemy. But King Edward would
not suffer it should be so, therefore they altogether went into the City,
being very much grieved, that the principal knights of their Army so sore
wounded.

CHAP. LVI.
Of the grief and sorrow made in Constantinople, for the dangerous estate
wherein the Giant Dramussande was brought: And how the Turks placed their Camp
before City of Constantinople.
WHen the Emperors Captains were thus come into the city with their trains,
they passed the night in vsiting them that were so sore wounded: at whose ill
luck, Primaleon greatly grieved, for he judged the want of their help to be
such, as he was out of hope to defend the enemy from entering on land the next
day. And most of all, for that Palmerin of England, Florendos, the King
Recinde, Belcar, Berold, Don Rosuel, and Bellizart were in such case, as they
could not endure to bear Arms again so soon. Upon this he concluded to let
the enemies take landing, and to suffer them to b^ild their Tents, and provide
for the field, in the mea^e while the wounded persons would be in better
disposition, and the succor they looked for would be likewise arrived,
wherewith they had good hope to bid the enemy a brave battle, in the mean
time, they daily gave Albayzar and his company sundry assaults. King Edward
going to visit the wounded persons, found the Prince Palmerin talking with the
fair Polinarda, whose company made him forget the grief of his hurts, for in
her alone consisted the only medicine to restore his health: in like manner he
found Florandos and Miragarda, Platir, and Sidelia, Polendos and Francelian,
Berolde and Onistalda of Normandy, Gracian and Claritia, Don Rosuell and
Dramatiana, Bellizant and Den^sa, Francian and Bernarda, Guerin and Clariana,
and diverse others of the Knights, with them to whom they bare most affection.

But Dramusiande was not in like case as these fortunate Lovers were, for his
wounds were so yangerous, as he could not enjoy the sweet company of his best
beloved Arlencea, toward whom he remained marvelous affectionate: so that I
assure you, the Emperor and all of his Court were so sorry for his misfortune,
as if the City it self had been brought into extreme danger.

King Edward whose mind was not on such pleasure, as he made any account of
rest or quietness, kept his friend Dramusiande company, having his wife and
Queen Flerida with him, only to comfort the heavy and pensive estate of
Arlencea, whose sad case may be easily judged by young married lovers.
Florendos and Miragarda, visited the Giant Almaroll, whose danger almost was in
the same estate with Dramusiande: yet he was able to walk, and behave himself
more pleasant in company then the other, whose case was pitied and lamented of
all in general.

Soon after arrived there the Sage Aliart, by whose presence the former
fearful and uncertain doubts were somewhat calmed, in that he certified the
Emperor, how Florian would not be long absence from thence: which news did
much joy his Majesty, as he caught the Sage Aliart in his arms, and embraced
him with a gracious countenance.

Then came the Empress to entertain him with the same favor, the like did
Bazilia the Empress of Allemaigne, Gridonia, Polinarda, and the other
princesses and Ladies: among whom the Queen Flerida was most glad of his
presence, as well to perceive the love King Edward her husband bare him, as
also, because he had sundry times preserved the live of his Children by his
knowledge.

The same day came to the Emperors Court the Prince Floraman, who travailed to
find the Prince Florian of the Forest, and being advertised how the enemies
had laid siege at Constantinople, he left his Realm of Sardignia giving charge
to the Governors he had left there, that they should leuey a great Army with
all expedition, and send them after him to Constantinople, as you may read more
at large hereafter. The same day likewise there arrived King Estrellant of
Hungaria, accompanied with two thousand horsemen, and ten thousand footmen,
being under the conduct of the Prince Frisoll his Son.

Albayzar was greatly grieved at the loss of his men, wherefore he gave charge
to his Chirurgions in his camp, that they should be careful and respective
to them which were wounded, and commanded the ^laine to be buried. And when
all things were accomplished that he thought expedient, he called the
principal estates of his army to council, with whom he concluded, that all
persons should be vigilant and careful of themselves that night, because the
next morning he should take landing, at a certain watchword he would give
them.

The day had no sooner chased away the uncomfortable and obscure night, but the
Ships, Galleys, Brigandines, Ga^^ots, and other provision for war, took
landing about a league distance from Constantinople, being not hindered or
forbidden by any: whereupon they sounded the drums, trumpets, cornets,
clarions, and other instruments, wherewith they made such a triumphant noise,
as the people in the City were much amazed thereat.

The Sage Aliart and Floraman, desiring to see the Camp of the enemy,
requested the Emperor, that he would license them to go thither, which his
Majesty would not grant to any: yet had he such assurance in the knowledge
of the Sage Aliart, as in what place soever he was, he needed not to fear him.
These two knights thus departed the City, being armed with no other defense
but only their swords, and because the day was fair and clear, they betook
themselves to a little hill, where they might at pleasure discern the enemies
Army. Diverse thought it good to scout out and take them, because by them they
might understand the strength of the City, but Albayzar would not grant it
should be so: wherefore he sent an Esquire unto them (who attended on him when
he was in the Emperors court) to let them understand, that if they would come
near and see his Camp, he, who was then in authority to command them, was
such an indifferent friend unto them, as they might come and depart without any
danger.

These two knights gave such credit to the message Albayzar sent them, as they
went in the Esquiers company, which Albayzar perceiving, he came forth (with
two Pages in very rich apparel, attending on him) to receive them. Afterward
he went with them through the Camp, because they should see the mighty
strength thereof, and he declared to them the names of the Princes in his
companay, among whom were very many Giantes, as terrible and ouglie as they
which were slain by Dramusiande and Palmerin of England.

All this while Albayzar had diligent regard to these two Christian Knights, to
see if all this sight he had shown them could discourage them with fear or
doubt of their Welfare: but they contained such a stout and undaunted
countenance as they seemed to disdain those occasions, which Albayzar thought
should most dismay them, whereat he did not a little marvel.

After they had seen the whole Army, Albayzar accompanied hem very near the
City, desiring them to salute the Emperor and Empress from him: then taking
his leave courteously of them, he returned ^o his Camp, and they walked on
very sadly, especially, the Sage Aliart, who having foreseen what would
happen, could not hide the sorrow he conceived in his mind. Nevertheless,
they behaved themselves pleasantly at their entrance into the City, because
they would not discourage the minds of the people: but when they were come to
the Palace, and into the Emperors presence, the Prince Floraman* by the
commandment of his Majesty) entered into these speeches.

My gracious Lord, the riches which your enemies has brought before your
City, were incredible in rehearsal, for if I should take upon me to make
rehearsal thereof, I should wast a great deal of time, which I may apply to
better purpose, in certifying your excellency of your enemies strength:
wherefore this is to let your Majesty understand, that your enemies can be no
less in number then two hundred thousand, the very simplest whereof, carries
such a bravery of mind, as he will abide the Feeld to the latest hour of
death.

The King of Aetolia, being thirty years of age, has the conduct this day of
them which are under his charge, being ten thousand Horsemen, and forty
thousand Footmen, so bravely armed, as surely I must of necessity commend them.

But above all the rest, the pride of the Prince Albayzar does much amaze me,
for no small estimation he made of your puissance, as himself gave us the
sight of his whole Army, granting the like assurance to any of your Court,
as he did to us, if so be they will desire to see his Garrison, a thing which
I have diligently noted, and which cannot greatly profit himself: as for the
rest whereof perhaps I may be forgetful, my good Lord the Sage Aliart can
at large discourse unto your Highness.

You have beh^ued your selves so well my Friends (said the Emperor) as it is
not possible for any other to bring us a more certain assurance in this cause:
wherefore, it is necessary that we enter into council, how we may avoid the
enterprise of Alb^yzar and his Soldiers.

And I am content that he shall likewise see our City, so that charge be
given to our Captains, to behave themselves with such circumspection, as our
Enemies may not get any sudden advantage against us.

When the Emperor had set down this for a determination, the Princes betook
themselves to their several charges, that they might better respect the
practi^es of the Enemy.

CHAP. LVII.
Of that which Albayzar did, after he had well provided for his Army; and of
the succor which came to the Emperor Palmerin.
ALbayzar, providing for the strength of his Army, caused such Trenches and
Rampires of Defense and Fortification to be made round about his Camp, as they
were imagined sufficient to withstand and resist any furious Battery
whatsoever. And for that he would have some knowledge of the valor of his
Enemies, he appointed his principal Captain in places of importance, for most
assurance of his Camp, and afterward by the consent of his Council, he set
his Galleys and Ships on fire, reserving but a certain number of his swiftest
Brigandines: So that the sight of the F^re made such astonishment in
Constantinople, as they fully resolved and determined to hazard their lives,
or to subdue the pomp and glory of their enemies, seeing they presumed so much
on themselves.

The Emperor sitting in his Chair in one of the Turrets of his Palace,
perceived very well, that he should not drive his Enemies out of his Empire,
without the great effusion of Blood, and loss of his Friends. For the space of
seven days they continued burning their Ships, leaving themselves destitute
of provision to depart from thence, if Fortune should oppose her self against
them, and at the end of seven days, they of Constantinople began to skyrmish.

The wounded Princes had recovered their former estates, except Dramusiande,
and the Giant Almaroll: yet the Chirurgions assured the Emperor, how the
greatest danger was past, and they likely to do well enough. In the mean
while as King Edward and Primaleon endeavored themselves to fortify the City,
the Governors of those Realms belonging to the Kings present in
Constantinople, sent such good provision of strength and forces as they could
possibly make ready on the sudden, but I will rehearse them unto you who had
(in this necessity) chiefest succor sent them, from their Kingdoms and
Signories.

First of all, the Emperor Ve^nar of Allemaigne, had sent him two thousand
Horsemen, and twelve thousand Footmen, King Arnedes of France, had the like
number. Recinde King of Spain, had two thousand light Horsemen, and eight
thousand Footmen. The Prince Floraman had four hundred Horsemen, and four
thousand Footmen. Tarnaes King of Lacedemonia, had four hundred Horsemen, and
four thousand Footmen.

From Thrace, to honor their King Florian of the Forest, came four hundred
knights on Horseback, and four thousand Footmen. From England came four
hundred knights and ten thousand Footmen. From Navarre came two hundred light
horsemen. From Denmark came two hundred light Horsemen.

Drapo the Duke of Normandy, came thither with two thousand Knights on
Horseback, and four thous^nd brave Footmen. To the Prince Belcar, came four
hundred Horsemen, and one thousand Footmen. Roramant King of Bohemia, sent
four thousand Footmen.

Estrellant arrived there, accompanied with eight thousand and four hundred
gallant Knights on Horseback, and ten thousand hardy fighting men on foot:
who joining with them of the City, were in number twenty thousand Horsemen,
and threescore thousand Footmen.

The Emperor and his Counsel appointed, that they which were thus come to
assist him, should rest themselves for certain days, because they had
sustained a weary Journey, so that during the time, the wounded persons were
able to bear Armor, with the aid of these, they gave Battle to their enemies.

CHAP. LVIII.
Of an adventure which happened, by the arrival of a strange Knight
accompanied with a Lady, in the Prince Albayzars Camp.
WHile they that were come to the succor of the Emperor reposed themselves,
the young Princes and Knights of the Court of Constantinople, gave the Enemy
sundry Assaults and skirmishes, prevailing always so happily, as the
advantage still came on their side. During the time they skirmished in this
manner, the Emperor with the Empress and her Ladies, being on a high Tower to
see these brave Attempts, they perceived to enter the City toward the
Enemies Camp, a Knight that seemed to have so good opinion of himself, being
mounted on a brave and gallant Courser, and himself attired in guylte Armor,
whereon was wrought diverse Ingenious knottes and Devises in silver, beside,
his Armor was bloody in many places, which gave sufficient testimony, that the
Knight daily enjoyed but little rest, and in his Shield was Love artificially
figured, being roughly held by the hair of the head, by a bloody minded
Tyrant.

This Knight seemed to carry his Lance as it were on the neck of his Horse,
and having on the point thereof a little white Ensign, which he wore in sign
of Peace and quietness. His Esquire bare another Shield after him, covered
over with the skin of a wild Beast, and another Lance in his hand, by him
rid a Lady on a black Palfray, she being attyred after the Turkish manner, in
a Robe of white Sattine, which was cut and pinked in many places, so that the
Black silks lying under the white, gave a very brave grace unto her Apparel,
because the body and sleeves was very thick beset with Pearls and stones of
great estimation. This Ladies hair was spread abroad over her shoulders, and
her face was covered because she would not be known.

So soon as the Knight was come near the Prince Albayzars Tent, he stayed for
a pretty space, whereat the Turks were somewhat abashed, because they knew not
on which part this Knight should be, in that they judged him by his Armor to
be a Christian, and the Apparel of the Lady being Turkish, they could not
imagine any certainty in this case. In the mean while the Princes in the
Camp were thus regarding and beholding the Knight, they perceived him to send
his Esquyre to the Prince Albayzars Tent, having his Face covered, least he
should be known, when he began his mind in this manner.

My Lord, the Knight which you see presumes so near your Camp, by me gives
you to understand, that he has many years served the Lady in his company,
yet not able to win or once enjoy her Love: and for that she could not well
drive him off with any more delays or excuses, she desired him to bring her
unto this place, where he must Enterprise to Io^st against four Knights on her
behalf. And if it so fall out, that Fortune favors him with the victory,
she will not fail to requite his labor with her Love: but if the Knights in
your Camp shall refuse to try their valors against him, she has given him
leave to offer the same conditions to the Emperors Knights in Constantinople,
where, if refusal be made likewise, the Lady must consent to recompense him,
as if he had vanquished, where she made the challenge. Therefore my Lords, you
may determine with your selves, which of you dare make trial of the valor of
this Knight.

I would gladly know, said the Soldane of Persia (who was a gallaunt young
Prince, and very brave in Armor) what recompense the Knight will make him, to
whom the victory may happen? You shall then my Lord (answered the Esquyre) send
him your own Esquier, for I have reported to you what was given me in charge.

So, without any more words he returned to his Master, accompanied with an
Esquyre from the Soldane of Persia, to whom the Knight that came with the
Lady, made this answer. I see well my Friend, that the request of thy Lord
stands with good reason, wherefore thou may (...) say unto him, that if thy
misfortune be such* as that any of these four Knights chance to unhorse me,
I will not fail to deliver him my Horse and Armor: Besides, I will show
obeisance to any he shall command me, on condition that this Lady may remain
at her liberty, to do what she shall imagine convenient for herself. (...)
Pagan Princes were as well contented as could be with this good offer of the
Knight, wherefore they ordained to Ioust against the four young King, who
were very bravely and gallantly attyred in rich and costly Armor. The first of
them was the king of (...): the second, the king of Trebisond: the th^rd, the
king of Caspia: and the fourth, was the hardy Soldane of Persia.

King Edward, Recinde, Arnedes, Palmerin of England, and Dramusiande departed
from the City of Constantinople, (with a safe Conduct from the Prince
Albayzar) to see these Iousts: to them came Albayzar mounted on horseback
being unarmed, except only a Lance which he carried in his hand, being
accompanied with ^iue other Princes and a Giant. When they were (...) near the
Princes that came from the City, Al^^yzars saluted them very graciously: but
the Knight that came with the Lady, spoke to them in the Greek tongue, that
they should apply their minds to other affairs, (...) to wast the (...) in
saluting them, whom they could not affect (...) favor or friendshyp: when he
had thus said, he returned to the Lady, and provided himself to enter the
Ioust.

It seems to me (said Albayzar) that the Knight no doubt, is both hardy and
valiant, because he makes show of such a brave (...): Wherefore I think it
best that we accord to his will, rather then abide the danger of our own
lives. So concluding he granted the first Ioust to the king of Tr^b^zonde, who
was mounted on a goodly ^aye Courser, his Armor of green color, and in his
Shield was figured in a field of Sinople, a Giant slain, in witness that
he conquered him nobly in a Combat.

After the King of Trebisund had taken his leave of Albayzar, he presently ran
against the strange Knight, but he encountered him with such force, as his
Lance slew in pieces up into the Air: nevertheless, the king of Trebisond
sped so unfortunately as he was sent to measure his length on the ground, so
fore shaken and amazed, as he was same to be ^arried forth of the Field. In
the mean while the Knight rid to the Lady, who was very glad that he had sped
so well, the king of Caspia presented himself in the Field, being in Carnation
Armor, and a Hart^^ Silver portrayed on his Shield, in a field of Sable: he
gave his horse the spur^es against the Knight, but he was sent to keep the
king of Trebisond company. Which the king of Bithinia perceiving (he being
armed like the king of Caspia) ran against the strange Knight valiantly, and
meeting with him in the midst of the Carrie^^, broke his Lance bravely on
his Shield, but the strange Knight failed of the breaking his Lance: yet he
met the king so roughly, in Iousting against his body, as he was thrown out
of his Saddle, and the strange Knight forced to forsake his Styrrops. But when
he had recovered himself, he went to the Lady, desiring her not to think
amiss of him for that little ^ayle, and he would make her amends on the fourth
King.

Then the Sultan of Persia, being bravely mounted in guilt Armor, and bearing
in his Shield, Fortune stately placed in her Charryot of Triumph, in a Golden
field, advanced himself into the Course, and Albayzar did him the honor to
clap down the (...), Helmet, delivering him likewise the Lance he carried in
his own hand, whereat the Strange Knight was (...) his Enemy made such
account of: so taking his leave of the (...), he pricked forth to receive the
Soldane, (...), they meeting both together with such ^orce, as their Lances
were broken, (...) through the midst, yet themselves nothing (...) where^pon
the S^ldane of Persia (seeing the (...) prowresse of his Enemy) came unto him
with these words. I think it good (Sir Knight) that we yet once more hazard
the trial of the Ioust: but because I see you destitute of a Lance, I will
entreat the Prince Albayzar to bestow one upon you. Sir (answered the strange
Knight) I am content to allow any thing you shall ordain, yet am I somewhat
offended with my self, that I did not make you partaker of your fellows
misfortune. Marrye I persuade my self, that the fault consisted in my Horse,
who is so sore labored with travel, as he can hardly perform his duty.

Sir Knight (answered the Soldane) you shall not complain for so small a
matter, therefore I will bestow one of my own Horses upon you. In troth Sir
(answered the strange Knight) I am so unacquainted with this Country, as I
know not at whose hands I might request such a favor: yet for all my want is
great, and your offer very courteous, I cannot with good will make choice of
your horse. My Friend (said Dramusiande) for that I think well of your
behavior and gentleness, I pray you to accept this Horse, whereon I am
mounted. Good Sir (answered the strange Knight, in that you grant him such
courtesy, who is a stranger, and unknown to you, your good will in the offer
would highly impeach me, if I should refuse it.

So he alighted from his Horse, and mounted on that which Dramusiande had sent
him, giving a sign to the Soldane, that without delay, he should defend
himself.

Then each of them taking a Lance, they encountered in the midst of the
Carriere so bravely, as the strange Knight lost both his Styrrops, but the
Soldane of Persia, was thrown to the Earth so sore hurt, as there came four
knights to carry him forth of the field.

The strange Knight returning again, he came unto the Prince Albayzar, with
these words. You see Sir, that I have accomplished the Challenge which I
presented unto you on this Ladies behalf: therefore (Sir Albayzar) if you will
grant license to any more of your Knights, to deal in the same trial with
me, I will attend the^ the Ioust here till night, or so long as my horse is
able to hold out.

I perceive well Sir (answered the Prince Albayzar) that the pride wherewith
you are accompanied, makes you so gallant in speeches: but assure your self,
it does not a little grieve me, that I am general of this army, which is a
hinderance to me for dealing with you. Nevertheless, for the desire I have to
pull down your glorious stomach, I am content that all my knights shall
hazard their fortune against you. King Edward and the other Princes with him,
did highly commend the courage of the strange knight: and but for that he spoke
the Greek language so perfectly, they would have judged him to be the Prince
Florian of the Forest.

It was not long before four knights (from the Prince Albayzar) presented
themselves in the field, very bravely Armed, whom the strange knight unhorsed
one after another presently: whereat Albayzar was much offended, so that he
desired the knight to rest himself a while, to which words the knight thus
answered.

You see Sir, I have two Lances yet left, and I am very willing to bestow the
breaking of them: therefore send the Giant that stands next you, and he and I
will try our fortunes together. Alas Sir (answered Albayzar) you are too
forward in wishing Fortune to turn her face from you, therefore I pray thee
Framustant (quoth the Giant) that thou will grant the knight his honest
request.

The Giant was so glad to do any thing that might content Albayzar, as he
armed himself immediately, and giving his horse the spurs against the
knight, they met together so forcibly, as the knight was constrained to catch
hold about the neck of his horse, being sorry to receive such a foil in the
presence of so many good knights.

Wherefore, to revenge himself on his enemy, he took the second Lance,
wherewith he encountered the Giant so worthily, as himself was almost cast out
of his saddle: but such was his fortune against the Giant, as the point of his
Lance entered the Beuere of his Helmet, whereby he cast him on the croup ^r of
his horse, and the Giant thinking to recover himself, pulde the bridle of his
horse so strongly to him, as the horse fell down kackward upon him, which fall
^id so astonish him, as he was carried out of the field deprived of his senses.
This mishap disliked the Prince Albayzar, to whom the strange knight came with
these speeches.

If thou think it good (Sir Albayzar) I will now depart into the City, for
that the Lady desires me so to do: it draws toward Night, and the
entertainment you will allow me here, I judge shall be very slender. I see
well then (answered Albayzar) that it is not your will to use me in any thing,
nevertheless, for the pr^wesse I have seen in you, I am content to accompany
the Lady to the Gate of the City, not doubting of my assurance, being
lycenced by the King Rec^nde and these other Princes. King Edward and his
friends took in ^ood part the words of Albayzar, and when he had brought them
to the gates of the City, he took his leave of the king Recinde and all the
rest, desiring the strange knight to tell him who he was.

You demand the thing (answered this knight) which I force not greatly to make
known unto you, wherefore you shall understand, that I am the knight of the
Savage man, your principal enemy, and this Lady is the Queen of Thrace my
Wife: then he took off his Helmet, saying he was glad to meet him in the
place, where he would have occasion to deal further with him. At th^se words
Albayzar was so offended, as he would not speak to any all that night. King
Edward and his friends rode into the City joyfully, certifying the Emperor
of the arrival of Florian. The Queen of Thrac^ was very graciously
entertained by the Empress and the other Ladies, who maruailed much at her
strange apparel, which was the workmanship of the Queen Milia, whereof the
(...) to make a present, t^ one of the daughters of the king Armato her
brother, as I have already declared to you. The Emperor was so glad at the
arrival of his Nephew, as he would hardly suffer him out of his presence, he
kissed the hand of the Empress his grandmother, and of the Queen Flerida his
Mother: and after he had saluted all his friends, he was conducted to his
chamber, to have his wounds visited, which he received in the Ioust, against
the Prince Albayzars Knights.

CHAP. LIX.
Here shall be declared, after what manner the Prince Florian of the Forest
arrived at Constantinople, and of many things that happened after his coming.
SO soon as the Prince Florian had recovered his Queen and Wife, by aid and
assistance of the Sage Aliart, he followed Adventures a certain time, because
she should perceive his valiant and Noble disposition: but when he understood
the hard case wherinto his dear Friends at Constantinople were brought, he
changed his former determination, and caused his Queen to deck her self in
the Turkish Attire, and took his way to the place where his troubled Friends
remained. And because he could not enter the City, but he must first pass
the Camp of his Enemies, he disguised himself very strangely, covering his
Shield with the Sauadge devise, and carried the Shield whereof I have spoken
already, which he found in one of the chambers of the Castle, where the Queen
Leonarda was Enchaunted.

In this manner he presented himself before Albayzars Tents, where he sped in
Iousting as you have heard before, and after he had rested himself two days,
he desired the Emperor to give his Enemies Battle, because he thought every
day a year, till he might encounter with the Prince Albayzar, but his Majesty
deferred the matter so long as he could, because he would be assured of the
good disposition of all his Army. The Turks took it very strangely that they
had traveled so far, to lay siege to the principal City in all the Empire,
and yet to (...) so long before they joined in Battle: but Albayzar knew very
well the advantage that they of the City might get of them, in that they were
compassed within such strong Walls of defense, besides, that City was
plentifully stored with good and hardy Knights, who would murder many of
his, ere they would yield themselves. Therefore he changed his mind from giving
the assault, and made havoc and spoil of them about the City thereby to
provoke the Emperor to seek revenge: but in the mean while they continued
their spoiling, the Soldane of Persia, sent a Messenger to the Emperor, who
being brought into his Majesty's presence, setting his knee to the ground, he
began in this manner.

Most puissant Emperor, the Soldane of Persia, my Sovereign Lord, with the
license of the Prince Albayzar his captain, and the consent of the whole
Turkish Army, says, that he is greatly offended at that which has happened,
in the several Iousts against his Nephew Florian, with whom he would once more
gladly hazard himself: on condition, that you willl suffer twelve Knights of
your Court to come into the Field to morrow morning, to Ioust and Combat
against twelve Turks, of which company my Lord will be the captain. And thus
much we will grant, that the Combat shall be fought before the Empress
Chamber window, to the end, that these Princesses and Ladies may see the
valor and prowess, which shall be shown on both sides, and they will agree
to give over, and end the Combat, when these Ladies shall think good so to
command them. Moreover, he humbly desired the Empress, that it may stand with
her pleasure (after the Iousts be ended) to give them leave to dance with
these Ladies: the Emperor returned him this answer.

Thou may (my friend) say unto thy Lord that I am content to grant his
request, and the twelve knights o^ my Court, shall not fail to meet them in
the Field at two hours warning: beside, the Empress shall give them leave to
dance with these Ladies, who I trust will agree to what I determine, albeit
they know them for their sworn Enemies. But if any other Knights come in
company with the twelve, thou may say to the Soldane thy Lord, that they are
forbidden to come in Arms, the like do I promise with the knights of my Court,
that none but themselves shall come Armed into the Field. The Esquire returning
with his answer to the Soldane of Persia, both he and his Companions began
presently to prepare their Devises and Armor.

CHAP. LX.
How the Combat between twelve Turks and twelve Christians begun, and
how the Ladies caused it to be given over presently.
Between the Knights of the Emperors Court arose great controversy, because
every one strove to be of the number of the twelve, and very hardly could they
be quieted, such was their earnest desire to deal with the Turks: yet in the
end they were glad to obey the determination of Florian, who chose the twelve
according as he named them to you. The first was Palmerin of England his
Brother, the Prince Florendos, Gracian, Berolde, Floraman, of Sardignia,
Blandidon, Platir, Pompides, the King Estrellant of Hungaria, Don Rosuell,
Francian, Son to the King Polendos, and Don Rosian de la Bronde: these twelve
Knights were Armed very richly, having their Coats of Arms made by their
Ladies, King Edward, Arnedes, Recinde, the Sultan Bellagris, and the Giant
Dramusiande, they being all unarmed, accompanied these Knights into the Field,
which was in the same place, where the Sultan of Persia had appointed it,
because the Empress and her Ladies might see their behavior.

Then came the Soldane of Persia, and the eleven knights of his company, they
being honored with the presence of the kings of Gamba, of Sparta, of Armenia,
and the Giant Framustant, they being all unarmed. The Soldane of Persia desired
greatly to unhorse the prince Florian of the Forest, he coming foremost with
the King of Aetolia, who of the two was thought the most valiant: against him
Palmerin of England determined to Ioust, for he knew him by the devise in his
sheelde, which was a golden tower in a field of Sable. The Soldane of Persia
clapped down the Beuere of his Helmet, and the King of Armenia gave him his
Lance, so, when they were all ready to the Ioust, at the sound of the
Trumpets they ran altogether courageously, and met one another with such force,
as the most part of them was cast to the ground. Palmerin of England enconntred
the king of Aetolia so bravely, as he was sent to measure his length on the
ground, and himself was so shaken, as he forsook both his Stirrops. Florian
and the Soldane of Persia encountered with such force, as they were both cast
forth of their Saddles. Florendos unhorsed the Prince of Arfasia, named
Argelao: in brief, they were all unhorsed, except Palmerin, Platir, and the
King Polendos, who desiring to accompany their friends, alighted from their
horses to charge their enemies. The Soldane of Persia, and the king of Aetolia,
who were more offended at their misfortune then all the other, presented
themselves before their enemies, and so with the aid of their companions, they
began the Combat with the Sword: but they sped no better thereby then they
did at the Ioust, which the Ladies pitying, and seeing the Soldane of Persia
in great danger, by reason that Florian had woonne the advantage over him,
likewise, that Palmerin and Florendos had brought their enemies into
subjection, concluded that the Princess Miragarda, accompanied with four
other Ladies, and the king Tarnaes of Lacedemonia, should go into the field to
separate them: but so soon as the Combattants had espied her, they would not
suffer her to come so far as they were, but gave over their Combat and come
to meet her.

The Princess Miragarda, thought her self greatly honored by their
forbearance of the Combat, and having very graciously thanked them all, she
returned back again, holding the Prince Florendos by the hand, and they all
by degrees following in decent manner. When they were come to the Palace, the
Soldane and his company were very honorably entertained by the Emperor, the
Empress, Miragarda, Gridonia, Flerida, and the other Princes, who gave the
Princess Polinarda to understand, that the Soldane of Persia thought
marvelous well on her.

The Emperor caused them to be brought into the Chamber of Presence, which was
richly behanged with clothes of inestimable value: but when the Turks entered
the Chamber, their minds were ravished with beholding the stately manner
thereof. King Edward, Recinde, Arnedes, and the other Kings, entertained the
Turks with singular humanity, which made them judge, that the courtesy and
bounty of the Emperors Court, could not be matched in all the world beside:
but when they beheld the rare and excellent beauty of the Ladies, they
imagined, that their Knights prevailed more by their Heavenly feature, then by
the strength that consisted in themselves. The Soldane of Persia still viewing
the Princess Miragarda, took her to be the fair Polinarda: but at length he
found how he was deceived, for he saw Florendos still in her company, and that
Palmerin kept his Wife Polinarda in talk with him, which made him presently
recall his error.

As for the other Turkish Princes, whose minds were only to seek the spoil
of the City, they took their leave and departed, and when they were come to
their Camp, they practiced which way to work their traiterous intents. The
Soldane of Persia took the Princess Polinarda to dance, the king of Aetolia
took the beautiful Princess Miragarda, and the Soldane Albayzar took the
Queen Leonarda* knowing that the Prince Florian would scantly be pleased
therewith: but the King of Cospia, albeit he was young himself, yet he
refused all the other Ladies, and took the Queen Flerida: so, falling to
their Courtly Pastimes, after they had Daunced so much as pleased themselves,
in courteous manner they departed thence. But as they were going forth of the
Chamber, the Giant Framustant (who had all this while well viewed Arlencea) was
so ravished in affection toward her, as he challenged the Combat against
Dramusiande on the morrow: and because they would not dally on either side,
they threw down their Gages, which the Emperor caused to be taken up,
assuring them the Field on his behalf, and the Soldane Albayzar made them the
same promise. In this manner they took their leave one of another, every one
wishing that the Night were past, because they had good hope to see a notable
Combat, and this you shall understand by the way, that Framustant was the
only Giant on whose force Albayzar wholly reposed himself.

CHAP. LXI.
Of a Noble and valiant Combat, between Dramusiande, and the Giant Framustant.
ON the next morrow Dramusiande addressed himself to the place where the
Combat should be fought, accompanied with the Emperor Vernar, and king Edward
and his Sons, of whom he was more loved and honored, then of all the other.

It was not long after, before the Giant Framustant came, being attended on by
diverse of his companions and friends, he being in an Armor very rich and
strong, as it was necessary for him, dealing with one of such valor as was the
Giant Dramusiande, whom he exceeded far in hugeness of stature, being
mounted on a lusty Courser, which made Albayzar and his Friends imagine that
the victory would happen on his side: but they that were acquainted with the
noble prowess of Dramusiande, judged the contrary.

Certain words were uttered on either side, but they continued not long, for
Dramusiande being very earnest in desire, to chastise the proud behavior of
Framustant, gave his horse the Spurs against him, who likewise prepared
himself to entertain him: and they encountered with such exceeding force, as
they were glad to catch hold about the necks of their horses to shun the
fall.

But they immediately recovered their Saddles again, and drawing their Swords
out of their scabbards, they began to charge one an other with such Furious
strokes, as surely the Combat seemed to be most dangerous: but because they
could not meet so closely together on Horseback as they would, they both
alighted, and Dramusiande behaved himself with such expert and nimble
dexterity in fight, as Framustant could fasten very few strokes on him, but
he laid on load on his Enemy, and such was the eagerness of their Quarrel
on either side, as it could hardly be judged to whom the advantage would
happen.

So long endured the Combat, as their shields were so broken and defaced, that
they could find but little defense in them, and their Armor was so cruelly cut
and mangled, as their bodies were wounded in many places: which made all the
Regardants of this mind, that this Combat deserved as great commendation as
ever did any: yea, the Combat between Dramusiande and the Giant Barocant, might
not compare with this, for that Framustant showed himself more sufficient in
power then the other was.

In brief, the doubtfulnes of this Combat was such, as Victory was not to be
hoped for on either side, for Fortune (who reserved these Champyons for Actions
of greater moment) would not suffer that Combat to endure any longer: for, at
that very instant time, there arrived in the Field the Princess Targiana,
accompanied with the Princess of Armenia, and diverse worthy Knights, who being
advertised that the famous City of Constantinople was besieged, desired to
travel thither, to see the Prince Albayzar: but before they came forth of
their Kingdoms, they left sufficient Governors to take the charge of them,
and afterward (being accompanied with two thousand Knights) they iourneyed
until they came before the Walls of Constantinople.

The Princess Targiana bearing great good will to the Emperor, for the honor
he bestowed on her in his Court, began to weep and take it heavily, seeing
her Friends so troubled and brought into danger: but when she had knowledge of
the Combat between Framustant and Dramusiande, she would not alight from her
horse, but entered the Field; the Prince Albayzar being with her, (who was not
a little glad of her arrival) the Princess of Armenia, the Soldane of Persia,
and sundry other Kings in her company.

In this manner she came where these two Giants fought the Combat, and
approaching to Dramusiande, she laid her hand on his right shoulder: then
taking her mask from her face, she spoke unto him in this manner. Me thinks it
were reason (Sir Dramusiande) that all former quarrels should be set apart and
ended, at the presence of her who is your loyal and unfeigned Friend.
Dramusiande calling her to his remembrance, at length returned her this answer.

Certainly Madame, he might be accounted of an ungentle mind, that would
refuse to be vanquished, on condition that you thought it agreeable to your
nature: and I judge you do advantage me very much, in wishing me to give over
the Combat, especially, seeing I am matched with such a strong and puissant
Enemy. I know well (said Framustant) that these glozing words are not spoken
from the heart, but only (as it were) to flowte and s^orne me: nevertheless,
I hope to make you find them true in the end. I pray thee Framustant
(answered Dramusiande) show thy self at this instant somewhat obedient to
Madame Targiana, considering we are in the place, where we may at all times
try our selves together.

Albayzar commanded Framustant to withdraw himself, and in the mean while
the Emperor Vernar, King Edward, and diverse other Princes came to the Princess
Targiana (but Florian of the Forest shruncke away into the City, because he
would not have her know him) and after they had saluted her as her dignity
deserved, she willed them to do her humble duty to the Emperor, the Empress,
and all the other Princesses, her friends.

So, she took her leave of them, they returning into the City with
Dramusiande, and she departing with Albayzar and the Princes to their Camp,
where she was received marvelous stately on all sides, they being very glad
to have the company of Ladies, as well as the Princes had in the City.

The Emperor of Allemaigne and King Edward, spent their time in discoursing on
the beauty of the Princess of Armenia, who exceeded far the Princess
Targiana, and continuing the commendation of this fair Lady, they came to the
Palace, the Emperor rejoicing greatly at the arrival of the Princess
Targiana, and the Empress bare so great good will unto her, as the Princess
and Ladies sought to desire license, that they might go welcome the Princess
Targiana, but she her self so flattered the prince Albayzar, as she obtained
license of him, to go show her reverence to the Empress and her Ladies.

On the next morning she rode bravely to the City, accompanied with the
Princess of Armenia and the Soldane of Persia, with diverse other Princes who
brought them to the City, at the entrance whereof, the Emperor sat in his
Chair (being brought thither for the honor of Targiana) and there he took
her in his arms, as if she had been his own Daughter: the like he did to the
Princess of Armenia, the Soldane of Persia, and the other Kings that came in
the company with the Princess Targiana, and so he was carried with them to the
Palace, where entering the Empress Chamber, she was entertained with gracious
courtesy, both she and all her company beside. After they had embraced one
another, the Princess Polinarda presented the Queen Flerida to Targiana,
whom she held by the hand, using many gentle salutations to her: but after she
had knowledge of Miragarda and Leonarda, she perceived very well that her
beauty might not compare with theirs, and greeuing that Leonarda had escaped
so well from the place where she caused her to be enchaunted, she came to the
Princess Miragarda with these speeches.

I cannot choose (Madame) but esteem marvelous well of their pains, that
adventure their honor in the field in the defense of your beauty: which is
the cause that I must take in very good part, the labor that the Prince
Albayzar bestowed on your behalf. To the Queen Leonarda she would not speak
one word, because she was married to the Prince Florian, whom she condemned as
her mortal enemy. The Princess of Armenia, sitting between Miragarda and
Leonarda, was very much abashed, in that she was not acquainted with any of the
Ladies of the Emperors Court, who (notwithstanding) entertained her very
honorably: thus they continued their Princely courtesies one to another,
till the night drawing on, Targiana took her leave of the Emperor, desiring
his Majesty to excuse her for the war, which was commenced contrary to her
will.

The Empress and the Ladies brought them to the Palace gate, where (on each
side) they parted with such heaviness, as they could not speak to one
another: but the Emperor himself accompanied them without the City, and
because Targiana excused her self of the war, which Albayzar had enterprised
against his Majesty, he took her by the hand, speaking to her in this manner.

I promise you (Madame) it is not a little grief to me, that I cannot at this
time witness, how le^th I am to be judged ungrateful unto you, who deserves
to be honored with most gracious service. And as for the malicious dealing of
Albayzar, trust me, it cannot diminish one jot of the good will I bear you:
but this I assure you, you may dispose both of me and my Court at your
pleasure, and may make your self as bold and welcome here, as if you were in
the great Turk your Fathers Court.

So breaking off, and saluting each other with great courtesy, the Emperor
was carried back to his Palace, and Targiana was conducted to the Camp,
accompanied with the Emperor Vernar, the Kings of England, France, and
Spain, and many other Princes of the Emperors Court, who having brought her to
the Camp, took their leave, and returned to the City, devising severally
among themselves, to whose lotte Targiana, and the other Ladies should fall, if
so be the victory chanced on their side: for it is oftentimes the nature of
Soldiers, to share and divide the spoil among themselves, before Fortune has
delivered it into their hands.

CHAP. LXII.
Of the Battle between the Christians and the Turks, and of that which
happened.
NOt many Days after the arrival of the Princess Targiana, the Princes (as
well on the one side as on the other) concluded to join in Battle, Marry the
Christians were more desirous thereto then the Turks, because the Victuals
began to wax scant within the City: Besides, Albayzar came oftentimes, and
provoked them also with his Standard and Ensigns displayed, which urged the
Knights to cry and call to their Co^manders and Captains, to suffer them to
saillie forth of the City: for it was a grief to them to be so enclosed
within, and their Enemies come daring so boldly to them without. Upon this,
Primaleon would gladly have issued forth, if the other Princes would have bin
ruled after him, but they would not Adventure so rashly, because many of them
were weak and sickly with traveling on the Seas, therefore they determined to
recover themselves in perfect assurance of their health, before they would
thuste themselves into the face of danger.

After they had well rested and recovered themselves, and found that they were
strong and able to deal with the Enemy, the Commanders summoned their
trains into the Field, and King Edward being General of the whole Forces,
commanded both Horsemen and Foote-men to prepare themselves to Battle. The
first Squadron was conducted by the Soldane Bellagris: to whom was committed
five thousand good Soldiers, being all his own Subjects. The second was given
in charge to Recinde King of Spain: who had the conduct of three thousand, but
then sent him from the Kingdom of Spain. The third was led by Arnedes King of
France, who had the charge of the like number as the King of Spain had, with
the two thousand Soldiers that were sent him from France. The fourth was under
the conduct of Polendos King of Thessalie, who had attending on him the like
number. The fifth was in the charge of the Emperor Vernar of Allemaigne: and
the sixth and last (being four thousand) was conducted by King Edward of
England. Primaleon would not this day take upon him any charge, that he might
the better give succor to those places where he perceived most danger,
because he judged it a policy to be used in War.

All these that follow were bravely seen in the Field this Day, Belcar,
Drapos of Normandy, Maiortes, otherwise called the Great Dog, Palmerin of
England, Florian of the Forest, Florendos, Platir, Blandidon, Berolde Prince
of Spain, Floraman of Sardignia, Gracian of France, Don Rosuell, Bellizart,
Onistalde, Tenebrant, Francian, Pompides, the Sage Aliart, the King Estreliant,
Frisoll, Albanis of Frieze, Rodamont, Dragonalt King of Navarre, Luyman of
Burgundy, German of Orleance, Tremoran, Don Resiran de la Bronde,
Dramusiande, Almaroll, and all the most renowned Knights of the Emperors
Court, who were in the Squadron under the conduct of the Soldane Bellagris,
they all concluding with themselves, that so soon as the Battle should be
begun, they would each of them take part on that side, where their duty and
affection did best serve them.

The King Tarnaes (accompanied with many valiant Knights, had committed to his
charge the defense of the City, and of the Footmen were chosen fifty
thousand, such as were accounted the most wisest and expert Soldiers, that
were under the conducting of the King Tarnaes, to help to prevent any danger
imminent to the City. King Edward himself, being very brave and gallantly
Armed, ceased not to visit his charge of Horsemen, and likewise he came among
the young Princes and Knights, encouraging them in noble speeches, and with a
countenance bewraying the invincible mind of a Conqueror, desiring them to
remember their Knightly deeds passed, which might be an occasion to stir
them up more nobly, in defense of the flower of all Christendom.

With these and other such like speeches, he did so animate and embolden all
his Train, as they that were the most fearful, and had least mind to deal
with their enemies, seemed as willing and forwards to the Battle, as he that
was the brauest Soldier in the Field: which when the King perceived, he
withdrew himself and his company, commanding the Soldane Bellagris to give the
first assault.

Albayzar divided his Horsemen in ten companyes, giving to every Squadron five
thousand men. The first Squadron was conducted by the Sultan of Persia, who was
accompanied with the Giant Framustant, and about five hundred well approved
Soldiers. The second was given in charge to the king of Trebizonde: the third,
to the king of Caspia: the fourth, to the king of Armenia: the fifth, to the
king of Gamba: the sixth, to the king of Sparta: the seventh, to the king of
Bithinia: the eight, to the prince Argelo of Arfasia: the tenth and last, was
conducted by the Soldane Albayzar himself, with whom were seven Giants for
the Guard of his person.

But so soon as Framusta^t espied Dramusiande in the forefront of the
Christians Army, being desirous to approve himself against him only, he
went (by the license of Albayzar) to the foremost Squadron of the Turks,
because he thought by this means to encounter with Dramusiande. The young
princes in Albayzars Camp, were divided into four parts, each part contained
five and twenty thousand: and they that were left beside, were sent to the
Pauillons, for safegarde of the princess Targiana, and the princess of
Armenia.

As for the richness of their Armor, and ingenious Devises, which these
knights (as well on the one side as the other) bare in this conflict, would
trouble the eloquent tongue of Marcus Tullius Cicero, to make true sufficient
discourse thereof. But to yield the greater contentment to those friendely
Gentlemen, who take delight in reading of this famous History, I will rehearse
the Names of them that were brauest in the Field: and first I will begin with
the Christians, whereof there were sometimes two or three together, whose Armor
and Devises were like in color or proportion.

King Edward, the Emperor Vernar, and the Soldane Bellagris, had their Armor
in Scarlet, white and black colors, with mighty Chains of Gold crossing
their Bodies, and in their shieldes they bare a flying Griffon, in a field of
Silver, and underneath was written in Letters of Gold, the Names of such as
they esteemed to be their best beloved, and most famous Friends.

Primaleon and the King Polendos, were in white Armor, and in their shieldes
was portrayed in a silver field, a cloven Rock, which Devise Primaleon was
wont to bear, when he was amorous of the princess Gridonia his Wife.
Recinde, Arnedes, and Francian, were in gylt Armor, and two Lions Rampant in
their shieldes, in a field of Azure. The King of Vngaria, Estrellant, and
Belcar his Uncle, were in black armor, shadowed with little streams of Gold,
because it was not long since the deceasse of the King Frisoll and Ditree, and
for their Devises they had figured in their shieldes a golden Tree, in a field
of Sable.

Palmerin of England, and the prince Florendos, were in green Armor, very
thick beset with little fillets of gold, and in their shieldes was figured
Fortune in a Silver field, whereby was understood, that they did yet repose
some trust in her.

The Prince Floraman of Sardignia, and the Kinght of the Sauadge-man, had their
Armours of an Indian color, all wrought over with little shrubbes of Gold:
but the Devises of their shieldes were contrary: for Floraman had portrayed in
his shield, Death holding a Lady by the hand, in a field of Sable, and
Florian kept his Sauadge Devise, wherewith he had achieved so many honorable
victories. Dragonalt King of Nauatre, and Albanis of Frieze, king of Denmark,
were in read Armor, with circles of silver, cross thwarting every way: and
in their shields was pictured in a field of Sinople, Love, holding a Knight
underneath his feet: for this Devise the Princess Miragarda commanded
Dragonalt to carry all his life time, when he was vanquished by the prince
Florendos, before the Castle of Almaroll.

The Prince Berolde, and Onistalde his Brother, were both in gylt Corselets,
but their Bases were black, and in their shields was figured little flames of
fire, in a field of Sable. Polinard and Muncalion, had their Armor of green
and Carnation colors, and in their shields was displaied a silver Sea, in a
field of Sinople. Blandidon and Frisoll, were in black Armor, carrying for
their Devises in their shields, two golden Griffons, in a Field of Geules.
Pompides and Platir were in green Armor, and each of them carried in his
shield a silver Bull in a field of Sinople: for Pompides took very great
delight in this Devise.

The Armours of the prince Gracian, and that of Guerin his Brother, was of
Green, Scarlet, and white colors, with fillets of Gold, cross strickt to
separate the colors, and in their shieldes was figured a Garden of flowers, in
a silver Field. Rodamont and Bellizart, had their Armor of Verimillion
color, and in their shieldes they carried Hope, in the habit of a Woman, but
deprived of life: this Devise was in a field of Geules.

Don Rosuell and Dramian were both in white Armor, very thick beset with
Roses of Gold, and in their shields was pictured a displayed Ensign of silver
in a Golden field.

Basilliart and Didon his Brother, were in Azure Armor, all wrought over with
little Silver shrubbes, and in the same manner were their shields. Luyman of
Burgundy, and Tremoran, had their Armor of Tawny color, as color
conformable to their amorous thoughts: but because Tremoran was out of hope to
espouse his Lady, he carried his Devise according to his ill hap: and Layman
of Burguudie, being in the same case, was the more willing to keep his
company, and therefore they carried for their Devises in their Shielees,
Sifiphus tumbling his restless stone in a field of Sable. The Sage Aliart of
the Obscure Valley, and Don Rosian de la Bronde, were in white Armor, and this
was the manner of the Devises in their shieldes. The Sage Aliart had the figure
of God Apollo in his shield, in a field of Sinople, and Don Rosian had in his
shield, the tower of Nemrod, from whence he was lineally descended. Maiortes
and the Giant Almaroll, were in black Armor, and their shieldes of the same
color, without any manner of Devise.

The Giant Dramusiande was in a strong Armor of A^ier, and his shield of the
same manner: of whom the Christians made especial account, because they knew
the noble valor he was endued withal. Diverse others were very brave, both in
their Armor, and Devises of their shieldes, which made a gallant show among
the Christians: but I let them pass at this time, to avoid prolixitie.

And now we will speak somewhat of the Prince Albayzar, who was very
gallantly mounted in a Green Armor, which was thick beset with Spheres of
gold, in sign of victory, and in his shield was pictured in a field of
Sinople, the lively and natural form of the Princess Targiana. The Soldane
of Persia, was in a Carnation colored Armor, being very thick beset with
precious stones of incredible estimation, and about the skyrts of his Bases
were framed diversity of fine and curious artificial knottes of Gold, in the
midst whereof stood two Letters of P. P. which he had caused to be placed
there, only for that they were the first Letters of the Name of the Princess
Polinarda, toward whom he was marvelous affectionate, and he was in good
hope to be rewarded with her, if they woonne the victory: in his Shield was
figured Hope, in a green vesture like a young beautiful Lady, and underneath
her was written in letters of gold, the name of the Princess Polinarda. The
king of Gaspia was in Tawny Armor, streaked over in diverse places with black,
in sign that he had been vanquished in the Combat past: and in his shield he
bare for his devise, a Bear, having his claws al bloody, in a field of Sable,
whereby he gave them to understand, that he had good hope to bathe his hands
in the blood of his Enemies. The king of Trebisonde, was in red Armor, all
over figured with little silver Birds, having their wings spread abroad, in
manner as they were flying, and carried the picture of god Mars in his Shield,
with the Minotaurs-head, that he conquered in Creete: this devise was in a
golden Field. The king of Sparta was in white Armor, and in his shield was
portrated a Lion torn in pieces, because he had torn a Lion himself, when he
was in his youthful time. The king of Aetolia was in black Armor, bearing
for his Devise in his shield, a black Bull, in a field of Geules. The king of
Armenia was in Azured Armor, wrought all over with roses of gold, and in his
shield was figured a Phoenix, in a field of Azure: whereby his meaning was,
that his Lady was the only Phoenix of beauty in the world, to whom no other
might equal her self. The king of Gamba was in guylt Armor, with his Bases
of silver, and in his Shield was pictured a golden Lion in a silver field. The
king of Bythinia was in green Armor, crosse-streaked with bonds of silver,
coupling in manner of knots: and in his shield he carried a golden Tiger
rampant, against a Rock of Crystal, in a field of Sinople. The Prince Argelao
of Arfasia, had his Armor like to the king of Bythinia. Many other of the
Prince Albayzars knights came into the field, being very bravely Armed, but I
will let them pass unnamed at this time: assuring you that Framustant and the
other Giants were armed very gallantly, and behaved themselves with such report
in the field, as they thought verily to dismay the Christians with their
countenance.

CHAP. LXIII.
Of the first Battle between the Christians and the Turks, and the success
thereof.
THe Army on either side, being appointed in good and decent manner, the
Potentates, Kings, Princes, and persons of most Authority (would needs go
place themselves in the foremost rank) holding this opinion, that in such a
renowned Battle wherein the peril of all Christendom consisted, they which
presented themselves the foremost in Fight, should deserve the greatest honor
and glory in the Field: which consideration made the Captains leave their
charges to their Lieutenants, and come and place themselves in the face of the
Battle.

Then the Drums and Trumpets sounding gallantly on either side, the Soldane
of Persia marched on with his train, to receive the first Squadron of the
Christians, and meeting together, Primaleon encountered the King of Casp^a, and
brake his Lance so bravely on him, as himself forsook both his stirrops: but
the king of Caspia had such a forcible stroke, as he was sent headlong to the
Earth, very sore wounded. Palmerin of England served the king of Aetolia in the
same manner, albeit he was reputed amongst the Turks for an especial good
Knight at Arms. Florendos and the king of Armenia failed in the Ioust, but
they met so forceably together with their bodies, as both they and their Horses
tumbled to the ground: the Prince Florendos recovered himself again quickly,
but the Turk was so amazed with his fall, as he could hardly tell where he
was, whereupon his two Couzins came unto him, and conducted him between them
to his Tent. Berolde of Spain, and Floraman of Sardignia, addressed themselves
to the Prince Argelao and the king of Bithinia, and encountered with them so
furiously, as they were all cast forth of their saddles, being not able to
mount themselves again, because the number was so great, and the fight so h^te
where they were. Recinde and Arnedes ran against the Kings of Gamba and
Sparta, they being all unhorsed, except the king Recinde, who kept his horse
valiantly. The Soldane Bellagris and the King of Trebisonde met together, and
brake their Lances very bravely, not being any thing shaken in the encounter.

The Soldane of Persia, who desired to have himself seen in the field, had no
sooner espied the knight of the Sauadgeman, but he gave his horse the spurs,
and encountered with him so nobly, as the knight of the Sauadgeman lost both his
stirrops, which he recovered again presently: but the Soldane was so sore
shaken, as he lay along on the neck of his horse, and had tumbled to the
ground, if one of his train had not immediately succored him.

Among them that dealt in the first encounter, Dramusiande and Framustant was
most to be regarded, for they failing at the breaking of their Lances, met in
such courageous manner together with their bodies, as both horses and men were
sent to the ground: and recovering themselves nimbly again, they began a
furious and cruel combat, and to the example of all other knights, charged
one another with most puissant strokes.

All the Princes of the Emperors Court were at this first encounter, except
King Edward, the Emperor Vernar, and the king Polendos, who would not depart
from their Squadrons, fearing least they would disparse themselves out of
order: and the Giant Almaroll kept them company likewise, because he saw no
more Giants in the foremost rank but Framustant, with whom Dramusiande
fought very gallantly.

After thyy had thus encountered with their lances, and many knights thrown to
the earth, some slain outright, and other some in little better case: they
drew their swords on all sides, and began the most cruel Battle that ever
was seen, and the Captains returned again to their several charges, because
they would not have them fall out of order. Argelao, and the King of Bithinia,
fighting on foot against Floraman of Sardignia, and Berolde of Spain, were
succored by the Soldane of Persia, who like a noble captain praunced among
the ranckes, to animate and encourage the minds of his friends, and assembling
them in sundry companies, he came where these four continued the fight still
fiercely: but the Soldane, Bellagris with his train, showed such prowess on
the fresh comers, as with in a while, both the Soldane of Persia himself, and
the company he brought with him were enforced to give them place against their
wills, leaving Argelao and the king of Bithinia in such danger, as had not the
king of Trebisonde come upon them with the second Turkish Squadro^, they had
been slain by the hands of Floraman, and the Prince Berolde. The Soldane of
Persia was so greatly grieved, seeing his men so vanquished, and they that were
left so out of heart, as he cried for succor to the king of Trebisonde: with
whose aid he returned to recover what he had lost, and at length made the
means to get Argelao and the king of Bithinia through the preasse.

But he that had the^ seen the prince Primaleon, might plainly have discerned
his willing^es to preuails against his enemies: for he laid on load so on
every side, and following upon the^ with his train so nobly, as not one durst
stand before him to endure his fury: by this means he recovered horses again
to Floraman and Berolde, but they were so wounded, as they were glad to get
forth of the battle. Primaleon, Palmerin of England, and Florian of the
Forest with their traynes, held the king of Trebisondes second Squadron so
h^te play, as they wished themselves a little further off. But on the left hand
of this Squadron was the most dangerous battle, between Framustant and
Dramusiande, who had gotten great advantage of his enemies, by reason that
Framustantes sword was broken to his hand, but Albayzar sent two hundred
Knights on foot to help the Giant, which when Primaleon perceived, he spoke
to Palmerin of England in this manner: I pray you Sir, go with me to succor
our friend Dramasiande, for I will never return into the City, except I have
him with me. Without any more words they laid about them lustily, and knocked
down every one that stood before them, until they came where Dramusiande was:
thither likewise came to defend him against his enemies, the Knight of the
Sauageman, Florendos, Platir, Polinard, Pompides, the Sage Aliart, Maiortes,
Frisoll, Blandidon, Don Rosiran de la Bronde, Belcar, and his sons, being
likewise accompanied with twenty of the most renowned Knights in all the
Army: and to aid Framustant came the Sultan of Persia, and the king of
Trebisond, accompanied with a hundred knights of great authority and valor,
they being all on foot.

When Primaleon saw his friends without their horses he alighted likewise, and
so did the Prince Palmerin: but when the other Christian knights heard that
Primaleon fought on foot, they forsook their horses, and came hastily running
to defend him, and now began such a cruel and fierce battle, as on all
sides it remained very doubtful and dangerous, Dramusiande and Framustant so
laid upon each other with their pommils of their swords, as they were at
length so sore travailed, as their strokes could but little hurt them.
Primaleon and the king of Trebisonde buckled together, but such was the
fierceness of their fight, as in the end they were constrained to pause a
while: the like happened to Palmerin of England and the Soldane of Persia: but
the Knight of the Savage man slew two Knights, who came traitorously and
struck him behind his back, and Florendos with the rest of his companions
stuck so closely to their tackling, as many of the enemies ran like dogs
away.

But Maiortes was so compassed in with his enemies, as none of his friends
might come to help him, so that he had such grievous wounds given him, as
(having slain so many of his enemies as durst abide him) he fell down dead
to the ground himself.

Florian of the Forest, was so grieved when he saw him fall, as the tears
trickled down his cheeks, and albeit he was in extreme heaviness, yet he
followed on them that had kilde Maiortes, and revenged his death nobly, because
the death of so brave a noble man, was much lamented of them that knew his
valiant mind, but most especially of his Son Dridan, who with anguish of
mind cast himself amongst his enemies, and within a while he behaved himself
so well, as the Turks knew to their cost his extreme grief for the death of
his Father: yet such was his unhappy fortune in the end, as (being beset among
the thickest of his enemies, and many cruel wounds given in diverse places of
his body) he fell to the ground, his vital spirit forsaking him, and made him
follow his Fathers dead ghost, which was no small grief to the noble king
Edward of England, in respect of the great friend ship and love, that had
remained of long time, between him and Maiortes.

And because he judged, that fighting thus on foot would be the death of many
his dear friends, he commanded his hard horses to break through the
ranckes, whereto they presently obeyed, and scattered the troops of the
enemies in such sort, as all his friends were mounte^ on horseback again,
and Dramusiande and Framustant were separated a sunder, but at this second
encounter, the king of Trebisonde was slain by the hand of the noble Palmerin
of England. Dramusiand and Framustant were so daungerously wounded, as they
were not able to hold out the fight any longer: wherefore, they were conveyed
thence, the one to the Turks Tents, and the other to the City to be
tendered with present regard, according as their dangerous estates required.
When the conflict was thus broken, diverse that had entered with the first
squadron, retired to take breathing: but Primaleon, Palmerin, nor many of the
Emperors Court beside, were any of them, for it was a pleasure to them to
endure the travail of Arms, such small account they made of their hurts and
their enemies.

The Empress and the Ladies seeing so great cruelty, and the loss of so many
noble Gentlemen, withdrew themselves into their chambers, where they lamented
in such grievous manner, as if they had seen the enemy entered into the City,
whereupon, many Ladies of great authorite (hearing their pitiful lamentatio^s)
came unto the Palace, reposing altogether their hope in the aged Emperor, if
the knights in the Field should fail of the victory.

The king Tarnaes would have denied the Ladies entrance into the Palace, but
it was more then he could well do: for hardly can any man govern the common
people, especially, when a general fear of their lives is threatened before
their eyes.

The Emperor himself, whose debilitie in years and grief of mind (conceived
by this unlooked for stratageme) deprived him of his woonted good judgment,
and pollitique means to prevent so great mischief, as he could not imagine
with himself how to remedy this sudden misfortune: but even with a Woman's
stomach, rather then the invincible mind he had always borne heretofore,
fell into pusillanimitie and doubtful fear with himself, utterly forgetting
the ancient Adage: Audaces Fortuna iuuat; and Targiana, the Princess of
Armenia and all the Ladies in the Turks Camp, were so fearful and doubtful
of the victory, as the Ladies in the Emperors Court.

King Edward being General of the Christian Army, desiring to witness his
noble valor in the field (having rested himself a pretty space) dismounted
three knights one after another with one Lance: afterward drawing his sword,
he charged the enimes on all sides about him so valiantly, as they were glad
to avoid and give him place. And the Prince Albayzar likewise, seeking to
honor himself this day with the renown of the field, came upon the
Christians with incredible prowess: and such resistaunce he made with his
fresh company, as the Battle endured a long time very blody and cruel, so
that a man could not judge which side had the most advantage.

But then came a new assault upon the Christians, by a great number of Turks
on the left wing, among whom were six monstrous and terrible Giants, which
Assault was so hot for the time, as the Christians were enforced to retire.
The Giant Almaroll (who had all this while kept company with the King Recinde
his Lord (seeing the Christians withdraw themselves, addressed himself to
one of the Giants called Dramorant, and with a mighty Mace that he had gotten
in the Battle, he kept him such rough play, as he could not pass on
forwards, as he willingly would have done. And the King Recinde, seeing
another Giant named Trafamor, coming to strike at Almaroll behind his back,
stepped before him to hinder his determination: but he being Aged and feeble,
and not able to resist the merciless strokes of this bloody-minded Giant
Trafamor, was so pitifully wounded, as he fell down at the Giants feet, who
took his sword, and thrust it to the heart of the King Recinde.

Which when the Prince Palmerin perceived, he was very ry sorry, and coming
in a rage to the Giant Trafamor, never left him, until such time as he had
laid him down dead on the ground: but he was so sore but himself* as he was
glad to get forth of the Battle, and by the commandment of the Prince
Primaleon, ^hee was carried into the City, where they made great doubt of his
life, by reason he had lost such abundance of his Blood.

Almaroll and Dramorant were sundred, whereupon the death of Recinde K: of
Spain, was blazed through the Army, which was such heavy news to Arnedes King
of France, his Couzin and singular good Friend, as making no account of his
life) he threw himself amongst his enemies: where (seeking to revenge the
death of the King of Spain) he lost his own life, and by him was slain
Onistalde, Son to the king Recinde, who followed Arnedes, to revenge his
Fathers death.

King Edward and the other Princes, were so offended, when they saw their
dearest Friends thus cast to the ground, as they ran amongst the thickest of
their Enemies, and laid on load like desperate men: the Knight of the
Sauadge-man likewise, on whose shield no manner of Devise could be discerned,
it was so hackt and broken in pieces: came unto the Giant Dramorant, and
handled him in such Knightly order, as he made him tumble down dead before him.

Belcar and the King Polendos, entering on the king of Aetoliaes Troop, were in
the end enforced to pay the sharp tribute, which Death demands of Nature
by duty: this unfortunate success caused no little heaviness among the
Christians, but in especilly to the Prince Berolde of Spain, who understanding
that the King Recinde his Father, and Onistalde his Brother, were slain by the
enemies, he rushed in fiercely upon them, determining either to revenge their
loss, or leave his life among them for company.

And the Prince Floraman of Sardignia followed close after him, butchering the
Turks on every side, whereby he manifested to the Prince Berolde, the entyre
good will and affection he bare him: but the valiant Florendos did most of all
injury the Enemy this day, for the Knightly strokes that were to be seen on
his Shield, delivered a true testimony of the great dangers he had escaped: all
which he made of no account, such was his earnest desire to revenge the death
of his dear Friends. So that this Battle may be reputed for the most cruel
and perilous that ever was seen, in that so many grievous and tragical
Spectacles were to be seen that dismal Day, with the loss of a number of
famous Princes and most renowned Knights: for there you might have seen Don
Rosuell and Bellizart to break hardily through the preasse of their Enemies,
without either fear or regard of their own lives, to look for their noble
Father the Prince Belcar: and Francian on the other side, came to search for
his Father, the King Polendos: which the Enemies perceiving, and knowing them
to be near allied to the Emperor, followed fiercely after them, to see who
could first murder them.

The Prince Berolde was no sooner come to the place, where his Father lay
slain, but he saw how the Giant Almaroll had lost his Helmet, and his face
so pitifully besmiered with his blood, as it was a great grief to all that
beheld him, for he had in that place laid seven hardy Knights slain at his
foot, and determined not to forsake the dead body of the Prince, before he had
lost his own life likewise in that place.

The enemies resisted the Prince Berolde so strongly, as had it not been for
the succor of the Emperor Vernar Primaleon, Florendos and Blandidon, he had
been sent to keep his father company: and Primaleon labored very earnestly
to get the Giant Almaroll forth of the battle, because he was destritute of
a Helmet, his Armor broken very much, and his body wounded in many places, but
such was the love and fidelity he bare to his Prince, as it was impossible for
Primaleon to cause him withdraw himself.

Upon this reskew of the Princes to Berolde, the enemies came running amain to
this place where they were, with the Soldane of Persia conducting them, who
hearing how Almaroll continued manfully killing all that came before him,
galloped through the rank till he came at Almaroll: but who so had seen the
gallant behavior of Primaleon and Florendos his Son, in defending Almaroll
from the enemies fury, would have imagined the very type of Knightly valor to
consist in these two famous champions, who were not a little grieved to see
Almaroll so willing to seek his own death, and could not be persuaded from
that mind by any of his friends.

The Giant Gramato (who came in company with the Soldane of Persia) advanced
himself to deal with Almaroll, but the hardy Florendos stepped before him,
and had slain him outright, if Almaroll had not caught him about the body: but
he being so grievously wounded, as no succor whatsoever would save his life,
fell down dead before the Giant Gramato, whom Berolde afterward charged so
roughly, as Gramato ended his life to accompany the Giant Almaroll.

Now began the courage of the Christians to increase worthily, in that they
were stronger in that place then the Turks, for the Soldane of Persia was
conveyed forth of the Battle, by reason of a wound that he had received in
his throat by the push of a Sword: so that the Soldane Bellagris found good
opportunity, to carry the bodies of the King Recinde and Onistalde his son
forth of the field, the Prince Berolde helping to conduct the bodies, because
himself had lost so much blood, as he could scantly hold out any longer.

Primaleon having a regard to the troops of men dispersed in the Field, beheld
King Edward and his train driven to the retire, for that Albayzar accompanied
with three Giants and a number of knights (seeing the Christians fore
travailed) came upon them with a fresh charge: but king Edward met his proud
enemy with such puissance, as he was glad to draw back to rest himself a
while, assuring you, that the King of England behaved himself so nobly in the
field, as the whole Christian camp reposed themselves on him.

Pompides, Basiliart, the Sage Aliart, Platir, Frisol, Germain of Orlnance,
Luyman of Burgundy, Rodamont, Albanis of Frize, Dragonalt, Don Rosiran de la
Bronde, Tremoran, Tenebrant, Don Rosuell, Bellizart, and diverse other of the
Christian Knights resisted the enemy very valiantly, and followed so fast upon
Albayzar and his company, as (had not fresh supplies still come) they had made
a notable conquest of their adversaries.

Primaleon left to govern these the Soldane Bellagris, and Blandidon went with
Florendos and Floraman to the noble King Edward of England, and as they would
have approached to him, they espied the Emperor Vernar, and Polinard his
Brother on foot, enclosed with such a number of Turks, as their lives were
greatly to be feared: for the King of Bythinia had slain the Emperor Vernars
Horse, and falling to the ground, brake one of his Masters legs in the fall,
so that the Emperor was feign to stand upon one leg to defend himself, in
which hard case he was very near his death, but that his Brother Polinard
stepped presently before him, and defended him with such manly prowess, as the
enemy could not any way come to hurt the Emperor. Primaleon seeing the
misfortune of the Emperor of Allemaigne, and how the Turks sought every way
to take his life from him, was so overcome with inward grief, as the tears
trickled down his cheeks: and fearing now the utter ruin of Constantinople,
he ran with such courage upon the enemies, as down they tumbled dead to the
ground on every side of him. And Florendos, thought his Armor was shiuered,
and he had no sheeld to defend himself, yet (accompanied with the Prince
Floraman) he followed his father, showing incredible prowess. Floraman settled
himself against the king of Bithinia, and prevailed so well against him, as he
sent him headlong to the ground deprived of his life: but Primaleon seeing
Floraman to be somewhat sore hurt, desired him to withdraw himself out of
the Battle.

When the Turks that were conducted by the king of Bythinia, saw their
Captain slain, they began to retire very speedily, by which means Primaleon
recovered and mounted Polinard on Horseback again: but he could not imagine
how to got the Emperor Vernar out of the field: which made him adventure with
his men in such danger, as it was doubtful he should have fallen into his
enemies hands. For the king of Armenia came upon them again with four
thousand men, hoping to recover that which the other Kings had lost, so that
Primaleon was feign to alight from his Horse, for the defense of the Emperor
Vernar: in like manner did most of the Princes and Knights, fearing least any
harm should come unto the Prince and the Emperor, but many of them were
slaiue in this new assault, and so was the king of Armenia, with five hundred
of his best tried Soldyers.

The Emperor Vernar, seeing Death ready to entertain him, and that there was
no means for him to shun it, embraced it mildely and patiently: but when the
young Princes saw the Emperor slain, they carried him forth of the Field,
and brought him with great heaviness into the City, which was now become in
a manner desolate.

The most virtuous and valiant King Edward, seeing himself left alone with the
Soldane Albayzar, whom he dealt so stoutly withal, as Pompides, Platir, and
the other Princes might rest themselves, and cause their Friends that were
there slain, to be transported thence, in the end he brought Albayzar into
such estate, as he had kilde him in the Field, if he had not been the sooner
reskued by the Giants that came with him: Nevertheless, he taught him his
duty so well, as he took the English Prince for a very sharp Schoolemaister.

While King Edward and Albayzar continued their Fight, the night drawing on
apace, the Trumpets sounded the retrait, so that every one hasted unto his
Ensign: the King Edward summoned his men together, they all thinking so well
on their General, as they judged themselves happy to be under his leading and
government. Bellagris and Primaleon brought their trains likewise to him, and
after they were all places in array, the Christians betook themselves to the
City, and the Turks returend to their Camp.

CHAP. LXIII.
Of that which they did at Constantinople, before they gave the Enemies the
second Battle, and of the great misfortunes which happened in the City, amongst
which, chanced the untimely death of the aged Emperor Palmerin.
AFter that the Christian and Pagan Princes, with their forces on either side,
were thus retired to their several holds, by the consent of Albayzar and
Palmerin, the Princes and Knights that were slain in the battle, were carried
thence to be interred, and their funerals to be performed: but for the
grievous complaints made in the City, for the loss of so many noble and
renowned Princes, I leave them to the judgment of the courteous Reader, who
must needs think the grief to be great, in that Christendom received such a
loss, as in many years could not be recoured again. The consideration here
of entered so deep into the aged Emperors heart, as he forsook this earthly
vale of misery, yielding his soul to God, and his body to the bowelles of his
mother, from whence it came at first: at which time, the enchaunted bird that
he kept in his palace, sung three times together with a very pitiful note,
so that both old and young in the Court, did not alittle marvel thereat.

Of this bird, you may read more at large in the notable and famous History
of the Emperor Palmerins life, which Book is called Palmerin d'Oliue, a
History plentifully stored with discourses of singular delight, being for the
worthiness thereof, esteemed of many Nations, as this History is likewise: and
therefore, for the excellency of this aforesaid History, and in respect it
depends on matters briefly touched in this book, so that it is accounted as
a parcel of this History, I entend (God ayding me, to publish it shortly, when
(I doubt not) but the Gentle reader shall find it worthy of the commendations
that I have used of it in this place. The Obsequies and Funeralles of the
Emperor were solemnized with great pomp and dignity: in like manner did they
honor the Emperor of Allemainge, and the other Kings that were slain in the
battle.

Not many days after, the wounded Princes found themselves in good disposition
again, weerevpon they determined to enter the field, because the enemies
demanded the battle: but first of all they provided for the safeguard of the
City, which was committed to the charge of the King Tarnaes of Lacedemonia: and
the Sage Aliart of the Obscure Valley, they having their conduct five hundred
Knights on horseback, and four thousand able footmen, and for the rest of
the Christians they were divided into six several Bands. The first was
conducted by the Pr^nce Primaleon, who had atiending on him two thousand and
five hundred Knights. The second Band, being of the same number, was committed
to the Prince Floraman of Sardignia. The third, to the king Estrellant. The
fourth, to Albanis of Frieze. The fifth, to Drapos Duke of Normandy: all these
five hands being like in number. The sixth was under the charge of the noble
king Edward, to whom came all the rest of the Christian soldiers. The Soldane
Bellagris with his train, had the charge of the utter wings, to give aid
where he saw need required.

When these Knights departed from the city toward the field, they were all in
black Armor, and their shields of the same color without any devices, their
horses were likewise trapped in black, and the more to express their inward
heaviness, they would have neither Drum, Trumpet, nor any kind of instrument
used in war with them. Nevertheless, albeit this sad proceeding to the
battle, declared their own heaninesse, yet was it likewise a fear and
terror to the enemy, seeing them coming far from them: and every man had
closed the Beuer of his helmet, because the enemy should not perceive their
mournful countenances.

When they were come to the place where the Battle should be fought, they
spread themselves abread in the field, after the device of their Captains,
without making any manner of noise at all. The footmen came after, being all
attired in black likewise, and without either Drums, Phifes, or Trumpets,
whereby they gave the enemies to understand, what unfeigned love and affection
they bare to their Emperor, and how they could not forget what gracious and
friendly entertainment, he was wont to make to his very enemies.

A thing which all Princes ought to have in regard, and in remembering the great
virtue of this famous Emperor, to govern their Kingdoms in such sort, as the
people may rather know what a grievous loss they have by the death of such a
Prince, then to behave themselves in such manner, as their Subjects shall
rejoice to be rid of their Governor. The Turks were greatly abashed, seeing
their enemies come marching in this order, they knew well by their mourning
habits, that they would in this battle make no account of their lives.

But Albayzar seeing the astonishment of his Soldiers, came to encourage them
like a noble captain, laying before them the renown of the victory, which
should be the recompense of all their travails, and a sufficient revenge for
the death of many of their parents and friends, who lost their lives before
the walls of Constantinople, for which cause this war was first enterprised.

When he had a good space used these and such like speeches to them, they began
to wax desirous of the battle, and chasing all their formerfeare out of
remembrance, they marched on after the same manner as they did in the first
battle, saving that they were under the charge of other captains, for that
they which conducted them before were slain. Their Armor was very much broken
and bruised, and so died with the blood that issued from their bodies, that it
was almost as strange a sight in the field, as the Christians sad and
mournful habites of black.

King Edward seeing his men placed in decent order, and the backwings in such
regard as he thought meetest, he gave charge to Primaleon to give the consent
with his company, for he had with him the noble Palmerin of England, Florian of
the Forest, Florendos, Platir, Pompides, Blandidon, Don Rosuel, Bellizart,
Dragonalt, King of Navarre, the Giant Dramusiand, and the most renowned princes
of the Court.

On the enemies side, the King of Aetolia was first in the field, because he
conducted the foremost troop, wherein was the most puissant knights in all the
Turkish Army, beside the Giant Framustant, who desired above all other things
to prevail against Dramusiande. The Christians finding themselves in a
readiness, the Turks sounded their Drums and Trumpets to begin the
Battle: but suddenly came on them so great a tempest, as they returned back
again, being not able to join in fight for the space of two hours after.

In the mean time as this tempest continues, let us return to the City of
Constantinople, which (as you have heard before (was committed to the chargs of
Tarnaes king of Lacedemonia, and the Sage Aliart of the Obscure Valley, who
finding by his Art that the City of Constantinople would be brought to
destruction, and that king Edward of England, and the Prince Primaleon, with
the rest of the Princes and Knights that maintained the war, would stand in
great hazard of loosing their lives, being not able to avoid the cruelty of the
Turks who would get the City into their possession: upon these aforesaid
considerations he determined to provide for the safety of the Princesses and
Ladies of high authority, who were (most of them) great with child, and near
the ^ime of their deliverance. Wherefore, that the fruit of their bodies might
not perish in this extremity, he raised a very dark and obscure cloud, which
shadowed the light of the firmament in such sort, as not only they in the
field were covered therewith, but also the City was so wrapped in the cloud, as
it was not possible for them to discern it.

In the mean while, both the Armies remained in great amazement by this
darkness, as they had not the power to meet together, Aliart conveyed
through this da^ke Cloud, the Empress, the Princess Polinarda, and all other
Princesses and Ladies beside, to the Perilous Isle, which the Prince Palmerin
of England had bestowed on him: and he shaddowed the Isle likewise (by his
Enchantment) in such manner, that it remained (as it were) invisible, until
Aliart conceived so well of the time and reason, as he thought good to discover
it. These Ladies were surprised with marvelous admiration, when they found
themselves not in Constantinople, but in a strange land, where they could not
have their company, who had endured so many hard and dangerous conflicts for
their sakes, this (above all other causes) did most offend and trouble their
consciences: yet at length, when they saw no other remedy, they were glad to
practice and content themselves with often visiting each other in their
Chambers, to expel all other cogitations that seem irksome unto them.

Thus will we leave the Empress and her ladies in the Perilous Isle, and
return to the King Tarnaes at Constantinople, who (after the cloud was
vanished away, and the day clear again) seeing that the Empress with her
Ladies, and the Sage Aliart had forsaken his Company, conceived such extreme
grief within himself (doubting least some mischaunce had befallen them (as
amidde his pitiful Lamentations he yielded up the Ghost: leaving the City
so comfortless and dispayring within themselves, as they desired to finish
their lives, forsaking quite all hope in them that were in the Field, to whom
happened what Fortune had ordained, as you may read in the Chapter following.

CHAP. LXV.
Of the second Battle between the Christians and the Turks, and what
happened therein.
THe dark cloud being gone out of fight, and the Sage Aliart having brought
the Empress and her Ladies to the Perilous Isle, the day began to wax clear
again, and the Army marched forward to meet together. But as they were about
to enter the skyrmish, they heard a most lamentable and pitiful outcrye,
which made them stay their hands, and looking about to see the cause of this
noise, they saw a great many of Ladies and Damosells come forth of the City,
with their hair dispersed abroad over their shoulders, and wringing their
hands in very grievous manner. And for that they had lost the King Tarnaes,
and the Sage Aliart, whom they knew were left for their succor and Defense:
they came into the Christian Camp, to their Husbands, Brethren, Sons, and
Kinsmen: For seeing they could promise themselves no assurance in the City,
they would live and die with them in the Field.

King Edward and Primaleon were so amazed at the clamor of these Women, as they
caused their Ensigns to stay, and commanded the Horsemen not to break their
Array, till they had understood the cause of this disorder: but when it was
told them, how that the King Tarnaes and the Sage Aliart had forsaken the
City, they were both driven into a great admyration with themselves,
whereupon they sent Pompides, and Platir into the City, to bring them
certain tidings of this unlooked for mischaunce.

When these two Knights were come into the City, and heard after what manner
the King Tarnaes dyed, as also how the Sage Aliart was gone no man could tell
whether: they began to think within themselves, that both they and all their
Train were brought to such extremity, as Fortune had concluded to finish the
memory of their Knightly deeds, by delivering their lived to the swords of
their enemies. They did likewise persuade themselves, that the Sage Aliart
absented himself for no other occasion, but only because he perceived their
general destruction was at hand: and in this respect, they judged he had
provided some refuge for the Empress and the Ladies, that their Enemies might
not triumph in their misfortunes, to the great coffeehouse of their Lords
and Husbands. With these heavy News they returned to their Camp again,
certifying King Edward, and Primaleon, how the Sage Aliart was departed:
Whereupon they concluded by general determination, to withdraw themselves into
the City, to make provision for the Defense thereof, before they would enter
the Battle with their Enemies.

But I assure you, it was a pitiful sight to behold, how the Men, Women, and
Children, came and fell down at the Princes feet: yea, the Ancient Citizens,
with their gray heads, and white beards, being so weak and feeble with Age, as
they were glad to support themselves with their staves: they all made their
humble requests, that they might rather enter the Battle, and thereto end
their lives, then to be destroyed at home with their Wives and Children by the
enemy.

King Edward, Primaleon, and all other Princes were not a little abashed,
finding the Palace in such a desolate manner, neither the Empress, the
Princesses, nor any of the other Ladies to be found, this vexed their minds
with inexpressible grief. They went into their accustomed Chambers, and not
finding them there to whom they were most affectionate, their very souls were
ready to forsake their bodies: for the young Princes, enjoying their sweet
Ladies so short a time, for whose sakes they had suffered so many bitter
brunts, they thought themselves not able to live any long time, being deprived
of their company, whom they honored with most pure and unfeigned affection. For
now their pains were greater then ever they had been before, and this mishap
was more irksome to them then all the dangers past, because their Ladies were
the rewards of their knightly victories: but having thus lost them on such a
sudden, they were out of hope to enjoy the sight of them any more, wherefore
they seemed as men deprived of their senses, looking ghastly and fearfully one
upon an other, knowing not which way to comfort or redr^sse their present
heaviness.

In this case the Christian Princes remained for the space of three days,
having no mind at all to give their enemies battle, during which time,
Primaleon maid conueiance of the aged men, with their wives and children in
the night time, to diverse of his Castles and Fortresses near adjoining,
knowing them far unable to help in this extremity, and then he caused the
walls of the City to be beaten flat to the ground, which was thought good by
the advice of every one to be so done, and that for two especial causes. The
first, that it would more animate and imbolden the Christians in the time of
battle, seeing themselves dispoyled of the place, wherein they reposed their
assurance of safety. The other, that the enemies should not vaunt how they had
destroyed the City, but that it was defaced by the Christians themselves, if so
be Fortune suffered them to enjoy the victory.

They of the city seeing the walls so spoiled, even to the very first
foundation there^f, conceived such hatred against the Turks (whom they
reputed to cause the subversion of their strongest defense) as they prepared
themselves altogether to enter the Field, to revenge themselves on their proud
and usurping enemies: and so they marched all with the Princes into the Field,
who went in the same manner as they did before, when Aliart conveyed the
Empress and her Ladies from Constantinople to the Perilous Isle.

Albayzar knowing well the intent of his enemies, commanded his Captains to
place their men in array, afterward, the Trumpets summoning them bravely to the
Battle, he commanded the king of Aetolia to give the onset with his Band to
the enemy: whereto the king presently obeyed, and coming on gallantly with his
troop of men, the Prince Primaleon prepared himself to receive him, and
giving his horse the spurs, he prevailed so fortunately in the encounter, as
he made the King of Aetolia measure his length on the ground, but he was
quickly succored by his men, otherwise Primaleon had given him his deaths
wound. Palmerin of England ran against the Prince Argelao, and met him with
such puissance, as his Lance pierced clean through his body, so that he fell
to the ground stark dead: the like did the Knight of the Savage man to a
valiant Knight named Richard, who was esteemed a singular Captain amongst the
Turks: the Prince Florendos, Platir, Gracian, Berolde, and the other knights,
slew them outright likewise that encountered them in the Ioust. Dramusiande and
Framustant brake their Lances, but yet they kept their horses valiantly:
whereupon, they drew their swords, and began to charge each other very
furiously. The Christians behaved themselves so worthily at this first
encounter, as the King of Aetolia (whose train were twice so many in number,
as they with the Prince Primaleon) was glad to retire, being not able to endure
the hardy strokes of the Princes, Palmerin, Florian and Florendos: but they
were feign to betake themselves for refuge to the second squadron, which was
conducted by the King of Caspia, who came bravely upon Primaleon and his
company, yet not able to enforce the^ to retire one foot back from them, for
Palmerin and the other princes maintained the sight so sharply against them, as
they were once more compelled to recoyle backward: Which the Soldane of Persia
perceiving he came to assist them with his company, when in sooth he had made a
great slaughter of the wearied Christians, if it had not been for the Prince
Floraman: who seeing the Soldane of Persia come so fast forward with his
Squadron, he rushed in upon them with his Band of men, and resisted them in
very gallant manner. Palmerin bare great malice to the Soldane of Persia,
because he was so amorous of y^ Princess Polinarda his wife, wherefore he ran
fiercely against him, and brake his Lance so bravely on him, as the Soldane
tumbled headlong backward out of his Saddle: but the Turks labored earnestly
to mount the king again, and Primaleon went to aid the Prince Floraman, who
was likewise cast beside his horse.

Thus were they helping one another of them nearest at hand, so that they had
forgotten Dramusiande and Framustant, who having forsaken their horses, fought
so long together and in such cruel manner, as their bodies were wounded in
many places, but Dramusiande was like to sustain the worst, in that Framustant
was assisted against him by another Knight, named Grantor: and Dramusiande had
been slain between them, if it had not been for the Prince Florian his
dear friend, who came and buckled with Grantor in such sort, as he laid him
dead at his foot immediately.

When the Turks beheld that Grantor was slain, they environed the Prince
Florian and Dramusiande so terrible on every side, as their lines were
brought, into some danger: but the king Estrellant of Hungaria (who had the
charge of the third Christian Squa^ron) entered upon the Tu^^es, and drove them
back perforce, till they saw their friends brought into safety again, and
Framustant was very near discharged of his life, but the Soldane Albayzar
seeing his danger, commanded them altogether to run on the Christians, the
like did King Edward to his men, because they should help their fellows in
their necessity. Florian seeing Albayzar coming with his Lance charged in
his rest, gave his horse the spurs to meet him, and these two worthy knights
encountered together so nobly, as Albayzar was glad to catch hold about the
neck of his horse to shun the fall: but the Prince Florians horse was so
stark with travail, as he fell to the ground under his Master, who leapt out
of the Saddle quickly, so that he sustained no harm by the fall. Albayzar
labored very earnestly, to get Dramusiande and the Prince Florian within the
ranks of his men, because he saw how cruelly they hacked and hewed the
Turks, that he thought himself happiest who could avoid their presence, but
yet such a company of men had Albayzar hemd them in withal, as the loss of
their lives were now determined, if the Sultan Bellagris and Polinarda had not
arrived there with expedition, for they walking up and down with their Bands
of men, to give aid where they perceived necessity required, saw the
dangerous estates of Dramusiande and Florian, and thrusting in upon the Turks
with great puissance, they reskewed Dramusiande, and brought him forth of the
Army to rest himself a while, and they mounted Florian on horseback again,
notwithstanding all the practices of the enemy to the contrary, but they were
glad to convey Framustant forth of the Battle likewise, for they saw him so
sore travailed, as he was scant able to stand on his feet.

After that these two Giants were out of the Field, the greatest hurley burly
was by the prince Psimaleon, because Palmerin of England and the Soldane of
Persia, (they being on foot) fought marvelous fiercely together, the like did
Polinard with a stout Turk named Ferrebrocque, which caused the men on all
sides to hasten to this conflict. The King of Aetolia accompanied with five
hundred knights on foot, came to reskew the Sultan of Persia, but Berolde of
Spain, remembering the death of the King Recinde his Father, joined in fight
with the King of Aetolia, King Edward came thither with his troop of men to
assist his friends, and so did Albayzar on the behalf of the Soldane of
Persia, he bringing with him many Knights, beside four stout and cruel
Giants, whose presence did much terrify the Christians, so that many of them
durst not enter the fight with such Monsters.

Yet could not all these knights and Giants dismay the noble Palmerin of
England, but he continued in fight so bravely with the Soldane of Persia, as he
would not leave him, till he saw him slain at hia foot: for whose death tha
Turks lamented very much, in that he was the principal captain under the
Prince Albayzar, who likewise took the Soldanes death so heavily, as he came
with his men upon the Christians like a mad man. The victory of the Prince
Palmerin against the Soldane, was but little comfort to him, in that he saw ye
prince Polinard (who fought still against Ferrebrocque) fall down dead to the
ground, and Ferrebrocque with diverse other Turks fall down slain on each
side of him likewise: but the death of Polinard was very grievous to his
friends and companions, in that the Emperor Vernar his brother was kilde in the
first battle, and the Empress Bazilia (seeing her lord and husband gone)
reposed al her hope and comfort on the prince Polinard. Florendos, whose grief
could not be expressed for the death of his friend Polinard, because they had
been nourished al their youth together, in the Emperors court) to revenge the
death of her dear friend and companion, he ran fiercely amongst the thickest
of his enemies, and the first he met withal was the giant Pandolfo, who holding
a mighty mace in his hand, advanced himself to receive the prince Florendos.
Then began a fierce and terrible combat between them, so that within a while,
the giant Pandolfo railed and exclaimed against his gods horribly, finding
himself not able to resist the force of one knight, he being wont to vanquish
every one that entered fight with him: but Florendos not regarding his railling
words, brought him into such feeble estate, as at length he fell down on his
knees, when Florendos taking off his Helmet, strooke^ of his head from his
shoulders. Berolde of Spain lekewise slew the king of Aetolia, which when
Albayzar perceived, he came running on Berolde, and twenty knights with him,
so that they had murdered the Spanish prince amongst them, but the Soldane
Bellagris hindered their determination: for he came with his band of men and
reskewed him, commanding four knights to carry him forth of the battle, for
that he seemed rather a dead man, then one that had any life left in him, and
in this order he was brought to Pacentio the Emperors chief Chamberlain, who
had the charge given him for the wounded persons, because he was very skillful
therein, and being a man of very ancient time, he was not judged fit to enter
the fight. The Prince Beroldes misfortune was such grief to his friends, as
they rather desired to bear him company, then to live in hope of an uncertain
victory, which was ye more doubtful to them when they remembered the loss of
the Emperor Vernar, the King Recinde and the other Princes.

But the knight of the Sauageman, seeing the great slaughter that Albayzar made
of his friends, pricked through to the place where he was, and came unto him
with these words. Now is the time Albayzar, which allows us opportuuitie to
satisfy our long desired revenge of each other, and because we two are the
occasions of all this trouble, I pray thee let this quarrel be ended between
thee and me, and let not those (who are innocent in this matter) loose their
lives for our offenses. I am so glad (answered Albayzar) that it is my good
hap to meet with thee at this time, as I would not change my present
fortune for the most renowned estate in the world. So breaking off, these two
valiant Princes began a fierce Co^bat, wherein Albayzar was brought into great
danger, but that a Giant named Altrope came and defended him, which Giant the
knight of the Sauadgeman soon deprived of his life, and would have gone
afterward forth of the Battle to rest himself a while, but the king of
Sparta came with a great many knights, and compassed the knight of the
Sauageman in such sort, as he was fully determined to loose his life amongst
them. Yet so it chanced, that Primaleon and Palmerin, (who saw the hard case
of his Brother Florian) arrived there, and at this ^ickering they slew the king
of Sparta, Luymeno his Son, and Antistes his Brother, beside many other
knights and personages of great account: and on the Christians side were
slain, Tenebrant and Francian, whose loss the Christians did very much
lament. Then was tidinges brought to the Soldane Bellagris, that one had killed
his son Blandidon, which report was so grievous to him, as he brake through
the thickest of his enemies, till he came where his Son lay: then presently
he alighted from his horse, and coming to his Son, he made such sorrowful
lamentations over him, as it would have moved a stony heart to pity.
Blandidon, who had yet some life left in him, hearing the voice of the Soldane
of Niquee his Father, opened his eyes, and offered to lift up his head to
speak unto him: but such was his feebleness, as he could not move his head,
whereupon he was carried forth of the Field, and committed to the custody of the
old Pacentio.

Bellagris took the matter so heavily for his son, as he concluded to finish
his days in that place, and so cruelly was he assaulted by his enemy, as he
likewise resigned up his vital spirit, after that he had kilde the Giant
Malearque. In this conflict were slain of the Turks, the king of Gamba, and
his two Brothers, the Giant Pisistrato, the king of Caspia, the Giant
Framustant, who was slain by the noble Dramnsiande, beside a number of famous
Turks, and on the Christians side were slain Germayne of Orleaunce, Luyman of
Burgundy, Pompides the king of Scots, and diverse other worthy Christian
Soldiers.

But then to amaze them the more, a number of the Citizens of Constantinople,
brought forth such richesse as was left in the City, and set it on fire before
the enemies face, to the end that if the enemy remained victor, he should not
vaunt of the spoil of their goods: but they being not so content, when they
had burnt their riches, went and set on fire the brauest buildinges in the
City, and one after another brought them all into Cinders, which was no small
grief to the Christian Army, seeing such a renowned City so set on fire,
which had triumphed over all other Nations.

Albayzar seeing the christians stricken in a maze at the sight of the fire,
came with a fresh Ba^d of men upon the^, and the knight of the Sauadgeman
seeing Albayzar coming, buckled himself against him, where on either side was
shown incredible prowess: but in the end the Prince Florian prevailed so well
against his enemies, as he yielded up the ghost at his foot; which the Turks
beholding, they began to faint very much, in that their whole hope and refuge
lay in the Prince of Babylon, nevertheless, such was their affection to him,
as they would not depart from his dead body, but hemde in the Knight of the
Savage man so hardly on every side, as they had almost slain him, but that he
was reskewed by diverse of his friends, who in short time got the better of the
Turks, and the Knight of the Savage man was carried to the old Pacentio, who
judged him almost past recovery.

Thus did the Christians obtain the victory of the Turks, albeit with little
pleasure to themselves, for such small account they made of the honor they had
gotten, as no man had any mind to go fetch the riches which was left in the
Turks tents, so grievously did they take the loss of their friends, and the
absence of their Ladies, whom they thought never to see again.

The common Hindes and Boores of the Country, came to ransacke the Turks
Tents, and because they had more knowledge of the Gold, then of the infinite
riches of the precious Stones and other Jewels, they took their fill of the
worst, leaving those things behind them of greater estimation: not much unlike
to Aesopes Cock, that for sooke a precious Stone for a Barley corn, but it is
to be committed to the brutishnes of the people, in that they had not been
brought up in places of knowledge and good judgment.

CHAP. LXVI.
The counsel and advise, that the Sage Aliart gave to them of the Empire of
Constantinople. And how he caused the body of the Emperor Palmerin, and the
other Princes that were wounded in the Battle, to be conveyed to the
Perilous Isle.
WHen the Christians had thus prevailed against the Turks, the Sage Aliart
came into the Christian Camp, and set down order, that all they which had
been flaine in the Battle, should be buried in such manner, as their
posterity after them should remember their singular prowess in this Battle
against the great Turk. And as for them that were living, yet very sore
wounded, he anointed them with a certain kind of ointment, the virtue whereof
was such, as it cast them into a sound sleep.

In the mean while Argentao, the Governor of the Profound Isle, (whom the
Sage Aliart had commanded to come) arrived in the Port of Constantinople,
with four Galleyes, and being come on shore, the Sage Aliart and he went into
the City, and commanded all the inhabitants to assemble themselves together,
which they did immediately, when he began to let them understand, what small
hope was to be reposed on the lives of the Prince Primaleon their Emperor, and
Florendos his Son, because they had been so cruelly wounded in the Battle,
desiring them to take their loss so patiently as they could, and not to dismay
themselves: but that they should provide for the reedifying their City, not
only to assure themselves from the danger of their enemies, but to witness to
the world, that fortune had not the power to root out quite the name of the
noble City of Constantinople, as she had subverted the memory of many other
famous and renowned Cities.

Beside, they should call home again those Citizens, who (for fear of
danger) had taken themselves to the near adjoining Fortresses, and by a
general voice to choose them a governor, for otherwise they should not
contain themselves within bonds of assurance. And therefore (quoth he) I am
the more willing you should choose you a Governor (if so be the Emperor
Primaleon, and the Prince Florendos his Son, should finish their lives, by
the hurts they have received in the Battle, because I would not have you left
comfortless: but this you must understand, that the young Princess Primaleon,
Son of the noble Florendos and the Princess Miragarda, must be the next
inheritour of the Empire. Now, for that the Child is very young, and beside,
he is a long way hence, I would you would get you such a governor, as might be
thought worthy of so great a charge, and whom you may be well contented
withal, until the young Primaleon come to sufficient years, that he may be
able to receive his royal Scepter of government.

And this I must desire you, that you will not be offended because I keep the
child so far from you, for I assure you, he shall be daily in the company of
other noble Princes, with whom he shall exercise Knightly Arms, and learn
the rules of discretion and Virtue, wherewith it is necessary a Prince should
be adorned. For your selves, I would wish you to order your dealings so well,
as he that shall succeed this Empire, may receive no occasion to dislike you:
and that you may continue your course the better, I will come diverse times to
visit you, to let you understand of the welfare of the Emperor Primaleon.

The Citizens of Constantinople took in very good part these friendly
speeches, but they were not a little agrieued, that there was no greater
assurance of the Emperor Primaleons life: wherefore seeing the Sage Aliarts
excused the matter so well, they requested of him, that he would tell them in
what place the young Prince was nourished, that they might come sometimes to
visit him as their Lord and Sovereign.

Your request (answered Aliart) is very great, yet will I somewhat content your
earnest desire: the place where your prince is nourished, is called the
Perillious Isle, which sometime belonged to the Sage Vrganda, but at this time
it is in my custody, for that my brother, and the noble Palmerin of England,
who conquered it with his sword and great loss of his blood, bestowed it upon
me.

After he had thus directed them for the order of their government, he took
his way to the monastery of Saint Clare, where the body of the Emperor
Palmerin lay embalmed, and the bodies of the other Kings and Princess, which
he caused to be conveyed into one of Argentaos Galleys: but Primaleon, King
Edward and his sons, Berolde, Gracian, Floraman of Sardignia, and Blandidon,
who were all esteemed as dead persons, for that Aliart had laid them in such a
trance, they were laid in another Galley, where their wounds were visited very
diligently.

Then the Galleyes departing from the City, the people began to lament
exceedingly, because so many noble princes were brought into such dangerous
estates: yet durst they not show any kind of fear or dismaying, least they
should chance to displease their friend the Sage Aliart. Within few days the
Galleys arrived at the Perilous Isle, where their Ladies received them very
worthily, and the Sage Aliart showed himself so diligent toward the recovery
of their health, as they remained on all sides greatly contented.

FINIS.
To the courteous Reader.
THus Gentlemen, I have finished the second part of this most famous History,
desiring you to bear with the rudeness in the translation, and to esteem of
my good will, which far more then my cunning will stretch unto. As for the
the History of Palmerin d'Oliue, which contaiueth three several parts, and
should have bin translated before this, or Prmaleon of Greece, because they are
the original of all the other stories: after I have ended the third part of
this worthy History (God aiding me) you shall have them very speedily, with
any thing else that I desire you to accept of this, and to consider how highly
it has been, and yet is esteemed in diverse countries, being first written in
the Spanish towgue, next in Italian, and afterward in French, and how it has
been countenanced with the titles of Princes and Personages of great dignity,
which may move you to allow it the better acceptance, in that it is to the
honor of our country of England, and devised by strangers, to honor it the
more. Thus not doubting of your favorable judgment, I humbly take my leave,
wishing you all good happes, that is meet for all such gentle and friendly
minds to have.

Yours A. M.

A Table for the more ready finding of every Chapter, contained in this Book.
OF that which happened to the Prince Florendos, after that he had left the
Castle of Dramorant the Cruel, where he vanquished Astribor. chap. 1. Of that
which happened to the Prince Florendos, after that he departed from the castle
of the Prince Arnalto, chap. 2. How the Damsel of the Princess of Terace,
arrived at the Court of the Emperor Palmerin. And of that which happened to
the Knight of the Tiger. chap. 3. Of that which happened to the Knight of the
Tiger, against those that were in ambush to take the Damosel. chap. 4. Of that
which happened to the Knight of the Savage man, after he departed from the
Court of the Emperor Vernar. chap. 5. Of that which happened to the knight of
the Savage man, before he had taken his farewell of the Damsel. chap. 6. How
the knights which belonged to the giants Brocalon and Baleato, surrendered up
the Castles unto the noble knight of the Savage man: and of that which happned
to the prince Florendos, etc. chap. 7. Of the combats that the Prince
Florendos fought, the second day after he enterprised to guard the Shield of
the Princess Miragarda. chap. 8. Of a strange adventure which chanced before
the Castle of the Giant Almarol, and what happened to the Prince Florendos.
chap. 9. Here shall be declared, what and who the Knight was, that came in the
company of the Princess Arnalte, and for what cause he and she travailed to
the castle of the Giant Almaroll: and of the great entertainment that was made
in the Court, etc. chap. 10. How the Emperor with his noble company, entered
the city of Constantinople, and of the gracious entertainment which was made to
Leonarda, etc. chap. 11. Of an adventure which happened in the Court of the
Emperor Palmerin, and of, etc. cha. 12. Here shall be discoursed what and who
the Damsel was, that had thus gotten the Prince Florian, etc. chap. 13. Of
that which happened to the knight of the Tiger, following the search of the
prince Florian, etc. cha. 14. Of that which happened to the Knight of the
Savage man, etc. cha. 15. Of the adventures which chanced to the Knight of the
Savage man, conducting these Ladies to the king of Spaines Court: and of that
which happened to the knight of the Tiger, etc. cha. 16. Of the combat between
the Giant Espouuantable, and the noble knight of the Tiger: and of the battle
between Berolde, Plaetih and the Sage Aliart, etc. cha. 17. Of that which
happened to the noble Prince Palmerin of England, etc. cha. 18. Here is yet
contained what happened to Palmerin of England, etc. chap. 19. How Alfernao
arrived at the Emperors court of Constantinople, etc. cha. 20. How the princes
and knights which were prisoners to the great Turk, arrived at the court of
Constantinople, whereupon the king Recinde delivered out of prison, etc. chapter 21.
How the knight of the Savage man (accompanied with the damsels) arrived in the
king of Spaines court, and of that which happened to him there against the P.
Albayzar. chapter 22. How the Damsels knight and Albayzar iousted together. chap.
23. Of that which happened to the Damsels knight, in going to the Castle of
Almaroll. cha. 24. How Trafolant and these other three knights yielded
themselves in the Spanish court. And how the damsels knight arrived at the
Castle, etc. cha. 25. Of the Iousts which were enterprised between the
Damsels knight, and him that kept the shield of the Princess Miragarda: and
of the combat at which the knight, etc. c. 26. Of that which happened to the
damsels knight, as he returned to the Court of Recinde, etc. chap. 27. What
the Prince Flore^dos did to the vanquished knight. And how those knights whom
the prince Florian had conquered, etc. chap. 28. Of that which happened to the
Knight of the Savage man, when he came to the Castle where Arnalte the
Princess of Navarre, etc. chap. 19. How the Prince Albayzar embarked himself
to sail into Turkey, after he had presented himself to Leonarda, the
Princess of Thrace, etc., chap. 30. Of that which happened to the knight of
the Tiger, after he was departed from the Perilous Isle, etc. chap. 31. How
the Knight of the Tiger took his leave of Meliadus the King of the Scots, and
of the Princess Armisia his daughter, etc. chap. 32. How the knight of the
Tiger arrived at Constantinople, and of an adventure which was, etc. chap. 33.
Of the talk which the Prince Palmerin had with the princess Polinarda his
Lady. chap. 34. How certain Knights arrived at the Court of the Emperor
Palmerin, who were advertised how the Turks had provided a great Army, etc.
chap. 35. Of an adventure which happened (during the trouble at Constantinople)
in the Realm of France, and after what manner, etc. chap. 36. Of that which
happened to certain other knights, who would prove the adventure of these, etc.
chap. 37. Of that which happened to the knight of the Savage man, in proving
the adventure with these four, etc. chap. 38. How the strange knight entered
the field to Ioust under the name of madame Latrania. chap. 39. Of that which
happened to the strange knight, the first day he guarded the passage of the
Valley. chap. 40. The complaints which the strange Knight made in the night
time, under the window of the chamber, where the four Ladies, etc. chap. 41.
What happened to the strange knight the second day he guarded the passage of the
valley. chap. 42. Of that which happened to the strange knight the third and
etc. chap. 43. Of that which happened to the strange knight this night: and how
the Knight of the Sphere entered the combat the day following. chap. 44. Of
that which the strange knight did the day following, garding the Valley, chap.
45. Of that which happened to the strange knight the last day he guarded the
passage, under the name of Madame Torsia. chap. 46. How the knight of the
Savage man arrived at the Court of Constantinople: and how Dragonalt and
Arnalte the Queen of Navarre; etc. chap. 47. How Arnedes king of France and his
Queen, Recinde king of Spain and his Queen, accompanied with the princess
Miragarda and the Giant Almaroll, arrived at, etc. chap. 48. Of the conference
which the Emperor had with the Princes: and how the marriages which he had
appointed were now etc. chap. 49. How the Sultan Bellagris was baptized, and
how afterward the Emperor caused him to be married to Pandritia, and how, etc.
chap. 50. How the Queen of Thrace was conveyed away by a strange adventure,
while the knights, etc. chap. 51. How by the aid of the Sage Aliart of the
Obscure Valley, the noble knight of the Savage man delivered out of the
Enchantment his, etc. chap. 52. Of that which the Christians did in
Constantinople, at what time the Princess Targiana sent tidings to the Court
of the Emperor Palmerin, of the coming of his enemies. chap* 53. How the
enemies sent an Ambassador unto the Emperors Court, and of the answer was,
etc. chap* 54. How the Army of the great Turk arrived at the Port of
Constantinople, and of the noble and valiant prowess of the Christians, etc.
cha. 55. Of the grief and sorrow made in Constantinople, for the dangerous
estate wherein the Giant Dramusiande was brought: And how the Turks placed
their camp before the city of Constantinople. cha. 56. Of that which Albayzar
did after he had well provided for his army, and of the succor which came to
the Emperor Palmerin. cha. 57. Of an adventure which happened by the arrival
of a strange knight, accompanied with a Lady, in the Prince Albayzars camp.
cha. 58. Hear shall be declared, after what manner the Prince Florian of the
Forest, arrived at Constantinople, and of many things etc. cha. 59. How the
combat between twelve Turks and twelve Christians was begun, and how the
Ladies caused it to be given, etc. cha. 60. Of a noble and valiant combat
between Dramusiande and the Giant Framustant. cha. 61. Of the battle
between the Turks and the Christians, and of that which happened. cha. 62. Of
the first battle between the Christians and the Turks, and the success
thereof. cha. 63. Of that which they did in Constantinople, before they gave
the enemy the second battle. cha. 64. Of the second battle between the
Christians, and the Turks, and what happened. cha. 65. The counsel and advise
that the Sage Aliart gave to them of the Empire of Constantinople. And how he
caused the bodies of the Emperor Palmerin and the other Princes, etc. chap.
66.
The end of the Table.

