A GODLY AND FRVITEFVLL Sermon, made upon the 20. and 21. verses of the 14.
Chapter of the book of Genesis: Wherein there is taught, what provision ought
to be made for the mynister.

Very necessary to be learned of all Christians.

By Eusebius Paget

VBIQVE FLORET.


LONDON Imprinted by John Wolf, for Thomas Man, dwelling in Paternoster row,
at the sign of the Talbot, 1583.

Genesis. 14. 20 Abram gave him Tithe of all.

21 Then the King of Sodom said to Abram. Give me the persons, take the
goods to thyselfe.


THE last time beloved that I was in this place, which was the fourth day of
this last week, you heard that this third and last part of this chapter,
The repetition
contains the triumph of Abram after the victory: In whose return from the
battle he was met of 2. Kings, the one King of Sodom, the other was the King
of Salem. Wherein we considered first, ye Abram and the king of Sodom in ye
first part: secondly, the dealings between Abram and Melchisedech in the
second part. In the first part whereas Sodom came forth to meet Abram: We did
note, that adversity teaches many good lessons, which men in prosperity will
never learn: namelye, the King of Sodom who before this time would neither
pity Abram being a stranger, nor reverence him for his religion which he
professed every where, and set up badges and Ensigns of the same in every
place where he came, but in his prosperity had his whole delight in
wantonness and pride, and is now by aduerssite taught humility: and he
comes forth to meet and salute Abram. Secondly, that this king now saw what
profit he got by pride, and what the way of wickedness had brought him unto,
and that the estate of Abram, how troublesome, mad, and foolish soever it
seemed to him, yet to be far better and more glorious then his, so, there is
not so wicked a man but that he once acknowledges his own estate to be
miserable, and the estate of Gods children to be most happy and blessed. Next
the history of Melchizedech followed, inserted as in a parenthesis, Wherein
we considered. First what he was, 2. what he did, 3. what he said. Out of the
first part, which is at large described in the seventh to the Hebrews, we
considered first his name, to wit Melchizedech, which signifies righteousness,
and that he was king of Salem, yt is peace, wherein the holy ghost notes ye
righteousness is king of peace. and that righteousness governs in the kingdom
of peace, and no peace where unrighteousness reigns, as the prophet Isa.
57.21. says, there is no peace says my God to the wicked. Secondlye, in that
first part we noted that he was without Father and Mother. For that the holy
Ghost does make no mention of them. Wherein I showed how vainly they deal,
that would have him to be either Shem, or an Angel, or the son of God, and
brought forth reasons to confute those fancies. Thirdly, we considered that
he was King and Priest, noting in all these things that he was a figure of
Christ. First in his name, for that Christ is righteousness it self, reigning
in men's conscyences, and bringing peace to the soul: secondly in his parents
Christ is without father in respect of his manhood, and without mother in
respect of his godhead: Thirdly in his offices, Christ is a King to reign, and
a priest to offer up sacrifice to God his father for ever. Then we considered
the deeds of Melchizedech, which was the bringing forth of bread and wine to
relieve the wearied army of Abram: where in I confuted the fancy of the
Papists, that would have this bread and wine of Melchizedech, to be a figure
of their Mass: First, showing that if there had been any such matter in it,
the holy Ghost would have noted it in the 7. to the Hebrews, where he
descrybeth him so largely. For if it had figured so great a mystery as they
account their mass to be, the holy Ghost would not have set so light by it,
as to have said never a word of it. Melchizedech brought forth bread, but
they deny their sacrifice to be bread, but the body of christ: In denying
their wafar cake to be bread, they say truly, for it is a paltry thing, not
moving the senses of the receauers to that consideration it should: Besides
that, it has been made as many wright, of bad confections, as dogs grease.
And some of their ancestors before time made their stuff with infants blood,
and some with more filthy and abominable things then are here to be named.
Melchizedech brought forth bread and wine to refresh the feeble souldiars,
wherein was noted, that the Lord does always provide for those that travail
in his business, and take pains to deliver the oppressed, as Abram
aduenturing to deliver his brother Lot, receives comfort by a stranger.
Melchizedech blessed Abram from the lord, in which his words were noted, that
blessings came from God, and that they are the Lords blessings, and not man's
that stand, and his curses that take effect. Next they that comfort the
afflicted are blessed of God, and they that grieve the Spyrite of GOD in his
children, by adding afflictions to afflictions, are cursed of God: coming from
that to the title wherein he called him possessour of Heaven, and Earth. I
noted he gave God these titles, being only possessour of Heaven, and that the
Pope can not open and shut it with his pardons at his pleasure, for heaven is
the Lords: and next in that he names him possessour of earth: I noted that he
will take account of us whether we use it as he has directed us, or abuse it
contrary to his will, and therein we see what a happy and blessed thing it is
for Gods children, whose kingdom and inheritance is not upon the earth but in
heaven, where no tyrannous oppressors can trouble and annoy: on the other side
what a woeful change shall these oppressing tyrants make, which say, now ye
earth is theirs to serve their lusts, and then they must answer to the
professor of it, and must flit to hell from the earth for their abusing it. So
Melchizedech ended his speech with thanksgiving and yielding the glory of that
triumph unto God for the victory as to him was due, and these were the
Principal notes which I gave then as I remember. Now it rests before we
enter into the history of the king of Sodom, that we consider what Abram did
to Melchizedech: The holy Ghost says, Abram gave him Tyth of all, wherein he
gives us to consider that Abram being lightened by Gods spirit, saw in
Melchizedech some more excellent thing then is ordinarilye found in men, and
therefore he gave him an extraordinarye entertainment, and presented him with
such a present, as we read not of in the Scriptures, until we come to this
place therefore that we may the better understand it, let us observe. First,
what it is that is given, namely Tithes. Secondly, to whom it was given, to
Melchizedech. Thirdly by whom they were given, by Abram, and Fourthly, whereof
these Tithes were, which are set down by the holy Ghost in the epistle to the
Hebrews 7. to be of the spoils which Abram had gotten in the Wars, as
appears in ye fourth verse. Tithes were a portion which the Lord reserved to
him self to be paid to himself, by them to whom he gave the possession of
the earth, and the enjoying of Earthlye blessings, so Moises says Leuit.
27.30. The tith is the Lords, it is holy to the Lord. So Jacob said, Gene.
28.22. Of all thou shall give me, I will give the tenth to thee, which thing
was yielded as a testimony of their grateful and thankful minds to him that
bestowed those benefits upon them, and as an acknowledgement that all they
had was the Lords, and they held the same of him in chief. For the second
part to whom it was given, it is here noted that it was to Melchizedech, an
axcellent person, a figure of Christ, the son of God, a choice man placed by
the Lord, as it were in his own room, to take homage of Abram for the Lords
right, and thus the Lord has dealt in sundry places of the scripture,
appointing diverse sons of men to be his deputies, to receive relief of
those outward signs of the inward honor due unto him self, of which sorts
there be principally four. First, the Levites appointed to teach Gods people,
who being first cursed by Jacob for the bloodinesse of the hands of Leui, and
left without any tribe or inheritance, but to be divided in Jacob, and
scattered in Israel. Genesis 49.7. their hands were after sanctified of the Lord
for showing their love and zeal to the Lord, in killing the idolaters which
had worshipped ye calfe. The curse of dividing and scattering, the Lord
applied as a means that his law might be taught in every corner of Israel,
and the loss of their inheritance he recompensed by feeding them with his
own portion, and promising them that he himself would be their lot and their
inheritance. Nomb. 18.20. The second sort are the poor, the stranger, the
fatherless, and the widow. Deuteronomy. 26.12. The third sort are kings, whom the
Lord has placed in his own room, to guide and govern his people, as
Samuel said when the people would needs have a King, he will take the tenth
of your sede and of your fields and give it to his Eunuchs and to his
servants. 1. Sam. 8.15. The fourth sort, were the children of the Prophets
trained up at school at Rama, and such other places as Universities, that they
might be the apter for the matters of the Lord, as may be gathered by sundry
places of the scripture. Next comes to be considered, who paid Tithes: namely
Abram: wherein the author to the Hebrews, notes what an excellent man
Melchizedech was, to whom Abram the Patriark paid tithes: but far more
excellent is the Kingdom and Priesthood of Christ, figured by Melchizedech: he
also does teach us that the end and abolishing of the priesthood of Leui was
figured in this, that Leui in the loins of Abraham paid Tithes to
Melchizedech. This also was figured in that the priests, and Levites paid
tithes (of those Tithes which were brought them) to the high priest (who was
also a figure of Christ) Number. 18.26. Lastly in this text we are to note whereof
he paid tithes, which the holy Ghost to the Heb. 7.4. answers to be of the
spoils gotten by his hands. There were sundry sorts of Tithes paid, as of
the fruits of the ground, of the gains of their hands, and of the increase
of their Cattle, whereby we see the great care that God had for the Levites in
providing, for them that had no inheritance of their own: so that as the
people of Israel had increase of any fruits, the Levites attending upon
religion, had their portion of the same. As these tithes were of diverse sorts,
so were they diversely paid, of some they paid the first fruits, of some the
third, of some the tenth: some were paid in money, and some otherwise, whereby
we see that the holy ghost speaking of tithes is not always to be understood of
tenths some do take it, but these Tithes were of the fruits gotten by Abram his
hands. Thus have you heard the sum of this text. But now it is convenient
(this being the first time that we find the mat-of Tithes, spoken of since we
began this book of Genesis) that we should enter deeper into these words and
learn somewhat out of them for our selves. Which matter I would gladly pass
over for the avoiding of false surmises and sinister reports, but that our
Savior in that commission given in the latter end of the 28. after Matthew,
gives commandment, saying: Teach them to do all that I have commanded you:
And the Apostle Paul in the Act. 20. cap. 26. and 27. verses protests that he
is free from the blood of all men, for that he kept nothing back, but had
showed them all the counsel of God: the minister therefore must teach all that
Christ has commanded, even all the councels of God revealed in his word, and
he that keeps them back, shall be found guilty both of the breach of the
commandment of Christ, and also of the blood of his flock. The Pastor must
teach threefore, and you must learn not only to know the duty of a
Minister to his people, but also of the people toward their minister.
Howsoever therefore the doctrine delivered, shall be mistaken or wrested, yet
the truth must be delivered, let men take it as they will, the Lord will give
it such success as he shall think best. Some peradventure will ask what this
matter of tithes appertains to the ministry now? and will (to save their
goods) say, that these were ceremonial laws, and so were abrogated by
Christ's coming. To whom I answer, that the Lord (of that portion reserved
unto him self) appointed some part to the Levites for the mayntenance of the
ministry about the Lords work. and some part of them for the sacryfices of
meat offeringes, drink offeringes, sin offeringes, trespass offerings, and
peace offeringes: this last part for the sacrifices was ceremonial, and so
Christ the body being come, the shadows are ended. But this, that homage be
done to the King of all Kings, and that the mynystrye be maintained for the
setting forth of the true worship of GOD, and suppressing of all false
worships, is not ceremonial but moral, and shall so long continue as any face
of a Church or religion shall be upon the earth. He therefore that shall say
that this is altogether ceremonial and ended by Christ, says ye Christ is a
hinderer, and less careful for the ministry of the Gospel, then he was for
the exercise of figures and shadows under the law. But many of these men which
so willinglye would have this law for the maintenance of the ministry to be
disanulled as ceremonyall, and yet do like enough, and to much of other
ceremonies, not only Iewishe, but Antichristian and Popish, even taken from
the heathen, do hereby declare that it is not the ceremony, which they would
have buried, but the preaching of the Gospel that they can not abide, for that
it rippeth up their conscience, it rubbeth just where they are galled, and
discovers their sins: It is not a ceremonye, it is this that greeueth them.
On the other side, satan (seeking to bring the ministers either to slack their
dilygence in Gods matters, and to get their bread by other means, or by
poverty to run into debt, contempt and shame) haith raised up a sort of
covetous men, which pull from the ministers what they can, and will as willingly
have their guts drawn out of their belly, as they will part from any of their
goods for the maintenance of the ministers. And these men will seem to have
scripture for their purpose, yea they have this at their fingers end out of
Mat. 10. 8. Freely ye have received, freely give, so far they have learned, but
no further, for that it served not their purpose: For our Savior left not his
Apostles without their provision in this their painful journey, but in the
same chapter appointed in every city where they should come, that they should
be received into the houses of them that were worthy. and that provision
should be set before them for their maintenance, but if they found not places
fit for that peace they brought, they should shake the dust from their feet to
be a witness of greater vengeance to that place, then that which light upon
Sodom and Gomorrhe: But few are those houses that such men hold and keep,
where the minister may be received with his wife and children, and have
maintenance set before them with joy: yea few they are in deed where the
sincere minister may eat his meat with joy, but that the abundance of sin
shall make him think his bread to be as grauel between his teeth, and his
drink to be as wormwood to his taste, and so with grief they would soon
make the minister with shame to go and beg his bread. But as our Savior
that gave that former particular charge, to give freely, and to take neither
bag nor scrip nor money, so afterward in the 22. of Luke 35. he does ask his
Apostles whether they wanted any thing or no, when he thus sent them forth and
added therewithal, now he that has a scrippe, let him possess it, and he
that has not a sword let him sell his coat and buy one, that is, the world
will grow to such misery, and the ministry to such affliction, yt every one
will be ready to scratch and pull from you. Therefore use ye the means that
are lawful in the fear of the lord for your maintenance.

That this matter may be the playner laid open, and made more manifest to the
capacity of our understanding. Let us consider, first whether there be any
stipend appointed for the ministry or no? 2. How the same should be paid? 3. to
whom it should be paid? For the first, the law of nature taught it them that
had not the law of God to direct them, sundry godly kings have executed it,
the Fathers directed by Gods spirit before the law was written used it, God by
his law established it, Christ has ratified it unto us in the new testament,
and the Apostles have in sundry places taught it, and because the Apostle Paul
made a large discourse of this matter, and used sundry reasons to prove the
same, let us leave all other, and rippe up those in the 1. Cor. 9. where he
uses four principal reasons to confirm the same. The first gathered of the
example of the Apostles, The second by comparison. The third of the law
written, the fourth of ye authority of Christ. First he says it is lawful,
yea the other Apostles have power to take maintenance of you for them and their
wives, and may not I and Barnabas have it? His reason of comparison he
follows thus. The soldier has his costs borne in his warfare, the
husbandman eats of the fruits of his labors, the shepeheard feeds of the
milk of his flock. The Ox has his mouth open to feed of ye corn he
treads out. They that waited of the altar were fed of ye same, we the
ministers are the soldiers and ensign bearers in your christian wars, we are
Gods husbandmen, you are Gods husbandry, we are the shepheardes, you are the
sheep, we tread you out and divide unto you the bread of life, the word of
God, we minister not unto you figures and shadows as the Leuits did, but the
gospel, the power of God to salvation, why should not we then be maintained as
soldiers? why reap we not of our labors as husbandmen? why are we not fed as
shepherds? Why have we not the liberty of Oxen? Why live we not of our
calling as the Leuits did? Is our calling more vile then any other occupation?
Are not our labors worthy meat and drink? Yes, yes, your gain is great by
exchange with us, for dross you have gold, for carnal things, spiritual.
And for earthly things, heavenly. Yea further, you can find nothing in the
world to be laid in equal balla^ce to weigh against the word of God: from
reasoning thus by comparison, he proceeds to his argument of authority of
the law written, and therein he stands not long, for he said it is
sufficient, his word is a reason of force, and his will is a perfect rule of
righteousness. Then he goes forward to his 4. argument, and proves that Christ
allowed and ratified the same in the gospel, ordeyning that they which preach
the gospel should live of the gospel. And the Apostle to the Gal. 6.6.7.
uses ye same reason used before in the law, for there the Lord challenged it
as a law due unto himself, and here he says, that he which defraudeth the
minister, deceyueth himself, and mocketh God: for as he was king before ye
law, and in the law before the coming of Christ in the flesh, so is he king
still, the preaching of the gospel is the scepter of his kingdom, the ministers
are his scepter bearers, and therefore he shows by the Apostle. 1. Tim. 5.17.
that they which labor in the word and doctrine, are worthy of double honor,
that is, a liberal allowance of the maintenance of him and his. For the second
part, how the same should be paid, or whereof raised, the holy Ghost has not
appointed, therefore to say that the tenthes belong to the ministers as
commanded by the Lord, we have no warrant for it, neither dare I say that the
magistrate may not appoint ye tenthes for the mainetenance of the ministry,
except I saw the same forbidden by the lord. As kings have received their
kingdoms and scepters from the Lord, so must they endeavor that the kingdom
of God may have place in their dominions, that he may rule amongst the^ by his
word, and that the ministers be sufficiently provided for, as they will
answer for it to the king of kings, of whom they hold their crowns in
chief: but it is left at liberty to the^ to raise it, either by tenths of
fruits of ye earth, or of cattle, or of money, or by what means they shall in
their godly wisdom think most convenient, and the more certain they make
this portion, the mo mischiefs they do prevent, for the leaving of it
uncertain, does often cause the minister, either to make merchandise of the
word, or for gain to flatter ye welthy, or with shame for want to beg, or for
need to starve, all which subtle practices Satan daily puts in execution,
seeking thereby either to overthrow the ministry, or to make it by such
blemishes to loose the force and beauty of the same. But though magistrates
should be careless in these matters, yet the people of God must be careful to
do their duty in this respect. There was no king of Canaan that be law
compelled Abram to pay these tithes, neither was there any Christian prince in
the primative Church, that by law appointed maintenance for the ministers, yet
Abram paid, and the Apostles and bishops after them were provided for. But to
come nerer to see how they must be paid. This must be paid religiously, readily
and liberally: religiously as to God for the enlarging of his kingdom, the
defense of the truth, and maintenance of his true worship. It must be done
readily in time convenient, and of a willing mind. It must be done liberally,
that the minister be not driven to slack his calling and to employ his time in
other things, thereby to get his living: by this liberallitie I mean not yt
they should be glutted up with dainties and maintained pompously, for that is
as great a mischief on the other side. For when Satan can not stop ye
preaching of the gospel by pennury and scarcity, then he tries to choke and
smother it with the glory of the world, and this way alas he does too much
prevail. But though there be some either made slow of speech, or altogether
tong-tied by this God Mammon and so bewitched, that they can like better of
ministers that live as Athiests, drunkerds, wantons and old doting priests,
then they do of paineful and sincere preachers, yet it is a wonder to see with
what cursing and swearing, how slackly and slowly, and with what pinching and
sparing the rest have their portions, unless they had all conspired to
overthrow the ministry. Abram was rich and yet paid tithes: the rich now a
days that should give most liberally, will for the most part take tithes, there
are very few of them that will pay any. The ministers are driven to live of
that they can have of the poorest, which are often times so scraped, that they
are more meet to take alms then to pay tithes. In the book of Nehem. 13.4.
there is a story recorded how Tobiah the Ammonite kinsman to Eliashib ye priest
had gotten by his favor into the chamber made for the provision of the house
of God and of the Levites, so that they fled to their land, and left the house
of God void, but when Nehemiah heard of it, he obtained liberty of king
Artahshasht, and came to Jerusalem with grief, he found the same to be true,
he cast out all Tobiah his stuff, and resorted those things to their former
use. If that our noble prince would now send forth some godly and zealous
Nehemiah, to look to these matters now, he might find a number of Tobiahs
entered into the chambers, appointed for the provision of the ministry. First
he should find yt the Abbeys (kinsmen to the high priest of Rome) began to
make this spoil, and got into their hands the best benefices by impropriating
them, they are overthrown, these spoils are not restored, but many men live
of that they stole from the ministry. Secondly he should find a number of
bishops equal in this sin, with Eliashih, or with that high priest of Rome,
for they have spoiled many benefices by confirming leases to their kinsmen by
power, or by blood, or by the purse, yea I know one bishop in this realm,
that has confirmed I think nere 20. of the best benefices in his diocese,
some to his children, some to his kinsmen, some to his officers, some for money
to diverse that are as badde as Ammonites in religion, Thirdly he shall find a
number of patrones that will be so nigh kinsmen to the ministers, that they
will have all the house and profits, and allow them scraps with the serving
men, when they have waited on their patrones trencher, or they will cousin them
of the house and gleabe, it is part of their inheritance, it stands as
conveniently for them, as Nabothes vyneyard did for Ahab, let our cosins the
pield priests dwell in some bad cotages, these houses are meeter for gentle
men: or they will for cosinage have the tith corn for provision for their
house, and leave their poor cousin tithe goose and tith calfe, with the eggs
at Easter, at least they will have their own tithes. Never a chaplain of them
all shall put them besides it. Some what there must be given to the mystresse
their wives, or to find a child at School. Fourthly, he shall find many
wealthy and mighty men to be so near kinsmen to the ministers, yt they will
pay either nothing, or very little, they will pleasure them some other way. But
if they may not have it as they list, they will be neither their cosins nor
friends, the preacher nor gospeller must not harbor there, he were better to
be many a mile from them. To be short, I am not able to reckon up the practices
that this good commissioner should find devised by satan and put in execution
by men, for the cosining and spoil of the ministry, profane me^ have dealt
better with their idle priests then we with our ministers. Pharao that
heathenishe king, in whom was no religion, took this order when the great
famine was in Egypt, as appears in Genesis 47.22 that his idol priests were
maintained of his own charge. Iezabel that Qeeene so full of wickedness,
mayntained Baals priests at her own table 1. King. 18.17. and Michah as it is
in the book of Judges 17.5.10. made him an Idol, got him a priest, and
provided for him his handful, to wit, very liberally: equal with Pharao, with
IeZabell, and with Michah, were our forerunners in the time of popery, who
crammed both the bellies and the pursses of Satan's hirelings, ye chapplaines of
Antichrist who could do nothing but say a Mass or mumble up a mattins, but
now in the time of the Gospel to get any thing for the maintenance of the
ministry of the same, is as I said before, as grievous to them as the pulling
of their bowels out of their bellies, yea, they seek to put away even that
which is less. Here I might take occasion to show both how religion and
justice, godliness and honesty are made shipwreck of by the spoil of the
ministry: for thereby eight commandments of the ten are broken. For neither
the knowledge of God, nor the true estimation and love of him commanded in the
first commandment: nor the avoiding of Idolatrye, and setting forth of the
true worship of God, prescribed in the second commandment, nor the reverence
of the name of God set forth in the third, nor the observation of the
sabbath, established in the 4. Nor the honor of the ministry appointed in the
fifth. Nor the avoiding of bloudguiltines and preservation of life given in
charge in the 6. Nor the giving to every man his right required in the 8. Nor
the having of a contented heart without any motion, coveting or desiring yt
which is another man's, straightly exacted of us in ye tenth, are any whit at all
regarded, so yt by violating all the commandments in the first table, it
shows yt there wants godliness in him yt spoileth the ministry: and by
breaking 4. commandments of the second table, it declares ye honesty has
suffered a very dangerous shipwreck: At a word it gives an euideth testimony yt
there remains in ye man a very small remnant, either of religion, or else of
righteousness. Now we are to consider, to who^ these tithes, stipends, or
maintenance (call the^ as you please) are to be paid. They are to be paid to
such as are ensign berers in ye Lords wars: they yt preach the gospel must
live of the gospel. Abram paid tithes to Melchizedech, who had applied him
self to comfort Abram, to give thanks to God to preach and show forth the
praises of God. Our savior commands yt the hier should be paid to the
laborers, and the Apostle appoints the double honor to them yt travel in the
word and doctrine, and he commands 2. These. 3.10. that if there were any
which would not work yt they should not eat, so yt the mass men, ye idle
shepherds, the dumb dogs, ye blind and sleepy watchmen, the wine prophets, ye
foolish ignorant shepherds, ye idle loiterers, and ye slowbellies, have no
part of this allowance allotted unto the^, either by the law, the prophets, our
savior, or his Apostles, their allowance is woe, the price of blood for the
guiltines of the people of god Yet these ye preach least, fleece most, and if
they procure a quarter sermon for their people, this must be one principal
caveat to ye preacher, the people are slack in paying their tithes, they must
be stirred up to feed the idle flatterer, and some preachers are so simple as
to serve the greedy chapleins humor for his Noble. Lord in thy good time
remove these loiterers, scraping sleecers, and time seruers, and place in
their room such painful laborers as will bear the weight of the burdens, and
abide ye brunt and heat of the day, and be esteemed worthy to yt honor you have
appointed for them. Now it rests that we proceed with ye history of the king
of Sodom, wherein is set down, first the supplication which the king of Sodom
made to Abram expressed in the 21. ver. next the answer of Abram to the same,
which follows in the 3. last verses. In ye king of Sodoms supplication. Give
me the persons, take the goods to thy self: is showed great equitye and
charity, equity toward Abram, in that he would take neither men nor money
without Abrams leave, for that by his painful travels, and endangering his
own life, he had gotten them as spoils in the wars, and craving the men he
desires not the goods, but is willing to leave them with him: on the other
side, he shows great charity and pitye fowardes his subjects, in yt he sueth
so earnestly to have the^ set at liberty. This surely is a notable
supplication, and a very rare example of a singular suit. If we consider all
circumstances. First he is very poor, then his countreye is spoiled, next his
goods are carried away, he is left very bare, why does he not rather in respect
of him self, seek the riches and ask the goods, then crave the men. Why does
he not consider yt he has nothing to keep them on, no not for himself. All
these considerations are swallowed by ye love he bears to his subjects, his
mercy to his men full of miseries and calamities, causes him to regard none of
those things, but he says, Give me the persons, take the goods to thy self.
This example is seldom followed (to ye shame I speak it of the miserable
worldlings that live in these days) yt this profane king not professing God,
dwelling at the vile place Sodom, showed more mercy toward men, the^ many
called christians, dwelling in ye body of Christian realms, do to their
Christian brethren. Few are those masters yt tender not their beasts more then
their servants, few are the Landlords that regard not the goods more the^ men,
as the oppressing of ye poor, by rackinges of rentes, by excessive fines, by
extraordinary payments, gnawing from them the bread gotten with paineful hands,
before it can come into the childrens bellies, and the vnharbouring of the
harbourlesse, when they have scraped them to the bones does witness, and the
cry of the same does come to the ears of the Lord of hosts, by the pitiful
complaints of men, women, and children, widows, and Orphans, yea, the
fatherless infants, are driven to wail, because that merciless Landlordes
crave the goods and have no compassion upon christians. To be short, few are
those ministers ye care more for the souls, then for the stipends and tithes,
as the covetous heaping up of many benefices together the number of none
residentes, ye careless setting over of souls, to journey men and hirelings
that will serve best chepe, ye greedy scraping for tithes, ye seldom preaching
yea many great Rabbyns which would be counted ioly preachers, will preach no
oftener then shame, law, or iniunction compel the^. Yea some that should spur
others forward, may be presented in their several charges for defaulte of
their quarter Sermons. This testifies yt they seek not the souls but the
goods. Thus in these few words we see ye course of the world in general,
which is to be condemned by this example of the king of Sodom, and I fear it
will not be amended til God consume us and our corruptions with fire, as he did
the Sodomits. The time is past, the answer of Abram I defer to the 4. day of
this weke. Let us pray that we may profit by that we have now heard.

FINIS.

