THE benefit that Christians receive by Jesus Christ crucified.

Translated out of French into English, by A. G.

Imprinted at London at the three Cranes in the Vintree, for George Bishop and
Thomas Woodcocke. 1580.

To the English Reader.
THou have here delivered to thee, good Reader, a little treatise, first written
in the Italian tongue, and printed at Venice: after that, translated intoo the
French language, and printed at Lions, and now^ translated and printed for thee
to read in the English tongue. Enquire not of the Author, he is unknown, and
to know him, would do thee but little good. Read the book devoutly, regard
the matter of it attentively, it may do thee much good in these evil days.
This may be counted among the greatest evils with which this age is infected,
that they, which are called christians, are miserably divided about Christ. And
yet in truth (as the Apostle says unto us,) 2. Cor.^
there is but one God, which is the father, of whom are all things, and we in
him: and our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him. To
discourse on this division and the cause thereof, would be to some pleasing,
to some it would be displeasing. For what one truth can please minds so
diversely divided? would God it could please al to become one in that one
Christ, whose name we all do carry. In this little book is that benefit^
which comes by Christ crucified to the Christians, truly and comfortably
handled: which benefit if all Christians did truly understand and faithfully
embrace, this division would vanishe away, and in Christ the Christians should
become one. To this end read this book, and much good in Christ may it do
to all them which do read it.

Amen.
The Translator sends greeting to all Christians under heaven.
I Cannot marvel enough whereof it comes that all of us are more moved by
injuries then by benefits: and that we take the one so much too heart
imprinting them in our remembrance, and forget the other so suddaynely. Truly
we cannot deny, but that among so many other imperfections wherewith we are
unhappily defiled, we have also taken this, of the great corruption and
maymednesse of our earthly and transitory humane nature, wherein there cannot
be imagined any thing more inconvenient nor more hurtefull, than reprochefull
unthankfulness, which a man might rightly term the welspring of all Vices.
For by it our minds are so drawn away and perverted, that the more we be
besette round about, and laden with the benefits of GOD our Sovereign
Father, so much the more become we blockishe, and as it were distraught and
out of our wits, running after our own lusts and vanities, wherthrough (as
though we had drunk of the River Lethe,) we forget our selves, and misspende
our whole time, busying our heads like little Children that go seeking of
pinnes in the Sand, whereaboute they are so wholly occupied, that although a
man call them, they hear him not, or at leastwise make as though they heard
him not: from whence if we did now and then lift up our eyes unto Heaven,
and enforce our selves too remember the great benefit that we daily receive
of his right fatherly goodness and mercy: it were not to be doubted, but we
should be more inclined to love him, and too obey his holy will, than we be:
whereas (which worse is) we be not only careless to yield due thanks unto
him, but also at al times cease not to offend him: so deeply is the vice of
unthankfulness rooted in us. Rightly may he be blamed for unthankfulness,
which acknowledges not the good that has been done to him, at leastwise by
saying Gramereie: Unthankful is he that forgets it: but tootoo unthankful
is he that rendereth evil for good. Wherefore we can find no lawful excuse,
because that which way soever we turn our selves, the bountifulness of this
great God shines throughout upon us. Let us a little stir up ou^ wits,
and let us look about us as far and wide as the huge frame of the world may
exte^d, so divinely set together and garnished with so great diversity of
goodly creatures, so well compassed, and in such an order so wisely co^pacted,
that there is nothing superfluous, nothing unprofitable, nothing whereof there
may not be re^dred a reason. This huge Sun the fou^tain of al light and heat,
and the cause of al earthly generation: the Moon which marketh us out the
years, the months and the seaso^s: the sky so trimly azured and richly set
with the ^^istering stars: this huge Sea which beats upon all sides of the
earth, the weight whereof is borne upon his own round counterpeise, the great
number of living creatures that are upon it, whereof some fly in the Air,
every where dispersed, and othersome dwell in the hollow Caves of it, which
nature has fashioned of set purpose for them: what shall I say more? So many
high mountains, within whose veins are found innumerable treasures: And
others, from whence issue many a fair spring sprouting out their thin and
clear water: And othersome, whereout do gushe violent streams and pleasant
Rivers, nourishing infinite numbers and kinds of fishes: So many trees and
plants yielding most delicate fruits and sweet savors: Such store of
medicinable herbs and roots: So many Playnes and Valleys, most fruiteful:
Such store of meadows beautified with their lovely flowers: And to be short,
the full hugeness of the whole, the power of the Elements, and the natural
beauty of the creatures: what are they else, but the utterance and open
showing of Gods love and great liberaltie toward us: of which each one in his
kind gives glory to the Lord* yea, ask even the ^eastes, and they will
inform thee: demand of the fowls of the air, and they will tell thee: or
else speak to the earth, and she will report unto thee: and to the fishes of
the Sea, (...). 12.
and they will answer thee, The Lord spoke the word, and we were made:
he commanded, and we were created. For in his hand is the life of every
living thing: And by him have all of us our being, moving, and continuance.
Such is the speech of allcreatures. Only man, who is made after the image
and likeness of God, endued with understanding, memory, and reason, (showing
himself in that behalf more unhappy then the brute beasts) passes over the
abundance of so great benefits with his eyes shut, betrampling and beraying
them with his feet, as a swine does precious stones: Insomuch that after he
has once wholly buried remembrance, there insueth ignorance and utter
blindness. O lamentable state of reasonable man! who can hope for any change
in thee, except it be from evil to worse, seeing thou have no knowledge at all
of God, and that all his benefits are despised through thine extreme
unthankfulness in this behalf? if so many creatures wherewith this whole
huge world is garnished to thy use, and (to touch thee yet more nearly) if
the cunning compacting together of thine own body, which may well be called a
little world, as wherein a man may behold the sovereign wisdom of the
woorkemaister: if thy soul wherein shines the invisible image of the
everlasting God: if thine own life: if the consideration of so great abundance
of good things, whereof he gives thee the use every day, are not sufficient
enough to move the affections of thy heart: at leastwise yet ought thou of
reason too be inflamed and provoked by the benefit of all benefits, and by
that most precious gift which he has made unto thee of his own proper and
only Son, who is the very image of his substance, and in whom dwells the
whole fullness of the Godheade, together with all the treasures of Wisdom, and
al knowledge: Yea and so much ought it too move thee the more because that
without having regard that thou werte his great enemy, he has laid all
thine infirmities pon his back, and made him to die upon the cross for thy
sake, punishing thy sins in him, for the which thou thy self had
deserved eternal damnation. Go now thou unthankful person, and deuize all
the excuses that thou will: and they shall serve to no purpose, but too accuse
thee and too give sentence against thy self. The wonderful creation, order,
and government of this huge world, can give thee knowledge of his fatherly
love, wisdom, and infinite power, although not in all points to the full. But in
Jesus Christ crucified, all the bowelles of Gods mercy are opened unto thee at
large and perfectly. There is no more any veyle that can hinder thee from the
knowing of so great love. See thou not how that at his death the veyle was
rent asunder in the mids? And when he cried that all was finished, and bowed
down his holy head, he gave a token that peace was made between God and man?
Let us therefore henceforth learn (O my brethren) to acknowledge the sovereign
benefit which we have received by Jesus Christ crucified. Let us behold the
perfectness of his life, and his most holy doctrine. Let us open our eyes at
the unmeasurable brightness of his even lasting truth, and let us with all
our force, follow the way wherein he has gone before us. Let us with a
cheerful and glad heart embrace the Cross which he has set before us: and
discharging our shoulders from all burdens, and all sin wherein we (...)
wrapped, let us run with patience too the combat that is appointed for vs^
having an eye to the beginner and accomplisher of faith, Jesus Christ, who in
steed of worldly glory sustained the Cross, and despised all the shame
thereof. Let us put of the old man with all his wretched and combersome doings
and grievous burdens, and clothe our selves with the new man, whose yooke is
sweet, and burden light. Let us by true faith run between the arms of his
mercy, and pray him to vouchsafe to lighten us* and to make us capable of all
his graces, and specially of the great benefit that we have received of him
by his cross. Concerning the which, forasmuch as there is lighted into my
hands a little treatise compiled in the Italian tongue, where in he is
merueilously well and lively drawn with another manner of pensil than painters
use: I thought it good to put it into French, too the end that my Countrymen
also might take profit by it, and receive like comfort as I have received by
it and specially the simple people, and such as have no great depth of
knowledge. For it seems, that the Author (whosoever he was) was wholly minded
to apply all things unto them, without seeking or affecting any finenesse of
speech, or great darkness of sentences. But even as in Summer time we see the
River Saon go gently to join himself with the River of Rhone, without doing
any damage to any body: even so goes this man, slyding so smoothely into the
bosom of his dear spouse Jesus Christ, without staying at any other thing,
that ouermalicious should he be, which would look awry on him, or by any
means let him of his course.

And thus my brethren, fare ye well in God, who enrich you with his gracious
gifts, from day to day.

Amen.
Of the benefit that Christians receive by Jesus Christ crucified.
The first Chapter.
Of Original sin, and of man's wretchedness.
THe holy scripture says, The state of man before and after that he had
sinned.
that God created man after his own Image and likeness, making him, as in
respect of his body, impassible: and as touching his soul, righteous, true,
good, merciful and holy. But after that he being over com with desire of
knowledge, had eaten of the Apple that God had forbidd^^ him, he lost the said
image and likeness of God, and became like the brute beasts, and like the devil
who had abused him. For as touching his soul, he became unrighteous, untrue,
cruel, p^^^^lesse, and the enemy of God and as touching his body, he became
passible and subject to a thousand inconveniences and diseases: and not only
like, but also inferior to brute beasts. And eue^ as if our forefathers had
obeyed God, they should have left us their righteousness and holiness as an
heritage: even so by being disobedient unto God, they have left us the
inheritance of unrighteousness, wickedness, and Gods displeasure, in such sort
as it is impossible for us (through our own strength) to love GOD, or to frame
ourselves unto his holy will. May we be enemies unto him, as to o^e that must
punish our sins, because he is a just judge, and therefore can we not any
more trust wholly to his holy mercy. To be short, our whole nature was corrupted
by Adams sin. And like as erst it had superiorite above all creatures: so
became it an underling to all, the bondslaue of Satan, sin, and death, and
condemned to the miseries of hell. (...) he lost his judgment altogether, and
began to say that good was evil, and evil g^d; esteeming false things to be
true, and true things to be false. Which thing the Prophet considering, Psalm.
114 Psalm. 14.
saith^ that all men are liars (...) that there is not one that does good*
because the Devil like a stout man of arms rules his own palace* that is
too (...)* the world, whereof he became a prince and Lord. Ther^ is no tongue
that can express the thousandth part of our mise rye, in that we being
created by Gods own hand, have lost the said image of God, and are become
like the Devil, and too like to him in nature and condition, willing
whatsoever he wills, and likewise refusing what soever he misliketh. By
reason where of being given up for a pray to that wicked spirit, there is no
sin so greevous, which every one of us would not be ready to do, if the
grace of God stay us not. Original sin.
And this our deprivation of righteousness, and this forward inclination to
all unrighteousness and naughtiness, is called original sin: the which we
bring with us from out of our mothers womb, so as we be borne the children of
wrath: and it has had his first spring from our first fathers, and is the
cause and fountain of all the vices and iniquities that we commit: wherfrom if
we will be delivered, and return again to our first innocence to recover the
image of god: first of all it stands us on hand so know our own wretchedness.
A very good comparison
For like as no man will ever seek to the physician, except he know himself
to be diseased, or acknowledge the excellency of the Physician, and how much
he is bound^ unto him, except he know his own disease to be pestilent and
deadly: eue^ so no man acknowledges Jesus Christ the only Physician of our
souls, except he first know his own soul to be diseased: neither can he
perceive the excellency of him nor how much he is bound unto him, except he
first enter intoo the knowledge of his own outrageous sins, and of the
incurable infirmity, which we have received through the infection of our first
fathers.

The second Chapter.
How the Law was given by God, to the end that we knowing our sin, and not
having any hope of ability to make our selves righteous by our own works,
should have recourse to Gods mercy, and unto the righteousness of faith.
OUR God therefore minding of his infinite goodness and mercy to send his only
Son to set free the wretched children of Adam: and knowing that first of all
it behooved him to make them understand their own misery, chose Abraham, (in
whose seed he promised to bless al nations,) and accepted his offspring for
his peculiar people, unto whom, (after their departure out of Egypt, and
deliverance from the bondage of Pharao,) he by the means of Moses, gave the
Law, which forbids all lusting, and commands us to love GOD with all our
heart, with all our soul, and with all our strength, in such wise as our whole
trust be reposed in him, and we ready to leave our life for his sake, to suffer
al torments in our members, and to be berefte of all our goods, dignities,
and honors for the love of our God, choosing too die, rather then to do any
thing that may mislike him, be it never so little: and doing all things in
that behalf with a merry heart, and with all forwardness and cheerfulness.
Moreover the Law commands us to love our neighbor as our self, meaning by
the Neighbor, Who is our neighbor.
all manner of men, as well friends as foes and it wills us to do to every
man as we would be done unto, and to love other men's cases as our own. And so
by looking in this holy Law, as in a clear lookingglasse, man does out of
hand espy his own great imperfection and unableness too obey Gods
commandementes, and to render him the honor and love which he ought to yield
to his maker. The first office of the Law then, The first office or duty of
the Law.
is to make sin known, as Saint Paul affirms. And in another place he
says, Romans 3. and 7. The second office of the law.
I had not known what sin is, but by the law. The second office of the law,
is to make sin increase, for as much as we being quite gone from the obeying
of God, and become bondslaues to the Devil, being full of wicked works and
inordinate affections, cannot abide that God should forbid us to lust, which
increases so much the more, as it is the more prohibited: by reason whereof S.
Paul says, that sin was dead, but the law came and raised it up again, and
so it became out of measure great. The third office of the law.
The third office of the Law, is to show the wrath and judgment of God,
who threatens death and everlasting punishment, to such as keep not the Law
throughout in all points. For the holy scripture says, Deuteronomy. 27.
Curfed is he that perfourmeth not thoroughly all the things that are written in
the book of the law. And therefore S. Paul says, 2. Cor. 3.
that the Law is a ministry, and that it brings forth wrath. The law then
having discovered sin and increased it, and showed forth the wrath and
in^ig^ation of GOD who threatens death, The fourth office of the law.
executes his fourth office, which is too put a man in fear, who there upon
falls ^^too sorrowefulnesse, and would feign satisfy the law: but forasmuch
as he sees clearly, that he is not able: he wareth angry against God, and
would with all his heart y^ there were no God, because he fears too be sore
chastized and punished by him, according as S. Paul says, Romans 4.
That the wisdom of the flesh is the enemy of God, because it neither is nor
can be subject to the law of God. The fifth office of the law.
The fifth office of the law (which is the principal end and the most
excellent and necessary office of it) is to constrain a man too go unto Jesus
Christ, in like wise as the Hebrews, being dismayed, were constrained to
appeal unto Moses, saying: Exodus 2^^
Let not the Lord speak unto us, least we dye, but speak thou unto us, and we
will obey thee in all things. And the Lord answered: v^rily they have spoke
exceeding well. Yea they were not praised for any other thing, than for their
desiring of a Mediator betwixt God and them, which was Moses, who represented
Jesus Christ, that should be the Advocate and Mediator between God and man: in
respect whereof God said unto Moses, I will raise up a Prophet among their
brethren like unto thee, and I will put my word in his mouth, and he shall
speak unto them all the things that I shall command him, and I will punish
all those that will not obey my word, which he shall speak in my name.

The third Chapter.
How the forgiveness of our sins, our justification and our salvation depend
upon Jesus Christ.
WHen as our God the^ had sent the said great Prophet which he had promised us,
(who is his only son) to the end that he should set us free from the curse of
the law, Collo. 3.
and reconcile us unto our God: that he should make our will fit for good
works, healing our freewil, and repayring in us the foresaid Image of God
which we had lost through the fault of our first parents: Acts. 4.
for as much as we know that under heaven there is none other name given unto
men whereby we may be saved, but the name of Jesus Christ: Let us run unto him
with y^ feet of lively faith, and east our selves between his arms: Matthew.
11.
since he allureth us so graciously* crying: Come unto me all you that labor
and are heavy load, and I will refresh you: What comfort or what joy in this
life can be comparable to this his saying there, when as a man f^eling
himself oppressed with the intolerable weight of his sins, understands so
sweet and amiable words of the son of God, who promises so graciously to
refreshe and ryd him of his great pains? But all the matter lies in
acknowledging our own weakness and misery in good earnest. For he shall
never know what is sweet, who has not tasted of the sour. And therefore
Jesus Christ says: If any man thirst, John. ^
let him come to me and drink: as if he had meant to say, if a man know not
himself to be a sinner, nor thirst after righteousness, he cannot taste of the
sweetness of Jesus Christ, how sweet it is to talk of him, to think of
him, and to follow his most holy life. But when we once thoroughly know our
own infirmity by means of the law, let us hearken too S. John Baptist, who
poynteth us too the sovereign Physician with his Finger, John. ^.
saying: Behold the Lamb of GOD which takes away the sins of the world.
For he it is that delivers us from the heavy yoke of the Law, (...)
abrogating and disanulling the curses and sharp threatninges of the same:
healing all our infirmities: reformyng our free will, returning us too our
ancient innocence, John. 8.
and repairing in us the image of our God: insomuch that (according to S.
Paul's saying) like as by Adam we be all dead: 1. Cor. 15.
so by Jesus Christ we are al quickened. And it is not to believed that the
sin of Adam, which we have by inheritance from him, should be of more force
than the righteousness of Christ, that which we also inherit by faith. It
seems that man has great cause to complain, that (without any reason why)
he is conceived and borne in sin, Psalm. 50.
and in the wickedness of his parents, by means of who^, death reigns over
all men. But now is all our sorrow taken away, in as much as by a like mean
(without any occasion given on our behalf) righteousness and everlasting life
are come by Jesus Christ, and by him death is s^aine, whereof Saint Paul
makes a very godly discourse, which I purpose too set down here following.
Wherefore (faith he) like as by one man, Rom 3^
sin entered into the world, and death by sin: even so death went over al men,
forasmuch as al men have sinned. For until the law, sin was in the world:
but sin was not regarded as long as there was no law. Never the latter death
reigned from Adam unto Moses, even over them also that sinned not after the
like manner of the transgression of Adam, who was a figure of him that was to
come. But yet the gift is not so as is the offense: for if through the offense
of one, many be dead: much more the grace of God, and the gift by grace which
is by one man Jesus Christ, has abounded unto many. Neither is y^ gift so as
that which entered in by one that sinned. For the fault came of one offense unto
condemnation, but y^ gift is of many offenses to justification. For if by the
offense of one, death reigned through one: much more shall they which receive
the abundance of grace and of the gift of righteousness, reign in life
through one, that is, Jesus Christ. Likewise then, as by the offense of one,
that fault came on al men to comdemnation, so by the righteousness of one, the
benefit abounded toward all men to the justification of life. For as by one
man's disobedience many were made sinners: so by the obedience of one shall many
also be made righteous. Moreover the law entered thereupon, that the offense
should abound: nevertheless where sin abounded, there grace abounded much
more, that as sin has reigned unto death, so might grace also reign by
righteousness unto eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord. By these
words of S. Paul, we manifestly perceive the thing to be true, which we have
said heereto fore: that is to wit, that the law was given too make sin
known: which sin we do also know, not to be of greater force than
Christ's righteousness, wherethrough we be justified before God. For even as
Jesus Christ is stronger than Adam was: so is his righteonsnesse more mighty
than the sin of Adam. And if the sin of Adam was sufficient enough to make
al men sinners and children of wrath without any misdeedes of our own: much
more shall Christ's righteousness be of greater force to make us all righteous
and the children of grace, without any of our own good works: which cannot be
good, unless that before we do them, we our selves be made good, The greatness
of sin ought not ^o cause despair.
as Augustine also affirms. Hereby a man may know in what error they be who
by reason of some great offense, despair of Gods good will, imagining that he
is not willing to forgive, cover, and pardon al sin, having already punished
and chastized all our ^^^es and iniquities in his own only begotten and
dearly beloved son, and consequently granted a general pardon to all
mankind, which every body enjoys that believes the gospel, that is to say,
which believes the happy tidings of the Apostles have published through the
whole world, saying: ^or. 5.
We beseech you for Jesus Christ's sake, be ye reconciled unto GOD: for he
that never knew sin, was made a sacrifice for our sin, that we might become
righteous in him. The prophet Esaias for seeing this great goodness of God,
writes these heavenly words, which do so well paint out the passion of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and the cause thereof, as it is not to be found better
described, eve^ in the writings of the Apostles. Who (says he) will believe our
report, and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? But he shall grow up
before him as a branch, and as a root out of a dry ground, he has neither
form nor beauty: when we shall see him, there shall be no form that we
should desire him: He is despised and rejected of men, he is a man full of
sorrows, and has experience of infirmity, we hid as it were our faces
from him: he was despised and we esteemed him not. Surely he has borne our
infirmities and carried our sorrows, yet we did judge him as plagued and
smitten of God, and humbled: but he was wounded for our transgressions: he was
broken for our iniquities. The chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with
his stripes we are healed. All we like sheep have gone astray: we have turned
every one to his own way, and the Lord has laid upon him the iniquity of
us all: he was oppressed and he was afflicted, yet did he not open his mouth.
He is brought as a sheep to the slaughter, and as a sheep before the shearer
is dumme, so he opens not his mouth. O great unkindness! O thing
abominable! that we, which profess our selves Christians, and hear that the
son of God has taken all our sins upon him, and washed them out with his
precious blood, suffering himself to be fastened too the Cross for our
sakes; should nevertheless make as though we would justify our selves, and
purchase forgiveness of our sins by our own works: as who would say,
that the deserts, righteousness and bloodshed of Jesus Christ were not
enough too do it, unless we came to put too our works and righteousness
which are altogether de^iled and spotted with self love, selfcliking,
selfprofite, and a thousand other vanities, for which we have need to crave
pardon at Gods hand, rather then reward. Neither do we think of the
threatenings, which S. Paul uses to the Galathians, Galat. 5.
who having been deceived by false Preachers, believed not that the
Justification by faith was sufficient of it self, but went about still to be
made righteous by thelaw. Unto whom S. Paul says: Jesus Christ shall nothing
profit you that justify your selves by the law: for you be fallen from grace,
because that we through the spirit of says wayt for the hope of
righteousness. Now if the seeking of righteousness and forgiveness of An
excellent comparison of the inability of our own works.
sins by the keeping of the law which GOD gave upon mount Sinai with so
great glory and majesty, be the denying of Christ and of his Grace: what
shall we say to those that will needs justify themselves before God, by their
own laws and obseruances? I would wish that such folks should a little
compare the one with the other, and afterward give Judgment themselves. God
myndeth not too do that honor, nor to give that glory to his own law, and
yet they will have him too give it too men's laws and ordinances. But that
honor is given only to his only begotten son, who alone by the sacrifice
of his death and passion, has made full amends for all our sins past,
present, and to come, as Saint Paul and Saint John declare. Wherefore as often
as we apply this satisfaction of Jesus ^eb. 7. John, 12.
Christ's, unto our souls by faith: out of all doubt we obtain forgiveness of
our sins, and become good and righteous before God, through his
righteousness. And therefore after that Saint Paul has said, Phil. 3.
that as touching the righteousness of the law, he had lived unblameable: he
adds, and yet whatsoever I have gained by it, I have accounted in all
respects too be but loss, for the love of Christ. And specially I esteem
all things to be loss, for the excellent knowledge of Jesus Christ my Lord,
for whom I have compted all things too be loss, and deem them but as doung,
so may I win Christ, and be found in him, not having mine own righteousness
which is of the law, but the righteousness which is by the faith of Jesus
Christ, with righteousness is given by God, I mean the righteousness of faith
that I may come to the knowledge of Jesus Christ. O most notable words, which
al Christians ought to have engraven in their hearts, praying God to make them
to fast it perfectly! L^e how Saint Paul shows plainly, that whosoever
knows Christ aright, esteems all the woorks of the law to be hurtful, for
so much as they make us too swerve from our trust in Jesus Christ, too whom
every man ought to impute his salvation, and too trust only unto him alone.
And to enforce this sentence the more, he adds further, that he esteems all
things but as doung, so he may gain Christ and he found incorporated in him:
declaring thereby, that whosoever trusts in his own works, and pretends
not justify himself by them, gets not Jesus Christ, another is engraffed
into him. And forasmuch as the whole mystery of our faith consists in the
truth hereof: to the end we might the better understand what he meant to say:
he adds and repeteth oftentunes, that he had nothing to do with all the
outward justification and all y^ righteousness that is grounded upon the keeping
of the law, but y^ he would cloth himself with the righteousness which God
gives by says to all them that believe that all our sins are fully
chastised and punished in Jesus Christ: and that Jesus Christ (as Saint Paul
says) is made our wisdom, 1. Cor. 1.
righteousness, holiness, and redemption to the end (as it is written) that
he which will glory, should glory in y^ Lord, and not in his own woorks. Uery
true it is, that in the holy Scriptures there are some textes to be found,
which being misunderstood, seem to gainesay this holy doctrine of Saint
Paul's, and to attribute justification and remission of sins unto works, and
to charity. But those authorities have already been well expounded by some who
have showed plainly that such as have understood them in the sense aforesaid,
understood them not aright. Wherefore my dear beloved brethren, let us not
follow the fond opinions of the bewitched Galathians, but rather let us follow
the truth which S. Paul teaches us, and let us give the whole glory of our
justification unto Gods mercy, and to the merits of his Son, who by his
own bloodshed has set us free from the soueraintie of the law, and from (...)
give us life and endless felicity. I say yet further, that he has delivered
us from the dominion of the law insomuch as he has given us his holy spirit,
who teaches us al truth, and that he has satisfied the law to the full, and
given the same satisfaction unto al his members, (that is to wit, to al true
Christians) so as they may safely appear at Gods throne, because they be
clothed with the righteousness of his Christ, and by him delivered from the curse
of the law. How man is delivered and set free from the curse of the law.
Galat. 3. Romans 8. Colos. 2.
Then can not the law any more accuse us or co^ndenm us, nor move our
affections or appetites, nor increase sin in us. And therefore S. Paul
says, that the obligation which was against us is cancelled by Jesus Christ,
and discharged upon the tree of the cross, insomuch as he has set us free
from the subjection of the law, and consequently from the tyranny of sin and
death, which can no more hold us oppressed, because it is overcome by Jesus
Christ in his resurrection, and so consequently by us which are his members, in
such manner, that we may say with Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 15.
and with the Prophet Osee* Death is quite vanquished and destroyed: O death
where is thy sting? O Hell, where is thy (...) strength of sin is the law. But
God be praised, who has granted us victory by our Lord Jesus Christ. He is
the blessed seed that has crushed the head of the venomous Serpent, that is
to wit, of the Devil, insomuche that al those which believe in Jesus Christ,
reposing their whole trust in his grace, do overcome sin, death, the devil,
and hell, as Christ has done. He is that blessed seed of Abraham, in the which
God has promised blessedness to al nations, It behooves every particular
person too fight with the said horrible serpent, and to deliver himself from
that curse. But that enterprise was so great, that all the force of the whole
world knit together, was not able too go through with it. Wherefore our God the
father of mercy, being moved with compassion of our miseries, has given us his
only begotten son, who has delivered us from the venim of the serpent, and
is himself become our blessedness and righteousness, condicionally that we
accept the same, renouncing all our own outward iustifications. Then my dear
brethren let us embrace the righteousness of our Lord Jesus Christ, and let us
make it ours by means of faith: let us assure our selves, that we be
righteous, not for our own work^, but through the merits of Jesus Christ, and
let us live merrily and assured, that the righteousness of Jesus Christ has
utterly done away all our unrighteousness, and made us good, righteous, and holy
before God, who beholding us ingrafted into his son by faith, esteems us
not now any more as the children of Adam, but as his own children, and has
made us heirs of all his riches, with his own begotten son.

The fourth Chapter.
Of the effects of lively faith, and of the union of man's soul with Jesus
Christ.
THis holy faith woorketh after such a sort in us, How we receive the
likeness of God.
that he which believes that Jesus Christ has taken all his sins upon
him, becomes like unto Christ, and overcomes sin, the devil, death and
hell. And the reason thereof is this: namely that the Church (that is to wit
every faithful soul) is Christ's wife, A very good similitude expressing the
manner how our sins are taken away by Christ.
and Christ is her husband. For we know how the law of marriage is, that of
two, they become one selfsame thing, being two in one flesh, and that the goods
and substance of either of them become common too them both: by means whereof
the husband says, that the dowry of the wife is his, and likewise the wife
says that her husbands house and al his riches are hers:and of a truth so
they are: for other wise they should not be one flesh, as the Scripture says.
After the same manner has God married his only begotten and dear beloved
son to the faithful soul, which has not any other thing peculiar of her
own, save only sin, and yet the son of God has not disdayned to take her
for his well beloved spouse together with her peculiar dowry, which is sin.
And now by reason of the union which is in this holy marriage, look what the
one has, is also the others, Jesus Christ therefore says thus: y^ dowry of
man's soul my dear wife, (that is to wit, her sins and tra^sgressings of the
law, Gods wrath against her, the boldness of the devil over her, the prison of
hell, and al other her evils) are become mine, and are in my power to do what I
list with them. Wherefore it is at my choice to deal with them at my pleasure,
and therefore I will put out the hand writing which is against the soul my
wife, I will take it out of y^ way, I will fasten it to my cross in mine own
body, and in the same will I spoil principalities and powers, and make a show
of them openly and triumph over them, and consum^ them utterly unto nothing.

Now when God saw his son, who knew no sin, neither had any sin in him,
thus willingly taking on him, the foulness of our iniquity, he made him to be
sin for us, eue^ the very sacrifice for our sin: and did sharply punish our
sin in him, putting him to death, even the death of the Cross. Math. 28^
Philip. 2.
Howebeit for as much as he was his well-beloved and obedient Son, he would
not leave him in death, nor suffer his holy one to see corruption: but raised
him up from death to life, giving him all power in heaven and earth, and set
him at his right hand in glory. Now then the wise likewise with exceeding
great joy does say: the Realms and Kingdoms of my most dear husband and
savior are mine, by him I am an heir of heaven, my husbands riches (that is
to wit, his holiness, his innocence, his righteousness and his godhead, together
with all his virtue and might) are mine and for me: and therefore in him I am
holy, innocent, righteous, and godly, and there is not any spotte in me, I am
wel^auoured and fair, inasmuch as my lawful husband has not any blemish in
him, but is altogether goodly and fair. And since that he is wholly mine, and so
consequently all that he has is mine, and all that he has is pure and holy: it
follow^th that I also am pure and holy. Therefore to begin at his most innocent
birth, he has thereby sanctified the birth of his spouse co^^^^ued in sin. The
godly childhood and youth of the bridegrom, has justified the childish and
youthful life of his dearly beloved bride. For the love and vnio^ that is
betwixt the soul of a true Christian and the Bridesgrome Jesus Christ, makes
all the works of either of them, to be common to them both. By reason whereof,
when a man says, Jesus Christ has fasted, Jesus Christ has prayed, Jesus
Christ was heard of the father, raised y^ dead, drove devils out of men, healed
the sick, dyed, rose again, and ascended into heaven: Like wise a man may say,
that a christen man has done all y^ selfsame works, for so much as y^ works of
Christ are the works of the Christian, because he has done them for him.
Uerily a man may say that the Christian has been nailed to the cross,
buried, raised again, is gone up into heaven, become the child of God, and
mad^ partaker of the godhead. On the other side* all the works that a Christian
man does, are Christ's works, because it is his will to take the^ for his. And
forasmuch as they be imperfect, and he thoroughly perfect, and cannot away with
any imperfect thing: he has made them perfect with his virtues, to the end
that his wife should be always joyful and well contented and not be afraid
of any thing, assuring herself, that although there be yet still some defalte
in her works, yet notwithstanding they be acceptable to God in respect of his
son, upon who^ he has his eyes always fastened. O that unmeasurable goodness
of God^ how greatly is the christian bound unto God? there is no love of man,
be it never so great, that may be compared with the love that God bears too the
soul of every faithful Christian, whereof Christ is the bridegroom. Ephe. ^
Where upon S. Paul says, that Jesus Christ has so loved his wife the church,
which is builded of living stones (that is of the souls of the believing
Christians) that for to sanctify her, he has offered himself to the death of
the cross, cleansing her with the washing of water, by his word, to join her
to himself a glorious church without spot or wrincle or other like thing: but
that the should be holy and unblameable (that is to wit, like unto him in
holiness and innocence) and also be the true and lawful daughter of God, who
has loved the world so well, that as Jesus Christ himself says) he has
given his only begotten son, John. 3.
to the end that every one which believed in him should not perish, but have
life everlasting. For God sent not his son into the world too condemn the
world: but too the end that the world might be saved by him, insomuche that he
which believes in him shall not be damned. Some man might demand after what
manner the vnio^ of this holy marriage is made, How the ^aithfull man's soul is
assured of (...) being ma^^ed unto Christ.
and how the soul, which is y^ bride, and her bridegroom Jesus Christ, are
knit together. What assurance can I have, that my Soul is united unto Jesus
Christ, and become his spouse? How can I assuredly glory that I am Queen and
Mistres of his great riches, as a wife may? I can easily believe that other
folks shall receive this honor and glory: but I cannot persuade my self that
I am one of those same too whom God has given so great grace: For I know
mine own wretchedness and imperfection. My deerebe loved brother, I answer
thee, that thine assurance consists in true and lively faith, wherewith (as
S. Peter says) God cleanses men's hearts: Acts. 5.
and this faith is grounded in the believing of the gospel, that is to say, in
the believing of the glad tidinges which have been published on Gods
beehalfe through the whole world: which contains in effect, y^ God has used
the rigorousnes of his justice against Jesus Christ chastizing and punishing
all our sins in him. Mat. 3.
And whosoever receives this good tidings, and believes it steadfastly, has
the true faith and does enjoy the forgiveness of his sins, and is also
reconciled unto God: and of the child of wrath, is become the child of grace:
and recovering the image of God, enters into the kingdom of God, 2. Cor. 3.
and is made the temple of God, who marieth man's soul to his only Son, by
the mean of this says, which faith is a work of God, and the gift of God, as
S. Paul says oftentimes. And God gives it unto those whom he calls to
him, of purpose to justify the^ and to glorify the^, and to give the^
everlasting life, according as our Lord Jesus Christ witnesses saying: John. 6.
This is the will of him that sent me, even that every one which sees the
son and believes in him should have everlasting life, and I will raise him
up again at the latter day. John. 3.
And like as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness: so must the son
of man be lifted up, to the end that every one which believes in him might
not perish, but have life everlasting. Also he says too Martha: He that
believes in me shall live, John. 11.
although he were dead, and every one that lives and bele ueth in me, shall
not die for ever. And to a company of the Jews he says: I. John. 12.
I am come a light into the world, to the end that every man which believes in
me, should not abide in darkness. And S. John in his Epistle says: Here in
appeared the love of God toward us, 1. John. 4.
for that God is love, and sent his only begotten Son intoo this world,
that we might live through him. And herein is love known, not in that we loved
God, but in that he loved us, and sent his Son too make atonement for our
sins. And moreover he sent him to destroy our enemies. For the bringing whereof
too pass, he made him partaker of our flesh, and of our blood, as says
Saint Paul: too the end that by his death, (...). 2.
he might destroy him that had the dominion of death, that is to wit, the
devil, and set all such at liberty, as were subject to bondage all their-lyfe
long, for fear of death, Seeing then that we have records of the holy
scripture, concerning the promises, whereof we have spoken heertofore, and
concerning many other promises that are dispersed in diverse places of the same,
we cannot doubt of it. And for so much as the holy scripture speaks to al
ingeneral, none of us ought to distrust in himself, that the selfsame thing
which the scripture says, should not belong particularly to himself. And too
the end that this point wherein lies and consists the whole mystery of our
holy faith, A very goodly similitude and fit for the expressing of the free
forgiveness of (...) for Jesus Christ's ^ake.
may be understood the better: let us put the case that some good and holy
King, cause the proclamation to be made through his whole Realm^ by the sound
of a Trumpet, that al rebels and banished men shall safely return home to their
houses, because that at the suite and deserte of some dear friend of theirs,
it has pleased him to pardon them: certainly none of those rebels ought too
doubt of the obtaining of true pardon of his rebellion, but rather ought
assuredly too return home too his house, to live under the shadow of that
holy King. And if he will not return, by shall bear the pen^lty of it because
that through his own unbelief he dies in exile and in the displeasure of his
Prince. But this good king is the Lord of heaven and earth, who for the
obedience and desert of our good brother Jesus Christ, has pardoned as all
our sins, and (as we have said a^ore) has made open proclamation through
the whole world, that al of us may safely return into his kingdom. Wherefore
he that believes this proclamation, does straight ways return into Gods
kingdom, (whereout we were driven by the offense of our first Parents,) and
blessedly governed by gods holy spirit. And he that gives no credit to the
said proclamation, shall never enjoy the said general pardon: but for his
vnbeleefes sake shall abide in banishment under the tyranny of the devil, and
live and die in extreme misery, living and dying in the displeasure of the
King of heaven and earth, and that justly. For me cannot commit a greater
offense against this good God, then to account him as a liar and deceiuer:
which verily we do, in not giving credit too his promises. O how passing
heavy is this deadly sin of unbelief! which so far forth as is possible
(^ereueth God of his glory and perfection: besides the great harm that it
does to a man's self, which is his own damnation and the endless torment of
his soul, which the miserable (...) feels even in this life. But on the
contrary, he that comes unto God with assuredness of this faith, believing
him without any mistrust or doubt of his promises, and warranting himself for
a certainty, that God will perform all that ever he has promised him;
gives all the glory unto God, and lives continually in rest and endless joy,
evermore praising and thanking the Lord God, for choozing him to the glory of
the eternal life. (...)
And here of they have an assured earnest penny and gage, that is to wit, the
son of God, whom they take for their most loving Bridegroom, y^ blood of
whom, has made their hearts so drunken, that through this passing holy
belief, there is in the christian heart engendered so lively a hope and so
certain a trust of Gods mercy toward us, and such an operation is wrought in
us, as we rest our selves wholly upon God, leaving the whole care of us unto
him in such wise, that being thoroughly assured of Gods good will, we are not
afraid, neither of the Devil, nor of his ministers, nor of death. Which holy
and steadfast trust of Gods mercy, inlargeth our heart, cheereth it up, and
with certain merueilous sweet affections directs it unto GOD, filling it,
and setting it on Fire with an exceeding fervent love. ^eb. 4.
And therefore Paul incourageth us too go with all boldness to the throne of
Grace: and he counsels us that we should not shake it off, nor make light
of our trust, which has great recompense and reward. But this so holy and
divine affiance is gendred in our hearts by the working of the holy Ghost, who
is communicated unto us by faith, ^eb. I0.
which never goes without the love of God. And here of it comes, that w^e
are provoked too do good works with a certain liveliness and effectual
cheerfulness: whereby we gather such a strength and inclination to do them,
as we be thoroughly ready and forward, to do and to suffer all intolerable
things for the love and glory of our most gracious and merciful father, who
has enriched us with so abundant grace through Jesus Christ, and of his
enemies made us his most dear children. This true faith is no sooner given a
man, but he is by and by endued and imprinted with a certain violent love of
good works, to yield right sweet and amiable fruits both unto God, and
likewise unto his neighbor, as a very good and fruitful tree. And it is no
more possible that he should be otherwise, than it is possible that a Faggot
should be set on fire, and not cast light immediately. This is the holy Faith,
Heb. 8.
without the which it is impossible yt any man should please God, and whereby
all the holy men (as well of the old Testament as of the new) have been saved,
according as S. Paul witnesses of Abraham: Romans 4.
concerning who^, the Scripture says, Genesis 15.
that Abraham believed God, and it was reckoned to him for righteousness. And
therefore he says a little before: We believe that a man is justified by faith
without the deeds of the law. And in an other place he says: Romans 2.
So then in that time shall the remnant be saved, according to the election of
grace: and if they be saved by grace, Galat. 3.
then is it not by works, for then were grace no grace. Abac. 2.
And to the Galathia^s he says, it is a manifest matter, that no man
becomes righteous before GOD by the Law, because the righteous lives by
Faith. And the Law consists not in belief, but he that perfourmeth the
things that the law commands, shall live by that performance. And further be
says, that a man cannot become righteous by the deeds of the law, but only by
believing in Jesus Christ. Galat 3.
Again, a little after he says that if a man can become righteous by the law,
Jesus Christ dyed in vain: Moreover to the Romans, Romans 10.
making comparion between the righteousness of the law, and the righteousness
of the Gospel, he says, that the one consists in the doing of works, and
the other in believing. For if thou confess, our Lord Jesus Christ wn^ thy
mouth, and believe in thy heart that God has raised him up from death, thou
shall be saved. For the belief of the heart makes a man righteous, and the
confession of y^ mouth makes him safe. Lo how this good Teacher S. Paul
shows evidently that faith makes a man righteous without any works. And not
only S. Paul, but also ^ holy doctors that came after him, have confirmed and
allowed this most holy truth of Justification by faith: S. Augustine
among whom S. Augustine is the chief, who in his book of faith and works,
and in his book of the Spirit and the Letter, and in his book of fourscore
and three questions, and in his book which he did write to Bouiface, and in
his treatise upon the xxxi. Psalm, and in many other places, defends this
article, showing that we become righteous by faith without any help of good
works: Howebeit that good works are the effects of righteousness, and not
the cause of it. And he shows that the words of S. James being soundly
understood, are nothing contrary to this article. Which thing Origin does also
affirm in his 4. Origin.
book upon the Epistle to the Romans saying that S. Paul's meaning is, that
faith only is sufficient to make men righteous in somuche that a man becomes
righteous, only by believing, although he have not done any good work at
all. For so it is, that y^ Thief became righteous with out the works of the law,
forasmuch as the Lord sought not what good works he had done in times past,
nor waited until he had done any after he had believed, but having accepted him
for righteous upon his only confession, took him for his companion, even he
should enter into Paradise. Likewise, that so renowned Mary Magdal^. Luke. 6.
woman in the Gospel of S. Luke, while she was at the feet of Jesus Christ,
heard it said unto her, thy sins are forgi^en thee. And a little after he
says unto her, thy faith has saved thee, go thy way in peace. Afterward
Origin says, In many places of the Gospel a man may see how our Lord Jesus
Christ has spoken in such wise, as he shows that faith is the cause of
the salvation of the beteeuers. Then is a man ma^e righteous by faith, and the
works of the law further him nothing at al. On the contrary, where Faith is
not, (which Faith makes the believer righteous) although a man do the works
which the Law commands: yet notwithstanding forasmuch as they be not builded
upon the foundation of faith, albe* it that to outward appearance they seem
good, yet can they not justify him that does them, because he wants faith,
which is the mark of them that are become righteous before God. Faith is the
mark of those that are justified
And who is he that can boast himself to be righteous, when he hears God say
by his Prophet Esaias, Esaias 64.
that all our righteousness is as a defiled cloth of a menstruous woman? Then
can we not justly glory in our selves, but in the only faith of the cross of
Jesus Christ. S. Basil.
S. Bas^l in his Homily of humility, says that the Christian ought to hold
him self for righteous through belief in Jesus Christ: and his words are
these. The Apostle says, that he which gloryeth, should glory in the Lord, in
that God has made Jesus Christ to be our wisdom, righteousness, holiness and
redemption, to the end, that he which would glory, should glory in the Lord,
because that ^he per^ite and sound gloriyng, is to glory in the Lord. For in
so doing, a man presumes not upon his own righteousness, but acknowledges
his want or ^he true righteousness, and that he is made righteous, only by
believing in Jesus Christ. And S. Paul glories of the despiting of his own
righteousness, and of his seeking of Christ's righteousness, by faith, which
comes of God. S. Hyllary in his nienth Canon upon the exposition of S.
Matthewe says these words: S. ^i^^^lary.
The Scribes considering Jesus Christ but only as man, were troubled that a
man should forgive sins, and pardon that thing which the Law could not
do, becauss that only faith justifies. Saint Ambrose, S. Ambrose Romans 4.
in expounding these word^s of S. Paul [ Unto him that believes in him which
justifies the ungodly. his faith is accounted for righteousness, according to
the purpose of Gods grace.] (Like as David also says, that the man is ble^^ed
whom Go^d accompteth righteous without good works) writes thus. S. Paul
says, that unto him which believes in Jesus Christ (that is to wit, to the
Gentile) his faith is imputed for righteousness, as it was unto Abraham. In
what wise the^ think the Jews to become righteous by the works of the law:
and yet to be righteous as Abraham was, seeing that Abraham became not
righteous by the deeds of the Law, but only by faith? Then is not the Law
needful, forasmuch as the sinner becomes righteous before God through only
faith, according to gods gracious purpose, as David says. The Apostle
confirms that which he has said, by the Prophets example, saying: Psalm. 31.
Blessed is y^ man whom God accepts for righteous without works: Whereby
David means that those men are very happy, who^ God has determined to accept
for righteous before him, by only faith, without any pains taking or
observation of the Law on their behalf. Thus shows he the blessedness of
the time wherein Christ was borne, insomuch as the Lord himself says: Many
righteous men and Prophets have coueted to see the things that you see, and
too hear the things that you hear, and have not heard them. The selfsame
thing says S. Ambrose in expounding the first cap. of the I. Epistle to y^
Corinthians, affirming openly y^ whosoever believes in Jesus Christ, is become
righteous Without works and without any desert, and receives forgiveness of
his sins by faith alone. Also he affirms the same thing in an Epistle which
he writes to Irenaeus, saying: let no man boast of his own works, for no man
becomes righteous by his own works: but he that has righteousness, has
it of free gift, for so much as he is made righteous by Jesus Christ. The^ is
(...) faith that delivers by Christ's blood: for happy is he whose sin is
forgeuen and pardoned. S. Bernard
And S. Bernard in his threescore and seventeen Sermon upon the Ballet of
Ballets, confirms the same, saying that our own merits bear no sway at
all, in making us righteous, which thing must be attributed wholly unto grace,
with makes us righteous freely, and likewise discharges us from the bondage of
sin. And he adds, that Jesus Christ marries the soul and ^oupleth it unto
himself by faith, without that any desert of our works ought or can come
between. But because I will not be too long, I will make an end of mine
allegations, when I have uttered one very notable and good saying of Saint
Ambrose in his book entitled of Jacob concerning the blessed life. G^n. 17.
The said holy mansaith, that like as Jacob having not on his own behalf
deserved the birthright, A very good comparison how we be clothedwith the
righteousness of Jesus Christ.
shrouded himself under the apparel of his brother and clothed him self
with his garment, which yielded a very sweet sent, and in that wise presented
him self to his father, to receive the blessing under another ma^s person too
his own behoof: even so is it requisite for us to cloth our selves with the
righteousness of Jesus Christ by faith, and to shroud our selves under the
divine pureness of our eldest brother, if we will be received for righteous
before God. And certainly this is true. For if we appear before God unclothed
of the righteousness of Jesus Christ, out of all doubt we shall be judged
worthy of everlasting damnation. But contrariwise, if GOD see us apparelled
with the righteousness of his son Christ: the^ will he surely take us for
righteous, and holy, and worthy of eternal life. And verily it is a great
rashness in such as pretend to attain unto righteousness by y^ keeping of
Gods commandments, which are alcomprehe^ded in * loving God, with all our
heart, with all our soul, and with all our strength, and our neighbor as our
self. No man can boast of the perfourmance of Gods law.
But who is so arrogant or so mad as to presume that he is able to perform
those commandments to the full? Or who sees not that Gods law requires
perfect love, and condemns all imperfectness. Let every man consider well
his own works, which partly shall seem good unto him, and he shall find
that they ought rather to be called transgressions of that most holy law,
according also as they be altogether unclean and imperfect, so that he must
be feign to utter this saying of David's, Enter not into judgment with thy
servant O Lord, Psalm. 102
for no man living shall be found righteous in thy sight And Solomon says,
Prou. 20. Job. 15.
who is he that may say, my heart is clean: And Job cries out, What man is
he that can be undefiled, and what man borne of woman can show him self
righteous? Behold he found no steadfastness among his Saints, yea the heavens
are not clean in his sight. Now much more abominable and filthy is man,
who drinks iniquity as it were water? And S. John says, If we say we be
without sin, ^. Ihon. 2.
we deceive our selves. And specially our Savior Jesus Christ teaches us to
say, as often as we pray, Forgive us all our trespasses, as we forgive them
that trespass against us. Matthew 6.
And herby may well be gathered the folly of those y^ make mercha^dise of their
works, presuming to save by them, not only them selves, but also their
neighbors: as though our Lord Jesus Christ had not said unto them, When ye
have done all that ever is commanded you, Luke. 17.
say ye, we be unprofitable servants, we have done but as we ought to do.
Ye see that although we had performed Gods law too the full, yet
nevertheless we should esteem and call our selves unprofitable servants. Now
then seeing that men are so far of from this full perfourmance: who is he that
dares be so bold as to glorify him self that he has added so great an
overplus of deseruinges above the full measure, as he may have to deal abroad
unto others? But to return to our purpose, I would that the proud sinner
which bears him self in hand that he makes himself righteous before God
by doing some works which are allowable to the world, would consider that all
the works which proceed out of an unclean and foul heart, are also unclean
and filthy, and consequently cannot be acceptable unto God, nor have any power
to make the party righteous. Therefore we must first of all cleanse the
heart, if we mind that our works should please God. The cleansing of the
heart proceeds of faith, as the holy Ghost affirms by the mouth of S.
Peter. Acts. 15.
Then must we not say that the unrighteous person and the sinner becomes
righteous, good, and acceptable unto God by his own works: But we must of
necessity conclude, that faith cleanses our har^es, and makes us good,
righteous and acceptable before God, and furthermore causes our works too
please him, notwithstanding that they be altogether unprofitable and
imperfect. For in as much as we be become the children of God through faith:
he considers our works not as a severe and rigorous judge, but as a most
merciful father, having pity of our frailenesse, and regarding us as the
members of his eldest son, whose per^ection and righteousness does supply
all our uncleanness and imperfection, which arenot laid to our charge,
forsomuche as they be covered under the pureness and innocence of Jesus
Christ, and come not to judgment before God. And hereupon it co^neth too
pass, How the works of the faithful, though they be imperfect, please God.
that all our works which proceed of a true faith, (notwithstanding that
they be wholly sinful and corrupt of themselves) shall nevertheless be praised
and allowed by Jesus Christ in the general judgment, because they be the
fruits and Testimonies of our faith whereby we be saved. For insomuche as we
have loved y^ brethren of Jesus Christ, we shall show evidently, that we have
also been faithful, and brethren of Christ, and therefore by faith, we
shall be put in full possession of the everlasting kingdom which our
sovereign Lord God has prepared for us before y^ creating of the world:
Matthew. 25.
not for our merits sakes, but through his mercy whereby he has chosen us,
and called us to the grace of his Gospel, and made us righteous, to the intent
to glorify us everlastingly with his only begotten son Jesus Christ, who is
the holiness and righteousness of us, but not of them which will not confess
that faith is sufficient of it self too make a man righteous and acceptable to
the Lord GOD, who through his fatherly goodness and loving kindness, offers and
gives us Jesus Christ with his righteousness, without any desert of our own
works. What thing can work or cause a man too deserve so great a gift and
Ireasure as Jesus Christ is? This treasure is given only through the grace,
favor, and mercyfulnesse of GOD: In what manner faith iustifiet.
and only faith is the thing that receives such a gift, as too make us enjoy
the forgiveness of our sins.

And therefore when S. Paul and other Doctors say, that only faith makes men
righteous without works: they mean, y^ it makes us so enjoy y^ general
forgiveness of our sins, and to receive Jesus Christ, who (as says S. Paul)
dwells in our hearts by faith, ^phe. 3.
and ouercomming and pacifiyng the troubles of our consci^nces, satisfies Gods
justice for our sins. Furthermore it appeaseth Gods wrath justly moved
against us, quenetheth the fire of Hell, whereinto our natural corruption did
throw us headlong, and cheerfully destroys and overthrows the Devil
together with all his power and tyranny: Which things, all y^ works that al y^
men in the world can lay together, are not able to deserve nor to bring to
pass. That glory and that prerogative is reserved alonly to the son of God,
that is to wit, too the blessed Jesus Christ, who has power above all the the
powers that are in heaven, in earth, and in Hell, and gives himself and his
merits, to al such as distrusting in themselves do set their whole hope of
being saved, in him and in his merits. And therefore let no man beguile him
self when he hears it said, that only faith justifies without works:
and think, as false christians do (who draw all things to live fleshly) that
the true faith consists in believing the bare s^rory of Jesus Christ, after
the same manner as men believe the story of Caesar, or Alexander. Such manner
of belief is but an historical belief, grounded merely upon the report of
men, and upon their writings, and lightly imprinted in our conceit by a
certain custom, and is like to the faith of the Turks, who for the like
reasons believe the fables of their Alcaron. And such a faith is but an
imagination of man, which never renueth the har^ of man, nor warmeth it with
the love of God, neither do any good works ensue, or any change of life
which faith should bring forth. And therefore they falsty hold opinion,
against y^ holy scripture and against the holy Doctors of the church, y^ only
faith makes not ma^e righteous, but y^ they must also have works, unto who^ I
answer that this historical and fond belief, and all the works that ensue
thereof, are not only unable to make a man righteous: but also do cast the
parties headlong to the bottom of hell, Mat. 12.
like unto those y^ have no oil in their larpes, that is to say, no liecly
^aith in their hearts. The faith that makes men righteous, is a work of God in
us, whereby out old man is crucified, and we being transformed in Jesus
Christ, become new creatures, and the dear beloved children of God. Romans 6.
This heavenly faith is it that graffeth us into the death and resurrection of
Jesus Christ, and consequently mortifieth our flesh with the affects and lusts
thereof. For when we by the operation of faith do know our selves to be dead
with Jesus Christ: we are at a full point with our selves and with the world,
and are thoroughly resolved, how it is meet that they which are dead with Jesus
Christ, should mortify their earthly members, that is to wit, the sinful
affections of they mind, and the lusts of the flesh and forasmuch as we know we
be raised again in Christ, we bend our selves to the leading of a spiritual
and holy life, like unto that which we shall live in heaven, after the last
resurrection. This holy faith making us to enjoy the general pard^n that is
published by the Gospel, brings us into the kingdom of our good God, and
pacifieth our consciences, mainteining us in continual joy, and holy and
spiritual sweetness. This selfsame faith knitteth us unto God, and makes him to
dwell in our hearts, and clotheth our soul with himself, so as the^ceforth
the holy Ghost moves us to do the same things whereunto he moved Jesus Christ
while he was in the world, and was co^uersant among men, that is to wit, unto
lo wlines, meekenes, obedientnes unto God, louingnes, and other perfections,
wherthrough we recover y^ image of God. For these selfsame causes, Jesus Christ
did rightly attribute blessedness unto this inspired faith: which blessedness
cannot be v^out good works and holiness of life. And how can it be that a
Christian should not beocme holy, seeing that Jesus Christ is become his
holiness through ^aith: Therefore by faith we be justified and saved: S. Paul
calls the^ saints who^ we call Christians.
and therefore S. Paul does in a manner always call those Saints, whom we call
now Christians: who, if they have not Christ's spirit are none of Christ's, and
consequently no Christians at al. But if they have the spirit of Jesus Christ
to rule and govern them, we must not doubt, but that although they know well
that they be made righteous through faith only: He that believes cannot be
with out good works.
yet for all that, they will become never the more slothful to do good works.
For Christ's spirit is the spirit of love, and love cannot be idle, nor cease
from the doing of good works. But if we will say the truth, a man can do no
good works, except he first know himself to be become righteous by faith: for
before he knows that, his doing of good works is rather too make himself
righteous, than for the love and glory of God: and so he defiles all his works
with selfeloue, for the love of himself and for his own profit. But he that
knows himself to be become righteous by the merits and righteousness of
Christ, (which he makes his own by faith) labors happily, and does good
works, alonely for the love and glory of Christ, and not for love of
himself, nor to make himself righteous, And thervpo^ it comes, that the
true Christian, (that is to wit, he that accounts him self righteous by
reason of Christ's righteousness) asks not whether good works be commanded or
not: but being wholly moved and provoked with a certain violence of godly
love, he offers himself willingly to doal the works that are holy and
Christianlike, and never cease to do well. He therefore which feels not
the marvelous effects by his faith, which we have heretofore declared, y^ the
inspired faith works in y^ heart of the christian: Let him assure himself,
that he has not the christian faith, and let him pray earnestly unto God to
give it him, saying: Lord, help mine unbelief. And when he hears it said,
Mark. 2.
that only faith makes men righteous, let him not deceive himself, and say
What need I to weary my self in doing good works? faith is enough to send me
to Paradise. To such an one I answer, that only faith sends us to
Paradise: but yet let him take good heed: for the devils do also believe and
tremble, James 2.
as says S. James: O miserable man, will thou go with them too Paradise? By
this false co^clusio^ thou may know (my brother) in what an error thou art:
for thou weenest to have the faith that makes men righteous, and thou have it
not. Apoc. 3.
Thou say thou art rich, and have no need of any thing, and thou see not
how thou art poor, wretched, blind, and naked. I council thee to buy gold of
God, that is thoroughly fixed with fire, (that is to say, true faith set on fire
with good works) to the intent thou may become rich: and to cloth thy self
with white raiment (that is to wit with Christ's innocence) to the end that
the shame of thy nakedness (which is the great filthiness of thy sins) be
not seen to the whole world. Then is the justifying faith as it were a flame
of fire, which cannot but cast forth brightness. And like as the flame
burns the wood without the help of the light, A lively comparison.
and yet the flame cannot be without the light: so is it assuredly true, that
faith alone consumes and burns away sin without the help of works, and
yet that the same faith cannot be with out good works. Wherefore, like as if
we see a flame of fire that gives no light, we know by and by that it is but
vain and painted: even so when we see not some light of good works in a
man, it is a token that he has not the true inspired faith, Ihat S. James
meant concerning works. James. 2.
which God gives to his chosen, too justify and glorify them withal. And
hold it for certain, that S. James meant so, when he said, show me thy
faith by thy works, and I will show thee my faith by my works. For his meaning
was, that he s^ is plu^ged in ambitiousnes, and worldly pleasurs, believes not
(though he say he believe) forasmuch as he shows not in himself the effects of
faith. Also we may liken this holy faith too the Godhead which is in Jesus
Christ: A heanenly comparison
who being very man (but without sin) did wonderful things, healing the sick,
giving sight to the blind, walking upon the water, and raising up the dead unto
life again: and yet these merueilous works were not the cause that he was God.
For before he did any of those things, he was God and the lawful and only
begotten son of God, and he need not to work those miracles to make himself
God by them, but forasmuch as he was God, therefore he did them. And so, the
miracles that Christ wrought, made him not to be God, but showed openly that he
was God. In likewise, true faith is as it were a Godhead in the Soul of a
Christian, which does wondrous works, and is never weary of well doing, and
yet those works are not the cause that a Christian is a christian, that is to
wit, that he is righteous, good, holy, and acceptable unto God, neither
needs he to work all those good works to become such a one. But forasmuch
as he is a christian by faith, like as Jesus Christ being a man was also God by
his Godhead; he does all those good works, which make not the christian too
be righteous and good, but show him to be good, righteous and holy. So then,
like as Christ's Godhead was the cause that he wrought miracles: even so faith
working through love, is the cause of the good works that a christen man does.
And like as a man may say of Jesus Christ, that he has done this miracle or
that, and that those miracles, besides that they glorified God, were also a
great honor unto Jesus Christ as he was man, who for his obedience even unto
death, was reco^penced at Gods hand in his resurrection, and had given unto him
al power both in heaven and earth, which he had not before as in respect of his
manhood, but deserved it by the union with is betwixt the word of God and the
ma^hood of Christ: So does faith in a Christian, which faith by reason of the
union that it has with the soul, attributes that thing too the one in is
proper to the other: whereupon it comes, that the holy scripture promises the
christian everlasting life for his good woorks, because good works are the
fruits and testimonies of lively faith, and proceed of it as light proceeds
from a flame of fire, acco^rding as I have said hertofore. And by this holy
faith which imbraceth Jesus Christ, it comes to pass that our soul is joined
with Christ, and is so united and knit to him, that whatsoever Christ has
merited and deserved, the same is imputed unto the soul, as though it had
merited and deserved it. And therefore S. Augustine says, that God crowns
his own gifts in us. Of this union of the soul with Jesus Christ, Christ
himself bears good record, where he prays so his father for his Apostles
and for such as should believe in him by their preaching: John. 17.
I pray not (says he) for them only, but also for all those that shall believe
in me through their word, to the end they may be all one thing, that like as
thou my father art in me, and I in thee, so they also may b^e one in us, and
that the world may believe that thou have sent me, and that I have given them
the glory which thou have given me, so as they should be one selfsame thing
like as thou and I are one. Whereby it appears evidently, that if we believe
the word of the Apostles (who preached that Jesus Christ died for our sins,
Romans 4.
and rose again for our justification) we become al one thing with him: and
forasmuch as he is all one with God, we also become al one with god, by the
mean of Jesus Christ. 2. Cor. 6.
D wonderful glory of the Christian, to whom it is granted through faith, to
possess the unspeakable benefits which the Angels long to behold! By this
present discourse a man may plainly perceive the difference y^ is betwixt us
and them that defend the justification by faith and works together. Herein we
agree with them, that we stablish works, affirming that the ^aith which
justifies cannot be without good works, and that those which are become
righteous are they that do the good woorks that may rightly be called good
works. But we differ from them in this, that we say, 1. Pet-2.
that faith makes men righteous without the help of woorke^s. And the reason
is ready: namely, because that by faith we put on Christ, and make his
holiness and righteousness to be ours. And seeing the case so stands, that
Christ's righteousness is given us by fayeth: ^ Galat. 3.
We cannot be so thanklesse, blind, and unhappy, as not to believe that he is
of sufficient ability, to make us acceptable and right before God. Let us say
with the Apostle, (...). 9.
If the blood of Oxen and Goats and the Ashes of a Cow sprinkled, cleanses
the unclean, as touching the cleansing of the flesh: how much more shall that
blood of Jesus Christ, who by the everlasting spirit offered himself
undefiled unto God, to cleanse our consciences from dead works to serve the
living God? I pray thee now, thou good and devout christian, consider well which
of these two opinions is the truest, holiest, and worthiest to be preached:
Ours, which aduanceth the benefit of Jesus Christ, and pulls down the pride
of man which would exalt his own works against Christ's glory, or the other,
which by affirming that faith of it self justifies not, defaceth the glory
and benefit of Jesus Christ, and puffs up the pride of man, who cannot
abide to be justified freely by our Lord Jesus Christ without some merit of
his own. But (say they) it is a great quickening up to good works to say
that a man makes himself righteous before God by means of them. I answer,
that we also confess that good works are acceptable to God, and that he of
his mere grace and free liberality recompenceth them in paradise. But we say
more over, that no works are good, saving those that (S. Augustine says) are
done by those that are become righteous through faith, because, that if the
tree be not good, it cannot yield good fruit. And ^urthermore we say, that
such as are become righteous through faith, forasmuch as they know themselves
to be righteous through Gods righteousness purchased by Christ, make no
bargayning with God for their works, as though they would buy their manner of
justification such as it is with them: but being inflamed with the love of
God, and desirous to glorify Jesus Christ who has made them righteous by
giving them his merits and riches, they bestow all their whole study and
labor to do Gods will, fighting manfully against the love of themselves, and
against the world and the Devil. And when they fall through frailty of y^ flesh,
they recover themselves by and by, and are so much the more desirous to do
good, and so much the more in love with their God, considering that he lays
not their sins to their charge, because they be ingrafted into Jesus Christ,
who has made full amends for all his members, upon the tree of his trosse,
and makes continual intercession for them to the eternal father, who for the
love of his only begotten son beholds them always with a gentle
countenance, governing and defending them as his most dear children, and in
the end giving them the heritage of the world, making the like fashioned to the
glorious image of Christ. These loving motions are y^ spurs that prick
forward the true Christians to do good woorks: who considering that they are
become the children of God through faith, and made partakers of his divine
nature, are stirred up by the holy Ghost dwelling in them, to live as it
becomes the children of so great a Lord, and are greatly ashamed that they
maintain not the beauty of their heavenly noblenes: and therefore they employ
their whole endeavor to the following of their firstborue brother Jesus Christ
living in great lowlines and m^eekenes, in all things seeking the glory of God,
giving their lives for their brethren, doing good to their enemies, gloriyng in
y^ sufferance of reproaches, and in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, Galat.
6. ^^ke. 2.
and saying with Zachary, We be delivered out of hand of our enemies, to serve
God without fear, in holiness and righteousness all the days of our life. They
say with S. Paul, The grace of the Lord is appeared, (...) 2.
to abolish al wickedness and al worldly desires in us, to the end we should
live a sober, holy, and honest life in this world, waiting for the blessed
hope, and for the glorious appearing of the great God and savior. These and
such other like thoughts, desires, and affections, are wrought by inspired
faith in the souls of them that are become righteous. And as for him that
either wholly or partly feleth not these godly affections and operations in his
heart, but is given over to the flesh and the world; let him assur^ himself,
that he has not yet the justifying faith, nor is the member of Christ,
because he has not Christ's spirit, and consequently is none of his, and he
that is none of Christ's, is no Christian. Then let man's wisdom cease
henceforth to fight Romans 8.
against the righteousness of the most holy faith, and let us give all the
glory of our justification, Gala. 3.
to the merits of Jesus Christ with whom we be clothed through faith.

The fifth Chapter.
In what wise the Christian is clothed with Jesus Christ.
ALthough that by the things aforesaid, a man may easily and plainly enough
perc^iue, how a Christian may clothe himself with Jesus Christ: yet
nevertheless, I mind to speak a little of it, assuring my self, that unto
the good and faithful Christian, it can seem neither grievous nor troublesome
to speak thereof, although the thing were repeated a thousand tunes. Therefore
I say, that the Christian knows that Jesus Christ, together with all his
righteousness, holiness, and innocen^ie, is his own through faith. And like
as when a man purposes to present himself before some great Lord or Prince,
h^ labors to array himself in some fair and rostely apparreli: even so,
when the Christian is decked and arrayed with the innocence of Christ, and with
all his perfection, he prese^teth himself boldly before God the Lord of all,
assuring himself, y^ through Christ's merits he is in as good case, as if he
had purchased all that which Jesus Christ has purchased and deserved. And
truly, faith makes every of (...) to possess Christ and all that is his, as
we possess our own garment. And therefore to be clothed with Jesus Christ, is
nothing else but to believe for a certainty, that Christ is wholly ours: and so
is he in very deed, if we believe so, and hold our selves assured, that by the
same heavenly garment we be recetued into favor before God. For it is most
certain that he as a most dear father has given us his son: meaning that
all his righteousness, and all that ever he is, can, or has done, should be in
our power and jurisdiction, in such wise as it should be lawful for us to
make our boast of them, as if we had done, purchasen, and deserved them, by our
own strength. And whosoever believes this, shall find that his belief is good
and true, as we have showed heretofore. Then must the Christian have a steadfast
faith and belief, y^ all the goods, all the graces, and all the riches of Jesus
Christ, are his: for since y^ God has given us Jesus Christ himself, how should
it be possible that he has not given us all things with him? Wow if this be
true, as true it is in deed: Romans S.
y^ Christian may rightly say, I am y^ child of God, and Jesus Christ is my
brother, I am Lord of heaven and earth, and of hell and of death, and of the
law, insomuch as the law cannot accuse me nor lay any curse upon me, because
the righteousness of God is become mine. And this faith is it alone y^ makes a
man to be called a christi^ and which clotheth him with Jesus Christ as we have
said before. And boldly may this be called a great mystery, wherunder are
contamed marvelous things, and things not heard of, concerning y^ great God,
which cannot enter into ma^s heart, except God do first soften it with his holy
grace as he has promised to do by his holy prophet, saying, I will give you a
new heart, and I will put a new mind into you, and I will take away the stony
heart out of your body, and I will give you a heart of flesh. Now then, he that
believes not after the said manner, that Jesus Christ with all the goods that
he possesses, is his; cannot call himself a true Christian, nor ever have a
quiet and joyful conscience, nor a good and fervent courage too do good: but
shall easily faint in doing of good works, yea and moreover he shall never
be able to do works that are truly good. This only belief and trust y^ we
have in the merits of Jesus Christ, makes men true christians, stout,
cheereful, merry, lovers of God, ready to do good works, Possessors, of Gods
kingdom and of God himself, and his right dearly beloved children, in who^
the holy Ghost does truly dwell. What heart is so cowardly, cold, and vile,
which considering the inestimable greatness of the gift that God has bestowed
upon him, in giving him his own so well-beloved son with all his perfectness;
Jesus thrist the (...) example of Christians.
is not inflamed with an exeeding earnest desire, to become like unto him in
good works? specially seeing that the father has given him unto us for an
example whereon we must continually look, framing our life after such a sort, as
it may be a true counterpaine of the life of Jesus Christ, forasmuch as Christ
(as says S. Peter) has suffered for us, 2. ^et. 2.
leaning us an ensample, to the end that we should follow his footesteppes.
Out of this consideration issues another kind of clothing of a man's self
with Christ, which we may term an example clothing, for so much as the
christian must frame his whole life after y^ example of Christ, fashioning
himself like unto him in all his deeds, words, and thoughts, leuing his
former wicked life, and decking himself with the new life, that is to wit,
with the life of Christ. By reason whereof S. Paul says, Ephe 4. Romans 15.
Let us cast away the works of darkness, and put on the armor of light, not
in feasting, nor in drunkenness, nor in chambering and wantonness, nor in
striefe: but put upon you the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no preparation for
the flesh, nor for the lusts thereof. Hereupon the true Christian being in
love with Jesus Christ, says in him self, Since that Jesus Christ, not having
any need of me, has redeemed me with his own blood, and is become poor to
inriche me: I will likewise give my goods, yea and my very life, for the love
and welfare of my neighbor. And like as I am clothed with Jesus Christ for y^
love he has borne to me: so will I have my neighbor in Christ, to cloth
himself with me and with my goods likewise, for ^ love that I bear him for
Christ's sake. He that does not so, is no true Christian, for he cannot say,
that he loves Jesus Christ, if he love not the members and brothers of him:
and if we love not our neighbor, for whose sake Christ has shed his blood,
we cannot truly say that we love Jesus Christ: who being equal with God,
was obedient to his father even to the death of the cross, (...) 2.
and has loved and redeemed us, giving himself unto us, with all that ever he
has. After the same manner, we being rich and having abundance of good things
at Christ's hand, must also be obedient unto God, to offer and give our works
and all that me have, yea and even our selves, to our neighbors and brethren in
Jesus Christ, seraing them and helping them at their need, and being to them
as another Christ. And like as Jesus Christ was lowly and gentle, Mark. 12.
and far from all debate and strife: so must we set our whole mind upon
lowliness and meekness, eschewing al strife and impacience, as well which
consist in words and reasoning, as in deeds: And as Jesus Christ has endured
all the persecutions and spites of the world for y^ glory of God: so must we
with all patientnes cheerfully bear the persecutions and reproaches that are
done by false Christians to all such as will live faithfully in Jesus Christ:
who gave his life for his enemies, and prayed for them upon the cross: and so
must we also pray always for our enemies, 2. ^im. 2.
and willingly spend our life for their welfare. And this is to follow Christ's
steps according as S. Peter says. For when we know Jesus Christ with all his
riches to be our own good, (which thing is to be clothed with Christ, and too
become pure and clean without spot) there remains nothing more for us to do,
but to glorify God by following the life of Jesus Christ, and to do to our
brethren as Christ has done to us: and specially forasmuch as we be
warranted by his word, that whatsoever we do to his brethren and ours, he
accepts it as a benefit done to himself. And doubtless seeing that the true
Christians are members of Christ, we cannot do either good or evil to the true
Christians, but we do it likewise unto Christ, insomche that he rejoices or
suffers in his members. Therefore like as Jesus Christ is our clothing by
faith, so also must we through love become the clothing of our brethren, and
have as good care of them as of our own bodies: for they be members of our
body, whereof Christ is the head. And this is the holy godly love and charity
which springs and proceeds of the true unfeigned faith, Romans 12.
which GOD has breathed into his elect: which faith (as says S. Paul)
works by love. Howbeit forasmuch as the life of our Lord Jesus Christ,
wherewithal we must be clothed, 1. Tim. 1. Galat 5.
was a continual cross, full of troubles, reproaches, and persecutions: if we
will fashion our selves like unto his life, we must continually bear the
cross, as he himself says: If any man will come after me, let him forsake
himself, and take up his cross and follow me. Luke. 9.
But the chief cause of this cross is, for that our god purposes to mortify
the affections of our mind and the lusts of our flesh by that exercise: to the
end we may conceive in our selves the great perfection wherein we be comprised
by our Lord Jesus Christ, by being grafted into him. Also his will is, that
our faith being ^ined like gold in a furnace of troubles, John. 15 Phillip. 3.
should shine bright too his glory. Moreover his intent is, that we by our
infirmities, should set out his great power, which the world in despite of it,
beholds in us, inasmuch as our frailty becomes strong by troubles and
persecutions, and the more that it was beaten down and oppressed, so much the
more it is strong and steadfast. Whereof the Apostle S. Paul says, 2. Cor. 12.
2. Cor. 4.
we carry this treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency of the power
might be gods and not ours. On all sides we suffer tribulation, but we are not
overcome: we be poor, but not overcome of poverty: we suffer persecution,
but yet are we not forsaken: we be despised, but yet we perish not: and so we
daily bear about us the dying of our Lord Jesus Christin our body, that the
life of Jesus Christ may also be openly showed in us. And seeing the case is
so, y^ our Lord Jesus Christ and all his dear disciples glorified God by
tribulations: let us also embrace them joyfully, and say with the Apostle S.
Paul, Galat. 6.
God forbid that I should glory, save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ:
and let us so deal, as the world may (whether it will or no) perceive and see
with his eyes, the wonderful effects that God works in such as sincerely
embrace the grace of his Gospel. Let us so deal I say, as the worldlinges may
see with how great quietness of mind the true Christians endure the loss of
their goods, with death of their children, slanders, the diseases of the body,
and the persecutions of false christians: and also that they may see how the
only true Christians do worship God inspirite and truth, taking in good
worth at his hand whatsoever happens, and ho^ding all that he does to be
good, righteous, and holy, praising him always for the same, whether it be
inprosperite or adversity, thanking him as a most gracious and loving father,
and acknowledging it for a right great gift of Gods goodness, Romans 5.
too suffer any adversity, and chiefly for the go spell, and for following the
steps of Christ, specially forasmuch as we know, After what sort patience
ingendreth trial.
that tribulario^ ingendreth patience, and patience trial, and trial hope, and
hope makes us not ashamed. I say y^ patience engendereth trial, because that
whereas God has promised help in trouble to such as trust in him, we find
it by experience, in that we continue strong and steadfast all the while, and
are vpholden by the hand of God: which thing we could not do withal the powers
that we have of our own. So then by patience we find that our Lord gives
us the help that he has promised us at our need, whereby our hope is
confirmed. And it were an over great unthankfulness not to trust to such an aid
and favor for the time to come, as we have found by experience to be so
certain and steadfast h^refore. But what need we so many words? It ought to
suffice us to know, that the true christians are through tribulation clothed
with the image of our Lord Jesus Christ crucified: Romans 8.
which if we bear willingly and with a good heart, we shall in the end be
clothed with the image of Jesus Christ glorified. ^. Cor. 2.
For as the passions of Jesus Christ do abound: so through him, shall the
consolations ouerabounde: and if we suffer with him here below for a time, we
shall also regine with him there above for ever.

The sixth Chapter.
Certain remedies against distrust.
BUt forasmuch as the Devil and man^ wisdom labor continually to dispossess
us of this most holy faith, wherethrough we believe that all our sins are
chastized and punished in Jesus Christ, and that through his most precious
bloodshed, we be reconciled to the majesty of God: it is very needful for a
Christian to have his weapons always in a readiness, to defend himself from
the said most mischievous temptation, which seeks to bereave the soul of
her life. Mark. 9.
Among the said weapons (in my judgment) the mightiest and best are,
Fourereme dies against the temptations of Distrust. Prayer.
Prayer, the often use of the holy communion, the remembering of holy Baptism,
and the minding of Predestination. In our prayer, we may well say with the
father of the poor Lunatike person, of who^ mention is made in the Gospel of
S. Mark, Lord Jesus, help mine unbelief. Or else we may say with the
Apostles, Lord increase our faith. Math. 9.
And if there reign in us a continual desire to grow in faith, hope, and
love: we will continually pray, 1. Ches. 5. True prai^
as S. Paul instructs us. For prayer is nothing else but a fervent mind
settled upon God. By the remembering of Baptism, Baptism
we shall assure our selves that we are at peace with God. 1. Pet. 3.
And forasmuch as S. Peter says that the Ark of Noe was a figure of Baptism:
therefore, like as Noe was saved from the flood of the Arc, because he
believed y^ promises of God: so also are we by faith saved in Baptism from
Gods wrath. Mark. 10.
Which faith is grounded upon the word of our Lord Jesus Christ, who says
y^ he which believes and is baptized, shall be saved. And good right it is: for
in baptism we put on Jesus Christ as the Apostle S. Paul affirms, Galat. 3.
and consequently we be made partakers of his righteousness, and of all his
goods: and under this precious robe, the sins y^ our ^railtie commits,
lie hidden and covered and are not imputed unto us. And so, according as S.
Paul says, Romans 4.
the blessedness which the Psalmist speaks of, apperteineth unto us: namely,
Ps^l^^. 3.
Blessed are they whose misdoings are forgeuen, and whose sins are covered.
Blessed is the man to whom^, the Lord imputes not sin. But it stands a
Christian in hand, to take good heed, that upon these words he take no liberty
to sin: for this doctrine belongs to none such as honor themselves with
the name of Christians, confessing Christ with their mouth, and yet deny him in
their deeds. But it concerns the true Christians, who though they fight
manfully against the flesh, the world, and the Devil: do notwithstanding
fall daily, and are constreyned to say, Lord forgive us our offenses. These
are they to whom we speak to comfort them and to hold them up, that they fall
not into despair: as though the blood of Christ washed us not from all sin,
and that he were not our advocate, and the Attonementmaker for his members.
And therefore when we be provoked too doubt of the forgiveness of our
sins, and that our own conscience begins to trouble us: then must we
furnishe our selves with true faith, and out of hand have recourse to the
precious blood of Jesus Christ, The supper of the Lord.
shed for us upon the altar of the cross, and distributed to his Apostles at
his last Supper, under the veil of a most Holy Sacrament, which was ordained
by Christ, to the end y^ we should celebrate the remembrance of his death,
and that by the same visible Sacrament, our troubled consciences might be
assured of our atonement with God. The blessed Jesus Christ made his last
Will, when he said, this is my body which is given for you, Luke. 22.
and this is my blood of the new Testament, Mark. 16.
which is shed for many for the forgiveness of their sins. We know that a
Testament (says S. Paul) although it be but a man's Testament, Ga^at. 3.
yet never thelesse if it be allowed, no man dispiseth it, or adds any thing
to it: and that no Testament is of force til the testator be dead, but has full
power after y^ parties decease. Then did Jesus Christ make his Testament,
wherein he promises forgiveness of sins, and the grace and good favor of him
self and of his father together with mercy and everlasting life. And to the
intent that the said Testament should be of full force, he has confirmed it
with his own precious blood and with his own death. By reason whereof, Saint
Paul says, Heb. ^
that Jesus Christ is the Mediator of the new Testament, that by his dying
for the the redemption of those transgressions which were in the former
testament, they that are called might receive the promise of the eternal
inheritance. For whersoeuer is a Testament, there must also be y^ death of the
Testator: for the Testament is confirmed by the death of the party, insomuch
as it is of no value so long as the maker of it is alive. Wherefore we be very
certain and assured by the death of Jesus Christ, that his Testament is
available, whereby all our misdeedes are pardoned, and we made heirs of
eternal life. And for a token and faithful pledge hereof, (...) lib. 1
in steed of a Seal, he has left us this Divine Sacrament, which not only
gives our souls assured hope of their everlasting Salvation, but also
warranteth unto us that immortality of our flesh, forasmuch as it is even now
quickened by that immortal flesh of his, and in a certain manner becomes
partaker of the immortality thereof, and he that is partaker of that divine
flesh by faith, shall not perish for ever. But unto him that receives it
without the said faith, it turns too a dangerous poison, John. 6.
because that like as when bodily sustenance finds the stomach encumbered
with evil humors, it corrupts likewise and works great anoyance: eue^ so
if this spiritual food light into a sinful soul that is full of malice and
misbeliefe, it casts it headlong intoo some greater ruin, not through it
own default, but because that too the unclean and unbeliever all things are
unclean: notwithstanding that the things be sanctified by the Lords
blessing. 1. Cor. 11.
For (says S. Paul) be that eats of that bread and drinks of that cup
unworthily, is What is meant by not making a di^fere^ce of the Lords body.
is guilty of the body and blood of the Lord, and he eats and drinks his
own damnation, because he makes no difference of the Lords body. For he
makes no difference of the Lords body, which presumes to the Lords supper
without faith, and charity. He that receives this Sacramen^ protests
himself too trust in none other thing than the blood of Christ.
And forasmuch as he believes not that body to be his life and the cleanser of
all his sins: he makes Jesus Christ a liar, and treads the son of god
under foot, and esteems the blood of the Testamente whereby he was
sanctified but as a common worldly thing, and does great wrong to the spirit
of grace, and he shall be punished very sore at Gods hand, for this his unbelief
and wicked hypocriste. For whereas he reposeth not that trust of his
justification in the passion of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: yet
nevertheless he receives this most holy Sacrament, and makes protestation
that he puts not his trust in any other thing. Whereby he accuses himself,
and is witness of his own iniquity, and conde^neth himself to everlasting
death, by refusing the life which GOD promises him in that holy Sacrament. And
in this point, when the Christian feels that his enemies are like to overcome
him: that is too wit, when he begins too doubt whether he have received
forgiveness of his sins by Jesus Christ: and that he shall not be able to
withstand the Devil and his temptations: and that the accusation of his own
doubtful conscience comes too press him, so as he begins too fear least
Hell fire should swallow him up, and death hold him in his everlasting bands by
reason of gods wrath, I say, when the good Christian feels himself in such
an agony: Let him get him to his holy Sacrament with a good heart and stout
courage, and receive it devoutly; saying in his heart, and answering his
enemies thus: I confess I have deserved a thousand hels, and everlasting death
by reason of the great sins which I have committed. But this heavenly
Sacrament which I receive at that preset, assures me of the forgiveness of
all my misdoinges, and of mine atonement with God. For if I have an eye to my
works, there is no doubt but I acknowledge my self a sinner, and condemn mine
own self in such wise, as my conscience should never be quiet, if I should
think that my sins are pardoned me for my works sake. But when I look to
the promises and covenants of God, who promises me forgeuenes of my sins by
the blood of Jesus Christ, I am as sure I have obtained it, and that I have
his favor, as I am sure y^ he which has made y^ promises and covenants,
cannot lie nor deceive: and through this steadfast faith I become righteous by
Christ's righteousness, wherthrough I am saved, and my conscience quieted. Has
he not given his most innocent body into the hands of sinners for our sins?
Romans 4.
Has he not shed his blood to wash away my iniquities? Why then do thou
vex thy self O my soul? put thy trust in the Lord, who bears thee so
great love, that to deliver thee from eternal death, it has pleased him that
his only son should suffer death and passion, who has taken upon himself
our poverty, to give us his riches: laid our weakness upon himself, to
stablish us in his strength: become mortal, to make us immortal: come down
untoo the earth, to advance us up too heaven: and become the son of man with
us, too make us the children of God with himself. Who is he then that shall
accuse us? Romans 8.
God is he that justifies us, and who shall condemn us? Jesus Christ is dead
for us, yea and risen again (...) us, and sits at the right hand of God*
making intercession for us. Let us then D my soul leave of these tears and
sighs.

THE CIII: Psalm.
1 MY Soul praise thou the Lord, and all that is within me, praise his holy
name.
2 My soul, praise thou the Lord, and forget not all his benefits.
3 Which forgiueth al thine iniquity, and heals all thine infirmities.
4 Which redeemeth thy life from the grave, and crowns thee with mercy and
compassion.
5 Which satisfies thy mouth with good things: and thy youth is renewed like
the Eagles.
6 The Lord executes righteousness^ and judgment to all that are oppressed.
7 No made his ways known unto Moses, and his works unto the children of
Israel.
8 The Lord is full of compassion and mercy, s^ow to anger, and of great
kindness.
9 We will not always chide, neither keep^ his anger for ever.
10 He has not dealt with us after our sins, nor rewarded us according to our
iniquities.
11 For as high as the heaven is above the earth: so great is his mercy
toward them that fear him.
12 As far as the East is from the West: so far has he removed our sins
from us.
13 As a father has compassion on his children, so has the Lord compassion on
them that fear him.
14 For he knows whereof we be made: he remembers that we are but dust.
15 The days of man are as grass: as a flower of the field, so florisheth he.
16 For y^ wind goes over it, and it is gone, and the place thereof shall know
it no more.
17 But y^ loving kindness of y^ Lord endures for ever and ever upon the^ that
fear him, amp; his righteousness upon childrens children.
18 Unto them y^ keep his covenant, and think upon his commandments to do
them.
19 The Lord has prepared his throne in heaven, and his kingdom rules over
all.
20 Praise the Lord, ye his Angels, that excel in strength, that do his
commandment in obeying the voice of his woord^.
21 Praise the Lord, al ye his hosts, ye his servants that do his pleasure.
22 Praise the Lord, all ye his works, in all places of his dominion: my soul
praise thou the Lord.
So has he had mercy on us, in giving us his only son. With this faith, with
those tha^ksgeuings, with these or such other like thoughts must we receive
the sacrament of the body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ. After this
manner is all fearfulness driven out of the soul of the Christian: and charity
is increased, faith strengthened, the conscience quieted, and the tongue never
ceasseth to praise. God, and to yield him infinite thanks for so great a
benefit. This is the virtue, efficacy, and only trust of our soul. This is
the rock, whereupon if the conscience be builded, it fears another tempest,
nor the gates of hell, nor Gods wrath, nor the law, nor sin, nor death, nor
the devils, nor any other thing. And forasmuch as the substance of the Lords
supper and table consists is this divine sacrament: When the Christian is at
it, he must hold his eyes fastened continually upon the passion of our
gracious Savior, beholding him on the one side upon the cross laden with all
our sins: and God on the other side punishing, chastising, and whipping his
own only begotten and Deerebeloued son in stead of us. O happy is that
man that shuts his eyes from al other sights, and will neither hear nor see
any other thing than Jesus Christ crucified, in who^ are laid up and bestowed
all the treasures of Gods wisdom and divine knowledge^ Blessed (say I) is he
that feeds his mind with so heavenly a food, and makes himself drunken in
the love of God with so sweet and singular a liquor. But before I make an end
of this matter, I will first advertise the Christian, that Saint Augustine
has ordinarily been wont too term this holy Sacrament, the bond of
charity, and the mystery of unity. And he says, that whosoever receives the
mystery of unity, and regards not the bond of peace, receives not the
Sacrament to his own behoo^e, but as a witness against himself. Therefore we
must understand, Why the holy sacrament of thanksgiving was ordain^d.
y^ the Lord has ordained this holy sacrament not only to make us sure of y^
forgiueues of our sins: but also to inflame us to peace, unity, and brotherly
charity. For in this Sacrament the Lord does after such a manner make us
parlakers of his body, as he becomes al one thing with us, and we with him. By
reason whereof, Christen peace and union are betokened by the bread and wine.
forasmuch as he has but one body whereof, he makes us Partakers: it is meet^
that we also should by such partaking become al one body together among our
selves. And this vnto^ is represe^ted by the bread of the sacrament: which as
it is made of many grains mingled and kneaded together, in such wise as one of
them ca^ not be discerned from another: So also must we be toyned together
after such a sort, and so united together into one agreement of mind, as no
division may creep in. And this does S. Paul show us, when he says: Is not
the cup of blessing which we bless, the communion of the blood of Jesus
Christ, is not the bread y^ we break, the communion of the body of Jesus
Christ whereas we be many, yet are we but one bread and one body, for so much as
we be all Partakers of one bread. By these things we understand, ^e that
offe^eth one of his Christian brethren. offends Christ (...)
that when we receive his most holy communion, we must consider that we are al
of us ingraffed into Christ, and are all become members of one selfsame body,
that is to wit, of Jesus Christ, in such wise as we cannot offend, defame, or
despise any of our brethren, but we must therewithal offend, defame, and
despise, our said head Jesus Christ: neither ca^ we be at variance with any of
our brethren, but in likewise we must be at odds with him. Also we cannot love
him, except we love him in our brethren. Look how much care we have of our
own body, so much must we have of our Christian brethren, who are the members
of our body. And like as no part of our body feels any grief, which
spreads not it self into all the other parts: so ought we to determine with our
selves, that our brother feleth not any inconvenience, which should not move us
to co^passio^. With such manner of thoughts must we prepare our selves to this
holy sacrament, quickening up our spirits with a fervent love to our
neighbourward. For what greater spur ca^ we have to prick us to love one
another, A preparation to the receiving of the holy Sacramen^
tha^ to see that Jesus Christ, by giving himself un too us, not only allureth
us too give our selves one to another, but also by making himself common to us
all, makes us also to be al one selfsame thing in him? In respect whereof, we
ought to covet and procure, that in all of us there may be but one mind, one
heart, and one tou^g, accorded and united together in thought, words, and
deeds. And we must mark well, He that receives the Sacrament binds him^selfe
to all the duties of charity.
that as often as we receive this holy and worthy sacrament, we bind our selves
to all the duties of charity: as not to offend any of our brethren, nor too
leave any thing undone, that may be profitable and helpful in their necessity.
But if there come any to this heavenly table of the Lord, y^ are divided at
varia^ce with their brethren, the same must assure themselves that they eat
unworthily, and are guilty of the body and blood of the Lord, and that they
eat and drink their own damnation: for that there wanted nothing on their
behalf, but y^ the body of Jesus Christ was rent and plucked in pieces again,
whilst they by hatred are divided from their brethren, y^ us to wit, from the
members of Jesus Christ, and have not any part with him, and yet nevertheless in
receiving this holy communion, pretended to be Ieeu^ that their whole salvation
consists in the participation and union with Jesus Christ. Then let us go my
brethren The true end for which the holy sacrament is ordained.
to the receiving of this heavenly bread, to celebrate the remembrance of our
Lords passion, and to strengthen and fortify the belief and assurance of the
forgiveness of our sins, with the remembrance thereof, and to quicken up our
minds and toungs to praise and exalt the infinite goodness of our God, and
finally to cherish brotherly love, and to witness y^ same one to another by ^
straight vnio^ with al of us have in the body of our Lord Jesus Christ. The
fo^rth remedy against (...).
Besides prayer, and the remembering of Baptism, and the often resorting to the
most holy communion, there is one other very good remedy, against di strust and
fearfulnes* which is no less friend to Christian charity: namely the
remembrance of our predestination and election to eternal life, grounded upon
the word of God which is the sword of the holy Ghost, wherewith we may beat
back our enemies. Rejoice ye in this (says the Lord) that your names are
written in heaven. Ephe. 5. Luke. 10.
There is no greater joy in this life, nor any thing that more comfort the
Christian that is afflicted, tempted, or fallen into any sin, than the
remembrance of predestination, and the assuring of our selves that we be of the
number of them whose names are written in the book of life, and with are chosen
to be fashioned like unto the image of Jesus Christ, O how unspeakeable is the
comfort of him y^ has this faith, and museth continually in his hear upon
this exceeding sweet predestination, whereby he knows y^ although he fall
often, yet notwtstanding, God his father who has foreordeined him too
everlasting life, Psalm. 36.
holds him up, and reaches out his hand unto him continually. And he says
continually in himself, if God have chosen me and predestined me to the
glory of his children, who can hinder me: If God be with us Romans ^
(says S. Paul) who can be against us? Nay rather, Be that receives the
Gospel is sure that he is predesinate^. The effect proceeding of the knowledge
of predestination.
to the end that the predestination may be accomplished in us, he has sent his
dear beloved son, who is a most sure earnest penny and pledge unto us, that
we which have received: the grace of the Gospel, are Gods children, chosen to
eternal life. This holy Predestination mainteineth the true christian in a
continual spiritual joy increases in him the endeavor of good works, and
inflameth him with the love of God, and makes him enemy tothe world and to
sin. Who is so fierce and hardharted, which knowing that God of his mercy
has made him his child from everlasting, will not by and by be inflamed to
love God? Who is of so vile and base courage, y^ he will not esteem all the
pleasures, all the honors, and all the riches of the world as filthy mire, when
he knows that he has made him a ^itizen of heaven? yea these are they that
worship God rightly in spirit and truth, receiving al things (as well in
prosperity as in adversity) at the hand of God their father, and evermore
praising and thanking him or all as their good father, who is righte^us and
holy in all his woorks. These being inflamed with the love of God, and armed
with the knowledge of their Predestinati^n, fear neither death, nor sin, nor
the devil, nor hell: neither know they what the wrath of God is: for they see
none other thing in God, but love and fatherly kindness toward them. And if
they fall into any troubles, they accept them as tokens of Gods favor, crying
out with S. Paul, Romans 8.
Who is it that shall separate us from Gods love? shall tribulations, shall
anguish, shall persecution, or hunger, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? as it
is written for thy sake are we killed all the day long, and counted as sheep
appointed to the slaughter. But in all these things we get y^ upper hand through
him that has loved us. Wherefore, it is not for naught that Saint John says,
how the true Christians know right well, that they must be saved and glorified,
and that by reason of the same affiance, they make themselves holy as Jesus
Christ is holy. And when S. Paul exhorts his disciples too a good and holy
life: he is wont to put them in remembrance of their election and
predestination, as of a thing of very great force to stir up the minds of
the true Christians to the loving of God, and too the perfourmance of good
works. And for the same cause our good Lord Jesus Christ speaks openly of
this holy predestination, as one that knew of how great importance the
knowledge thereof is to the edifiyng of his elect. But percha^ce thou will say
to me, I know well that they whose names are written in heaven, have cause to
live in continual joy, and glorify God both in word and deed: but I know
not whether I am of that number or no, and therefore I live in continual fear:
specially because I know my self to be an exceeding weak and frail sinner,
from the violence whereof I am not able to defend my self, but that I am
overcome of it daily. And furthermore, forasmuch as I see my self continually
afflicted and troubled with diverse temptations, me thinks I do as it were
behold with mine eyes, y^ wrath of God scourging me. To answer to these doubts
of thine, I say my right dear brother, that thou must assure thy self, that
al these are but temptations of the devil, who by all means seeks to rob us
of that faith and confidence that springs of faith, and assures us of Gods
good will toward us. He labors to strip our soul out of this precious
garment: for he knows y^ none is a true Christian, except he believe Gods
word, which promises forgiveness of all sins, and peace too all them,
which accept the grace of the Gospel. Uerily I say that he which upon these
promises of God, persuades not himself assuredly, that God is a merciful and
loving father unto him, nor with steadfast confidence looks to receive the
inheritance of the heavenly kingdom at his hand: is not faithful in deed, and
makes himself utterly unworthy of Gods grace. In respect whereof, Heb. 3.
S. Paul says, that we be the temple of God, so farfoorth as we firmly
maintain the confidence and glory of our hope, unto the end. And in another
place he exhorts us that we should not give over our trust, Heb. 10.
which has great reward of recompense. And therefore my brethren, let us give
our whole endeavor to do the will of God, as it becomes good children, and
beware that we sin not, as near as we can. And although we fall
oftentimes intoo sin through our own frailty, yet let us not by and by
surmise, that we be vessels of wrath, or that we be utterly forsaken of the
holy Ghost: for we have our Advocate Jesus Christ before God the father, and he
is the atonement maker for our sins. Let us bethink us of the opinion of S.
Augustine, who says that none of the Saints is righteous and without sin:
and yet notwithstanding that, he cease not to be righteous and holy, so
farfoorth as he retain his holiness with affection. And therefore if we have
afflictions and tribulations, Afflictions are no signs of reprobation
let us not think that God sends the^ because he is our enemy, Pro. 5.
but because he is our most loving father. The Lord (says Solomon) chastises
him whom he loves, and scourges every child of his who^ he receives.
Wherefore if we have received the grace of the gospel, whereby man is received of
God for his child, A true mark to know God children by.
me must not doubt of Gods grace and good will toward us. And when we
perceive our selves too delight in Gods word, and to have a desire to follow the
life of Jesus Christ: we must steadfastly believe, that we be the children of
God, and the temple of the holy Ghost: For those things cannot be done by the
power of man's wisdom, but are the gifts of the holy Ghost, who dwells in
us by faith, and is as it were a seal of authority which seals up Gods
promises in our hearts, Ephe. 2. Wherefore the Apostle calls the holy Ghost
she spirit of promise.
the certainly whereof is printed aforeha^d in our minds and is given us as a
pleadge to stablishe and confirm the same. As Soon as you believe (says the
Apostle S. Paul) ye be sealed by the holy spirit of promise, who is the
earnest penny of our inheritance. Behold how he shows us hereby, that the
hearts of the faithful are marked with the holy Ghost, as it were with a
seal: in respect^ whereof he calls the holy Ghost the spirit of promise,
forasmuch as he confirms the promise of the Gospel, the which (as I have
oftentimes told you) is a happy tidinges that promises forgiveness of sins
and everlasting life, to all such as believe that all their misdoings are
blotted out in Jesus Christ. All we that believe in Jesus Christ (says Saint
Paul) are become the children of God: Gala^. ^
and because we be his children, he has sent the spirit of his son into our
heart, which cries, Father, Father. And to the Romans, those (says he) that
are guided by the spirit of God, are the children of God: for ye have not
received again the spirit of bondage in fear: Romans ^
but the spirit of adoption, whereby me cry, father, father. For certainly the
same spirit bears our spirit record, that we be the children of God. Now
then, if we be children, we be also heirs. And we must mark well, that in these
two places, the Apostle Saint Paul speaks plainly, not of any special
revelation, but of a certain record which the holy Ghost does commonly yield
too all such as receive the grace of the Gospel. Then if the holy Ghost assure
us that we be Gods children and heirs: why should we doubt of our
Predestination: Rom 8.
The same man says in the same Epistle, Whom he has predestined, them
has he also called: and whom he has called, them has he also made
righteous: and whom he has made righteous, them also has he glorified. What
shall we then say too all these things? if God be on our side, who can be
against us? And therefore if and plainly perceive, that God has called me by
giving me faith and the fruits of faith, A true mark of Predesti^n.
that is to wit, Peace of conscience, mortification of the flesh, and
quickening of the spirit, whether it be in whole or in part: why should I
doubt that I am not predestined? And moreover we say with Saint Paul, that
all true Christians (that is to wit, all such as believe the Gospel) receive
not the spirit of this world, 1. Eor. 2.
but the spirit that comes from God: by the inspiration whereof they discern
the things that God has given them. What marvel then is it, if we know that
God has certainly given us everlasting life? But there are some which say,
that no man ought to presume so far, as to boast humselfe to have the spirit
of God. They speak in such wise. as if the Christian should glory of y^ having
of it for his own deserts, and not by the only and mere mercy of God: and
as though it were a presumptuousnes to profess himself a Christian: or as
though a man could be a Christian without the having of Christ's spirit: or
as though we could without flat hypocrisy say, that Jesus Christ is our
Lord, or call God our father, if the holy Ghost moved not our hearts and toungs
to utter to sweet words. Romans 8. 1. Cor. 1^.
And yet notwithstanding, even they that count us presu^ptuous for saying that
God has given us his holy spirit. with faith, forbid us not to say every day
Our Father, but rather command us. But I would have them to tell me, how it
is possible to separate faith and the holy Ghost asunder, seeing that faith is
the peculiar work of the holy Ghost? If it be presumption to believe that the
holy Ghost is in us, He that glories not that he has the holy Ghost is no
true Christian.
why does S. Paul bid y^ Corinthia^s try themselves whether they have faith or
no, affirming them to be reprobates, if they know not y^ Jesus Christ is in
the^? But in very deed, it is a great blindness to accuse the Christians of
presumptuousnes for taking upon them to glory of the presence of the holy
Ghost. without with glorying, there cannot be any Christianity at al. But Jesus
Cherist (who cannot ly) says, y^ his spirit is unknown to y^ world, John. 14.
and that they only do know him, within whom he dwells. Then let them begin
to become god Christians, and put away their Jewish minds, and embrace the
grace of the holy Gospel in good earnest: and then shall they know that the good
and true Christians both have the holy Ghost, and also acknowledge ethe^selues
to have him. But some one may say to me, that the Christian cannot by any
means know that he is in Gods favor, without some special revelation: and so
consequently, that he cannot know whether he be predestined or no. And he may
specially allege these words of Solomon, Eccle. 6.
A man knows not whether he be worthy of hatred or of love: and also these
words of the Apostle 1. Cor. 4.
S. Paul to the Corinthians: A man may know that he is in Gods favor.
I feel not my self guilty of any thing, and yet feel I not my self
justified for all that. It seems to be sufficiently declared by the textes of
holy scripture, that the said opinion is false: and now remains only to be
showed briefly, that these two textes whereupon the same opinion is chiefly
grounded, ought not too be taken in that sense. As touching Solomon's sentence,
although it be scarce well and faithfully translated in the commontranslation:
yet is there not any man so dull, who in reading Solomo^s whole discourse, may
not plainly perceive, that by saying so, he meant, that if any man will take
upon him to judge by the casualties, By the cha^ces of this life, no man can
judge whether a man be in Gods favor or displeasure.
that happen in this life, who is loved or hated of God: He labors in
vain^, considering that the selfsame chances which light upon the righteous:
light also upon the unrighteous: upon him that sacrifizeth, as well as upon him
that sacrifizeth not: and as soon upon the good man as upon the sinner.
Whereof it may be gathered, that GOD does not always show his love toward
those whom he indueth with outward prosperities: and contrariwise, that he
shows not his displeasure toward those whom he punishes. Then my right
dear brethren in Christ Jesus our Lord do you think it reason to conclude,
that a man cannot be sure of Gods favor, because the same surenesse cannot
be perceived by the sundry chances, that happen every day in these transitory
and temporal things? A little before, Solomon says that a man cannot discern
any difference between the soul of man, and the life of a Beast: for it is
seen that both man and Beast dye after one manner. Shall we then conclude by
this outward accident, that the persuasion which we have conceived of the
immortality of y^ soul, is grounded but only upon conjecture: so surely: and
it were a great folly to stand upon a thing so notably known. And as for S.
Paul's words, I say, that forasmuch as he was speaking of the administration
of the Gospel, he meant that his heart misgiues him not of any misdealing
therein, and yet for all that, that he is not sure he has done his whole
duty to the full, and therein obtained the praise of righteousness to Godward,
as if he had done all that perteyned and was convenient to be done by a
faithful Steward: and therefore in speaking of his office, like a just and
discrete person, he durst not justify himself, nor auow that he had
discharged his duty to the uttermost, and satisfied his Lords will, but
referred all things to the only judgment of his Lord. And verily, whosoever
reads these words of the Apostle S. Paul, and considers the words going
before them with some judgment, and likewise the words that follow: will not
doubt, but this is the true sense of them. I know well that some men in
expounding these words of the Apostle S. Paul, say, that although he knew
himself to be without sin, yet he knew not whether he were righteous to
Godward or no, according as David affirms, that no man can perfectly know his
own sins. Romans 3. 5.
But these men perceived not that S. Paul groundeth not righteousness upon
works but upon faith, and that he utterly refuses his own righteousness to
embrace only the righteousness which God has given us, through our Lord
Jesus Christ. Phillip. 3.
Also they consider not, y^ he was most certain to be accepted for righteous,
in mainteining the soundness and pureness of the Christian faith, and that he
knew well how the crown of that righteousness was laid up for him in heaven:
and also, that he was fully assured, 2. Tim. 4.
that no creature in heaven, earth, nor hell, was able to separate him from the
love of God, and that he longed to die because he knew for a truth, that after
his death, Romans 8.
he should be with Jesus Christ. All which things should be false if he had
not been well assured that he was righteous, Ph^. 1.
(I mean) by faith, and not by works. therefore my dearly beloved brethren,
let us cease to speak y^ thing of the Apostle S. Paul, with he never once
thought of himself, but fircely fought against it continually, in answering
such as measured righteousness by works, and not by faith in our Lord Jesus
Christ. But beside^ these two authorities of Solomon and S. Paul, a man might
allege some other places of Holy Scripture, which whereas they warn and
encourage men to fear GOD seem too be contrary too the assurance of this our
Predestination. The two sorts of fear, childly and ^^uish.
And if I would declare them all particularly, I should be ouerlong. But I say
generally, that the fear of punishment was proper to the old Testament, and
childly love too the new Testamente: according as Saint Paul witnesses, when
he says to the Romans, ye have not received the spirit of bondage too
fear: but ye have received the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, father,
father. ^. Tim. 1
And likewise unto Timothy he says, that GOD has not given us the spirit of
fearefullnes, but rather of power and love: which spirit Jesus Christ has
given us according too the promise made by the mouth of the Holy Prophets, and
brought to pass, that we being delivered out of our enemies hands, may serve
him without fear before his holy presence, in all holiness and righteousness
all the days of our life. By these and many other places of the holy
Scripture, a man may plainly gather, that the paineful and slavish
fearfulness agrees not with a Christian: and this is already confirmed by
this, that such manner of fearfulness is utterly contrary to the spiritual
cheerfulness and joy, which is peculiar to the Christian, as the Apostle
Saint Paul shows openly to the Romans, Romans 14*
saying that the kingdom of God is righteousness, and peace, and joy in the
holy Ghost: that is to say, that every man which enters into the kingdom of
the grace of the Gospel, is become righteous through faith: and afterward
adds peace of conscience, which consequently breeds such a spiritual and
holy rest and gladness, Ephe. 6. Phillip. 4.
in respect whereof, the same Saint Paul does oftentimes encourage the
Christians to live meryly. And Saint Peter says, 1. Pet. 1.
that all they which believe in Jesus Christ, do continually rejoice with an
unspeakeable and glorious joy, notwithstanding that they be afflicted with
diverse temptations. The slavish fear threateneth the wicked, and the childly
fear encourages the chosen.
And therefore when the holy Scripture threatens and frayeth the christians,
they must understand, that it speaks to such as are so licencious, that for
somuche as they keep not the thankfulness and honesty that belo^ng to Gods
children, they must be handled as servants, and hilde in awe, until they come
to taste and feel how sweet and pleasant the Lord is, and until such time as
faith work his affectes in them, and that they have so much childly love, as
may suffice to keep and maintain them in honesty of Christian conversation,
and in following the example of our Lord Jesus Christ. And when the self same
scripture exhorts Christians to the true fear: it means not that they
should fear the judgment and wrath of God, as though it were presently ready
to condemn the^: for as I have said already) by the record which the holy
Ghost gives to their spirit, they know that God has chosen them and called
them, of his own mere mercy, and not for their deserts. By reason whereof,
they doubt not at all, but y^ by the selfsame goodness and mercy, he will
maintain them in the happy state wherein he has placed them. And after such
manner scripture exhorts them, The effects of childly fear.
not to slavish fear but to childishe, that is to wit, that like good children
they should be loath too offend against the Christian religion, Ephe. 4.
or to commit any thing against the duty and honesty of Gods true children,
and likewise too grieve the holy Ghost that dwells in them: to the end that
knowing the corruptednesse of our nature, we should always be heedefull and
diligent, and never have any trust in our selves: for in our flesh and in our
minds do the appetites and affections continually dwell: which, as deadly
enemies of the soul, lay a thousand snares and baytes for us, incessantly
laboring too make us proud, ambicious, lecherous, and covetous. This is the
fear whereunto the whole Scripture exhorts the Christiaes that have once
tasted how sweet the Lord is, and which bestow all their endeavor in
following Christ's footesteppes, who cast not from them this holy fear,
because they labor to put of the old man. And the good Christians must never
bereave themselves quite and clean of this childly fear, which is the
singular friend of Christian charity, like as the slauishe fear is such an
enemy unto it, as they can by no means dwell together. And by the the
foresaid things, The Christian may warrant himself the forgiveness of his
sins.
a man may plainly perceive, that the good Christian ought never too doubt of
the forgiveness of his sins, nor of Gods favor. Nevertheless, for the
better satisfiyng of the Reader, I purpose too set down here under, certain
authorities of the holy. Doctors, which comfirme this foresaid truth. Saint
Hyllary in his fifth Canon upon Matthew says, it is Gods will, that we should
hope without any doubting of his unknown will. For if the belief be
doubtful, there can be no righteousness obtained by believing. And thus we
see, that according to S. Hyllary, S. Hillary.
a man obteineth not forgiveness of his sins at Gods hand, except he
believe undoubtedly to obtain it. And good right it is that it should be so.
James. 1.
For he that doubts, is like a wave of the sea, which is tossed and turmoyled
with the wind. And therefore let not such a one think to obtain any thing at
Gods hand. But let us hear Saint Augustine, who in his Manuell counsels us
too drive away the said foolish imagination, S. Augu^t.
which intends to dispossess us of the foresaid good and sage assuredness.
Let such foolish imagination (says he) murmr as much as it lifts, saying,
who art thou? Hows great is that glory? By what deserts hopest thou too
obtain it? I answer assuredly: I know in whom I have believed and I know
that he (of his great love) has made me his son: I know he is true of
his promise, and able too perform his word: For he can do what he will.
And when I think upon the Lords death, the multitude of my sins cannot
dismay me, for in his death do I put all my trust. His death is my whole
desert, it is my refuge, it is my salvation, my life and resurrection, and the
merry of the Lord is my desert, I am not poor of desert, so long as the Lord
of mercy sayleth me not. And since the mercies of y^ Lord are many: many also
are my deseruinges. The more y^ he is of power to save, the more am I sure to
be saved. The same S. Augustine talking with GOD in another place, says that
he had despayred by reason of his great sins and infinite negligences, if
the word of GOD had not become flesh. And a^one after, he says these
words: All my hops all the assurance of my trust is settled in his precious
blood, which was shed for us and for our salvation. In him my poor heart
takes breath: and putting my whole trust in him, I long to come unto thee O
Father, not having mine own righteousness, but that righteousness of thy
son Iusus Christ. In these two places Saint Augustine shows plainly, that
the Christian must not be afraid, but assure him self of righteousness, by
grounding himself, not upon his own works, but upon the precious blood of
Jesus Christ, which cleanses us from all our sins, and makes our peace
with GOD. Saint Bernarde S. Bernard
in his first Sermon upon the Annunciation saves most evidently, that it is
enough to believe that a man can have forgiveness of our sins, but by Gods
mercy: nor any one good desire or ability too do so much as one good work,
except GOD give it him: no nor that a man cannot deserve eternal life by his
works, but if GOD give him the gift so to believe: But besides all these
things (says Saint Bernard) which ought rather too be counted a certain
entrance and foundation of our faith,) it is needeful that thou believe also,
that thy sins are forgeuen thee for the love of Jesus Christ. Each one must
believe particularly his sins are released and forgeuen him freely.
See how this holy man confesses that it is not enough too believe generally
the forgiveness of sins: but he must also believe particularly that his
own sins are forgeuen him by Jesus Christ, and the reason is ready at
hand: namely, that forasmuch as GOD has promised thee to accept thee for
righteous through the merits of Jesus Christ, if thou believe not that thou
art become righteous through him, thou make GOD a liar, and consequently thou
make thy self unworthy of thy grace and liberality. But thou will say to
me, and I believe well the forgiveness of sins, and I know that GOD is true:
but I am afraid that I am not worthy to have so great a gift. I answer, that
the forgiveness of thy sins shall not be a gift of free grace, but a wages, if
God would give it thee for the worthiness of thy works. But I reply upon
thee, that God accepts thee for righteous, and lays not thy sin to thy
charge, because of Christ's merits, which are given unto thee, and become thine
by faith. Therefore, following the Counsel of Saint Bernard, believe thou not
only the forgiveness of sins in general, but also apply the same belief
to thine own particular person, by believing without any doubt, that all thy
misdoinges are pardoned thee through Jesus Christ. And in so doing thou shall
give the glory unto GOD, by confessing him too be merciful and true, and
shall become righteous and holy before GOD, forsomuche as by the same
confession, the holiness and righteousness of Jesus Christ, shall be
communicated unto thee. But to return to our purpose of Predestination: I
say, that by the things above mentioned, a man may evidently perceive, that
the assurance of Predestination does the hurt, but rather greatly profit the
true Christians. And I think not that it can hurt the false Christians and
reprobates. For albeit that such manner of folk would bear themselves in
hand, and pretend too the worldewarde too be of the number of the
predestmate: yet can they never persuade their own consciences, which will
ever be gnawing and crying out to the contrary. But yet it seems greatly,
that the doctrine of Predestination may hurt them. For they be woonts to say:
If I be of the number of the reprobates, what shall it avail me too do good
works? And if I be of the number of the predestinate, I shall be saved without
any laboring of mine too do good works. I answer thee at few^ words, that
by such diuelishe arguments they increase Gods wrath against themselves, who
has disclosed the knowledge of Predestination too the Christians, too make
them whot, and not cold in the love of God: and to set them forward and not
backward unto good works. And therefore the true Christian, on the one side
holds himself assuredly predestined unto everlasting life, and to be
saved, not at all by his own merits, but by Gods election, who has
predestined us not for our own works sakes, but to show the greatness of
his mercy: And on the other side endeavors himself to do good works
after the example of Jesus Christ as much as if his salvation depended upon his
own policy and pains taking. As for him that ceasseth to do good because of
the doctrine of Predestination, saying: If I be predestined, I shall be saved
without strayning of my self to do good works: he shows evidently, that
his traveling is not for the love of God, but for the love of himself. By
reason whereof, the works that he does, may perhaps be good and holy too the
sight of men, but they be wicked and abominable before the Lord God, who
has an eye to the intent. And herevppon it may be gathered, that the doctrine
of Predestination works rather good than harm to the false Christians. For it
discovers their hypocris^e, which cannot cure it self so long as it lies
hidden under the mantle of outward works. But I would hau^ them that say, I
will not streine my self to do well, for if I be predestined: I shall be
saved without tiring of my self so much: I say, I would have them tell me,
how it happens, that when they be diseased, they say not also I will have
neither Physician nor physic: for look what God had determined upon me,
cannot but come too pass? why eat they? why drink they? why till they the
ground? why plant they Uines? and why be they so diligent in doing all things
convenient for to sustain y^ body? why say they not also, that all these
turmoylings, policies, and travails of ours are superfluous, forasmuch as it
is not possible, but that whatsoever God has foreseen and determined
concerning our life and death, must needs come to pass? And therefore if Gods
providence make the^ not negligent and idle in things pertaining to the body:
why should it make the^ more slothful and negligent in that which concerns
the Christian perfection, which without all comparison is far nobler then the
body? But forasmuch as we see that neither Jesus Christ, nor Saint Paul, for
any doubt of offending the reprobats have forborne to preach the truth, which
is necessary to the edifying of the chosen, for the love of whom the
everlasting son of God became man, and was put to death upon the Cross: we
also in likewise ought not to forbear the preaching of Predestination to the
true Christians, forasmuch as we have seen* that it imports great
edification.

Now are we come to the end of our purpose, wherein our thief intent has
been (according to our small power) to magnify the wonderful benefit which the
Christen man has received by Jesus Christ crusified, and to show that faith
of her self alone justifies, that is to wit, that God receives and holds
them for righteous, which believe steadfastly, y^ Christ has made full amends
for their sins: howbeit, that as light can not be separated from fire, which
of it self burns and deuoureth al things: even so good works cannot be
separated from says, which alone by it self justifies.

And this holy doctrine (which exalts Jesus Christ, and represseth and
abateth the pride of man) has and always shall be rejected, and fought against,
by such Christians as have Jewish minds. But happy is he, who following the
example of Saint Paul, spoyleth himself of his own righteousness, and would
have none other righteousness, than that which is of Jesus Christ, wherewith
if he be clothed and appareled, he may most assuredly appear before God, and
shall receive his blessing and the heritage of heaven and earth, with his only
son Jesus Christ our Lord: too whom be al honor, praise and glory, from
this time forth for evermore.

Amen.
Christ is the end of the Law.
Imprinted at London at the three Cranes in the Vintree by Thomas Dawson, for
George Bishop and Thomas Wodcocke. 1580.


