A SHORT RELATION, OF THE LIFE, VIRTVES, and miracles, of S. ELIZABETH CALLED
THE PEACEMAKER. QVEEN OF PORTVGALL. Of the third Rule of S. FRANCIS. Canonised
by Pope URBAN the VIII. the 25. of May. Anno 1625.

Translated out of Dutch; by Sister Catharine Francis, Abbess of the English
Monastery of S. FRANCIS third Rule in Bruxelles.

AT BRVXELLES, By Ihon Pepermans, at the sign of the goulden Bible, 1628.

^^^^^BETHA PORTVGALLIAE REGINA (...) S. Francisci Vixit annis LXV. Obijt ano
1336. (...) ^lp: et Excud: Sto Van* Schore


TO THE REVEREND, RELIGIOUS, AND DEVOVT servant of Jesus Christ. SISTER
CATHARINE FRANCIS, Abbess of the English Monastery of S. Francis third Rule.
in Bruxelles. Everlasting health.
REVEREND MOTHER. Having seen in English the little book of the life of S.
ELISABETH Queen of Portugal: which F. Paludan. abbridged, and gave out to all
the people in Spanish, French, and Dutch, in the solemnity made at the
publishing of her Canonisation, in Bruxelles: I knew it to be your Reuerences
hand wrighting, and being farther certified that it was your own labor, and
that you had your self translated it out of the dutch. Esteeming it so much
the more, I conferred it with the original; and finding it in all things to
agree, and to be a mirror, not only for Religious, but also for Princes, I had
scruple to hide what was so behouefull for the commun good; therefore
witnessing here the truth of the translation, I demanded of our superior his
approbation that it might be printed, which had, I dedicate your worck to your
own self, vvilling you to go forvvard in so good exercise, for nothing
moves more to perfection then the examples of those saints that were in all
respects of the same profession that our selves are: nor contrarievvise can
any thing more hinder it, then to be bound to one profession, and in affection
to follovv another. Verily, to your serious looking into their lives (next unto
your daily, and nightly exercise of quire and meditation) I must attribute that
principal spirit of government, to which in short time you have attained by
the assistance of him who needs no long times in teaching, Almighty God, who
ever bless your endeavors, and bring us all to see his face, in heaven. Pray
for your pore Chaplain.

BR. FRANCIS BELL.

THE AVTHOR, TO THE READER.
TVrning over diverse Authors, and with attention reading their histories, the
better to inform my self of the parentage, affinity, and life of our holy
Queen Elizabetb: I have found that her Origin is the illustrious house of
Aragon, and her alliance by marriage, with the kingly house of Portugal, which
howses I have noted to have been very fruictfull of holy persons: And not only
in thees two but also in many others, as France, Castile, Bohemia, Hungary,
Poland, and Brabant I have observed the like blessings and favors. Amongst
which kingdoms and Princedomes, the mutual marriages and alliances from all
antiquity, by course even till this time have caused an affinity worthy the
consideration: In so much that the Princes and Potentates living this day, if
they be come of thees families, have either their origin from the number of
thees Saints or else are allied and of kindred to them reigning now in glory
with Christ our savior.

Chiefly it is to be noted how this holy Saint Elisabeth Queen of Portugal is
Parent to the Emperor Ferdinand, the 2. and the Catholic King of Spain
Philip Dominicus victor, by right line in the tenth degree. To the Infanta
Isabella Clara Eugenia, gouerness of the low countries and Burgondie, in the
9. degree. To the Duke of Bavaria and the Duke of Nuburg, in the 11. degree.

The most Christian King of France, that now lives, is to her and S. Jews,
his predecessor in the kingdom of France (who was also of the third Order of
our Seraphicall father S. Francis) and to her Sister S. Elisabeth who was a
Nun of S. Clares Order; in the eleventh degree: he is also cozen to S. Jews
Bishop of Tolosa, who was a Freer of S. Francis Order: and also to B. Ioanna
Queen of France, Foundress of our B. Ladies order, called the Anuntiates.

The King of Poland that reigns at this day, has in his Parentage S.
Hedwigis, and her daughter. S. Gertrude; and B. Aleyda Princess of Poland, and
B. Salomea Queen of Halicia, Moreover, he has S. Casimirus, his uncle, Brother
to his grandfather.

The Lantsgraue of Hessen descends from S. Elisabeth Queen of Hungary and
Bohemia (she was of the third order of S. Francis) he is in the 10. degree
from her.

The kingdoms of Hungary and Bohemia have honored their kings and Princes
with parentage of Saints and Beatified, Saint Elisabeth before mentioned, and
S. Margarite (of the order of S. Dominick) Cunegunda and Iolenta of the order
of S. Clare: all daughters of Andrew the 3. and Bela the 4. Kings of Hungary:
B. Agnes of the order of S. Clare daughter to Primislaus king of Bohemia: S.
Albertus Cardinal and Martyr Bishop of Leedes (whose relics ly in Bruxelles
in the church of the Discalced Carmelites, translated thither from Rhems by the
Archduke of happy memory Albertus the Just, and Isabella Clara Eugenia his
beloved wife the year 1612.) who was son, brother, and uncle to the Dukes of
Brabant.

But here I desire you to marck, how the kingdom of Portugal, goes beyond
the others; for setting aside the holy Elisabeth (whose life shall here briefly
be set down) ye shall find, coming out of this kingdom, the first king
Alphonsus; the 3. daughters of his son Sancius; Theresa Queen of Leon;
Mafalda Queen of Castile, after Religiouse of S. Bernards order: and Sancia of
the same order: The Prince Ferdinand son to king Ihon the first, and the
Infanta Ioane daughter to king Alphonsus the fifth, all eminent for holiness of
life and miracles: where, in many thousand families again you shall not find
one.

All thees Saints, to the number of 24. have sprung out of thees ten Catholic
families within the space of about 400. years. And had we looked further back
to their first beginning or their conversion to the Christian faith, every
family would have yealded more: for in Hungary we should yet have found S.
Stephan, and Emeric kings, and Ladislaus Prince of that Kingdom. In Bohemia,
S. VVenceslaus Martyr. In Austria, S. Leopoldus. In Brabant, SS. Pipin,
Arnulphus, Emebert, Begga, Gertrude, Gudula, Pharaildis, Reynaldis, VValtrudis,
Aldegund, etc. and so in the rest.

And to return again to S. Elisabeth Queen of Portugal, Note, that of her are
come, 7. Emperors, consequently one after another: six Empresses: 36. Kings:
and 43. Queens.

All which together is to be seen as clear as the sunn; in a table which I
have set forth; to the honor of the same Saint: and vvithall, that the devout
reader may see therein how men in this world (if they will cooperate with
Gods preventing grace) notvvithstanding majesty, greatness, might, honor, and
kingdom, may attain to great holiness: And that also beholding and
considering so many Saints, the Christian Princes that glory to be of their
race may be thereby spurred and pricked on to virtue, and follow their
holiness* and choose them for Patrones, Advocates, and guides, in the unknown
way, of this life, and after in the just judgment of the upright judge.

Those that have the card which I set out, must note, first that it was not
possible to give all the Queens place therein, or to set down their names,
because the piece is little, and also because many of them were married to
kings, whom it was no need to bring in: and those that are set down are
without crowns, excepting the Saints, and those that were heirs to kingdoms
or princedomes, who by their marriages transferred them to other families.

Secondly, here in is clearly to be seen, the right and lawful succession of
the kingdoms of Hungary, and Bohemia, and all the Provinces, and Dominions of
the house of Austria unto the person of Ferdinando Emperor of the Romans.
Also the inheritance and succession not only of all the kingdoms of Spain but
also of Sicilie, and Naples, of the Dukedom of Burgundy, Brabant, and the
rest of the Dominions of the low countries, lawfully to pertein and fall upon
the person of the Catholic king Philip the 4. Dominic Victor, and that not by
force of arms, much less by prudence and humane industry: but only by the
disposition and providence of God: who (Eccl. cap. 10.) translateth kingdoms
from nation to nation. Whence may be seen the idleness, and vanity or
manifest impiety of such as prefer the inventions of their own brains, or,
to speak more properly, certain laws of state, before the providence and
care-that God has of the government of Empires and Dominions: and for their
better safeguard and security, set faith and conscience a side, offend God
and his holy church.

Thirdly, all Potentates shall here note, that the strongest castle, the
chiefest fortification and defense of their estates is, sincere faith, and
Religion not affected: for although the riches and regions be moved together,
although the earth be in uproar, and hell come in for a part: nothing of all
this can shake the Monarch that fears God, and loves his church, and does
not communicate nor participate with the adversaries there of, and is zealous of
sincere and perfect justice.

Fourthly that no man may have any thing to say, if it seem to him that I have
done more then the decrees of the church do permit, touching the description of
the 24. Saints. Because they be not all in the Catalogue of the Canonised by
order of the Roman church, althoug the greatest part of them be so: yet the
others shined and do as yet shine with many miracles in their several places
and provinces* VVher they are holden, esteemed and reverenced, for Saints; and
of some of them the Martyrologes of their orders do make mention, so that no
doubt being made of their sanctity it remains that we endeavor to follow
them. There is in the table a distinction, for the Saints Canonised, or
Beatified, are in ouall circles with beams of glory about their heads, the
other in round circles without beams. And because the beatification of B.
Ioane Queen of France, is labored for at Rome, and the decree from day to day
expected, she is set in an ouall circle.

For the rest, what thing so ever can be desired more in the description of
the card: the marks and distinctions therein set down, and chiefly the
branches of it do show it clearly. Let, this suffice, gentle Reader, for thy
direction; enjoy my little labor, and take it thanckfully*

F. F. P.

COncordat cum originali Teutonico Ita testor 5. Octobris 1628.

Fr. Franciscus Bell.

Imprimatur,

Fr. Franciscus a sancta Clara, Lector Theologiae: Collegij S. Bonauenturae
Duaci, Guardianus, and R. P. Ministri Prouinciae Angliae, Cis mare vices gerens.

A SHORT DECLARATION OF THE LIFE, VIRTVES, AND MIRACLES OF S. ELIZABETH, CALLED
THE PEACEMAKER: QVEEN OF PORTVGALL.
Of her parents and bringing up.
THE FIRST CHAPTER.
THIS B. Saint Elizabeth was daughter to Peeter king of Aragon, her mother was
named Co^stancia, daughter of Manfredus, King of Cecilie and Cozen to the
Emperor. Frederick, the second: She was borne in the year of our Lord 1272.
In the reign of her grandfather james (of whose merits and good works it is
found written that he builded and endowed, to the honor of the glorious mother
of god, 2000.) churches when this happy child was Christened, they named her
Elizabeth in memory of that other S. Elizabeth, daughter to Andrew king of
Hungary, who dyed before, in great holiness of life. and was numbered amongst
the Saints by Gregory the 9. whose sister Called Violence, was wife to the
forenamed james: and grandmother to this holy Saint. her birthe did so much
rejoice her grandfather, that he presently made peace with his son, her
father; with whom he had been long at variance; but now at this joyful time
of her nativity he concluded peace, between them, and took this vvelcome
guifte, his grandchild home to his palace, and brought her up with great
care. instructing her in all virtues. when she was 6. years old her
grandfather dyed, and she was brought home to her fathers house, where in her
tender years she gave great testimony of her future virtues; by her gravity
and devotion which was of great edification, for she kept the same manner of
Rule in all her actions. and espetially in her prayers and devotions which she
had learned of her grandfather, and when she was Come to the age of 8. years
she daily read the 7. hovvres of the divine office: with great devotion and
diligence, she was loving and charitable to the poor, giving according to her
age all that she could procure, at which her father did very much admire
ascribing all the good succes of his affairs to his daughters merits for
which he gave daily thanks unto almighty God.

Of the marriage of B. Saint Elizabeth.
THE II. CHAPTER.
THe fame of this holy Saint, and her natural indowments vvher-vvith she was
adorned was spread through the vvholl world so that she was desired in
marriage by many Princes, to wit, the Prince, of Naples, and the Prince of
Brittan^y who sent their Embassadores, to the king of Aragon her father to
desire this royal daughter in marriage, but this was unwelcome nevves, un to
him who greaued to think that he should part with his beloved daughter, and
much more grievous was it to the holy Elizabeth, that sought after the
heavenly Bridegroom not desiring any earthly Prince. About this time dyed
Alphonsus, the 3. king of Portugal, and after him reigned in his kingdom his
son Dionisius, who being now settled in his kingdom did Choose out 3. of
the greatest Peers, of his Royalme, whom he sent in Embassage to the king of
Aragon, to desire this his daughter in marriage: the king at that time kept his
Court at Barcinona where the aforsayde Embassadores arrived, their names
wear the Lord John Velho, Lord John Martinium, and the Lord Vasco Perez, who
presenting their Embassage to the king; he deliberating with him self on
which of these 3. Princes, he should bestow his daughter, so dear and
delightful unto him, in regard of her virtuous disposition, at the last he
made choice of the king of Portugal, rather then either of the other two
Princes, in regard they were not as yet established in their kingdoms as the
king Dionysius was. Besides, this king was not so near in blood unto the lady
Elizabeth as the other two Princes were, all which were Motives that made
the king her father vvilling to bestow her upon the aforsayd king Dionysius;
and so soon as consent was given thereunto; the Lord Velho as chief* of these
Embassadores* took this holy Elizabeth to wife, in the name of his king, who
understanding thereof did much rejoice with all his subjects, exceedingly
congratulating this hopeful marriage, and with great desire expected her
Coming: esteeming her as given them from heaven, when she was to depart from
her fathers palace, toward her husbands court: the king her father with
great attendance* accompanied her to the borders of Castile: where she was
honorably received by Aminitius Sancius who at that time being hindered with
vvarres. Gave her to the protection, of his brother james: and the best of the
nobility of Castile. At Brigante upon the Borders of Portugal Alphonsus
brother to the aforsaide king Dionysius, avvaited her, and brought with him
many Bishops and nobles of the land, honorably conducting her Royal parson to
Trancosie, where the king did attend the Coming of his bryde, and the marriage
was solemnised with unspeakable joy of all. In the year of our lord 1282. the
king gave her for vvelcome (after the custom of Portugal) great special
rents out of certain cities; and also courtiers and attendants, as beseemed
her.

Of her holy life in her marriage state.
THE III. CHAPTER.
THis nevve state of life: and great honor did not any vvayes diminish her
accustomed devotions: for although this holy Queen were but 12. years of
age: yet did she measure and dispose of all her affairs in due time and knevve
how to direct and turn all her actions to the honor of God; as her mirthe
into modesty: her joy into tears: her ievvells and costly apparel, to sharp
discipline and chastising her body. She was much given to the service of God
in holy contemplation; yet did she never neglect her service and due respects
unto the king her husband: she kept a just accounte how she spent the day:
rising early in the morning to read her Matines and Prime: and so soon as the
Priests and musicians were ready to perform the divine service: she went
with speed to the Chapel where she heard mass very devoutly upon her knees:
and after mass having reverently kissed the Priests hand she made her offering
according to the solemnity of the day: that she might not appear with empty
hands before allmighty God, this being done she read the rest of her hovvres:
and this was her accustomed manner. all the time of her life: and for the last
she read the office of Our B. Lady. and the office of the dead: in the after
noones she went a gain to the Chapel to hear the Vesperas, and to
perform the rest of her office: after which she gave her self to holy
contemplation vvherin she shed a boundance of tears that proceeded from the
tenderness of her heart she also used to read devout books which incite to
virtue: and after this she exercised her self in skillful needle work;
Chiefly to shun idleness and to give others good example, she made with her
own hands all things that were necessary for the church, she went often
to confession and received the most holy Sacrament, of the Altar with great
devotion.

Of her great abstinence, and how her fasting was confirmed with a miracle.
THE IV. CHAPTER.
THis holy Queen was not only a lover of praire but also of great abstinence,
accustoming her self to a very spare diett: that her soul might be the more
pleasing unto God: and besides the fasting days appointed by the holy church,
she kept 3. in a week and she likewise fasted the adue^t of our lord: and
from the Eve of S. John Baptist until the day of our B. ladies assumption, and
some times she fasted the lent of S. Michael when these fastes seemed easy to
her, then did she fast the. Freedayes and Saturdayes, with the Eues of our lady
and all the Apostles, with bread and water: and she would have proceeded
further in fasting but that the king her husband over ruled her. This wise and
virtuous Queen knevv well that costly meals great banquettes, and fine
apparel was often times the nurce of many sins: and it pleased God to show
by a miracle how pleasing the sobriety and abstinence of this his hand maid
was unto him; for being sick at Alanquerti, she was appointed by the Doctor to
drink wine for the recovery of her strength, but she for the love of
abstinence did refuse to drink it, verily believing it was not good for her
health. For not she alone: but all the kings and Queens of Portugal were
noe drinkers of wine: so that it pleased almighty God wonderfully to look
upon her, for as her waighting woman brought her twice a Cup of Could
water to drink it was both times miraculously turned in to good wine.

Of her mildnes to the poor, likewise confirmed with a miracle.
THE V. CHAPTER.
THis holy Queen was all vvayes found mild and very charitable toward the
poor being ever vvilling and ready to help and comfort them in all that
possibly she might, so that her liberality seemed to go above her Estate, she
never let any depart from her vnco^forted although there came many unto her,
not so much driven by corporal necessity as to receive of her some consolation
and ease of their griefs by her pious counsel, and virtuous example. She had
great compassion upon all strangers: and outlandishe pilgrims tenderly
receiving and charitably releeuing them according to their necessity with
money, Clothes, and lodging. She gave to all Cloisters as well of men as of
women, to the uttermost of her power. She did much commiserate the
disstressed estate of poor gentilmen which through any misfortune were
fallen to decay: and she sought out means, to help them. Likewise this pious
Queen did understand that within her Royalme were very many women of good
account which suffered great misery for want of maintenance. and thereby were
in danger to fall in to sin a but she employed her most trust^ servants to
relieve their necessity and by her means preferred many in marriage: and
although her piety were alvvayes plentifully manifested to the needy, yet upon
fasting days: and in the holy week she exercised most charity: and
aparelling her self in very poor Clothes she was present at all the
ceremonies of the holy Catholic church. Upon good frjday she washed the feet
of 13. poor men and having done she humbly kissed their feet and gave them
nevve Clothes. the like she did on holy thursday to 13. poor women. It
chanched that one of these poor women had a very soar foot which was
grievously eaten with a cancre: and being loath the princess should perceive
it she drew it back, and gave her other foot to vvash, but the holy Queen
took the soar foot into her hand and vvashed it very*tenderly and although it
had so strong a savor that it could hardly be endured yet did she humbly kiss
it, whereupon the said soar was imediatly healed miraculously. The like
pious work she did upon a good friday at Scalabi, when all the people were
gone but only one poor man who stayed in the court to seek some remedy of a
foare disease with which he was afflicted, the porter seeing him was very
angry and in a great fury required of him how he came to be infected with
such a grievous disease, and why he did not go away with the other people
and taking a staff in his hand did beat this poor man and vvound him very
grievously. this wicked deed was made known unto the holy Queen, who did
grieve very much at that her servant had done, and caused the poor man to be
brought unto her and comforted him in all that she could, binding up his
wounds with her own hands and gave order to her servants that they-should
have care of him: but it pleased God that the next day, he was cured, and came
to the holy Queen to give her thanks for his health. she continued her
acustomed charity and liberalytie to the poor which was shevved to be most
pleasing to the divine bounty by this which follovveth. It chanced on a time
as she carried in her lapp a great sum of money to give to the poor, she
met with the king her husband who said unto her, what is that my beloved
that you carry there? she ansvvered they be roses: and opening her lapp the
money was miraculously turned in to fair roses which did yield forth a very
fragrant smelle: although it were then the time of vvinter; and hereof it
comes that this holy Elizabeth, is alvvayes painted houlding roses in her
lapp: she was ever very hard and sparing to her self but to the poor most
mild and liberal.

Of a certain peace which she made.
THE VI. CHAPTER.
WIth great right is this holy Queen styled Pacifica, which is as much to say
as Peacemaker for she seems to have been borne for that end, to make peace.
There was a very dangerous accident happened betvveen the king her husband and
his brother Alphonsus about certain rentes and revenues, which were in question
betvveene them: and the matter was grown unto that pass that it seemed
impossible, to be ended without the sheding of much blood: but this virtuous
Queen made peace betvveen them with her own loss: presenting to them as a
gift to make the peace a town Called Cintram, and other towns of Portugal,
with all her richest revenues. She knevve the office of a Queen was to
appease the angry mind of the king and make peace between him and his
subjects; also to admonish those in office to discover the deceipts of the
enemies in the court: She counseled the king to be always liberal to those
that deserved well: and not to give ear to those that backbite and detract
others: and when she knevve of any that were at debate then did she labor all
that she might to pacify them, making conditions that they might not go to
law and if the parties were poor that sustained the injury she gave them of
her own goods because the peace should not be broken: yet without detriment
to justice if there were any thing that deserved punishment. This holy Queen
likewise made peace betvveen the king of Aragon her brother, and her daughters
husband Ferdinandus king of Castile: which although many Priests, and Bishops
had undertaken and could not bring to pass, yet she by her endeavors brought it
to so good an end that they both did choose the king her husband to decide the
matter: and at an other time this pious Queen made peace betvveen her son in
law Ferdinandus king of Castile, and her husband the king, that were both up
in arms and ready to give battle; and when the Prince Alphonsus had rebelled
2. or 3. times, and had taken in, one of his cities she so over came him with
fair words and just reasons that she brought him home again to the service of
his father: and thereby quieted the Civil vvarres in Portugal.

Of her patience in tribulation.
THE VII. CHAPTER.
ALthough this holy Queen had alvvayes her desires and endeavors exercised in
the making of peace: and seeking to conserve it, yet could she not her self be
exempted from envious tongues: for, there were some that sought to raise a
great slander of her and to set debate betvveene her and the king her husband,
persuading him that the Queen did give intelligence to her son Alphonsus of
all his fathers decrees, and that was the reason that the kings Army had
alvvayes such ill success, and so often overthrow and his son Alphonso the
victory. The king being thus incensed a against his virtuous and most innocent
queen: became so enraged with her that he deprived her of all her rentes and
revenues, and in banishment sent her to Alanquer giving her that place for her
prison: and this caused great grief to all the Royalme but especially to the
governors of her Castelles, who all promised to defend her innocence and
right her vvronges with their swords: but she refused all human help and
putting her trust only in God, gave her self wholly to her devotions spending
the days and nights in holy prayer chastising her body with very sore
penance: all the week long eating or drinking nothing but dry bread and could
water; and when the king her husband understood of her great austerity, and
virtuous manner of living he was moved to pity: and it pleased Almighty God to
open his eyes so that believing her innocence he caused her to be brought home
again according to her Princely estate, and after ward she was held in
greater estimation.

Of her love and loyalty to the king her husband.
THE VIII. CHAPTER.
THe vvisdome and constancy of this holy Queen has shined in all the course
of her life, but espetially it was made manifest by the great patience
vvhervvith she did bear the disloyal and disordered life of her husband, and
his love to other women, by whom he had children: forgetting his plyted faith
unto his virtuous Queen, and loving wife, who grieved very much for two
causes, the one, that Almighty God was so much offended, and the other, that
the subjects through the kings evil example might be incited to follovv his
lewd life. The children which he had by other women she did not hate like a
step mother, but brought them up with tender care, and motherly love,
instructing them in all virtue as if they had been her own, at which the
king did very much vvonder, and thereby was moved to amend his life and not any
more to wrong his marriage estate, yet there were still malicious minds which
sought to auert his love from this his virtuous Queen: by raising a new
slander against her innocence, it was in this manner. There was a young
courtier, that bare great hatred unto another courtier of good and orderly
life, and one whom this virtuous Queen did much employ to carry alms to
poor folks, and such like service, it came to pass that the envious young man
taking in a vvrong sense the charitable endeavors of this pious Queen, did
accuse her to be disloyal to the king her husband with this young man: the king
being thus incensed sought by all means to put the young man to death: and
there upon commanded secretly the men that kept his lime kelles, to take the
first man he should send to them, and bind him and cast him in to the burning
furnace. So the king sent the innocent young man to be burnt, who went, not
mistrusting any such matter, and as he was going on the way he heard the bell
ring to the elevation of the B. Sacrament in the mass: and according to the
custom went in to the church to pray, as he had been warned by his father to
do at such times, and being there were more masses to be said, he stayed still
to keep his devotion. The king desirous to hear of his death, sent the false
accuser to the men of the lime ^elle, to know if they had performed his
command; they taking him for the man they should destroy, ansvvered that they
had not yet, but now they would, and so they took him presently and cast him
headlong into the burning furnace. when the nevves was brought to the king by
the first messager, he stood amazed at this vvonderfull and righteous work
of God seeing evil counsel always to fall heaviest upon the counselor, and
that the innocent Queen was thus preserved from the slander.

Of her children.
THE IX. CHAPTER.
IT pleased God that her first child was a daughter, whom she named
Constancia, after her grandmother, this daughter was after ward married to
Ferdinandus the 3. of that name, king of Castile, with great joy, but it was
soon turned into sorrovve by the nevves of her sudden and unexpected death:
for as this Queen Elizabeth with the king her husband went from Scalabi to
Arambuiam, there came an hermit in great sorrovv, and desired to speak with
the Queen: she gave him audience, who said unto her. I shall declare unto
your highness most sad and heavy nevves; your daughter is suddenly departed
this life, and her sorrowful soul has appeared openly to me in my chapel
and prayed me to give you to understand that she is in purgatory, and she
desired the holy sacrifice of the mass might be offered a vvholl year for her
release. The pious mother fulfilled the desire of her daughter: and the year
being accomplished her daughter appeared to her in Conymbria in her sleep,
clothed in white, and seeming to be full of joy, called her mother by her name
saying, mother Elizabeth almighty God will revvard you in heaven, vvhither
now I go released from all pain. Heervpon the Queen vvaked and smiling with
joy went presently to the pastor and understood by him that her daughters
apparition was upon the masses concluding: at which she was much comforted.
The 17. year of her age she bare her daughter Constancia and the 20. year of
her age she bare her son Alphonsus, at Conimbria, and he reigned after the
death of his father.

Of her pious works showed in the building of many holy places.
THE X. CHAPTER.
THis holy Queen was very mild, and benign to all sorts of people, but
espetially she had regard unto the commun good and public profit, for when
she understood of any decayed churches or hospitalles she presently took order
to have them repaired at her own cost and charges. Her piety in this kind
was so great, that a Gentilvvoman dwelling at Almosterium not far from
Scalabi began to build a cloister for Nuns of S. Bernards order: and being
prevented by death could not make an end of it, but left her begun work to
this holy Elizabeth, who did most willingly undertake to finish it, to perform
the last will and testament of the decessed. having finished this good work
she left it richly provided of rentes, leaving the name and honor thereof unto
her who did first begin the work. The like to, this she did also at Scalabi,
for the Bishop of that city began an alms house for found-linges but being
prevented by death, could not finish it, and in his last vvil he commended his
work to the holy Queen Elizabeth, much desiring that she would not by any
means leave it undone: the Queen did not only accomplish his desire in this,
but also made the work much greater and augmented the rents, and gave good
order for the government of the house, her self did give the children to eat,
out of motherly love, and when they were grown bigg she put them to learn
such trades as they were found capable of. This holy Queens virtue was seen
in the vvillingnes vvhervvith she undertook to finish works begun by others,
vvherin she knew there was more labor and charges for her then any applause of
the world: for she sought nothing but the honor of God in all her actions, and
the salvation of souls, and commun vvealths good. There was a Cloister of S.
Clares order in Conimbria very little both church and house, in regard it was
begun by a Gentilvvoman that could not finish it for want of means: and this
holy Elizabeth bought houses and grovvnd joining to the Cloister, to enlarge
it. she made an hospital by her palace: vvherin she maintained 15. poor men,
and as many poor women, she builded also a house in the City of Nouarium for
women that having prostituted their honesty, were converted from their lewd
life to good.

Of the death and burial of her husband and how she lived after his death.
THE XI. CHAPTER.
THe love and loyalty this holy Queen bare to her husband was most espetially
manifested in his sickness, in and after his death, for first she offered many
prayers and good works for his conversion, humbly imploring the divine mercy
for him, and seeking by all means to purge his soul from sin, that he might
without spot depart this life: for that effect she gave very much alms, with
desire that his life might be prolonged if it were the divine will. But it
pleased God so to dispose that the king, her husband dyed at that time: and
although she were left in great sorrow yet she made not much show exteriourly,
but laid away her Costly apparel and in the midst of her grief thought
more upon her souls health then any speeches of men: and in this pious
consideration she took the habit of the poor Clares: and cutting of her hair
and girding her self with a cord, attired in this holy habit, in humble manner
she appeared before the peers and nobles of the land, who stood all round
about the corpse, and she said unto them with a sad and sorrowful voice,
think my good lords, that the Queen is also dead with the king: and let it
be your care to bury him with kingly arms as becomes a king: but for my self
j have no need of any Courtly attendance, as ladies of honor, or any other
servants: neither let this attire you see me wear seem strange unto you, for
this shall be the last act of mourning, this habit shall bring unto my memory
the death of my decessed husband: my head shorn and covered with this holy
veil shall vvitness the fidelity of Elizabeth: this unwonted spectacle shall
incite all to lament; and having ended this speech which caused much grieff to
all that were present she spoke many comfortable words to the nobility,
giving such wise and prudent reasons for what she did, that they remained both
satisfied and edified. This holy Queen was present to see her husbands
funeral solemnized with great honor, and her son Alphonsus, with many
Prelates and Princes follovved the corpse laden with sorrovv: after them
follovved the holy Elizabeth to the wonder of all beholders: in this sort they
went till they came to a Cloister of Nuns of S. Bernards order: which the
king before had builded not far from the City, there he had desired to be
buried, and according to his desire it was done. The funeral being ended, and
all returned home, the Queen stayed by the toombe, not so much to bewail her
vvidovvhood, as to help the soul of her husband with prayers and good
works, for there was no naked, or needy poor, but she clothed and relieved:
the masses she caused to be said for him were innumerable* these things
done, she went to Conimbria, because she would not give her Nobles too much
sorrovv by parting from them quite. She had a private way from her palace to
the Cloister of the poor Clares, with whom she conuersed much, but so as not
to bind her self to them: yet she went to the quire with the religious to
perform the divine office, and did exercise her self in all humble works
with them according as time gave her leave. She visited other Cloisters,
churches, and holy places, not only those that were near hand, but also such
as were fart off, giving her offering with her own hand: and that she might
the better attend to the help and relief of poor people, she was counseled
to take upon her the third Rule of S. Francis which she did, and kept it
always after, to the end of her life.

How S. Elisabeth went to Galicia to visit S. James in Compostella and of the
offering she made.
THE XII. CHAPTER.
NOt fully a year after the death of the king her husband, this holy Queen
took her way toward Compostella, with all her court, to visit the body of
the holy Apostell S. James, but none knew whither she intended to go till she
had travailed some days iourny, and passed the rivers of Dure and Minie, then
they all imagined by her devout and holy manner of life vvhither she went. When
they came near to the City, so that they could see the tops of the steeples,
the Queen alighted and went thither on foott, to the vvonder of all her
followers. It is not possible to declare with what great devotion and
reverence she honored the body of the Apostel, and stayed there until the day
of his feast, attending with more then ordinary devotion at the solemnity
thereof till all was finished: she likewise gave to understand with what
affection she vvare her costly attire whilst her husband lived: for at that
time she bestovved all her best apparel imbrodered with precious stones upon
that holy place: she gave also her Royal Crown: with her gould and silver
plate to adorn the temple. She gave moreover a fair mule, with a gould
bridell, with the arms of Portugal, and Aragon: and a great sum of money,
with other costly gifts, which she bestovved on that place, in honor of the
glorious Apostle S. James: where they are seen to the great admiration of all
people who never beheld such riches. Having finished her devotion the
Archbishop gave her a mantell and a staff that she might be like to other
Pilgrims.

How she builded the Cloister of S. Clare, after her return to the Kingdom.
THE XIII. CHAPTER.
Being now returned home, she kept the solemnity of the year day, of her
deceased husband, at Odiuille with Alponsus her Son, and many Bishops and
great nobles, which solemnity being finished, she returned to Conimbria, to
finish a Cloister of S. Clare which she had begun, vvhere-vnto she gave her
gold chains and other rich attire. she caused to be sent for, all such
tradesmen as make things necessary for the service of the church, as chalices,
crosses, tabernacles, candlestickes, lamps and all other manner of church stuff
what soever, used in the service of God: one part she gave to the Cloister,
an other part to other churches in Portugal. Some rich and costly gifts and
jewels she gave unto her married daughter, some to her cosen, some also unto
Queen Mary of Castile, and some to Leonora Queen of Aragon and other
Princesses who were near unto her in blood, from thence forth to live in
simplicity and poverty with great strictnes, to finish the rest of her life.
This holy Princess with great care and diligence finished the Cloister of S.
Clare with the church, before mentioned (for to that end she came to
Conimbria) and made for her self a house adjoining to the Cloister, that from
thence she might come to the sisters, to forvvard the workmen, she
likewise increased the rents of the same Cloister, and the number of sisters.
In building she had great vnder-standing. In the church of the aforsaide
Cloister she caused to be made for her a tomb wherein at her death she
intended to be buried. In the building of the tomb there being a great stone
which the worck men could not remove out of the place, the holy Queen laying
her hand upon the stone it was very easily after wards removed to the right
place, without labor, which could not be but by miracle.

How the river Tagus was parted to make way for the holy Queen, and of one
blind, whom she cured.
THE XIV. CHAPTER.
Here also follovveth a worthy miracle, that God did unto this holy Queen,
in the Kingly river Tagus, which runs by the City of Scalabi. There is in
this water made by hands of Angels the sepulcher of S. Irene, after the
manner of S. Clements: this holy Queen had a very great desire to visit the
said Sepulcher but seeing she could not pass unto it, through the water, she
prayed on the banck with bended knees, and eyes full of tears, when behold,
the water parted it self the Sepulcher apeared, and she with great devotion
went betwixt the waters upon the sands, giving thanks to God, and to the
holy S. for so great grace and favor. There, with great reverence beholding the
B. Body, now and then kissing it devoutly, she continued in prayer all the
whole day. At her return, the forsaid water follovved her with so soft a
pase as though it had been a servant to attend her, until she was passed
over. Besides this miracle, I shall declare another; this virtuous Queen
delivered many people from diverse very grievous infirmities, and great dangers,
but one maid borne blind she cured by only touching her eyes, with her holy
hand.

Of her sobriety in her widowhood, and the profitable spending of her time.
THE XV. CHAPTER.
We have declared how sober, and abstinent this holy Queen was when her
husband lived, and how she observed many fasting days. This virtue she did
not only practice in her younger years, but also grown old she was very
strict in fasting. While her husband lived, she could not fast so much as
she did desire, being he had forbid her, but after the death of the king,
her fasts were both long and many, follovving her own devotion so much, as
she would not only abstein from costly, and delicate diet, but also from
suffising her nature with poor and ordinary meats, notvvithstanding that she
was very near 60. years of age. The pious Princess knevv right well how to
divide the time both of night and day to her own profit. She had always
with her 5. Sisters of the poor Clares: she rose in the night to read her
mattins with them, in her Chapel, they also read Prime together, and after
heard Mass, with great recollection, then she gave her self wholy to
meditation, upon the passion of our lord Jesus, with very tender affection
sheeding forth abundance of tears, both for her own sin^es, and others, and
praying for the salvation of all. The private mass being ended, she heard
solemn mass for the soul of her husband, after that she heard another private
mass, so that she let no day pass without hearing of 3. masses which being
done she took some necessary refection for the strengthening of her body,
though with greater desire she thirsted after heavenly food. After dinner
she caused the workmen to be called, and hearing their reconning gave order
for building of what remained to be finished. After this she gave audience to
all, not letting any depart disconsolate. Then did she retire in to her
chamber to recollect her self: and then she went to her chapel to hear the
Vesperas, and Complin: which she also read in a lower voice with the
religious. Her devotions being ended she took her supper, if it were not
fasting day, as with her it was alvvayes for the most part; and after this
she disposed her self to take her rest. She was of very little sleep, rising
in the nights, half Clothed, she prayed upon the bare grovvnd with sighs and
groans, with her eyes elevated toward heaven, and then cast down to the
feet of crucified Jesus she humbly implored the highest to take mercy upon her,
and the soul of her husband. Thus praying she would strike her breast to
resist sleep till she could no more. Her recreation was, not in seeing plays,
nor any other vain delights of this world, but her greatest joy was to be
with the Clarisses, where she often remained in her littell house she had
caused to be builded by the port of the Cloister, that she might live and take
her refection with them. She counseled spiritual persons to labor for the
perfection of their estate, and to be faithful and loyal to their heavenly
spous, this was the delight of holy Elizabeth: she rejoiced excedingly when
any young virgins gave them selves to the service of God: as it appeared in the
vvillingnes vvher with she gave leave to her sisters daughter who desired to
be a Clariss, furthering her therein after she had well tried her constancy.

Of her humility and meekness to all sorts of people.
THE XVI. CHAPTER.
THis holy Saint Elizabeth did manifest her love and mild*nes to all that were
in any necessity, assisting them in all charity without any exception of
parsons. When she received injury from any, she did not only pardon the
offenders, but would not suffer them to be punished for ought done unto her
self. She did so willingly forgive all offenses that she was never seen to
be angry at any time: follovving herein the example of S. Elizabeth Queen of
Hungary, after whom she was named, as is a forsayed. She builded an
hospital near to her house, for the relief of poor people and divided it
into two several dwellings the one for men, and the other for women, with
all necessaryes for their use. She received in to it 15. poor people of either
sex: admonishing them to live well and orderly, and to have patience in
sickness and poverty: she ordained a Chapel and a mass to be said therein
every day for their spiritual comfort: and for their corporal she clothed
them every year, and served them like a servant, dressing their meat and
helping with great affection those that were sick, lifting them up, and
laying their pillovves as she thought would give them most ease. There was not
any sickness how dangerous so ever that could withdraw her from the service
of the poor. Her charity abounded in a time of great necessity, when at
Conimbria there was so great a dearth, that many dyed of hunger: for her
Palace was a receptacle of the poor whom she relieved with corn, meat and
money, having rather to die her self, then live to see others in want. She
likewise provided for all Cloisters, and took care to bury the dead. Many of
the courtiers feared her liberality would bring her and them to suffer
misery, and therefore they used to put her in mind to take care of her own
family, whereunto she was bound: their solicitation in this kind much grieved
her, and she requested them not to fear for almighty God would not permit
them to want.

How the holy Elizabeth went disguised, to S. James, to Compostella.
THE XVII. CHAPTER.
Having finished the Cloister of S. Clare and reflecting upon the goodness of
God showed to her, and many other Princes and kings whom she had outlived:
she desired very earnestly to be released of this life, and to be with Jesus
Christ. Understanding that at Compostella there was a great Iubile, a poena and
culpa, secretly without knowledge of her courtiers, in strange apparel, and a
staff in her hand, she went thitherwardes 64. years old all alone, unless
with one or two of her Chamberlaines: not vvithstanding that it was then the
heat of summer. She carried her Clothes and other necessary things on her
back, begging like a poor woman alms for Goddes-sake. It has not been
often heard that any Queen travailed in this manner. This pilgrimage she made
but one year before her death. At her return home she was entreated to make
peace betvveen her son Alphonsus, and her daughters son king of Castille,
called also Alphonsus, but she could not effect it, being prevented by death.

Of the death of this holy Queen.
THE XVIII. CHAPTER.
AS the holy Queen travailed toward Estrimotium there to treat of the before
named peace with her son Alphonsus, it pleased almighty God that she fell in
to infirmity which seemed at first little, but afterward great. Before her
extremity of sickness she came every day to the Chapel to hear divine service
accompanied with the king her son, and having setteled all her afaires with
him and his wife, her sickness increased so much upon a monday that she kept her
chamber, and the kings daughter, her grand child tended her very carefully In
this sickness she was visited by the most glorious Virgin Mary who came
accompanied with a great troop of Virgins all in white with crowns of
gould upon their heads, affectionatly bowing them selves tovvard her: which
the holy Elizabeth seeing, and perceiving them to come near unto her, she
desired the Queen her daughter in law, and the rest of those who were present
that they would give place to that heavenly company: then feeling her death to
aproache she sent for her Confessor, and having made her confession she made
him say mass in another room where she might both see and hear it. The mass
being ended, having alone put on her Religious habit, she forced her self with
great pain to go to the Altar, where she received the most holy Sacrament
devoutly upon her knees the same day that she rendered her blessed soul in to
the hands of her creator. Having ended her devotion at the altar, she returned
to her bed. About evening (although the Doctors did not think she would have
departed so speedily) she called for her son and treated with him of the peace
for which she had come thither; after this she desired him to go to supper,
and as he was going out with the Doctor, he heard a sudden cry of all that
were in the chamber, and coming in, he called upon his dying mother; and
kissing her hand she came a little to her self and spoke to him, about things
of very great importance: and after, turning her self she cast her eyes upon
a crucifix and calling upon our blessed lady whom she had seen in her sickness
she gave her spirit into the hands of her redeemer. Anno 1336. being the 4. of
July: she was, 65. years of age when she dyed.

Of her Burial.
THE XIX. CHAPTER.
AS soon as the holy soul was departed from the body, they opened her
testament: where they found that she had charged her son Alphonsus to bury
her body at Conimbria in the church of S. Clare that she had made. Heerto he
appointed the the principalest of his court, who much feared to carry the body
so far, by reason of the heat of the time: but the king would accomplish his
mothers will. The body being shut in a coffin, and laid upon a wagon: by
the shaking upon the way, some moisture issued through the chinckes of the
chest: which they perceiving that had the care of the body, began to murmur
against the king, fearing the evil smell which they presumed would follow.
Here upon came one of them to the coffin and felt so svveet a savor as he
said he had never felt the like: the rest approaching felt the same: and all
of them judged it to be an odor from heaven. On the seventh day they arrived
at Conimbria, when all the city and kingdom was filled with sorrow for the
death of so good a Queen. After solemn service, the body was laid in the
grave which before she had caused to be made: and it chanced that the hands
and clothes of the men that laydit in were besprinckled with a liquor that
came out of the body: which gave such a sweet savor as it exceeded the
savor of roses or the sweetest flovvers.

Of the miracles which happened after her death.
THE XX. CHAPTER.
AFter the death of this holy Queen, many miracles were wrought, by which her
merits before Almighty God were made known to the world.

Two men that had long been sick of violent agues carried the Bear in which the
holy body had layen, and comending themselves to the merits of this Saint
Elizabeth were forthwith cured.

A Clariss had long time so great pain in her head and teeth that she could
eat no meat: but coming to the Bear she was forthwith cured.

Ferdinand Stephans a citizen of Conimbria had his foot hurt with a nail
which by no means could be drawn out, and commending himself to this holy
Queen was presently helped.

A woman that had the pestilence, and a carbuncle upon her hand, winding it in
a cloth that the holy Elizabeth had used, was presently cured.

Two blind women visiting her grave received sight instantly.

The mother of a Canon Regular being blind, and by her son lead to the
grave: having there done her devotion, was restored to clear sight instantly.

Many others of sundry diseases, as of hot agues, burning fevers, possessed
by the devil, blind, distract of their vvittes, etc. coming to her grave, or
being anointed with the oil that burned in her lamp: were miraculously
cured.

How it came to pass that her feast was kept: and how her holy body was found
entire, and honorably taken up.
THE XXI CHAPTER.
THe king Emanuell understanding of the miracles done by the merits of the holy
S. Elisabeth, obtained of Pope Leo the X. that in the diocese of Conimbria her
feast day might be solemnized: and king Ihon the 3. son of Alphonsus,
obtained of Pope Paul the IIII. that the same might be kept over all Portugal.
Almighty God by 3. wonderful miracles did show how pleasing this solemnity
was unto him* for three Clarisses afflicted with incurable diseases, were
healed thereat: After this, Philip the 3. of that name king of Spain and
Portugal, procured that six persons of note should be ordained to seek out
the miracles of this holy Elisabeth, which being done very carefully, the
forenamed king sent to Rome to Pope Paul the V. to the end she might be
Canonised: but the Pope dying it was not then brought to pass. At last the
present Pope Vrbanus the VIII* at the request of King Philip the 4. made the
foresaid inquisition of the miracles, where after 276. years that she had
been dead, to wit, in the year of our lord 1612. her grave having been
opened in presence of many vvitnesses, and expert Doctors of Physic: they
found in the toombe a chest of vvood covered with ox hides which began to be
rotten, shut with bars of yro^, that were eaten up with rust: the body wound
in duble silk: the face honorably covered to the breast with a cypres veil.
The body was all entire and whole, the face with lively color as if she
had been but newly buried: and the linen clothes about her still so nevve, as
without great stress they could not be torn. A Religious man that was there,
called Ihon Delgado touched the face of the Queen which received the print of
his fingers. The great Doctor of Physic Balthazar Azeredo drevv to him three
times her arm and it went back to the place every time without breaking.
There was found by her in the grave a staff and a purse, which betokened her
virtuous life, and liberality to the poor: with the staff she had gone on
pilgrimage to S. James. Out of the purse she had reached money to the needy.
The Bishop Alphonsus Albicastre, because this rich treasure had been found in
his diocese, made (with consent of the king) to the honor of the holy
Elisabeth, a costly chapel of polished marble, vvtih a gilded arch, under the
which he placed a silver shrine, with windows to be opened that as need
was the body might be seen, as well without, of the people: as within of the
Religious. This good Bishop after he had bestovved 12000. crowns upon the
vvorck, being prevented by death could not finish it: he left with the king of
Spain 30000. crowns for the Canonisation, who himself did forder it, but
being taken away by death savve it not done. in fine, it was brought to an end
by king Philip the 4. and she is Canonised by Pope Urban the VIII. in the year
of Iubile 1625. the 25. of May, to the honor and glory of God.

FINIS.



