A FVLL DECLARATION OF THE FAITH AND CEREMONIES PROFESSED IN the dominions of
the most Illustrious and noble Prince FREDERICK, 5. Prince, Elector Palatine.

PVBLISHED FOR THE BENEFIT AND SATISFACTIon of all Gods people.

ACCORDING TO THE Original printed in the High Dutch tongue.

Translated into English by John Rolte.

LONDON, Imprinted for William Welby, at the Swan in Paul's Church yard. 1614.

DR WM BEVERIDGE BP of ST ASAPH.
portrait of William Beveridge

RECTE FACIENDO SECURUS coat of arms or blazon





TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sr. EDWARD COKE, LORD CHIEF JUSTICE of England, one
of his Majesty's most Honorable privy Councel^ Grace and peace be multiplied by
the knowledge of God, and of Jesus our Lord.
NAoman, Captain of the host of the King of Syria, (Right Honorable) a great
man with his Master, and Honorable, hearkening to the report of a little
captive maid of the land of Israel, obtained not only the cure of the leprosy
of his body, but also of his soul: and therefore he did not only confess the
God of Israel to be the only true God, but he required two mules burden of
the earth of that land, vowing he would never after offer burnt offering or
sacrifice to other gods, but unto the Lord.

The good acceptance whereof, with the mercy and providence of God therein
considered, (Right Honorable) moved me the rather to make answer unto some
such demands, as have been propounded unto me here in my fatherland, about the
fruitfulness of that good land, where are the upper springs and the nether
springs, which it has pleased God to alot to the Othoniel and Achsah of our
times, the son in law, and daughter to Caleb, the the noblest Prince and
longest liver of all the people of Israel, who has seen the Lords wonders and
deliverances, in Egypt, the red Sea, Wilderness, and land of Promise, (Preserve
them still, O Lord, from all the Canaanites, etc. among whom they live, and
make them all for strength of body, wisdom, constancy and years like unto
Caleb, and with Othoniel to subdue the enemies of Israel.) And not having any
better means then this, whereby to give content, I have now presented my
little cake, and offered my two mites, to the Lords servants and treasury,
being all that I had. The former being, A faithful Admonition of the Prince
Elector Palatines Churches, aduising to unity. And this, A full Declaration of
their faith. So as that this is not only an Apollogie of the former, as
appears in the 8. Chapter: but is able to give full satisfaction to all such
honest people as desire to know what to trust to in them For which end they
first published the same, as appears in the 1. Chapter, and which I only
aimed at in translating it. For as for peace haters nothing will satisfy them,
God-fearing people then finding what they seek for, I trust none will blame
me for that I have taught it to speak English in so plain a style; the Lord
knowing that I have done it so faithfully as possibly I could.

The causes moving me to be so bold as to put your Honors cognizance upon
this Prince Electors man, are for that it has pleased God to move the heart
of our dread Sovereign to assign your Honor a general charge to do justice
to the oppressed, and to defend the fatherless, the widow, and the stranger.
And therefore as I served in the former to the Table of the Right Honorable
Oliver Lord S. John, as a dish of Renish Grapes, that so others might the more
willingly taste thereof, so by your Honors good acceptance also of this tree
into your Orchard, it may spread it self the further in the vineyard which God
has planted in this Iseland. And so that good land may have, two faithful and
Honorable witnesses sufficient to avouch the truth against any that shall
bring an evil report upon the same. And though he be now so homely apparrelled
in an English shepherds weed, the fault thereof is to be ascribed to me, for
I assure my self had a Jonathan got his acquaintance he would have honored
him more, yet as he now is, I trust your Honor shall reap no disgrace by him,
for he was borne in Ishaies house, and he is strong, valient and wise, and the
Lord is with him: wherefore as he fought with the Lion and the Bear in his
father-land, so dare he (with his 5. smooth stones taken out of the Lords
brook) encounter Goliath aabroad, if he hear him blaspheme the Lord and his
host: which he shall be the better able to do, and himself take no harm,
being so honorably harnished. And no doubt but he shall find some opposition
abroad, it so being that his brethren (the sons of Bilhah and Zilpah) hate him
at home, because his father loves him more then them: and because his works
are good, (which is the common case of all the dearest children of God.) Who
now also is more feeling of a strangers case then your Honor? But why do I
still call him a stranger? the whole city knowing that he is a virtuous man,
and a prosolite, and therefore has not only taken our God for his God, but
our people for his people: surely the heart of none but Marah will refuse him.
Yet whatsoever entertainment he finds, yea although it should be such as may
discourage him, he has kept the words of Gods patience, and done that which
appertained to him: and he will not for all that despair, or renounce the
confession of the truth (as Prince Frederick of blessed memory did formerly
answer those that thought to daunt him) though the whole world should leave
him. Now the God of Israel under whose wings he is come to trust, recompense
his works more and more with a full reward. And the same al sufficient God,
remember your Honor, and wipe not out the kindness that you have showed on the
house of our God, and on the offices thereof.

Your Honors most humble at command JOHN ROLTE.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
CHristian Reader, that which Suetonius reports concerning Caligula, that he
had wont to say, that he commended nothing so much in his nature as impudency
and obstinacy, may truly be verified of certain refractorie persons in this
age of ours, who professing the same faith and religion which we do, and
calling themselves Protestants, yet cease not stiflie to maintain some
certain errors, though they be never so clearly convinced, and to slander
their brethren and religion, though they justify and explain themselves never
so apparently: and that which is yet a greater sign of impudency and
obstinacy, the more they are persuaded and exhorted by all loving and
brotherly means to unity and amity, the more they rage, and spit out the
venom of their malice against the perswaders. This uncharitable dealing as it
appears in most of the writings of those who call themselves Luthers
disciples. So in none more then in their proceedings against the Ministers of
Prince Frederick Elector his Church: for after that the^^ had in a Christian
zeal of truth and peace set forth their Faithful Admonition, wherein they
cleared their doctrine^ from many slanderous imputations ^^d ofter^d the hand
of fellowship and brotherhood to then ^ouersaries, notwithstandiag their
disagreement in some points: and labored also to win them to peace by all
loving and kind protestations: yet diverse of a more turbulent nature amongst
them, have not spared to exagitate that book, and accuse the writers thereof
of fraudulent dealing both in delivering some, and concealing other of their
doctrines: and in a word, to condemn them more then ever they did before: for
which cause those godly men of the Prince Electors Church, were constrained to
write this second book, called, A full Declaration of their faith and
ceremonies: that they might stop the mouths of their malicious adversaries,
and show to the world that they hold no such damnable errors as they impute
unto them.

My purpose is not commend this small vollume unto thee for it will commend it
self, if thou please to peruse it with an indifferent eye: my intent is only
to show thee how useful it may be to the Church of God. The ends of the first
writing of it were these; first, that the world might know what they hold
concerning the matter of religion, and how sound their faith is in all
fundamental points thereof. Secondly, that the mouths of their adversaries
the rigid Lutherans might be stopped, who cease not maliciously to lay unto
their charges strange and blasphemous doctrines, which they never thought nor
taught. And thirdly, that all men might perceive, how those that falsely call
themselves Luthers disciples, do swerve more from Luthers opinion then these
do, except in one thing only which is the doctrine of the sacrament: for
albeit Luther spoke many things in the beat of contention, which might seem to
afford some ground to their opinions, yet when that heat was cooled, and his
speeches proceeded from better aduisement, he is so far from patronizing
such paradoxes, that none is more contrary unto them then himself is: these
were ends of the first writing this book.

And as for the translating, it wants not lawful and commendable uses: for,
first we may here see, what cause we have to bless God for the religeous care
of our dread sovereign, in matching his only daughter a princess peerless,
with a Prince of that soundness in religion as the Prince Elector is: thereby
discovering his singular love to the truth, and his upright heart to God: when
as neither masses of treasure nor height of honor did so much preponder at in
his royal heart, as did true religion, and the advancement of the Gospel, and
the glory of God. What is to marry in the Lord, if this be not? and what can be
a truer token of a religious heart then this is? policy, councelleth to
strengthen states and kingdoms by conioyning them together by marriages. And
in this respect not only religion is often not regarded, but even natures law
contemned, as experience shows in many places of Christendom, and especially
in the house of Austria. But our religeous Sovereign esteeming it no policy
but vanity, which is not grounded upon the fear of God, the root of true
wisdom, has preferred true religion above all; and labored to strengthen
himself rather in the Lord, then in the world. Albeit there be never the less
no disparagement in that happy match, either in honor, he being descended
from Kings and Emperors, and the principal Elector Imperial. Or in wealth
and power, his dominion being both great and large, able to answer his
stoutest enemy in the face, if need should require, or in gifts of nature, of
which this whole land, and especially Cambridge graced by his highness
presence are eye, and ear, and heart witnesses: notwithstanding, religion was
his Majesty's chief motive: and so being, it gives us all his subjects that
fear God, cause both to praise God for his Majesty's happy reign over us, and
to lay down our lives and goods at his feet to give him contentment: and to
pray to God with earnest devotion for the continuing of his life and reign. As
also to hope that as his Majesty has begun this first happy marriage of his
royal issue in the Lord, so he will not swerve from the said rule in the
second, of him who is the breath of our nostrels, and the only radiant star
of our horrison.

Secondly, this Treatise may serve to advertise us that we are not alone in the
profession of our faith, nor do separate our selves from other reformed
Churches: but join the hands of fellowship and friendship with the Churches of
Germany; yea of France, the Low Countries, Denmark and all other reformed
Churches of the world, which howsoever they differ from us in some ceremonies;
yet in substance of faith, we run all one way, and mind one thing. And
touching Ceremonies, being nothing but external accidents and ornaments of
religion, that they are not so obstinately maintained by any of us, as if the
life of religion should consist therein: or that we are not ready to alter and
change the fashion of them if necessity, either in respect of charity or
scandal should so require. And as for the difference betwixt the Lutherans and
Caluinists, that they are not so great nor so many as our adversaries would
make them, and as the world take them to be: excepting only a few strange
positions broched and defended by some of a more rough and bitter spirit of
that sect; who as they swarne from the standert of their Captain Luther, so
are condemned of their own pewfellowes, to whom God has vouchsafed a more
mild and peaceable heart. This is plainly discovered in this book; and not
only this, but also with what spirit of meekness these good men, the Authors
of this book, are inspired, who being reviled, scorned, and contumeliously
railed upon, by those rough and rigid false disciples of Luther, reviled not
again, but after the example of Christ refer the righting of their wrongs to
him that is the rightful Judge of heaven and earth: and by all gentle and
loving persuasions labor to win them to the truth.

Lastly, it may stand up as a bulwark, against the malicious slanders of our
rancored adversaries the Jesuits, and other of the Romish crew, and this as in
many points, so especially in these two: that the Protestant Church for want
of a vissible Judge endued with infallibillety of judgment and impossibility
of erring is rent and torn in pieces into so many sects, as there are
particular Churches, and almost persons. And that we, if not professedly, yet
by consequents, hold this damnable doctrine, that God is the author of sin:
both which slanders are so clearly dispelled in this tract, that none can
choose but subscribe to the same, who is not either mufled with ignorance, or
blinded with malice. For touching the first, here they may see, how though we
be disioyned by distance of peace, yet we accord together in the unity of one
truth, and that all differences amongst us, are almost only in such matters,
as concern not the life of religion, but the exterior shape and garment
thereof. And this by the guidance of our invisible head Jesus Christ, and his
blessed spirit of truth, in better and in a more excellent manner, then they by
their visible Judge the pretended vicar of Christ upon earth. And touching the
second, that neither directly we teach, nor indirectly may be deduced from
our doctrines, that God is the author of sin, is so evidently and sincerely
discovered in this book, as none that reads the same with aduisement can but
account our adversaries notorious callumniaters to lay so soul a crime to our
charges upon so silly a ground; but no marvel, seeing slandering and lying is
one of the chief pillars of their kingdom. These be the profitable uses,
that may be made of this book, Now the God of all mercy direct all our
thoughts, words and works, to the advancement of his glory, and the
edification of his Church. And thus commending this book to thy favorable
acceptance, I commend thee to the grace of Christ Jesus.

Thine in the Lord, and the poor servant of Jesus Christ Thomas Beard Doctor
of Divinity.

THE CONTENTS OF THIS DECLARATION.
FIrst there is placed a Preface: of the cause and end of this Declaration.
After follows the Declaration it self, wherein are ten Chapters, Containing
as follows. The 1. Chapter. That we have not such a detestable faith, as is
measured to us abroad. The 2. Chapter. What our faith is in very truth. The 3.
Chapter. That we have not founded and learned such our faith, from blind
reason, much less from the revelation of Satan, as some calumniate us, also
not out of the writings of failable men, but only and alone, out of the
infallible word of God, through the gracious inlightning of his holy spirit.
The 4. Chapter. That Doctor Luther of happy memory, did even believe and
teach, as we believe and teach: except that only one point of the holy supper.
And, that also we differ not in the same point, so much as many imagine. The 5.
Chapter. Wherefore we cannot hold with Doctor Luther in all things about the
point of the holy Supper. The 6. Chapter. That we do not believe and teach
otherwise of the person of Christ, then as Doctor Luther of happy memory did
believe and teach: excepting the vbiquitie of the body of Christ, which he also
at last renounced himself. The 7. Chapter. That we do not believe and teach
otherwise of the foreknowledge and almighty providence of God over all
creatures, and of the original of sin, then as Doctor Luther of happy
memory has believed and taught thereof. The 8. Chapter. That we believe and
teach no otherwise of the everlasting Predestination of God, or of the free
election by grace of the children of God to everlasting life, or which is all
one, from whence faith springs, then as Doctor Luther of happy memory did
believe and teach. The 9. Chapter. That we believe and teach no otherwise of
holy Baptism, then as Doctor Luther of happy memory, published in the
Smalkaldish Articles, and in the Sermon of the blessed Sacrament of holy
Baptism, anno 1519. delivered his opinion. The 10. Chapter. That the
Ceremonies which we use in our Churches, are neither against the word of God
nor Christian liberty. These are the Chapters of this Declaration: upon which
this conclusion follows; that for the same they have no just cause to
condemn us as heathens.
The Vollumes of Luther mentioned, are his Dutch Vollumes.

OF THE END AND CONTENTS OF THIS DECLARATION.
CHristian loving Reader, it cannot be uttered, what mischief the contention
about the Sacrament has done, and yet daily does, and is to be feared will
do more and more in the Protestant Churches. Now we for our parts are not only
ready to embrace peace continually, and for that end have tried all means to
purchase the same, whatsoever any Christians are bound to do therein: but so
there are also many God fearing people on the adverse part, both of high and
low degree, who desire peace as gladly even as we do, and would further it to
the uttermost of their powers, who also acknowledge that the means thereto
propounded by us (that we, namely, whilst we agree in the foundation of faith,
should not condemn each other for difference in opinion about by-questions:
considering that it is impossible in this life, that the perfection and
uniform confession of all the mysteries of God, should be holden by all
members of Christ in all things: as the Scripture witnesses, and experience
has always manifested) are Christian, and agreeable to the word and will of
God. Only they are hindrered by part of their portly preachers: who say and
write, that it stands not alone upon some few by-questions: but also that
there is difference in opinion, in the foundation of Christian faith, and that
we have so many detestable errors, that no Christian man can with good
conscience acknowledge us for brethren in Christ, and according to the same,
hold peace and brothership with us.

That now this obstacle may be removed, and that goodhearted people may know
what to trust unto about us; we are willing once more (adding to full measure)
to declare, what we believe or do not believe, of all and every point of
doctrine, and thereby also declare, what we use for Ceremonies, or do not use
in our Churches: with the causes added thereto, wherefore we do the one, and
not the other.

The merciful true God and Father be pleased to bestow his grace and blessing
on such a work, that the eyes of many people may be opened thereby, to the
honor of him, and benefit of his Churches. Amen.

A FVLL DECLARATION OF THE FAITH, AND CEREMOnies of the Pfaltzgraues Churches.
CHAP. I. That we have not such a detestable faith, as is measured to us abroad
by peace-hating people.
NOw to begin: We protest before God, and whole Christendom, that we have not
in any sort, such a detestable faith, as peace-hating people ascribe unto us,
whereas they say:

That we deny Gods omnipotency. The (...) these (...) is to the^ (...) Cha^
(...)


That we make God the author of sin.

That we make God to be a tyrant.

That we deny the Godhead of Christ.

That we deny the personal union of both the natures in Christ.

That we say, that the divine and humane natures in in Christ, have in no sort
any actual and working fellowship one with the other.

That we deny original sin.

That we say, that the son of God died not for us indeed and in truth, but
only a bare man.

That we deny the power of the death of Christ.

That we deny the necessity of believing in Christ, and say, that the
unbelieving heathens can be saved as well as the Christians.

That we make holy Baptism of no effect.

That we deny the bliss making, eating, and drinking of the body and blood of
Christ in the holy Supper.

That we teach, that he that is elected to everlasting life must be saved, be
he never so wicked; and he that is ordained to everlasting death, he must be
damned, live he so holily as he can possibly.

Such, and many more the like blasphemies against God they do accuse us of,
that we both believe and teach.

But we can avouch it before God, that we tremble from our hearts, to think
upon the very naming of such blasphemies against God, if we were to tax others
for them: how far is it then from us, that we our selves should believe and
teach such?

Also those our defamers are never able to produce any sound proof against us,
that we did ever believe or teach any such things A^ they themselves now lay
open, Doctor Myllius in the brothership of the Lutheran Evangelist Churches.
These. 163.
and acknowledge in their last writings: that we never approved any such
detestable opinions. And yet cease they not to throw the scandal upon us: and
will excuse the same with this: that it is no new thing to lay upon heretics,
the evil consequents which follow their doctrines as their own errors,
though they do not allow the same. But be it new or old, we give all honest
men leave to judge, whether it be right or not?

The Heathen had formerly a ^^ouerbe: Inter bonos been agier oportet; that is,
honest me^ should deal honestly with each other. Also; Quisque debet esse
interpres suorum verborum: that is, every man should be the interpreter of his
own words. In which manner also says Syrach, Chap. 19.16, 17. A man lets
words fall sometimes, which be means not so; for who is it that fails not
sometimes with his tongue? speak to thy neighbor thereof, before thou
threaten him, etc. That has ever been the judgment of the ancient, as well
among the Heathens, as people of God: that we should catch no man in his
words, but give every man leave to be his own expositor, how he understands
the same.

What in the end will come hereof, when the one shall so deal with the other,
and deceiueably lay imputations of error on the other, which never came in his
mind? Surely then shall men by such courses, not only make heretics of
Zwinglius, Calvin, Beza, Martyr, etc. And not only of Luther, Melancton,
Brentius, etc. but also of the Prophets and Apostles themselves.

The Evangelist Mark writes, chapter 6.5. that Christ could do no great
works in his father-land. If a wicked man had to deal with these words, might
he not seem to have show for this conclusion, that the Evangelist Mark had
denied Christ's omnipotency. Moses says; God hardened Pharaohs heart. Exodus
11.10.
Paul goes yet further, (...). 18.
and says, He hardens whom he will. When a wicked man deals therewith,
could not he with great show make this conclusion, and say, Moses and Paul
make God the author of sin? And did not Paul complain thereof many hundred
years ago, that men would even make such conclusions out of his doctrine
against it?

Or do not the defamers know, that that wretched fellow Doctor Pistorius now at
this present concludes against blessed Doctor Luther? He writes; Doctor Luther
was a Tritheit, who said, there are three Gods. Also he was a Sabellian, who
said, there was but one person of the Godhead. Also he was an Arian, who denied
the everlasting Godhead of Christ. Also that he was an Eutichian, who mingled
the two natures of Christ in one. Also a Nestorian, who separated the two
natures in Christ. Also a Valentinian, who were so mad headed, as to say,
that the humane nature of Christ descended from heaven. Also a Marcionite, who
blasphemed that Christ was not crucified and died in very deed, but only in
show. Such, and many more the like detestable heresies, that wretched fellow
Pistorius construeth upon blessed Doctor Luther. And to prove the same against
him, he cites his own words, which make a great show to that end. What will
our defamers say unto it? they can say no otherwise in truth, then that Doctor
Luther was not honestly dealt withal, to construe his words so, and to draw
such conclusions from them as never came into his mind in all his life.

Even the very same answer shall they receive from us also who forge such
falsehoods (things else not heard of) as are above specified, and the like
things upon us. Which yet we repeat not for their sakes, for to them is all
singing and saying lost. But what we say, that speak we for those honest men's
sakes, who would gladly understand how the estate in religion stands with us,
and whom it also concerns as much as us, that they be thoroughly informed
therein.

They may now know, and may well and boldly put this trust in us, (for we
fear God, and desire not to deceive any man) that all the odious and
blasphemous things whereof we are calumniated here and there by contentious
spirits, are no other things, but even mere flat lies. And they need not be
troubled, though they allege, that there stand our own plain words. Is it
not true, that our own plain words stand there. That God is (...) mighty:
that God is the author of sin, etc. But there stand only such words in our
writings, out of the which these and the like blasphemies may be wrested, if
men will deal dishonestly with us, or not respect, or take to heart what we
say, as we have often declared. In which kind of handling, way be drawn even
such and the like odious blasphemies against God, with as great show of reason
(as is before specified) and that out of the word of God it self. We speak
not this to that intent, as if we esteemed our writings equivalent to the word
of God. We know full well that we are men, who can err and fail. But this
only is that we say, Can they make an evil construction of Gods word, wherein
yet there is no fault (when they will be wicked) and conclude many evil things
from thence, with great show of reason: how much more may our words be
construed evil, and with great show, many great and fearful errors be
drawn from thence, which are not always void of failings of themselves?
Wherefore good people are not to respect such their conclusions. Yea also when
they shall lay our own words in our own books before their faces: yet are
they not presently to construe, that this or that is our opinion, as the words
at first show seem to bear: but they are to look both before and behind
what is added, and what we declare either there, or in other our writings of
the like matter.

Note. Neither side is to blame other for private writings.
Especially good understanding people may have good respect how we have
expounded our meanings, in our Catechism, and other manifest and open writings
(of many godly learned men together advised upon, and put forth under the
general title of one or more reformed Churches) for private writings are not
always so well considered of as they should. And many of those writings also
there are, which most of us never once saw or read in all our lives. And
therefore we do not acknowledge our selves indebted to render a reckoning for
them. Even as we also do not think that the adverse part will take upon
them, to make answer for every thing that is privately penned by one or other
on their sides, of the learned (even the learnedest not exempted) which might
be esteemed to be done either hastily or vndeliberately.

And therefore it is that we do even in the beginning of this writing, say and
testify, both for our needs sake, and also for the common benefit: that we
(in no respect) have any such dangerous and detestable belief, as peace-hating
people ascribe unto us.

CHAP. II. What our faith is in very truth.
NOw if any man shall further demand, what then is our faith indeed, the which
we willingly acknowledge? then is this our answer, as follows.

We believe that there is one Of God.
the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, with the Son and holy Ghost, and that
accordingly, there are three distinct persons in that one godly Essence, the
Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost.

We believe further, that the same one God is everlasting

We believe further, that the same one true God Of the Creation.


We believe further, that God sustaineth and rules Of the s^ knowledge of God.
that no creature can stir or move it self without his will; and therefore
nothing can come to pass without his permission, whether it be good or evil.
Also, all that God does at present, or permits to come to pass, he
foreknew it from everlasting, and with well bethought council had determined,
that he even so would do it, or permit it. Also that he did not determine to
permit any wicked thing to come to pass, but that which he could and would
turn to a good end.

We believe further, that in the beginning God Of the fall of Angels and men;
and of original sin.
and to blessed immortality. But they, to wit, the Angels, and the two first of
mankind, did shortly after their creation, fall from God their Creator: and
have by such their fall, brought not only upon themselves the wrath of God,
but also such a pollution of their natures, that now they can no more either
will, or accomplish any thing that is good. Which pollution fell on the lost
Angels altogether at one tim. But mankind inherits such defilement, together
with the guiltines both of the first and second death by propagation one from
another. From whence it is, that the same corruption of mankind, is called
original sin

We believe further, though such a fearful fall, Of the cause of man's fall.
could not have come to pass without Gods permission, and that he appoints
nothing without good consideration: yet is not the fault of this fall in any
manner to be ascribed to him; considering, that he so created the Angels and
men, that they had free will to turn to good, as well as to bad.

We believe further, that it becomes not poor Paul says, Romans 11.32. Gal.
3.22.
that God has shut up all under unbelief, or under sin, that he might have
mercy on all: (that is, that no man may be saved, but merely by the mercy of
God.) Also, Romans 9.22.23.
What and if God would, to show his wrath, and to make his power known, suffer
with long patience the vessels of wrath prepared to destruction: and that he
might declare the riches of his glory, upon the vessels of mercy, which he has
prepared unto glory. By this ought we in all reason to let it so remain.

We believe further, that the fallen Angels and wicked Angels and men, had the
bridle in their own powers, where should we be able to abide for the^?

We believe further, that though God permit Absalom, to the punishment of
David; and the treason of Judas, to the freedom of mankind) also though he
often punish sin by sin, and blind and harden those commonly at last, who
with seeing eyes will yet be blind, (as formerly he did Pharaoh) yet
nevertheless he of himself has no pleasure in sin, much less does he
provoke or drive any man thereunto: but that the precedent working cause of all
sin, which goes before, is only and alone the free and unforced will of
wicked Angels and men.

We believe further, that God has adjudged the

We believe further, that God had indeed just

To accomplish the said council and will of God the heavenly father, the Son
of God our Lord, Mary; and like unto us in all things, sin excepted. And when
he had lived as a man thirty years, he began to teach and preach, the
merciful pleasure of his heavenly father toward us poor sinful men: And in
the fourth year after that, he was captiued, crucified, put to death, and
buried, descended into hell, and rose again from the dead the third day, and
ascended into heaven, forty days after, and set himself at the right hand of
God the father Almighty; from whence he shall return to judge the quick and
the dead.

And therefore we believe of Christ, that he is not a bare man, Of the person
of Christ.
but that he is the everlasting Almighty

And being thus at present both God and man, both according to both natures.
For according to the humane nature was he not from everlasting. Also,
according to the Divine nature was he not borne in the last times. But he is
from everlasting according to the Divine nature, and first borne in the last
times according to the humane nature.



That by the offering up of his body, he must enter into the heavenly
tabernacles, and not remain upon the earth: else were he not our Priest. Heb.
the 8.9. and 10. Chapters.

Of the power of the death of Christ.
(whilst he being not a bare man, but the Son of God died) is a full and
alsufficient payment, not only for our sins, but also the sins of the
whole world. And that he by his death has purchased, not only forgiveness
of sins, but also the new birth by the holy Ghost, and and lastly everlasting
life.

it says, He that believes not shall be damned, Mark. 16.16. Also. He that
believes not in the Son of God, the wrath of God abides on him. Ioh. 3.36.

We believe further, that the true saving faith Of the nature of the saving
faith.
For such a faith lays hold on Christ wholly, who was made of God not only
righteousness to us, but also sanctification, 1. Cor. 1.30.

We believe further, that though the true blissemaking Of the righteousness
before God.
yet nevertheless the man before Gods justice seat (that is, when he is
thoroughly touched with his sins) neither can or should bear himself upon
his good works; it so being that they are ever imperfect. But that a man shall
appeal only and alone unto the grace of God, before his judgment seat, which
grace he has prepared for us in Christ, and take hold on the same grace with
a believing heart; and so will God forgive him his sins, and esteem him just
for the full satisfaction of Jesus Christ. And that is our meaning when we
say, that man is justified before God, only by faith, without help of good
works: namely, not that good works should be abandoned, but only that a man
should not put any confidence therein.

We believe further, that God has ordained the Of the Ministry.
that he would work in us faith in Christ thereby, and that the same preaching
of God the Lord, is no jest, but that it is his earnest will and intent that
all people that hear such preaching, should believe the same, and should
return to Christ.

Of the fountain of faith.
We believe further, that mankind is so corrupted by the fall of our first
Parents, that they cannot understand or entertain the preaching of Christ,
unless God open their understandings by his holy spirit, and turn their
hearts to Christ.

is an especial work of God, Ephesians. 2.8. Also, 2. These. 3.5.

that all men are sinners, Romans 3.23. But God gives it by grace, to whom he
will, Romans 9.18.

For from the beginning of of the world, God knows all his works, Act. 15.18.

Paul says, The election h^^h obtained it, the rest have been hardened, Romans
11.7. Also as Luke says, As many as were ordained to eternal life, believed,
Act. 13.48.

2. Tim. 2 19.
for such a search is in vain. It being so that God has sealed the book of
life, and will not permit any creature to peep therein. But we ought to keep
our selves to the revealed word of God, which says, that God has chosen us in
Christ, that is, to that end he might make us saved through Christ, and no
otherwise, Ephesians. 1.3. And there accordingly he commands us to repent, and
believe in Christ, and so seek salvation in him. This commandment of Christ
should we endeavor to hold, so far as God gives us power, and continually
pray that God will be pleased more and more to increase our faith. When we
do so, then need we not search further, whether we be elected to everlasting
life or not. For this is sure and out of all doubt, that all those that repent
them without hypocrisy, and believe in Christ, are elected to everlasting
salvation.

But for this cause will not God reveal our election But work out our
salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. 2.2.

Which fear wheresoever it is, certainly it is accompanied That God is
faithful and will not suffer us to be tempted above that we be able, 1. Cor.
10.13. Also, He will not break the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax,
Esa. 42.3. Also, That Christ will cast out no man that comes to him, that is,
that desires to be saved by him, Ioh. 6.37. And That also no man shall pluck
them out of my hand, Ioh. 10.28. From which comfort the faithful find such joy
which passes all understanding: Mat 24.24. 2. Tim. 2.19. etc.
and those portions of the holy Scripture which speak of the unchangeable
election and choice of God, are then no more fearful, but vnmeasurably
pleasant and comfortable to them. For they conclude out of it, That nothing can
separate them from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord, Romans
8.38. And it is impossible that any where a man should say from his heart, I
believe to obtain everlasting life: But all men must doubt of life eternal,
if we had not that comfort, that God had so blessed us that believe in him, 1.
Pet. 1.2.
That he would keep us in the same faith by his power to everlasting life. For
we are much too weak to protect our selves, against so much assaultment by the
devil, the world, and our own flesh.

Of the holy Sacraments.
together with the repetition of his word, to strengthen and keep us in faith,
the principal end thereof being, that God might thereby also set before our
eyes the promises of the Gospel, or the profits we have by Christ, that so we
might not only hear, but also see, feel, and apprehend, how he is minded
toward us: namely, that he will forgive us our sins, and bestow upon us the
holy Ghost, and everlasting life, for the merit of of Christ's bloodshedding.
These his promises and profits will God assure us by the holy Sacraments.



Of Gods covenant. Ier. 31.31, 32, 33, 34. Heb. 8.9, 10, 11, 12.
And this is the new covenant of God with us men, which is so often thought of
in the holy Scripture, namely, that God will be merciful to us for Christ his
sake; we on the contrary should be obedient unto him, and according to his
Commandment believe in Christ, Also in the ordaining the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, and otherwise.
and love as Christians.

The old covenant was, that God would be merciful to man, if he fully kept the
Law But if he ouertread the same in the least measure, then should he

Therefore has God made a new covenant with Paul says, Act. 15.11. Wherein he
promises us that he will be merciful to us, for Christ his sake, though we
do not perfectly k^epe the Law, but have many ways broken the same. Only we
shall acknowledge his grace, and receive it with faithful hearts, and shall
endeavor our selves from henceforth in testification of our duties to live
unblameably: to which then he will plentiously impart the help of his spirit
unto us, when we shall entreat him for the same; and he will cover all our
imperfections with the perfect obedience of Jesus Christ. This is the new
covenant of God with us men, for confirmation whereof he has ordained the holy
Sacraments. For even as men use to deal one with another in their contracts
and agreements, they make it not only with words, but also they ratify it
with writing, and seal, are other open testifications, customs or ceremonies:
even so deals the Lord with us. He transferreth his gracious covenant to us,
not only with words, and has not only ratified it by writing, but has
instituted certain ceremonies to that end, that thereby the same his covenant
betwixt him and us might be confirmed and ratified, manifestly to the whole
world, and be as it were sealed also. And this is the right end and profit of
the holy Sacraments.



Of holy Baptism.
ordained of God for these ends: first, that they for their parts whosoever
they be, that gives up themselves to the Christian faith, and so will enter
into bond with him, give hereby an open token and testimony, whereby they can
and shall inform themselves so long as they live, that God has assuredly
taken them into covenant with him, and according to the form of the same
covenant, washes them so certainly from the filthiness of the soul, with the
blood and spirit of Christ, that is, forgiueth their sins for the merit of
Christ's bloodshedding, and more and more regenerateth them by the spirit of
Christ, making them new creatures; so certainly as they are sprinkled and
washed outwardly with water, which commonly takes away the filthiness of the
body: And secondly, that they also on the contrary side, for their parts openly
acknowledge before the whole world, by the taking upon them the godly token of
the covenant, and testify their duty to God the Lord, to do even as
couenanters and members of Christ are bound and indebted for to do, living a
pure and blameless life, by the assistance of his spirit.

To that end is Baptism ordained of God. Wherefore

For though it be named the washing of the new birth, and the purging from sins
in the holy Scripture; Tit. 3.5. Act 22.16.
yet nevertheless has it not that construction as if the outward water bath,
could wash and regenerate one from sins, whether he believe or do not
believe: But this construction has it, that by this manifest and honorable
ceremony, the faithful are admitted for children of God, and the washing away
of sins, which is performed by the 1. Ioh. 1 8.
blood and Tit. 3.5. 1. Cor. 6.11.
spirit of Christ, is thereby figured and sealed to them, with one word: The
water saves us not: the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the
covenant of a good conscience with God, says Peter, 1. Pet. 3.21.

Further, and though it be that a man do ouertread Of repentance after
Baptism.
and sometimes be brought to an heavy fall, by the deceits of Satan, the
world, and his own flesh; yet shall he not therefore despair in the grace and
mercy of God, but look back and consider, the obligement which he promised
God in Baptism, and according to the same contract, repent; that is, be
heartily sorry for all the evils he has committed; and entreat God, that he will
pardon the same for Christ his sake, and after never do so again. Then will
God also consider his covenant, and forgive him his sins, and give him more
strength to encounter the devil, as he has promised in Baptism. And so has
Baptism his profit, power, and working, so long as a man lives upon the
earth, though not at the very present when a man receives it. For all the
promises of God are sealed unto the believers by Baptism: Ezech. 33 11.
under which promises, this is one, where God says, So true as I live says
the Lord God, I desire not the death of the wicked, but that he return from
his way and live. And so is also this promise sealed to us in Baptism. And
therefore we shall not follow the devil, Ioh. 8.44.
who prouokes us to despair. He is a liar, and a murderer from the
beginning. But God is a faithful God, Psalm. 25.3.
and never deceived any man who has put trust in his promises. With this may,
and shall every poor troubled sinner constantly comfort himself.

Of the holy Supper.
amongst other means, he ought often to use the holy Supper; which is the
second Sacrament of the new Testament, ordained of Christ principally, and
instituted for that end, to set his death before our eyes most clearly and
often times, and to assure us daily more and more of the partaking thereof, or
the fellowship of his crucified body, and shead blood. For this is the meaning,
where he took the bread and brake it, and said; This is my body which is
broken for you, take and eat, etc. as if he spoke to every man in particular:
behold here beloved man, I know well that thou art in sorrow for thy sins.
But be of good cheer; for as sure as the bread is there broken before thine
eyes, and the wine is severed from the bread: so certainly was my body broken,
or put to death for thee upon the Cross, and my blood was severed and spilt
from my holy body, for the forgiveness of thy sins: Also, so surely as I
give thee the holy tokens of my body and blood to eat and drink, and thou
have part and fellowship therein as well as others: even so assuredly shall
thou have part and fellowship in my true body and blood, which I delivered to
the death of the Cross, the same was also performed for thy welfare. Also thou
shall be thereby delivered from the everlasting hunger and thirst, which else
thou must have suffered in hell. Lay hold then thereon by true faith; and as
thou there take, eatest, and drinkest the holy tokens of my body and blood
with thy mouth: even so shut up my crucified body, and shead blood into thy
heart: and then thou shall never hunger and thirst. For whosoever eats my
flesh, and drinks my blood, Ioh 6.35, 54, 55, 56, 57.
has everlasting life; and I will raise him up at the last day: yea also in
this life will dwell in him, and he in me; and will continually govern and
comfort him with my spirit. Therefore be of good comfort beloved man, though
thou be but weak. No me^ shall pluck thee out of my hand. Ioh. 10.28.29.
The father who has given thee to me, is stronger then all, etc. This is the
first and principal benefit and use of the holy Supper; that we namely as is
aforesaid, may be assured in our hearts daily more and more thereby of the
death of Christ, and his blessed fellowship, or of the covenant of the grace of
God, which is founded upon the death of Christ, as Christ says; This is the
new covenant in my blood: as if he had said, that shall be a token and seal,
or assurance and confirmation of the new covenant, which I have purchased for
you with my blood.

1. Cor. 11.26.
Do it in remembrance of me: And Paul; As often as ye shall eat this bread,
and drink this cup, ye shall show the Lords death till he come.

Paul says; The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of
the blood of Christ? 1. Cor. 10.16.17.
for we that are many are one bread and one body because we are all partakers
of one bread; therefore fly from Idolatry, 1. Cor. 10.14.
and have no fellowship with the devils, 1. Cor. 10.20.21.
etc. Also we are all baptized into one body by one spirit (namely, in
Baptism) and have been all made to drink into one spirit, (namely, in the
holy Supper) therefore shall we as members of one body take care for each
other, and one member have patience and compassion with another, 1. Cor. 12,
12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27.

And we believe lastly, that for the most part God

CHAP. III. That we have not founded and learnt such our faith, from blind
reason, much less from the revelation of Satan (as some calumniate us) nor
from the weak writings of men. But only and alone, out of the infallible word
of God, through the gracious inlightening of his holy spirit.
THis is our faith, which we have not founded and learnt, from blind reason,
(as some accuse us) much less from Satan's inspiration, as some calumniate us
(for causes which shall be shown in the fifth Chapter,) also not from the
weak writings of men; but only and alone out of the infallible word of God,
through the enlightening of his spirit.

We read indeed also the writings of men, especially those whom God has
stirred up in these last days, against the idolatrous Popedom: such as were
of Luther, Melancton, Zwinglius, Oecalampadius, Bucer, Brentius, Calvin, Beza,
etc. And confess to the glory of God, that we have received information from
them, and do daily receive, the better how to understand a ^ight the holy
Scriptures, and to use the same to our profit.

But we do not found our selves in matters of faith upon the same, or any
man's writings else; but we found our selves in matters of faith only and alone
upon the word of God, and believe men no further then they can show what they
say, out of the word of God. Psalm. 116.11.
And that therefore, for that we know that all men may fail, though they be as
highly enlightened, and as holy as may possibly be; and that God is only he
that cannot err. And therefore we put no confidence in any man, when he
speaks of himself. But if he say it stands in Gods word, which he
speaks, then do we search Gods word for it, whether it be so or not. And
when we find it true, then believe we him: not therefore that he is the
speaker, but therefore that we see that God has said it.

But if any man shall ask, wherefore do we hold the writings of the Prophets
and Apostles to be the word of God, and not the writings of Zwinglius or
Luther, whereas nevertheless the Prophets and Apostles were even as well men,
as Luther Zwinglius, Philip, Calvin, etc. To them give we this answer.

The Prophets and Apostles were indeed even as well men, as other teachers of
the Churches of God. But they did not speak and write as men; but what they
spoke and writ in matters of faith, that received they by inspiration from God,
2. Tim. 3.16 2. T^t. 1.21.
without means, and were commanded to speak or write. which amongst many
other infallible marke-tokens, may be hereby manifested. For where they said
(as they used to say) this or this has the Lord spoken: there did the Lord
confirm such their sayings that they were true, with great and unaccustomed
wonders before all creatures, and so given them testimony by his own
almightinesse, that they speak the truth, and that that in truth was his word,
which they either spoke or writ in his name.

It is otherwise to be thought of Augustine, Cyprian, Hierome, Luther,
Zwinglius, and other the like teachers, who rose up after the times of the
Prophets and Apostles. They never published that ever God revealed his word
unto them without means, much less did they ever any where ratify the same
by wonderful tokens; but have always in their Sermons and writings drawn
their testimonies out of the writings of the Prophets and Apostles, as the
undoubted word of God: whilst now they ever appealed to the writings of the
Prophets and Apostles, and directed us thither, as to the foundation of their
faith: therefore also neither can nor shall we do otherwise then search in the
writings of the Prophets and Apostles, whether their doctrine be founded
thereupon or not. In which search, when we find it even so in Gods word, as
they have alleged and mentioned unto us, then receive we it thankfully, and
give praise to God for them. But when we find it otherwise, and perceive it,
that they stumble at some thing, and have not rightly understood the word of
God, then let we their allegations go, and keep only to Gods word. Would God
that all those that either will or should judge about the troublous contentions
in religion, would well consider this difference betwixt the word of God, and
the writings of men. It would stand much better (a thing much to be lamented)
then it now stands in the Protestant Churches. Doctor Luther of happy memory
has with this only one difference confounded the whole Papacy. For as often
as they brought against him any of the fathers, as Augustine, Hierome, etc. so
often answered he: Hierome and Augustine, as all other fathers, were men, and
could fail; and therefore he would not be tied to them. Only Gods word could
not err: therefore would not he be confuted and showed by any thing but by
Gods word. This was Doctor Luthers answer against the Popedom. And all
Protestant Churches acknowledge, that this his answer was right and good.

If then Doctor Luther did well and right, that he would not bind himself to
any writings of men, but only to the word of God; then can no man take it
evil at our hands that we herein follow his example, and also bind not our
selves to any writings of men, be he called Lutherus, or Zwinglius, or how he
will, but only to the word of God.

And yet do we not despise any of them; but give God hearty thanks for them,
and remember them with befitting commendations and praises, for all the great
things God has done by them; especially by Doctor Martin Luther, of whom
Zwinglius himself writes: He was the little David, Tom. 2. fol. 377. B. Item
fol. 315. B. Item fol. 326. B.
who first encountered with the great Goliath of Rome, which it may be none of
the rest would have adventured upon. And this honor did he not grudge to
afford him. Only he then should not grudge at other men, when they help to
follow the battle against the Philistims, when he had given the bold onset,
and put the enemy to flight. Which argument of Zwinglius we cannot otherwise
acknowledge then for Christian. And also we are of the same opinion that
Zwinglius was that Doctor Luther was a chosen champion of God, by whom he
would bring again the light of the holy Gospel, in these last times, out of
the dark Papacy. Only we say thereby that he was also a man, who had his
infirmities as well as other men. And especially must all they acknowledge who
will speak of him impartially, that in controversies he was much too hasty, and
in anger often thrust out such things which cannot be answered. As in a book
where the words stand fast, cast he out amongst others these words: Mary (the
mother of Christ) did neither eat Christ bodily, nor spiritually. Tom. 3. Ien.
fol. 363. B. That cannot be answered, otherwise then that his anger is to be
borne with. For and if Mary had not eaten Christ spiritually, then must she
be damned, and perish everlastingly. Or else the words of Christ must be
false, where he says Verily, verily I say unto you, except you eat the flesh
of the Son of man, and drink his blood, you have no life in you. Also in the
great Confession of the Lords Supper, casts he out these words: And it was
not true that Christ at the same time was in heaven, (namely, when he spoke
with Nicodemus upon the earth, Ioh. 3.^3.) Tom. 3. fol. 480. Also even in the
same place says he, The Angels are at one time in heaven, and also on the
earth, etc.

And many of the like examples could we show out of Doctor Luthers writings,
which put us out of all doubt, that he was a man, and so could fail and err
even as well as other men. Wherefore no man can blame us, that we also in his
writings follow the command of God, which says, Prove all, and hold that which
is good, 1. These. 5.21.

CHAP. IIII. That Doctor Luther of happy memory, did believe and teach no
otherwise, then we believe and teach; except that only one point of the holy
Supper. And that in the same point also, we differ not so much as many people
imagine.
WHich whilst we do, and seauer as befitteth; that which he taught with well
considered counsel, from those inconsiderate speeches, which sometimes fell
from him, in the heat of contention: then appears it plainly that he both
believed and taught of all and every necessary point, even as we believe and
teach, that one point of the holy Supper excepted.

And yet differ we not in the same point so much from each other as many men
take it.

For, it so being that in all Sacraments two things are to be considered, first
the tokens, and then the betokened riches (whereon out of all doubt more
depends many thousand times then on the outward tokens) then are we
agreeable in all things with Doctor Luther in the betokened treasures of the
holy Supper. For even as Doctor Luther taught, that the betokened treasures in
the holy Supper (or the same to which the holy Supper points, and which
makes a man right and blessed before God,) is not the bodily, but the
spiritual eating and drinking of the body and blood of Christ In the Sermon
upon Sacraments ^ay ^rinted in quarto, 1523 in the 55.56.57 deaf. Als^ in the
Church Postil, pr^ at Strasburg. 1529. in the 2. part. 102. Also in another
Sermon of the Sacrament: in the Church Postil, pr. at Wittenberge, anno 1540.
in the first part, 129.
: even so teach we also. Also, even as Doctor Luther teaches, That the bodily
eating and drinking of the body and blood of Christ, is nothing else, then to
believe that Christ has given his body to death for us, and his blood to be
spilt for the forgiveness of our sins In the former places. Also in the
expounding the Epistle on Septuagessimae Sunday: pr. in Wittenberge, Post 275.
B.
: Even so teach we also.

Also, even as Doctor Luther teaches, That all they who do eat and and
drink spiritually the natural body and blood of Christ, (that is, that do
believe that Christ gave himself to death for them) are by such a faith one
bread, and one spiritual body with Christ and themselves; and therefore they
can in Christ lay hold on all things, and on the contrary they are again
indebted, to adventure all in the behalf of Christ and his members Jn the
former places, also in Tom. 3. Ion. 235.206.207.
: Even so teach we also.

Only here lies the difference, what the outward tokens be, by which bodily
eatings (from which the ungodly are not exempted) the spiritual feeding upon
the body and blood of Christ, which belongs to the children of God, is
betokened, confirmed, and sealed. We say, the same outward tok ns are bread and
wine. Doctor Luther understands, they are not only bread and wine, but also
the body of Christ in bread, and the blood of Christ in wine. And so the
difference betwixt our doctrine in the Supper, and Doctor Luther, lies not in
the ground of salvation, but only in the tokens, which should show us to the
ground of salvation.

It may please the reader rightly to consider. Doctor Luther contendeth very
ho^ly for the bodily presence, and mouthly feeding upon the body and blood of
Christ in the holy supper: But for all that, he does not estimate the s^m
bodily presence and mouthly feeding, for to be the true treasure and kernel of
the holy Supper, but only to be the tokens, or for a part of the tokens,
whereby the true treasure and kernel of the hol^ Supper; namely, the
spiritual and alone blisse-making feeding of the body and blood of Christ,
which only is performed by faith, is betokened and sealed unto us. As is to be
collected by these his words where he says; Christ has not instituted the two
kinds (namely, bread and wine) barely, and nakedly, but his true natural flesh
in bread, has he given, and his true natural blood in the wine, that so he
might give a perfect and complete Sacrament. Tom. 1. Ien. 205. Also, it is not
enough to seed upon the body and blood of Christ outwardly; as it is not enough
that a man paint oats before a horse, to seed him withal. He must have true
oats In the Church Post il. de Anno 1529. part. 2. fo. 102. B.
. Also, the flesh is not profitable. The words that I speak are spirit and
life, says Christ With which words he will show, that the fleshly eating of
the flesh is not pr fitable. But to believe that Gods Son is flesh, and came
from heaven, and shead his blood for me, that that is profit and life.
Therefore to eat the flesh of the Son of God, and to drink his blood, is
nothing else, then that I do believe, that his flesh is given for me, and his
blood is spil^ for me, and that he has overcome for me, death, devil, hell,
and all mishaps. Out of which faith, flows a powerful confidence in him, and
a stout and bold spirit, against all mischance, so that hereafter I have no
cause to fear, whether it be ^inne, death, devil, or Hell, whilst I am
assured that my Lord has cast them under my feet, and overcome them for me.
That is caused by the spiritual eating, and not by the bodily The spiritual
and inward eating in the heart does it, not the outward, which is effected in
the Sacrament Even in the same place.
.

Behold Reader, those our Doctor Luthers own very words; whereby he
manifestly teaches and witnesses, that the bodily eating and drinking of the
body of Christ, which he understands to be acted in the holy Supper, not to
be the right blisse-making eating and drinking of the children of God, but
only that it is a token, which the wicked can as well receive as the godly, as
he says in other places: Judas receives it even as well as Peter.

Therefore the difference betwixt us and Doctor Luther, consists not in the
foundation of salvation, in cause of the holy Sacrament; for whether Judas
received it as well as Peter, that cannot be the foundation of salvation. Else
were our foundation very barely grounded. But the difference consists only in
the tokens, which show us only to the foundation of salvation, and shall give
us assurance in our hearts.

Whilst we now agree in the true ground of salvation, that is, that the
spiritual and alone blisse-making eating and drinking of the body and blood of
Christ, which is acted by faith, (as we, God be thanked, therein agree in all
things together) is it not then most lamentable, that we should separate our
selves so shamefully one from another, about the tokens, which the wicked can
receive as well as the godly?

CHAP. V. Wherefore we cannot agree in all things with Doctor Luther in the
point of the holy Supper.
YEa, wherefore do you it then, might some man say? Wherefore do you not give
Doctor Luther and his followers right? and so were the contention ceased.
Answer: That is not the way to exclude discord in the Churches of God, that
one should say the other holds truth to please him, though in his heart he
think the contrary. For God has flatly forbidden and said, Esa. 5.20. Woe
unto them which put darkness for light, and light for darkness. But this is
the way, to hold peace and unity in the Churches of God, that one bear with
the infirmities and errors of another (which overthrow not the foundation of
salvation) and condemn them not for them. And this have we hitherto done to
the uttermost, and will do it hereafter, it pleasing God the Lord: and as well
bear with Doctor Luther himself, as also with his followers, and not condemn
them, being that otherwise they make a good confession of the foundation of
faith. Only we desire as requisite, that they also may bear with us, where
they understand that we fail, and not presently give us to the devil, as
their custom is. It is well known over Christendom, that we have nothing
from the world, but despite and shame, cross and persecution, because we agree
not with Doctor Luther in all things, about the holy Supper. And therefore every
understanding man can easily judge, that there is an higher force then any
thing in this world, that must occasion it. For we are not of such a
commixture, that we should rather desire despite and shame, cross and
persecution in this life, rather then honor, peace, and rest amongst men.
Therefore it is our entreaty, that no man will ouershoot himself in condemning
us, because that we are gone aside from Doctor Luther in some measure in the
point of the holy Supper. But godly Christians may be pleased to consider the
motives moving us so to do, and in such consideration, not be led away in
respect of Doctor Luthers credit.

He was a notable man, and highly endued. But it is no new thing with God the
Lord, to reveal something to a simple unlettered man, which he would never
make known to the greatest Doctors of all. And God will so have it, that we
shall acknowledge such his counsels, and shall yield him obedience therein, as
it is written: Quench not the spirit: despise not prophesying: 1. These.
5.19.20. Also, If any thing be revealed to another that fitteth by; let the
first hold his peace, 1. Cor. 14.30.

These are the motives, beloved Reader, which move, force, and drive us to
depart from Doctor Luthers opinion in this, that the body of Christ should be
really in the bread of the Supper, hidden, etc. because we see, and we are
persuaded in our consciences, that such an opinion has not only no ground in

Luther has no warrant in the word of God, The first cause wherefore we
cannot receive Doctor Luthers opinion: whilst (plainly to say) it has no
warrant in Gods word.
which is from hence manifest and clear. For whatsoever shall have warrant
from thence, that must be either expressly written therein, or it must be such
as can well be drawn from thence by necessary consequence.

Now stands Doctor Luthers opinion, (that the body of Christ should be in the
bread) not expressly written in Gods word.

For Christ says not that his body is in the bread, but that the bread is his
body, as plainly appears by the text: And he took the bread and thanked,
and brake it, and said, This is my body. But not, therein is my body.

And also, such a construction follows not out of the word of God. Christ
indeed showed forth bread, and said, This is my body. But it follows not of
necessity, that he meant it so; as if he would have said, Therein is my body.

For this manner of reasoning, when one says, This is this or that, has nor
always such a meaning, as if one said, Therein is this or that. But this
manner of reasoning, when one faith, This is this or that, has often this
meaning; as if one would say, this betokens this or that, or which is to one
effect, (as Doctor Luther himself confesses, Tom. 3. fol. 343. B.) This is a
token and sign of this or that. For example: Gr. 26.
where Joseph says to Pharaoh, Seven kine are seven years: that can no
otherwise be understood, then as if he had said: Seven kine betoken seven
years. Even in like manner when Christ said to his Disciples: Mat. 13.38. Luke
8.11.
The ground is the world, the seed is the word of God, etc. That can be no
otherwise understood, then as if he had said: The ground betokens the world;
the seed betokens the word of God. The very like, where Paul speaks of the
Rock, 1. Cor. 10.1.4. Gal. 4.24.
which yielded forth water for the children of Israel in the wilderness. The
Rock was Christ. Also of Hagar and Sarah: These are the two Testaments. These
speeches can no otherwise be understood, then as if he had said: The Rock
betokened Christ. Also, Hagar and Sarah betoken the old and the new Testaments.

And such examples are not only found in those places, where dreams, and
parables, or visions, are spoke of (as some are ready to allege,) but such
examples are also found in the institution of the Sacraments. As in the
institution of Circumcision, God says, This is my covenant, Genesis 17.10 where
he meant; this shall be a token of my covenant; as he presently after cleared,
verse. 11. And as the Apostle Paul says thereof, Rom 4.11. where he says,
that Abraham received the sign of Circumcision, as the seal of the
righteousness of faith. The like says God in the instituting of the
Passover: Exodus 12.11.
It is the Lords Passover; where he meant; It shall be a token and
remembrance, or a sign of the Lords passing by your houses, when he slew the
first borne in Egypt, as he himself also presently declares, Exodus
12.13.14.27. Exodus 13.9.

Whilst now this construction, when as one says, This is this or that, can
also be understood, as if one said, This betokens this or that; and such a
construction is not against the word of God, even when the Sacraments are spoke
of: it follows, that one cannot so conclude, as Doctor Luther concludes.
Christ spoke of the bread: This is my body: that therefore he meant; Therein is
my body. That follows not, as is before said. For he could also have well
spoken, That betokens my body, or which is all one, That is a token or sign
of my body. Yea it is easilier to to be believed, that he meant, This
betokens my body, or this is a sign of my body; then, Therein is my body.

For this manner of speaking, when one says, This is this or that, in stead of
therein is this or that, is never any where usual, but when vessels are spoken
of, wherein something is comprehended: then says one, This is that or that,
when he means, Therein is this or that. For example, a man points to a fat,
and says, this is Rheinish wine; when he means, therein is Rheinish wine. Now
the Sacraments are no vessels, wherein the goodness of God are shut in, as
wine or bear is in the corner of a fat. But the Sacraments are tokens or
seals, whereby God betokens, confirms, and seals his bounty, and the
part we have therein, unto us, as is well known. Whilst then the Sacraments
are not vessels, from whence shall a man conjecture that Christ would speak
thereof, as men are used to do of vessels.

Is it not more to be credited, whilst the Sacraments are tokens, that Christ
also meant so, as men use to speak of signs? Now it is the manner both by God
and man, when one speaks of signs, that one gives the token the name of the
betokened thing it self, and says; This is that or that, when he would say;
This is a token of this or that.

For example: In godly matters, of the Circumcision says God, This is my
covenant, Genesis 17.10.11.
whereas he meant; This shall be a token of my covenant: as is before
rehearsed. And in the like manner in worldly matters; when a man strikes on a
painted hand with a bill in a Princes camp or Court, men say this is the
freedom; whereas it is meant, this is a token of the freedom, or it is a
sign that freedom is in

Behold Reader, this is the custom both by God and man, and so uses God and
man to speak: that they say namely, This is that or that, whereas they would
say, This betokens this or that; or, this is a token and sign of this or
that. Wherefore should then the Son of God only, in the institution of the
tokens of his grace speak any otherwise? for that the holy Supper is a
Sacrament; that is, a holy token, or a holy sign, or remembrance of the death
of Christ, that is uncontrollable, it so being that Christ so calls it
himself, where he says; Do it in remembrance of me.

Whereas now Christ instituted the Supper to that end, that it should be a
remembrance, or a calling to mind, or token and sign, how that Christ gave
his body and blood to death for us: wherefore should we not so understand the
words which Christ speaks of bread, This is my body, as it is of common use
both by God and men, to understand the like words, which speak of tokens and
remembrances and callings to mind: as if he had said; This bread which I
break before your eyes, and command you to eat, shall be a remembrance or
calling to mind, how that I have, or shall break my body upon the Cross,
that is, let my self be slain, martyred, and killed, that I might be unto you
a true bread of everlasting life, that is, a right powerful deliverance from
the everlasting hunger and misery, which else you must have endured in hell.
We demand of every man upon his conscience, what should hinder that this
constructio^ of Christ words should not take place?

We do not yet say that it must needs be so; but only this is that we say
now, that no man shall show any weighty cause wherefore it may not well be so.

It is first of all alleged, that that word is, Tom. 3 fol. 471. B.
will not bear it, that it should be taken figuratively; but that word is,
must always be understood really. But the clean contrary is already showed by
many examples, and sufficiently manifested.

Then they allege the words of Christ; This is my body, being words of a
testament, and therefore they must be understood according to the letter, as it
stands. But where stands it written, that in the Testaments all words must be
understood literally as they stand? And where is there any where a Christian
man under the Sun, who ever understood these words, The cup is the new
Testament, literally as they stand? namely, that the cup is the new Testament,
that is, the forgiveness of sins: the holy Ghost: and the everlasting life
it self. For those are the treasures which God has promised and published in
the new Testament, or new Covenant, that is in the Gospel. If now any man
should believe that a cup, which sometimes a Goldsmiths made, should be the
new Testament it self, that is the forgiveness of sins, and the holy Ghost,
that would we gladly understand. Yea or if there were any man in the world,
that did believe that the bread it self were the body of Christ, as the words
of Christ stand, Tom. 3. fol. 485. and many other places.
that would we gladly understand. Doctor Luther says, No; but bread is bread,
and remains bread even in the midst of eating it: But in the bread is the
body of Christ. Then remains he not by the words, as they sound. For the words
of Christ sound undeniably thus; that that which he took in his hand and
broke, namely, the bread, was his body; but not, that in bread was his body, as
Doctor Luther says. Also not that under the forms of bread and wine, was his
body; as the Papists say. And so is there no man in the world, who understands
the words as they sound: but they all fly from the words, and seek the
construction, one this, and the other that. Yea Doctor Luther confesses
sometimes most plainly, that in the words of Christ, This is my body, is a
Synecdoche Tom 3 fol. 80. and 484.
: and that Synecdoche is a figure Tom. 3. 80.
, or a trope Tom. 3 456.
: The figure Synecdoche, makes all very clear Tom. 3 80.
, etc. What is then in the minds of men, that they keep the common people up,
with this false position? That in the words of Christ's Testament, there is no
trope or figure to be admitted, but we most remain simply by the sound of
the bare letter.

Brentius in John. 6.
Some say, that though it be without No, that in the words of Christ, This is my
body, a Trope must be admitted: yet must it not be such a trope, which give
the words a figurative construction. For in the Sacraments of the new Testament
there are no significations. Tom. 3. fol. 503.
But this rule is also false. And Doctor Luther himself witnesses in many
places, that even as well in the Sacraments of the new Testament, as in the
Sacraments of the old Testament there are significations. For even so speaks
he of the holy Baptism in the little Catechism: Question. What signifies the
Baptising with water? Answer: Many more the like places there are, Tom Ion.
fol 183. 184. 115. 186. 187. Jn the Sermon of Baptism.
It signifies, that the old Adam with all sins and bad lusts should be
drowned in us, and we should arise to be new creatures, etc. Which is as much
as if he had said with one word: It betokens the new birth, or regeneration.
For regeneration is nothing else, but a deading of the old man, and quickening
of the new. Even so says Doctor Luther: Tom. 1 Jen. fol. 204. 205 26.
This is the true signification of the Sacrament. Also, it is not enough that a
man know what the Sacrament is, and what it signifies. Also, yet was Christ's
body given therefore, that the signification of the Sacrament might be taken to
heart. And therefore also is this rule false and nothing, where men say; That in
the Sacraments of the new Testament there are no significations: Therefore
cannot the words of Christ have that construction, This is my body; as if he
had said, this signifies my body. There are significations in all Sacraments,
as well in the new, as in the old Testament. Only here is the difference,
that the Sacraments of the old Testament had relation to the Messiah to come:
but the Sacraments of the new Testament have their relation to Christ already
come. As Doctor Luther himself very notably and well shows in the Church
Postill, in the exposition of the words of Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 10.3.4. Our
fathers have all eaten one food (namely with us) and have all drunk one
spiritual drink, etc. where he says; It is every where one faith and spirit,
Postill Wittenberg, anno 1540 in the winter part. fol. 275.
though several tokens and words be there. The tokens and words are from time
to time delivered otherwise. But there remains yet all one faith in the only
one God, who by several tokens and words delivered at times, do communicate
one faith and spirit, and works in all the Saints of God by the same one
manner of pardon of sins, delivery from death, and purchase of salvation;
whether it be in the beginning, middle, or end of the world. That is Paul's
meaning here, that he fathers have eaten the same food, and drunk the same
drink with us: yet adds he that word, spiritually, unto it. For outwardly
and bodily had they other tokens and words then we, but even the very same
spirit and faith of Christ which we have. But to eat and drink spiritually,
is nothing else then to believe the word and tokens of God, as Christ also
says, Ioh. 6. He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me,
and I in him. Also, my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed:
that is, he that believes in me he shall live. Also, they drunk of the
spiritual rock which followed, which was Christ: that is, they believed in
the same Christ, in whom we believe, although he was not then come in the
flesh, but should come afterward. And the token of such their faith, was the
material rock, where they drunk of the material water; even as we by the
material bread and wine upon the alter, eat the true Christ spiritually, that
is, in eating and drinking outwardly, do we nourish faith inwardly. Whilst
now these things are thus, and whilst in all Sacraments there are
significations and signs: as also the Apology of the Auspurges Confession
says, with the ancient Doctor Augustine, of all Sacraments; The Sacrament is a
visible word: for the outward token is a picture, whereby the same is signified
which is preached by the word, etc. Seeing therefore (say we) that there are
significations in all Sacraments, therefore it follows, that also this manner
of speech has place in all Sacraments, where one says, This is this or that,
when it is meant, this betokens this or that.

Neither can any weighty cause be shown wherefore the words of Christ, This is
my body, should not even so be understood, as if he had said, this betokens
my body, or, which is all one, this is a token or remembrance, or calling to
mind of my body.

Out of which we do further conclude, whilst the words of Christ, This is my
body, must not be so understood; as if he had said, Therein is my body; but
may well be understood so, as if he would have said, this betokens my body:
that accordingly Doctor Luthers opinion, where he says, that the body of
Christ is in the bread, out of Christ's words, where he said, This is my body,
has no necessary conclusion.

And this is the first cause why we cannot lean to Doctor Luthers opinion,
about the real presence of the body of Christ, in the bread: namely, whilst
such a construction has no ground in the word of God: it being so, that in
neither stands expressly in the words of Christ, neither can be drawn from
thence by any necessary consequence.

The second cause, why we cannot yield to Doctor Luthers above named opinion,
is this; The second cause why we cannot lean to Doct. Luthers opinion: namely,
whilst it is flat against Gods word.
for that we see and are assured in our hearts, that such an opinion has not
only no ground in the word of God, but also that it runs flatly against the
same.

For first of all, so witnesses Gods word clearly, that Christ ascended into
heaven, forty days after his resurrection, and at present is no more upon the
earth. I am no more in the world, says Christ, Ioh. 17.11. And the Apostle to
the Hebrews shows it very largely, that he must by the offering of his body,
enter into the heavenly Sanctuary: And concludes therout, that therefore if he
were upon earth, then were he not Priest, in the 8.9. and 10. Chapters. See
Reader, this is the clear and infallible word of God, that Christ is not any
more bodily upon earth: therefore cannot the contrary that he is now upon
earth, be true.

Secondly, the word of God witnesses clearly that Christ has once himself
renounced, and said, that the bodily eating of his body is not profitable to
salvation, the flesh profits not, namely, to be eaten with the mouth, (as the
Capernaites meant, that they must eat his flesh,) John 6.63. What now Christ
has once cast away as unprofitable to salvation: that is impossible that he
should again have ever ordained it, as profitable to salvation. For he recals
not his word: neither will he rebuke himself of lying, as Doctor Luther truly
writes, Tom. 3. fol. 530. B.

Thirdly, the word of God witnesses plainly, That Christ once dying for us,
henceforth dies no more, Romans 6.9.10. Therefore shall not his blood hereafter
be severed from his body any more really, Tom. 3. fol. 529.
as Doctor Luthers opinion shows. For he says, his body is in the bread
without blood, and his blood in the wine without the body. This is as much as
if he said, that his body is dead in the Supper. For a body without blood is
dead. Now his body cannot die any more: therefore neither can the opinion of
Doctor Luther, of the real, and separated presence of the body of Christ in
the bread, and his blood in the wine, be right.

Doctor Luther troubles himself very much, C'earan^e of the first difference
betwixt D Luther and the holy Scripture.
how he might make these contrarieties agree with the holy Scriptures,
especially the first. For he knows and confesses, that it stands thereon
principally; but we have not heard it as yet, wherein he could give us
satisfaction in our consciences.

He says first of all; God is Almighty, Tom 3. fol. 454. 455.
therefore he can so make it, that the body of Christ can be at one time in
heaven, and also in the bread. Now it is very true, God is Almighty: but he is
also true. Note. We deny not the almighty power of Christ.
Therefore whilst he did say, that Christ is not now present any more bodily
upon earth, it is impossible that it should be otherwise, for it is impossible
that God should lie, Heb. 6.18.

He says further; a man must put reason aside in matters of faith. Answer.
When it is certain, that any thing is Gods word, then shall we indeed set
aside reason, and believe Gods word simply; in consideration that his power is
without end, and our understanding not capable. But when it is disputable,
whether any thing be the word of God, or the doctrine of men: then has not God
commanded us that we should believe every thing alike, like unto unreasonable
creatures, or ignorant children, whatsoever is propounded: but he has
commanded the flat contrary, and said, Be ye not like an horse, or like a
mule, which understands not Psalm. 32 9.
, or as the children 1. Cor. 14 20.
, wavering and carried about with every wind of doctrine Ephesians. 4.14.
: but try all things, and keep that which is good 1. These. 5 21.
And has also expressly set this rule of proving before us, that we might see,
if any thing be agreeable to the proportion of faith Romans 12.6.
. For his word cannot be together, yea, and nay 2 Cor. 1.18.
. And therefore ought no man to take dislike in us, that we will not
acknowledge these things together, which run one against the other as flatly as
yea and nay, as if they were both the word of God. God has not set such things
before us above our comprehension, which are flatly against another; 1529.
namely, even as yea and nay; said Zwinglius truly, in the conference at
Marpurg. For even so also says the spirit of God himself, that the word of
God is not together yea and nay, in the former recited place, 2. Cor. 1.18.

Tom. 3 Ien. fol. 40^.
Doctor Luther says further, that these things do not run one against the
other, as yea, and nay. For they are understood in several manner: as namely in
this manner: When it is said, that Christ is at present Not mo^e on earth
bodily; then is it understood of the sightly, moveable, and comprehensible
manner. But when it is said that Christ is yea, at present on earth bodily,
then is it understood of the unsightly, immovable, and incomprehensible manner.

Answer, but where stands it written, that the body of Christ, has belonging
to it a form unvisible, immovable, and incomprehensible, besides the visible,
Tom 3. fol. 255. and 455. etc.
moveable and comprehensible? Doctor Luther says, God is Almighty: therefore
the body of Christ may have more then two several manners of being.

Answer. God is indeed Almighty; Note. We deny not the Almightinesse of
Christ.
but he does not therefore every thing that we take conceit of, but he does
what he himself will, as it is written: Our God is in heaven, he does
whatsoever he will, Psalm. 115.3.

And therefore our reasonable request is, to know where it stands written, that
God will, that the only one body of Christ should together take several and
contrary forms of being upon it?

Doctor Luther says, the Sophisters, (that is, Tom. 3. fol. 457.
the Popish Schoolmen) say, there are three manner of ways, to be in a place.

Answer. First, our faith is not to be grounded upon the Schoolmen.
Secondly, neither do the schoolmen say, that any where one only thing can
have three several forms together of being in a place. But this say the
Schoolmen: Even as there are three several things; bodies, created spirits,
and God: even so there are three several manners of being in a place. For a
body is in one place Circumscriptiue, that is, so that it is compassed with a
certain space, and is neither greater nor lesser then the place wherein it is;
therefore also it is sightly and comprehensible. A created spirit is in a place
definitive, that is, that it is most certainly there, but yet not comprehended
in a certain place, and needs not a space, but pierces through wood and
stone, as a sound passes through a wall. God is in all places, Repletiue, that
is, so that he fills heaven and earth with his presence. This say the
Schoolmen; namely, that these three several things: bodies, spirits, and God,
have three several manners of being somewhere. But that any where, one only
thing should have together all three aforenamed forms of being somewhere, that
have the Schoolmen never spoken: neither yet did ever any man else speak it.
But Doctor Luther is the first that said it.

Therefore we have reason to ask wherefore he says it? and what ground he
has for it in the word of God?

Tom. 3 Jen. fol. 457. B.
He says, that we cannot deny it, that Christ went through doors being
locked* and arose through the grave stone it being sealed. Which he must needs
perform by the second manner of being in a place, and so must he indeed be
without space and place: it so being that he passed through the shut door,
and the sealed grave stone, even as a spirit passes through wood and stone, or
as a sound forces through a wall; or as the Sunshine glanceth through a
glass window, etc.

Answer. It stands not written in Gods word, that Christ came to his Disciples
through locked doors: but only this stands in Gods word, that he came unto
them, when the doors were locked, Ioh. 20.19.26. Out of which it follows
not, that he passed through the locked doors fast shut, with his body, as a
spirit passes through wood and stone; or as a sound through a wall, etc. For
Peter came also out of prison, when the doors were locked, and yet
nevertheless he passed not through the shut doors: but the doors must give
way unto him, as stands expressly written, Act. 12.10. When they were past the
first and second watch, they came unto the iron gate that leads unto the
city, which opened unto them of it own accord, etc. If now the doors must
open to Peter, that he could go out of prison without change and alteration of
his true body; wherefore should not much more all doors and stones give place
to the Son of God himself, that so he might pass where he would, without
change and alteration of his true body? should not the thing that is formed,
give place to the former? says Hierome. Hier ad Pammach.


And even in like manner is it with the sealed grave stone; though it cannot
be showed that Christ did arise, till such time as the Angel had rolled the
same away; even as Matthew expressly writes, that he rolled it away, Chap. 28.2.

It is believed also, says Doct. Luther, Tom 3. fol. 460.
that Christ was also so borne of his mother.

Answer. It is not every where believed, and there is no necessity to believe
it; for it is not written any where in the word of God. This is written in the
word of God, that Christ was conceived supernaturally without the help of man,
only by the power of the holy Ghost. But that he should be borne
supernaturally, and come out of the body of his mother being closed, that
stands not at all in the word of God: but much more the clear contrary is
written therein. For the Law is expressly referred to Christ, which says: Every
man child that first opens the womb, shall be called holy to the Lord, Luke
2.23. and what needs much disputing? Christ himself clears it, Luke 24.39.
where he says: Behold my hands and my feet, it is I my self, handle me and
see: for a spirit has no flesh and bones, as ye see me have. By which words
he most clearly shows, that the second manner of being somewhere, namely, to
be unseen, and vnpalpable, is not common to bodies, but belongs to the
spirits. Therefore this opinion, that the body of Christ should be unvisible
and vnpalpable as the spirits are, has not only no ground in Gods word, but
is also flat against the same.

And admit that it could be showed out of the word of God, that the body of
Christ were at present unsightly, and vnfeeleable; yet were not the
Contradiction which is betwixt the holy Scripture and Doctor Luthers opinion,
where the holy Scripture says, he is not at present more upon earth; but
Doctor Luther says, he is yet now upon the earth) nothing at all ended
thereby. For the spirits also or Angels, though they be unvisible, and not to
be handled, as they be, yet nevertheless are they but in one place at one
time. Therefore if it be true, as it is, that Christ is at present in heaven:
then can he be no more upon the earth after the second manner, then after the
first together at one time. And accordingly the bodily presence of Christ
together in many thousand places, (that is, in all places where the holy Supper
is celebrated) by the second manner of being in a place, (namely, as the
created spirits are in one place,) can never be defended and maintained. But
will a man have the bodily presence of Christ alike in many thousand places,
then must he also of necessity ascribe to the body of Christ the third manner:
which manner is to be alike, wholly, and altogether in all places.

Now Doctor Luther confesses, that this manner is proper to God only. Tem. 3.
fol. 457. B. where he says: This manner is only ascribed to God, as he says
by the Prophet Jeremy: Am I a God at hand, Ier. 23.23.24.
and not far off? do not I fill heaven and earth, etc. See Reader, there
Doctor Luther confesses, and proves it by the word of God; that the third
manner of being, (namely, to be wholly in all places) entirely belongs to God
himself. And yet nevertheless where he sees, Mark Reader the fountain of
vbiquitie.
that the bodily presence of Christ in the bread of the holy Supper, cannot
otherwise be maintained by him, he lets the heat of contention, and desire of
the victory so far bear sway, that he adds against the presently forenamed
knowledge and confession of his own, and says: The body of Christ has also
the third manner upon it of being somewhere, Tom. 3. fol. 459. 460. etc. And
clearer yet: The body of Christ is every where, Tom. 3. Ien. fol. 457. And was
at that time every where, when he walked upon the earth. Tom. 3. fol. 354.
493. Also. Yea he is in all places from his mothers womb. Tom. 3. fol 464.
Also, It is all through and through full Christ, even according to the manhood,
Tom. 3. Ien. fol. 458. Also, Heaven and earth is his sack: as the corn
fills the sack, even so fills he every thing. Tom. 2. Wit. fol. 115. B In the
Sermon against the Swarm spirits.
. Also, He is over all, in all creatures, so that I can find him in stone, in
fire, in water, or even in the snare, as he is certainly there. Note. This
Sermon is left out in the Jenish Tomis.
Tom. 2. Wit. fol. 96. B. Yet suffers he not himself to be caught and laid
hold on, he can well deliver himself, etc. Tom. 3 Ien. fol. 355.

This is in truth a lamentable example, out of which one may see what
contention can do, when one yields too much unto it. It is also a sufficient,
and more then sufficient testimony, that the doctrine of the bodily presence of
Christ in the Supper cannot be right. For what is right, that can also be
maintained with upright grounds, as Sirack says; The Law shall be fulfilled
without lies, and wisdom is sufficient to a faithful mouth, Chap. 34.8. Now
can the doctrine of the bodily presence of Christ in the Supper, never be
maintained with found grounds. But if a man will maintain it, then must he
take the falsest grounds to help him, which may be thought of, to maintain
it, namely, the omnipresence of the body of Christ, as the reader sees:
therefore it is impossible, that such a doctrine can be true.

But some man might say, you have not as yet proved, that the Omnipresence of
Christ is a false ground.

Answer. What need is thereof much proof, Doctor Luther has at last himself
again acknowledged and confessed: Page 152.
as the Brunswicks Divines at the conference at Quedelburg, openly testified
and with sufficient documents explaned and manifested. Also, most of the
Lutheran Divines do at present acknowledge it: for all that, they formerly
vnderwrit the Concordien book, which was taken in hand to ratify this
opinion. And all Christian men must acknowledge it; or must confess that the
whole story of the Gospel is false: yea that the whole Christian faith is
nothing, but a very mere sight in a looking glass. For a body which is every
where, can neither be conceived nor carried in a body, nor borne into the world
of such a mother who is not every where. Also, a body that is every where, can
neither be captiued nor bound, nor carried from one place to another, nor be
scourged, nor crucified, nor put to death, nor be taken from the Cross, nor
be buried of those who are not every where, etc.

That must all Christian men confess. And all do uniformly confess it also;
three or four Cauellers excepted, with whom we hereof dispute in vain. For
they know well aforehand, that they fail therein: and yet for all that, they
will not give the glory to God. Yet and if they have delight in disputing, they
should give us an answer herein wherefore they cease not so to smooth the
matter to their good Lords, that either the ma^hood must be every where, or the
two natures in Christ must be separated from each other. Whereas they
nevertheless confess in open writing, In concordium book, fol. 246 B. Also
in the Apology of the Concordium book in the first Chapter against the
Bremers fol. 3. A. and fol. 7. B.
that Christ ( when he was in his mothers body, also, when he hung upon the
Cross, yea for the most time that he walked upon the earth) was not every
where in body actually, and yet for all that, the two natures that are in him
are not separated from each other. When they can untie that knot unto us, then
will we yield unto them. But if they cannot, then should they yield unto us:
Also in the confutation of the printed confession of faith at Herborne, page
138. Protocol. Maulbrun. Act. 5.
or the whole world shall take knowledge, that they do not contend for the
glory of God, but only for their own glory and profit.

And thus much be spoken of the first contrariety betwixt Doctor Luthers
opinion, and the holy Scripture. Which is, that the holy Scripture says, the
body of Christ at present is not any more upon the earth: but Doctor Luther
says, that he is now upon the earth.

Clearance of the second contrariety betwixt Doctor Luthers opinion, and the
holy Scripture.
The second contrariety is, that the holy Scripture says, that the bodily
eating of the flesh of Christ, is not profitable, Ioh. 6. But Doctor Luther
says, that it is profitable. Tom. 1. Ien. fol. 82. 358. 464. 455. etc.

This contrariety the better to salve up, says Doctor Luther. Where Christ
says, The flesh profits not, Ioh. 6. That he there spoke not of his flesh,
as if that were not profitable to be eaten with the bodily mouth: but he spoke
of our bad flesh, that the same is not profitable.

Answer. The whole disputation with Christ held with the Capernaites. Ioh. 6.
Chapt. is of his flesh, how a man should eat the same, and not of our flesh,
whether it be bad or good. Christ says, one must eat his flesh, else could
he not be saved. Whereat the Capernaites were offended, and understood the
speech of Christ so, as if his flesh should be eaten bodily. To remove this
stumbling block, Christ gave them to understand, that it was not his meaning
that his flesh should be eaten bodily: for he must ascend into heaven. Also,
that the flesh profited not. These were the grounds whereby Christ overthrew
the bodily eating of his flesh. How can Doctor Luther then say, that Christ did
not speak of his flesh?

He says: his ground for it, is this: Tom. 3 fol. 364. A.
that where the two words, flesh and spirit, in the Scripture are opposed one
to another, there cannot flesh be called the body of Christ, but is always
called that old flesh, which is borne of flesh, John 3.

Answer. This ground is manifestly false. For there are many places in the
Scripture, where flesh and spirit are opposed to the other, and yet therein the
word flesh is understood of the body of Christ, and also cannot be any
otherwise understood. As where it is said: God is manifest in the flesh,
justified in the spirit. 1. Tim. 3.16. Also, Christ was made of the seed of
David, according to the flesh, and declared mightily to be the Son of God,
touching the spirit. Romans 1.3.4. Also, Christ was put to death concerning the
flesh, but was quickend in the spirit. 1. Pet. 3.18. And also Doct. Luther
himself, never otherwise expounded this saying of Christ, where he says: The
flesh profits not, then we expound the same, when he contends not about the
Sacrament: namely, the eating of the flesh of Christ with the bodily mouth, not
to be profitable to salvation: as is to be seen in several writings of his.

First, in the Sermon on Corpus Christi day, printed in quarto, Anno, 1523. 36.
leaf, where he says: For even so says he, (namely Christ) himself
afterward the flesh profits not: And again, my flesh gives life, how shall
we separate that? the spirit separates it. Christ will have it, that the bodily
eating of his flesh is not profitable, but to believe that the flesh is the Son
of God, come down from heaven for my sake, and shead his blood for me, etc.

After, in the repetition of this Sermon in the Church Postill, printed at
Wittenberge, Anno, 1527. in the Summer part, fol. 111. B. where he says: But
that this is the true understanding of the Gospel, (namely, that it is to be
understood of the spiritual eating and drinking,) the words which the Lord
spoke at the end of the Chapter do show: It is the spirit that quickens, the
flesh profits nothing. The words that I speak unto you are spirit and truth.
With which words Christ will have us know, that the bodily eating of his flesh
is not profitable: but to believe that this flesh is Gods Son, come from heaven
for my sake, and shead his blood for me, that is profitable and is life
everlasting.

Also, again in the Church Postill, Anno, 1540. printed at Wittenberge in the
winter part, fol. 275. B. where he says: When the word of God, and tokens are
not there, or are not acknowledged, then helps it not though God were there
himself. Even as Christ says of himself, Ioh. 6. The flesh profits not, so
long as they respect not the words which he speaks of his flesh, which word
makes his body to be food, where he says: he is the living bread from
heaven, etc.

And therefore also in this point the contrariety betwixt the holy Scripture
and Doctor Luthers opinion, is without No: namely, that the holy Scripture
says, the flesh of Christ bodily or mouthly eaten is Not profitable. Doctor
Luther yet says, the flesh of Christ bodily or mouthly eaten, is profitable.
His followers take this refuge to help them: that in Ioh. 6. Christ spoke only
against the natural gross Capernaitish eating of his flesh, that it is not
profitable.

But even that is also a vain refuge. For first, Christ spoke generally
against all bodily eating of his flesh, and opposes that to his ascension, and
says: What then if ye should see the Son of man ascend up where he was before?
verse 62. As if he would say, how will ye then reach my flesh with your
mouths? Secondly, so is also the difference betwixt the bodily and natural
eating in it self, false and of no worth. For the mouth cannot eat
supernaturally, but all eating with the mouth is a natural eating.

And so the second Contrariety betwixt the holy Scripture and Doctor Luthers
opinion for all this, without No.

The third Contrariety betwixt Doctor Luthers opinion, and betwixt the holy
Scripture, Clearance of the third contrariety betwixt Doctor Luthers opinion
and the holy Scripture.
(as we have above touched) is this, that the holy Scripture says, Christ
once dying for us, can henceforth die no more. Which is even as much as if it
said: his body can be no more without blood, and his blood can be no more
really severed from the body, or be shead out of the body. But Doctor Luthers
opinion brings this with it, that now every day, namely, as often as the holy
Communion is administered, that the body of Christ is without blood, and that
the blood of Christ is really severed from his body. For the bread is indeed
severed from the wine really. When now the body is in the bread, and not in the
wine; and contrariwise the blood is in the wine, and not in the bread: then is
it indeed manifest that they must be separated really from each other. And
Doctor Luther yields, that that is his meaning, where he says: I am to know,
that I receive the body of Christ in the Sacrament without blood. Tom. 3. fol.
529.

Upon this Contrariety do we not find any thing of respect, which Doctor
Luther has answered in his strife writings. Neither do we see how it is
possible to answer any thing groundedly; and therefore it remains as it is.

And this is now sufficiently spoken, of the second cause, why we cannot give
approbation to Doctor Luthers opinion, about the bodily presence of the body
and blood of Christ, in the bread and wine of the holy Supper; namely, whilst
such an opinion has not only no ground in Gods word, but also is manifoldly
against the same.

3 The third cause wherefore we yield not no Doctor Luthers opinion; namely,
whilst it has no testimony from the old Apostolical Churches, but was first
batch^d in the blindest times of Popery.
The third cause is, that such a construction has no testimony from the
Apostolical Churches: but was first founded many hundred years after the
birth of Christ, in the very darkest days of Popery, as the Reader may easily
come to understand out of the following witnesses of the old Doctors of the
Church.

Tertullian, who lived about the year of Christ, 200. says: The Lord took
bread, and divided it amongst his Disciples, and made the same his body, in
that he said, This is my body, that is, a representatio^ of my body.

Cyprian, who lived about the year after Christ, Sermon. de Chrism.
240. says: That the bread and the wine are the body and the blood of Christ,
as the betokening, and the betokened thing used to be termed with one name.

Gregory Nazianzen, Apologet.
who lived about the year of Christ's birth, 360. names the bread a sign
answerable to the body of Christ.

Chrysostom, who lived about the year after the birth of Christ, 370. says,
Psalm in 22.
Bread and wine are a figure of the body and blood of Christ. Also, Homil 17.
ad Heb.
the Supper is a token and sign of remembrance of the death of Christ.

Augustine, who lived about the year after the birth of Christ, 390. says,
The Lord has commanded a representation of his body in the Supper Psalm. 3.
. Also, The Lord has himself not spared to say, This is my body, when he gave
but a token of his body Contra Adim. C. 12.
. Also, The Sacrament is named, being one thing with the name of the same thing
which it signifies Epist. 23 ad Bonif.
. Also, The Scripture uses even so to speak, that it names the token as the
betokened thing In Joh. N. 63.
. Also, The heavenly bread, which is the flesh of Christ, is in his kind
called the body of Christ, it being indeed a Sacrament, (that is, a holy token)
of the body of Christ: which was hanged upon the Cross visibly palpably, and
dyingly. And the offering of the flesh, which is performed by the hands of the
Minister, is termed the suffering and dying of Christ upon the Cross, not
that it is the thing it self, but that it betokens it, as a mystery Sent.
Prosp.
.

Theodoret, Dial. 1.
who lived about the year after the birth of Christ, 440. says, Our Savior
himself has changed the names, and has given the name of the tokens to his
body, and of his body to the tokens, etc. And in sundry places, he names the
bread and wine in the Supper, a representation, and opponent sign of the body
and blood of Christ.

Beda, who lived about the year after the birth of Christ, Super Lucam.
730. says, Christ has instituted in stead of the flesh and blood of the
Lamb, the Sacrament of his flesh and blood, in the representation of bread and
wine.

De coe^^ Domini ad Carolum Magnum.
Bertram, who lived about the year after the birth of Christ, 800. when some
began to believe the bodily presence of Christ in the Supper: and being
demanded thereabouts by Charles the great, freely declared, That the bread is
figuratively, and not really the body of Christ.

From the witnesses it is very manifest, that the evil custom of the bodily
presence of Christ in the Supper, did not arise before such time as that Popery
got the mastery. Wherefore cannot we otherwise estimate such a custom but for
a Popish leaven.

About which no man has any just cause to wonder, that Doctor Luther, who
otherwise was a deadly enemy to the Popedom, did never encounter this
abomination of the Popedom. Even Elias the Prophet also did not encounter the
calves of Bethel, 2. King. 25.15.
which Jeroboam had set up: but they remained even unto the days of King
Josias: and yet nevertheless they were Baalitish abominations. God has such a
manner, that he accomplisheth not all by one man, that so no man might be made
an idol, but must ascribe the honor only to him. And also there were outward
causes which were a hinderance to Doctor Luther, that he could not attain to
the true ground of this matter.

For first, he was borne and brought up in the Popedom, and he was a Friar
full fifteen years long, in which many years, and from his childhood the
evil custom of the bodily presence of Christ in the bread, was so strongly
rooted in him, that he could not easily remove it out of his heart afterward.
Even as also many other Popish errors (as the Purgatory, Transubstantiation,
the Communion under one kind, and honoring of the Sacrament, calling upon the
Saints, etc.) in the beginning of his Reformation, for certain years together
cleave fast unto him.

Secondly, and whereas Doctor Carlstadt would show unto him that he failed in
this point; then did not Carlstadt only bring it in very vnbefittingly, in
that that he said, that Christ with the word this pointed not to bread, but to
his by-sitting body at table, which Doctor Luther could easily confute him in,
and so thereby he was more and more fortified in his opinion: but he
propounded it also in such a rough manner, that it was no marvel that Doct.
Luther would not receive information from him.

Thirdly, and for all that Zwinglius did afterward propound the matter better
and in behoof fuller manner, then Doctor Carlstadt had done, using such
weighty arguments, which might very well have opened the eyes of Doctor Luther:
yet nevertheless he was so inflamed by the contention with Doctor Carlstadt,
that for very anger thereof he could neither see nor hear more thereabouts.
As all his strife writings testify, wherein he approves or denies such
things, as no man can approve or deny, who is settled in his mind.

For example. Whereas Zwinglius shows him, that the word Is, often in the
Scripture betokens so much as Calls, as, whereas Joseph says to Pharaoh,
Seven kine are seven years, etc. Whereas it cannot be denied; yet for all
that, ere he will yield to Zwinglius, he denies it, and says: The seven kine
did not betoken seven years, Genesis 41.
but were really seven years, Tom. 3. fol. 443.

Also, where Oecolampadius alleged unto him, that there were figurative
speeches very usual in the institution of the Sacraments, as in the institution
of the Easter Lamb, did God say: This is the Lords Passover, etc. Where his
meaning was, this is a token and remembrance of the Passover. Howsoever that
also was uncontrollable, yet for all that ere he would yield himself
vanquished, he rather denies it, and says: It is not a bare figurative speech
in the institution of tha Easter Lamb, and in all other figures of the old
Testament. Tom. 3. fol. 477. B. Also, whereas Oecolampadius alleged unto him,
that this speech, when one says, This is this or that, is often in effect as
if one says, This is a token of this or that: and amongst others alleged the
text, Genes. 17.10.11. where God says of Circumcision, verse. 10. This shall
be my Covenant: and presently thereafter explaines his speech thus, The same
shall be a token of the Covenant, verse. 11. Yet ere he would approve
Oecolampadius therein, he denies it, that this text was in the Bible. For these
are his own words hereof: My Genesis says not (says he) that Circumcision
is a covenant and token. Tom. 3. fol. 478. B.

And whilst he saw that he could not vanquish Zwinglius with sufficient
grounds, then took he upon him to ouerbeare him with heavy imputations, and
says, he denied the Communicationem idiomatum, that is, Tom. 3 fol. 250. B.
the Communion of the properties of both natures in the one only and
inseperable person of Christ, as did Nestorius; and taught, that not the Son
of God, Tom 3. fol. 462. B.
but only a mere man died for us, etc. Which thing he knew very well, that
Zwinglius never believed in all his life, but much more, that he had testified
and written many times the clean contrary. This Process now gives sufficient
information, that Doctor Luther was wholly overcome with anger in the handling
hereof, and was not his own master therein. And therefore let no man marvel
that he could never come unto the true understanding of the truth thereof.

And so much be also spoken of the third cause, wherefore we cannot yield to
Doctor Luthers opinion, about the bodily presence of Christ in the holy Supper;
namely, whilst we see that such an opinion has no testimony from the ancient
Apostolical Churches, but was hatched first of all in the very darkest days
of Popery.

4 The fourth cause wherefore we cannot yield to Doctor Luthers opinion;
namely, whilst such an opinion is the chiefest ground and foundation of Popery.
The fourth cause is, because we see that such an opinion also at this present
day, is the principal pillar and foundation of the Popedom. For the whole
Popedom together with all his inventions, poyseth it self principally upon
the Mass. But the Mass consists only and alone upon the bodily presence of
Christ in the bread of the holy Supper. For if Christ were not there bodily,
then acknowledge the Papists themselves, that the Sacrament should neither be
bowed unto, neither should or could a man offer up God, for the sins of the
living and the dead. But when he is bodily there, say they, then cannot a man
renounce the honoring without sinning. And Doctor Luther himself writes
thus, Tom. 3. fol. 206. B. where he says: Whosoever believes not that the
body and blood of Christ is there, he does right, that he neither worshipeth
spiritually nor fleshly. But who so believes it, he cannot possibly deny him
his worship without sin. Further, and if Christ be there bodily, say the
Papists, wherefore shall not he be offered up to God the father, or testify
and dare to pray, that he will be gracious to his folk for his sake, This say
the Papists. And it is impossible that any man can answer them with sufficient
grounds, so long as a man yields unto them, that Christ is there bodily.

Where we now see, that the greatest idolatry of al, that ever was committed,
and the whole strength and power of the Popedom, depends upon this one evil
custom, that Christ is bodily in the Sacrament, should we not then
necessarily loath such an evil custom?

The fifth cause, 5 The fifth cause wherefore we cannot yield to Doct. Luthers
opinion; namely, whilst such an opinion leads men from the right way to
salvation, to the Opus operatum, etc.
wherefore we cannot but loath such an evil custom, is this: for that we se
that the same also does procure no good in the Protestant Churches, but it
leads the people daily more and more, from the right way to salvation, unto
the opus operatu^, that is, unto these persuasions, that they can be saved by
the outward work of the Sacrament, though inwardly, there be no living faith,
and true conversion. Yea the poor people in the Lutherisch Churches, know for
the most no more, what should be the true conversion of God the Lord: but think
that it is sufficient, if he does but once in the month go to Confession, and
receives the Sacrament with an indifferent meditation; though he live
afterward as it pleases him. If one tell them; that they who have received
Christ truly, Ioh 6.5.7. Ephesians 2.^0. Gal. 2.20.
and have eat and drunk him, are wholly changed by him and and made new men,
and live now no more, but Christ lives in them: then tells a man them of mere
Bohemian villages. For not one of a thousand understands what it is to be a new
creature, who is created in Christ Jesus. To say nothing that they should
examine themselves, whether they find any such change in themselves or no. Yea
those that will be the wittiest, know of all others the least thereof. Which
is hereby manifest, that they also mock us about, and for it, when we say unto
them, 2. Cor. 5.17. Gal. 5.6.
that nothing stands for good with Christ, but a new creature; and they
allege, that the Caluinish spirit is a very spirit of sorrow, which will not
afford a man any mirth. As if that were a Christian man's joy, that he need not
fear to sin. O blindness above al blindness. And from whence proceeds
such a pernicious blindness? verily, from nothing else then that the poor
people think, that howsoever they live, when they can but receive the
Sacrament upon their death beds, then do they therein receive Christ bodily.
Out of which they conclude, that they receive also the forgiveness of sins, and
everlasting life therewithal. And what other concllusion can they make? for
the Apostle Paul says himself: Seeing he gave us his Son, how should he not
with him give us all things also? Romans 8.32.33.
And so they depart with their pasport Necessaries for their voyage.
; verily, verily, like to like, and to be feared many of them to that place,
where they will exclaim and cry against their soules-sorrowers everlastingly,
that they have not better instructed them in the way to everlasting life.

Now the God-fearing Reader may consider, whether these five causes, which we
have hitherto mentioned, be not weighty enough to hold us Luthers opinion? The
first cause were sufficient. For whatsoever has not his foundation in the word
of God, that shall no man endure to be forced upon him, as an artickle of
faith, as Doctor Luther right and truly used to sing and say: And take thou
heed of man's devise,
Thereby consumes the Pearl of prise,
This learn I thee, for the last.


Where now this is added to it, that the aforenamed opinion is also flat
against the word of God, should we then resist the word of God, to procure

We trust in God, that men of understanding shall acknowledge, that in this
matter we hold the truth.

Only this will yet be a stumbling block to many, hindering them from entering
into Christian brothership with us, for that they are informed, that we not
only in the point of the Supper, but also in many other high and waighth
points: as namely, Of the Person of Christ: Also, Of the foreknowledge or
almighty providence of God over all creatures: and of original of sin: Also
Of the everlasting Election of God; and of holy Baptism: do believe and teach
otherwise, then Doctor Luther did believe and teach. Wherefore it is of
necessity, that we do also show our minds in these points: as we will
presently do hereafter.

But we must prepare the Reader aforehand, that he may know how the
calumniation arose, that it is said, that our Religion is from the devil, and
that Zwinglius so confessed himself, that his Religion was revealed unto him
in a dream, by a spirit, of whom he knows not, whether he were white or
black. Now then the estate of the business was thus.

When Zwinglius was come so far by diligent meditation in the holy
Scriptures, and especially by the 6. Chapter of John, as also through daily
study in the writings of the ancient fathers, that he now doubted not any more
of the true understanding of the holy Supper, according to the intent of
Christ: he declared first of all the fame in writings and Sermons to the
Churches of God, and after that he entreated the Counsel of Zurick, that he
might publicly utter the same unto the two hundred. Which being done, and
audience affoorded him, he propounded, that the worshipping of the Sacrament,
and the Mass ought to be abolished, and in stead thereof the holy Supper
should be established and commanded, agreeable to the institution of Christ: in
consideration, that now, blessed be God therefore, it was apparent, that the
custom of the corporal presence of Christ, (upon which the aforenamed
abominations were founded) was false. For it was most clear in the 6. Chapter
of John, that Christ had himself cast away the carnal eating of his body, as
unprofitable to salvation. And also the articles of the Christian faith, were
undoubtful, which say plainly, that Christ is bodily ascended into heaven,
where he shall remain, till he return to judge the quick and the dead.
Wherefore cannot those words, This is my body, in any manner be so understood,
as if Christ would have said, This is really my body, or, therein is really my
body: But the words of Christ, This is my body, must so be necessarily
understood: as if he had said, This betokens my body: as it was usual in the
Scripture, to say, This is this or that, in the stead of, this betokens this
or that. For example, Luke 8. Christ says: The seed is the word of God. Also
Mat. 13 he says: The field is the world; the weeds are the wicked; the sower
is the devil. In which sayings it is uncontrollable, that this word Is, is as
much as bet^keneth. And therefore the exposition of the word of Christ (that
the word Is, is as much as betokens) is not disagreeable to the use of the
holy Scripture. This was the drift of the speeches of Zwinglius: which speech
indeed was well acceped of the greatest number: but yet not of them all: but
part of them gainsaid him. But above all others, there was a Clerk amongst the
company ( After an albus fuerit, that is, whom he was, Tom. 2. fo 247.
will not Zwinglius nominate) he opposed himself against him very hotely, two
days together. And amongst others, he cauelled against those examples which
Zwinglius had alleged to show, that the word Is, is often taken in the
Scripture for as much as betokens; saying, that those examples agreed not
with the cause in controversy. For they spoke of parables. But in this was it
not spoken of parables, but of the Sacrament. And howsoever that Zwinglius gave
him presently such an answer, wherewith all men of understanding were well
satisfied, (as namely, that these speeches, The seed is the word of God, the
field is the world, were not parables, but expositions of the before going
Parables: and if they were indeed Parables, yet did they not contradict his
purpose. For he would only thereby make plain, that it was not unusual in
the Scripture, that the word Is, was taken for betokens. But that in like
manner also it must be so, that did not he conclude from this example, but
from the grounds aforenamed, that Christ had himself cast away the bodily
eating of his flesh, Ioh. 6. and that he were not at present any more bodily
on earth, but in the heavens; according to the article of Christian faith. For
all which, whilst some weak ones, were brought into a mamuring by this
allegation, touching parables, the Council held it for good, that the next day
they should come together again, and should well consider the matter as it
behooved. And Zwinglius was very well content therewith, and in the mean time
he thought further on the same. And whilst he perceived that it depended
principally upon this, that he should produce examples, wherein there were no
parables, and yet nevertheless the word Is, was taken for betokens, he was
very much troubled in himself, where he might find such an example. And when
he found none before night, and went to bed with such a troubled mind, in the
night that he had this dream which we now following, not with our own, but
with his own words, will make manifest: Tom. 11. Zwing. fol. 249 in subsidio
de Eucharistia.
which truly translated, are as follows.

It was amongst others not the least trouble, namely, that I should bring
examples, in which there were no parables. Then thought I here and there, and
searched every where; but could find no other example, besides those which I
had already published in my book: or if I found any, then were the same
parables. But when the 13. day of April approached, (I tell the truth, and it
is so certainly true that I tell, that my conscience enforces me also, that I
must declare it, though I had rather not utter it. But I must utter what the
Lord has imparted unto me, though I know very well what jests and mocks will
be made of me for it,) when as now, the 13. of April approached, I thought in
my sleep, as if I were again disputing with the contradicting Scribe, in
great heaviness, and that I was so put to silence, that I could not stir my
tongue, to deliver that truth, which I nevertheless well understood in my
self. Which perplexity troubled me very sore, as is very usual in dreams
(for I make not relation of any higher then a dream, for so much as concerns
my self: howbeit it was no small thing which I learned out of the same dream,
God be praised; whom only to honor, I make this manifest to the world,) with
this there comes unexpectedly, (who he was I say not; for I tell a dream) who
put into my mind, and said: thou sluggard, wherefore do thou not answer him
by that which is written in the second book of Moses in the 12. Chapter? for
it is the Lords Passover. So soon as that apparition came before me, I
awaked, and sprang out of the bed, and turned to the specified sentence first
in the Greek Bible: and after that I made relation thereof in the best order I
possibly could, to the whole congregation. Which Oration of mine, being gladly
and willingly heard by them, (as shall be by and by declared) all they that
were studious in the holy Scripture, and were before brought to doubt by the
mentioning of parables, were now by this fully freed of all doubtings. And they
celebrated upon the same three days, one after the other, (namely, on
holy-thursday, good friday, and Easter day,) the Supper of Christ in such
multitudes, the the like thereunto I never beheld in all the days of my life.

Behold Reader, these are the words of Zwinglius of his dream, which words are
so euilly construed in di^ers places, as if he had thereby acknowledged, that
the devil did reveal unto him his doctrine of the Lords Supper: where he yet
for all that, twice testifies the clean contrary, Note. Doct. Luther writes
indeed the devil disputed with himself, and proved unto him, that the hedge
Mass was false. Tom. 6. Jen. fol 81. But in Zwiglius cannot the like be found.
and says, that God revealed unto him, what he learnt in the dream, and his
conscience enforced him, that he must tell it, to the praise and honor of
him, Also he makes no mention in any speech, that a spirit appeared unto him.
But he says only, that one came before him, who put in his mind, which can
also well have been a man. For it befalls often, that in dreams by night, the
cogitation of this or that man comes before ones sight: as Ananias came in the
sight of Paul, Act. 9.12. more then that, Zwinglius does not say, that he
learned his opinion of the holy Supper, (namely, that the word, This is my
body, is in effect as much as, this betokens my body,) first of all in a
dream: (which also he could not say; it so being, that he had publicly
preached the same oftentimes, and had twice maintained it before the Council.)
But only this says, Zwinglius, that a befitting or example then formerly he
could find, was made known unto him in this dream, to make his opinion to
be believed the better. And so there are three falsehoods in this Calumny. The
first is, that Zwinglius learned his opinion of the Communion first in a
dream. The second is, that a spirit did reveal such a doctrine unto him. The
third is, that he confesses he knew not whether it were a good or wicked
spirit.

The color the defamers have for it, is this; for that Zwinglius says of the
same that he see in his dream, in Latin: Ater an albus fuerit nihil memini:
this construe they so upon him, as if he had said, whether it was a black or
white spirit, know not I. But first of all, Zwinglius makes no mention of any
such matter, that it should be a spirit, as is formerly mentioned. Secondly,
the words also, white and black afford it not. Yea indeed the words afford
the clean contrary. For not of spirits, but of men, whom one either knows
not, or will not know or nominate, is it usual to say in this manner in
Latin: Albus an ater fit, nescio: and it has no other manner of construction,
then when a man says, I know not who he is. As the truth may be seen to the
desirous Reader in the Adagijs Erasmi. Hieron. aduersus Heluidium, ego ipse,
qui contra ^escribo, cum in eadem vrbe tecum co^sistam, qu^ balbatis and
crub^scis, albus, vt aiunt, an ater fi^nesci^. Tom 2. fol. 247.
Chil. 1. Cent. 6. Adag. 99. And Zwinglius also uses even the very same form
of speech of the aforenamed Clerk, who had so stiffly repugned him: and says,
Whether he were black or white, is not necessary to be spoken in this place.
For every honest man sees plainly, that he would not otherwise say, then
that he would not nominate who the same Clerk was: which so to do, he might
have several motives to occasion him. Even in the like manner would he not
also specify, whom he was that appeared to him in his dream, that none should
tax him of desire of glory, if he should have spoken too exquisitely of this
revelation: but he esteemed it sufficient to give God the honor thereof,
praising him, and thanking him, before whole Christendom for that he gave him
so profitable an information. That and no otherwise was the meaning of
Zwinglius. And the Defamers know it assuredly. For it is not to be thought,
that they should know so much Latin, and not know and understand the nature of
this Proverb, Ater an albus fuerit: and yet for all that, as yet they make no
conscience at all to say the clean contrary. But let them look well unto it,
that they deal not too rudely with God the Lord. For assuredly he will not
suffer himself to be iested withal. Zwinglius did never boast that any new
thing was revealed unto him in a dream: but only this did he give God the
glory of, that he had informed him in a dream of a sentence in the Bible,
which else he could not call to mind. Which saying is written, Exodus 12.12.
where God says of the Easter Lamb, and of the whole feast, which should be
held thereupon, It is the Lords Passover: and presently after he expounds it
himself even in this manner: That it should be a token and remembrance of the
Passover. Exodus 12.13.14. And Exodus 13.9. This saying says Zwinglius, did God
inform him of in a dream. Whereas now his Calumniators do say, that it is a
devils doctrine which Zwinglius learnt in his dream; what do they otherwise,
then rail upon the word of God, as if it were a devils doctrine? God be
merciful to them and us all. But verily verily, it appears to be much like,
as if they did herein commit the sin, whereof Christ speaks, Matthew. 12.
which shall never be forgiven, neither in this world, nor in the world to
come. But the mercy of the Lord is superaboundant. And we will not burden any
man with our judgment: but what we say, that speak we only for this end, in
hope that happily some man may reform himself, by their information.

And so much also be spoken of this matter.

CHAP. VI. That we believe and teach no otherwise of the person of Christ, then
as Doctor Luther of happy memory, did believe and teach, except the vbiquity
of the body of Christ, which he also himself renounced at last.
NOw we return to the maine point. And as we promised a little past, so will
we perform it presently, and make manifest to the peace-louing Reader, that
we are not contradictory to Doctor Luther in any sort, in all the other
points, which at this day there is so much contention about. Even as Zwinglius
also did not disagree with Doctor Luther after the conference at Marpurge in
any point, but only this: Whether Christ is bodily also in the bread and wine
of the Supper. Of all other points did they accord also wholly, one with the
other. Which agreement is to be seen in Doctor Luther himself: Tom. 4. Ien.
follio, 469. and is word by word as follows.

These Articles hereafter written, were agreed upon at Marpurge, by those whose
names are here under written. The 3. of October. Anno 1529.
and that the same God is one in essence and nature, and threefold in person;
namely, Father, Son, and holy Ghost, after the same manner, as was confirmed
in the Council of Nice, and as is sung and read in the Nicen Creed, in all the
Christian Churches in the world.

For the second, we believe, that not the father, nor holy

For the third, that the same God and Mary's Son,

For the fourth we believe that Original sin descends Adam by birth and
inheritance, and is such a sin, that it damneth all men: and if that Christ
had not come to relieve us with his death and life, then had we thereby
perished everlastingly, and could never have come to the kingdom of God.

For the fifth we believe that we are delivered from the

For the sixth, that such a faith is a gift of God, which holy Ghost gives and
prouides it, as it pleases him, into our hearts, when we attend unto the
Gospel of Christ.



Of the outward preaching of Gods word.
Romans 10.

Of Baptism.
Go and baptize, and Gods promise, who so believes, is therein, therefore it
is not only a bare token, or watchword amongst the Christians, but a token and
work of God wherein our faith is helped, by which we are regenerated.

holy Ghost, does afterward, if we be esteemed and be indeed just, and holy,
thereby stirs up good works in us, namely, love to our neighbors, prayers
to God, and patient enduring persecutions.

Of Confession.
FOr the eleventh, that confession or advice seeking from

Of the Magistracy.
FOr the twelfth, that all Magistrates and worldly degrees,

For the thirteenth, the inventions of men in Gods worship,

For the fourteenth, We all believe and hold, about the Supper of our loving
Lord Jesus Christ, that it is to be used in both kinds: also that the Mass is
not a work, whereby one can purchase for the other, life and death, and grace:
that also the Sacrament of the Alter, is a Sacrament of the true body and blood
of Jesus Christ, and the spiritual feeding upon the same body and blood, is of
greatest necessity to every Christian; and likewise the use of the said
Sacrament is, as the word of the Almighty God is given and ordained for that
end, that thereby the weak conscience might be quickened by the holy Ghost.

And though it be so, that at this time we cannot agree whether the true body
and blood of Christ, be bodily in the bread and wine: yet ought the one part
to perform Christian love to the other, so far as every man's conscience will
bear; and both sides entreat the Almighty God with all feruency, that he
would settle us in the right understanding by the holy Ghost. Amen.

Martinus Luther. Philip Melancthon. Iustus Jonas. Andreas Osiander. Johannes
Brentius. Stephanus Agricola. Johannes Oecolampadius. Vlricus Zwinglius.
Martinus Bucer. Casper Hedio.


Behold Reader; even this was the agreement betwixt Doctor Luther, and
Zwinglius, at Marpurge together. And it abides also at this day, even the same
agreement betwixt Doctor Luther and us.

It is true indeed that there are more points contrauerted at present betwixt
the disciples of Doctor Luther and us. But nothing at al with Doctor Luther
himself. Which we do not speak therefore, that our intent is to help and
protect our selves with the name of Doctor Luther. Blessed be God, we have a
greater help and protection for our grounds, namely, the unvanquishable word of
God.

And whereas we do yet notify the witness of Doctor Luther also; that is
done by us for this end, that thereby the eyes of those might be opened, who
have hitherto been blinded with his name.

The first then of the remaining points, which at this day are forced to the
lists, is the point of the person of Christ. About which indeed many great and
fearful errors are measured out unto us by our accusers. But we are able to
speak it for a truth unto the Reader, that we did never believe and teach,
and also now do not otherwise believe and teach in our Churches, about the
person of Christ, then as happy Doctor Luther at all times did believe and
teach thereof: excepting the vbiquitie of the body of Christ. Which also at
last Doctor Luthers himself renounced and said: Touching the vbiquity, or
being of Christ's body in all places, it shall not be disputed of: there is
much other matter herein. Tom. 8. fol. 340. B In all other doctrines about the
person of Christ we do fully consent with Doctor Luther.

Indeed our accusers do allege, that we teach otherwise about the union of
the properties of both the natures in Christ, What we are condemned in, about
the person of Christ.
then as happy Doctor Luther did teach thereof. For instance, they do say,
that we teach, that the divine and humane natures in Christ, have no actual
and working fellowship one with another, and that accordingly, the man Christ
is not God in very deed and truth, but only in bare name and title. Also, that
not in very deed and truth the Son of God, but only a mere man suffered for
us.

But the Reader may take assured knowledge, that such blasphemous thoughts
against God, never entered into our minds. But we have always, through the
grace of God both believed and taught the clean contrary. And we even now
also believe and teach the same: That the godly and humane natures in Christ
have the most inward and nearest fellowship one with the other; being both
united together into one person. And that there accordingly Christ is very man,
not only in ^^re name and title, but also in deed and truth. Also, that not a
mere man, but the true Son of God, Chap. 2.
died for us upon the Cross. That is our faith herein, as is to be seen above
and in all our other Confessions.

And our accusers know it assuredly. And yet are they not afraid of God, but
publish otherwise of us. They take this for their help, for that Doctor Luther
did in some measure cast in the teeth of Zwinglius, that he should have learned
concerning the fellowship of the properties of both the natures in Christ, also
of the Godhead of Christ, and of the sufferings and death of Christ, not truly,
but on the blasphemous manner above named. But the Reader shall understand,
that Doctor Luther himself did it not, but only Doctor Luthers anger did do
it, which ought in all reason to be buried with him. For God knows it, and
every man may also know it, who will but read the writings of Zwinglius, that
Doctor Luther, as well in this as in many other things, offered violence and
injury, to the good honest man. And admit that he did use some such reasons,
which seem to savor of the often named errors, in his first writings: yet
did he in his following writings oftentimes so free himself both plainly and
iudiciously, that in conscience al evil suspicions of him should vanish away.

But admit this also, that Zwinglius had not sufficiently cleared him self:
yet have others of our teachers, since the death of Zwinglius, cleared
themselves many hundred times: and we clear our selves herewithall once more,
adding to full measure: that we do not believe and teach otherwise, neither
ever did otherwise believe and teach in our Churches, of the fellowship or
Communion of the properties of both natures in Christ, (in Latin, De
communicatione idiomatum) then as Doctor Luther of happy memory did believe
and teach thereof.

The Sum whereof is to this effect: The sum of the doctrine of Doctor
Martin Luther of the fellowship of the properties.
That the Communion of both natures in Christ, are common to the alone and
inseperable persons of Christ. That is, that of Christ may be said and uttered
both the properties of the divine, and also the humane natures, whilst both
the said natures are in him: Or which is all one; that all may be said of
Christ, what may be said of God, and what may be said of a man: whilst he is
both God and man. But yet must such a speech be understood with difference, as
namely in this manner: When any divine thing is spoken of him, then must it be
understood of the divine nature. But when as any humane thing is spoken of him,
then must it be understood of the the humane nature. For example: It may be
said indeed and in truth of Christ; that he is from everlasting: and also,
that he was borne at the appointed time: but not both according to both
natures, but the former after the divine, the other according to the humane
nature. And it is of small consequence, with what name the person of Christ is
named. For example, Whether he be called God or man, the Son of God or of
man, etc. then is it all to one effect. For it is always understood of the
person, which is together God and man. Therefore as it may well and truly be
said; Christ is from everlasting: even so may it also be well and truly said:
the Son of man is from everlasting. Also, as it may well and truly be said,
Christ was borne of the Virgin Mary, and died for us upon the Cross: even so
may it also be well and truly said, the Son of God was borne of the Virgin
Mary, and died for us upon the Cross.

This was the doctrine of Doctor Luther, of the fellowship of the properties of
both the natures in Christ. That namely, (as is said) the properties of both
natures in Christ, are common to the alone inseperable person of Christ; but
not to the natures themselves. And that this fellowship is mutual, that is,
that they are as well transferred from the humane nature to the divine, as from
the divine to the humane. For example, that it may as well be said, the Son
of God died for us, as it may be said, the man Christ is Almighty. And as in
deed and truth the Son of God died for us, though he did not die according to
the Godhead: even so in deed and in truth is the Son of man Almighty, though
he be not almighty according to the manhood.

Against this our accusers do teach, Vbiquities doctrine of the fellowship of
the Properties.
that the properties of both the natures in Christ, are not common to the alone
and inseperable person of Christ; but also to the natures themselves, and that
for all that such a fellowship is not mutual: that is, that such a fellowship
is not transferred as well from the manhood to the Godhead, as from the Godhead
to the humane; but that only some properties of the Godhead are common to the
manhood nature. Therefore a man may well say; the manhood of Christ is
almighty, all-knowing every where present, etc. whilst it is united to the
almighty, all knowing, and every where present Godhead, personally: but on the
contrary it may not be said, the Godhead of Christ is created, visible,
palpable, and diable, whilst it is united to the created, visible, palpable,
and to the dejected diable manhood, personally. This is at this day the
doctrine of the Vbiquitists. And they say that Doctor Luther, of happy memory,
did even so believe and teach. But setting aside the vbiquity of the body of
Christ, they inform the Reader amiss.

And we are well assured, that Doctor Luther did never teach so in all his life
of the fellowship of the properties, as the Vbiquitists do teach thereof:
namely, that such fellowship is performed in the natures themselves. This did
Doctor Luuher, as is said, never teach in all his life. But so often as he
spoke of the fellowship of the properties of both the natures in Christ, That
such a fellowship is performed in the person of Christ, without hurt to the
difference of natures: and that the same passes to and fro, that is, that all
humane properties may be spoken of the Son of God, as also all divine
properties of the Son of man.

This has been indeed, and at all times the doctrine of Doctor Luther, of the
fellowship of the properties of both natures in Christ. The which, that the
peace-louing Reader may be thoroughly informed of, we will set down word by
word, in this place, all the passages (as they befell from year to year one
after another) wherein Doctor Luther did teach of the fellowship of the
properties of both the natures in Christ, and that as well out of his strife
writings, as out of his doctrinall writings.

Extract out of Doctor Martin Luthers writings of the fellowship of the
properties of both natures in Christ.

AMongst which places, the first is, in the Church Postill which Doctor Luther
did write, Anno, 1521. and calls it his best book. Tom. 2 Ien. fol. 381 B.
In the same place, in the exposition of the Epistle upon Christ's day, he says
thus:

That we now return again to Christ, it is to be believed constantly, that
Christ is true God and true man. And sometimes the Scripture speaks, and
himself after the Divine nature, and sometimes after the humane nature. As
where he says, Ioh. 8. Before Abraham was, I am. That was spoken of the
Godhead. But where he says, Mat. 20. to James and John, to sit at my right
hand, and at my left hand, is not mine to give, Note. The manhood of Christ is
not almighty.

Note. The manhood of Christ is not all-knowing.


That was spoken of the humanity, even as he could not help himself upon the
Cross. Howsoever some will here so show their cunnings, with their dark
expositions, that they join with heretics. Also is this spoken of the man
Christ, where he says, Mark. 13. Of that day and hour knows no man, no not
the Angels which are in heaven, neither the Son himself, save the Father. The
Gloss is not here needful, Note. They that say, that Christ is also almighty
according to the manhood, they mingle the two natures one with the other.
the Son knows not, that is, he will not know it. What avails such a
Gloss? The manhood of Christ has even like unto another holy natural man,
not always thought all things, spoken, willed, as some make of him an almighty
man: mingling the two natures and their operations one in the other,
ignorantly, etc.

The second place is, in the great Confession which he writ, Anno, 1528. Tom.
3. Ien. fol. 455 B. where he says thus: All words, works, sufferings, and
whatsoever Christ does; that does, works, speaks, and suffers the true
Son of God. And it is truly spoken, the Son of God died for us, etc. If now
here the she weather maker, women's wit, the allaeosis grandmother shall say,
indeed the Diety can neither suffer nor die: th u shall answer, that is true.
But for all that, whilst the Diety and humanity in Christ is one person,
therefore yields the Scripture for such personal unions sake also to the Deity
Namely in concreto, as he presently shows himself.
, all that belongs to the humanity, and contrariwise Note. The fellowship of
the propertie^ p sse to and again: namely, as well from the manhood to the
Godhead, as from the godly to the humane nature: but not only from the godly
to the humane nature, as at present the Vbiquitists do teach.
. And is in truth so also. For this must thou confess: the person, (meaning
Christ) suffers, dies. Now the person is true God. Therefore it is truly
spoken, Gods Son suffered. For although indeed that one part, (that I may so
speak) as the Divine, suffers not, yet suffers the person, which is God,
in the other part, as in the Deity. Even as is usually spoken: the Kings Son
is wounded, when only his leg is wounded. Solomon is white, when yet his soul
only is white. Absolon is fair, when yet his body is only fair. Peter is
bald, when yet his head only is bald. For whilst body and soul is one
person, so long the whole person is rightly and well applied, in all whatsoever
betideth the body and soul, yea the smallest member thereof. This is the
manner of reasoning in the whole world, not in Gods word alone. And indeed it
is the very truth. Here Doctor Luther understood not Zwinglius right: but that
concerns us not at all at this day.

Note, Doctor Luther acknowledges, that in this speech, Christ is dead, there
is a trope. Only be will not have it, that the same trope shall be called an
Alloeosis, but it shall be called a Synecdoche: which is no thing else, then a
mere wordstrife.


For in very truth, the Son of God was crucified for us, that is, the person
which is God. For it, it, I say, to wit, the person, was crucified according to
the manhood. So shall we appropriate according to the whole person, what
betideth to the other part of the person, for this cause, that both is one
person. So also do the old fathers speak, and all new Divines, and all
languages, and the whole Scripture. But the cursed Alloeosis turns this about,
and changes, and appropriateth to the parts, which in the Scripture is applied
to the whole person: making Tropes of his own, to pervert the Scripture, and
to separate the person, etc. And presently after: Whilst he Tropes so gladly,
why remains he not by the old Trope, which the Scripture and all divines
hitherto have used herein; namely, Synecdoche: as, Christ is dead according to
the manhood, etc. Also, they exclaim on us, that we mix the two natures in
one essence. That is not true We do not say, that the Godhead is the
humanity, or the divine nature, is the humane nature; which were to mingle the
natures into one essence. Note.
But we mingle the two differing natures, in one only person, and say God is
man, and man is God. But we exclaim again on them, that they separate the
person of Christ, as if it were two persons. For if the alloeosis shall hold,
as Zwinglius handles it, then must Christ be two persons, one divine, and one
humane That was never the opinion of Zwinglius.
, whilst he draws the speech of the sufferings of Christ, only upon the
humane nature That did not Zwinglius do, with any other meaning, then as a
little before Doctor Luther had also done.
, and turns all things from the Deity Not otherwise, then as Doctor Luther
also in the af rego^ng words.
. For if the works, shall be seauered and parted, then must also the person
be separated, whilst that all works or sufferings, are not appropriated to
the natures, but to the persons. For it is the person that does all, and
suffers all, one after this nature, the other after that nature That is the
opinion of Zwinglius.
: as all the learned understand it well. Therefore do we We also. Tom 7 fol.
84. B. and 85. A.
hold our Lord Christ so for God and man in one person: non confundendo
naturas, nec diuidendo personam, that we mingle not the natures, nor separate
the person.

The third place, where Doctor Luther handled the doctrine de communicatione
Idiomatum, or of the communion of the properties, is in the exposition of the
14 Chap. of John, written, Anno, 1538. where amongst others he says thus:

Christ speaks both the word of God and man: out of which is powerfully
declared, that he is both true man and also true God. Also, if a man speak of
Christ, The properties of both natures shall be ascribed to the person of
Christ.
he must teach significantly, that he is one only person, and yet two
several natures, namely, godly and humane. Also, that the person in Christ
must remain vnseparated: so that on both sides the properties of the humane
and Divine nature are to be ascribed to the whole person, and be said of him:
the man Christ borne of the Virgin Mary, is Almighty, and does all that we
entreat of him, Christ is Almighty according to the godly, and not according to
the humane nature.
but not in respect of the manhood, but because of the Divine nature: not for
that he was borne of his mother, but because he is the Son of God. Even so
also on the contrary, Christ Gods Son entreates the Father, not according to
the Divine nature or essence, it so being that he is alike almighty with the
Father; but therefore, for that he is true man, and the Son of Mary. The
natures shall be difference made of, and yet the person be vnseparated.
So that the words be so drawn together, and made to agree according to the
union of the person, that evermore the natures be made differing, and yet the
person remain vnseparated, etc.

Of the person of Christ, may be said the properties of both natures.

Note. Yet shall he well seen unto, what is to be understood after the humane,
or what after the Divine.


Whilst then God and man is believed to be one person, we ought also so to
speak of him, as both natures require, that some sayings concern the manhood,
but some the Godhead: that it be marked what he speaks after the humane
nature, and also what according to the Divine. For if it be not respected, and
truly made difference of, then must needs follow so many heresies, as have
been in former times: whereas some did say, he was not true God; some others,
he was not true man. For they could not so resolve with themselves, that they
should distinctly separate the twofold speech according to the two natures. For
oftentimes he spoke in such a manner, as the simplest man upon earth should
hardly do. As where he says, I am come not to be served, but to serve: there
likeneth he himself wholly to a servant, under all men, for all that he is
true God, and Lord of all creatures, whom every man should serve and worship.
Also in 4^. Psalm, he likeneth himself to a sinner, and says, he was
punished for sin, which yet cannot be according to the Divine nature. Again,
he speaks often also, as no Angel nor man should speak, with the word of
high Majesty, and yet in the lowest weak shape and fashion, as he walked upon
the earth. As Ioh. 6. What then if ye should see the Son of man ascend up where
he was before. Yea all that the Scripture speaks of Christ that speaks it
so, that it takes hold on the whole person, even as both (God and man) were one
manner of essence, and often so changes the word That is the Alloeosis of
Zwinglius, for Alloeosis is not o h^^wise called then a changing.
, that of either nature both is spoken That is, of the person called after the
nature of ^^^her: as Doct. Luther himself clears presently. Note. The Son of
God has suffered, is to be understood, per Communicationem Idiomatum.
, for the personal v^ions sake: which is called communicatio Idiomatum, that
it may be said:

The man Christ is the everlasting Son of God, by whom all creatures were
made, and is a Lord of heaven and earth, etc.

So also again:

Christ the Son of God (that is, the person which is true God) was conceived
and borne of the Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, and
died.

Also, Gods Son sits with the Publicans and sinners at table, and washes the
feet of the Disciples. This does he not do according to the Divine nature: but
yet whilst the same person does it, it is truly spoken, that the Son of God
does it. Even so says Paul, 1. Cor. 2.8. Had they known it, they would not
have crucified the Lord of glory. And Christ himself, Ioh. 6. What then if ye
see the Son of man ascend up where he was before. That was wholly spoken of
the Divine nature, which was from everlasting with the Father: and yet is
spoken of the person also, which is true man.

And in sum, what the person Christ speaks and does, that speaks and does
both, true God and true man. So that always all his words and works be
settled upon the whole person, and not so to rend them from each other, as if he
were not true God, or not true man: yet so, that the natures be differingly
known and believed. For if the same shall be certainly and differingly
spoken of, then must it be said: God is an other nature then man God and man
does he s^ here for De^^^ and humanity.

Note. The Divine nature did not die.

A comparison of a man.


: and the hum^ne nature is not from everlasting, as the Divine: so is the
Divine not temporally borne nor died, as the humane. And yet are they both
united in the person, that it is one Christ; and it may be said of him, the man
is God, and the man is the same that created all things. Even like as a mere
natural man's body and soul are two differing natures, and yet they make one
person or one man, and each natures work and office, is spoken of the whole
man. For so speak we of every other man. The man eats and drinks,
digesteth, sleeps, goes, stands, and works, etc. which he yet does none
of all in soul, but only in body: and yet it may be said of the whole person,
which consists of body and soul. For he is a man, not in respect of the
body, but in respect of body and soul. Again it is said of him, the man
thinks, deuiseth, teaches. For according to the reason of the soul, he may
be a teacher or master, Judge, Counceller, Ruler, none of which the body
according to the members thereof bestows upon him, and yet for all that a man
says, that he is a witty head, judicious, learned, wise, and well spoken,
cunning. And the like is said of a wife, the mother bears, conceiues, or
suckles the child, and yet she is not called a mother according to the soul,
but only according to the body: for all that it is ascribed to the whole
person of the wife. Also, when one strikes a man on the head, it is said, this
man has smitten John, or Margaret. Even so when a member is hurt or wounded,
then is it said the whole man is wounded.

This homely comparison do I make, The person of Christ speaks and does all:
yet either according to one nature.
that it may be understood, how in the person of Christ of the two natures,
difference is to be made, and yet the person remain whole and vnseparated
therewithal; that whatsoever Christ speaks and does, that has both God and
man spoken and done, and yet either according to each nature. The offspring of
all heresy about Christ, is the difference of both natures not duly pondered.
He that holds such is a difference, may pass safely and well, and not fear
to be misled, by the erroneous thoughts of heretics, which proceed only from
hence, for that they do not rightly join what ought to hold and agree
together, or not duly divide and separate, what ought to be divided. Therofore
ought we to rely upon the word and Scripture, and so hold the article, and
confess that this Christ is true God, by whom all things were created and
sustained: and again, the same Christ the Son of God, was borne of the
Virgin, and died upon the Cross, etc. Also, the mother Mary conceiues, bears,
suckles and nourishes, not only the man, or flesh and blood: for that were to
separate the person; but she conceiues and nourishes a Son, who is Gods
Son; therefore is she truly called, not only the Mother of man, but also of
God. As the old fathers also taught the same against the Nestorians, who would
make a way through, that Mary should not be called the mother of God, and
would not say, that she had borne the Son of God. Against this must we
allege the article of our faith, I believe in Jesus Christ the only Son of
God the Father, our Lord, borne of the Virgin Mary, suffered, crucifi^d, and
died, etc. always the same only Son of God our Lord, that it is truly said,
Mary is the right true mother of God. And the Jews did not only crucify the
Son of man, but the true Son of God. For I will not have such a one of
Christ, Worship.
in whom I shall believe, and call upon as my Savior, who is a bare man; else
shall I shall to the devil. For bare flesh and blood could not root out sin,
pacify God, and take away his displeasure, vanquish and destroy death and
hell, nor provide the kingdom of God. Also, Worship.
whilst the Angels in heaven worship him, and call him their Lord, lying in
the Cribbe, as the they say to the sheepheards, Luke 2. Unto you is borne a
Savior, which is Christ the Lord, etc. then must he be true God. For the
Angels worship not bare flesh or humane nature. Therefore there must be both God
and man together, in this person, and when Christ is named, then is named an
vnseuered person, who is both God and man. That whosoever s^^th Christ,
hears, or lays hold on him with the faith of the heart, he lays hold
certainly, not only on the man, but on the true God, that God be not made to
sit above in heaven loytering among the Angels, but here below in the Crib,
and lying in the mothers lap, and in some, where the person is found, For
what serves it, whereas it is said, that the Son of God, and not a bare man,
died for us.
there is certainly found the godly Majesty. This serves now to this end, as
has been often said, that we may resist the devil, and vanquish him in the
battle of death, and other extremities, when he terrifieth us with sin and
hell. For if he could persuade me, that I should behold Christ as a bare man
crucified and dead for me, then were I utterly lost. But and if I repose my
whole treasure hereon, that Christ both true God and man, died for me, etc.
that waieth up and drives away all sin, death, hell, and all woe and sorrow
of heart. For when I know this, that he who is true God suffered for me, and
died, and again, the same true man risen from the dead, ascended into heaven,
etc. Then can I assuredly conclude, that my sin and death is by him destroyed
and overcome, and therefore now there remains no anger with God, nor
displeasure against me, whilst I both hear and see in this person, nothing
else then mere tokens of mercy.

Behold, so learn to understand this article, that the person of Christ be
kept whole, and that the work of both natures be infolded together, though the
natures be made distinguished. For according to Divine nature, was he not
borne of man, neither took he any thing from the Virgin; and it is true that
God is the Creator, but the man a creature or thing formed. But they are united
into one person, and now God and man is called one Christ, that Mary has borne
a Son, and the Jews crucified such a person, which is both God and: else, if
he were bare man (as other holy men) he were not of ability with all his
holiness, blood, and death, to free us of one sin, or to quench one drop of
hell fire.

The fourth place where Doctor Luther entreates about the doctrine of the
Communion of the properties, Tom 7 Jen. fol. 249.
is in the book of the Councels and Churches, written Anno 1539. where he
says: The error of Nestorius was not that he held Christ for a bare man,
neither that he made two persons of him, but confessed two natures, God and man
in one person; but he would not yield unto the communicationem Idiomatum, which
I cannot utter in Dutch word. Idioma is as much as what concerns one nature,
or the properties thereof. As dying, suffering, weeping, speaking, laughing,
eating, drinking, sleeping, sorrowing, to be borne, to have a mother, to suck
the breasts, going, standing, working, sitting, lying, Properties of the humane
nature.
and whatsoever else, are called Idiomata humanae naturae, that is properties,
which appertain to a natural man, which he either can do or not, or must do.
For Idioma, Properties of the Divine nature.
in Greek is proprium, in Latin. Let us therefore call it property. Again,
Idioma Deitatis, is properties of the Divine nature, that it dies not, is
almighty, infinite, unborn, eats not, drinks not, sleeps not, stands
not, goes not, sorrows not, weepeth not. And what shall a man say much? It is
an unmeasurable contrary thing, God, to be a man, therefore can the Idiomata of
both natures not agree in one. This is the opinion of Nestorius.

When I now should preach thus, Jesus a Carpenter of Nazareth (for so do the
Evangelists call him, the Son of a Carpenter) goes there in the street, and
fetches his mother a pot of water, and a penniworth of bread, that so he may
eat and drink with his mother; and the same Jesus the Carpenter, is the right
true God in one person: herein yields Nestorius unto me, and says, it is true.
But when I say thus, there goes God in the street, and fetches water and
bread, to eat and drink with his mother: this speech will not Nestorius yield
unto, but says: to fetch water, to buy bread, to have a mother, to eat and to
drink with her, those are Idiomata, properties of the humane nature, and not
of the Divine. Even so, when I say; Jesus the Carpenter was crucified by the
Jews, and the same Jesus is the true God, this yields Nestorius unto me, that
it is true. But if I say God was crucified by the Jews, then says he, no. For
to endure the Cross and die; is not the Divine but the humane natures Idioma,
or property. When now common Christians shall hear this, then cannot they
think otherwise, then that he esteems Christ to be a mere man, and
seperates the person which yet he does not intend to do, but only that the
words sound, as if he did it. By which may be seen, that he was a very vain
and ignorant man. For it being that he yields, that God and man joined in
one person is united, As God and man is united into one person: even so the
properties of the natures.
then can be in no sort gainsay, that the Idiomata of the natures should not
also be united. Else what were this God and man in one person united? And his
folly is even with that against which we teach in the Schools, Qu^ concedit
antecedens bonae consequentiae, non potest negare cons^q^ens^ which is as much
as this, is one true, then must the other be also true; is the other not true,
then is the first also not true. Whosoever yields to this, that Margaret is a
married wife, he cannot deny, that her child (if she be honest is
legitimate. When one teaches this in the Schools, no man thinks that there
should be any such blockish people. But demand of the Magistrates and Lawyers
thereof, if they have not many the like oftentimes before them, who acknowledge
one thing, and yet will not yield to that that follows upon it.

But it might be alleged, that Nestorius did craftily confess, that Christ
was God, and one person. No: he was not so skillful for all his stoutnesse,
but he meant it earnestly. For in a Sermon (says the Tripartite history) did
he cry, no ^ouing Jew, thou have no cause to boast, thou could not crucify
God. There will he say, Christ is indeed God, but God is not crucified. And in
the Council before Bishop Cyrill he said, that many acknowledge Christ to be
God, but I will never say, that God is bitris, or trinitris, which is as much
as to say, Jesus indeed is God, which is so much talked of. But that God is
borne twice or thrice, that will not I teach. And this troubles his mind (as
the Tripartite story testifies) how that God and dying have no agreement
together. For he thinks it a fearful thing to be heard that God should die.
Christ according to the Godhead immortal.
And this was his opinion, that Christ was immortal according to the Godhead,
yet had he not so much understanding to utter the same. It befell so also, that
the other Bishops were also stout, not considering how the wound might be
healed, but only how it might be rent larger, howbeit to speak effectually,
out of the opinion of Nestorius, it must follow, that Christ is a mere man and
two persons: and yet indeed it was not his meaning. For the blockish unlearned
man did not see that he propounded impossible things, that he together
earnestly held Christ to be God and man in one person, The properties of the
natures shall be given to the person of Christ.
and yet would not yield the Idiomata of the natures, to the same person of
Christ. The first will he hold for the truth: but yet it shall not be true,
what follows out of the first. Whereby he manifests, that he understands not
himself, what he meant.

Note.
For we Christians must appropriate the Idiomata of the two natures in Christ,
to the persons alike and all. As Christ is God and man in one person; therefore
whatsoever is spoke of him, as man, that must also be spoken of God, namely,
Christ is dead, and Christ is God, therefore is God dead, not the separated
God, but the God which is united to mankind. For of the separated God is both
false, namely, that Christ is God, and God is dead: both I say is false; for
then is not God man. But Nestorius admires at it, that God dies; he should
consider, that it is as wonderful that God became man, for therewith was the
vndying God the same, who must die, suffer, As God was man, even so died he
also. If Christ had not true humane Idiomata, then were he an illusion.
and have all humane Idiomata? Else what were the same man, with whom God
united himself personally, if he should not have humane Idiomata? It must be
an illusion as the Manichies had before taught. Again, what is spoken of God,
must also be ascribed to the manhood, namely, God created the world, and is
almighty, the man Christ is God. Therefore has the man Christ created the
world, and is almighty, the cause is: for God and man make one person; therefore
the person bears the Idiomata of both natures.

Oh Lord God, about such a comfortabl article, About the person of Christ ought
not to be contended.
ought we always to rejoice, and not contend, undoubted in the true faith, and
sing praise and thank God the father for such unspeakable mercy, that he has
suffered his beloved Son to be man and brother with us alike. Subtle Satan
stirs up discomforts, by stout ambitious, misdoubting people, that this lovely
and happy comfort might be hindered from us, and spoiled in us. This is to be
lamented of before the Lord. For we Christians must be assured hereof, that if
God be not also in the scale, Wherefore it must be said; God is dead for us.
and make the weight, then sink we to the earth with our dish. This understand
I thus, if it shall not be said, God is dead for us, but only a man, then are
we utterly lost. But when the death of God, and God died lies, in the scale,
then sinkes he down, and we mount up, How it is to be understood, that God did
die.
as a light empty dish. But he can well mount aloft also, or spring out of his
scale, nay he could not sit in the scale, except he were a man like unto us,
that it might be said, God died, Gods wounds, Gods blood, Gods death; for God
in his nature cannot die. But now that God and man is united into one person,
it is truly said, Gods death, when that man dies, who is one thing or one
person with God.

Also this Council condemned much too little about Nestorius. For it handled
only that only Idioma, that God was borne of Mary. From whence the histories
mention, that in this Council was decreed against Nestorius, Mary should be
called Theotocos, that is, the mother of God, whereas Nestorius denies all
Idiomata of the humane nature of God in Christ, as dying, Cross, suffering,
and all whatsoever agrees not with the Godhead. Therefore they should not
only have decreed, that Mary was Theotocos, but also, that Pilate, and the
Jews were the crucifiers and murderers of God, and the like. But whereas they
condemned him afterward through all the Idiomata with these words: Nestorius
denies, that Christ is God and one person, is indeed in ^ffectu, or by
consequence true, but too roughly, and too strangely spoken whilst Nestorius
could not otherwise think hereof, that there was manifest wrong and violence
done unto him. For he never taught such words, but always spoke against it,
that Christ was true God, and not two persons, upon which he d^^u^ the Arians
very much. For such blo^kish ^olke ca^^^ syllogi^e or make consequents, namely,
that that sh ll be s^id to deny the substance or nature, which denies the
Idiomata or properties of the nature, Note. He that denies the properties, he
denies the natures.
but so should the judgment goe^ howbeit Nestorius confesses, that Christ
true God and man is one person, but w^^lest he gives not the Idiomata of the
humane nature, to the some ^^dly person of Christ, it is false, and is much as
^f he did deny the nature it self. And they should not only have determined
upon that one Idioma of the mother Mary. Whereby the things handled in this
Council might better have been explained. Which as I esteem very few have
hitherto well understood. Out of Platina, Note. Doct. Luther accuse h Zwinglius
for a Nestorian, not therefore that he should have denied the s^eciall
Communion of the properties which pass only from the Deity upon the humanity:
but therefore, because he denied the above w^^tten common fellowshi^ of the
properties wh ch pass as w^ll from the humane nature upon the Divine, as from
the Divine upon the humane nature. In which in truth he do h Zwinglius w^ong.
But it concerns not us in this place. For we seek nothing else as present,
but only to lay open Doctor (...) opinion truly of the Communion of the
properties.
and the like to him, it is impossible to be understood. For I have had also
Nestorians before me, who have contended very stiffly, that the Godhead of
Christ could not suffer; and for testimony also Zwinglius writ against me,
over these words, Verbum caro factum est, and would not allow barely, that
verbum should be called factum; but would have it, Verbum caro facta est. For
cause God could not be made. But I at the same time did not my self know, that
such an opinion of Nestorius was dark, because I understood not this Council
also, but knew it to be erroneous out of the holy Scriptures, Augustine, and
the Master of Sentences: And who knows how many Nestorians there are in the
Papacy, which yet highly praise this Council? For reason will here be very
acute and will not hear, that God should die, or have one essence according to
humanity, though they hitherto accustomably do believe that Christ is God, as
Nestorius did.

The fifth place, where Doctor Luther handles the doctrine of the Communion of
the properties is Tom. 8. Ien. fol. 165. in the book of the last words of
David, written, Anno, 15^3. Where he first of all gives the title, of both the
natures in Christ: and speaks thereof further thus:

Tom 1 fol. 165
When now thou beleeuest and understand that Christ is true God and, is the
Scripture teaches us, then took to it afterward, and learn to be further
assured, that thou separatest not the person, no the^ minglest in one essence,
the two ^^tures, or the Divine and humane essence, but that thou make
difference of the natures, (...) and keep the person one alone. For many
fine wits have stumbled at this, that they either would have made the Godhead
and manhood one nature, or else two persons, as Nestorius and Eutiches, with
others like unto them. The Turks and Jews esteem themselves high and lofty
spirits in this matter, and us Christians for mere idiots. If he be God (say
they) how can he die as a man? for God is immortal. If he be man, how can he
be Gods Son? for God has no wife, etc. Well, let these miserable dolts pass,
surfeted with their own folly. But stick thou fast in the Christian faith,
which teaches us in the Scriptures, that Jesus Christ is true God, and Gods
Son, therewith also true man, David and Mary's Son, yet not two sons, two
men, or two persons, but one only Son, one only person, in two differing
natures, the Deity and humanity. For even as in the above named article of the
Deity, thou must beware that thou minglest not three persons in one person,
neither distinguishest the essence or nature into three Gods, but hold three
several persons, in one godly essence: even so thou must again beware that
thou partest or separatest not the alone person into two persons, Vnio facit
nomina communia, that is, even as the two natures accord in one person, so do
the names also accord in one person.
or minglest the two natures in one person, but must maintain two several
natures in one alone person. And even as the two natures accord in one person,
so accord also the names of both natures, in the names of the alone person,
which in Latin is called communicatio idiomatum vel proprietatum, as, the man
is called, and is borne of the Virgin Mary, and crucified of the Jews. The
same names shall also be given to the Son of God, and be said, God is borne
of Mary, and crucified of the Jews. For God and man is one person, and not two
Sons, one Gods, the other Mary's, but is one only Son of God and of Mary.

When thou now would say, as Nestorius, God, or Jesus Gods Son, was not
borne of Mary, nor crucified of the Jews, but only the man Mary's Son: then
there thou make two persons, and separatest the only person, that it is one
person, which was borne and crucified, and is one other person, that was
neither borne nor crucified; and so either nature, to be for himself, a
several person, and two several Sons: which is even as much as if God were
not become man, but that God remained by himself a separated person from the
man, and that the man remained a separated person by himself from God: that is
stark naught: that will not the Scripture bear, which says, John 1. The word
became flesh, Luke 1. That shall be borne of thee, shall be called the Son
of God. And he childrens faith says, I believe in Jesus Christ, the Son of
God, conceived by the holy Ghost, borne of the Virgin Mary, etc. say not that
Gods Son is another, but the same who was borne of Mary, and was her Son.
Again, when thou would say, as Eutyches, that the man Jesus the Son of
Mary, is not Creator of heaven and earth, or is not Gods Son, who ought to
be worshipped. As of late also a mad spirit gave out an harsh sentence,
Worship.
how dangerously we Christians taught, that we worshipped a creature in stead
of God. The inexpert idiot reads neither Scripture nor books, but dreams of
such high mysteries, out of his own mad pate, and so is a self-growne Doctor.
Behold, here is the person again separated, and two persons made of one.
Nestorius diuides the person thus, that he rendeth the manhood from the Deity,
and makes of either nature a several person, that only the man is crucified.
Eutyches again he rendeth the Deity from the manhood so, that he makes of
either nature a several person: also, that God shall be worshipped, as being
distinguished from the manhood. how Christ shall be inuocated.
But the Scripture, and the belief say thus: When we invoke the man borne of
Mary, then do we not invoke a severed man, who for himself, besides God,
without God, is a several own person, but we invoke one only true God, who
with the father and the holy Ghost, is one only God, and with the humanity one
only person. Whosoever now has not such understanding, he must needs err in
the Scriptures, and cannot possibly frame himself to them. For in the
Scriptures, Messiah is called Gods servant, Esa. 42. Behold, my servant in whom
I am well pleased. And in the 53. Behold my servant will do wisely. Yea he is
called a worm, and not a man, Psalm. 22. I said, Lord be merciful unto me,
heal my soul, for I have sinned against thee. Psalm. 69. O God thou know my
foolishness, and my sins are not hid from thee. Also, the reproaches of them
that reproched thee, are fallen upon me. Innumerable evils have compassed me
about, mine iniquities have taken hold upon me, so that I am not ab^e to look
up; they are more then the hairs of mine head, therefore my heart fails me,
Psalm. 40. Here exclaimes reason. Jew, and Mahomet against us Christians, how
can this be understood of God? how can God be a servant? how can he be a
miserable sinner? God be merciful to us, what unreasonable, mad, barbarous
people are we Christians, in respect of such high, wise, holy men, who worship
no creature, but only the one only God? What is this? reason does not find
such in their Bible; that is, in the chimney corner, or in lubber-land; and the
Jews find it not also in their bible; that is, in the Talmude, etc. We
Christians do know, (blessed and praised be God for ever) that the Messiah is
Gods only everlasting Son, whom he sent into the world, to take our sins
upon him, to die for us, and to vanquish death for us, as Esaias says plainly,
53. All we like sheep have gone astray, but the Lord has laid upon him the
iniquity of us all, and he gave his life for one offering, etc. For this do
we sing and glory in with all joy, that Gods Son, the true only God, with
the father and holy Ghost, is become a man and a worm for us men, God is dead,
God bore our sins upon the Cross in his own person. God has redeemed us by
his own blood. For God and man is one person: What the man here does,
suffers, and speaks, that does, suffers, and speaks God: and what God
does and speaks, that does and speaks the man, which is the only Son of
God and Mary, in one inseperable person, and two differing natures.

Out of all these places it is manifest, that Doctor Luther did never teach in
all his life any such communicationem idiomatum, as is presently taught:
Namely, that only the Divine properties should be common to the humane
nature, and yet not all, but only some of them: but the humane properties
should not be common to the Divine nature. Also, whatsoever is said by virtue
of such communion of the whole person of Christ, the same may also be said of
either nature. For example, whilst it may be said by virtue of the communion
of the properties: the man Christ is almighty: therefore may it also be said;
the manhood of Christ is almighty.

This do we say, did Doctor Luther never teach in all his life, but this is
always the same that he taught, de communicatione idiomatum: that the
properties of both natures are common to the one alone and inseperable person
of Christ; and that according to the same both Divine and humane properties may
be said of the one alone and inseperable person of Christ: but yet with this
prouiso, that the Divine properties shall be understood of him, according to
the Divine, and the humane properties according to the humane nature.

And it is not much material, though some of his words sound so, as if both
the natures properties should be common to either nature. As where he says,
Jn Chap 14. John.
as before is mentioned: All that the Scripture speaks of Christ, that
speaks it so, that it takes hold on the whole person, even as were both God
and man one essence, and often so changes the words, that of either nature
both is spoken, for the personal unions sake. Which is called Communicationem
idiomatum These words seem well so to sound, as if the properties of both
natures should be common, not only to the whole person of Christ, but also to
either nature in the same person. But Doctor Luther in very truth, had no such
meaning. But this is his meaning, That of the person of Christ named after
either nature, both the natures properties may be said, That is, that of
Christ both the natures properties may be said, be it either spoken of the
Divine or of the humane nature. Even as presently after he expounded himself,
where he says: that it may be said, that the man Christ is the everlasting
Son of God, by whom all creatures were made, and is Lord of heaven and earth,
etc. So also again, Christ the Son of God, (that is, the person which is
true God) was conceived and borne of the Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius
Pilate, was crucified, and died, etc. Out of which his exposition, it is
apparent, that he in the former speech where he said, that of either nature
both kinds may be said, did use the names of the nature for the names of the
person; abstract for the concret, as the Logicians say, which thing also he
very often used to do: as he confesses himself, where he says: So speaks
the Scripture more acutely of Christ then we, In the Postill upon the Epist.
upon Christ's day fol 101. B. Edit. Wit. Anno, 1540.
and wreatheth the person so finely in the nature, and parts the nature
again, that there are few who do truly understand, and I my self have erred
in this and the like speech, that I have appropriated to the nature, that which
appertains to the person, and contrariwise.

Therefore when one will judge truly of his doctrine; then must he not pick out
only some single words out of his writings, (as hitherto some have done) but
he must have due regard unto his whole exposition. Then shall he find, that
he taught no otherwise, then as is before mentioned, of the communion of the
properties; namely, That the proper^ies of both natures are common to the alone
person of Christ, such person being termed by which nature they will, but not
that the properties of one nature should be common to the other nature.

Therefore that is in no sort the doctrine of Doctor Luther, which is urged at
this day under Doctor Luthers name: Whereas it is alleged, the properties of
both natures in Christ, are not only common to the alone and inseperable
person of Christ, but also to the natures amongst themselves: and such
communion does not pass to and fro, from one nature to the other, but only
from the Divine nature unto the humane: and they do not make all, but only
some Divine properties participating: as namely, the Omnipotency, Omniscience,
etc. This do we say, is in no sort the doctrine of Doctor Luther, but it is a
very mere nouelty, first of all invented long after the death of Doctor
Luther. And it is besides that, a very dangerous innovation For thereby is not
only the old heresy of Eutyches revived again, which raised the difference
of both the natures in Christ, and said, the two natures of Christ were mixed
in one, through the personal conjunction, and the Godhead also died for us:
but also by such a nouelty is the Arians (who deny the Godhead of Christ) the
passage thoroughly laid open to glide themselves into Dutchland. Which we have
often mentioned, and will hereby once more give warning of. And we entreat
all those, who bear a good heart toward God and their father-land, that they
would therefore considerately ponder the cause, and speak what will ensue upon
this contention? Doct. Martin Luther Tom. 7. Ien. fol. 79. 80. 81.
The only ground, whereby we are able to maintain the true Godhead of Christ
against the Arians, and hitherto have maintained it, is this: That Christ in
the holy Scripture is not only called God, (which also indeed sometimes is
attributed to the creatures, as to the Angels Job 1.6.
, and to the Magistrates Psalm. 82.7.
) but that unto him also are ascribed Divine properties, works and honors, as
these are, almighty, all-knowing, to be every where present, etc. when now
this ground shall be taken from us; and it be said, that to a nature, which is
not God, may also be ascribed Divine properties (as the Nouelists say; that the
humane nature of Christ, though it be not God, but a creature and thing made,
yet may have Divine properties, Omnipotency, Omniscience, etc. attributed to
it.) Where withal can we further maintain the true Deity of Christ against
the Arians.

For where it is alleged, that the humane nature of Christ has the divine
properties not upon it, Apol. Concord. fol. 46.
and for it self, but in consideration, and by virtue of the personal union:
that helps not the matter at all: But if it be that any where a creature
has the divine properties upon it, let it have the same from whence it will,
and in what manner it will, then is the ground false, that all that has godly
properties upon it, is God. Yea indeed this starting hole is more for the
Arians then against them. For and if so be that of a creature, which of it
self has no godly properties upon it, yet there may be godly properties
affirmed because that he is affoorded the use of such properties by God: it
cannot be in any manner concluded that Christ upon and for himself is God,
though for all that Divine properties are spoken and affirmed of him in the
holy Scriptures. So must either the Vbiquitists hold that which is false;
whereas they say, that also of the humane nature of Christ may be spoken and
said godly properties: or the Arrians must hold the truth, whereas they say,
that all is not God, of whom Divine properties are said and uttered in the holy
Scriptures.

This is our entreaty again, loving sirs, that you would consider it. Either
the Vbiquitists nouation must fall, or else the ground of the true Godhead of
Christ must come to naught, and the Arians be yielded to have the truth. Then
return we every man home into his own conscience, whether he will be
helpful or no, to the Arians blasphemies against God, that they may take place
in the Protestant Churches.

CHAP. VII. That we do not believe and teach otherwise of the foreknowledge
and almighty providence of God over all creatures, and of the fountain from
whence sin springs, then as Doctor Luther of happy memory has believed
and taught thereof.
THe second point, which was brought into controversy after the death of
Luther, is of the foreknowledge, that is, of the almighty government of God
ouerall creatures, Garthius against the confession of faith, page 25.

Milius in the Evangelists brothership. thesi. 158.


good and bad. Of the same we have heretofore diverse times so declared our
minds, that the contentious are forced to confess themselves, that there is
nothing rebukeable in the same. Only say they, that we have aforetime spoken
and written of that matter, otherwise then now we do speak and write thereof.

Admit now that it were so indeed, ought we therefore to be railed upon, for
that we make amendment? But for all that, they give wrong information also
thereof. For (God be blessed and praised) the doctrine of the foreknowledge,
or almighty government of God over all creatures, has been always so true in
our Churches and so clear, that we never have had any need to amend the same.
The Reader may please to look over all the Catechismes and confessions of our
Churches, which he can ever come by. And he shall find no other doctrine
therein of the foreknowledge of God, then the same which we do at present
maintain in our Sermons and writings.

This is the cause then, why the contentious allege that we teach otherwise
of the foreknowledge of God, then we have done formerly: for that now (God be
praised, and thanked) many Protestant Princes and Lords, have themselves heard
and read what we teach, as well of this as other points. And demand of the
contentious, wherefore they talk of so many terrible things, which we should
teach about the foreknowledge of God, whereas they cannot yet find the least
show thereof in our Sermons and writings. When now they be so caught in
untruth, and cannot escape: then do they seek this starting hole and say: yea,
it is true, in the present Sermons and writings of the Calumnists, are not such
terrible errors to be found. But if their former writings be seen into:
there may the same be found in abundant measure.

This is the original cause of this calumny, as if we did teach otherwise at
present of the foreknowledge of God, then we have taught in former times.

But what, they accuse us to have formerly taught so offensiuely, of the
foreknowledge of God, and now to be silent in, in sum is thus much: That God
had not only seen from everlasting, all that comes to pass, whether it be
good or bad, that it would come to pass: but also decreed, that it should come
to pass, for cause of a good end, to which he would use the same. Or, which
is all one; that nothing is accomplished without the everlasting council and
will of God, whether it be good or bad, and that the same everlasting council
and will of God is unchangeable. And that according to the same al must so come
to pass, as it comes to pass. Also, that the permission of God, when he
permits that which is evil, is not a bare permission, but that God has
always his hand in the work, and he turns and orders every action, to
what he has ordained it in his everlasting council.

Out of all which say they, this must necessarily follow, that God is the
author of sin, and has ^ pleasure and delight in sin. This is the
complaint which they make against us.

Now it is without No, that such sayings are found, in our men's writings, as
are above rehearsed. But nevertheless the same are also found in the writings
of Doctor Luther. As, There comes nothing to pass without the will of God
says he: Tom. 6. Wit. fol. 520. A. Also, all comes to pass only according
to the everlasting will of God, and it must so befall unto us, as he will. fol.
590. B. Also, all must so come to pass, as God has decreed it. fol. 526. A.
Also, all in all creatures must be accomplished after the Divine will. fol.
527. A. Also, it must not presently be otherwise with us then according to the
Divine will. ibid. Also, Let the Diatribe plot, think, imagine, sing, say,
what they will: yet has God decreed from everlasting, that Judas must be a
traitor, then must he commit treason; and it is not in Judas, or in the power
of any creature, to have it any otherwise, or to change his will. fol.524. A.
Also, Out of which it follows, that it cannot be denied, that all which we
do, and all that befalls, whether we think it well or no, as befalling by
chance, and is changeable, yet must it so come to pass, and cannot be
otherwise, if thou look to the will of God. For Gods will is powerful, and
will not be hindered. For he is nothing else then the godly force and power it
self. And also God is the most wise, so that no man can deceive him. When now
his will, will not suffer it self to be hindered, neither can be hindered, then
cannot the work be hindered, that it should not be accomplished in time,
place, manner, measure, as God has decreed and will have it. fol. 470. A. Also,
this do we also say, that when God works all in all things, he also works
in the ungodly, it so being that he created all things alone, and rules alone,
and moves and drives them according to his almighty powerful working, which
no creature can shun or change, but it must follow, every thing according to
his own kind given it of God. Then are they copartners of God in works, all
ungodly, etc. fol. 548. Also, all people upon the earth find these two
principles printed and written in their hearts, that they must acknowledge in
their hearts, and say yea thereunto, (howsoever not willingly) when they hear
them mentioned. For the first, that God is almighty, not only in respect of
force, but also in respect of powerful operation, etc. For the second, that he
knows all things, and has decreed from everlasting, and can neither err nor
fail. When yea is said in the hearts of all men, to these two principles, then
it follows by and by most powerfully, and certainly, that no man can gainsay,
that we were not, neither are made by our own wills: but it must even so
come to pass according to the will of God. And it follows also, that we do
nothing what we will, according to free will but what, when, and how God has
decreed it from everlasting, and works: according to his council, and
everlasting power, which can neither fail or change. fol 528.

Such and many more the like sayings are written here and there in the writings
of Doct. Luther which do affirm as much as we do; That all must so come to
pass, as God has decreed, ordained, and determined from everlasting; and that
his almighty working concurreth in all things. Therefore either we do no^ make
God by this our speech to be the author o^ sin: or Doctor Luther must have
also made him to be the author of sin.

It may be both are true, might some man say that namely, Doctor Luther as
well as you, did err in this point? Answer: they may fail that will yet
cannot God fail; who has spoken even so in his holy word of this matter, as
both we and Doct. Luther speak thereof: that namely, there comes nothing to
pass, without the council and will of God, whether it be good or bad.

For example: was not that a wicked act, that Judas betrayed Christ? yet for
all that Christ says, that it was so determined by God. Behold, says he, the
hand of him that betrayeth me, is with me at the table, and truly the Son of
man goes, as it is appointed. Luke 22.21.22. And to the like effect, as it is
written of him. Math. 26.24.

[Note. As it is appointed, and as it is written of him, is taken in the holy
Scriptures for all one. By which it is manifest, that all that stands written in
the Scriptures, that should come to pass in time to come, was so appointed by
God, that it should come to pass, and that these sayings: the Scripture must
be fulfilled, and the council of God must stand, are all one.]

And Peter says: whilst it was so appointed or so written, it must therefore
be accomplished. The Scripture must have been fulfilled, which the holy Ghost
by the mouth of David, spoke before of Judas. Act. 1.16.

Yea not only the treason of Judas, but also of all the wicked deeds and
murtherous acts, which Herod and Pilate with the heathen and people of Israel
committed against the Son of God, says the Scripture: They did whatsoever
the hand and council of God had determined before to be done. Act. 4.28. And
adds further thereunto, that accordingly it must so come to pass. It must
be so says Christ himself. Matthew. 26.54.

Also, it was so written (or determined. For that is all one, as was presently
before showed) And thus it behooved Christ to suffer. Luke 24.46.

Yea the Scripture throughout ascribes this whole work to God the Lord
himself, and says; The Lord would break him, and make him subject to
infirmities, Esa. 53.10. Also, I will smite the shepherd. Zach. 13.7.

So was the work principally the work of God, But Judas, Herod and Pilate,
with the heathen, and the people of Israel were but instruments and tools,
which God used to accomplish such a work.

Another example. Whereas the brethren of Ios^ph sold their innocent brother
Joseph to perpetual slavery into Egypt, was not that a great sin? yet Joseph
says: You sent me not hither, but God, Genesis 45.8. Did God then do it, then did
he determine before and conclude, that he would do it: for he effects nothing
inconsiderately: But he works all things after the council of his own will,
Ephesians. 1.11.

Another example. Whereas Sampson took a a Heathen woman to his wife, against
the expresse^ word of God, and against the faithful disswasion o^ his parents,
was not that a great sin? and yet the Scripture says, It came of the Lord.
Judge. 14.4.

An other example. That Shemei cursed the Lord anointed, was not that a great
sin? and yet for all that David says: The Lord has bidden him, (tha^ is,
the Lord has so ordained it, through his incomprehensible and unsearchable
providence) who dare then say, wherefore have thou done so? that is, therefore
no man can hinder him, but it must be so. 2. Sam. 16.10.

An other example. Whereas Satan provoked David to number the people, and David
did it. 1. Chron. 21.1. that was a great sin; as well of Satan, as of David.
Nevertheless the Scripture says not barely and alone, that God did permit it:
but it says also, that God did it himself; as appears by the plain text:
And the wrath of the Lord was again kindled against Israel, and he moved David
against them, in that he said, go, number Israel and Judah, 2. Sam. 24.1.

An other example. Was not that a fearful great sin? that the unnatural
son Absolon hoisted his aged and decaying father from his kingly seat, lying
with his fathers ten concubines in the sight of all Israel? yet says God to
David; not only I will permit it: but also I will do it. I will take thy
wives before thine eyes, and give them unto thy neighbor, and he shall lie
with thy wives in the sight of this Sun. For thou did it secretly: but I
will do this thing before all Israel. 2. Sam. 12.11.12.

These and the like examples, whereof there are great store in the Bible, do
manifestly witness, that the permission of God, when he permits that which
is evil, is not a bare and naked permission: but that he has also a hand in
the work, and he gouernes and turns it after his own pleasure. Otherwise
he could not say, I will do it: or I have done it.

It is very hotly cast in our teeth, that one of ours should have written, that
God does something provoke a man holily to sin. But with as great diligence is
that left out, that without doubt stands by it (or we mistake the matter) that
God does so no otherwise, then when he will punish sin with sin, which
undoubtedly is a holy work: as the contentius are forced to confess, where
they say, So is blinding ascribed to God the Lord, as a punishment of sins
formerly committed, which in it self is a good work of godly justice. Heilb.
Synops. fol. 50. And what cause have they to complain much against us? the
holy Ghost himself uses the like speech, where he says in the lately
mentioned example of David. And the wrath of the Lord was again kindled
against Israel, and he moved David against them, in that he said, go, number
Israel. 2. Sam. 24.1.

But yet they are hard sayings, might some man say, and they seem in truth to
import as much, as if God were thereby made the causer of sin, and had a
delight in sin. For how is it possible that he should not be the causer of
sin, and have a delight and pleasure in sin, when that he has not only
determined the same, that it should be accomplished; but also has himself a
hand in the work, and moves mankind thereunto?

Answer. Blind, mad, and peremptory reason thinks so indeed. But whosoever
submits himself to the word of God, with an humble heart, he shall well know
and learn to understand, that therefore God is no causer of sin, or has
delight and pleasure in sin, though indeed he have ordained, that this or
that sinful work of his creature should come to pass, and the work must be
done, yea he ascribes it to himself. The which the better to be understood,
by the Godfearing Reader, we will impart this information in short, according
to our powers for his assistance.

The Almighty God, as he once created al things, even so governs he all
things continually by his providence. Therefore the providence of God is
nothing else, then the almighty government of God over all creatures good and
bad: and contains two parts in it. The first part is, that he maintains
the being and power of all creatures, so far and in what manner it pleases
him: without which maintenance no creature can be sustained a minute of one
hour: or is able to rule or move himself in ^he least measure, as Paul says:
He gives to all life and breath, and all things. Also, In him we live, and
move, and have our being. Act. 17.25.28. The second part is, that he has the
motions of all creatures in his hands, and turns them which way he will:
according to the work which he will accomplish by them: as David says, They
continue all by thine ordinances, Psalm. 119.91. and the examples manifest, that
sometimes fire, sometimes water: sometimes good, sometimes bad Angels: sometimes
godly, sometimes wicked men: sometimes frogs, sometimes lice, etc. must serve to
accomplish his councels. And there is nothing exempt from such a disposing of
God: even also that which seems to be already performed: as it is written:
The lot is cast into the lap, but the whole disposition thereof is of the Lord.
Prou 16.33. No not yet the very hearts and thoughts of men, as it is written:
The Lord looks down from heaven, and beholds all the children of men. From
the habitation of his dwelling he beholds all them that dwell on the earth. He
fashioneth their hearts every one, Psalm 33.13.14.15. Also, The heart of the
King is in the hand of the Lord, he turns it whither soever it pleases him,
Prou. 21.1.

It is true God has endued the Angels and men with that kind and nature, that
they can move themselves by their own free will, and either intend this or
that. Even indeed as they do. But for all that he holds the raines of their
free will in his hand, in such a manner, that either he can let them proceed,
when it goes after his will; or he can pull it back, or move it to this or
the other side, even as sometimes a man draws on a beast to a snare, which
he lets either pass freely before him, or pulls back, or can turn
hither or thither. Which comparison God himself uses, where he says to the
King of Assiria; I will put my hook in thy nostrels, and my bridle in thy
lips, and will bring thee back again the same way thou came. Esa. 37.29.

So both Angels and men remain all of them together under the power and
government of God; and cannot forecast, much less bring to pass, either little
or great, without the will of God.

Yet for all that there is a great difference, in that which they intend to
do. For sometimes they do that which God has commanded them to do:
sometimes they do the clean contrary, out of their free will. When they now do
that which God has given them commission for, then do they right therein, and
God is well pleased therewith, furthereth it, and rewards it at the last. But
when they do what he has forbidden them, then do they badly therein. And
though he suffer them sometimes to go on in such their doings, yet has he
no pleasure in their disobedience, but hates the same disobedience earnestly,
and punishes them at last. But he therefore suffers them to proceed in such
their wicked actions, that he may use the same to good; and also knows how to
turn them so, in their wicked course by the bridle of his providence, that
they cannot assault any where in their wickedness, but where he will. For
which there is a notable example of Shemei: he was of himself the enemy of
David: and God uses him to this end, that he should pour out his enmity upon
David even at the same time, when God would correct and humble David by him.
Which David confessed truly, where he says: Suffer him to curse; for the Lord
has bidden him curse David. Who dare then say, wherefore have thou done so? 2.
Sam. 16.10. God did not bid him by any outward command: but he bid him by a
secret and unsearchable manner, whereby he moved the wicked band-dog, that he
should even fall upon David and bite him. Even as he by his secret and
unsearchable order, commanded the ravens, that they should feed Elias, 1. King.
17.4. And the Whale-fish, that he should cast out Jonas upon the dry land,
Jonas 2.10.

According to these, so it is true that God does not that which is evil, but
permits or suffers it to be done. Therefore in all equity there can be
no guilt of sin laid upon him. But the guilt only of sin is the free wicked
will of the sinful creatures. But for all that the permission or sufferance of
God must so be right understood; namely not thus, that God does only barely
look on, what is done by the creatures: like unto one who standing on a high
tower, beholding how the knaves run about and tumble together in the market
stead: but cares not for it, how they agree together, neither having it in his
power to alter it. No: It has no such meaning in it. But the permission or
sufferance of God is so to be understood, that indeed he lets the wicked
creatures run a little after their own free wills: but yet he holds the
raines always in his hand, as before is specified: whereby he can soon turn
them, now this way, now that, or else wholly hold them back, according to his
own pleasure: and he guides them so with his raines, that every one must
perform the same, which he has determined to have effected by them.

From whence it may well be said, that the permission of God is not a bare
permission, but tha^ God has always a hand with them in the action^ For in
all permissions of God concur these tw^ parts of the foreknowledge of God
together. First that he sustaineth the being and power of the creature, even in
the committing of sin; as is well known. For the second, that he has also
their wicked and sinful motions in his hands, and so turns them, that the
same must be effected thereby, which he will have effected, to the furtherance
of his glory, and the benefit of his servants. Therefore he also ascribes the
work, which is effected in this manner, oftentimes to himself: as the above
named examples do witness.

Moreover, whatsoever God now effects or permits in one or other, and in
what manner he turns and accomplisheth the one or the other: even so has
he foreknowne to do from everlasting, and determined in himself; as it is
written: From the beginning of the world God knows all his works. Act.
15.18. Also, He works all things according to the council of his own will.
Ephesians. 111. Which council and will of his, most certain cannot be hindered or
kept back by any creature: but it must vnfaileably come to pass whatsoever he
has determined: as it is written: The Lord of hosts has determined it, who
shall disanull it? and his hand is stretched out, and who shall turn it away?
Esa. 14.27. Yet for all that, the wicked creatures do perform their evil
actions, which they do, without any provocation thereto, but out of free will.
For not every must, takes away free will, Christ must suffer, Luke 24.26.46.
And yet it was his good will, Psalm. 40.8. The heaven must contain Christ,
Act. 3.21. And yet he was not forced to it, but did it gladly, Ioh. 17.13.24.
So, Judas must betray Christ; and yet he was not enforced to it, to betray
him, neither secretly, nor openly, but he did do it gladly, and out if
freewill: therefore he is also rightly punished everlastingly for it. And even
the same is one part of the special unspeakable wisdom of God; that he can
so manage his government, that he also with those creatures, which yet do what
they do, out of free will, and in respect of their natures could do otherwise,
yet for all that can infallibly accomplish the same, which he has determined
to have accomplished by them.

Doctor Luther says thus of this matter: If not we our selves, but God works
in us our salvation, then cannot we act any thing holily, before such time as
his is there, do we, frame we, and work we it the best we can. And I say, we
must do wickedly, not that we are enforced thereunto; but as we use to say, it
must be so of necessity, without resistance; and yet not by any powerful
compulsion and force. That is, when a man has not the spirit of God, then is
he not as it were driven headlong by force, that he must commit wickedness
against his will (as they use to carry a thief or murderer to the gallows
against his will) but he does it willingly and gladly, etc. That is here by us
called a Must, or must be of necessity, which is no^ subject to alteration,
etc. Tom. 6. Wit. Germ. fol. 479 480. Also, We know well that Judas betrayed
Christ wilfully. But we say; that such a will in Judas was certainly and
unchangeably to be accomplished, at the time and hour as God had determined
it. Or, if we be not yet understood, then must we make a difference of two
necessities. One necessity, where I am forced to a work by force. The other,
where a thing must come to pass at a certain time without constraint, etc He
that now hears us speak, let him know, that we speak of the last, and not of
the first. That is we do not speak of this, whether Judas was willingly a
traitor, or against his will: but whether it must come to pass at the time and
hour, which God had determined unchangeably, that he should betray Christ
willingly. fol. 529. a.

This is the construction of us, and Doct. Luther, how these sayings are to be
understood: that nothing comes to pass, unless God has ordained it that it
should come to pass, whether it be good or evil, and that it must so come to
pass, even as the Lord has determined it: and that the permission of God is
not a bare and empty permission, but that always there is mingled something of
his working. Out of which exposition, we hope the God-fearing Reader has
understood so much: that by such speeches God is not made the causer of sin;
but only that the honor is given unto him, that he is the Almighty Lord of
heaven and earth: without whose will no creature can move and stir it self:
and that he also suffers no creature otherwise to move and stir, then as
he will turn and use their motions to a good end, though it be otherwise
euilly intended by the creature. As it is spoken very plainly, and finely made
difference of, about the mad knaves, who sold their brother Joseph into Egypt:
Ye thought evil against me, but God disposed it to good, that he might bring
to pass, as it is this day, and save much people alive, Genesis 50.20.

What is especially meant by that word Provoke: it is clearly expounded in the
holy Scripture: that God for his part provoke no man to wickedness; but
Satan, and the evil lusts of men do it. Iam. 1.13.14. 1. Ioh. 3.8. But
whilst God uses this means thereto, when he will punish sin with sin,
that he delivers men up unto Satan or their own lusts; therefore the work
which these instruments accomplish, is not only ascribed to the instruments,
but somewhat also to God himself. As the often mentioned examples of David do
witness: of which it is written in one place, that the devil stood up, and
provoked David to number Israel, 1. Chron. 21.1. And in another place it
stands, The Lord moved him thereunto. 2. Sam. 24.1. namely, through the
service of Satan. For all things are servants to him. Psalm. 119.91. And there
are more examples to be found in the Scriptures, which do say, that God does
oftentimes use the devil, and other wicked creatures in his service. As Job 1.
Also, 1. King. 22. etc.

And we take it this is spoken sufficiently of this matter, to manifest our
innocence.

Now will we also hear how our contradictors will have it, how men should
speak of the foreknowledge of God. They would have that men should say, that
indeed God did see from everlasting the evil aforehand, that it would come to
pass: but he did not determine that it should come to pass. As also it is not
his will now that men should do wickedly.

Answer. It is most certainly not the will of God, that men should commit
evil. And so far forth in very deed has he not determined, that any evil
should come to pass, as if namely he took a pleasure in the same evil. But
in respect that he through this or that evil work of his creature, will
accomplish this or that good work, or will perform punishments, then can no
man deny that he has determined, that the same evil deed should be performed
through his permission: except they will deny and control the Lord Christ
himelfe, who expressly said, that it was determined that Judas should betray
him. Luke 22.22.

Also, except they will gainesay all the Apostles jointly, who speak most
clearly, that Herod and Pilate, with the Gentiles and people of Israel, did
do no otherwise, then the hand and council of God determined before to be
done. Act. 4.28. In sum, God will in some respect do a thing, and also will
not in some other regards and considerations. God will have it that Judas
should be faithful and true to Christ, in respect that it is right and good of
it self so to be. But in consideration, that through the unfaithfulness and
treason of Judas, our redemption might be procured: therefore will he have it,
that the same treason shall proceed: and in consideration hereof, has he
also determined from everlasting that it should proceed. For as he will have a
thing at present, even so and no otherwise has he willed and determined
everlastingly, according to the often aforementioned saying, known unto God
are all his works, from the beginning of the world, Act. 15.18. And the holy
Scripture goes yet further, and says, that God does not only use every
creature to what purpose he will, it being so that he created them: but also
that he has stirred up and created every creature for this cause, that he
would use them to this or that end: as we read of King Pharaoh, that God
says plainly to him: And in very deed, for this cause have I raised thee up,
for to show in thee my power, and that my name may be declared throughout all
nations. Exodus 9.16. Which is indeed a very hard saying to reason, and the
wicked have always murmured against it, and said: Why does he yet find fault?
for who has resisted his will? Romans 9.19. But the spirit of God stands to it,
and esteems the wicked not worthy of any other answer, then this: Nay but O
man, who art thou that reply against God? shall the thing formed say to him
that formed it, why have thou made me thus? has not the Potter power over the
clay, of the same lump, to make one vessel unto honor, and another to
dishonor? Romans 9.20.21. With which answer the godly being humbled, cast down
themselves and say, Lord thou art righteous in all thy ways, and holy in all
thy works. Psalm. 145.17. Though we poor men understand not, how thou rulest.
Psalm. 147.5.

The contradictors also find fault with this word Determined, and say it is not
truly spoken, when it is said, God has determined all things to a good end,
whatsoever comes to pass, whether it be good or evil. Now not only the holy
Scripture uses this phrase in this matter. As where the Apostles do jointly
say: Herod and Pilate, with the Gentiles, and people of Israel did do to
Christ, whatsoever the hand and council of God had before determined to be
done, etc. Act. 4.28. (for so did Doctor Luther interpret the Greek word
Proherise, which Paul uses in this place. Romans 8.29. Also, 1. Cor. 2.7. Ephesians.
1 5.11.) Also, where Sirach says: Death and bloodshead, strife and sword,
calamities, famine, tribulation and scourge: these things are created for the
wicked, Chap. 40.9.10. But also Doctor Luther uses the very same word, even to
the same purpose as we do, where he says, It is indeed so, that no man can
do good or hurt, as the Scripture says, except he be ordained thereunto of
God. Tom. 2. Ien. fol. 210. Therefore the Lutherans have no just cause of
complaint against us for this matter.

But we have just cause of wondering, how they will reconcile that which they
say in the Concordion book: The foreknowledge of God orders the evil, and
sets it his bounds. fol. 250. Also, What the corrupt wicked will of Satan and
men intend, act, and desire, that is seen and known of God aforehand; and his
Praescience, that is, foreknowledge, keeps his Order, even in the wicked fact
or working, that God sets his mark and measure to the evil which he
likes not, how far it shall go, and how long it shall endure: when and how
he will hinder and punish the same, all which yet the Lord God so governs,
that it must redound to the honor of his Divine Majesty, and the benefit of
his chosen servants, and the wicked shall come to confusion by the same. fol.
319. And yet they allege, that it is Caluinish, when it is said, that God has
appointed also the evil that comes to pass, to every thing his proper end?

They say in the Concordion book: But the beginning and cause of evil, is not
the foreknowledge of God, (for God prouides and works not evil, neither
helps and furthers the same) but Satan, and the corrupt will of man. fol.
319. Answer. Even the very same also is our opinion. For we say not, that the
foreknowledge of God is the beginning and cause of sin: but that the alone
working cause of evil, in as much as it is evil, is the devils and men's
corrupt will. Only say we, that God turns it to good, by his unsearchable
wisdom and power, the evil which he lets come to pass, and has ordained
the the same to such a good use, by his foreknowledge. And this confess our
contradictors also. Wherefore is the discord then? for nothing else, as it is
manifest, then for the fools cap. Except our contradictors be of this meaning,
that God did not certainly conclude any thing from everlasting, of all things,
which his creatures purposed in time to come, out of their own free wills,
whether such things should come to pass or not, and unto what end he would
turn and use them: but that he only did behold from everlasting, and now
continually beholdet^ what every man does: and that he does every day bethink
himself a new, what he will do therein, as the necessity of his honor and
our salvation shall require. Even as a general does, who cannot determine all
things at one time, what he will do afterward; but must daily consult
according as occasion is administered. If our contradictors be of this opinion,
then do we roundly confess, that we are not of their opinion. For we do not
believe in such an vnmighty God, who might order and change his councels
according to the wills and purposes of his creatures: But we do believe in
such an almighty God, after whose council and will, all creatures must be
ordered, whether they do it gladly or not, wittingly or ignorantly. This is
our faith: and we trust, no man that does know God, shall lay any blame unto us
for the same.

Also, unto this is commonly drawn the disputation about the fall of our first
parents: and it is demanded, whether such a f^ll were before from everlasting
ordained by God and determined, that it should come to pass or no; and whether
accordingly it must so come to pass? Now it were much better, that we on both
sides troubled our selves how we might be raised again from this heavy
fall, then that we should much dispute how we came into the same. But yet for
all that, to the end that nothing be kept in silence by us: we do plainly
confess, that we do not believe that God did create man at a venturous
haphazard: but we are thus persuaded, that God, first and before he created
man, did consider all things well, not only how he would create them, but also
how he would govern them, and what he would make, or in what manner he
would use them to his honor. For if God also cares so for the sparrowes,
whereof two are sold for a farthing, that not one of them shall fall to the
ground without his will. Mat. 10.29. How much more has he then so cared for
mankind, which he created after his own image, from everlasting, that nothing
could befall unto him, without his will. And we read expressly also in the
holy Scripture, that God has from everlasting decreed with himself the
disposition or order, 1. Pet. 1.20. Mat. 20.16. Ephesians. 1.3.4.5,
6.7.8.9.10.11.12. Romans 9.21.22.23.
how he would deal with the fallen posterity of mankind. Namely, that he would
give them his Son to be a Mediator, and would convert many of them to him,
and show his mercy and grace to them, but unto the other his just anger against
sin. How can we then doubt, that he also did purpose and determine in
himself from everlasting to permit the fall: yea that he created the same
humane race, even for that disposition and order sake, which he would hold in
the government of man's posterity? for it is impossible that God should not
attain unto the end, which he purposed in himself in the creating of man, or
else he must not be an almighty God. Then is there now no need to pry and
search into the secret council of God, what he decreed from everlasting
therein, about the creation and government of the posterity of mankind. The
issue thereof demonstrateth it plainly enough: were we now but so humble, that
we would suffer our selves to be tutored by God, and desired not to tutor him.

But whereas some will conclude hence, that if the fall of mankind were
ordained of God from everlasting, then could it not possibly fail, but he
must be a causer thereof: that does not follow at all. Even as little as God
is the cause that Judas did betray Christ, though indeed he determined, that it
should come to pass. Luke 22.22. The cause why it follows not is this: for
that God did not determine that he would himself found and work the fall of
mankind; but only, that he would permit the devil to be founder of it, and
man to set it a work, as it also came to pass. The devil has founded the
fall; our first parents have set it a work: all out of free will. Therefore is
not the guilt to be ascribed to God the Lord, but only to themselves. Which
yet is such a wise and almighty God, who could establish from everlasting, his
own infallible councels, even also of the same, which his creatures would do
out of free will.

And so much also of this point.

CHAP. VIII. That we do not bebeeue and teach otherwise of Gods everlasting
Election, or of the free election by grace of the children of God, to
everlasting life, or which is all one, of the offspring of faith: then as Doctor
Luther of happy memory did believe and teach.
THe third point which is brought to the lights, after the death of Doct.
Luther, and above other points at this present day, is most eagerly pursued and
encountered is about the everlasting election of God: or of the free election by
grace of the children of God to everlasting life: Or, which is all one, of the
fountain from whence faith springs. Whereof we thus expressed our minds in
the faithful Admonition.

That mankind is so corrupted through the fall, Page 35.
that he is never able to believe in Christ, Now in English in page 14. Luth.
or to come unto him by his own power; though he be called to him by the
Gospel: but that he may understand and receive the Gospel of Christ, God
together with the outward preaching of the Gospel must also inwardly open his
understanding, and turn his heart to Christ by his holy spirit.

And so is faith nothing less then a work of free will: but a mere free gift
of God, which gift no man has deserved of God; it so being that all men are
sinners. But God gives such grace freely by grace to whom he will. But those
whom he presently will, those has he willed from everlasting: according to
the saying of James: From the beginning of the world God knows all his
works. Therefore flows faith from this spring, even the everlasting
foreknowledge of God: And the faithful have no cause to ascribe it to
themselves, but to praise God, that they do believe. The unbelievers also
cannot ascribe the fault to God, but to themselves that they do not believe.
For though all men are so corrupted by nature that they cannot of themselves
believe in Christ: yet has not God so corrupted them; but they have so
corrupted themselves; seeing that through the devils prouocatio^ they fell
willingly from God. About which fall no man has cause to complain against God,
though he should leave all men in their destruction and unbelief together. And
therefore that he does help only some out of the same, for that they are to
magnify his mercy, and not to dispute with him about the rest.

But when as one desires to know whether God has foreseen, and chosen him to
eternal life, or not: Then shall he not search into the secret council of God:
for such a searching is but in vain, and tends to no other end, then to
serve to bring another to despair, or indeed unto fleshly security. But when
one desires to be assured, whether he be ordained to salvation or no, let him
hold himself to the revealed word of God; and according to the command thereof
believe in Christ and repent. And then need he not further search whether he be
elected to everlasting life or not: for all they that believe in Christ without
hypocrisy, are chosen to life everlasting, as it is written, All that believe
in him shall not perish, but have everlasting life.

Now Doctor Muller confesses, In the brothership of the Protestant Churches
These 141.142. Page 85. 86. 87. Page 87.
that this confession is right. Only he says, we lest out something therein.
Some man might say, what is that? that says he; To whom God will give the gift
of faith, and to whom he will not give it? whether his will stands so, that he
will bestow faith on all those who are called by the Gospel: or only to save
few, namely, only those which he foresaw and chose to everlasting life from
everlasting, freely out of his mere good pleasure? This says he is the Bride
for whom the dance is provided. About this question consists the maine point
only. Therein the poor brothership of the Psaltzgrauians are as still as a
mouse.

Answer. This is the maine point, What is the maine question in this matter.
and that alone is about this question, whether God will only give faith to
them, to whom he has determined to give the same freely out of mere pleasure?
Or, whether from everlasting God found and saw any where any cause in us?
wherefore he would give faith to us before others? This do we affirm. But
that we should have purposely omitted the same in our faithful Admonition, and
have been therein as still as the mouse; to this do we say no. And we appeal
to the eye sight.

Our words about this question are these: And so is faith nothing less then a
work of free will: but a mere free gift of God, which gift no man has
deserved of God; it so being that all men are sinners. But God gives such grace
freely by grace to whom he will. But those whom he presently will, those has
he willed from everlasting, according to the saying of James: From the
beginning of the world God knows all his works. Therefore flows faith from
this spring, even the everlasting foreknowledge of God: and the faithful have
no cause to ascribe it to themselves, but to praise God, that they do believe.
Do you call that as still as the mouse? do we not set both the affirmative and
negative: that is, which is the cause, or is not, wherefore God determined to
bestow faith on us before others from everlasting; Is not the negative clear:
no man has deserved such a gift of God? Is not the affirmative also clear:
But God gives such grace freely by grace to whom he will? but those whom he
presently will, those has he willed from everlasting. Could not Doct. Muller
see there, that we set down a free mere good pleasure of God?

Then you confess might some man say that God freely out of mere pleasure did
choose some men before others to this end, that he would give them faith?
Answer. What needs much questioning? It stands clearly there, in our
faithful Admenition: No man has deserved it of God; but he gives it to whom
he will, freely by mere grace. That is indeed a free mere good pleasure.

And wherefore should we be ashamed of this confession, which is so manifest
in the word of God? By grace are ye saved through faith (says Paul) and that
not of your selves: it is the gift of God, not of works lest any man should
boast himself. Ephesians. 2.8.9. Also, It is not in him that wills, nor in him
that runs, but in God that shows mercy. Romans 9.16. Also, therefore he has
mercy on whom he will, Rom 9.18. And the Son of God himself knows not to
give any other witness of the cause, wherefore God did hide the Gospel from
the wise and men of understanding, and opened it to babes, but the mere good
pleasure of God. It is so, says he, O father, because thy good pleasure was
such. Matthew. 11.26. How should we poor sinners then find any where, and show
any other cause?

Well then, says Doctor Muller, whilst you confess that, that God gives the
gift of faith to some men out of mere good pleasure, and gives it not to
others; therefore can we not acknowledge you for brethren. For that is a very
abominable doctrine, Page 90. lin 7.
whereby the foundation of faith cannot stand pure and stable: Page 89. lin.
15. 16.
and Doctor Luther never taught so in all his life but the Caluinists devils
hose stink thus.

But this is the true sold doctrine of the Lutherans (says Doctor Muller
further) that Gods free election has his reference unto faith, that is, Page
95. lin. 15. 16. 17.
as he plainly exsed his mind in others of his writings, (which writings, as
also the agreeable writings, of Hunnius are witnessed by Doctor Daniel Hofman,
professor of Helmstadt, in his Apology, Page 46 unto 67.) that God foresaw
from everlasting, who would believe in Christ. And those did he predestinate to
everlasting life. For though no man of himself can fully believe in Christ;
yet could every man do so much out of natural strength: which when he does,
God will undoubtedly give him faith. For every man can by the power of nature,
hear and meditate in the word of God. Also, desire to believe; Also, to remove
the thorns and thistles out of the heart, which hinders faith; and in short,
make himself so qualified, as his should be to whom God will give faith. And
such faith was for seen of God, and his election founded thereupon. Therefore
is not Gods election a free mere decree of God; but the cause is in man,
wherefore he chooses one, and not the other.

Doctor Mar. Luther of the cause why God did choose one man before another.
Answer. Then hear (peace-louing Reader) Doctor Luther himself, if that be
his doctrine? In no sort says Doctor Luther. But this is my doctrine:

Even as a man, before he was created, did add nothing nor endeavored
thereunto, that he might be a creature, etc. but it befell only by the will
of Divine power and goodness, etc. So, before a man be regenerate, and become
a new creature, by the spirit and faith, he does nothing thereunto, neither
can he strive any thing, whereby he may prepare himself to the spiritual new
birth, and to the kingdom of God. Tom. 6. Wit. Germ. fol. 548. B. Also, If
not we our selves, but God works our salvation in us, then cannot we do any
blessed work, before such time as his work is there, though we do frame our
selves, and work it the best we can. fol. 479. B. Also, We have there the
precious clear words, which sound thus: he has mercy on whom he will, and
whom he will he hardens. fol. 527. A. Also, It is not in him that wills,
nor in him that runs, but in God that shows mercy. folio, 526. B. Item,
For to will and rejoice to keep Gods law, thou have not of thy self, but from
God, which he bestows on whom he pleases. fol 511. B. Also, If thou art
accepted of God, he will give and bestow upon thee the power to keep the
Commandments, etc. fol. 511. B. Also, It belongs not to every man, neither
is it sprung from the choice or power of man, that one hears the word of
Christ earnestly, etc. Tom. 6. Ien. fol. 182. A. Also, It follows originally
from the election of God, who shall believe or not believe; who shall be losed
from sin or not losed. In the Preface upon the Epistle to the Romans, which
is to be found in every Wittenberges Bible. Also, The Lord has ordained the
ministry of his word, that he might bestow faith thereby, and we men attain
unto it, etc. and he gives also faith by the same, as the means thereunto,
together with the holy Ghost, how and to whom he will, etc. Tom. 5. Ien. fol.
15. Also, Man was created to everlasting life, or to everlasting death, before
all other creatures. Tom. 6. Wit. Germ. fol. 480. B. Also, God ordained some
to damnation, before ever they were borne. fol. 534. B. Also, Christ weepeth,
sorroweth, and yearneth over the damnation of the wicked, albeit the
everlasting Divine will, did let some pass, cast them off, and damned them
purposely. fol. 510. B. Also, After follows the similitude, that there are
several vessels, some to honor, some to dishonor; whereby he teaches and
concludes, that the vessels did not prepare themselves, but the Lord did do
it, which he also will have understood in the ninth Chapter Also, Prou. 16.4
The Lord has made all things for his own sake, yea, even the wicked for the
day of evil. Note. Note.
of the Romans, in the work of the potter, etc. fol. 533. B. Also, This
similitude is laid out by two words: there are elect, and damned; so are there
vessels for honor, and for dishonor. fol. 534. B. Also, The similitude
stands as firm as a wall, touching the potter and vessels, etc. That it
consists not in our power and wills what vessels we should be. fol. 536. B.
Also, Christ in the 11. of Matthew, shows no other cause wherefore the Gospel
was hid from the wise and men of understanding, etc. then that it was so the
good pleasure of his father. Note. Merely out of will.
fol. 513. B. Also, I know well what it is that the reason of man is highly
offended withal; namely, that God out of will, and merely out of will,
forsakes and hardens a man, even as he had a pleasure in the everlasting
destruction of him. fol. 527. B. Also, Then you hear very well, that reason
thinks it unbeseeming, that God should damn those, who cannot will that which
is good, neither can shun the desert of damnation, and therefore it must be
false which Paul says, He has mercy on who^ he will, and who^ he will he
hardens, so must now our Lord God deiect himself out of his chair and a
common fellow sit therein, and so suffer himself to be prescribed laws and
ordinances, to damn no man but as we by the judgment of reason think, that
he has deserved the same. fol. 534. A. But if God so works, that he has
respect to desert, wherefore do they then murmr so much, and contend with
God? Wherefore do they say, why does he yet complain? who has resisted his
will? and what cause had Paul to still them? for they would not make much
wondering, much less complain so hotly, when as they knew that they had
deserved it. Also, Where remains then, that the potter had power to make what
he would, one vessel for honor, the other to dishonor: if he be subject to
laws and services, and dare not effect what he will, but it shall be
propounded to him what he should do? For these two are directly opposite the
one to the other, that desert should be respected, and that also he should have
the power and liberty to do what pleases him. Even as the house-father in the
Gospel sufficiently testifies, dealing with the murmuring workmen, lays
before them his power and liberty, and says: Is it not lawful for me to do as
I will with mine own, etc? But I will admit, that God the Lord must be such a
one, that he has respect to desert in those whom he damneth: So must we even
as well yield and say, that God has respect to desert in those, whom he
saves. For and if we will follow the judgment of reason, then is it even as
unlike and untrue, that he saves those who do not deserve it, as that he
condemns those, who have not deserved the same Namely, according to the
opinion of reason: it so being that it is impossible for them to shun sin.
. So must we (I perceive) also conclude, that he should make men out of
foregoing deserts; or they will say, that he is an unjust God, who has a
delight and pleasure in wicked men, and therewithal that he makes sinners,
drawing them from sin and ungodly courses, by his grace and reward. But we
unto us miserable men, if we had such a God, who then should be saved? Whereby
thou see how deep and secret wickedness is hidden in the heart of man, that
God should make the sinner blessed without desert, and take the sinner, who
has deserved otherwise to mercy: to this does not reason say, that he is an
unrighteous God, for this it complains not, neither murmureth against God,
whereas yet it is unright, if it should be measured even according to reason.
But wherefore does it not complain for it? Indeed it is a thing that is sweet
and serviceable to it. Therefore it seems true, and most acceptable. But when
God does condemn those who have not deserved the same, or has ordained some
to destruction before ever they were borne: whilst this is a bitter and sower
doctrine unto them, and sauoureth not their pallates, therefore complain they
that it is unjust, and unsupportable, there they contend, murmr and
blaspheme. Wherefore thou see, that the Diatribe do not censure there,
according to likelihoods and truths, but according to their own minds and
hearts delights. For and if they do thoroughly and truly consider that, then do
they even as well contend with God, when he saves sinners, and those that
deserved it not, as they do contend with him, when he damneth those who have
not deserved the same. Also they will even as well praise God and thank him,
when he condemns those that deserved it not, as they glorify him, when he
receives sinners to mercy, and saves them who did not merit the same. For it
seems alike unright on both sides, if the reason of man should be the judge
herein. For it is even alike unjust, when a man should praise Cain for the
murder he committed, and extol him as a King before God, as when a man should
imprison and strangle innocent Abell. If so be now that reason commends God,
when he receives the sinner to mercy, and yet blames God, when he
condemns those that did not deserve it, then shall catch them here
manifestly, and can vanquish them in this, that they do not soundly and barely
praise God, as their God, but censure according to their own profits, seeking
and praising themselves, and their own things in God, not seeking God barely
and his honor. But loving reason is it pleasing to thee, when God accepts
and saves sinners; then should it not displease thee also when he damneth
whom he will. Is he just in that, then is he also just herein. In that does
he shead out grace and bounty upon us being unworthy; in this he uses severe
fierceness, anger and sharpness, against them that did not deserve the same.
But according to the censure of men, he does too much to them on both sides,
and he is so an unrighteous God, but yet he is a just and faithful God in
himself. For how that is right, that he saves the sinner, and those that
deserved it not, is at present not able to be conceived of us, but we shall know
it, when we attain to the mansion, where faith shall be complete, and we
shall see face to face. Even so also, how that is right, that he condemns
those who have not deserved the same, is also at present not conceiueable: but
we believe it, until the time that the Son of man shall be revealed from
heaven. fol. 534. B. Also, That the everlasting will of the Divine Majesty
lets some pass, casts them off, and condemns them: we need not
enquire wherefore God does it, but it beseems rather that we worship God with
fear and trembling, who is able to effect so high and weighty works, and will
do it. fol. 510. B. Al^o, Here were now the right place: here were it time
for a man to stand amazed at the wonderful unsearchable judgments and ways
of the Divine Majesty, and to worship the same with fear, and to say: Thy will
be done in earth as it is in heaven. But some are no where less fearing God,
then in this: being only desirous to search into, lay hold on, and control
this secret unsearchable judgment and that every where by their conceits: and
they allege for it, that they do very much tremble, to meddle with the word
of God, lest they should enter too deep into the same: whereas yet God has
commanded to search the Scriptures; yet there will they not search: And where
he has commanded not to meddle, there will they of set purpose be searching
without ceasing: which for all that is nothing else, then blasphemy against
God. For is not this a vain conceiting search, when I shall undertake to
captive to the freedom of my will, the everlasting Divine Predestination, Note.
which in all equity ought to be free, moving over all creatures? Or that I
shall rail upon the everlasting Predestination of God, when I shall be
limited: or that I shall blame, or else murmr and say, why does he yet find
fault? who has resisted his will? Also, who is the Lord? where remains then
that which is said in the Scripture, he will not the death of a sinner? has
he created us therefore to take pleasure in our pain, torment, and everlasting
damnation? And many more the like words, Note.
which also shall be barked out and howled by the damned in hell
everlastingly. fol. 527. a.b.

Also, it must be otherwise spoken of God or of the will of God, which he
caused to be preached to us, which he has revealed and propounded to us:
then of the will of God, which he has not caused to be preached, revealed or
commanded. So far now as God is silent of himself, and will not here be
made known unto us, therein should we not trouble our selves. fol. 527. B.
Also, with this do the Diatribes deceive themselves, in that they put not a
difference betwixt God, Note.
as he is preached and revealed, and betwixt God, as he unrevealed, that is,
betwixt Gods word, and God himself. God does many things, which he makes not
known to us by his word. He wills also many things, which he makes not
known to us by his word. Even so he will not the death of a sinner, according
to the will which he has revealed in his word. But yet he will, according to his
secret unsearchable will. Now we are to have respect to his word, and are to let
pass his unsearchable will, whereof we have no commandment at all. For we
must square our selves after the rule of his word: and not after his
unsearchable will. For who can rule himself after the will of God, which is
wholly hidden, and is not to be known? It is enough for us to know that there
is an unsearchable will in God: but what it is that this will effects, how,
whether, how far it goes, that is not beseeming us once to enquire after, to
search into, or to know, but only to reverence in all fear and trembling.
fol. 508 A. Also, If flesh and blood shall now stumble and murmr at it,
though it murmr never so much, yet can it accomplish nothing: God is not
therefore changeable: and though many wicked be offended and fall away, or
deny the Lord, or disdain him, yet remain the faithful and elect.

Even as the same is to be answered them, who demand, Doctor Martin Luther, why
God let Adam fall.
wherefore God suffered Adam to fall? and wherefore did he let us al be sinners
in him, and be borne in a nature corrupted, if he could have sustained him
sufficiently? Or, wherefore did he not first resanctifie the nature, renew and
cleanse the same, before such time as all other men were borne out of the same?
or did not make us otherwise? To which in short this answer is sufficient, He
is God: to the will of whom, can no law ground, or cause to be yielded. For it
so being that there is nothing in heaven or earth to paralise him; also nothing
that surmounts him; there can be no rule, number or measure appointed him, but
his will is the measure, or rule to all creatures. For if so be that his will
has a measure or rule, law, ground and cause then were it indeed not Gods will
at all. For that which he will, is not therefore right, because he should or
must so will it; but the clean contrary; that which he will is therefore
right, because he will so have it. The creature has laws and ordinances,
grounds and causes appointed to it: but the will of the Creator has none: will
we then ordain another God, and another Creator of the creatures? fol. 524.
A. Also, But we say now even as we have done formerly, that the secret will
of Gods Majesty shall not be enquired into, but only shun selfe-conceited
reason, which always forsakes Christ, faith, love, and the Cross, and will
mount above the clouds, before her feathers be grown. We are not here to be
troubled in searching into the high great secrets of Gods Majesty, which
dwells in right that none can attain unto, as Paul says. 1. Tim. 6. We must
keep our selves close to God, wherein he accepts of us, who became man, even
in Jesus Christ the crucified, as Paul says, in whom is hidden the fullness of
the wisdom of God. For in him have we richly both what is known unto us, and
that which we ought not to know. fol 510. A Also, But reason will here say,
even like the custom of the mockers, being both nose wise and self minded.
Yea indeed this is a fine found thing, that when as you are forced with strong
grounds and arguments, that then you fly to the will of Gods Majesty; there
must the counterpartie hold his peace: even as the Astrology with their
Epicyclis, turn all questions from the course of the heavens. To which this my
answer: It is not a thing found by me, whereas I say the will of God is not
to be searched into, but it is founded in the word of God, and there
commanded. For so says Paul to the Romans, chap. 9. Thou will say then unto
me, why does he yet complain? for who has resisted his will? But O man, who
art thou which pleadest against God? shall the thing formed, say to him that
formed it, why have thou made me thus? has not the potter power of the clay,
to make of the same lump, etc. And Esaias spoke thereof before Paul, in his 58.
Chapter. They seek me daily, and will know my ways, even as a nation that did
righteously, and had not forsaken the statutes of their God, they ask of me
the ordinances of justice, and will draw near unto God. As I take it these
words give sufficient testimony, that man shall not search into the will of the
Majesty. And it so being, that this case of freewill and everlasting
Predestination, is of such special consequence, where the corrupt reason and
fleshly man are accustomed to search after the will of the Majesty; it is
therefore of special necessity that we say unto them, that they herein keep
silence, and yield the honor that belongs to the Divine will and Majesty. In
other matters which are handled, wherein cause may be given, and cause must be
taken upon command, therein are not men so diligent in searching. But and if
yet there be some who will be searching after the will, and will not give
regard to our admonition; those do we let pass, evermore to hold combat with
God, as the giants do: and they shall see the profit or praise they shall
purchase by it. fol. 510. B. The Reader may may find many more testimonies of
Doctor Mart. Luther, in the book which is entitled, Constant doctrine of D.
Mart. Luther of the first moving causes of faith: printed at Amberg, Anno,
1598. in 410.


Behold Reader: this is the doctrine of Doctor Luther, of the cause of our
election to everlasting life. Whether now we, or Doctor Muller, and Doct.
Hunnius are the better Lutherans in this point, we yield to the censure of all
honest Lutherans. It is true indeed that there be some who let not to blase
that Doctor Luther did at last renounce and alter the aforesaid doctrine. But
the Concordien book says no thereunto, and says;

Upon this we will set down one saying, where Doctor Luther pronounces
afterward with a Protestation, to remain by the same even to the day of his
death, expressing his mind in the great confession of the holy Supper, where he
says thus: Herewithall do I renounce and condemn all foul errors and
doctrines, which advance the free will of man, as being a mere opposite to the
help and grace of our Savior Jesus Christ. For whilst that without Christ,
death and sin is our Lord, and the devil our God and Prince, there can be
no power nor strength, no wit nor understanding, whereby we can frame or
further our selves to righteousness and life, but we must remain blind and
fettered slaves of sin and Satan, doing and intending whatsoever shall be
pleasing to him, and so shall be contrary to God and his Commandments. In
these words (says the Concordien book) Doctor Luther of happy and blessed
memory, yields our free will no power at all, whereby to further it self unto
righteousness, or to strive toward the same, but says, that mankind is
blinded and captiued to do only what shall be the will of the devil, and
shall be contrary unto God. Therefore here is no partaking in works by our
wills in the conversion of mankind. And a man must be drawn and borne again of
God; else is there not a thought in our hearts, which is able to move it self
toward the Gospel whereby to embrace it, of it own accord. As also Doct.
Note. Doctor Luthers book, de seruo arbitrio, is cannonised in the Concordium
book.
Luther writ of this matter against Erasmus, in the book de seruo arbitrio,
that is, of the captiued will of man, and maintained the same thoroughly, and
afterward repeated and expounded it in the notable exposition of the first
book of Moses upon the 26. Chapter, (Note. He did not retract it, but repeated
and expounded it) as in like manner in the same place also, where other
by-matters are disputed of by Erasmus, as, de absoluta necessitate, etc. He
shows how he would have the same taken and understood, against all
misconstructions, and peruertings As we use also to do.
. To which we also now refer our selves We also.
, and also direct others thereunto. Therefore it is false doctrine, when it is
propounded, that the unregenerate man has yet so much power, that he desires
to entertain the Gospel, to comfort himself therewithal, and that so the
natural man's will partaketh something in the conversion: for such an erroneous
opinion is flat against the Divine Scriptures, the Christian Auspurges
Confession, the Apology of the Same, the Smalkaldes articles, the great and
small Catechism of Luther, and other of that notable highly enlightened
Divines writings. Thus far the Concordien book. fol. 271. B. and 272. B.

Some man might say, then is the Concordien book Caluinish also? Answer. We
cannot find it any otherwise in this matter. For even as we say; that God found
no cause in us wherefore he should choose us before others to everlasting life:
even so says the Concordien book also: and says, the contrary doctrine is a
terrible and blasphemous heresy. fol. 251. B. And it notifieth also the right
ground, wherefore God saw and found no cause in us, why he should elect us:
namely therefore; Because says it, before such time as a man is enlightened,
changed, newborn, renewed, and drawn by the holy Ghost, he can effect as
much of himself, and by his own natural power in Divine matters, change
himself, or begin to regenerate himself, work or partake in working, even as
much as a stone, block or hedge. For though he be able to govern the
outward members, and to hear and ponder the Gospel in some measure, and also
speak thereof, as is to be seen in the hypocrisy of the Pharesies: yet does
he esteem for folly, and will not believe it. Carrying himself therein worse
then a block: because he is an enemy and contradictor of the will of God, if
so be the holy Ghost be not powerful in him, and do not work and kindle in
him faith and other virtues and obediences well pleasing to the Lord. Even as
the holy Scriptures do not ascribe to the humane power of the natural free
will, either part or whole, little or more share thereof about conversion, to
believe in Christ, to be newborn, to be changed, and whatsoever else
appertains to the beginning and accomplshing of the same work; but in
Solidum, that is wholly and altogether, ascribes the same only to the Divine
working, and to the holy Ghost. fol. 269. B.

Behold Reader; so teaches the Concordien book of this matter. And so it sets
in effectu even as well as we, an an absolute decree, that is, a free mere
council of God; whereby he has elected some whom he would enlighten to
believe in Christ. And says, God did not find any cause of such his council
in us. Of reprobation.
Only for so much as concerns reprobation, therein is it not a mere set
council: but there is in him a manifest and well known cause of reprobation;
namely sin: which we also yield the true construction unto. For God condemns
no man but for sin; and therefore has he not ordained any man to damnation,
but in respect of sin. And in that respect the council of reprobation is
indeed not a mere free council. But when it shall be demanded, that whilst
all men are sinners, and that no man has ability above others, to furnish and
frame himself to Gods gracious election: wherefore then does God pass by
these in the election and not others. To this do we say, that there can be no
cause showed. And the Concordien book does even confess the very same also;
for it teaches expressly (as was presently showed) that no man has power
before others, to furnish and frame himself to Gods gracious election. And
therefore we accord in this point, and that wholly with the Concordien book:
except it be so that it discordeth with it self. Which contrariety to be in
it, will never be yielded unto by Doctor Daniel Hofman, who was a famous
Lutheran, and a principal subscriber of the Concordien book: but he says,
this is the constant and proper doctrine of the Concordien book, that God did
not find any cause of election in us: and that Doctor Hunnius and Mylius, who
do say, that God did foresee from everlasting, who they were that would fit
and prepare themselves before all others to faith in Christ, and upon the same
he directed his election: are fallen away from Doctor Luther, yea and indeed
from the whole true believing Churches, and that they have brought in such a
doctrine into Wittenberge, which is not only pure Popery, but is indeed much
more gross then is the doctrine of the Papists: for the Papists are not gone
so far as yet, that they said, that men could by natural power qualify and
fitly furnish himself to Gods election. And that he is sorry from his heart,
that those who sit in the chair of Luther, should so lamentably alter his
doctrine. Doctor Hunnius and Doctor Mylius had borrowed this matter out of
Mumpelgartes conference, and learnt the same from Doct. Jacob Andreas. But they
built most falsely, who did not partake with these folk. For to win the whole
world thereby, did he not know how to obtain the mere grace and mercy of God
by such a doctrine. This says Doct. Hofman, and inlargeth it very much in his
Apologia, or answer upon Doctor Hunnius, and Doctor Mylius, their letter of
excommunication, from the 46. leaf unto the 67.

Lib. 2. de great. Cap. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16.
And it is the truth. For Bellarmine the Archpapist set these two propositions
in his strife writings, and shows them notably: first, that there is no cause
of election in us: for the second, that the cause of the reprobation of the
wicked is in part the mere will of God: and partly the foreseen sins. The
bare will of God; as far forth as all men are sinners. Therefore there can
be no cause showed, wherefore he makes this man just, and leaves that
sticking fast in his sin. The sin: so far forth as God has determined to
condemn no man but in respect of sin. This says the Archpapist Bellarmine.
And he says right therein. That now there should be a more offensive doctrine
in the Cathedra of Luther, against the mere good grace of God, then the
Papists do maintain, that is indeed to be lamented, says Doctor Hofman. And
verily this is a cause which ought to move the Protestant Princes and Lords
most necessarily, by the better furtherance of faithful God fearing people,
both of spiritual and temporal estates, well to con der the same, and how
those three or four content^^^s spirits, which bring in such stuff into the
Churches of God, might be bridled by sufficient and timely councels. For else,
if they be suffered to proceed, as they have laid the frame of their work,
then they will bring forth a monstrous shape. Page 66.
As Doctor Daniel Hofman again calls to mind most truly and well; where he
says: You shall yet see wonderful contention and separation in the Churches
of God, if so be that Doctor Hunnius, and his Wittenbergers do not give
place, and give the honor to God. We have done our duties: he that will be
blind, let him be ever blind.

Concerning the blasphemous consequents wherwithall the contentious burden
ours, and Doctor Luthers Scripture like doctrine of Gods gracious free
election; as if namely, God did not wish all men salvation, and the like: we
do also esteem not worthy of any other answer, then that which Doctor
Hofman gives upon it, Page 16.
where he says: And Doctor Mylius should not also presently conclude, Si Deus
distinxit: ergo non omnes dignatur misere cordia (if God make difference of
men: then does he not wish all men salvation.) For the word of God is worthy
of greater reverence, as that it should be compared with the sudden speeches
of men.

One thing yet must we needs put the Christian Reader in mind of, for the
conclusion of this Chapter. Doctor Mylius will afterward avouch, that the
Caluinists should teach, That the elect can never perish, though they live as
they list. And to prove this upon them to be so, These 172. Page 116.
he amongst others cites Marlorat upon the 11. Chapter of John, where these
words stand to be read: Whereby it stands vnreuokeable, whom God has chosen out
of the world, he can never utterly perish, Note (...) by () ^^ncluded words did
Doct. Mylius leave out of ^t purpose, and in the stead the (...), he (...) etc.
These. 172. Page 117.
(for no man can take them out of the hand of the shepherd.) But who so to
reprobated by God, he can never be saved, though he had all the good works
of the of the Saints together on an heap. So little change is there in the
council of God. Over these words Doctor Mylius make himself exceeding merry,
and says: hear O you loving Psaltzgranians, you have your conclusion. Now
these very words are not the words of a Caluinist, but they are the words of
Brentius, who died an enemy of the Caluinists, as his Testament declares: as
the desirous Reader may see the truth, the words being printed at Hagenaw,
Anno, 1534. in the Exegesi of Bremius, in the 260. leaf. And Marlorat did not
only write them out of Brentius: but he set his, even Brentius his name
thereby with an R. (as he used to do. This could not the strife sick blind
man perceive, but thought, that he would then set a block in the way of the
Caluinists: when he himself and his factious companion did do it themselves.
Is not this a liug^ example, how they ^eale with the Caluinists? and how their
citationes, or testimonies are to be ^steemed, by which they would have them
taken for heretics? The matter in it self consisting, ^^maines all one, as we
have written in our faithful Admonition: We say indeed that the elect cannot
be lost. (...).
And why should we not say so? Christ says it himself, Mat. 24 chapter And Doctor
Luther says so also in innumerable many places Yet the Papist^ (...). lib 2.
de (...). cap 10.. 4. 1. Pet. 1.5. Luke 22.31. Ephesians. 1 4.5. Romans 8.30. Ezekiel 36
27.
. But that we should say that the elect cannot perish, with this addition, do
they what they will: that will never be showed in our writings. But this is our
opinion, and for that we say, that the elect cannot perish, because God
keeps them by his power in says to salvation: and though they sometimes
fall, yet they lie not therein, but he raises them again by repentance. For
whom God has elected to everlasting life, those has he not otherwise
elected, then with this condition, that he would give them faith in Christ and
that by his holy spirit he would make them new cr ^tures, and such people as
should walk in his Commandments. Therefore they are no elect that do what
they will, but only they that have a hearty purpose, and an earnest intent to
do what God will; this is our opinion herein. Which opinion the above written
doctrine of the bare council of God does not contradict at all. For we name
the gracious election not therefore a free bare council of God, that God will
make us saved freely and barely, Est absolutum decretum ^a priori no^ a
posteriori.
without faith and repentance, without Christ, without word and Sacraments, as
the enemies of peace do construe it. But therefore name we the gracious
election a free bare council of God, whilst God did find no cause in us
wherefore he should elect us before others, and dignifie us with faith in
Christ.

Therefore Doctor Mylius has no cause to triumph so much, and say, that we
renounce and cast off our former confession. We do not renounce and cast off
our former Confession: but we only guard off those lies, which formerly were
thrown upon us. And we hope that honest, understanding, God fearing, and
peace-louing people, shall have no cause of complaint any further against us,
for this point.

CHAP. IX. That we do not believe and teach otherwise of holy Baptism, then
as Doctor Luther of happy memory did teach thereof, in the Smalkaldes Articles,
and in the Sermon of the blessed Sacrament, the holy Baptism, an. 1519
THe fourth and last point of doctrine, which after the blessed death of Doctor
Luther, was brought into controversy, by unpeaceable people, to separate the
Protestant Churches daily more and more; is of the holy Baptism. Whereof our
adversaries say, that the washing away of sins, which is effected by the
blood of Christ, is not only betokened and sealed to the faithful and their
children through the holy Baptism, as we say: but that there is a secret
power adjoined or affixed to the water of Baptism also, whereby it washes
away sins, and regenerateth a man. As is to be seen in the conference at
Mompelgart. Page 430. and 433. Now indeed there are some sayings to be found in
the writings of Doctor Luther, which bear a show for such a construction. But
there withal there is such an exposition added thereunto, which is flat
opposite to the above mentioned idolatrous opinion.

As in the Smalkaldes Articles, in the third part, in the 5. article says he:
Tom. 6. Ien. fol. 519. lib. conc. fol. 149. B.
The Baptism is nothing else then Gods word in the water, commanded by his
institution. Or as Saint Paul says, Lauacrum in verbo.

As also Augustine says: Accedat verbum ad elementum; and fit sacramentum.
Note. Original of the Vbiquitists opinion of Baptism.
(when the word comes to the element, then it becomes a Sacrament,) and
therefore we do not assent unto Thomas Aquinus, and to the preaching Friars,
who forget Gods word (his institution,) and, God has founded a spiritual
power in the water, which washes away sins by the water. Also, not to Scotus,
and the barefoote Monks, who do teach, that the Baptism washes away sins,
by the accompanying of the Divine will: so that this purging is effected only
through the will of God, nothing at all through the word or water.

Behold Reader; there is the opinion of the Vbiquitists expressly disclaimed,
about the secret power, which should be hidden in the water of Baptism; and
testified, that such an opinion was sprung from the Monks, which Doctor Luther
will not ratify.

What then is the true understanding about Baptism, that declares Doctor
Luther very notably, in the Sermon of the blessed Sacrament of holy Baptism,
de Anno, 1519. Tom. 1. Ien. fol. 183. etc. where amongst other words, he says:

What Baptism is.
Baptism is an outward token or watchword, which makes a separation betwixt us
and all other Heathen men, whereby we may be known to be people belonging to
our captain Christ, under which standard (that is, the holy Cross) we fight
resolutely against sin.

Three things to be considered in Baptism. 1. The token.
Therefore we must have respect unto three things; the token, the signification,
and faith. The token consists therein, that the person be put into the
water, in the name of the Father, and the Son, and the holy Ghost; but he is
not suffered to remain therein, but is lifted out again; therefore it is
called, lifting out of Baptism. So both parts must be in the token, Baptism,
and the lifting out of the same.

2. The signification.
The signification is blessed dying to sin, and arising again in the grace of
God. So does Saint Paul call it. Tit. 3. A washing of the new birth, wherein a
man is newborn and renewed. The like says Christ also, Ioh. 3. Except a man
be borne of water, and of the spirit, (of grace) he cannot enter into the
kingdom of God. Also, the signification and dying, or drowning of sin, is
not fully accomplished in this life, until such time as the man dies also,
and wholly dissolueth to ponder. Then is the Sacrament or sign of Baptism
ended.

Also, the signification of spiritual Baptism, the drowning of sin endures
so long as we live, and is first wh^lly finished in death. Therre is the man
truly dipped in Baptism, and is effected as the baptism signifies, therefore
is the whole life nothing else then a spiritual christening without ceasing,
even unto the day of death, etc.

So that the life of a Christian man is nothing else, then a beginning to die
blessedly, even from the time of Baptism, unto the time of his death and
burial. For God will make him otherwise a new at the last day.

Also, the same simile, lifting up out of the Baptism, is performed suddenly:
but the signification, the spiritual birth, the increase of grace and
righteousness, it begins indeed in Baptism, but continues How this is to
be understood, is after declared by the token.
also even unto death, yea even unto the youngest day. There will first of all
be fulfilled, what is betokened by the lifting up. There shall we arise from
death, from sin, and from evils, clean in body and soul, and receive life
everlasting, etc.

Then shall the Angels at the last day lift out all Christians, Baptized
faithful Christians, and will there fulfill that which the Baptism and the
Godfathers signify. As Christ says, Matthew. 24. He shall send his Angels, etc.
Also, it shall be truly understood (for being pure in Baptism) and known
that our flesh, so long as it remains here, is naturally wicked and and
sinful. Which to help God did determine such a course, that he would recreate
it otherwise. Even as Ier. 18 testifies of the potter, when as the vessel
fell out not well, he cast the same together into the heap, and kneaded it:
and afterward he made thereof an other vessel, as seemed good to him. So
says God, are you in my hand. In the first birth did we not fall so well out,
therefore he casts us again in the earth through death, and he makes us
again at the youngest day, that so we may fall out well, and be without sin.

He begins these councels in Baptism: which betoken the death and
resurrection at the youngest day. Therefore so much as the signification, or
the token of the Sacrament is, so are the sins dead with the man, and he is
risen, Res Sacramenti: The work of the Sacrament.
and so is the Sacrament performed. But the work of the Sacrament is not as
yet wholly performed, that is, the death and resurrection at the youngest day,
but is to be expected.

So is man wholly pure and innocent Sacramentally: that is not otherwise meant,
then that he has the token of God, Baptism, whereby is testified his sins
should all die, and he should die in grace, and rise again at the youngest
day, pure, without sin, innocent, to live everlastingly. So is it in respect
of the Sacrament, true, that he is without sin, and innocent. But whilst
now that it is not fully accomplished, and that he lives in sinful flesh, he
is not without sin, neither is he pure in all things, but he is only entered
into the way of purity and innocence.

Therefore when a man comes to years, then begin the natural sinful lusts
to show themselves, as pride, anger, incontinency, hatred, covetousness, and
the like. Whereof there would not be one, if so be that sin were wholly
drowned and deaded in the Sacrament. Now it is only signified that they shall
be drowned through death and resurrection at the youngest day, etc.

True understanding of Baptism.
Then thou will say, what avails it me then to be Baptized, when it destroys
not, and puts sin away wholly and altogether? Here follows now the true
understanding of the Sacrament of Baptism. Thus auailes the blessed Sacrament
of Baptism, that God therein himself couenanteth with thee, and makes a
gracious and comfortable league with thee.

For the first, thou yeeldest thy self to the Sacrament of baptism, and to
the signification thereof. That is, that thou desire to die to sin, and to
be made new at the youngest day etc. that does God accept at thy hands, and
lets thee be baptized, and he begins presently to create thee anew:
Inspiring thee with his grace and holy spirit, which begins to mortify
nature and sin, and prepares thee to die, and to rise again at the last day.

For the second, thou also contractest to do the same, and to crucify thy
sin more and more, all thy life long, even to thy very death. Which is
acceptable to God also, and he exercises thee as long as thou live with
good works, and manifold sufferings, whereby he acts the same which thou
did desire in thy baptism: that is, that thou will be free from sin, and
wilt die, and wilt rise again at the youngest day, and so fulfill baptism.
Therefore do we read and see how he suffered his beloved Martyrs and Saints
to be so martyred, that they being but slain, fulfilled the Sacrament, died
and were created anew. For if so be that that comes not to pass, and we
have neither sufferings nor exercises, then will the corrupt nature of man so
prevail, that he will make baptism unprofitable unto him; and so he falls
by sin, and so remains an old man, as he was before. Whilst now such thy
covenant is unviolated, God gives thee grace again, and binds himself to
thee, that he will not impute thy sins unto thee, which are in thy nature
after baptism, he will not look upon them, neither damn thee for them, he
satisfies himself therein, taking pleasure that thou art continually in
exercise and desire to kill the same, and to be freed from them by death.
Therefore though evil thoughts or desires do indeed stir, yea though thou
also sometimes sinnest and fallest, yet if thou arise and returnest again into
the covenant, so are they thus esteemed by virtue of the Sacrament and
covenant, as Saint Paul says, Romans 8. Such is the nature of this Savior, that
he damneth not thy natural sinful motions, who beleeuest in Christ, and
do not cherish the same, neither consentest thereunto, etc.

If so be now this covenant were not, and that God did not mercifully look
through the fingers, then were there no sin so small, but it would condemn
us. For the justice of God can endure no sin. Therefore there is no greater
comfort upon the earth then baptism, The comfort which we have of Baptism.
through which we enter into the sentence of grace and mercy, which judges
not sin, but expels it with many exercises, The true understanding and use of
Baptism.
etc. In respect whereof no man has cause to be terrified, though he feels
evil lusts and desires, and not to despair, though he should even fall, but
should call his baptism to mind, and refresh himself heartily with the same,
that God has bound himself therein, to mortify his sins, and not reckon them
to damnation, if he do not consent thereunto, or remain therein, etc.

3. Faith.
Also, here is now the third part of the Sacrament to be handled, that is
faith; that is, that a man does constantly believe, how that this Sacrament
does not only betoken the death and resurrection at the youngest day, by which
a man is made anew, How that is to be understood, that the work of Baptism
does presently begin in Baptism.
to live everlastingly without sin, but that it also does certainly begin and
work the same, and unites us unto God, that we will even unto death,
mortify sin, and strive against the same, and he on the contrary side will
hold us excused, and deal graciously with us, and not judge us according to
rigor, for that we are not without sin in this life, until we be purified
by death. How a man is pure.
So now thou understand how a man is innocent, pure, and without sin in
baptism, and yet remains full of many evil lusts, so that he cannot
otherwise be called pure, then for that he has made entrance thereinto, and
for that the same purity has a sign and covenant, that he ought to be more
pure. For which cause God will not attribute his remaining uncleanness unto
him, and so he is more pure by Gods gracious account of him, then if that he
should be pure in his own nature, etc. For which cause a man must be very bold
and free in holding himself to baptism, and bear himself against all sin
and terror of conscience, and most humbly say: I know very well, that I have
no clean thing in me, but I am yet christened, through which God, who cannot
lie, has bound himself not to impute my sins unto me, but to crucify and
to destroy them.

So we do now understand, that our innocence of baptism is so called wholly
and solly in respect of the Divine mercy, which begun it, and takes pity on
sin, esteeming us as if we were without sin, etc.

Also, sin must still be, for in truth wicked motions are to be esteemed
sin, but this difference is to be made, that Gods grace will not yet reckon
them for sin, if that we encounter them with many endeauours, works and
sufferings, and at the last crucify them by death. Whosoever does not so, to
those will he not remit them, because they do not keep touch with him in
baptism, and their covenant, but hinder the begun work of God in baptism,
etc. And do not know that they had power given them for their whole lives,
even unto the time of death, yea and to the youngest day, as was said before.
Also, is there any man fallen into sin, then let him most strongly remember
his baptism, how God did there join in contract with him, to pardon all his
sins, if he will but resist them to the time of his death. Upon the same
truth and covenant of God, a man must cheerfully repose himself, and then
does baptism proceed in his work and strength again, and then is the heart
again quieted and refreshed. Not in respect of his work or satisfaction, but
in Gods mercy which is promised him in baptism, for ever to remain. And a man
must be so steadfast in faith, that though all creatures and all sins should
conspire against him, yet he would not be removed, in respect that whosoever
yields himself to be beaten from that hold, he makes God a liar in his
contract in the Sacrament of baptism, etc.

So then we see, that baptism, howsoever it be hindered in his work by sin;
Res Sacramenti: Baptism.
yet the forgiveness and crucifying of sin, is only made void, through
unbelief of the same. And faith recals again the same hinderance of his
operation, so that it does wholly consist in faith.

And that I may speak it plainly, then is it one thing, to pardon sin, and
an other to put off and renounce sin. Faith lays hold on the forgiveness
of sins, though they be not wholly expulsed but to expulse sin, is by an
endeavor against sin, and dying at the last, sin sinkes to the bottom. Both
of these works appertain to Baptism. So writes the Apostle to the Hebrews,
that they who were baptized, and their sins pardoned, they should cast away
sin, which pressed down. For whilst I do believe that God will not
attribute my sins unto me, then remains Baptism in force, and my sins
are pardoned, though a great part thereof remain. After that follows the
final disposition thereof, through sufferings and death. This is the article
which we confess, I believe in the holy Ghost, the forgiveness of sins,
etc. There consists Baptism most especially, in which this forgiveness is
performed, through Gods contract with us, etc.

Also, for which cause must we keep a good watch, lest a deceivable security
do not intrude it self, whereby we are moved to say with our selves, do so
great and gracious things consist in Baptism, that God will not ascribe our
sins unto us, and so soon as we return from sinning, then is all in good
case, by virtue of Baptism, then will I so long as I live, live as I list, and
afterward, or at the day of my death I will take my Baptism to heart, and put
God in mind of his covenant, and so fulfill the work of my Baptism. Yea
assuredly, there consists so much in Baptism, that when thou returnest again
from sin, and call upon thy covenant in Baptism, then are thy sins
pardoned unto thee. But look well to it, when thou shall sin so peruersly
and wilfully upon grace that judgment do not take hold on thee, and come upon
thee before thy return come, and though thou then would believe in Baptism
or trust therein, that through Gods perm ssion, thy tentation be so great,
that there will be no place for faith. For if so be that they do scarcely
remain, who do not sin, or indeed do fall by mere frailty: where shall
the outrageous appear, who have tempted and mocked the grace of God? Therefore
let us walk with fear and trembling, that we may maintain the riches of his
Divine Majesty with a steadfast faith, and give praise unto his mercy
cheerfully, for ever and ever. Amen.

Behold Reader, so has Doctor Luther expressed his mind, in the two
abouenamed places, namely, in the Smalkaldes articles, and in the Sermon de an.
1519. of the holy Supper. With which exposition we are very well satisfied.

And so the estate of the cause is hitherto to be found, that it is true,
which we said above in the fourth Chapter, and took upon us to demonstrate,
namely, that we agree with Doctor Luther, in all necessary points of Christian
Religion, excepting in one only question about the Communion: which question
also concerns not the grounds of salvation.

Therefore in respect of doctrine there is no man that has any just cause, to
separate and depart from us: to the great prejudice of the common good

CHAP. X. That the Ceremonies which we use in our Churches, are neither
against the word of God nor Christian liberty.
COncerning the ceremonies: for them have they less cause to separate
themselves from us: for it is not only not the will of God, that any where the
bond of love should be broken, and the practice of mercy one toward the other
should be unperformed in respect of some difference in outward things:
according to the express saying, I will have mercy, and not sacrifice. Matthew.
12.7. Anno, 1556. at Frankford.
Hos. 6.6. But also the Protestant Estates have many years since openly agree
and testified thus much, that concerning the ceremonies, that no state should
burden, vex or damnifie another, or falsely accuse them, or permit any of
theirs to do so, so long as they agree with the word of God.

Yea indeed might some man say, that is pasable: when they do but agree with
the word of God. But your ceremonies do disagree from the word of God?

Answer. If so be that any man can show unto us any thing in our Ceremonies,
which is not agreeable to the word of God, then are we willingly ready to
renounce the same. 1. Of breaking the bread.


The first and principal offense which is taken at us about Ceremonies, is,
that we break the bread at the Supper. But is not this agreeable to the word
of God? does it not stand expressly in the words of the institution of the holy
Supper: The Lord Jesus in the night that he was betrayed, he took bread, and
when he had given thanks, he brake it, etc. And in the first Epistle of Paul
to the Corinthians, the 10. chap. and 16. verse. The bread which we break, etc.

Or is it also possible that ever we can be able to celebrate the holy Supper
in any better form, then the very same wherein Christ and his Apostles did
celebrate the same? Doctor Luther says, it is impossible: For by how much our
Masses (so does he there name the holy Supper) are nearer to the Masses of
Christ, so much the better are they: and by how much the further off, so much
the more dangerous. Tom. 1. Ien. fol. 330. A.

2. That we celebrate the Supper over a table.
The second is, for that we celebrate the Supper over a table, and not over an
altar. Is not that agreeable to the word of God? Every way, says Doctor
Luther. For Christ did ordain and celebrate the Sacrament upon a table, not an
altar, etc. whereby to prevent that this wholesome gift could not, neither
might be turned into an offering. Tom. 2. Ien. fol. 227. A.

3. For that we take the Sacrament in the hand.
The third is, for that we do not suffer the Sacrament to be put into our
mouths, but take it our selves in the hand, and so do eat it and drink it,
as reasonable men use to eat and drink. But should not that be agreeable to
the word of God? Every way says Doctor Luther. Christ himself and whole
Christendom did so for a long time, and he gave us liberty to do the like. So
stands it now upon the loss of every man's salvation, that he do not call
back, neither accuse as unjust, nor suffer to be blamed, that which Christ
himself and whole Christendom formerly did practice. For that were even as
much, as to deny and condemn Christ, with all his Apostles, and whole
Christendom, when it was in best case, etc. And if that be therefore unright,
to touch the Sacrament with lay men's hands, because the hands commit sins, or
for that they are unhallowed: Then were it much more reasonable, that the
Sacrament were not received with the mouth, much less suffered it to enter
into the belly: yea indeed also, that no man might look upon it. For there is
neither mouth nor belly, nor eye hallowed. And there are many more sins
acted by the mouth and eyes, then with the hand. Tom. 3. Ien. fol. 48

The fourth is, 4. Of Confession.
for that we go not to Confession when we go to the Communion. But therein is
a mistake. For although that we do not commonly confess every man in
particular: yet confess we all of us at once together; that is, we
acknowledge our sins openly to God the Lord together, and we entreat him for
grace, and we testify our faith and hope: and thereupon we receive of the
Preacher the comfortable absolution of the holy Gospel: so often as we go to
the holy Communion. As the ordinances of our Churches manifest. Doct Luther
says, that the private Confession ought not to be enforced with laws: but
ought to be l^ft free. Tom. 5. Ien. fol. ^5. B.
But whereas we do not particularly every man confess our sins to the Minister,
and desire of him a secret absolution: That do we not only therefore, for
that such a process sprang out of the Popedom; and for that it is abused to
many terrible sins, as to treason, incontinency, blood bathes, etc. But also
whilst that we have commonly so many Communicants, that it is impossible for
us, to hear every man particularly. For when that we administer the holy
Supper: then do not we communicate two or three together: but the whole
Church communicates together: in which not only many hundreds, but also often
many thousands of persons are, yet hold we also this moderation herein, that
those who have not formerly communicated with us, are not admitted unto the
public Confession, before such time as they have made their desires known,
especially to the Ministers, and have given testimony of their faith and
Christian conversation. Also, that al those who are troubled in their
consciences, with any special sins, whereby they are not able to quiet their
hearts with the public Confession and absolution, are admonished to repair
privately to the Ministers, to seek council and comfort from them. At what
time to all that desire it, it is most truly imparted unto. And by which
receiving we suppose that our Churches are benefited. If other men know how to
make it better, that do we gladly afford them. Only we will put them in
mind what Doctor Luther holds thereof. Who says: That private Confession
ought not to be in forced with laws, but ought to be free. Tom. 5. Ien. fol.
15. B. And the Popish Canons confess themselves that the private Confession is
not the command of the old or new Testament, but is imposed by the Church.
Did. 5. de poenit.

The fifth fault they find, is, 5. The Communion to the sick.
for that we carry not the holy Communion to the sick into their houses. But
herein also do we nothing against the word of God. For the word of God
says, the Supper shall be a Communion. Also it should be holden when they
come together, and one ought to tarry for another, 1. Cor. 11.18.33. And
therefore do we think that it is not conformable to the word of God, when it
is administered to one alone. And therefore also do we admonish our
Communicants, that they participate in the Supper when they are in health, and
may receive it with the public congregation: The which they also do; and are
very well satisfied with such an order: Excepting, when at any time one is a
bedrid man, and has such an infirmity upon him, which will not suffer him to
come to the public Communion. In that case if any man desire, that the Supper
might be communicated with him together in the house. It is readily
accomplished; yet with this caution, that the sick person do never
communicate alone, but that the whole company, as a little congregation or
house Church, do communicate with him. This do we hold to be agreeable to the
order of Christ: and yet prescribe we nothing to others therein.

The sixth fault they find, is, 6. Of the Exorcisme.
for that we do not use the Exorcisme, (that is, coniuring of the devil) in
Baptism. Which yet concerns not us alone; but also many other even of their
own Lutheran Churches: who leave out the Exorcisme in Baptism even as well as
we: as the orders of their Churches manifest. And Doctor Hunnius, chief
Professor of Wittenberge a little before his death, did write very large
theses, de abrogando Exorcismo: which were afterward printed at Erphord, and
from thence came to our hands: wherein he alleges many causes wherefore the
Exorcisme should also be abrogated in the rest of the Lutherian Churches
wholly, where yet it was in use. As namely, and for the first, whilst Christ
was not the author thereof, but it is a very mere invention of man. For the
second, whilst the words (I conjure thee thou unclean spirit, etc.) let them
be turned and trimmed the best that may be, yet for all that they bear show
of no other construction, then as if the children of Christians were bodily
possessed of the devil.

For the third, whilst the gift of dispossession together with other miracles,
are ceased, and we know not now any more of any coniurers of the devil, then
of the popish Exorcists and Witches.

For the fourth, whilst not only the common man, but also many learned make
it a thing of necessity: as if without it Baptism were not complete. Which is
manifest by this, for that they strive so vehemently therefore, and deal so
euilly, when the remouall is required.

For the fifth, whilst it is a taking of the name of God in vain: when as it
is said; I conjure thee thou unclean spirit, in the name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the holy Ghost, etc. Whereas there is no unclean spirit
therein: and also there is no warrant from God for any such coniuration.

For the sixth, whilst it is a cause of much contention in the Churches of
God, the peace and quietness whereof ought not to be hindered unnecessarily.

For the seventh, whilst it were comely, to hold in these things also a
conformity with the rest of the Protestant Churches. Wherein it is always most
reasonable, for those Churches to yield, who yet have the Exorcisme.

For the other who have abrogated it, cannot with good conscience establish it
again.

For the eighth, for that thereby they should come nearer to the integrity of
the Apostolical Churches, which they used in Baptism.

For the ninth, for that long since the Protestant Estates in a public Edict,
(the title whereof is, A notable demonstration of the causes, wherefore the
Princes Electors and Dukes, with other States of the Auspurgs Confession, could
not appear at the intended Council of Trent, which Pope Pius the fourth, had
published there to be held, etc. in the 217. page, of the first printing, or
204. of the second,) had declared thus their minds herein, and said: The holy
Scripture witnesses, that Christ has commanded to baptize in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost: and has neither commanded
Crisme nor Exorcisme to be used. Matthew. 28. Whilst then both those things,
are not the ordinances of Christ, but the inventions of man, therefore they lie
under the saying of Christ: In vain they worship me, teaching for doctrines
men's precepts. Matthew. 15.

These are near abouts the causes, which Doctor Hunnius alleged, wherefore
the Exorcisme, ought to be disanulled in all Protestant Churches. Which motives
are worthy of deep consideration. And at the very least they do demonstrat
thus much: That it is not a Caluinish heresy, whereas many have abrogated the
Exorcisme. For the^ must the Wirtenbergers, the Hessens, and the Pfaltzgraue of
Newburges Churches, be also Caluinish: it so being that in the orders of their
Churches there is no exorcisme to be found.

7. Of women's Baptizing of children, or baptizing in need.
The seventh fault they find in our Ceremonies, is, for that we do not
approve of Baptising by a woman: whereas yet the case of necessity is alleged
against us. But we do not know of any such necessity: Mat. 28.19. Ioh. 20.21.
etc. 1. Cor. 4.1. 1. Cor. 14.33.
which should enforce us to fly from the institution of Christ: who did not
give over the commission and charge of the ministry of the word, and of
administering the holy Sacraments to women, but only unto men; as is very well
known.

But it is alleged, that if it so fall out that a Preacher cannot be had so
suddenly, that then the child is shortened of salvation. But where stands that
written, that the salvation is so knit unto Baptism in such a sort, that all
those that depart unbaptized, must therefore be damned and perish? The saying
of Christ is alleged: Except that a man be borne of water, and of the spirit,
he cannot enter into the kingdom of God, Ioh. 3.5. But first of all, this
saying did not speak of the earthly water in Baptism: as if without the same
no man could be regenerated and saved. For then the thief who suffered with
Christ on the Cross must have also been damned. To whom yet Christ said, to
day shall thou be with me in Paradise. But this sentence speaks of the
heavenly water of the holy Ghost. Which water God pours out upon us, when we
do believe in Christ. As it is written in, Ezekiel. 36. and in Ioh. the 7.
Chapters. And there is as little material cause to conclude the necessity of
the terrestrial or elementall water of Baptism, out of this saying: as out of
the saying in Matthew. 3.11. He will Baptize you with the holy Ghost and with
fire: there may be concluded a necessity of an terestriall or elementall fire
to be baptized withal. Besides and if it were that this saying speak of the
baptizing with water: yet did it not therefore follow, that all unbaptized
children must perish. For there was as vehement words spoken of Circumcision,
as could ever be said of Baptism: The uncircumcised manchild, in whose flesh
the foreskin is not circumcised, even that person shall be cut off from his
people. Genesis 17.14. And yet it has not such a construction, as if all
uncircumcised children should perish: but only it is thus to be understood,
that those children should perish, who out of a contempt of Gods token of his
covenants were of purpose not circumcised. Even as God himself adds the
cause, where he says: Because he has broken my covenant: that is, has
disdained it, Genesis 17.14. Which contempt has no place yielded to it, where the
godly tokens of his covenant cannot be had after the ordinance and institution
of God. Therefore David did never make doubt of the salvation of his child, for
all that it died the seventh day of his age, and so was as then not
circumcised. 2. Sam. 12.18.23. For he did not suffer it to die uncircumcised
out of any contempt of the holy Sacrament: but seeing it did die before such
time as it should or could be circumcised according to the institution of God.
When now it shall so come to pass with our children, as it befell to David
with his child: that they die before such time as they can be baptized
according to the institution of Christ: then do we believe even so as David
did believe; namely, that God is a most true God, and will keep his covenant
(where he said: I will be thy God, and to thy seed after thee. Genes. 17.7.)
with us; though he do not always affix his zeal upon us.

The example of Zippora, Moses wife is also objected against us, who
circumcised her son; and God ceased to be angry, whereas else he would have
killed Moses, Exodus 4.24.25. Also the example of the Jewish women who did
secretly circumcise their children, under the persecution of Antiochus. 1. Mac.
1.51.63. and 2. Macch. 6.10. But it is yet disputable, whether these women did
right or not? and it cannot be forced out of it, that God did yet cease his
anger, when that Zippora circumcised her son. For it may be very well,
whilst the Lord obtained his maine purpose with his threatenings: (that namely
Zippora yielded to the circumcising of her child, which formerly she would not
do, till the rest of her failing, which accompanied this circumcision did also
concur: as that she did do it her self impatiently: whereas she ought to
have suffered her husband patiently to have done the same:) he did in mercy
bear with the same: even as he also did bear with others of his Saints both
in the old and new Testament in many things out of his mere goodness: not
that we should therefore imitate the same. And therefore we have no warrant by
these or other the like examples: but if so be that one could find such an
example in the holy Bible, that a child was circumcised before the eighth day,
because of the weakness thereof: that were something to the purpose. But there
is no such example to be found. And the Jews also at this day practice no
such nead circumcision. Therefore from hence there cannot be any nead Baptism
proved. And if any where in time of need women may baptize; then may they also
in time of need administer the holy Supper: which hitherto has never been
yielded unto them by any man.

The eighth fault which they find in our Ceremonies, is, 8. Of Jmages.
for that we have no pictures of God and his Saints in our Churches. But this
cannot be contradictorie to the word of God. For the having of God and his
Saints pictures in the Churches; is not only not commanded of God at any time
in his word, as our opponents themselves confess: but also earnestly
forbidden. As may be seen clearly in the second Commandment. Exodus 20. Deuteronomy.
5.
Thou shall make thee no graven Image, neither any similitude of things that
are in heaven above, neither that are in the earth beneath, nor that are in the
waters under the earth, then shall not bow down to them, neither serve them,
etc. In which Commandment God has forbidden two things vncontroleably: first,
that there shall be no similitude made of him in any manner: yea also not in the
shape of a man, as he expressly declares himself, Deuteronomy. 4.15.16.17. where he
says: Take therefore good heed unto your selves, for ye saw no Image in the
day that the Lord spoke unto you in Horeb, out of the midst of the fire: that
ye corrupt not your selves, and make you a graven Image, or representation of
any figure, whether it be the likeness of man or woman, or the likeness of
any beast that is on the earth, or the likeness of any feathered foul that
flies in the air: or the likeness of any thing that creeps on the earth,
or the likeness of any fish that is in the waters beneath the earth. By which
text the Wittenbergers were enforced, and acknowledged many years agone, that
in the pictures of God, very easily might be sinned against the Commandment of
God. And therefore the lesser paintings of God, the better action performed
therein. In the needful answer. fol. 72. And therefore do we paint no manner
of pictures, that so we might not put our selves in danger of sin
unnecessarily. For that there is no necessity of having the picture of God, the
Wittenbergers themselves do willingly yield the same to us.

The second thing which God has forbidden us in the command of Images, is,
that we should not bow down unto them, nor serve them. Out of which
vngainesayably follows, that also we ought to have no Images in those places,
where there is any show and danger of bowing before them. For it stands
written, Abstain from all appearance of evil, 1. These. 5.22. Also, Thou shall
not tempt the Lord thy God: That is, thou shall not endanger thy self nor thy
neighbor peremptorily: not in hazard of the body, much less in hazard of the
soul. Deuteronomy. 6.16. Matthew. 4.7. Now have all their Images in the places of the
worship of God: and especially the Images upon the altars: the show and danger
of worship in them: as is largely demonstrated in the three writings: of the
Anholtes Reformation. Therefore cannot we otherways acknowledge them that such
Images are forbidden of God. Even as also in the in the Temple of Solomon, to
which for all that the maintainers of Images fly readily for shelter, there was
not one only altar Image, also not any one Image of God or of his Saints: but
there was only such caruings of knobs and grauings with flowers, which could
administer no show and danger of worship. The which also is not contradicted in
our Churches.

The ninth fault they find in our Ceremonies, is, 9. Only Deutsch service of
God in Deutsch Churches.
for that we have cast out of our Churches the Latin songs and collects, and
do perform the whole public worship of God in the Deutsch language. 1. Cor.
14.2.3.12.16.
Now for the same we have a clear text in the holy Bible, which says thus:
He that speaks a strange tongue, he speaks not to the edification of men
nor exhortation, nor comfort. Therefore seek that ye may excel unto the
edifying of the Church. Else when thou blessest with the spirit, (that is in an
unknown tongue) how shall he that occupies the room of the unlearned say,
Amen, at thy giving of thanks, seeing he knows not what thou say?

In which text is not only tolerated, but also commanded, that the public
worship of God should be exercised in a known language: whereby a poor
simple man may be comforted and edified, and when God is prayed unto and
praised, he may be able to say Amen thereunto. What think they then to
purchase, by taxing this for an error in us?

10 Of Mass apparel.
The tenth fault which they find in our Ceremonies, is, for that we have put
off the Mass apparel and quire vestments, whereof we will not vouchsafe to say
more then this, where stands it written, that Christ and his Apostles did put
on mass apparel and quire vestments, when they did exercise the worship of
God?

11. No Organs.
The eleventh fault they find, is, for than we use no Organs in our Churches.
Whereof the people are not rightly informed. For there are diverse Reformed
Churches, wherein the Organs are used. As indeed they are no where forbidden.
Yet commonly we do therefore not use them: whilst we find more hindrance to
proceed thereof then profit, by the worship of God: and also in this case we
desire to remain by the simplicity of the Apostolical Churches, which neither
had nor used any such things in their congregations. In the old Testament
indeed they had musical instruments in the worship of God: but it was always
so ordered, that the text, which was musicated, was withal sung in the native
language, and was understood of every one. And if when it shall be so ordered
at this day, then were it not wholly against us.

The twelfth fault they find, is, 12 Of bowing the knee, and putting off the
hat when one says Jesus.
for that we do not bow the knee, and put off the hat, as often as the name of
Jesus is named. Whereof we are constrained to inform the Reader something
more largely. For it bears a show, as if therein they had no small cause of
offense in us. Before all other things now, we do testify before God, that
we do not do any such thing out of any disdain of the precious name of
Jesus: but we do it in respect of the wilworship which was founded in Popery.
Where the knee is bowed, and the hat is put off, whenever the name of Jesus
is named: but when Christ is spoken, or the Son of God, then does no man put
off his hat: yea although jointly one does name God the father, Son, and holy
Ghost, the blessed Trinity, yet is there no man that takes off his hat,
neither does any man bow the knee: whereas yet God says: I have sworn by my
self, etc. That every knee shall bow unto me. Esa. 45.23. Only, when it is
said, Jesus, then do the folk take off their hats, and bend the knee: yea
though it be the name of Jesus Syrach. In this wilworship would not our
forefathers be partakers; and therefore let fall the use wherein the
wilworship consists: and that by virtue of the command we have: Abstain from
all appearance of evil. 1. These. 5.20. But whereas it is alleged, that it
stands in the word of God expressly written, that every knee should bow at the
name of Jesus: to this our answer is; If it stood expressly in the word of God,
that the knee should be bowed, or the hat be put off, as often as we heard
the name Jesus spoken, then were we indeed wicked people, for not performing
it But we do not find such a command any where. The saying of Paul is
objected, where he says of Christ: Wherefore God has also highly exalted him,
and given him a name above every name, that at the name of Jesus should every
knee bow, both of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the
earth: and that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is the Lord,
unto the glory of the father. Phil. 2.9.10.11. But if it please the Reader to
consider the text thoroughly, then shall he find that the name Jesus does not
intend the little word Jesus: but the honor, power and Majesty, which God has
given to the Lord Jesus: that namely to him shall all creatures yield the
honor of being their Lord, and must crouch and bow unto him. For concerning
the name or little word Jesus, the same name was not first given unto the Lord
Christ at the time of his exaltation, but when he was circumcised the eighth
day, then was his name called Jesus. Besides this, so is not the name Jesus,
when the little word Jesus is understood thereby: a name over all names; that
is, not such a name which was only given to the Lord Jesus: for it was a common
name in use among the Jews; as may well perceived out of Jesus Sirach, and
many places of the Scripture. These are two immovable grounds, out of which it
is clear, that in the above cited saying, by the name Jesus, is not to be
understood the little word Jesus; but the honor, power and Majesty, which God
gave unto Christ, after that he raised him from the dead: as also the Apostle
Paul himself in another place declares very plainly thus, where he says:
God has raised Christ from the dead, and set him at his right hand in the
heavenly places: far above all principalities, and powers, and might, and
dominion, and every thing that is named, (see Reader, this is the name above
all names) not in this world only, but also in that that is to come, and has
made all things subject under his feet, and has appointed him, etc. Ephesians.
1.20.21. Yea and indeed also in the former text which they allege as making
for them; Paul expounds his own meaning, what it is which he understand by
the great name which God gave unto Christ after his resurrection: namely, the
name, that he should be a Lord over all creatures in heaven, and upon the
earth: or as the words of Paul themselves are: That every tongue should
confess that Jesus Christ is the Lord, unto the glory of God the Father.
Neither are we the first who do so expound these words, but the old teachers,
Origin, Chrysostom, and Basil, and many more, have even so expounded the same,
many hundred of years agone: which exposition if it may take place, then can
there be nothing concluded out of the same; for the bowing of the knee so
often as the word Jesus is nominated, but it must be confessed, that such a
custom is taken up from men: indeed upon a good meaning, but yet from men, and
that without any authority from the word of God. Therefore it cannot truly be
said that they that discontinue such a custom, do deal contrary to the word
of God therein: yet we for our parts accuse not the action, leaving it free in
the liberty of a Christian: and we do sometimes use it our selves, as we see it
behoofefull, to avoid offense. But why it is that we cannot give all men
satisfaction herein: even this is the cause, because others also do not give
us content. For even as they take offense, for that we do not always bow the
knee, and take off the hat, when the name Jesus is named: even so are we
offended on the contrary, that they do only bow the knee and take off the hat
when one says Jesus, and not in like manner when Christ or God is said.
Therefore it is the surest course, that both of us cease together, according to
the saying of Paul: Bear ye one another burden, and so fulfill the law of
Christ. Gal. 6.2.

13. Of Christian liberty.
The thirteenth fault which they find is, for that we hold certain of the
above mentioned, (as the breaking of bread, also the putting away of Images,
etc.) for needful: whereas our opponents hold them but for mere indifferent
things: and therefore they complain against us, as that we should deal
against the Christian liberty. But on the contrary side our opponents hold
certain things for needful (as the confession in the ear; also the bowing of
the knee at the word Jesus, etc.) which we esteem but for mere indifferent
things. Therefore also the best that is to be done in this matter, is, that the
one side bears with the other, till such time as we do all of us attain to
deeper understanding: even as the Apostle Paul admonishes us, where he says:
One believes that he may eat of all things: and another which is weak
eats herbs. Let not him that eats, despise him that eats not: and let
not him which eats not, condemn him that eats: for God has received him
Who art thou that condemnest another man's servant? he stands or falls to
his own master: yea he shall be established: for God is able to make him
stand. Romans 14.2.3.4. And so much also be spoken of the Ceremonies.

CONCLUSION.
ANd thus the Christian Reader has understood what we believe or do not
believe: also, what we do use for Ceremonies, or do not use: and wherefore we
do the one and not the other: and we hope has observed so much out of the
same, that we are not so wicked people as we are proclaimed to be abroad: but
that we are such people, who desire to serve God truly according to his holy
word: also that we do not believe and teach otherwise of the grounds of
salvation, then as Doctor Luther of happy memory did believe and teach.

All which we have therefore discussed so largely, that thereby good hearted
people; who with us do acknowledge how perilous it is in the Protestant
Churches on both sides, by reason that they separate themselves, and in that
respect would gladly lay their consultations for peace and unity; might be
thoroughly assured, that by such their consultations they shall not sin
against God. As the contentious have hitherto said; in this that they alleged,
and yet do allege that they are contradictory to Doctor Luther, not only in
some by questions, but also in the grounds of salvation Doct. Mylius. Thesi
124.135.136 etc.
, and that we have a more scandalous belief of Christ then the devils have
Thesi. 56.175.
. Which if it were true, then could not any man indeed with good conscience
acknowledge us for brethren in matters of faith and accordingly unite
themselves with us. But we hope, that all those who have read this our
declaration with circumspection, and well pondered the same; shall bring in
another verdit of us, and we wish it from the bottom of our hearts, that our
hope may be fulfilled: not only in respect of our selves, but also in regard
of themselves; God he knows it. For we tremble in consideration of the
estate of the poor common people, and of so many women and children; who are
endangered to the uttermost as well on the one side as on the other: If we
cease not to separate our selves from each other. And it is to be feared, in
short time also. For it is manifest, and it proclaims it self daily more and
more in all nations, what bloodthirsty plots the Jesuits propound to
themselves, against all those who are gone out from the Popedom, whether they
be called Lutherans or Caluinists. It is very true, Doctor Mylius. Thesi.
203.204.
the contentious will (...) believe it, that any mischief can betide them from
the Popedom: and therefore they laugh at us very scornfully, for that we are
so fearful. But the bold valiants have cause to look well to themselves,
that the Scripture be not fulfilled in them, which says: Woe to them that are
at ease in Zion, and trust in the mountain of Samaria: and that put far away
from them the evil day; and are not sorry for the affliction of Joseph.
Therefore now shall they go captive with the first that go captive, and the
sorrow of them that stretched themselves is at hand. Amos 6.1.3.6.7.

We confess, that we fear, that there will shortly befall some calamity in
Deutchland: except it be prevented in time. And therefore our Council is to
hold peace and unity amongst our selves: as being the best means to stop the
common misery. Will this our Council yet be acknowledged and accepted: well
and good. If not; then have we done what appertained to us. And we will not
for all that despair, or renounce the Confession of the truth, though the
whole world should leave us. Romans 8.31.
God being on our side, who can be against us: hereof we are well assured in
our hearts. And it shall not be grievous, if it please him to lay some
affliction upon us. For all must work together for the best to us. Romans 8.28.
For the love of God is shead ^broad in our hearts: and his spirit bears
witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God: Ephesians. 1.4.5.
and that we were chosen to be such his children, before the foundation of the
world was laid. And therefore are we persuaded, that neither death, nor life,
nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to
come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us
from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. And therefore do we
sing merrily with Doctor Luther: Though they take our life,
Goods, name, child, and wife:
See thou let all go,
They get naught but woe:
And we shall have the kingdom.


And with King David:

Psalm. 41.14. Psalm. 72.18.19.
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel: which only does wondrous things: and
blessed be his glorious name for ever. And let all the earth be filled with his
glory. So be it, even so be it.

FINIS.

