COLLECTANEA. OVT OF St GREGORY THE GREAT, AND St BERNARD THE Devout, against
the Papists who adhere to the doctrine of the present Church of Rome, in the
most fundamental points between them and us.

AVG. DE CIV. DEI Lib. 19. Cap. 27. Iustitia nostra potius constat remissione
peccatorum, quam perfectione virtutum.

AT OXFORD, Printed by JOHN LICHFIELD, and JAMES SHORT, Printers to the famous
University. 1618.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, HIS VERY GOOD FRIEND, Mr GEOROE CHVRCHOVVSE, Mayor
of the city of New Sarum in the County of Wiltes. To the Justices, and Aldermen
his Assistants; and the whole incorporation there: JOHN PANKE wishes the full
fruition of divine blessings, both in this and that other World to come.
I Hold it a ground apparent in reason (good Mr Mayor) that every evil is so
much the greater evil, Tanto aliquod malum est pejus malum, quanto magis
adimit de bono. Aug.
by how much the more it with-draweth from good; from which principle then, may
undoubtedly be drawn this following truth, That they deserve ill of the
Christian common wealth, who oppugn the faith by bringing in heresies, or when
brought in by others, defend them, because the foundation being ruinous, it is
of necessity, that whatsoever is thereupon built does fall; Insomuch, that the
most wisest adviser of mankind, our Lord and Savior, willed his weak
Disciples to beware of the Leaven of the Pharisees and Saduces, Mat. 16.11.
which is interpreted to be the doctrine they taught. From all which, thus much
will appear to all men, that they must bew are what, and of whom they hear:
for as it is not possible to gather grapes of thorns, Mat. 7.16.
or figs of thistles, no more is it of new teachers wholesome doctrine. Ipsa
doctrinae novitas est de se suspecta, quoniam Christus and Apostoli ejus
sufficientem doctrinam ad vitam aeternam consequendam dederunt. Et recte
Tertullianus, Rectum est quod omnium est primum, adulterinum vero, quod novum
est and posterius. Joh. 20.31. Fides Catholica, quam indubie tenere oportet,
est ea quam sacrae literae tradu^t. -- quas Deus ipse manibus hominum scripsit.
As they are new teachers, so is their doctrine noveltie, which even in it
self is to be suspected, because Christ and his Apostles delivered sufficient
doctrine for the attaining of everlasting life: And as the holy Evangelist
says, These things are WRITTEN, that ye might believe, that Jesus is that
Christ that Son of God, and that in believing ye might have life thorough his
Name. Thus is that Catholic faith, which ought undoubtedly to be held, that
which the sacred Scriptures do deliver: With these we must sight against all
novell doctrines. Those are the weapons, with which we must profligate and
repel all humane inventions, God writing them by the hands of men. All Decrees
of Councels, Decretals of Popes, Traditions of Churches, and all Writings else
whatsoever, must give place to them. The holy Scriptures are that Torrent or
Brook, 1. Sam. L 7.
out of which DAVID took the stones, with which he ouer-threw the mighty
Goliath; other testimonies without these, are as Saul's armor, more combersome,
than serviceable; as arguments drawn from humane wisdom: Finally, according
to those Books of the Scriptures, (says S. Augustine) we judge frankly of all
other writings, Cont. Crescon. Grammat. lib. 2. cap. 31.
whether they be of the faithful, or unfaithful. Which if it be so, there
arises yet another maine point to be marked; That where the Scriptures are
either locked up from the people, that they may not exercise them by reading
and meditating on them; or where they are neglected and not opened by
preaching, through the idleness of Pastors, there must needs appear gross
ignorance in those that ought to be taught, and great sin remains to them
which should teach; for those which do not hear, cannot learn; which wanting,
presently that evil enemy the Devil, ever ready to hurt, first perverting the
affection, and then blinding the understanding, drawing all men into all
errors. This is so far from any possibility of gaine-saying, that both sides,
I mean, Papists and Protestants subscribe unto it. And although (God be
praised for it) that dark eclipse of the body of the Sun, does not appear
in our Horizon, (I mean in this famous Church of England) yet are there parts
beyond the Seas, which suffer that darkness, and lie plunged in all those
calamities, which are consequents of it. Contra hears: lib. 1. cap. 13.
Touching this matter (says Alphonsus a Castro) our own Country of Spain
may minister unto us plentiful testimonies, in which, not above ten years
since, citra december annos. He wrote this about the year 1534.
in that part of Cantabria, which now is called Navarra, and Biscaya, amongst
them which inhabit the vplands, sundry errors are found, many superstitions,
diverse idolatries, insomuch that they worship the Devil himself, appcaring
unto them in form of a Goat, which for certain is known to be practiced by
them in secret, these many years. In which matter there are more weon en than
men; for that evil enemy knows by the first man, that it is easier to
deceive a woman than a man, and that she will faster hold the ill, to which at
once she cleaves. This same mischief, though not so great we find likewise
in other parts of Spain, in which the word of God is very seldom preached;
for there are amongst them many superstitions, heathenish customs, through no
other cause appearing, but for want of Preachers. Thus far he. By which
relation, you and all men else may see the great miseries that follow the want
of the word of God, where true Religion is asleep, and the arch-enemy the
Devil rules the affections, Practice the Word then by often reading. Lectio
lecta placer, decies reperita placobit.
Be exercised in hearing it preached. By which doing you shall be the better able
to discern and judge of all doctrines propounded; for where do you read in
the holy Scriptures, or can you from thence conclude, Think of these points,
and inquire of them.
of Bread, and Wine? Or, Images to be placed in Churches, to the intent they
should be worshipped? Or, that any sin, venial, and not worthy of eternal
death? Or, in the Sacrament. Or, that Ignorance should be the mother of
Devotion, that is, the more ignorant, the more devout. Or, that it belongs to
the Pope to grant Indulgences and pardons to sinners, condonando illis poenam
ad cuius toletantiam peccator obligabatur etiam remissa culpa.
pardoning them the punishment, to the enduring whereof the offender is bound,
even after the fault is forgiven. For these I say, and a swarm of such new
vpstart doctrines, thrust upon you by the Church of Rome, consult with the Word
of God, contained in the Books of the Old and New Testament, and you shall
find no one step leading to them, but all the contrary, so near are they to
the curse that teach the^. Touching some which points, and diverse other
maintained against us, by the contrary erring party, I have for your further
knowledge and instruction in this small treatise rested my self only upon two
famous Doctors of the Church St Gregory called the great, sometime Bishop of
Rome, and St Bernard another Father though of later time, showing that both
these in many of the maine differences, and some of those of hie consequence,
taught the same doctrine to their churches and hearers, which the church of
England teaches to hers. Universal Bishop. Church which we believe in the
Creed is the whole company of the elect only. That we have noe otherwise
departed from the Church of Rome, than Rome has from it self. Gregory was
Pope of Rome about the year of our redemption by Christ 600. so that
whatsoever we shall teach and find in him, we and he may well make it good
against them. If he had his escapes and ouersights in some points of Doctrine,
according as they were then creeping in, and doubtfully held, being of less
moment and weight than those before mentioned; and law no further cause of
dissiking or disallowing them, than that time afforded him, in his own
judgment: as we may not join with him, in the apprehending of them; so are we
not willing to give any hard or unjust cen sure touching his person for
teaching them; But leaving both the builder, and that which he builded to their
own Master to stand or to fall, we are humbly to thank our great God for
directing his knowledge such that it kept the maine foundation by Jesus Christ.
Ch how sweetly does he sing that Gospel-like song! The felicity of the Saints
is mercy God re^dreth according to works, Mercy, not works. Not for works.
though not for the works. To that blessed life wherein we shall line with God
and of God, Our labor is not worthy our glory.
no labor can be equalled, no works can be compared. Our just advocate will
in judgment defend us for just, because we know and accuse our selves to be
unjust. Know you this readers, that this is Gregory's doctrine, and you will
not know the doctrine of the Council of Trent, some 60. years since
established, and now held and maintained by Paulus Quintus the now Pope. St.
Bernard the other Doctor proposed, lived in a time far more corrupt, yet still
held and preached the maine points that we do. He was (says Bishop Iuell) a
Monk, anno Domini 1117. about 500. years since. Iuel. art. 21. divis. 8.
and lived at Claravallis in France about the same time that Thomas Becket
lived in England. At which time, as it appears by his often complaints the
Church of God was miserably defaced. For thus he writes, namely touching the
Clergy of Rome, Nihil integri est in Clero etc. In the whole Clergy
(wherein he concludes the Pope, In Psalm. Qui habitat.
the Cardinals, the Bishops, and all the rest) there is no part left sound. It
remains now that the man of sin, De converfione Pauli.
that is Antichrist, be revealed. From the top to the toe, there is no
health. The servants of Christ, now serve Antichrist. In Cant. Cantic.
Therefore Bernard, living in a time of such corruption, and being carried away
with the violence and tempest of the same, must needs in some things not see
all. The most reverend Archbishop that now is, In his Graces answer to D.
Hill. reas. 1. 30. page 60.61. and reas. 5.. 28
says thus also of him. Although he saw not all things yet we find in him
saniorem partem a liberal profession of many good and sound points agreeable
to the Gospel. Touching the matter of merit by good works, for justification
by faith alone in Christ, for freewill, for certain assurance of salvation in
the death and by the strength of our Savior, and for disliking then the vile
life of the Clergy, how clear, how pregnant, how copious is he? These things
we teach together with him, and notwithstanding his other slipps, we doubt not
but his soul is with the Lord. He held the foundation by only faith in Christ,
and that our best deeds are but via regni, non causa regnandi. The way to the
kingdom, not the cause of reigning. Digress. 43.. 42. page 298.
Dr White in his Treatise of the way to the true Church, says Bernard knew
not the present Roman faith. He was a Papist in none of the principal points
of the religion. He held the sufficiency of the Scripture without traditions.
Justification by faith alone. That our works merit not. That no man can keep
the law. That a man, by the testimony of Gods spirit within him, may be
certain of Grace. That there is no such freewill as the popish schoolmen
teach. These, and such other testimonies have these worthy pillars of our
Church given, unto that worthy and religious man Bernard. The places touching
these points alleged, you shall find quoted at large by me, transcribed by my
pains out of his own works, as they lie word for word, led there unto by the
learned works, especially of your late right Reverend Bishop in his several
writings against Dr Bishop; touching whom, since it did please God to call him
so soon from you, I will say no more at this time but as Salomo^ says: Prove.
10.7.
The memorial of the just shall be blessed; Psalm. 112.16.
and the righteous shall be had in an everlasting remembrance; And for your
parts carry about with you this sentence of the wise man. Sapient. 4.13.
That though he departed from you soon, yet fulfilled he much time: Ostende^t
terris nunc tantu^ fata, neque vltra esse sinent. Aeneid. lib. 6.
God as it were but showing him unto you, and then taking him away. The learned
pains also taken by Dr Morton, the reverend Bishop of Chester in his treatise
called the Protestants appeal, I have used herein. Which two, have for you and
me, and all men else of our condition, trod such a beaten path, that it
leads to the discovery of all the by-waies invented by the Church of Rome to
hide that truth, which the Church of God has ever found in the holy
Scriptures, Counsels, and Fathers, to the depressing of heresies. O blessed
Bernard, Observe Bern: Spirit.
the spirit of God taught thee to teach, That eternal life is purchased by no
merits, but is freely given. That the merits of men are such, that life
everlasting is not due for them by right; or that God should be said to do
injury, except he yield it them. Surely (says he) whatsoever is wanting to
me of my self, I boldly take it unto me out of the bowels of my Lord, because
they flow out with mercy. My merit is the Lords mercy. Read O man in thine
own heart, read within thy self concerning thy self, the witness of truth, and
thou will judge thy self unworthy of commonlight. These and such other spoke
devout Bernard, but say the Papists so? No, they write in a more lofty style,
they scorn entreaty or supplication. The Rhemists in their Annotations on the
new Testament, Annot. in Mat. 6. v. 4. in Marc. 12. v. 21. in Ro^. 2. v. 6. in
Cor. 3. v. 8. and in Tim. Epist. 2. c. 4. v. 8.
do nothing so much as contrary this doctrine, pleading their works to be
meritorious. Works (say they) are the very cause of salvation, and fully
worthy of everlasting life. Observe the spirit of these men.
The joys of heaven is the hire, wages for works, which works can be no
other, then the valor, desert, price, worth, and merit of the same. Again,
Heaven is our own right, bargained, and wrought for, and accordingly paid unto
us, as our hire at the day of judgment. Mark these, and tell me, whether
there can be any greater oppositio^. It suffices for merit (says Bernard) to
know that merits are not sufficient; nay, say the Rhemists. Know that good
works are so far meritorious, Annot. in Hebr. 6. v. 10.
that God should be unjust if he rendered not heaven for the same. Is this
agreement with the Doctors and ancient Church? O no beloved, they are seducers
that teach such doctrine, and seduced are they that harken unto them. Thus much
I now thought good to say, to give you some light, before you enter to read
the whole. Mark and observe the margent notes with the text, and you shall
discover a number of blasphemies uttered by them against the Majesty of GOD,
as though they were men that know none of the mercies of God in Christ; or if
they do know them, as if they needed them not, establish, as if they were
ashamed to acknowledge them, a doctrine of the devise of their own brain, as
full of pride one way as it is of fear, anxiety, and doubt another way. J may
not in this be tedious unto you, desirous to end this speech I heartely pray
the God of heaven to power into your hearts the true feeling of all holy
comfort in the holy Ghost; and multiply his temporal blessings upon you and
yours, make your affairs quiet and peaceable to the increase of your outward
welfare; so to live, that you fear God, and honor the King.

From the Close at Sarum this 24 Iunij. 1618. Yours in all love, JOHN PANKE.

AN HUNDRED TESTIMONIES OF SAINT GREGORY the Great, sometime Bishop of Rome,
showing that in all and every of them, he agrees with the Protestants, against
the doctrine now taught by his following successors, the Bishope of Rome.
I. What is meant by the Rock. MAT. 16.
IN Petra Ecclesiae, hoc est, Lib. 3. Epist. 33.
in confessione beati Petri. In the rock of the church, that is, in the
confession of Peter.

Tu es Petrus, In 5. Psalm. poenit. in illa verba, Initio tu Domine terram
fundasti. By Ro^ke is meant Christ. They say Peter, and then the Pope.
and super hanc Petram aedificabo Ecclesiam) Ipse est enim Petra, a qua Petrus
nomen accepit, and super quam Ecclesiam se aedificaturum dixit. Thou art Peter,
and upon this Rock will I build my Church. For he is the Rock, from whence
Peter received his name, and upon whom he said he would build his Church.

In sacriloquio quando in singulari numero fundamentum dicitur, Lib. 28. in c.
38. Job. c. 6. Christ the foundation. They say Peter, and then the Pope.
nullus alius nisi Christus designatur. Wheresoever in holy Scripture, this
word Foundation is found in the singular number, it signifies Christ.

. 2. Perfection and sufficiency of the Scripture.
QVid cor and animam Dei nisi sacram eius Scripturam accipimus. In 1. Reg. l.
2. c. 3. Mor. l. c. 16. The holy Scripture contains the mind of God to us.
Ibid. lib. 18. cap. 14. All doctrine must be confirmed by Scripture.
Per eam Deus loquitur omne quod vult. What is the holy Scripture but the Heart
and Soul of God; by it God speaks all that he will.

Eos ad sacrae authoritatis paginas vocat, ut si vere loqui desiderent, inde
sumere debeant quid loquantur, etc. He calls them to the Books of the holy
Scripture, so that he that desires to speak or preach truly, must take from
thence that which he speaks, and fetch the grounds of his matters, out of the
sacred Books, that he may bring all that he speaks, to the foundation of
divine authority, and thereupon settle the buildings of his speech.

Sancti viri se consilijs Scripturae ex toto addicunt, ut videlicet nihil
agant, In Cant. cap. 5. and in Ezech. hom. 15. and 9. All matters concerning
faith and godliness are contained in the holy Scripture. They say, we must
look for a part thereof in traditions. All our armor against our ghostly
enemies.
nisi quod ex responso Scripturaru^ audiunt, etc. Holy men do wholly addict
themselves to the counsels or directions of the Scripture, namely so as to do
nothing, but they hear by answer of the Scripture, because of whatsoever
doubts, advice is sought for in the Scripture, it is there fully found, of all
things without exception. And all our munition or armor, yea all things that
do edify, all things that do instruct, are contained therein.

3. No merit in this life, but death.
IVsti perituros se absque ambiguitate praesciunt, Moral. lib. 8. cap. 9. No
meriting of heaven by man. They say, yes, by good works.
si remotapietate iudicentur, etc. The just do know beforehand, that they
shall perish without doubt, if God set mercy aside in the judging of them,
because even that which seems our just life is but sin, if Gods mercy when
he judges it, do not excuse the same.

Quod si illa sanctorum foelicitas misericordia est, In Psalm. poenit. 7.
and non merit is acquiritur, ubi erit quod scriptum est, and tu reddes
unicuique, secundum opera sua? Eternal life is mercy only, and is not to be
purchased or gained by merits.
etc. If the felicity of the Saints be mercy, and be not obtained by merits,
how shall that stand that is written, Thou shall render unto every man
according to his works? If it be rendered according to works, how shall it
be esteemed mercy? The Papists mock at this distinction in us: but blush at
it in Gregory.
But it is one thing to render according to works; and another thing to render
for the works themselves. For in that it is said, according to works, the very
quality of the works is understood, so as that whose good works shall appear,
his reward shall be glorious. For to that blessed life wherein we shall live with
God, and of God, no labor can be equalied, In Ezechiel, hom. 7. O^^riustice
is the imputation of justice or righteousness without works: for we know and
confess our selves to be unjust as touching works.
no works can be compared, for that the Apostle tells us. The sufferings of
this time are not comparable in worth to the glory to come, that shall be
reveiled on us.

Iustus Advocatus noster justos nos defendet in judicio, quia nosmetipsos and
cognoscimus and accusamus injustos. Non ergo in fletibus, non in actibus
nostris, sed in advocati nostri allogatione confidamus. Our just Advocate, will
in judgment defend us for just, because we know and accuse our selves to be
unjust: and therefore let us not put confidence in our tears, or in our
works, but in our Advocates allegation or intercession for us.

4. No true faith without works.
In Ezech. hom. 22. No separation between Faith and Works says Gregory: yes,
say they, a man may have true faith, without good works. The true name of
Faith is not appliable, where there is not Charity joined with it, neither can
there be true belief.
FIdem, spem, charitatem, atque operationem quamdiu in hac vita vivimus
aequales sibi esse apud nosmetipsos invenimus. etc. We find that faith, hope,
charity, and good works, so long as here we live are equal in us: For look
how much we believe, so much also we love, and how much we love, so much we
presume of hope: Of faith and works also, St John confesses, saying, He that
says, he knows God, and keeps not his Commandments, is a liar. For the
knowledge of God appertains to faith, the keeping of the Commandments to
works. When therefore power and time, and place of working serves, so much
does a man work, as he knows God, and so much does he show himself to know
God, where there is no love. Justification before God, consists not in
proceeding from Faith to Works, but in the continuation of Faith to Faith, yet
this Faith cannot be separated from Charity and good Works.
as he works good things for Gods sake. Every one that is conversant in the
exercise of this life, believes so much as he hops, and loves; and look
how much he believes, hops, loves, so much he works.

. 5. Concupiscence is sin in the first motions of it.
Moral. lib. 14. c. 9. Concupiscence or Lust is sin, even in the very habit, or
first motions of it.
Romans 6.12. Let not sin reign in your mortal bodies, that ye should there
unto obey by the lust of it. Non ait non sit, sed non regnet, quia non esse non
potest, non autem regnare in cordibus bonorum potest. The Apostle says not,
let it not be, but let it not reign, because it cannot but be, but it may be
without a kingdom in the hearts of good men. Moral. lib. 21. cap. 3. The
motion or sting of concupiscence, which is here called unlawful desire or
lust cannot be avoided of the Faithful in this life, yet has it not dominion
over them, so that that motion or sting, even the very temptation of Sin is Sin
in us, but without dominion. But contrary to this here of Gregory, do they
teach, that concupiscence is not Sin properly, but only called so by the
Scripture. Mor. lib: 18. c. 5. Evil cogitation before consent, and without
consent is sin. They say no, not before consent come. To decline in thought
is to fall into sin.
And again. Peccatum in mortali corpore non esse, sed regnare probibuit, quia
in carne corruptibili non regnare potest, sed non esse non potest. The Apostle
for bids not sin to be, but not to reign in our mortal body, because it
may be without reigning in corruptible flesh, but it cannot but be there. For
even to be tempted of sin, is sin unto it; which because we cannot be
altogether without so long as we live here, the holy preaching* for that it
cannot fully expel and drive it out, takes away from it the kingdom out of
the habitation of our hearts, that albeit unlawful desire, as a thief do
privily thrust in it self many times amongst our good thoughts, though it
enter into us, yet may not have dominion over us.

Sciendum est quod sunt peccata quae a justice vitari possunt, and sunt nonnulla
quae etiam a justice vitari non possunt. etc. We are to know, that there are
sins which the just may avoid, and there are sins which cannot be avoided
in them. For whose heart is their abiding in this corruptible flesh that does
not fall by sinister thought, though he be not drowned so far as to the pit
of consent: and yet the very cogitation of evil things is sin, albeit whilst
the cogitation is resisted, the mind is delivered from its own confusion. The
mind therefore of the just, although it be free from evil work, yet sometime
falls by evil thought; it falls into sin, because there is a declining,
at least in thought, and yet it has not whence afterward with tears to
reprove it self, because it first recouereth it self, before it fall by
consent.

In 1. reg. l. 6. c. 2. prope finem. Here is the root, original sin still
dwelling and abiding in us, and the motion of the flesh, the immediate effect
there of it self also sin. They teach contrary, that original sin does not
remain after baptism; and also that that which remains is no sin.
Romans 7.17. Now it is not I that do it, but sin that dwells in me.
Peccatum, quod se non operari perhibuit motum carnis intellexit; Peccatum autem
in se inhabitans originalem culpam etc. By the sin (says Gregory) which the
Apostle says he works not, he means the motion of the flesh; and by sin
dwelling in him he means original sin; and of original sin is caused
the sin of the motion of the flesh; that sin continuing in us, cannot now
by the power of any teacher be destroyed.

Psalm. 51.5. Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin has my mother
conceived me. Nam cum Propheta dicat ecce in iniquitatibus etc. In Evang. hom.
3 We are not in the world without the sin, we brought into the world.
Sine culpa in mundo esse non potuit, qui in mundum cum culpa venit. The
Prophet (says Gregory) could not be without sin in this world, who came with
sin into the world; and expounds his words to this effect. Opus est domine
vt miserearis quia ab ineunte vitae primor dio in peccati foveam incidi, In
Psalm. poenit. 4. We have still that remaining in us for which we must crave
pardon at Gods hands. How teaches the church of Rome now: that in the
regenerate there is nothing that God hates; nothing to stay them from entering
into heaven.
and concupiscentiae carnalis sordibus inquinata nativitatis meae initia
contraxi. Lord I have need that thou have mercy upon me because even from the
beginning of my life, I am fallen into the pit of sin, and have drawn my
first breath, defiled with the uncleanness of carnal concupiscence, not only
that iniquity which I have lately committed abides in me; I have also in me
for thee to pardon of the iniquity of old.

. 6. The certainty of salvation in the elect.
Mor. lib. 28. c. 7. The spirit of adoption gives witness to the faithful,
that they are the sons of God.
INter haec etiam qui redemit, non relinquit etc. Novit enim conditor noster
quando exurgere persecutionis procellam sinat, quando exurgentem reprimat etc.
Amidst persecutions (says Gregory upon 1. Cor. 10.13.) he that has redeemed
us, does not forsake us, our creator knows when to suffer the storm to
arise, and when to stay it from rising. He knows how to restrain that for
our safeguard, Ibid. l. 29. c. 12. Against the doctrine of doubting and the
uncertainty of salvation. But they teach that the holy spirit does not bear
us witness absolutely and assuredly, that we are the sons of God, but under a
condition which is not certain viz. if we continue suffering.
which he suffers for the exercising of us to go forth against us, that the
raging storm may wash us, and not drown us. Again, God so dispenses and
orders (says he) the temptations of the adversary, as that they come not
too many at once, or that those only which may be borne, do touch the soul
which God has enlightened, that albe it by the heat of the touch thereof they
torment us, yet they may not by burning wast and consume us.

Propheta intuens tantos hoc Ecclesia tempore specie tenus credere quantos
nimirum certum est electorum numerum summamque transire etc. Etiam hiad fidem
specie tenus regniveniunt. Ibid. l. 25. cap 8. They that fall away though in
respect of outward show and profession they be said for a time to believe, yet
because their faith has no root, they never have true faith.
The Prophet perceived so many in this time of the church to believe only in
show, that verily they passed the number of the elect; For they who are not of
the number of the elect, do believe bur in show, and come to the faith of the
kingdom in show. And again. Aurum quod pravis eius persuasionibus sterni
quasi lutum potuerit, aurum ante Dei oculos nunquam fuie. The gold, Ibid. l.
34. c. 13. We must not assure our seluer only by co^fide^ce of outward calling,
but the assurance must arise from the effect and testimony of inward grace.
which by Satan's wicked suggestions, comes to be trodden under foot like
dirt, was never gold in gods sight; For they that can be seduced never to
return again, seem to loose holiness which they had after a sort before the
eyes of men, but indeed never had it in the sight of God.

Quorum casus vtilitate non modica electorum profectibus seruit, Mor. l. 34. c.
13. When we see the falls of the^ that fall away we are moved thereby not to
trust in our selves but to depend upon God only.
quia illorum lapsum dum conspiciunt de suo statu contremiscunt and ruina quae
illos damnat istos humiliat, etc. The fall of which (worldlings, or carnal
men) yields no small benefit for the furtherance of the elect, because while
they see the fall of them they tremble as touching their own estate, and the
ruin which condemns the one, is the humiliation of the other. For they
learn to trust in the defense of him who helps from above, In 1. Reg. lib.
1. c. 1. moral. This is the assurance of the faithful, even an undoubted
belief, and knowledge that the heavenly city is theirs.
whilst they see others fall by resting on their own strength.

Quam familiariter diligit, suam esse induhitanter credit; suam namque hanc
civitatem esse cognoverat quidicebat, scimus quia si terrestris nostra domus
etc. Which heave^ly city Jerusalem, which is above, whosoever entirely loves,
does undoubtedly believe it is his own; for he knew this city to be his
that said, we know that if our earthly house of this habitation be dissolved,
we have a building which is of God, a house not made with hands eternal in
heaven.

. 7. The good works and sufferings of this life are not meritorious, The like
is before in the questions of merit. 3.
or worthy of the bless of the life to come.
A Pud eum districte iudicati, ipsi quoqui maculas inquinationis habent, quiper
munditiam sanctitatis lucent. Even they who shine in purity of holiness, Our
merit is the Lords showing mercy.
have also their spots of filthiness, if they be strictly and narrowly judged.

Quantalibet iustitia polleant, Ibid. cap. 21.
ne quaqua^ sibi ad innocentiam vel electi sufficiant, si in indicio districte
requira^tur. The Papists now talk of nothing so much, as of meriting or
deferuing of heaven. Ibid. l. 9. c. 18. Heaven is the reward, hire, and
repaiment for good works say they. No, says Gregory, whom will ye believe.
The very elect howsoever they exell in righteousness, have not sufficient in
them for innocence if in judgment they be strictly dealt withal.

Siremota pietate discutimur, opus nostrum poena dignum est, quod nos
remunerari praestolamur. Restat vt post quam bonu^ opus agitur lachrymae
expiationis exquira^tur quatenus ad aeterna praemia meritum recti operis
subvehat humilias postulationnis. If we be judged without mercy, Man's works
done by Christ's grace, do condignly, or worthily deserve eternal joy. No,
says Gregory, our best works are worthy to be punished, and subject to
perish if God deal severely and strictly with us. If amidst our good works,
it be by humble prayer and request that we obtain the eternal reward? what
religion have the Papists that plead for the worthiness of our works? and deride
us when we say that our good works are not worthy of the glory that is to
come. Ibid. l. 9. cap. 11. for Job. Ibid. in Psalm. poenit 1. for David,
our work is worthy of punishment; which we exspect to have rewarded, and
therefore the tears of expiation are to be required, that humility of prayer
may lift up the merit of good work to the obtaining of everlasting reward. And
to the same effect he makes the holy man Job to say, Et si ad opus virtutis
excrevero, ad vitam non ex meritis sed ex venia convalesco. Albeit I grow to
the work of virtue, yet I avail not to life by merits, but by pardon and
favor. And so he brings in David, saying, Non de meis meritis confidens vt
me falvum facias supplico, sed de sola misericordia tua praesumens impetrare
quod misericordia tua praesumens impetrare quod de meis meritis non spero. I
pray thee to save me, not trusting in my own merits, but presuming to obtain
that of thy mercy only, which I have no hope of by my own merits.

Mot. l. 1. c. 17.
Quid est quod in hac vita sine quavis tenuissimi contagij iniquitate
peragatur? Lib. 31. Cap. 5.
Electi quamdiu in hac vita sunt sine quantulocunque culpae contagio esse non
possunt. Lib. 32. cap. 4.
Nullus in hac vita ita perfectus est vt quamlibet Deo devotus sit, inter ipsa
quantumcunque pia vota non peccet. Lib. 35. cap. 16
Si de his divinitus districte discutimur, quis inter ista remanet salutis
locus quando and mala nestra pura mala sunt, If our good works cannot be purely
good, if all that we do be polluted and defiled with the contagion of sin,
if God by the eye of his severe judgment do strictly view and behold the
same, then cannot any good works of ours be truly said to be worthy of the
heavenly glory. Bernard de great. and lib. arbit. in fine.
and bona quae nos habere credimus pura bona esse nequaqua^ possunt? What is
there that can be done in this life, without some defilement of secret
contagion? The elect so long as they are in this life cannot be without some
contagion of sin. There is none so perfect in this life howsoever devoted
unto God, that does not sin amidst his most holy and religious desires. If
God do narrowly sift our doings, what place is there left for salvation, when
our evil doings are merely evil, but the good things we believe we have,
cannot be purely good.

2. Tim. 4.8. Henceforth is laid up for me a crown of justice, which God that
just judge will render unto me at that day. Est ergo quam Paulus expectat
corona iustitiae, Contrary to this, does the Church of Rome now teach saying,
that if God as a just judge render the joys of heaven as a crown of justice
then were they before justly deserved, and the suffering of them that deserved
them were in just proportion worthy of them. Is not this worthy doctrine? Greg.
Mor. l. 24. cap. 5.
sed iustitiae Dei non suae; Iustum est quippe, vt reddat quod debet. Debet
autem quod pollicitus est, and hac est iustitia, de qua praesumit Apostolus,
promissio Dei. It is a crown of Justice which St Paul expects, but of Gods
justice, not his own; For it is just that God pay that which he owes, and he
owes that which he promises, and this is the Justice whereof the Apostle
presumes, even the promise of God. Again. Iustitiae nostra dicitur, non quae
ex nostro nostra est sed quae divina largitate fit nostra. It is called our
instice (says Gregory) not which is not ours as of our own, but which by the
gift of God be comes ours.

Qui nihil boni sibi, sed toutum gratiae Dei tribuunt, In crowning our justice,
it is verified which is said in holy scripture: He crowns thee in mercy and
loving kindness. In Psalm Poenit. 7. It is not grace that does all, say the
Papists now. The just do attribute all to grace, faith Gregory.
scientes se nihil habere quod non acceperunt; hac enim operatus est in eis, is
qui vasa misericordiae fecit eos. The elect and faithful attribute no good to
themselves, but all wholly to the grace of God; knowing that they have nothing
that they have not received, for he has wrought it in them, who has made
them vessels of his mercy.

Praeveniens gratia liberum in eo arbitrium focerat in bono, In Ezec hom. 9.
This did Gregory speak of S. Paul, and the same is true in us.
libero arbitrio eandem gratiam est subsecutus in opere. The preventing grace
of God makes the will free in that that is good, and then we by free will do
in work follow the same grace.

. 8. There is no freedom in the will, to good and holy actions, except it be
made free.
SVperna pietas prius agit in nobis aliquid sine nobis, Greg. Mor. lib. 16.
cap. 10. We have no power in nature to follow when grace does lead. Idem. ibid.
When God by conversion has reformed our will and wrought in us the love of
righteousness, we by this work of grace in us do thenceforth apply our selves
to work with grace, and the work that we do is Gods work and it is our
work, yet no otherwise ours but that by the gift of God it is wrought in us,
and so becomes ours.
vt subsequente quoque nostro libero arbitrio bonum quod iam appetimus agat
nobiscum. The heavenly grace does first of all without us work somewhat in us
that our freewill following, he may do with us that good, whereunto we are now
become willing.

Divina nos bonit as vt innocents faciat praevenit, eandem gratiam nostrum
liberum arbitrium sequitur. The goodness of God preventeth us to make us
innocent, and our freewill follows the same grace.

Quod verba praedicationis Dei ab auribus ad corda descendunt, solo divino
munere agitur etc. Per internam gratiam solus omnipotens Deus praedicantium
verbis ad corda audientium invisibiliter aditum praestat. Insomuch that the
words of the preacher, do descend from the ear to the heart, it comes to
pass by the only gift of God who by inward grace invisibly gives passage for
the words of the preacher to the hearts of them that hear.

Ipsa perfectio nostra culpa non caret nisi hanc severus iudex in subtili lance
examinis misericorditer penset. Mor. lib. 5. cap. 9 All our righteousness if
it be narrowly sifted, is found unjust, and defective.
Our very perfection is not free from blame, vniesse God in the precise
balance of his merciful examination do mercifully weigh the same.

. 9. Our righteousness is Christ's righteousness. Mor. lib. 3. c. 11. The
righteousness of the law, is not fulfilled in us, but upon our true repentance,
God reputeth us innocent for Christ's sake

PEr hoc cuncta iustificat quod eum qui sine peccato est pro peccatoribus
damnat. God through Christ does justify us, because for us sinners, he
condemned him who was without sin.

Iustus advocatus noster iustos nos defendet in iudicio quia nosmet ipsos and
cognoscamus and accusamus iniustos. In Ezec. hom. 7. idem in Evang. hom. 25.
The Papists now speak of a righteousness inherent: which Gregory never
thought of.
Paratus est Deus poenitentiam nostram nobis ad innocentiam deputare. Our just
advocate will in judgment defend us for just, if we know and accuse our selves
to be unjust; God being ready for his sons sake to repute unto us our
penitency for innocence.

. 10. Faith excludes not all fear and doubt.
FIdes ipsa quae ad bona alia capescenda nos imbuit, Mor. l. 22. c. 14. There
may be a godly fear which is a distrust of our selves but the godly cannot
have a doubtful fear which is distrust full of God.
plerunque in exordijs suis nutat and solida est; and iam certissime habetur,
and tamen de eius fiducia adhuc sub dubitatione trepidatur: Pars namque eius
prius accipitur ut in nobis postmodum perfect compleatur. Faith it self which
seasoneth us to the receiving of other graces, commonly in the beginning
thereof is both wavering and sound; we already most certeinely have it, and
yet of the assurance thereof we fear and doubt: For we first receive a part of
it, that it may be afterward perfectly fulfilled in us. Greg. Ibid. Faith and
unbelief, certainty and uncertainty, assurance and doubt may be blended
together in one and the same man, why does the Church of Rome now teach the
contrary, saying that faith excludes all fear and doubt. The Scripture indeed
commending a fear unto us, does not mean a doubting fear, such as is
contrary to assurance of faith, but such as is contrary to presumption and
pride, and trust in our selves, and imparteth humlity, lowlines of mind,
distrust of our own strength, that we may rely upon the strength and power of
God. Mor. lib. 10. c. 8. Idem ibid.
He brings for example hereof, the poor man in the Gospel to whom Christ
said, Mark 9. v. 23.24. If thou can believe, all things are possible to him
that believes. And he answered; Lord I believe, help my unbelief. Vno
eodemque tempore clamabat se etiam credere and adhuc ex incredulitate dubitare.
At one and the same time (says he) he cried that he did believe, and yet
still did doubt by unbelief. Vno eodemque te^pore is qui nec dum perfect
crediderat simul and credebat, and incredulus erat. At one and the same time
(says he in another place) he which did not perfectly believe, did both
believe, and was also unbelieving. And yet in another place he says. Saepe
conting it ut fides jam in mente vigeat, sed tamen ex part aliqua in dubietate
contabescat. Vnam eandemque mentem and certitudo solidae fidei roborat, and
tamen ex aliquantula mutabilitate perfidiae aura dubietatis versat. It often
falls out, that faith now is growing in the mind, and yet by doubting it
languisheth in in some part; that certainery of sound faith strengthened one
and the same mind, which notwithstanding the wind of doubtfulnesse shakes by
some mutability of unbelief, as namely says he of the man before mentioned.
Per fidem sperans, and per infidelitatem fluctuans dicebat, etc. et exorare
certus iam per fidem coeperat, and adhuc incertus undas perfidiae ex
incredulitate tolerabat. Hoping by faith, and wavering by unbelief, he said,
Lord I believe, help my unbelief. He hoped in faith, yet wavered in unbelief.
He began to pray (says he) certain now by faith and yet being uncertain
he bare the waves of unbelief.

. 11. There is no Purgatory or third Place after this life.
HOc de igne tribulationis in hac nobis vita adhibito potest intelligi. Dial.
4. c. 39. Then it is no proof for warrant of a Purgatory after this life. Mor.
super Job lib. 8. c. 8. If after death there be no deliverance, if there be no
change, but as the Angel either good or had receives the Soul out of the
body, so it continues for ever, either exalted in joy or drowned in
punishment: then there can be no Purgatory, then there can be nothing but
either heaven or hell, where they that come shall abide for ever. Lib. 7.
indic. 2. epist. 111. Here is no place for Purgatory, for here he teaches us
to believe, that the faithful in death do attain to true life, and that their
passage from this world is to a better, neither does he acknowledge any use of
Prayers, Masses, Trentals, and other offices and obsequies for the dead, who
says that our devotion and love yields no fruit or profit to them.
The fire spoken of in S. Paul. 1 Corinthians. 3.13. may be understood of the fire
of tribulation, applied unto us in this life.

Quem nequaquam modo misericordia eripit, sola post praesens seculum iusticia
addicit, etc. Whom Mercy now delivers not, him Justice only after this world
imprisoneth. Hereof Solomon says, that in whatsoever place the tree falls,
whether toward the South, or toward the North, there it shall be; because at the
time of a man's death, either the good Spirit, or the evil spirit, shall
receive the Soul going from the Body, he shall hold it with him for ever,
without any change, that neither being exalted, it can come down to
punishment; nor being drowned in eternal punishments, can thence-forth rise to
any remedy of salvation.

Gregory writes an Epistle to his friend Aregius a Bishop, to comfort him,
wherein it is worthy to be observed, how constantly he carries himself to
the doctrine of the Scriptures. Amongst other words we read these, Indecens
est de illis taedio afflictionis addici, quos credendum est ad veram vitam
moriendo pervenisse, etc. It is indecent for us to give our selves to long
affliction of sorrow for them, whom we are to believe to have come by death
unto the true life. They have happily just excuse of long sorrow, who know not
any other life, who do not believe the passage from this world, to be to a
better World, but we who know, who believe and teach this, are not to be too
heavy for the dead, lest that which with others carries a show of piety, be to
us rather a matter of blame. For it is in a manner a kind of distrust to be
tormented with heaviness, contrary to that which he himself does teach. And
then citing the words of Saint Paul, 1 Thessalonians. 4.13. adds. This therefore
seeing we know, we are to have a care, as I have said, not to be afflicted for
the dead, but to bestow our affection upon the living, to whom our piety or
devotion may be profitable, and our love may yield fruit.

12. No carrying about of the Relics of the Saints.
IN Romany and totius Occidentis partibus omnino intolerabile est atque
sacrilegum, Lib. 3. epist. 30 Is the doctrine of the Church of Rome, the same
that it was of old? They now pull the Relics from the bodies of their
imagined Saints and martyrs: they vnbury them out of their graves, kiss them,
and carry them about, all which Gregory here misliketh.
si sanctorum corpora tangere quisquam fortasse praesumpserit, certum est quia
haec temeritas impunita nullo modo remanebit. In the Roman Church, and the
whole Western parts, it was a thing altogether intolerable, and a matter of
sacrilege, to presume to touch the bodies of the Saints; and if any man do
presume so to do, certain it is, that his rashness shall by no means remain
unpunished. And then having showed diverse examples of them, who adventuring too
near to the stirring or touching the Bodies of some holy Persons, were
thereupon greatly frighted, or by death miscarried, he concludes, Who then
knowing these things can be so rash, as that he will presume, I will not say,
to touch the Bodies of such, but in any sort to look upon them.

. 13. The Faith and Religion of the New Testament, differs not in substance
from the Old.
In Evangel. hom. 19. The church before Christ, was a part of that Church which
has been called Catholic since Christ's time If our faith be the same with
the faith of the fathers of the old testament, then must it needs be the
Catholic faith. Idem in Ezec. hom. 15. The catholic Church is now understood
to contain all the faithful from the beginning of the world to the end. Of the
catholic Church, there is but one body and one spirit which quickneth that
body, and one faith whereby we are all partakers of that spirit. In psalm.
paenit. 5. Whether we respect them that were before the incarnation of Christ,
or them that come after, they both make but one body, and therefore the holy
Ghost as the Soul is but one and the same to both. In Ezech. hom. 16.
HAbet vineam universalem scilicet Ecclesiam, quae ab Abel iusto, usque ad
ultimum electum, qui in fine mundi nasciturus est quot sanctos pertulit, quasi
tot palmites misit. God has his Vineyard, even the Universal Church, which
yields so many branches as it bringerh forth Saints from righteous Abel, unto
the last Elect that shall be borne in the end of the world.

Vna est Ecclesia electorum praecedentium atque sequentium. Praetered omnes
fideles qui ab Adam, in hunc usque diem fuerunt, quive futuri sunt quamdiu
mundus durabit, veram fidem profitentes ad candem Ecclesiam pertinent. There is
but one Church of the Elect, both before and since the time of Christ:
moreover, all the Faithful who have been from Adam till this day, and shall
be to the Worlds end, professing the true Faith, do belong unto the Catholic
Church.

Sicut est una anima quae diversa corporis membra vivificat: ita totam simul
Ecclesiam unus Spiritus Sanctus vegetat and illustrat. As it is but one Soul
which quickneth the diverse members of the body, so one holy Spirit gives life
and light to the whole Church.

Eadem fides, spes, charitas in antiquis patribus quae in novis doctoribus
fuit. In the old Father was the faith, hope, and charity, as in the new
teachers, namely the Apostles and the rest.

Quod apud nos valet aqua baptismatis, Mor. l. 4. c. 3.
hoc egit apud veteres vel pro maioribus virtus sacrificij, vel pro his qui ex
Abrahae stirpe prodierant mysterium circumcisionis. Look what the Water of
Baptism avails with us, The Fathers of the Old Testament had the grace and
effect of Baptism as well as we.
the same with the old Fathers did either faith only for Infants, or for them
of elder years the power of sacrifice, or for them that came of the stock of
Abraham, the Sacrament of Circumcision.

Sive hi qui electi in Testamento Veteri fuerunt, sive hi qui in Novo
Testamento secuti sunt, nimirum constat, In Ezech. hom. 16.
quia omnes ex amore Trinitatis accensi sunt, etc. Ad veram speciem ex
Trinitatis sunt cognitione decorati. Whether we respect or reckon the Elect in
the Old Testament, The Fathers of the Old Testament in the Unity of Godhead,
did see distinctly three Persons, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. In
Cant. cap. 5.
or they that followed in the New, they were all enkindled with the love, and
adorned unto true beauty, through the knowledge of the holy Trinity.

Apostoli a Prophetarum dictis vt fortes persisterent, fidem integram
acceperunt. The Apostles received the whole faith, to the end they might stand
firm, In Ezech. hom. 6. The law and the prophets and the Gospells and the
preaching of the Apostles, have all delivered only one and the same thing.
Ibid. Christ confirmed the same faith and religion, which the Jewish Church
before received, and added nothing touching the substance of doctrine. The
Apostles in preaching the Gospel said no other things but those which the
prophets and Moses did say should come.
from those things, that were spoken by the Prophets. And again. Quod praedicat
Lex, hoc etiam Prophetae; quod denuntiant Prophetae, hoc exhibet Evangelinin;
quod exhibuit Evangelium, hoc praedicaverunt Apostoli per mundum. Look what
the Law preaches, the same also do the Prophets teach, the same the Gospel
has exhibited, and what the Gospel exhibibited, the Apostles preached through
the world.

Viraque testamenta in nullo a se discrepa^t etc. Inest testamento veteri,
testamentum novum etc. Prophetia testamenti novi, testamentum vetus est, and
expositio testamenti veteris, testamentum novum. The two Testaments differ not
in any thing one from the other, the new Testament is contained in the old. The
old Testament is a prophecy of the new, and the new Testament the exposition
of the old.

, 14. What was said to Peter Mat. 16. whatsoever thou bindest etc. was spoken
to the whole Church.
Universally Ecclesiae dicitur, In 1. Reg. lib. 6 cap. 3. The Pope is an usurper
against God and the Church.
Quodcunque ligaveris, etc. It was said to the Universal Church, Whatsoever
thou bindest in earth, shall be bound in Heaven, etc.

. 15. How far God suffers Sin, and guides the wicked actions of wicked men.
OMnipotens Deus quod fieri prohibet, Mor. l. 11. c. 2. and lib. 16. c. 23.
There is much good wrought out of evil, which could not be without evil.
Hereupon the malicious Papists say, that we make God the author of sin. Ibid.
lib. 6. c. 12 To God we attribute no more but that he voluntarily permits,
and wisely orders, and justly uses to his purposes the sin of man: and so
much their own Pope Gregory says. Consider the act of sin in it self, it is
properly and only the work of man: but if we consider it in the circumstances
and order, it is rightly called the work of God. Moral. lib. 18. cap. 17. Mor.
lib. 2. c. 6. It was the Spirit of the Lord, that vexed Saul. Ibid. l. 18. c.
3. Ibid. l. 2. cap. 6.
just um est ut fieri sinat. Inulium abire non sinit iniustum, quod just fieri
permisit. It is just, that the Almighty God suffer that to be done, which
notwithstanding he forbids to be done, neither suffers he that injustice
to go vnrevenged, which he justly suffered to be done.

Miro modo fit, ut quod sine volu^tate Dei agitur eius voluntati contrarium non
sit, quia du^ in bonu^ usum malafacta vertu^tur, eius consilio militant, etiam
quae eius consilio repugnant. It comes strangely to pass, that that which is
done without the will of God, yet is not against his will, because whilst evil
deeds are turned to good use, those things show the Counsel and Will of God,
which notwithstanding are repugnant unto it.

Ab iniquis facta ne inordinate eveniant ipse disponens. God disposes the
doings of wicked men, that they may not befall unorderly.

Vnus idemque Spiritus and Domini appellatur and malus; Domini per licentiam
potestatis iustae, malus per desiderium voluntatis iniustae. It was the spirit
of the Lord (that vexed Saul) by leave and license of just power; but an evil
spirit by desire of unjust will.

Omnis Diaboli For potestas, read voluntas.
potestas * iniusta est, and tamen permittente Deo, omnis potestas iusta. The
will of the devil is altogether unjust, but his power which of Gods permission
only he has, is altogether just.

Deo ad usum iusti indicij and iniusta Diaboli voluntas servit. The unjust will
of the devil serves GOD for the use of just judgment.

Inde coacti sunt Dei voluntatem peragere, Moral. lib. 6. c. 22. Albeit God by
his wisdom and power do turn the evil of wicked men to his good purpose
and use; yet they do it not as with any purpose therein to serve God, but to
follow the sinful lusts of their own wicked hearts, and therefore are justly
punished for the doing of it. As is seen manifestly in these examples.
Wickedness issues wholly out of man's heart: but God by his secret hand guides
it to go one way rather then an other.
unde hanc moliti sunt astute commutare. Cum se aestimant cius miracula
persequendo abscindere haec nimirum compulsi sunt nesciendo dilatare. Hoc ad
pietatis suae obsequium redigit, quod contra illum humana crudelitas exarsit.
Cui cognitae debet nostra actio devote famulari, ne ei etiam nocens serviat, si
hanc superbiens declinat. Thereby Joseph's brethren were compelled to do the
will of God, whereby they subtly thought to defeat the same. The Jews by
persecuting, thought to cut off the miracles of Christ, but were compelled
unwittingly to spread the same further. God forces that to the service of his
piety, wherein humane cruelty burns or rages against him. Our action even
against our will serves the heavenly will of God, when in our pride it
shunneth the same.

. 16. The ancient Church knew not the idolatry used now in the Church of Rome,
in worshipping of Images.
INdico dudum ad nos pervenisse, Lib. 7. Ep. 109.
quod fraternitas vestra quosdam imaginum adoratores aspiciens easdem Ecclesiae
imagines confregit atque proiecit. Et quide^ zelu^ vos ne quid manu factum
adorari possit habuisse laudavimus, sed frangere easdem imagines non debuisse
iudicamus, etc. I certify you (says Gregory, to Serenus Bishop of Massilia)
that it came of late to our hearing, that your Brotherhood beholding some
worshipping Images, did break the same Church-images, and threw them away. And
surely, I commended you that you had that zeal, that nothing made with hands
should be worshipped. But yet I judge, that you should not have broken those
images. For therefore is the picture used in the Church, that they who are not
learned by Book, may yet by sight read upon the walls, those things which
they cannot read in Books. Therefore your Brotherhood should both preserve
the images, and forbid the people the worshipping of them, that both the
ignorant may have whence to gather the knowledge of the History, and the people
may not sin in worshipping of the Picture. Convocandi sunt dispersi Ecclesiae
filij eisque Scripturae Sacrae est testimonijs ostendendis, Idem. l. 9. ep. 9.
quia omne manufactum adorare non liceat, quoniam scriptum est, Dominum Deum
tuu^ adorabis, and illi soli servies. The Children of the Church are again to
be gathered together, and it must be showen by testimonies of the Scriptures,
that it is not lawful to worship any thing that is made with hands, because it
is written. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only thou shall serve.

Frangi non debuit quod non adorandum in Ecclesijs, Greg. ibid.
sed ad instruendas solummodo mentes fuit nescientium collocatum. That ought
not to be broken, which was not set up in the Church to be adored, but only to
instruct the ignorant.

Scio quidem quod Imaginem Salvatoris nostri non ideo petis ut quasi Deum
colas, Lib. 7. epist. 54 Here we see that Gregory does not instruct
Secundinus, as the Papists now adays do their Scholars. As to worship the
Image, or to kneel to it, for that he condemns; But wills him to understand
that these devotions belong only to God, and therefore that he must beware not
to put the image in the place of God to do to it those duties of religions
humiliation which are proper to God alone. Ibid. lib. 9. epist. 9. Not to
worship images, but to have them for remembrance, not to fall down before them
but to worship christ whom we remember by the^.
sed ob recordationem filij Dei, ut in eius amore recalescas, cuius te Imaginem
videre consideras, etc. I know verily (says Gregory to Secundinus) that thou
do not therefore desire the Image of our Savior that thou may worship it
as God, but for a remembrance of the Son of God, that thou may become
fervent in his love, whose Image thou considerest thy self to behold. And we
verily fall not down before it, as before the Godhead, but we worship him whom
by the Image we remember, either as borne, or having suffered, or now sitting
upon his Throne; and whilst the Picture, as it were a writing, brings to our
remembrance the Son of GOD, either it rejoices our mind as touching his
resurrection, or appeaseth it by his passion.

Si quis imagines facere voluerit minime prohibe: adorare vero imagines omnibus
modis devita; sed hoc solicit fraternitas tua admoneat, ut ex visione rei
gosta ardore^ compunctionis percipiant, and in adoratione solius omnipotentis
sanctae Trinitatis humiliter prosternantur. If any man will make images, forbid
him not: but by all means avoid the worshipping of Images: But this let your
Brotherhood carefully advertise them, by the sight of the story, to gather
fervency of compunction, but humbly to fall down or kneel in the worship of
the holy Trinity only.

. 17. The Books of the Machabees are not Canonical Scripture; of the easines
of the Scriptures, and fulness without traditions.
NOn inordinate agimus, si ex libris, Mor. lib. 19. c. 16. aut. 13. The church
of Rome now does accurse all those that refuse the books of the Machabees (of
which Gregory here speaks) for canonical Scripture. In Ezech. l. 1. hom.
9. ad fine^. The church of Rome now accurseth all those that do not reverence
traditions unwritten, as they do the written word. Mor. l. 18. c. 14. in
princ. The Papists are these heretics: from the writ word, they fly to
traditions unto them. Lib. 4. epist. 40 ad Theod. Medicum. Gregory exhorts
Lay men to the reading of the Scriptures. The Papists forbid them.
licet non Canonicis, sed tamen ad aedificationem Ecclesiae editis testimonia
proferamus. We do not deal disorderly, if we do bring forth testimonies out
of books that are not canonical; yet are published for the aedification of
the Church.

In hoc volumine, omnia quae erudiunt, cuncta quae aedificant scripta
continentur; libri sacri ad loquendum nobis quasi quaeda^ argenti venae sunt.
In this volume are all things which do instruct, and which do edify
contained. The holy Books are unto us to show us how to speak, as certain
veins of silver, etc.

Saepe haeretici dum sua student perversa astruere, ea proferunt quae in
sacrorum librorum paginis non tenentur. Hererikes do usually for the
confirmation of their perverse opinions suggest such proofs as are not found
in the Scriptures.

Sicuti terreni Imperatoris scripta acciperes, non quiesceres, nec somnum
oculis dares priusquam scripta illa agnovisses; Imperator coeli, Augelorum ac
hominum Deus tibi pro vita tua epistolas suas transmisit, and tamen eas
ardenter legere negligis: Stude ergo quaeso, and Creatoris tui verba meditare,
disce cor Dei in verbis Dei. And a little before, Quid est autem Scriptura
Sacra, nisi Epistola omnipotentis Dei ad creaturam suam? Wheresoever thou
receiuest the Letters of an earthly Prince, thou do not rest, nor give
sleep to thine eyes, before thou do understand those Letters. The Emperor
of Heaven, and God of Angels and men, sends his Writings unto thee for
direction of thy life: and yet thou do neglect to read them earnestly.
Study therefore, I pray thee, and meditate on the words of thy Creator. Learn
the mind of God in the word of God; for what is the holy Scripture, but an
Epistle of the Omnipote^t God unto his Creature.

Magnae vtilitatis est ipsa obscuritas eloquiorum Dei, Lib. 1. hom. 6. super
Ezech.
quia exercet sensum -- vt exercitatus capiat quod capere nequit, ociosus
habeat quoque adhuc maius aliud; quia si in cunctis sacrae scripturae
intelligentia esset aperta, vilesceret, quae in quibusdam locis obscurioribus
in venta animum reficit. The very obscurity of the Scriptures of God, is of
great profit and commodity, To oppose the obscurity of the Scriptures to
deter men from the reading of them is a very frothy argument and condemned by
Gregory.
because it exercises the understanding, that he that is exercised in them may
understand that which he could not; he that is idle may have also some more
occasion to search them because if the meaning of the holy scripture were plain
in all things, it would be of no account, which being found out in certain
obscure places, does refresh the mind.

Scriptura quasi quidam fluvius est, Epist. ad Leand. cap. 4. sup. mor.
vt dixerim planus and altus in quo and agnus ambulet and Elephas natet. The
Scripture is as it were a certain river as I have said shallow and deep;
wherein the lamb may go or walk, and the Elepha^t swim.

. 18. The Catholic Church in the Creed, is believed, not seen: and consists
of all the elect only, and excludes the reprobate out of it.
IN carne Dominus ad Ecclesiam veniens -- fines Ecclesiae occulti iudicij
distinxit. Mor. l. 28. cap. 6 The distinction of visible and invisible Church,
must not be take away. Gregory denies that wicked me^, and such as are the
limbs of Satan, may be truly members of the body of Christ, or that they
belong to the Catholic Church. The Papists affirm they may. In. Ps. 5.
poenit. post principiu^ and in principio
Intra has mensuras sunt omnes electi, extra has sunt omnes reprobi, etiamsi
intra fidei limitem esse videantur. Our Lord coming in the flesh unto the
Church, separated the bounds thereof, by the inwardnesse of his hidden
judgment, within whose limits are all the elect, and without those limits are
all the reprobate, although they seem to be within the bond of faith.

Sanctam Ecclesiam de sanctis in aeternu^ permansuris constructam, nullis huius
vita persecutionibus superandam, ipse super qui aedificate est evidenter
ostendit, cum ait, Portae inferi non praevalebunt adversus ca^. Vnum corpus est
tota sancta vniversalis ecclesia sub Christo Jesus capite suo constituta. etc.
He upon whom the Church is builded does evidently show, The glorious titles of
Spowse and Catholic Church, do properly belong and appertain unto the
faithful and elect of God. The Church of Rome now says that the Catholic
Church is visible and palpable, as is the kingdom of great Britain and of
France. And that one and the same man may be a member of Christ, in respect of
outward profession; and a member of the devil, in respect of his wicked life.
Horrible doctrine and most contrary to that taught here by S. Gregory. For tell
me Papist, what society is there between Christ and Belial, that both they
should share in one Man. In Job. l. 18. c. 27 and l. 12. c. 5. in principio.
Gregory excepteth none from being conceived in sin but our Savior Christ;
The Papists except the Virgin Mary.
that the holy Church which is gathered together of Saints who shall continue
for ever, and not be overcome with any the persecutions of this life, when he
says, The gates of hell shall not prevail against it. The whole holy
universal Church is one body, established under one head Jesus Christ. Christ
therefore with his whole Church whether that which is conversant at this
present in earth; or that which reigns with him in heaven, is one person; and
as there is one soul which quickneth diverse members of the body, so one holy
spirit does at once quicken and illustrate the whole Church. For as Christ who
is head of the Church was conceived by the holy Ghost; so the holy Church which
is his body is filled with the same spirit to life everlasting; whereby the
whole body underpropped and framed, does grow to an increase in God. That is the
body out of which the spirit does not quicken.

. 19. Only Christ was conceived by the holy ghost without any touch of sin.
ILle solus veraciter sanctus natus est, qui vt ipsam conditionem naturae
vinceret, ex commixtione carnalis copulae conceptus non est. nullus homo sine
peccato est, nisi ille qui in hunc mundum non venit ex peccato. He only indeed
was borne holy, who that he might overcome that condition of nature was not
conceived by the mixture of carnal copulation. No man is without sin, but he
who came into this world through sin.

. 20. The Pope usurps the title of universal Bishop, which Gregory refused.
EGo fidenter dico, quisquis se vniversale^ Sacerdotem vocat, Lib. 40. epist.
30. He that claims the title of the Universal Bishop, is the forerunner of
Antechrist, but the Papists give that title to the Pope. Ergo.
vel vocari desiderat in elatione sua Antichristum praecurrit; quia superbiendo
se caeteris praeponit. I speak it boldly, whosoever calls himself Universal
Bishop, or desires so to be called, is in his pride the forerunner of
Antechrist, because in making himself proud, he sets himself before other.

Hac in re a fratre and consacerdote me^ contra Evangelicam sententiam etc.
Lib. 4. Epist. 34.
Herein my Brother and fellow Bishop does against the meaning of the Gospel,
against S. Peter the Apostle, against all Churches, and against the ordinance
of the Canons. In this pride of his, what other thing is there betokned, but
the time of Ante-Christ is even at hand? For he follows him, that despising
the equality of joy among the Angels, labored to break up to the top of
singularity, saying thus, The Pope in advancing himself above all other
Bishops, imitateth Lucifer in his singularity, setting himself above the rest
of the Angels. Lib. 4. Epist. 38.
I will advance my throne above the stars of heaven, I will sit in the mount
of the Testament even in the corners of the North; I will get me up above the
light of the clouds, and will be like unto the highest. Rex superbiae in
foribus est etc. The king of pride is even in the gates; and an horrible thing
to speak Sacordotum est paratus exercitus, an army of Priests is made ready,
for now they play the soldiers, and bear their heads of high that were
ordained to be captains of humility.

Nether may you say, Lib. 6. Epist. 28.
that the using of this title is nothing; for if we bear this matter quietly,
we overthrowe the faith of the whole Church. The agreeing unto this wicked
title is the losing of the faith.

Nullus Romanorum pontificum hoc singularitatis nomen assumpsit. Lib. 4. Epist.
32.
None of the Bishops of Rome ever received this name of singularity: nullus
decessorum meorum hoc tam profano vocabulo vti voluit: None of my predecessors
ever consented to use this ungodly name. Nos hunc honorem nolumus oblatum
suscipere. Lib. 4. Epist. 36.
We being Bishops of Rome will not take this honor being offered unto us.

Quid tu Christo vniversalis Ecclesiae capiti, in extremi iudicij dicturus es
examini qui cuncta eius membra tibimet conaris vniver salis appellatione
supponere? What answer will thou make unto Christ, that indeed is the head of
the universal church at the trial of the last judgment, that thou go about
under the name of Universal Bishop, to subdue all his members unto thee?

An elucidation touching this title, Universal Bishop.
The occasion of these speeches of Gregory against this title of Universal
Bishop, was the pride of John, who was Patriarch of the Church of
Constantinople, who did endeavor to draw that title unto himself, against
which Gregory as you see excepteth, and would not that either John, or any
other should usurp that name. And as Gregory withstood it then, so do we now;
and set him against the Church of Rome, as opposite to it. The Papists finding
Gregory's testimonies true, do yet put a difference (in secreat meaning)
between the power and authority which John intended by it for himself, and
that which they intend by it for the Pope: which is this. John (say they) by
striving for that title attributed it so unto himself, that he meant to be
called Bishop alone, so as Bishopric should be taken away from all other;
and to be such an one as is a Bishop alone and altogether and only, so as there
be no other Bishop besides him: finally, that Bishop Universal by Gregory, is
as much as al Bishops; whereas we giving it to the Pope, debar not others
from being Bishops, or the Church from having such, but make him Universal
Bishop, over and above all other, as being the highest of all, and having power
over all other Bishops. Therefore the authority of Gregory is in this case
very impertine^tly alleged against the Pope, who does not take it in that
nature wherein John would have usurped it, but rightly uses it, according to
Gregory's meaning. Thus say they; but here is a bare, a naked, and an idle
speculation of their own brain. For it shall appear notwithstanding this fond
illation of theirs from the very text and tenor of Gregory's words by the
precedent authorities, and some more of his consequent, that John never meant,
nor Gregory never so did understand him, as that he would be universal Bishop,
thereby to take away all other, but even as the Bishop of Rome now does,
thereby to bring the rest in subjection unto him. Which if it be so, then is
not the autohrity answered, but they condemned by the verdict of their great S.
Gregory, who is in time from us more then 1000 years.

To prove this let us record the first testimony again.
He that claims that title (says Gregory) is the forerunne of Antechrist,
because in making himself proud, he sets himself before other. Lo! A
plain text, against their forged gloss. Gregory does not say, How can he be
before other that has no other but himself.
he would have no other but himself: But that he sets himself before
other. Before other. mark that.

In the second. He is like to him in the singularity of his pride, that
despised the equality of joy among Angels, saying. I will advance my throne
above the stars of heaven, etc. Here is seen the singularity of one, that
would be above many; but nothing of one, that would have none besides himself.

In the last there, it is said. Vlt.
Though go about to subdue all the members of Christ unto thee. To subdue
them; but not to take them clean away.

Writing to Mauritius the Emperor about this matter, he says, Lib. 4. Epist.
32.
Vtinam vel sine aliorum (non sublatione sed) imminutione vnus sit, qui vocari
appetit vniversalis. I would to God he might be one, without the lessning of
others, who desires to be called universal. Without the lessning of others
(says he) not without utter taking away of others.

To the Empress Constantia thus. Lib. 4. Epist. 34.
Illud appetere Iohannem vt omnibus dignior esse videatur. John desires that
he might seem worthier than all other. Not but that there should be others as
well as he: But that he might seem worthier than other.

To Elogius Bishop of Alexandria Per elationem pompatici sermonis, Christi sibi
studet membra subiugare. By the hautines of a glorious title he studieth to
bring into subjection unto him the members of Christ. To bring them under
subjection (says he) not to cut of any.

To John himself thus. Appetere eum vocabulum hoc, Lib. 4. Epist. 18.
vt nulli subesse, and solus omnibus praesse videretur. That he did affect that
title, that he might be subject to none, and seem only to be over all. So, it
appears here also, that he would not be Bishop alone; but subject to none,
and above all. Moreover he faith unto him Quid dicturus es, Ibid.
qui non solum Pater sed Generalis Pater in mundo vocari appetis? What will thou say who do not desire to be called only father in the world, but
universal or general father? General father (says he) not father alone. And
that which in this qestion takes away all scruple (he says) Cupere Iohannem
Episcops semetipsum vocabulo elationis praeponere, eosque sub se premere. That
John does desire by this title of pride to set himself before all other
Bishops, and to tread the^ under him. But set himself before others or bring
others under him, he could not, unless there be some, whom he may bring
under, and before who^ he may exalt himself. John there would be chief,
extol himself, be greater than the rest, be called general father: But he
would not expel the rest of the Bishops, but bring them under him, subject
them to him; diminish their authority, and bring them to naught.

A second elucidation or clearing of the same Question.
When John died Cyriacus succeeded. John sat there ten whole years. John had
sitten there ten whole years, he claymed the title of Universal to his
death, nor weighed he the admonitions of Gregory, yet carried he himself for
those ten years for Universal, yet in all that time, did not he discharge
any Bishop of his place. Wherefore it is a mere fable, to think there should
be no Bishop or Patriarch if there were any called Vniuversall. Cyriacus as in
seat, so in title succeeded John, He took away no Bishops. He called a Council
of Bishops, to which when Eusebius came, Gregory desired of him by his letter,
that he would not subscribe to that title, least any thing should be there
determined prejudicial touching any place or person. But neither in that
synod, nor for eleven years after, while Cyriacus held the sea (and that with
the title of Universal) was there any Bishop removed from his place, or any
fear that any should be removed. Therefore that devise before is a mere dream.
Touching Cyriacus this is certain, that he never left off the title of
Universal, before that Phocas the Emperor took it from Constantinople, and
gave it unto Rome. And this was done by Phocas in malice toward Cyriacus who
was offended with him, and in favor of Boniface 3. Bishop of Rome who
entreated for it, Boniface was Bishop of Rome next but one after Gregory.
and when he was the Bishops Chancelour insinuated himself into Phocas his
love, and had undertaken for his child at baptism. This decree of Phocas, Ad
annum 606
Baronius does thus report, The Bishop of Rome is only to be called Universal
Bishop, the Bishop of Constantinople not so.

John and Cyriacus therefore usurped nothing, but that which upon the grant of
Phocas, the Roman Bishop does now claim, under whom they remain in their
place, and are Bishops; And so under John did they remain, neither did the
title of Universal hinder them any thing. Notwithstanding, within a little
while after there is a great change made touching the name. In the Bishop of
Constantinople, it was a foolish, proud, wicked, perverse, profane, and
blaspheamous name; within two years after, it was none of all those in the
Bishop of Rome. Marveilous was the sentence of Phocas, who determined that a
name wicked and blasphemous (if we believe Gregory) should not belong to the
Bishop of Constantinople, and yet might be proper to the Bishop of Ro^e.
Wonderful also was the intent of Boniface, who accepted it; neither would he
that the Bishop of Constantinople should be preferred, or be above others, but
to him and other the Bishops of Rome such reverence is due, although he that
shall have it (witness Gregory) should be in that the follower of Lucifer, the
forerunner of Antechrist. In the mean while Gregory was a true Prophet,
touching what that word would come too in the end. For touching that title he
told the Emperor that he that should rejoice in it, Lib. 4. Epist. 32.
would build himself by that upon the honor of the Empire, and is it not come
so to pass? And to Anianus he said. That to consent to that wicked name, is no
other thing then to destroy the faith. And did the faith suffer no hurt, by
that that Phocas consented to it? Gregory's prophecy was true in both, that
name was deadly, both to the Empire and to the Church; and his successor
Boniface, was toward the Empire Lucifer, and toward the Church Antechrist.

But they insist, Lib. 4. Epist. 38. Restat vt vos Episcopi non sitis. Solus
conetur Episcopus appellari.
and reply, the words are plain. It remains that then you are no Bishops:
he only indeavoreth to be called Bishop. Therefore Gregory does expound
himself. We reioine, thus he writes to John. Cupis Episcoporum nomen, tui
comparatione calcare. Thou do desire in comparison of thy self, to tread
under the name of Bishops. In comparison of thy self, says he. Therefore what
he says, he says it comparatively, or by way of comparison, not absolutely.
Ye are indeed Bishops, but in comparison of him, ye are none; and he is not
absolutely a Bishop alone, but in comparison of you, he only is to be called a
Bishop. For when the title of Universal is admitted, whereby one may be above
another, and depresse the rest; they fall from the ancient right of Bishops, by
which right they are of one merit and priesthood. Neither does the potency of
Rome make an higher Bishop, nor the poverty of Eugubium make a lower. All are
to be deprived of this due honor, if any thing private be given to one (as
Gregory says to Mauritius) and therefore surely in comparison of him, (which
they were before) are not to be called Bishops: speaking after the usual
phrase, wherein, when any one is not, that he was, he is said indeed not to be
at all; so that he may be said to be alone, who in any thing is singular. For
they who were Fathers, were to be made the Sons of this Universal father;
They who were Pastors, were to come into his flock; and in comparison of him,
to be called a flock. And this is the nature of Gregory's words; hither they
reach. Against this they cannot be drawn; excep against the truth of the
histories, by which it is certain, that although for the space of twenty
years John first, This is the hinge where upon all the whole work does turn.
and Cyriacus after, held the title of Universal with tooth and nail: yet in
all that time they never indeavored to strip any of his Bishopric, or so to
carry themselves as though they alone would be Bishops, or usurped the name of
Bishop only to themselves.

These things being thus, and thus considered; that which was said at first
remains full and sound; That the Pope usurps the title of Universal
Bishop. That Gregory condemned it in John. And lastly that John's intent then,
and the Popes now touching that title, is one and the same, to all
constructions and purposes; any thing, in any wise said to the contrary
notwithstanding.

21. The Bishop of Rome acknowledged the Emperor to be his Lord and Sovereign.
ECce per me servum ultimum suum, Lib 3. epist. 61 ad Mauritium Imperatore^.
and vestrum respondebit Christus sacerdotes meos manui tuae commisi, etc. Ego
quidem vestrae iussioni subiectus, legem vestram per diversas terrarum parts
transmitti feci. Behold (says Gregory to Mauritius the Emperor) thus will
Christ answer you by me, being both his and your most humble servant;
Gregory acknowledges the Emperor to be his Lord and Soucraigne.
I have committed my Priests into thy hand, etc. As for my part, I being
subject to your Majesty's commandment, have caused your order to be
proclaimed thorough diverse parts of the world.

Christus dominari Imperatorem, non solum militibus, sed etiam Sacerdotibus
concessit. Lib. 3. epist. 64. Bellarmine wrote a book of the freedoe of priests
from temporal Lords. Ad Mauritium Imperatorem.
Christ has given power unto the Emperor to bear rule, not only over
soldiers, but also over Priests.

Et Imperatori obedientiam praebui, and pro Deo, quod sensi minime tacui. I
have showed my duty toward my Lord the Emperor, and touching God I have not
concealed what I thought.

Valde mihi durum videtur, ut ab eius (Christi) servitio milites suos
prohibeat, Lib. 2. indict. 11. epist. 103. Who sees not that the power which
Gregory acknowledges to be in the Emperor is as essentially over the Clergy,
as over the soldiers.
qui ei Imperatori Mauritio) and omnia tribuat, and dominari non solum
militibus, sed etiam Sacerdotibus concessit. It seems very hard unto me,
that he should forbid his soldiers the service of him, (viz. Christ)* who has
given him (the Emperor Mauritius) all things, and granted him not only to
rule over soldiers, but also over Priests.

De qua re, lib. 7. epist. 1. ad Sabinianum diaconum.
isnum est, quod breviter suggeras serenissimis dominis nostris, quia si ego
servus eorum in morte Long abardorum me miscere voluissem; hodie Longabardorum
gens, nec Regem, nec duces, nec comites haberet. atque in summa confusione
divisa esset; sed quia Deum timeo in mortem cuiuslibet hominis me miscere
formido. Touching which business (says Gregory) there is one thing which you
may quickly deliver to our noble Lords, because if I being their servant, would
have mingled my self in the slaughter of the Lumbards; the people of the
Lumbards had had at this day neither King, nor Duke, nor Earl, and had been
divided into great confusion. But because I fear God, I do tremble to mingle
my self into the death of any man.

St. Bernard. THE PREROGATIVE of Christ to be severed from sinners is common
with him unto none of the sons of Adam, no not to the Virgin Mary, although the
Papists would exempt her from being conceived in sin.
S^t Bernard writing to the Canons of Lions in France, touching the celebration
of the Feast of the Virgin Mary's conception, which was then creeping in,
reproves it in these words, Quamobrem et si quibus vel paucis filiorum hominum
datum est cum sanctitaete nasci, Epist. 174. ad Canonic. Lugdunens.
non tamen concipi: ut uni sane servaretur sancti praerogativa conceptus, qui
omnes sanctificaret: solissque absque peccato veniens, purgationem faceret
peccatorum. Wherefore to whom or to how few soever of the sons of men it be
given to be borne holy, yet are they not so conceived: that the prerogative of
an holy conception might be reserved unto one, who should make all holy; and
who alone coming without sin, should make the purgation for sin. Only
therefore our Lord Jesus was conceived by the holy Ghost, because he alone was
holy, before his conception; who being only excepted, he looks that all the
residue of Adams children every one, should humbly and truly confess of
himself, saying, Psalm. 51, 5.
I was shapen in wickedness, and in sin has my mother conceived me. Cum haec
ita se habeant: quaenam iam erit festive ratio conceptionis. Since these things
are thus, what ground has the celebrating of her conception?

In another place speaking of the mystery of Gods eternal predestination of
the Saints, before all worlds, and of death, running over all, he has these
words, Sine quo generalis velamine confusionis, Super Cant: Sermon. 78.
nemo filiorum hominum intravit hanc vitam, uno sane excepto, qui ingreditur
sine macula. Without which veil of general confusion, The reward of sin is
death: She died. Ergo she sinned.
none of the sons of men entered into this life: one only excepted, who
entered without spot, whose name is Emanuell.

The Catholic Church which we believe in the Creed, is the whole company of
the Elect only.
SAne secundum praedestinationem nunqua^ Ecclesia electorum penes Deum non
fuit. Super Cant: Sermon. 78.
Simiratur hoc infidelis, audiat quod magis miretur, nunquam non grata extitit,
nunquam non dilecta. Nec dubium, quin voce omnium electorum ista dicantur, ET
IPSI ECCLESIA SVNT. Surely (says he) according to Gods predestination, The
Church of the Elect was predestined by God through Christ, before the
foundation of the world. And all the Elect are that Church. Ephesians. cap. 1.
Sermon. 79.
the Church of the Elect was always with him. If he that believes not, marvel
at this, let him hear that which he may more marveil at, it was never but
pleasing unto him, never but beloved. Neither is there any doubt, but those
things are spoken by Saint Paul, (Ephesians. 1.) in the voice of all the Elect, And
they are the Church. In the next following he says, Non deficit genus
Christianum, nec fides de terra, nec charitas de Ecclesia, etc. Christian
Religion does not fail, The Church of the Elect is here described, which
only is built upon a Rock. And Bernard calls Christ the Rock, on which the
Church is built, not Peter, or the Pope. Can these words be understood to be
spoken but of the Elect, and of them only. In Job. lib. 28. cap. 9.
neither does faith from the earth, nor charity from the Church. The floods
came, the winds blew, and rushed against it, and yet it did not fall, because
it was built upon a Rock, for the Rock was Christ. Therefore, neither by
prattling of the Philosophers, nor cavils of Heretics, nor swords of Tyrants,
can it, or shall it at any time be separated from the love of God, which is in
Jesus Christ; so strongly does his soul hold him, who it loves, so good it is
for him to cleave unto God.

The like is taught by Gregory the great, who within the circuit of the
Catholic Church comprehends all the Elect, and excludes all the reprobate.
And draws a similitude from the Temple of God, and the court without the
Temple. Revel. 11. verse 1.2.
The one whereof Saint John in the Revelation was bid to meet and to cast the
other out. For the Jewish Temple was divided into three parts, So when we
speak of the holy Catholic Church, we cast out the reprobate, and number
only the Elect.
whereinto the High Priest entered once a year. In respect therefore of the two
later, the first is said to be cast out, because as a thing profane it is
neglected, when the Temple is measured.

There are no passions nor satisfactions of the Saints, whereby themselves can
merit; or that belong to the treasure of the Church, to be communicated by
Indulgences to others.
This devout and religious man writing de quadruplici debito of a fourefold
debt, Bern. sermon. de quadruplic. officio.
which all men are liable unto, and none able to satisfy; And after speech
had, of the love of Christ to sinful man, and of the Joys of Heaven prepared
for man repenting, breaking out against all satisfaction, enters into these
words. O si cognovisses and in quam multa and quam multis debeas, videres quam
nihil sit quod facis, quam nec inter minima numerandum ad comparationem
debitorum tuorum. O if the case so stand, that we owe more then we are able to
perform, how shall it go with our works of supererogation?
O man (says he) if thou did know how much, and to whom thou owe, thou
would see that that is nothing which thou do, neither not to be reckoned
among the very least, in comparison of thy debts. As there is no proportion,
between something and nothing; so has our life no equality to our Saviors,
seeing there is none worthier then his, nor none more wretched then ours. How
shall I satisfy, when I am constrained to pay my debt to the uttermost
farthing? All therefore that I am, I owe to him, from whom as from a Lord, who
made me, I have all; Remember Jacob Genes 32.10. he confesses that he was not
worthy of the least of Gods tempornll mercies: how much less are the Saints
worthy of eternal.
who does me good, who ministers unto me the influence of the Stars; the
temperature of the Air; the fruitfulness of the Earth; and the plenty of
Fruit. Let no man think that I am carried with so great madness as here to
make mention of my small mite, much less to reckon it. And then concludes.
Quis amplius ergo grunniet dicens; nimium laboramus, nimium ieiunamus, nimium
vigilamus, cum nec mill simae imo nec minimae parti, debitorum suorum valeat
respondere? No man's sufferings do abound, or over flow to satisfy for another.
Who therefore dare from henceforth complain and say, we labor too much,
fast too much, watch too much, when he cannot answer the thousand part, nay
not the least part of his debt.

Again speaking of the ten Virgins in the Gospel, expounding these words,
Bern. Sermon. de virginibus. Mat. 25.8.
Give us of your oil, says, Stulta petitio, vix iustus salvabitur, vix
sanctis iustitiae suae oleum sufficit ad salutem, quanto minus and sibi and
proximis. A foolish request, the righteous shall scarce be saved, The virgins
iu^stice or righteousness, is little enough for themselves.
the oil of their own righteousness hardly suffiseth the Saints to
salvation, how much less themselves and their neighbors. Noc, Daniel, Job,
shall not deliver a son or daughter, Ezech. 14.18: but like as the soul,
that sins, shall die. Ezech. 18.20. Sic anima quae institiam fecerit, sola
salvabitur. So that soul that does righteousness, only shall be saved.

De verb. lib. lob. cap. 5. in sex tribulat.
Again, speaking of the first and second Adam, says, Sola nimirum secundi Adae
tribulatio purgat, quos contaminavit offensio sola prioris, non quod propria
cuiquam sufficere possit satisfactio. Quid enim est omnis poenitentianostra,
nisi quod si non copatimur, omnino non possumus conreguare. It is the only
suffering of the second Adam, that purges us, whom the only offense of the
first Adam did defile. I say not that any man's own satissaction can suffice
him; for what is all our repentance, but only In the midst of our repentance
or penance we must hope sor pardon only by the says of Jesus Christ: yet in
weeping for our sins, in bearing our cross, in mortifying our members, in
offering our selves a sacrifice to God, we become like unto Christ in
suffering, and so are fitted to reign with him: but the purging us from sin,
must be reserved to the blood of Christ alone.
that if we suffer not with him, we cannot reign with him.

Man now in his corrupt nature, has of himself no power of freewill, in good
and holy actions; but there is from Adam laid upon him a necessity of sinning;
but yet without constraint.
Curet autem haec agere non minus suaviter quam fortiter, De great. and lib.
arbit. post medium.
hoc est non ex tristitia aut ex necessitate, (quod est initium non plenitudo
sapientiae) sed prompta and alacrivoluntate, quod facit sacrificium acceptum,
quoniam hilarem datorem diligit Deus. Let a man so regard these things, that he
do them no less willingly than resolvedly, not grudgingly, or of necessity,
which is the beginning, not the fullness of wisdom) but with a ready and
willing mind, because GOD loves a cheerful giver. And shall he in all things
follow wisdom, while he re solutely withstandeth vices, and sweetly obtains
peace in conscience: But certainly look, by whose example we are stirred up
to those things, even his aid and help we need, whereby we may be made
conformable to him through it, and be changed into the same Image from glory
unto glory, 2. Cor. 3.18.
as by the Spirit of the Lord. Ergo si a Domini Spiritu, iam non a libero
arbitrio, etc. Therefore, if by the Spirit of the Lord, The will of man by
nature, can not choose but to do evil, which is a necessity not of coaction,
but of depravation.
then not by freewill. Let no man then think it is called freewill, because it
has equal power to good and evil; since indeed it may fall of it self, but
not rise without the Spirit of God: Otherwise neither God nor the holy Angels,
being so good, that they cannot be evil; nor the Angels that fell, who are so
evil, that now they cannot be good, could be said to have freewill. But
therefore it is called free, because none can be good or evil nisi volens, but
willingly. Again. Porro, ube voluntas, ibi libertas; Super Cant. Sermon. 81.
quod tamen dice de naturali, non de spirituali, qua liberate (ut dicit
Apostolus) Christus nos libera. vit. Where will is, there is liberty, which
yet I speak of the natural, Galat. 4.31.
and not of the spiritual; by which liberty (as the Apostle says) Christ has
made us free; for of that he himself says the same, 2. Cor. 3.17.
Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty. So is the soul by a
wonderful and unhappy free necessity, Thereremaineth no freeness of will
unto good in man, but only a voluntary promptness and inclination to evil
without constraint. In Festo Pentecost. sermon. 1.
both bound, and free, bound because of necessity, free because it is
voluntary. And that which is more wonderful and more miserable; the more
guilty, because free; and the more free because guilty, and by this the more
bound because free.

Again. Initium revertendi ad Deum poenitentia est, quam sine dubio spiritus
operatur, non noster sed Dei, idque, and certa ratio docet, and confirmat
authoritas. The beginning of our conversion to God, is by repentance, which
without doubt the Spirit does work in us, not ours but Gods Spirit, and this
both reason does teach, and authority confirm. Who then, when he comes
benumbed or frozen to the fire, and shall be made warm or hor, does doubt
that he was heated by the fire which he could not have been without it. So he
that is first dead in iniquity, If we be dead in sin, where is our freewill to
good?
if afterward he be set on fire by the heat of repentance; does know and
find, that another spirit besides his own, which does reprove and discern
his, has come unto him.

De great. and liber. arbitr. ante medium.
Again, speaking of our first Parent Adam in Paradise, and both of what he had,
and of what he there lost, says, Corruit autem de posse non peccare, in non
posse non peccare, etc. He fell from his not being able to sin, to his not
being able to do any thing but sin, having altogether lost the liberty of
taking advice and counsel, as also that which he had of forbearing to sin.
And this loss happened unto him by the abusing of the liberty of his will.
Being fallen from his will, it is not still remaining free for him to raise up
himself again by the same. For although at this day he would do it, yet the
case so stands with him, as that it is not in his power not to sin. It must
be Christ that must inspire him, and indue him with new virtue by his
restoration, that the Lord may transform us into his Image how be it even
then our perfection comes not in this life, but in the life to come.

Again. Psalm. 20. verse 4.
Upon this Text. Praevenisti eum in benedictionibus dulcedin is. Thou do
prevent him with blessings of goodness, says, Parv. Sermon. in 39. Sermon.
Triplex nobis necessaria est benedictio, etc. Three blessings there are, which
are necessary for us, 1. that of preventing, 2, that of helping, 3. ending. The
first is of mercy, the second is of grace; the third is of glory. He does
prevent our co^versation by his mercy, he helps our conversation by his
grace, he does accomplish our ending with glory. Unless the Lord does give
these three blessings, nostra terra.
our bodies can bring forth no fruit. Neither can we begin any good thing,
before we be prevented by mercy; or do any good thing until we be helped by
grace, nor end in goodness, until we be filled with glory.

Against the doctrine of Merit, as it is taught in the Church of Rome now.
Testimonium conscientiae nostra in tribus consistere credo. In annunt, beat.
Mariae Sermon. 1.
I believe (says he) that the witness of our conscience stands in these
three. It is first of all necessary to believe, that we cannot have remission
of sin, but by the mercy of God; Then that we can have no good work, except
he give it. Lastly, Eternal life is freely given not purchased by any works.
Sins not imputed, are as though they had never bin committed.
that eternal life is purchased by no merits, but is freely given. For who can
make that clean, which is conceived of unclean seed, but he that is only
clean; truly that which is done, cannot be undone: but when he imputes it
not, it shall be as though it had not been done. For touching good works it is
most certain that no man has them of himself. If man's nature could not
stand, when it was yet perfect, how much less can it raise it self by it
self being now corrupt. The Rhemists in their annotations on the New Testament
do nothing so much as contrary this doctrine pleading their merits and works
to be meritorious. In Matthew, c. 6. v 4. in Mark 12. v. 11. that works are
the very cause of salvation, in Romans 2. v. 6. The Ioyof Heaven is the hire and
wages for works, which works can be no other but the valor, desert, price,
worth and merit of the same. In 1. cor. 3. v. 8. Heaven is our own right,
bargained or wrought for, and accordingly paid unto us as our hire, at the day
of judgment. In 2. Tim: 4. v. 8.
Neither are the merits of men such, that life everlasting is due for them by
right, or that God should be said to do injury, except he yield it them.

Again he says, Ego sidenter quod ex me mihi deest, usurpo nothi ex
visceribus domini, quoniam misericordia effluunt, nee desunt foramina per quae
effluant. Surely, whatsoever is wanting to me of my self, I boldly take it
unto me out of the bowels of my Lord, because they flow out with mercy, neither
wants there any ways by which they may flow. My merit is the Lords mercy. I
am not altogether poor in merit. so long as he is not poor in mercy. And if
the Lord be rich in mercy, then am I also no less in merit. And if the mercies
of the Lord be from everlasting to everlasting, I will sing the mercies of the
Lord for ever. Imputative justice is established, and inherent overthrown. De
great. and lib. arbit. in fine.
What shall I sing mine own righteousness? O Lord I will remember thy righteousness
only. For that is my righteousness, because thou art made by God righteousness
unto me. And upon that Text of St Paul, 2. Tim. 1.12. Scio cui credidi, and
certus sum, quia potens est depositu^ meu^ servare. I know who^ I have
believed, and am persuaded, Depositum meum that which I have committed vnhim.
2. Tim. 4.8. The crown of glory is the just reward of the righteous man: yet
not by virtue of his righteousness and desert, but by the merciful promise of
Almighty God. Look those notes of the Rhemists set down in the margent
before, at this mark. and tell me, how they agree with Bernard here. Works
are the cause; the very cause of getting heaven, No says Bern. They are the
way thither, not the cause of our reigning there.
that he is able to keep that which I have committed to him against that day.
He calls (says Bernard) the promise of God his depositum and because he
believed him that promised, he does confidently make mention of the promise. A
promise indeed of mercy, but to be paid in justice. This is therefore that
which S. Paul expected, a crown of justice, but of Gods justice, not his own.
For it is just that God pay what he owes; and he owes what he has
promised. And this is the justice of which the Apostle presumes even the
promise of God, least despising that, he might establish his own and so be
subject to the justice of God. And then in the end, he knitteth up the whole
tract with this excellent saying, St proprie appellentur ea qua dicimus nostra
merita etc. But if we speak properly of those things which we call our
merits, they are certain seed grounds of our hope; incitements of our love,
tokens of our secret predestination, foretokens of our future happiness, The
way to the kingdom, not the cause of our reigning, or of our having the
kingdom. Furthermore whom he justifies, not whom he finds just, those he
glorifieth.

In dedic. Eccles. Sermon. 5. Mat. 16. Thou art Christ the son of the living
God.
Again, speaking of Christ's speech in the 16. of Mat. to S. Peter Beatus es
Simo^ Barjona, nec multo post, vade retro satana. Blessed art thou Simon
Barjona; and a little after. Get thee behind me satan, says unde Barjona? How
was it that he was called Barjona? But because not flesh and blood but the father
by who^ he spoke it, revealed it unto him. How is it that he was called Satan?
but because he savoured of the things, that were of man, and not of God. Now,
if in both these considerations, we shall diligently look into our selves;
yea how in the one we are nothing, and how exalted in the other, I think our
glorying ought to be temperate; but peradventure it is more increased, yet is
it strengthened, that we should not rejoice in our selves, but in God. Neither
am I forgetful, but with fear and reverence I say Nos sumus. Nos inquam sumus
sed in cord Des. We are, we are I say, worthy but in the mind of God; we are
worthy, but by his acceptance, Gods acceptance not our worthiness.
not by our worthiness. It follows, Quod si nos ex puerili animositate gratis
salvari nolumus. If we of childish stomach will not be saved freely, justly
are we not saved at all. The dissembling of our misery excludes mercy, Read O
man in thine own heart say the Rhemists and thou shall find that thy works
are fully worthy of everlasting life. Rhem testam. annot. 2. Tim. 4. Sermon. in
Cant. 68.
neither has God (acceptance or) vouchsafing any place where presumption is of
our worthiness. Lege homo in cord tuo etc. Read O man in thine own heart,
read within thy self, concerning thy self: the witness of truth, and thou will judge thy self unworthy of this common light.

Again, Quid de merit is solicita sit Ecclesia, cui de proposito dei firmior
suppetit securiorque gloria^di ratio. Why is the Church so careful touching
merits, who has a more sure and secure cause of rejoicing by reason of the
purpose of God. It is not for thee to ask, by what merits we hope for good
things; No say the Rhemists, you must know that good works be so far
meritorious that God should be unjust, if he rendered not heaven for the same.
Annot. Heb. 6. v. 10.
seeing thou hear by the Prophet, Not for your sakes, but for mine own sake
will I do it, says the Lord. It suffices for merit to know that merits are
not sufficient. Be careful to have merits; when thou have them, know that
they be given thee, but for fruit thereof hope for the mercy of God. The want
of merits is a pernicious poverty, and the presumption of the spirit, is
deceitful riches.

Ser. 73. in Cant. Where are the overplus of the sufferings and satisfactions
of the Saints to be applied to others when the most righteous must pray, for
the forgiveness of their own sins? In Psalm. qui habitat. sermon.
Still he follows the same doctrine, Opus itaque habent and sancti pro
peccatis exorare, vt de misericordia salui fiant propria iustitiae non
fidentes. Omnes enim pecca^erunt and egent misericordia Dei. Even the Saints
have need to entreat for their sins, that by his mercy they may be saved, not
trusting to their own righteousness; For all have sinned, and stand in need of
the mercy of God. Quid enim stultius quam habitare in domo vix adhuc inchoata?
consummasse te putas? at cum consummaverit homo tunc incipit, etc. What more
foolish is it (says he) then to dwell in an house scarce as yet begun? Do
thou think that thou have finished it? But when man has finished it, then does
he but begin. Further, this dwelling is altogether ruinous, it has more need
to be underset and propped, then dwelt in. Is not our life frail and
uncertain? It is of necessity that whatsoever is founded upon it, Who can
think to set a sure building upon a tottering foundation?
be like unto it; for who does trust a sure building upon a tottering
foundation? Dangerous is the dwelling of them that trust in their merits, it is
dangerous because it is ruinous. Sermon. ibid. 15.
Hoc enim totum hominis meritum, si totam spem suam ponat in illo, qui totum
hominem salvum fecit. For this is the whole merit of man, to put his whole
trust in him, who has wholly saved man. Orate salvatore^, Epist. 310.
qui non vult mortem peccatoris, vt tempestivum iam exitum non differat, sed
custodiat. Curate munire votis calcaneum nudu^ meritis, vt is qui insideatur
invenire non possit vnde figat dentem and vulnus infligit. I beseech you
friends pray the savior for me, who will not the death of a sinner, that he
delay not this timely departure of mine, but keep it. I desire you to
strengthen with your prayers my heel (that is the ending of my life) which is
void of merit, that he that lays wait may not find wherein to fix his tooth
there by to give a wound.

To conclude, let that suffice, Sermon. 13. super Cant.
which this holy man Bernard; (reciting many worthy acts done in the old
Testament by the worthies of those times David, Joshua, lepthe, Gedeon, Sampson,
Judith, Judas Machabaeus; and how that none of these imparted their glory to
any other) infers strongly, Quid minus ab his omnibus conditor omnium fecit,
quo minus and ipse debeat gloriari singulariter? What has the maker of all
things done less then any of these, that he should glory alone, less then
they? He alone has triumphed over the enemies; he alone has delivered the
captives; and shall he have a partner in the glory?

It is impossible for any man how regenerate soever to fulfill the whole law,
now in his corrupt nature, because it says, Cursed is every man that
continues not in all things that are written therein. Sup. Cant. ser. 58 The
Law (if J may so speak) gives Law to the whole man, to al his thoughts words,
and deeds, and takes exception against any thing either inwardly or outwardly,
whereby we step aside from the rule thereof.

QVantumlibet in hoc corpore manens profeceris, erras si vitia putas emortuae,
and non magis suppressa: velis nolis intra fines tuos habitat Iebusaem,
subiugari potest sed non exterminari. Scto (inquit) quiae non habitat in me
bonum. Parum est nisi and malum, inesse fateatur. How much soever thou do
profit whilst thou abidest in this body, thou art deceived, Vices are not dead
in us. As the Rhemists before pleaded nothing more then their merits: so say
they in this question, of fulfilling Gods commandments through true inherent
justice. Annot. Mat. 5. v. 21. and 11. v. 30. and, goodme^ do keep all Gods
commandments, again, the keeping and doing of the Co^mendements is properly
our justification. In Luke c. 1. v. 6. It is not impossible to keep that
Commandment of loving God with all our heart. Luc. 10. v. 28. and 1. Ioh. 3. v.
22. Cant. Ser. 50. S. Bernard here does not only affirm the impossibility of
full and perfect keeping of the law, but gives reasons also, why God
notwithstanding held it profitable for us that he should give the Law, and in
every point speaks fully and expressly the same that we do.
if thou think that vices are dead in thee, and not rather suppressed. Whether
thou will or no the Iebusite will dwell within thy coasts, he may be brought
under, but not utterly banished. I know (says S. Paul) that in me dwells no
good thing. That is but a small matter, except he also confess, that evil
was present with him. He says, Not the good which I would do, that do I;
but I do the evil which I hate. But if I do that which I hate, it is no more
I that do it, but sin that dwells in me. Either if thou dare prefer
thy self before the Apostle (whose saying this is) or else confess with him,
that thou also do not want vices.

Quomodo ergo iubenda fuit, quae imple^da nullo modo erat? Aut si placet tibi
magis de affectuali datum fuisse mandatum, non inde contendo, dum modo
acquiescas and tu mihi quod minime in vita ista ab aliquo hominum possit vel
potuerit adimpleri. How was the law to be commanded, What can be, said more
plainly against the Papists now, then this? See the judgment of the Rhemists.
If the Commandments (say they) be impossible to be kept, Christ had mocked
and not taught the lawyer and others, when he propounded the keeping of them,
for the mean to obtain life everlasting. Annot. in Luc. c. 10. v. 28. No,
says S. Bernard, God by comman ding things impossible, does not thereby make
man a transgressour, but hu^bleth him, to the intent that man perceauing his
own defect might in (...) his righteous^es by works, fly unto Gods mercy and
grace.
which ca^ by no means be fulfilled? or if thou rather think that the
commandment was given for the ruling of our affections, I will not hereupon
strive; so that thou also do yield unto me, that in this life it neither can,
or over could be fulfilled of any man. Quis enim sibi arrogare id audeat,
quodse Paulus ipse fatetur non comprehendisse? For who dare arrogate that to
himself, which Paul himself confesses, he had not comprehended? Nec latuit
praceptorem praecepti pondus, hominum excedere vires. Neither was the commander
ignorant, that the weight of the commandment exceeded man's strength, but he
judged it to be profitable, that thereby they might be put in mind of their
own insufficiency, and so might know that they ought according to their
power labor to the end of righteousness. Ergo mandando impossibilia non
praevaricatores homines fecit, sed humiles, vt omne os obstruatur, and subdit
us fiat omnis mundus Deo: quia ex operibus legis non iustificabitur omnis caro
coram illo. Therefore by commanding things impossible, he made men not
transgressors but humble; that every mouth be stopped, and all the world made
subject unto God, because that by the works of the law, no flesh shall be
justified before him; for we receiving the Commandments, and feeling our own
want, will cry unto heaven, and God will have mercy upon us: Et sciemus in illa
die quia non ex operibus iustitia qua fecimus nos, sed secundum suam
misericordiam salvos nos fecit. And that we may know at that day, that not
for the works of righteousness which we have done, but of his own mercy
has he saved us.

Infelix ego home, De advent. dom Ser. 6.
quis me liberabit de corpore mortis huius? Unhappy man that I am (says S.
Paul) who shall deliver me from this body of death. For he did certainly
know that he could not before be delivered from that naughty root that
cleaves to the flesh, and from the law of sin, which is in our members,
until he were dissolved from this body, whereupon it was that he desired to
be dissolved, and to be with Christ, knowing that sin which works divorce
between God and us, cannot utterly be taken away, until till we be delivered
from this body: Marc. 9. In Ser. omnium Sanct. Sermon. 1. Consider I pray thee
Reader, how this text of Bern. agrees with these notes of the Rhemists.
Christians are truly just, and have in themselves inherent justice by doing
Gods commandments in Mat. c. 5. v. 21. The keeping and doing of the
Commandments is properly our justification. in Luc. 1. v. 6. and 75. No, says
Bernard, all our righteousness is as a stained and defiled cloth.
you have heard of one whom our Lord dispossessed of a Devil, and how tearing
and re^ting him the Devil departed. Therefore I say unto you, that kind of sin
which so often does trouble us (I mean our concupiscence and evil desires)
ought indeed to be repressed, and may by the grace of God, that it rainge not
in us, neither that we give our members weapons of iniquity to sin, and in
that respect, there is noe comdemnation to those that are in Jesus Christ. Sed
non eiicitur nisi in morte: but that sin is not cast forth but in death when we
dot so rent it, that the soul be separated from the body.

Beati qui esuriunt, et sitiunt iustitiam, queniam ipsi saturabuntur; sed quid
potest esse omnis iustitia nostra coram Deo? Blessed are they that hunger and
thirst for righteousness sake, for they shall be satissfied. But what ca^ all
our righteousness be before God? shall it not according to the prophet be
accounted as a most filthy and defiled cloth? and if all our rigthteousnesse be
straightly judged it shall be found unjust, and have no force. What therefore shall
become come of our sins, when as even our righteousness it self shall not be
able to answer for it self? Therefore earnestly crying with the Prophet, Enter
not into judgment with thy servant O Lord, let us with all humbleness run to
the throne of mercy which only is able to save our souls.

That faith only justifies; and that there it an infallible certainty of
salvation from confidence of Gods mercy in Christ, known to a man in his own
conscience by an ordinary special divine faith.
Cord creditur adiustitiam, ore fit confessio ad salutem. In vigil. natal.
dom. Sermon. 1. in fine.
Iustitia siquidem in cord, panis in domo. Est enim iustitia pani and beati
qui esuriunt and sitiunt iustitiam, quoniam ipsi saturabuntur. Siergo in cord
iustitia, est iustitia quae ex fide est. Hac enim sola habet gloriam apud Deum.
Fit etiam ore confessio ad salutem, and securus iam suscipe eum qui in Bethleem
Judah naseitur Iesum Christum filium Dei. With the heart man believes unto
righteousness, and with the mouth man confesses to salvation. Faith as it is
an instrument of apprehe^ding Christ to righteousness and life everlasting is
always alone, but as it is the way to salvation, it is not alone. Romans 10.10.
Truly righteousness in the heart, is as bread in the mouth, for
righteousness is bread; and blessed are they that hunger and thirst after
righteousness for they shall be satisfied. If therefore righteousness be in
the heart, it is the righteousness that is of faith, for that only has glory
with God: Let the confession be also in the mouth to salvation, and then being
secure, receive him who was borne in Bethleem Judah Jesus Christ the son of God.

Nam sibi quidem ipsi fidere, Ibid. Sermon. 5. If there were inherent
righteousness; man might trust to himself, but he may not trust to himself,
therefore he has not inherent righteousness.
non fides, sed perfidiae est. For truly for one to trust in himself is not
of faith, but of unbelief; neither is it confidence for a man to put his trust
in his own self, but diffidence and mistrust rather. But he is faithful, who
neither trusts to himself, nor hops in himself, but is to himself as a
lost vessel, so loosing his own life, that he may keep it to everlasting life.

At vero iustitiae tuae tanta vbique fragra^tia spargitur, vt non solum iustus
sed etiam ipsa dicaris iustitia, and iustitia iustificans. Tam validus denique
es ad iustificandum, quam multus ad ignoscendum. Quamobrem quisquis pro
peccatis compunctus esurit, Hunger and thirst after righteousness says he,
not inherent righteousness, but that righteousness which consists in the
forgiveness of sins. Idem ibid. Note. Justification before God is no where
in all the Scripture ascribed to any other vertuesaue only faith, the promise of
salvation is sometimes adjoined to other virtues, as fruits and marks of them
whom God has saved but never as causes thereof. S. Bernard speaks of a
righteousness, that forgiueth sins, and that is not inherent righteousness,
I trow. This is the very form of our righteousness, not to remember our
offenses. Ser. 1. de annun.
and sitit iustitiam, credat in te, qui iustific as impium, and solam
iustifieat us per fidem pacem habebit ad Deum. But indeed so sweet a savor of
thy righteousness is every where spread abroad, that thou may not only be
called righteous, but righteousness it self, and a justifying righteousness.
Furthermore, thou art as able to justify, as thou art ready to forgive. Where
fore whosoever inwardly grieved for his sin, does hunger and thirst after
righteousness, Let him believe in thee who justified the ungodly, and being
justified by faith only, he shall have peace with God.

Again in the same place, speaking of Christ who is our righteousness says,
Per iustitiam denique quea ex fide est, solvit funes peccatorum GRATIS
iustificans peccatorem. By the righteousness which is of faith, he loses the
cords of sinners, FREELY justifying the sinner. And teaching us to believe in
Christ speaks of him, as of a righteousness quae delicta donat, that
forgiueth sins; And wherein that righteousness does essentially and really
consist, he expresses thus, Delicta inventutis meae and ignorantias meat ne
memineris and iustus sum. Remember not the offenses of my youth and my
ignorances and I am righteous or just.

Sicredis peccata tua non posse deleri nisi ab eo cui soli peccasti, and in
quem peccatum non cadit, benefacis; sed add adhuc, vt and hoc credas, quia per
ipsum peccata tibi condonantur. Hoc est testimonium quod perhibet in cord
spiritus sanctus, dicens dimissa sunt tibi peccata tua. If thou do bele eve,
that thy sins cannot be forgiven, but by him against whom thou have only
sinned, and on whom sin never fell, The faith whereby a man is tisstified, is
such a faith as whereby I believe my own salvation.
thou do well, but add withal, that thou should believe also, that by
him thy sins are forgiven thee. This is the witness that the holy Ghost
bears in thy heart saying, thy sins are forgiven thee.

Again, Epist. 107. Why should not a man believe his own salvation, when the
spirit by faith reveals to him the purpose of God, that he shall be saved.
Iustus est quis, nisi qui amanti se Deo, vicem rependit amoris? quod non fit
nisi revelante spiritu per fidem homini aeternum dei propositum super sua
salute futura. Quae sane revelatio, non est aliud quam infusio gratiae
spiritualis. Who is just but he that returns love to God who has loved him?
which is not done, but when the spirit by faith, reveals to a man the
eternal purpose of God concerning his own salvation to come. Quae sane
revelatio etc which revelation is nothing else but the infusion of spiritual
grace whereby the deeds of the flesh are mortified, and the man prepared to the
kingdom of heaven, which flesh and blood inherit not, receaving together in
one spirit, both whereby he may presume that he is beloved, and does also love
again. And this secret of faith he presently after says is fons signatus, cui
alienus non communicate, est sol iustitiae qui timentibus deum tantum oritur. A
spring and fountain shut and sealed up to be private to themselves, the son
of righteousness, which does not shine but to them that fear God. And if
there be any that feel not that comfort in themselves, the Prophet (says he)
does pronounce of them that they are gens quae no^ audivit vocem Deisui, a
people that have not harkned to the voice of God speaking in them.

And before all this, Ibid.
in the same Epistle Sic ad ortum solis iustitiae sacramentum absconditum a
seculis de praedestinatis and beatificandis emergere aliquanclo incipit ex
abysso aternitatis, dum quisque vocatus per timorem, iustificatus per amorem
prasumit se quoque esse de numero beatorum, sciens nimirum quia quos
iustificavit illos and magnificanit. So at the rising of the sun of
righteousness (in our justification) the secret that was hidden from the
beginning concerning them that are predestinate, and shall be blessed,
begins to appear out of the depth of eternity, whilst a man called by the
fear of God, and made just by love, presumes that he is one of the number of
the blessed, knowing that whom he has justified, them also he has glorified.
For what? he hears himself called, when he is stricken with the fear of
God, and he feels that he is justified, when he is all besprinkled with the
love of God, and shall he doubt of his glorification? he is received into
favor, he is advanced, and shall he doubt only of the finishing? It
follows, habes homo huius arcani indicem spiritum iustificantem, coque ipso
testificantem spiritui tuo quod filius dei and ipse sis; agnosce consilium Dei
in vocatione Dei. O man thou have for thy declarer of that secret the spirit
justifying thee, and thereby testifying to thy Spirit, that even thou art the
child of God; acknowledge therefore the counsel of God in thy justification.
And this every one receives in his justification, wherein he begins to
know, as he is known, there being give^ to him to perceive somewhat beforeha^d
of his future bliss, even as it has lien hid from everlasting in God, Saint
Bernard establishes a foresight of future bliss.
by whom he was predestinate, and shall more fully appear in the same God,
when he shall make him blessed; yet, of which knowledge of himself, now
already perceived in part, he for the time reioycety in hope, Although a man
must not at all times rejoice in security, as though there were nothing any
more to trouble him: but he may be thus far secure, as to be without doubt of
an happy issue and deliverance, and this is the hope that we rejoice in.
but not in security rightly acknowledging himself to be the child, not of
wrath, but of grace, he has the trial and proof of the fatherly affection of
Gods goodness toward him, he perceives and considently resolves that he is
beloved of God, and presumes that he is one of the number of the blessed.

To conclude, this he says of the sinner casting away the works of darkness,
and putting on the armor of light, Gloriari iam incipit, he now begins to
glory besides hope, in the hope of the glory of the sons of God; For all his
denial of glorying in security, yet does he ever establish our rejoicing in
hope, because much conflict remains for the attayning of that which
notwithstanding certainly and undoubtedly is hoped for.
which glory now even near at hand he beholds with open face, leaping for
joy at this new light, he considers and says, Signatum est super nos lumen
vultus tui Domine, dedisti laetitiam in cord meo. The light of thy countenance
is scaled upon us O Lord, thou have put gladness in my heart. Iam si O bone
Pater vermis vilissimus and odio dignissimus sempiterno, tamen confidit amari,
quia se sentit amare* imo quia se amari praesentit non confunditur redamare.
Although most gracious Father, he now be a most vile worm, and worthy of
everlasting hatred, yet does he assure himself that he is beloved, because he
feels himself to love; nay because he first feels himself to be beloved;
therefore he is not ashamed to love again.

Again: Quis poterit salvus esse? dicunt discipuli Salvatoris. Sermon. 5. in
dedicatione eccles.
Apud homines hoc impossible est, sed non apud Deum. Who shall be saved? say the
Disciples of our Savior. This is impossible with men, but not with God. This
is our whole confidence; this is our only comfort; this is the whole means of
our hope But being sure of Gods ableness to save us, Although by other means
we cannot know whether we be beloved or hated of God; yet by faith and by the
spirit of God, that secret is revealed unto us, that we are beloved of God and
are his children.
what do we to be assured of his will thereto? For who knows whether he be
worthy of love or hatred? who has known the mind of the Lord, or who has
been his counselor? Hic iam plane fidem nobis subvenire necesse est. But
here faith must needs help us; here Gods truth must needs be our succor,
that that which lies hid concerning us in the Heart of God our Father may by
his Spirit be revealed unto us, and his Spirit by the testimony thereof may
persuade our spirits, that we are the children of God, and that it is done by
calling and justifying of us freely by faith; in which two there is as it were
a certain middle passage, from the eternal predestination to the
glorification which shall be hereafter.

Again, upon this Text, Omnis qui natus est ex Deo, non peccat, In Septuag.
Sermon. 1. 1. John. 5. v. 18.
sed generatio coelestis conservat illum. Every one that is borne of God
sins not, but the generation of God, or he that is begotten of God, does
keep him, says. Sed generationem istam quis enarrabit? But who shall declare
this generation? who can say, I am one of the number of the elect? I am one of
the children; The Scripture saying, This excludes all apprehension of flesh
and blood, as judgment of reason or humane knowledge, but the secret of the
spirit is excludes not.
Man does not know whethe he be worthy of love or hatred: verily we have not a
certainety, but the boldness of hope does comfort us, lest we should be
altogether grieved with the perplexity of the doubt, Sed propter hoc data sunt
signaquaedam, etc: but for all this there are manifest signs and tokens of
salvation, that it is without all doubt that he is of the number of the Elect,
in whom those tokens do remain.

Of which tokens or signs he speaks thus in another place, In Octav. Pasc.
Sermon. 2.
Quomodo sine testimonio electos suos deserat Deus? How should God leave his
Elect without testimony? (of their election) or what comfort might there be
unto them floting carefully betwixt hope and fear, if they did not find the
favor to have some testimony thereof? The Lord knows who are his, he only
knows whom he has chosen from the beginning; but what man knows, if he be
worthy of love or hatred? But if, as certain it is, that certainety be deemed
unto us, The certainety of faith is gathered from such signs and tokens as by
the Word of God are delivered unto us, and according to Saint Bernard are such
as do keep us from that wauing and wandering, which otherwise might be
betwixt hope and fear. Idem de Evang. septem panis Sermon. 3.
how much the more delightful shall they be, if we can find any tokens of
this election? For what rest can our soul have, so long as it has no
testimony of its own predestination? Therefore it is a word to be believed,
and worthy by all means to be received, whereby the witness and testimony of
our salvation is commended unto us.

Further, speaking of the seventh Loaf. and the three pieces belonging unto
it: and expressing this certainety in himself says, Septimus quoque panis est
spes obtinendi, cuius nihilominus teneo fragmenta tria, and little sapor dulcis
admodum gutturi meo. The seventh Loaf says he, is hope of obtaining pardon
for my sin; of which Loaf I hold three pieces, the taste of which is very
sweet to my throat. There be three I say, which do so strengthen and confirm
my heart, as that no want of merits, no consideration of mine own vileness,
no estimation of the heavenly bliss can cast me down from the height of my
hope being fast rooted therein. Saint Bernard affirms a certainty of faith,
built, not upon his own immediate knowledge and apprehension, but upon the
love of God in adopting him the truth of his promise, and his power to perform
the same.
These 3 I say, wherein my hope wholly consists charitatem adoptionis,
veritatem promissionis, potestatem redditionis; the love of God in adopting me;
the truth of his promise; and his power to perform the same. Let my foolish
thought now repine and murmr as much as it will, saying, Who art thou, and
how great is that glory; and by what merits do thou hope to obtain the
same? and I will boldly answer. I know whom I have believed, and I am certain
and sure of it, because he has adopted me in great love, because he is true in
his promise, and because he is of power to make good the same.

Further. Sermon. 8. in Cant.
Quae in vobis anima sensit aliquando in secreto conscientiae suae spiritum
filij clamantem, Abba Pater, Ipsa, ipsapaterno se diligi affectu praesumat,
quae eodem se spiritu, quo and filius affectam sentit, confide quaecunque es
illa, confide nihil hasitans. What soul amongst you soever does sometime feel
in the secret of his conscience, the spirit of the son, crying Abba Father;
that soul, even that soul may presume that it is beloved with a Fatherly
affection, which does feel it self beloved by the same spirit, that the son
is; be bold how foul soever thou art, be bold, doubting nothing at all. In
the spirit of the son, acknowledge thy self to be the daughter of the wife
and sister of the son. Non est quod iam talis anima dicere vereatur, dilectus
meus mihi: In Cant. 69. Sermon.
quod ex eo quod se diligere, and vehementer diligere sentit, etiam diligi
nihilominus vehementer non ambigit, ac de sua singulari intention,
solicitudine, cura, opera, diligentia studioque quo incessanter and ardenter
invigilat quemadmodum placeat Deo, aeque haec omnia in ipso indubitanter
agnoscit, recordans promissionis eius; Ergo ex proprijs, quae sunt penes Deum
agnoscit, nec dubitat se amari, qui amat. There is now no occasion that such a
soul should be afraid to say, my Welbeloved is mine, which out of that, that
it perceives it self to love, and vehemently to love, does nothing doubt, but
that it is beloved again vehemently; and out of its own special diligence,
care, study, endeavor, whereby it does earnestly and without intermission take
good heed, how it may please God, it does undoubtedly acknowledge all these
things to be in him, remembering his promise. Therefore from those things which
are properly Gods it does acknowledge, nor at all doubt, but that it is
beloved, which does love.

Men's quae divino Spiritu impletur, Greg. dial. lib. 1. cap. 1.
habet evidentissima sua signa, virtutes scilieet and humilitatem, quae si
utraque perfect in unamente conveniant, liquet quod de praesentia Spiritus
Sancti testimonium ferant. The mind that is filled with the holy Spirit, has
its most evident signs and tokens, that is to wit, grace and humility, both
which if they meet together in one soul, it is certain, that they bear
witness of the presence of the holy Ghost.

Deum sitiens anima prius timore compungitur, Greg. lib. 6. registri c. 187.
post amore etc. at vero quum longa moeroris anxietate fuerit formido
consumpta* quaedam iam de presumptione veniae nascitur securitas. The soul
that thirsts after God, is first pricked with fear, then with love; but when
fear through long heaviness of sorrow shall be consumed, there is then a
certain security bred of obtaining mercy.

Iustiviri securitas recte Leoni comparatur, Greg. Moral. lib. 31. cap. 23.
quia contra se cum quoslibet iusurgere conspicit, ad mentis suae confidentiam
redit: and scit quia cunctos adversantes superat, quia illum solum diligit,
quem invitus nullo modo amittat. The confidence of a just man may rightly be
compared to a Lion; because when he sees any to rise up against him, retireth
to the assurance of his own mind, and knows that he does overcome all that
oppose, because he only loves him, whom unwillingly by no means he may lose.

There is no inherent righteousness in man, whereby he may be justified before
Gods Tribunal; But the righteousness of Christ is imputed being apprehended
by faith.
Quod si dixerit, Patertuus addixit te, respondebo, sed frater meus redemit me,
Bern. Epist. 190.
cur non aliunde iustitia, cum aliunde reatus? Alius qui peccatorem constituit,
alius qui iustificat a peccato, alter in semine, alter in sanguine. An peccatu^
in semine peccatoris, and non iustitia, in Christi sanguine? sed iustitia.
inquiet, si cuius est, quid ad te? Esto, sed sit etiam culpa cuius est, quid ad
me? An iustitia iusti super eum erit, and impiet as impij non erit super eum?
Adam bound us. Christ has set us free. The matter of our condemnation is in
Adam, and the matter of our salvation is in Christ: so that Bernard here
plainly affirms both the imputation of Adams sin to condemnation, and the
imputation of Christ's righteousness accordingly to justification. The Rhemists
in their notes on the New Testament do nothing so much as mock and scoff at
this doctrine of the imputation of Christ's righteousness; blasphemously calling
it, a new no justice a fantastical apprehension of that which is not, a false
faith and untrue imputation. in Romans 3. verse 22. we are not only by
acceptance or imputation partakers of Christ's benefits, but are by his grace
made worthy thereof, and deserve our salvation condignely. Col. 1, v. 13. in
margin. this is lofty and hye doctrine, and worthy the buskin, but far from S.
Bernards humility.
But if he shall say, thy father has bound thee over, I will answer, but my
brother has redeemed me. Why should not righteousness be of an other, seeing
guilt is of another? It was another that made me a sinner, it is another that
justifies from sin, the one in his seed, the other in his blood. Is there
sin in the seed of a sinner, and is there not righteousness in the Blood of
Christ? But he will say, if there be a righteousness of any ones, what is that
to thee? Let it be so. But then let the fault be whose it is, what is that to
me? Shall the righteousness of the righteous be upon himself, and shall not
the wickedness of the wicked be upon himself? It is not meet that the son
should bear the iniquity of the father, and be denied to be partaker of the
righteousness of his brother.

And before in the same Epistle, Assignata est homini aliena iustitia, quia
caruit sua, nam si unus pro omnibus mortuus est, ergo omnes mortui sunt: ut
videlicet satisfactio unius omnibus imputetur, sicut omnivm peccata unus ille
portavit. There is appointed to man, an other man's righteousness; because he
wanted his own. For if one did die for all, then all were dead, that so the
satisfaction of one, might be imputed to all, even as that one did bear the
sins of all.

Again. In Cant. sermon. 61. Genes. 4.
Et ideo liquet errasse illum qui ait Mayor est iniquitas mea, quam ut
veneammerear, nisi quod non erat de membris Christi, nec pertinebat ad eum de
merito Christi, ut suum presumeret, suum diceret quod illius esset, tanquam rem
capitis membrum. And therefore he did err who said, My sin is greater than it
can be forgiven, and he spoke it in that he was not one of the members of
Christ, neither did any thing pertain unto him of the merit of Christ, that he
should presume it was his, The righteousness that is assigned unto us, is an
others, and not our own.
or that he could say, that was his which was Christ's, as a member of the
riches of the Head.

After, Domine memorabor iustitiae tua solius. Ipsa est enim and mea, nempe
factus es mihi in iustitia a Deo. Numquid mihi vere^dum ne non una ambobus
sufficiat? non est pallium breve quod non possit operire duos. Iustitia tua
iustitia in aeternum. Quid longius aeternitate, and te pariter, and me operiet
largiter largae and aeterna iustitia. Et in me quidem operit multitudinem
peccatorum, in te autem Domine quid nisi pietatis thesauros divina bonitatis?
Here is no mention of inherent righteousness, but only of Christ's
righteousness imputed, apprehended by faith.
O Lord, I will remember thy righteousness alone, for that is mine also; for
thou art made unto me righteousness by God. And shall I fear that one
righteousness will not serve two? It is not a short Cloak (as the Prophet faith)
such as cannot cover two. Thy righteousness is righteousness for ever. What
is longer than eternity. Thy large and everlasting righteousness will cover
both thee and me fully, in me it will indeed cover a multitude of sins; but
in thee O Lord what but the Treasures of Piety, the riches of goodness.

Again, In Cant. sermon. 25.
upon that speech of the Church, Niger sum, sed formosa, filia Jerusalem. I am
black. but welfavoured, daughter of Jerusalem, says, Videamus iam quid illud
fuerit dicere, nigrasum, sed formosa. Nulla ne in his verbis repugnantia est?
Absit, non omne quod nigrum est, continuo deforme est, etc. Let us see what it
is to say, I am black, but comely, This is the beauty of the church, not her
being without sin, but remission and forgiveness of sins by the
righteousness of Christ, imputed unto it, and apprehended by faith: so that as
the Church is black, but fair through Christ, so Christ is fair in himself,
but he seemed black for the Churches sake. Esaias 53.
Is there no repugna^cie in these words? God forbid. Every thing that is
black, is not straightwayes ill-favored. Blackness (for example) in the ball
of the eye is not uncomely, and some black hairs serve for ornament. After
this manner perhaps may the Bride (or Church) with the beauty truly of her
feature, not want her mole or spot of blacknes, but then it is in the time of
her pilgrimage. It shall be otherwise in her country, when the Bridegroom of
glory shall make her to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or
wrinckle, or any such thing. But now if she should say, she has no blacknes,
she should deceive her self, and there were no truth in her.

And to the same effect he says elsewhere, In Cant. sermon. 38. The Church is
but begun in this life to purged from iniquity, and framed in conversation to
depart therefrom: and so is every one that is justified by faith in Christ,
having Christ's righteousness imputed unto him: In Cantie. 38. Sermon.
showing how the Church (or Bride is said to be fair among weomen,
Spiritualis autem anima, etc. The spiritual soul although it be now so far
fair, because it walks not according to the flesh, but according to the
spirit. But yet in respect that it continues in this body, it does tend to the
perfection of fairenes, and therefore is not at all hands fair, but fair
among weomen, that is, in respect of earthly minds, and those that are not
spiritual, as she is. Tunc audies. Tota pulchra es amica mea, and macula non
est in te. Nunc vero etsi ex part iam similis, ex part tame^ tamen dissimilis
etc. sed and ego te dico pulchram, sed inter mulieres, id est, ex part. Then
(that is in the Country of Heaven) thou shall hear these words, Thou art all
fair my Love, Partly fair and partly black: the white garment of Christ must
cover this blackness.
and there is no spot in thee. But now although thou art in part like, yet in
part thou art unlike. I say thou art fair, but it is among weomen, that is to
say, in part.

Touching the lawfulness of marriages in Ministers where the gift of continency
is not given.
Vtinam qui continere non valent, perfectionem temerarie profiteri, Deconvers.
ad Cleric. sermon. 29.
aut coelebatui dare nomina verentur. Would to God that those that cannot
contain would stand in awe to profess single life: for doubtless it were much
better to marry then to burn. But there are many, and so many, that they
cannot be hid for multitude, and for impudency do not seek it, who use their
liberty, as an occasion to the flesh, abstaining from marriage, and flowing
from thence into all manner of filthiness, fornication, adulteries, incests,
Sodometry, and that which filthy Sodom never knew.

And touching those that have vowed a right vow (suppose chastity) and find
they cannot contain, or perform it, the bond is not absolute, but of
conditional necessity. Ego non arbitror minora vota impedire maiora, Epist.
47.
nec Deum exigere quodcunque bonum sibi promissum, si pro ea melius aliquod
persolutum. I do not think (says he) that lesser vows can hinder the
greater, neither that God does require, every good that is promised him, if for
those any thing better shallbee paid him, etc. In turpi voto muta decretum,
Lib. 5. ad sororem.
In a filthy vow, change thy mind.

Again. In Cant. sermon. 66.
Toll de Ecclesia honorabile co^nubium, and thorum immaculatum: nonne reples
eam concubinarijs, incestuosis, siminifluis, mollibus, masculorum
concubitoribus, and omni denique genere immundorum? Take from the Church
honorable marriage, and the undefiled bed; and do thou not fill it with
keepers of concubines, incestuous persons, seed-loosers, and all manner of
unclean persons.

There is no fleshly and orall eating of the natural body of Christ in the
Sacrament, neither do the wicked eat him at all.
Cum audirent dicentem, In Psalm. qui habitat. sermon. 3.
nisi manducaveritis carnem filij hominis, and biberitis eius sanguinem
dixerunt. etc. When they heard him say, Except you eat the flesh of the Son
of man, and drink his blood. They said, This is that which we call the eating
of Christ's flesh, and drinking of hish loud.
it is an hard saying, and they went from him. But what is it to eat his fiesh
and drink his blood, except to remember his sufferings, and to imitat that
conversation, which he led in the fiesh? whereto he appointed that pure
Sacrament of the altar where we receive the Lords body, that as the form of
bread does seem to enter into us; so we shall know by the conversation which
he had in the flesh that he does enter into us to dwell in our hearts by faith.

Again. Sacramentum dicitur sacrum signum, Inserm. de (...)
sive sacrum secretum. Multa quidem fiunt propter se tantum; alia vero propter
alia designanda, and ipsa dicuntur and sunt signa. A Sacrament is said to be
an holy sign, or an holy secret. The nature of a sign does consist in setting
forth another thing.
But many signs are ordained for themselves only, yet some signs are
ordained for other things and those are called, and so are signs. That
therefore we may take example from usual things. A ring is given as a ring
absolutely, in that there is no similitude. A visible sign is like a ring, or
an earnest penny.
It is given also to invest one into an inheritance and then it is a sign; so
that he that receaveth the ring may now say. The ring avails nothing, Grace
is considered in respect of those that use it; not that it is really in the
signs.
but it is the inheritance that I seek. In the same manner our Lord
approaching near to his passion, took care that his (members) should be
clothed with his grace, that the invisible grace might be exhibited by some
visible sign. To this purpose are all Sacraments instituted, to this purpose
was the receiving of the Eucharist, and Chrisme; to this purpose also was
Baptism, the beginning of all Sacraments; in which we are planted together
with him into the likeness of his death. For as in outward things there are
diverse signs, These examples fight directly against the corporal presence and
ye prove withal, that the Sacraments are not bare signs. In sermon. de
purificat. The Priest alone does not consecrate nor sacrifice, but the people
with him: therefore there is no real transubstantiation of the bread into the
body of Christ, nor real sacrifice of that body.
that we may tarry upon the example first taken. There are many ornaments
wherewith we are adorned, for example, a Bishop by his staff, and his ring.
As it is in these things, so are the diversities of gifts delivered in diverse
Sacraments.

Again. Neque enim credere debemus quod soli sacerdoti supra dictae virtutes
sint necessariae etc. Neither (says he) ought we to believe, that those fore
recited virtues belone only to the Priests: as though he alone did consecrate
and sacrifice the body of Christ; He does not sacrifice alone, he does not
consecrate alone, but the whole company of the faithful which stand by, do
consecrate and sacrifice with him. Therefore the standers by ought to have of
their own, as well as the Priest, firm faith, pure prayer, godly devotio^.
And in the same sermon expounding the Text of S. Paul, The cup of blessing
which we bless etc. says, Hear brethren, not me but the Apostle, The cup
of blessing which we bless, This is the appointed end of these mysteries;
there is a secret dispensation of grace in their use, that is a partaking of
the body and blood of Christ: but this infers not, nor does the nature of
the mystery require that the truth meant in the mysteries, should by any
corporal presence be contained, or lie hid under the signer. In caena domini.
is it not the communion of the blood of Christ? The cup, that is to say, the
partaking of the cup makes us to have a certain fellowship with Christ: And
the bread which we break is it not a partaking of the body of Christ? As if
he should say, the bread which we break makes us one body under Christ our
head; because as one bread is made of many corns, which afterward is turned
into the body of Christ, both by faith, and by the holy words which Christ
taught his (Church) so, many participating of that body in the unity of faith,
hope, and charity, are one body with Christ.

In his next tract of the Lords supper speaking plentifully of this argument
amongst many other, he has these words, In hoc Sacramento, no^ solum quaelibet
gratia, sed ille a quo est omnis gratia sumitur. In this Sacrament (says he)
not only every grace, but he from whom all grace flows is had. For Christ was
once made a saving oblation for the life of the world, a general
reconciliation, and gave to all Sacraments as well those of the old Testament,
as of the new, virtue and efficacy that by such and so great an offering, all
me^ might be sanctified that were to besaued. He is the lamb slain from the
beginning of the world, that is, to the faithful that were from the beginning;
And in that it is said, from the beginning, not the time of his death is set
forth, Prins enim mors cius prosuit quam fuit. If Christ spoke of the bread, as
certainly he did and S. Bernard acknowledges, then sinely transubstantiation
is utterly overthrown, as all Papists know, that know the difference
between them and us.
but of his bringing salvation. For his death did profit before it was. After
describing the order of the administration of the Lords supper. Christ (says
he) spoke of the bread, saying, Take eat, this is my body, and so of the wine,
drink you all of this, this is my blood which shall be shed for many to the
remission of sins. Now touching the efficacy and communion of the body and
blood of Christ; We (says he) are knit in an unspeakable union with Christ,
and Christ with us, as he himself says, he that eats my flesh and drinks
my blood, remains in me, and I in him. And this is to be thought of those
that receive worthily, and not of the wicked. Surely at one table, at the Lords
supper, Judas and Peter received both one consecrated bread; Peter to life,
Judas to damnation. And upon the words, Hoc facite in meam commemorationem. Do
this in remembrance of me. He mentions no real sacrifice of Christ's body
and blood, such as is made in the Mass; But a thank full remembrance of his
death and passion. Voluit Christus ve iugiter coleretur per misterium, quod
semel efferebatur in precium, and illa perennis victima viveret in memoria,
Lo! the death of Christ is always present in grace, away with the mass then.
and praefens esset semper in gratia. Christ appointed that he should be
always worshipped in a mystery, because He was once offered for redemption,
and that everlasting offering should live in memory, and be always present in
grace, nay it is a sufficient medicine for all, Here he plainly divides
remembrance from presence, attributing the one to this life whereins we be, and
the other to the life to come. 2. Cor. 5.7.
if through faith and imitation the memory of his forepassed death be kept. No^
enim pariomnino iucunditate sumitur cortex sacramenti and medulla frumenti etc.
Hic pereat physicale nutrimentum. Cibus iste no^ est ventris sed mentis. The
outward bark of the Sacrament, is not received with like pleasure, as the
fatness of the corn, faith and show, memory and presence, eternitre and time,
the visage and the glass, the image of God, and the fashion of a servant. But
here we walk by faith, and not by sight. In the mean time we ought to take
delight and rejoice, in the sacrament of the altar, in the making whereof the
faithful minister does find himself in the midst of the Father, Son, and
holy Ghost; the higher orders standing about on every side. Here let natural
nourishment cease. This is meat, not for the belly but for the soul.

To conclude, Sacramentum enim, sine re sacramenti niors est sumenti. Vt supra
in ser. de coma.
Res vero sacramenti etiam praeter sacramentum vita aeterna est accipienti. The
Sacrament without the thing of the Sacrament, Speak Papist. Tell plainly,
what is the Sacrament, and the thing of the Sacrament, and how the body of
Christ can be eaten even without the Sacrament?
is death to the receauer; but the thing of the Sacrament, even without the
Sacrament, is everlasting life to the receauer. As often as thou art godly and
faithfully affected, and devoted to imitate Christ in commemoration of him who
suffered for thee, thou eatest his body, and drinkest his blood and as long as
thou remainest in him by love, thou shall be counted unto him by the working of
righteousness and bolynesse in thee, of his body and of his members.

S. Bernard persuades Pope Eugenius from clayming temporal jurisdiction.
PRopheta cum ait (vt evellas, and destruas; De consider: ad Eugen. lib. 2.
Ierem, cap. 1.
and disperdas and dissipes, and adifices and plants) quid horum fastum sonat?
The Prophet Jeremy says. Behold I have appointed thee over nations, to pluck
up, and to root out, and to destroy, and throw down, to build and to plant:
which of these words do savor of pride? nay rather the spiritual labor is
expressed by terms borrowed of from husbandmen. And we therefore may
perceive, there is much given us in charge, a ministry, not a rule, Let it be
that you are a Prophet, but are you more then a Prophet? But if you be wise,
you will be content with that measure, which God has allotted unto you, for
what is more proceeds from evil. Learn by the example of the Prophet, to
have a charge; not so much to Lord it, as to practice that which the time
requires.

In his 42 Epistle, thus he writes Intelligit is quae dico? etc. Do you
understand what I say? Let honor be given to whom honor belongs. Let every
soul (says the Apostle) be subject to the higher powers. If every soul, then
yours; for who has excepted you, from this generality. If any man does
endeavor to except you from the obedience of the Prince, he deceaueth you. Do
not rest on their counsels, for notwithstanding they are Christians, yet they
think scorn, either to follow Christ's deeds, or obey Christ's words. Those are
they that say unto you Maintain Sir the honor of your Sea, There were
flatterers of the Pope in S. Bernards time, and have they banished them since?
etc are not you so good as your predecessors? If your Sea be not advanced by
you, yet let it not be abased by you. Haec isti. Thus say they. But Christ both
taught and did far otherwise; for he says, Give to Caesar the the things that
belong to Caesar, and give to God the things that belong to God,

Lib. 1. de consid. ad Eugenium.
In his book of Consideration written purposely to the Pope himself, he has
diverse passages to this same effect. In criminibus, non in possessionibus
potest as vestra etc. Your power (says he) is touching offenses, and not
possessions, because you received the keys of the kingdom of heaven, to deal
in the one but not in the other, shutting out offenders, but not possessioners,
that you might know (says Christ) that the son of man has power in earth to
forgive sins etc. Which does seem unto you, the greater dignity, and power;
to for give sins, or to divide inheritances? But there is no comparison.
Those mean and inferior things have their Judges, Kings, and Princes of the
earth. Why do you invade other men's bounds, why do you put your sickle in
other men's corn?

Again in his third book, Lib. 3. de cons. ad Eugen. Ps. 49
he has these words Non tu ille de quo Propheta. Et erit omnis terra possessio
tius etc. You are not he of whom the Prophet spoke And all the earth shall be
his possession. It is Christ who challenges it for his possession. To who^ but
to him is it said? Psalm. 2.
Ask of me and I will give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the
uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession. Give Christ the possession and
Lordship, take you the care of it. This is your part, stretch not your hand any
further. Yea, but you will say, Thou deniest me not to be above others; Non
negas prae esse, et dominari vetas? Plane sic.
and do thou deny me to have soveraigntie? indeed even so. Who governs by
taking care; you are exalted to profit others you govern as a faithful wise
servant, whom the Lord has set over his family. But to what end? Preach the
word depose noe princes.
that you may give them meat in due season. That is, to distribute the meat,
not to command with authority.

And in the fourth book speaking (as before) of those flatterers, that belike
were very near him, and therefore very likely to thrust too much greatness on
him, says, A te tamen mos iste, vel potius mors ista non coepit, in te vtinam
desinat. But they say, this custom, or rather this destruction began not in
you, I would yet it might end in you. Do you not see, that all your
Ecclesiastical zeal and care stands only in maintenance of honors upon
honor all is bestowed; upon holiness, either nothing or very little. If upon
occasion you would somewhat submit your self and deal familiarly. O do not
so, say they, it is not meet: Thus do the Jesuits school his holiness at Rome
now.
it is not agreeable to the time, it is not co^venient for your majesty.
Consider well what state you hear.

And in the second book, lib. 2. de consider.
speaking of worldly honor and wealth, and pomp, says. Nihil horum tabula
testatoris adsignavit: None of those does the holy Scriptures allow or give
you. But what? If you be content with their evidence, you shall rather inherit
care and pains, then Glory and riches. Blanditur cathedra? Does your chair
flatter you? you are in a watchtower, Inde denique superintendis.
from thence you carefully look over all, the name of Bishop sounding unto you
not Lordship, but service. Planum est Apostolis interdicitur dominatus. It is
plain, that soveraigntie was forbidden the Apostles; take heed therefore that
you usurp not, either as a Lord the Apostleship, or as being Apostolic,
Lordship, because you are forbidden both. If you will have both alike, you shall
loose both. Otherwise do not take your self to be exempted from the number
of those, of whom the Lord God does thus complain, They have reigned, but not
by me. Hosea. cap. 8. verse. 4.
They were Princes, but I knew them, not. But if it further any thing to rule,
without God, you have glory, but not with God. The Apostolic form is this,
soveraigntie is forbidden; service is commanded.

In his Epistle unto Lewis the younger King of France, Ad Ludonicu^ iuniorem
Regem Francoru^ epist. 170.
thus he writes, Si totus orbis adversum me coniuraret, etc. If the whole
world (says he) should conspire together against me, that I should undertake
any thing against the Kings authority, yet would I have God in my mind, and
durst not foolishly do any thing against the king who is ordained by him.
Neither am I ignorant where it is that I read, He that resists the power,
resists the ordinance of God And after some expostulation of matters that
then went not well, he adds, This truth shall never be lessened in us, The
honor of the King and the profit of his Kingdom shall never be impaired by
us.

In the 45. Epistle, Epist. 45. ad Ludou. regem Francor.
Stephan the Abbot of Cistercense, writing to the same Lewis thus, Rex coeli
and terrae regnum vobis in terra donavit, donaturus and in coelo, si id quod
accepistis, just and sapienter administrare studueritis. The King of Heaven
and earth, Then do not Princes hold their scepters of the Pope.
has given you a Kingdom upon earth, and will give you one in Heaven, if you
do endeavor to govern that, justly and wisely which you have received of
him. Do you consider when you please, O ye Papists, by teaching the contrary
doctrine? not the Lord of Paradise, but the Pope of Rome. Epist. 221. If
sovereign Majesty should do any thing to the Churches detriment, either in
oppressing it, or winking at the oppressing thereof: Saint Bernard in this case
will not dissemble the wrongs of his mother, but would take arms, yet such as
should become the Lords Priest, Christ's Champion, and the Churches Child,
Prayers and tears powered out to God.
Attenditis iam cui and ex hoc infensum vos redditis? Do you consider whom you
have offended and displeased by this deed of yours? Verily, not the Bishop of
Paris, but the Lord of Paradise, who is to be feared, who takes away the lives
of the Princes.

To conclude all, I find in the 221. Epistle to the same king Lewis these
words, At quicquid vobis de regno vestro de anima and corona vestra facere
placeat: nos Ecclesiae filij, etc. But howsoever it please you to esteem of
your life, crown, and dignity: yet we that are sons of the Church, cannot
at any hand, hide the co^tempts, wrongs, and the treading underfoot of our
mother. Profecto stabimus and pugnabimus usque ad mortem, si ita oportuerit pro
matre nostra, armis, quibus licet, non scutis and gladijs, sed precibus,
fletibusque ad Deum. Surely we will stand and fight even unto death, if it were
expedient, for our mother (the Church) with such weapons as is fitting not with
swords and bucklers; but with prayers and tears powered out to God.

Of unwritten Traditions which the Council of Trent, made equal with the
written word of God.
Epist. 91. ad Abbates Suissione congregatos. If the Council of Trent had bin
thus religious, they would never have equalled Traditions unwritten, with the
written Word of God, nor have fathered their massing ceremonies and vestments
on the Tradition of the Apostles, such as the miter, the stole, the albe,
amice, girdle, chisible, and fane.
Adistud concilium toto desiderio feror in quo traditiones, etc. I have an
exceeding great desire to be at a Council where Traditions may not be
obstinately defended, nor superstitiously observed, but where it may be with
diligence and humility inquired, what the good, and acceptable, and perfect
will of God is. Let them depart from you and from me, that say, we will not
be better than our Fathers. Either we must ascend, or descend. If thou will
stand still, thou must needs fall. He is not good, that will not be better;
and when thou will not become better, then thou beginnest to grow worse.

Again, Nonne iustissimum esse liquet, De praec. and dispensat. page 290. a.
fine.
etc. does it not appear most just (says he) that those things, which were
ordained for charity, may for charity also where it seems necessary, be
either omitted or deferred, or peradventure be changed more commodiously into
a better. If those traditions, which are brought in for a good intent, may be
laid aside: how much more the Church of Rome of its own accord thrusts upon
the Church of God.
As on the other side, it would be out of doubt very unjust, if those things
which were ordained for mere charity, should be retained against charity;
but whatsoever is ordained by God, is not to be violated or broken. And then
citing Pope Gelasius, saying, Vbi necessitas non est, inconvertibilia maneant
patrum sanctorum decreta. Where necessity does not require, let the decrees of
the holy Fathers remain untouched. Vbitamen Deo contraria non praecipit homo,
but it is where man does not command contrary things to God. For where the
authentical scriptures do speak, we must there neither look for a
commander, nor hearken to a forbidder.

FINIS.

