THE FALL OF BABEL. By the confusion of tongues, directly proving against the
Papists of this, and former ages; that a view of their writings, and books
being taken, it cannot be discerned by any man living, what they would say, or
how be understood, in the question of the sacrifice of the Mass, the Real
presence or transubstantiation; but in explaning their minds, they fall upon
such terms, as the Protestants use and allow. FVRTHER In the question of the
Popes supremacy is showed, how they abuse an authority of the ancient father
St. Cyprian, A Canon of the 1. Niceene counsel, And the Ecclesiastical
history of Socrates, and Sozomen. And lastly is set down a brief of the
succession of Popes in the sea of Rome for these 1600. years together; what
diversity there is in their account, what heresies, schisms, and intrusions
there has bin in that sea, delivered in opposition against their tables,
wherewith now adays they are very busy; and other things discovered against
them.

By JOHN PANKE.

2. Sam. 3.1. There was long war between the house of Saul, and the house of
David, but David waxed stronger, and the house of Saul waxed weaker.

Printed at Oxford by Joseph Barnes. 1608.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL and Reverend in Christ, M. D. A. the heads of
Colleges, and companies of students in the University of Oxford; And their
Colleagues, and associates, against the common adversary, in the University
of Cambridge; and all other public defenders of the true christian religion,
within this his Majesty's Realm of great Britain: John Pancke wishes grace
and peace from God the Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ.
I Have read it reported (Reverend Fathers and Brethren) Reyn: in the
beeginning of his 6. conclusions. And also in his apology of them. Quid opus
est vt properes periculum suscipere condemnationis loque^do, cum tace^do possis
esse tutior. Ambro. offic. l. 1. c. 2.
that it was the fortune of Aulus Albinus, to be reprehended by Cato the
censor, because being a Roman, and writing his history in Greek, he did
seem to ask pardon, if he did therein amiss, when with less adventure he
might have kept himself from all fault in not meddling with such a business at
all. My case at this time is even as his in this matter taken in hand; I would
both adventure it, and will also pray your pardons, if I have either done
amiss, in meddling with a business, that beelongeth to right approved
scholars, or have not proceeded so soundly against the adversaries, as the
weight of these questions does requier. My defense in both cases is by way of
excuse; for seeing I have for some few years past, bin conuersa^t in all your
writings that J could harken out to be printed against the adversaries, to whom
rather should J give an account, then unto you, either of the profit I have
made by them to overthrow the contrary part or incite you to continue yet
your further labors to the building up of the spiritual house of the Lord,
and better accomplish, all could do, and that by this kind of dedication?
Illustres and praestantes viri discipulorumcer taminibus, no^minus qua^ suis
vincunt. Amb. offic. l. 1. c 41. Si pro otioso verbo reddemus rationem videamus
ne reddamus pro otioso si enti^ Amb. offic. l. 1. c. 3.
The truth has spoken it, we shall render an account for every idle word, and
so shall we for our idle silence. J freely confess unto you al, that next the
book of God, your volumes and treatises have especially tied me at home, when
some other my companions have bin walking abroad. The holy truth, which in your
consciences you know you do uphold, is the waightiest assurance of well doing
that may be; The consent of nations and Churches abroad is a great motive to
prick you forward; but when by the particular travel of any on man, it may
also appear, that having had your writings tried by the Cano^ of holy
scripture and some antiquity else, and having it found that there is a true
Diapason, and concord in all your voices, in arguing the truth of the Lords
cause, this to be testified by others that are of the Laity, as children
ioining with you Fathers, will J suppose be noe small joy and gladness unto
you. Macte virtute. Go forward J beeseech you with good courage, the adversary
is insole^t but very weak, Lactant, instit. lib. 5. c. 20. fol. 465.
iam profecto ab amculis quas contemnunt, and a pueris nostratibus error
illocum ac stultitiae irridetur. even of old wives and young children which they
most contemn, is their very religion derided. Illa enim religio muta est, non
tantu^ quia muto^um est sed quia titus eius in manu and digitis estno^ in cord
aut lingua sicut nostra ibid. l 4. c. 3. fol. 303.
They can tell now as well as their teachers* that their religion is dumb, as
done unto stocks and blocks, and also is idle as being placed in the hand
and fingers, scarcely coming into the tongue, but never into the heart, as
the ancient father Lactantius says by the Gentiles, which aptly shows the
vanity of theirs also, for by euens and ods, they make their prayers long or
short. Their Beads. Iuell. Nolo nu^c aut Oxonienses Ca^tabrigiensibus, aut
Cantabrigienses Oxoniensibus anteponere: vtrosque constat and ingenio and
eruditione va^uisse. Sic. Melc. Canus de Graecis and Latinis, l. 7. fo. 231 a.
not the one before the other, but either of them before the best in the world.
Lilly. Fulke. Whita. L. B. Winchest Reynoldes. Besides, lib. de Romans Ecclesiae
Idolol. and Apolog. Thesium. Humphrey. Erat enim ingenio facili. co pioso,
suavi, and (quae sermonis maxima virtus) aperto, vt discernere nequeas, vtrum
ne ornatior in eloquendo, an faciliot in explicando, an potentior in
persuadendo fuerit Lac. de Cyp. lib. de iustitia. c. 1.
To incite you to this holy conflict I will call to your remembrances, the pains
of very worthy men both alive and dead. Let it be the honor of Bishop Iuell
once bishop of Sarum, that his reply, and Apology stand safe without just
reprehension, when his direct adversary D. Harding, reioined but to one of 27.
articles. Stapleton returned but to 4. and those so meanly clothed, that
himself might have bin ashamed, not answering the 10. part of the bishops text
leaving out whole sheets, to which he has not said a word; Dorman dealt also
against the Bishop, in 4. articles too, but too too porely. Propose to your
sights the industrious toiles of D. Fulke, and VVhitakers; the one for his
answer to the Rhemish testament, as also his defense of our translatio^s
against Gregory Martin, his answer to Bristow, Allen, and others. The other
for his pains against Champion, Stapleton, Dureus and Bellarmine. But in this,
are the living to be preferred before the dead, in that it has pleased God,
to reserve two of the stro^gest, in out living their first labors more tha^
20. years, the most learned and judicious Bishop of Winton, and D. Reynolds,
the one for his dialogues against the Jesuits the other for his conference with
Heart, wherein they see their desire on their enemies, no adversary daring to
propound against either of them. Who does not think the memory of D. Humfrey
is yet fresh, and laudable in the highest degree, for his answer to Campians
challenge; for elegancy of style, exactness of method, and substance of matter,
without all cast of the dice, as Lactantius said by St. Cyprian? D. Willet
has bin very painful as his Synopsis and Tetrastilon do plainly show. The
venerable Deane of Exeter D. Sutcliue, may not in this page of praise be
omitted, for answering as well the most learned among the adversaries, as those
that have the most dissolute tongues, Bellarmine and Gifford: It would be too
long to reakon all, therefore I content my self, with picking out the choice.
It shall always be my prayers unto Almighty God, that whenever it shall
please him to call these, or any of these to him self out of this wearisome
life, there may others arise in your places, to go on with the cause, as the
Poet speaks of the Golden bough, primo avulso non deficit alter, Aeneid lib 6.
one being taken away there wants not an other, and so give the adversary
not so much as a breathing time. And when you of the Clergy, and Scholars
have thus discharged their duties to God and the Prince; what rests for the
Laity to do, but to take up and read, and having read as the men of Baerea in
the Acts, to compare both sides with the scripture, and then resolve to
justify the truth in all sincerity? Act. 17.
And to you I say this again; the clearness and perspicuitie of your writings
has added such a plainenes to my understanding, to the finding out of the
truth, that if I should not absolutely aver that the doctrine this day taught
and professed in this Realm were the true and sincere doctrine of Christ and
of his Church, I should surely sin against mine own conscience: the contrary,
of the Church of Rome being only built on the rubbish of contradictions,
impieties, gloses, slights, falsifications, and forgeries, as by the samplar
which I have drawn out of their books, for that purpose, will manifestly
appear, I say not to you, who are mighty in knowledge that way already, but to
every mean reader, for whose sakes only, I undertook this labor. Ignoscant
scientes ne offe^da^tur nescientes, satius est offerre habe^ti quam differ
non habente^. Aug. de bapt. contra Donat. lib. 2. cap. 1.
The Lord Iehova continue the Kings Majesty in his holy intention of
furthering and favoring the doctrine established, and bless and prosper the
Reverend Bishops and Clergy, to be watchful against the common adversary the
Papist; And to give the rest of the Kingdom sound resolution to join strongly
together to the discountenauncing of Antichrist and all his designs.

From Tydworth the 1. of November. 1607. Yours in all duty and reverence, John
Panke.

TO AL OBSTINATE AND STIFF Recusants held in wilful blindness, and to all
lukewarm indifferent Papists, not yet fully settled in their Recusancy; health
of body and soundness of judgment.
I That hitherto bin your courses (poor seduced Brethren) by the charge that
your Masters have laid on you, to refuse all manner of conference with us, or
to read any of our treatises or books, that do any way tend to the crossing of
your opinions; which purpose as it takes away all sound judgment which may
any way come unto you; so it has given me for my part a full and a resolute
determination never to believe, but that by that policy they only would uphold
the drift of their religion, and that they fear it would fall, if it should
come to trial. To meet with this mischief on your part, I have taken a labor
not usual, to win you if it be possible to reading; I have laid almost forty
of your own writers together, some our own countrymen here at home, others
the best of your side that ever wrote: The Catologue of their names and editions
of their books (that so you be not deceived) I have noted unto you in the next
pages following; I have compared them in three of the principal questions
between you and us. The sacrifice of your Mass; Real presence, or
transubstantiation, and Popes supremacy, and do protest I never did, nor yet do
think any man living is able to take those authors, and prove any of those
points by them, or can draw out a plain and simple form of speech how they
would be understood in any of those questions. I am not ignorant, neither do
I make your teachers so simple, but you and they can say, This they believe in
gross
1
you offer up the son of God to his father, and that is your Mass; 2
you have him really present, and so you eat him, and that is your sacrament.
And 3
that the Pope is Christ's Vicar, and that is your belief; All this I believe
you can say, but this is not that which you ought to seek at your teachers
hands; For come to explane, what agreement your Mass has with that which
Christ did at his last supper, the night before he suffered: And what that was,
which he did at his last supper, and what the morrow on the cross; And what
your Mass is to either, or both. When we ask discourse upon this, here they
stagger and turn like mad men, as though it did belong to them only to
affirm what they lusted, and yield no account of what they say; or indeed as
though they knew not what to say: Harding. What words are there, and what
terms, are not there? Stapleton. Not as upon the Cross, explane and prove.
How is it unbloody? The Rhemists say, that the same blood that Christ shed on
the Cross, is in the chalice, at Mass. Dureus says, the sacrifice of the
Mass, is not without blood in it; but is offered with out shedding of blood.
Co^t. Whit. rat. 4. fol 183. what should the blood do there if it be not shed?
How the Pope claims his supremacy, is doubted of amongst them.
Being demanded where be the words of scripture by which the Priest has power
to offer up Christ to God his father, they answer there be words that set
forth an obligation in act and deed, but no terms expressed, a solution to a
question, much like the direction give^ by a Miller to a passenger; who bid him
leave the bottom, and ride the lower way between the two hills. What
difference is there between word and terms? Can any man distinguish? The
Church offers a daily sacrifice, not as upon the cross, but the selfsame
thing that was offered on the cross. The thing offered is one self same
sacrifice; but in the manner of doing, because it is unbloody, it is in the
remembrance of it. A real presence, they and you are sure of; but what Christ
did at his last supper to force that real presence, none of you know. What he
took, what he blessed, what he brake, what he gave, whereof he spoke, when he
said, Take eat, this is my body, that you know not, nor are ever able with all
the wits you have to explane. In the Popes supremacy, you do the like; no man
amongst you whatsoever, is able to determine, whether he claim his
superiority and rule iure divino by Gods Law, yea or no; because some of you
say yea, and some no; or whether he may called universal bishop. Stapleton
denies it, Bellarmine allows it, which shall we believe? So that refusing
our books, if you will but read your own, you shall content me. Read them,
fifth them, compare them, if not with ours, yet one with an other, try whither I
be an Impostor or; if you find them constant, plain and sincere, follow the^
on Gods name, I will never persuade you otherwise; but if you perceive them
inconstant, intricate and dark, so that you understand not their meaning,
think they may deceive you, think that their words in conference are more
cunningly placed, then their arguments are in disputation, when they are driven
to prove; in the one they say to you, what they please; and in the other they
must prove what they can. I do freely protest unto you, I impute not this to
the disability of the men; if they had a right cause in hand, they could easily
make it good, but as Lactantius said of Tully, Lact. li. 2. c. 10
Haec non est Ciceronis culpa, sed secta, This is not Ciceroes fault, but the
sects whereof he was; so, that your Masters can bring their matters to no
better pass in discourse, is not their fault, but the fault of the cause they
have in hand; if it could be done they could do it: And the same Lactantius
notes of the Heathen, Lib. 2. c. 1.
although in the course of their lives they would never acknowledge the only
God, or the God of the Christians; But says he if any necessity urged them, if
any pestilence annoyed them, tunc deum recordantur, then they remember God ad
Deum confugiunt, they fly to God, a Deo petitur auxilium, they pray help at
Gods hand, Deus vt subve^iat oratur, thee desire that God would succor them;
so is it with our adversaries toward us, they believe us not in the matter of
the sacrament, they detest our supper, and the presence we make Christ to have.
Equidem statuere no^ possum dole^dum ne potius an ridendum pute^ cum vide^ and
graves and doctos, and vt sibi videntur, sapientes viros, in tam miserandis
errorum fluctibus volutari. Lact. lib. 1 c 18.
But come to discourse, press them hard with argument, hold the^ to it, they
fly their own very words, and use ours; ours I say wherewith we express our
minds, and cannot say any thing for themselves, if they borrow not our
language, as by the discourse following shall be seen. Pause upon this and
demand what they mean. I cannot determine, whether I should more pity them,
or laugh at them, when I see such zealous men in their cause as they seem to
be, so deeply plu^ged in such miserable quavemires; For never yet did I read
any of your books, but in on point or other, there was disagreement from others
of the same side, or the author contrary to himself, or adding or subtracting
from the text, which he meddled with; or in some answer or defense so gross
and childish, that a weak man might have overthrown him; Or absolutely when the
matter came to the vpshot, said noe other then that which we have said. I will
not be found in this impudently to belie any of your writers, with more then
is to be found in the very pages of their books, (as your men deal by us)
but what I lay upon the^, be ye sure there to find it. And although the whole
course of this book do go against you and your teachers in this kind, yet
will I give here a taste of their dealing before hand, which I purposly kept for
this place, because I would not heap up al I could say at once, but sparse
and let them fall here some and there some, the better to profit. B. Iuells
chaleng art. 2. Hard. against the Bishop art. 2. fol. 55. 56.
One of the Articles whereof Bishop Juell contended with D Harding was, that the
Holy Communion for the space of 600. years after Christ was never ministered
openly in the Church unto the people under one kind (which is bread, the cupp
being taken from them) In discussing of which point D Harding grants, that
it was ministered in both kinds at Corinth as appears by S Paul, and in
sundry other places (says he) as we find most evidently in the writings of
diverse ancient fathers, Stapleton confesses as much, Return of untruths art.
2. fol. 44. b.
that S Paul and the primitive Church used so to do, long and many years.
What is this but to grant the whole question, and so grow from that which they
took upon them to justify? For if S. Paul and the primitive Church used to
minister it in both kinds long and many years together; what is this but to
say as B. Iuell said; The communion better the^ the private Mass. Hard. art.
1. fol. 39. b
the communion was never ministered openly to the people in one kind, for the
space of 600. years after Christ? The like does D. Harding confess for the
private Mass, for which he disputes to justify the priests sole receiving,
Marie J deny not (says he) but that it were more commendable and more godly
on the Churches part, if many well disposed and examined would be partakers of
the blessed sacrament with the priest: but though the clergy be worthily
blamed for negligence herein, through which the people may be thought to have
grown to this slacknesse and indeuotion, yet notwithstanding this part of the
Catholic religion remains sound and faultlesse. Again, whether I can show,
that a mass was said without company present to receive with the Priest that
said it or no; what skilleth it? such particularities and specialties of a
matter of fact, were very seldom recorded by writers of the first 600.
years. The private mass is now become a matter of small weight, and yet you
say the people receive spiritually when they look on and receive nothing
Reioynder fol 210. This is more then a matter of small weight as you said even
now, by this the priests private mass makes the people have a true communion.
Hard. art 1 fol. 28. Dor. art. 4. fol. 97. Hard. cont. Iuell art. 1. fol. 34 b.
for a private mass. art. 2. fo 64. for an ha^ communion. Saund. de visib monar
l. 7. fol. 669. for the private mass and fol. 675. for an half communion.
Dureus resp. Whitak., rat. 6. fol. 301. Ex Eusebius. eccles. hist. lib. 6. c. 44;
in Greek 36. in Latin and 43. in English Eckius, enchir. loc. comm. c. 15
fol. 156.
If the Communion, that is a company receiueing together, be in that respect,
better then the private mass, (as M, Harding himself says) where the Priest
receaueth all, the people gazing on, and receaueing nothing, which is the point
which M Jewel blamed; and the private mass be but a matter of small weight,
and a fact, the Priests negligence causing the peoples slacknesse; For shame
leave of to write in defense of it, as also to make that a true Communion and
spiritual receiving, when the People stand by and receive nothing, as both D.
Harding and M. Dorma^ do. Corporally the Priest, spiritually the people, says
he; Then say I the people that receive spiritually receive the better; for to
receive the flesh and blood of Christ corporally they assign to the wicked and
reprobate, such as Judas, and spiritually they assign only to the elect and
godly. But how are both these articles of private mass, and half communion,
proved against B. Iuell and us, by one example; of what a silly boy did give to
a sick man at his house in a case of necessity; The boy, because the Priest
was sick, brought from him a little of the sacrament and gave it the old man?
Do not these men lack the practice of the Church for their warrant, that will
obtrude such examples? The story is to be read in Eusebius in Greek, Latin,
and English, and therefore there can be no mystery in it, except men desire to
be abused. What says Eckius touching prayer unto Saints departed, which
doctrine is of great moment in the church of Rome, Explicit non est praecepta
sanctorum invocatio in sacris literis? The invocation of Saints departed is not
expressed in the holy scriptures; This invocation of Saints cannot be proved
net her by the old Testament, nor by the new.
Not in the old Testament (says he) for the Jews were prone to Idololatry; and
under the Gospel, it was not commanded, least the Gentiles that were converted
and believed, should think, they should be brought again to the worship of
Earthly Gods. Further, (says he) if the Apostles and Evangelists had taught
the Saints had bin to have bin worshipped, it would have argued great arrogance
in the^, as if they had sought renown after death; therefore the Apostles would
not by the express scripture teach the calling upon Saints. Thus far Eckius.
Sessio. 25. de inuocat
The counsel of Trent does not found it in the scriptures, but brings it in
(by the window an other way) by custom and consent of Fathers; which they do
but pretend neither, because they would not let go al their hold at once.
Saunders reakoneth this amongst other things to be the words of God, De visib.
monarc. l. 1. fol 12 Hoker Ecclespoll 1. par. 13. The benefit of having divines
laws written
not his word written, but his word unwritten. If we in this age of the world
be to trust to an unwritten word, I demand to whom that was delivered to be
kept and preserved? In the first age of the world, as God gave Laws to our
Fathers without writing, so he gave them memories which served in steed of
books; the defects of that kind of teaching, being known unto him he relieved
it by often iterating of one thing, and by putting the^ in mind of onething
often. After this grew the use of writing as means more durable to preserve
the laws of God from oblivion and corruption, as the lives of men grew the more
to be shortened: therefore is Moses said to write all the words of God, and unto
the Evangelist S. John express Charge is given Scribe, Exodus 24 4. Apoc. 1.11.
and 14.13. Ioh. 20.30.31.
write these things. Again, Many other signs also did Jesus in the presence
of his disciples which are not written in this book; but these things are
written that ye might believe that Jesus is that Christ that Son of God. So
that if now after so much writing, and the ceasing of God to speak to the
world but by writing, we shall divert from his written word, to his unwritten,
it will be to turn the truth of God into a lie, and to follow fables in steed of
truth. If this part of the doctrine of the Church of Rome in praying to Saints
be without al warrant of holy scripture as Eckius and Saunders do allow; how
much to blame are they, Dureus Conf. Whi rat. 1. f. 44 Cope dial. 3. fol. 332.
to the same purpose.
who would draw a prescript and rule from Christ's own words on the cross,
when he cried Eli, Eli, My God my God, why have thou forsaken me; saying that
it was familiar to the faithful Jews to pray unto Saints: because they thought
that Christ had called on Elias? Is it not a miserable gloss, that eats out
the bowels of the text? If it were an usual thing with the Jews to pray unto
Saints: how said Eckius that the Jews had it not in use, because they were
prone to idololatry, and to whom should they pray? The fathers of the old
testament, (says he also) were in Limbo, in hell; The Jews that said Christ
called on Elias, did deride and mock him: and so do the Papists abuse us,
Matthew. 27.47.
that allege the holy scriptures to such purposes; But into how many shapes,
will they turn this one parcel of scripture and make it serve more ways tha^
one? Saunders alleges it for the service in an unknown tongue, because the
Jews seemed to mistake Christ. De visib. mon. l. 7. fo. 679. for the service in
an unknown tongue
How near that speech of Christ on the cross comes either in favor of
praying to Saints: or to the service in an unknown tongue, I will not stick
even now to make themselves judges. The Doctrine of pardons has brought no
small treasure to the church of Rome, and yet Alphonsus, Alphons. a Castro. l.
8. verb. indulg. Pardons have no ground either in antiquity or in the
scriptures. Polid. Virg. de invent. rerum li. 8. c. 1. f. 614.
revere^ceth it but for new; Against the error of denying pardons says he, I
will contend in few words, because amongst all the things whereof we dispute in
this work, there is none that the holy scriptures have less mentioned then
pardons, and whereof the ancient writers have less spoken. This report of
Alphonsus does Polidore Virgill confirm out of Fisher, who was bishop of
Rochester, in these words: No Divine does at al doubt (says he) whether there
be purgatory, but yet among the ancient fathers, there is no mention at al of
it, or very seldom, yea even the Greeks to this day believe it not, for so
long as there was no care for purgatory nemo quaesivit indulgentias, no man
sought after pardons, for upon that depends all the credit of Pardons. No
purgatory no pardons.
So may they both be left, as having no ground in the word of God. Here you
have an open and known confession of themselves, that for these maine points
of their religion, Private mass; half communion, prayers to Saints,
Purgatory, and pardons, that the holy scripture does not speak in favor of
them, Princip. doctr. 6. c. 7. and. 17. Noe succession in the Apostle ship.
no nor antiquity neither. Touching the Popes office, they are not yet
resolved what to think of it; First Stapleton tells us That the Pope
succeeds not S Peter in the Apostleship, of the Apostleship there is noe
succession: by an absolute denial. Bellarmine says succedit aliquo modo in
Apostolatu, De Romans Pont l. 2. c. 31. fo 324 After a sort. Rhem. Annot. Ephesians.
4. v. 11. ^s a very continual apostle shipp.
the Pope succeeds after a sort in the Apostleship, that is, in the care of
the whole world. After a sort says he. The Rhemistes conclude the affirmative,
without any qualification, That the Room and dignity of the Pope is a very
continual Apostleship, by an absolute concession. So what they cannot perfect
at once they will by degrees. It is not says Stapleton, it is after a sort
says Bellarmine, Alphons^ a castro. l. 1. fol. 17.6 The sea Apostolic comes
after general counsels.
nay it is indeed say the Rhemists. They stagger in more then this about his
holiness, even of what force and strength his determination is. Seeds
Apostolica, The Apostolic sea, because it represents the whole Church as
the head, holds the first place after general counsels, in defining matters
of faith, says Alphonsus; And I take not (says he) the Apostolic sea for
the Pope alone, seeing he may err in the faith, as did Liberius and
Anastasius, but by the sea Apostolic I understand the whole College of
Cardinals and other learned and approved men, De Romans pont l. 4 c. 1. fol. 470
if they may be had to aid and assist the sentence which is to be given.
Bellarmine shuts out counsel, De council. author. l. 2. c. 19. fol. 183.
and Cardinals, and all, and makes the sentence of general counsels of noe
force, except there be added to it, the allowance of the Pope as the last
vpshot; Nay he will not only make him above al counsels, and the whole Church,
but he will make him the whole Church too; for where we object by a clear
evidence drawn from a text of holy scripture, that the Church is the last
tribunal, whereat al men must stand on earth, Mat. 18.15. 1. reprove him 2.
take 1. or 2. 3. tell the Church
because Christ said to Peter Tell the Church, the occasion may allight on
the Pope as well as on any other, to refer sinners to the Church, and therefore
the Pope ought to acknowledge the Church to be greater then himself, he
answers that the Pope may in some sort perform that order of reproof;
First, says he the Pope ought to admonish him that offends priuatlie; next
if that serve not, to call witnesses, lastly, to tell it to the church that is,
to tell it to him self, Tell it to the Church that is, to himself The Pope is
^he Church. De visib. mon. l. 7. fol 394.
as to the president and Church over whom he is, that is to say, to
excommunicate him publicly. Did ever any man hear such base shifts?
Bellarmine flies the Church and retireth to the Pope, Saunders on the other
side being hard driven for Honorius the Pope, who being condemned for an
heretic, was so taken and reputed, refuses him and flies to the Church, for
although (says he) Honorius had fallen into heresy, Though Honorius fell into
heresy yet the Church of Rome did not Saunders ibid fol. 362. 364.
yet can it not be said the Church of Rome did err in the faith, who did not
only not decree any such thing, but also did always detest that heresy,
whereof Honorius was condemned; The like and more he says in defense of
Anastasius the 2 whom Gratian in the decrees does note for an heretic; For
having said that although Anastasius had consorted and communicated with
heretics, tamen ab omni haeresis crimine libera mansisset Romana Ecclesia,
yet had the Roman church remained safe without all fault of heresy, adds,
The Church of Rome may for some small time fale into heresy
That although the Church of Rome did, or should have for some small
time-fallen into heresy, yet had God (and so he did) show his wonderful
providence toward that sea, in respect that the Pope, who caused the error,
was therefore stricken from above, least by the sea of Peter the Catholic
church should be drawn into error, noe man following the Pope therein, because
he was smitte^ of God; nor must we, says he, respect what Bishops do, but
what they lawfully do, seeing Christ commanded his people to follow and obey
those things which they who sit in the Chair of Moses should command: By this
reason it will follow that the Pope sits not in the Chair of Moses The
Church of Rome can now save the Popes credit.
And that is understood to be lawfully don which is don (after the ancient
custom) according to the mind of a counsel. Seeing therefore the Church of Rome
decreed noe such thing under Anastasius, verily it is free every way from
heresy. If the Church of Rome, can now save the Popes credit, that free and he
faulty; how is his determination, the vpshot of al, and above al? How is he the
church it self? And how is nothing firm, without his ratification, as
Bellarmine striveth to prove? And which is most material, how does he
strengthen his brethren, if he may be an heretic and they free? So that in
these conclusions, Bellarmine neither stands with Alphonsus, Bellar. nether
stands with Alph^nsus nor Saunders, nor with himself. The sea of Rome
subject to a general counsel. Bell. de Romans pontif. l. 4. c. 4 fol. 486
nor with Saunders, as has bin showed, no nor with himself; For Alphonsus
subjected the sea of Rome, the church of Rome, consisting of the Pope, Clergy,
and other godly men there, unto a general counsel; Bellarmine prefers the
Popes voice or decree above all, yea makes him the church; yet other where, he
sets for the Church, not the Pope alone, but the Pope and the people; and
that when the ancient fathers and the Popes do say the Church of Rome cannot
err, that then they are to be understood that in the Church of Rome, there
shall always be a Catholic bishop teaching, and Catholic people hearing or
judging, in concluding both under the name of the Church of Rome; and so has
he slain himself with his own sword.

Bellarmines good will to the Pope.
Furthermore Bellarmine is so careful for the Pope, that though he hold opinion
touching a matter of faith; as other men do; if in examination, it happen to be
an error, yet shall it be none in the Pope, but must be one in all men else: For
trial of this let any man read the 1. and 2. chapt. de sanct. beat. where he
proves it an error upon whom soever shall think that the souls of the
blessed do not see God until the last day. Bellar. de Sanctor. beatit. l. 1
c. 1. and 2
This error is put upon John 22. Bellarmine confesses as much, Ioannem hunc
revera sensisse animas non visuras Deum, nisi post resurrectionem. That John
22. did verily believe, Bell. de Romans pont. l. 4. c. 14. fol, 549. etc. 12.
fol. 531. he saves Pope Nicholas by the like.
that the souls see not God until the last day; But this he thought (says he)
when he might so think without danger of heresy, nulla enim adhuc
praecesserat Ecclesiae definitio, for there had no determination of the church
gone before. Why? The determination of himself, is the determination of the
church, as well as you said before, his telling of a thing to himself, was the
telling of it to the church. And why excuses he the Pope, by the not
determination of the Church? When he tells us himself, De conc. auth l. 2.
c. 2: and 5.
That neither general counsels nor particular, (which otherwise are subject to
err) can err, if the Pope confirm them. And yet see the man, be tells us,
De Romans pont l. 4. c. 14, f. 551
that John need not to revoke the error cum in errorem nullum incidisset, for
he fell into no error. If he fell into no error neither did they fall into any
error, on who^ Bellarmine lays the same error, nor must he call it an error to
say, The souls of the righteous see not God until the last day, seeing he
himself says that John so held and yet held no error. From absurd and gross
co^clusions, they fall to flat blasphemies. Romans 6.23. Rhem annot. on that Text.
Blasphemies and Contradictio^s
The reward of sin is death, but everlasting life is the gift of God, says S.
Paul; the Rhemists say, in their annotations, that The sequel of the speech
required, that as he said deathor damnation is the stipend of sin; so life
everlasting is the stipend of justice, and so it is. What indignity is this to
the holy Ghost to cross him so manifestly? S. Paul makes opposition between
eternal life and eternal death, touching the cause of either. The proper
working cause of death is sin, so says the Apostie, The reward, wages, or
stipend of sin is death, but everlasting life is (what? the stipende of good
works as the Rhemists say? no: but) the free gift of God. The Apostle might as
easily have said so, as they if it had bin so. Annot, 2. Cor. 5. verse. 10. Will
Reinolds cont. Whi^k. fol. 105^
Why did S. Paul invert and turn the sentence, if, as the one had deserved
hell, so the other had deserved heaven, but only to exclude what the Rhemists
bring in? They iterate this in an other place, where they say Heaven is as well
the reward of good works, as hell is the stipend of ill works. This is also
seconded by one from Rhemes, who says that the Apostle Saint Paul lays in
indifferent balance good works and evil, and makes the one the cause of
heaven, as the other is the cause of hell. But if it be so, that good works be
the cause, purchase and merit of eternal life, (as these men tell us) as
truly as evil works are the purchase and merit of hell, what say they to
their own note, Rhem. Annot. Rom c 9. v. 11. and 16.
upon another text, where they tell us, that by the example of the two two
twinns Iacoh and Esaw, it is evident that nether nations nor particular persons
be elected eternally or called temporallie, or preferred to Gods favor
before other, by their own merits, but of the^ two, where justly he might
have reprobated both, he saved of mercy one? What is this? as S Paul said
before eternal life is the gift of God, excluding merits. Yet they stand not
alwaie to this last; For they say again. Man has free will to make himself
a vessel of salvation or damnation, Rhem. Annot 2. Tim. 2. v. 21.
though salvation be attributed to gods mercy principally, the other to his
just judgment. H^w has man free will to make himself a vessel of salvation or
damnation, when salvation is principally of Gods mercy, and the other of his
judgment? Why explain they not that dark speech, that we may understand
it? Interpres eget interpret, They need more Interpreters then the text. They
told us before, that Gods mere mercy is seen in the elect, and justice in
the reprobat; And that they that are saved, Annot. Rhem. Rom 9. v. 6.11 14.
and. 16.
must hold of gods eternal purpose, mercy and election; And this election and
mercy depends on his own purpose, will, and determination; and that all are
worthy of damnation, before they be first called to mercy. Make good this
doctrine which they have last set down, and agreed upon, and the former will
prove blasphemous, and deregatorie to the m^iestie of God. That good works are
the cause of beauen, as evil are the cause of hell. Or that man has free will
to make himself a vessel of salvation or damnation. I doubt not if the
Rhemists be followed, but that a man might take up more contradictions then
those before, which they have heaped amongst their notes in that testament. 2.
Tim 2.25. God gives repentance.
Where S. Paul writing to Tymothy wills him to instruct with meekness, those
that resist or vvithstand the truth, proving if at any time God will give them
repentance, that they may acknowledge the truth; they note; That conversion
from sin and heresy, is the gift of god, and of his special grace. Annot.
upon that place in the margent. page 589.
I might ask them first, how this agrees with their own note one the other
side of their own leaf, so often mentioned before; Man has free will to make
him self a vessel of salvation or damnation.

But I will leave that now, and demand of them how it agrees with this; The
grace of god woorketh not in man against his will, nor forces any thing
without his acceptance and consent, Annot. 2. cor. 6. v. 1. Annot. Ioh. 6. v.
44. Annot Luc. 14. v. 23. Conversion from sin. and heresy is the gift of God
For whosoever are lead by the spirit of God Rhem. Romans 8. v 14. in marg. He
means not that the children of god be violently compelled against their
wills, but that they be sweetly d^awn moved, or induced to do good ex Aug.
Ench c. 64. de verbis domin. Sermon. 43. c 7 and deverb. Apost ser. 13. c. 11,
1^. Acts ^.
and therefore it lies in a man's will to frustrate or to follow the motion of
god. And this, The father draws us, and teaches us to come to his son and
believe these high and hard mysteries, not compelling or violently forcing any
against their will or without any respect of their consent, but by the sweet
internal motions and persuasions of his grace and spirit he wholy makes us
of our own will and liking to consent to the same. And in another place most
plainly The vehement persuasion that god uses both externally by force of his
word and miracles, and internally by his grace, to bring us unto him is called
compelling, not that he forces any to come to him against their wills, but that
he can alter and mollify an hard heart, and make him willing that before would
not. How these notes agree, al men may see if conversion from sin and heresy,
be the gifts of God, and of his special grace, and that he wholly makes us
of our own will and liking to consent, and that he does alter and mollify an
hard heart and makes him willing that before would not. I would know what
free will man has to vvish his own conversion (which is a supernatural thing)
before Gods grace and illumination come. Can it concur with a thing which is
not? A will to wish our conversio^ is not there before grace come, nether heth
it in man to frustrate the grace of God, when he does effectually call us,
as appears by S Paul called in the Acts: Again if it he in man's power to
frustrate or follow the motion of God, how is conversion from sin and heresy
the gift of God, which they say also? So that as the two first notes, do
oppugn each other, so do the two last also, ioining fairly with the doctrine
of the Church of England in one maine point of controversy, which is Free
will. To say that God alters and mollifieth an hard heart and makes him
willing, that before would not, is to say, That God makes us then willing
being otherwise by nature unwilling, Perkins Treatise of man's freewill and Gods
free grace fol. 102. De gratia and lib. arbit. l. 6. c. 15. fol. 557.
and so he regenerateth us, not against our wills, but with our wills; yet so as
the willingness to be regenerate is not of us, but of God. If they will stand
to their own notes, they may subscribe to this of ours. Bellar mine will come
to us himself, rather the^ we shall be alone in this question of our
conversion and free will: Conuersio homines addeum, vt etiam quodlibet aliud
opus pium, quatenus opus, a libero arbitrio est tantu^, non tamen secluso
auxilio generali, quatenus pium a SOLA GRATIA est, quatenus opus pium, a libero
arbitreo est and gratia^. The conversion of man unto God (says he) as every
other godly work, so far forth as it is a work, is only of free will, not
excluding Gods general help; so far forth as it is Godly, it is ONLY of
Grace, and so far forth as it is a Godly work, The good that is in the
work is of grace.
it is of Free will and Grace together. For the efficient cause of every
action of man, as it is an action, is from the will of man; as it is free, it
is by the freedom of the will, as it is Godly, it is by the good seed and
sufficient help for that seed: Further, Grace only does make that the action
or deed of man be godly and supernatural; which nature with all his strength can
never reach unto; What is this, but our assertion, and the overthrow of
himself and his fellows in this question? We never denied a natural power in
man, simply to will this or that, but to will that is good, Petrus Baro super
Ionam. These. 1. fo. 326 ex Aug.
we hold it a work of grace only, as Bellarmine here confesses. Libere agere
est humanae naturae, and it a cum ratione coniunctum vt ab ea non separetur,
libere agendo malum eligere, est corruptae naturae; bonum vero eligere est
gratiae, says a great protestant out of S. Augustine, Freely to do a thing, is
of the natural power in man, and so joined to his reason, that it cannot be
separated from it, in this free choice to choose a thing that is naught, is the
corruptnesse of nature, but to choose the good is of grace. Bellarmine in one
place complains that Pighius, De great. and lib. arb. l. 1 c. 3. f. 50. See
the same in Rey. admonit* ad lecto. in li de Romans Eccle. Idolol. q. 3 In very
many things Bellarmine is a protestant, or at the least not a Papist, Doctor
Dove in his book of recusancy. De iustific l. 5. cap. 7 fol 424. It is the
safest way to trust to the alone mercy of God
otherwise a great Catholic, went away from that side in some questions,
because he addicted himself to read Calvin's works; and I doubt me when
Bellarmine shall be called hence, they will say of him, he was too nere a
protestant. For besides that before; in the great question of Merit, thus he
writes, Propter incertitud^e^ propriae iustitiae and periculum inauis gloriae,
tutissi mumest fiduciam totam in sola ^es miserisordia and benignitate
reponere. In respect (says he) of the incertainty of our own righteousness
and for fear of vain glory, It is the safest way, to place al our trust and
hope, in the alone goodness and mercy of God. He sees well the weakness of his
cause, for which he striveth; otherwise he would never have come to the truth
so freely, howsoever in the expounding of his meaning in those words (which are
plain enough and need no exposition) he would feign mar them againel; For he
would yet have us believe that our works are vera iustitia, very
righteousness, and that they can abide the judgment of God; and may be relied
upon; which, if it were so, where is the defect, which causes the^ to fly to
his alone mercy? God is not unjust, if their works will abide his trial, let
them claim their due of desert without mercy or favor. For to him that works
is the reward not reakoned of grace but of duty, says S. Paul. Romans 4.4. De
iustific. l. 5. c. 16. fol. 463. 2. Tim 4.8.
Again, discoursing against his ancient brother Durand touching that text of
S. Paul, which the just judge shall gine unto me at that day, he says, that to
speak absolutely man cannot exact or require any thing of God, since all that
we have is his gift, yet taking in (as it were) the will of God and his promise,
in that he will not exact our works of us for nothing, but vvil render a reward
according to the proportion of the works, we may exact a reward of him; and
therefore (says he) the works of the righteous, remoto pacto velpromissione,
Ibid. fol 465.
setting his covenant and promise aside, are not worthy of eternal life. Gods
mercy and promise is then his best stake, howsoever sometimes he would pull it
up. To make our works truly and properly meritorious, and fully worthy of
everlasting life, What they say of good works Rhem. 2. Tim. 4, v, 8. Ieam c. 2
v. 22. What they say of good works
and more principal causes in the matter of justification then faith, to make
them the cause of heaven, as ill deeds, are the cause of hell* To say that we
may trust unto them, that they are true righteousness, and that they are able
to abide the judgment of God: And yet to say, that it is of his free mercy and
liberality, that either he promised any such reward to our works, and that the
works of themselves are his and none of ours, and that when he crowns our
works, he crowns his own gifts, and that he rewards them above our desert,
and all this in respect of his free promise and grant; are the words of men
that are disposed to play their parts on a stage, and when they are out of
their parts to imagine some God to come down amongst them to keep their credit
with the people; for their tenor and brief of all their talk is, we have
truly and properly deserved heaven, because of his free bounty and mercy he
first promised and then gave it us. Stapleton after much debating of this
question, De vniuets* iustif. doct lib. 10 c. 7. fol. 361. God is to himself
not not to us.
comes in the end to this. That debtor whenever we do read in the ancient
fathers that god is debtor unto us, in the great gift of eternal life, It must
be understood as debtor to himself, and in respect of his own promises, and
that he is not debtor unto us; to himself, not to us, for his own promises,
not for the worthiness of us or our woorks: If this suffice them we will stand
to it, God is just (sai^ we) in that he keeps promise and does not deceive
his of that reward, Whitak. cont. Gul. Reynold. fol. 58.
which they hope for, but the promise is free, for freely he promised, and
freely he gives, yet in that he bound himself unto us by his free promise,
it was just that he should perform the same not that we have justly and
worthily deserved any part of that reward, but because it is meet that God be
always faithful in his words: And so make him, if debtor to any, the^ to
himself, as Stapleton speaks: The Crown is the reward which God has
promised to the work, not because the work is vvorthie of it, but because it
pleased him so graciously and liberaly to bestow such excellent rewards upon
us, that have deserved so little; and so keep in with the promise and covenant,
and exact nothing of him because al are his, as Bellarmine a voucheth. Cui
redderet coronam iustus iudex, si no^ donasset gratia^ misericors pater? and
quomodo eslet ista corona iustitiae, nisi pra cessisset gratia quae iustificat
impium? Augde gra and lib. arb. c. 6. ^nnot 2. Tim. 4. v. 8.
And when he crowns us he crowns his own gifts, not our works, giving
before what he repaieth after. For how should he repay as a just judge,
unless he had first given as a merciful father? and how should this be a
crown of justice, if grace had not gone before, which justifies the ungodly
man as say the Rhemists?

Of these notes, and the rest in this whole book following I would have you
that are seduced to demand of your teachers what they think, praying them to
reveiwe and reexamine them: and for your parts to mark how they answer and
defend their opinions, but see with your own eyes trust not theirs Think that
the very debating of these questions (which they cannot choose but handle)
has drawn such confessio^s from them; settle your selves but once to compare
their reasons, First with the holy scripture, then with the ancient fathers of
the primitive time, and lastly by the protestant writers of this age in the
Church of England, and then judge where the truth is, you will then sone
perceive (I will speak of one for all) that noe man can more fully contradict
Bellarmine, then Bellarmine does himself, Nec enim poterit, ab vilo Cicero
quam. Cicerohe vehemen ius resutari. l 2. c. 9. fol. 148 Cicer pro domo sua
post medium. Staplet in the fortress. f. 5. b
as Lactantius said of Tully. If he or any of them, or al of them be grown
in your opinious great, it is but the elements of your sloth that will not give
you leave to look on him. Calamitas huius temporiss lan them viri propagauit.
The misery of this time wherein pusillanimity so much reigns in your minds,
has gotten him the praise he has, and not the cause he handles; for look
into that, and you will be ashamed both of it and him. We all iumpe in this.
As noe building stands without a sure and substantial foundation; so noe life
no salvation is to be hoped for without a right and true faith.

Let us therefore look whom we trust and what we believe Sireligio tollitur,
vulla nobis, ratio cum coelo est. Lactant l* 3* (...) 10. away religion fol.
224.
Take and we have noe society with heaven: Non hic nobis labor Invtilis ad
pernitiem, sed vtili ad salutem. Aug ep. 111. The Jews could tell that the
golden calfe which they worshipped was not God, yet were they idolaters and the
heathen did not think did not think that those things which they made with
their hands to be Gods etc. and yet were they gross Idolaters A quibus si
persuasionis eius rationem requiras nuilam possint reddere, sed ad maio rum
iudicia co^fugiant, quod alli sapientes fuerint, illi pro bauerint, illi
scierint quid esset optimum, seque ipsos se^sibus spoliant, ratione abdicant,
dum alienis erroribus jeredunt. Lact* 5. c. 20.
the labor thereof is not unprofitable leading us to destruction, but
profitable bringing to salvation. Believe not them that would draw you from
knowledge. Know that they abuse you, that say the scriptures are not for you
to read, and al to keep you in ignorance, because you shall not see what they
say or do. Take you heed of them that teach you worshipping of Images; praying
to Saints; that plead their pardons and their purgatory, noe one syllable in
Gods book sounding any way to either of them. I know they have excuses,
that you do it not to the image, but to the thing represented; which excuse
besides that it is the same that the Jews, and all Idolaters that were
heathen could make for themselves, it is a monstrous untruth in it self. They
know there be amongst them who have written in defense of the worshipping of
the imag of the Cross and trinity, even with the same worship that the
trinity should be worshipped with. The learned amongst them know, that this
which I say is true. Leave I beseech you your old and vvorneout excuses,
which hitherto some of you have bin accustomed to make in defense of the
religion, you are in liking with, which are so did we learn, so did, our
ancients teach, they were wise enough, they knew what they did and what was
best, and so spoil your selves of judgment, and banish reason only to rest on
other men's errors.

But if you will needs go to Fathers and ancients, go to the^ of 1500. 1400.
1300. 1200. 1000. years since, and not to the^ which lived in the Tyranny of
ignorance, for 400. 300. or 200. years ago, when Satan had covered the
greatest Monarkies in darkness, and ignorance, some few sparkles here and there
arising, being with the fogge and mist that then spread it self, soon put
out. Policy is the best point that their religion ever thriued by. That this is
true, I will lay a brief of the method which your masters use, (and you know is
true) in propagating their religion. First they take away al use of reading the
holy scriptures from the Laity whom they teach and instruct. Next they bar
them from al conference or society with any of whom they might learn to
understand what they are taught, whether agreeable to Gods word or not. 2
They take from them all the Protestants books, 3
and damn them to the pit of hell, not suffering them to read one of them. I
demand how far either a Turk or Jew, or any other miscreant might prevail
against any poor seduced soul that is in their custody, if they take them
time enough, with these means. Those they use touching the Ignorant, for
their scholars they have other. First they shall have the ancient Fathers and
Doctors, as they will please to deliver them, 4
by written notes of their own gathering; 5
if they chance to admit them to the prints, they shall then have such prints,
as they have newly set for the purpose; the ancient copies being altered. Then
they have a devise to show them counterfeit writings of the Fathers and
Doctors, such as they never wrote, instead of true; and therefore learned and
unlearned, 6
scholar or not scholar had need take heed to them in that. And when they are
hardly pursued, out comes the Index expurgatorius, in manner of a note book,
to tell the younger sort, when and wherein they shall refuse any author that
makes against the doctrine of the church of Rome: 7
And add unto this practice such an opinion as this, This is related more at
larg in the book it self where special mention is made of it.
The Church of Rome cannot err whatsoever it decree: and the Pope of Rome is
not to be accused whatsoever be does. And thus they seduce both one sort and
other. If ever there were slavery or tyranny this is it, the captivity of the
soul being ten thousand times more great and more grievous than that of the
body. God has called you unto liberty, not to be servants of sin; 8
but to serve erroneous opinions is worse than to bear tyrannous exactions. 9
Take from them these weapons, where with they chiefly fight, Gal. 5. 1.
Co^inth. 7. Judge. 15.
and you shall have them as Sampson without his hair, you may take them and
chain them where you list. Pardon me I desire you, if I be large, the
earnestness of my mind toward you has caused it, because I see the ways
that deceive you; where the apprehension of the mind is great, words to open
it will be many; vincil officium linguae sceleris magnitude. Their practices
against the truth, pass the quickness of my pen to describe, and therefore
every warning should work some wariness.

Touching my person, it skilleth not in this who I am, I hope you will consider
what is spoken, Hoker pref. to his 5. book of Eccles polic. Quaeso a vobis vt
eadem oration aequa, aeque vale at. I'anormitanus Laur. Humfr. cont Camp. ratio.
p. 2. fol. 381 and 456. spiritus sanctus non alligatur ordini vel gradui vel
^athredae etc. Quare nec ex munero homi number, nec ex personarum celsitate, fed
ex causae veritate omnia sunt aestima^da. Act. 20 The chief that have written
in the controuer sies, a little before Queen Elis, reign, and ever since.
and not who it is that speaks, but let the same reason prevail, whether
from a young man or an old, whether from a clerk or a lay man. There was a
great man of your Church, that once said, There was more heed to be given to a
lay man bringing scripture, than to the Pope and general counsel; And as
great a man amongst us has said, The holy Ghost is not tied to any Order,
degree or chair, but blows where he will, neither as S. Jerome says, we
must not judge as Pithogoras scholars according to what the teacher shall say,
but the strength of that which is taught (by whomsoever) must be waighed. If
the truth in these cases had bin to be sought for at the hands of any sort of
me^, Popes, or Cardinals, or touching the place, Rome, Paris, or Rhemes, or any
other seat, I am well assured S. Paul when he took his leave from those of
Ephesus, would not have omitted to have named any man or place to have resorted
unto, he only said thus. Now brethren I commend you to God, and unto the word
of his grace, which is able to build further, and to give you an inheritance
amongst all them that are sanctified. To draw to an end. Because you shall as
plainly see that I can direct you where you shall find the true religion taught
and mainetained according to the holy scriptures of God, as well as I have noted
unto you the false boulstred out, take into your hands those two treatises of
D. Cranmers of the Sacrament, Bishop Hoopers, and Bishop Ridlies of the same
argument. Bishop Iuels Reply, and defense of the Apology against Harding. D.
Nowell against Dorman. D. Fulkes answer to the Rhemists testament. D. Humphrey
against Campian. D. Whitakers against Campian and Dureus. Willets Synopsis, and
Tetrastilon, D. Reinolds confetence with Heart, and against Bellarmine, and
defense of his theses. D. Sutcline against Bellarmine often; My Lord of
Winchesters Dialogues against the Jesuits. D. Abbot against Hill, or any other
treatises of these against your side, you shall see the truth of Gods holy word
in several parts discussed in so wonderful an harmony, that though some of
them live now, and some be gone, they speak al one language, they all pronounce
Shibboleth plainly, Iud. 12.6.
it being but one truth which they speak. In their volumes and writings be
many and insinite quotations, both of scriptures, fathers, Doctors, Councels,
histories, laws, decrees, both Greek and Latin: pervse them, view them,
single them out in the questions they treat of (and they treat of al between
the church of Rome, and the church of England) in the Mass, sacrifice, real
presence, service in a strange tongue, half communion, Popes supremacy,
worshipping of Images, or in any difference else, and show me any apparent
abuse of holy scripture or history, contradiction each from other, shift,
color or devise, to darken the truth in any of those points, let it be in the
least nature, as those that I have already, and will further show in the book
following, and I protest before God I will fully give over either to write or
speak any thing against you, Osey. c. 8. 1. Cor. 14.20. Da domine, vt te quem
been credendo con fiteor male viuendo no^ denegem, and te quem strenua fide
sequor, ac tu negligentiae operibus non offendam. Aug. Epist. 111.
but will wholly apprehend your religion, as consonant to the truth. They that
sow wind shall reap a storm. Brethren be not children in understanding, but
as concerning maliciousnes be children, but in understanding be men of a ripe
age. I beseech almightle God to make us as wise as Serpents in providing the
food of everlasting life to nourish our souls, and as innocent as doves in
doing ill, that the corruptions of our lives do not taint it.

From Tidworth. the 1. of November. 1607. John Panke.

THE NAMES OF THE POPISH Writers, out of which this book has been gathered.
1 The third part of Thomas Aquinas sums, with Caietans tracts annexed.
printed at Lions. 1588. 2 The Sentences of Lumbard. at Lions. 1593. 3 The Trent
counsel. at Antwerpe. 1596, 4 The Roman Catechism, set out by the decree of
the Tridentine counsel. 1596. at Antwerpe. 5 The Index Expurgatorius, by the
decree of the Tride^tine counsel. at Lions 1586. 6 The English Testament, set
out by the College at Rhemes. anno. 1582. 7 Copes Dialogues, at Antwerpe.
1566. 8 Gregory Martin, against our authorized translatio^s at Rhemes. 1582. 9
D. Allen of the sacraments. at Antwerpe. 1576. 10 Stapleton of Justification
against the protestants. at Paris 1582. 11 Saunders visible monarchy at
VVirceburge. 1592. 12 Albertus Pyghius, of eccle siasticall government for the
Popes Monarchy. at Colen. 1572. 13 Alphonsus a Castro against heresies. 1534.
14 Tonstall b. of Durisme, of the truth of the body and blood of Christ in the
Eucharist. at Paris. 1554. 15 Melchior Canus, his divinity places. at Colen.
1585. 16 Hieronymus Torrensis* gathered S. Aug. Confessions. at Paris, 1580. 17
Andradius defense of the Tridentine counsel. at Colen. 1580. 18 Another of
Andradius in defener of the divines of Colen against Kemnitius. at Colen. 1564.
19 Lodovicus Granatensis of a public Communion at Colen. 1586. 20 Eckius
Enchiridion of common places at Colen. 1600. 21 Genebrards Chronicles. at
Colen. 1581. 22 Fasciculus Temporum. 23 Polidorus virgilius, of the first
finders out of things at Franckford. 1599. 24 Abdtas, Bishop of Babylon
writing the lives of the Apostles, at Colen. 1576. 25 The third tome of the
Homeles of the ancient fathers, set out by the decree of the Tre^t counsel, at
Lions 1588 26 D. Hardings answer to B. Iuell challenge. at Antverpe* 1565. 27
D. Hardings Reioynder to B. Jewels Reply. 28 Dormans proof of certain
articles denied by Mr. Jewel, at Antwerpe, 1564. 29 The return of untruths
by Stapleton against B. Iuells reply. at Antwerpe. 1566, 30 A Catechism by
Laurence Vaux Bachelour of divinity. an. 1583. 31 William Reynolds, against
D. Whitaker, called a refutation of sundry reprehensions, written at Rhemes,
and printed at Paris. 1583. 32 Stephen Gardener against B. Cranmer touching the
sacrament, called an explication and assertion of the true Catholic faith*
etc. 33 Another of his called a detection of the devils sophistry anno. 1546.
34 The fortress of the faith by Stapleton, annexed to Bedes history in
english. 35 John Dureus, his confutation of D. VVhitakers answer in the
behalf of Campian. Paris. 1582. 36 The disputations of Bellarmine against the
Protestants in general, in 9. volumes reveiwed and acknowledged by the author.
at Ingolst adium by Adame Sartorius. anno 1599. 37 Moditations, on the my
steries of the Rosary, of the most blessed Virgin Marie. translated into
english. 38 A popish supplication to the Kings Majesty. 1604. 39 Guicciardines
history in english by G. Fenton. 40 A table in writing hand, of a Catalogue of
the Popes from Saint Peter hitherto, 41 The firm foundation of Catholic
religion, translated by Pansfoote, and approved by Stapleton. Antwerpe 1590. 42
Platina, with Onuphrius annotations, on the lives of the Popes. at Louaine
anno. 1572. 43 Anastasius, the Popes library keeper, of the lives of the
Popes. at Magunce. anno. 1602.
The Speakers Tuberius the Gent. Romannus the Scholar

YOU know Romannus, if so you remember, that through a mere accident, or
rather a determination of God about Easter was 12. months, you and I did meet;
when after some words of controversy, we fell into a discourse touching my
being abroad at that festiual time, which occasioned some further matter
touching a scruple in my mind then uttered unto you, my not receiving of the
Communion, neither then, nor at any time before.


Romans Indeed Tuberius, I remember it well, as also the sum of our talk at
that time delivered; I hope I satisfied you in that point, how necessary to
salvation it is for every Christian man to participate of the flesh and blood
of Christ in the sacrament of the supper, so that for that matter, I hope you
need no farther lessons.


Tub. For the necessity thereof I am resolved; but yet by the settling thereof,
there is an orher question annexed to it, which I am afraid wilbee noe less a
maine bar unto my conscience, for not receiving now, as that other was before
of doubt, whether I might receive at all or not; the former of the thing, this
other of the belief of the thing! For not to hide from you any thing, which
may breed my disquiet, but to acquaint you therewith, since my last being with
you, I did light into other company, where talking of questions of salvation,
I related unto them so much of our conference, as touched the maine point of
necessity of receiving that sacrament, and was told by them, that I did very
well in apprehending so hie a point in the worship and service of God; But when
Irelated, what manner of man you were, in laying open unto me, what a sacrament
was, of the dignity and worth of that sacrament, and less that I had, the
while that I abstained, and other instructions thereto belonging, as at the
latter end you did, they perceived what you were, and were noe less angry
with me for attending you therein, then offended with you for instructing me
that way. They called themselves Catholics, of others they are usually styled
Papists, but whatsoever they be in name, me thinks their care over me is very
good, that I should enter the right way touching my be, leife in that
sacrament.


Romans Why? what perceived they by my words of that sacrament?


Tub. They take you to hold not Catholiklie of it, neither as our Lord and
savior jesus Christ did first institute it, nor as the ancient times of 1500:
years, by Fathers, counsels, and Doctors did; and therefore they wished me to
make a stand, and pause, before I joined with you therein; For you teach, that
they who receive it at your hands receive only a piece of bread, One of
Hardings slanders
and a draught of wine, not worth any thing and so call it a sacrament of the
Lords institution, whereas he gave his body, his real substantial body, and
so his disciples did eat him reallie, and substantiallie, and drank his very
blood, and to believe this is healthful, holy, and religious, and they that
receive it so, receive it, as Christ instituted it, and they who do otherwise,
Rhem. I. Cor. 11. fol. 453. in fine paginae. Magnus nuga tor magno co natu
magnas nobis nugas parit.
receive noe sacrament, but profane bread, as they called it; This they did
say of you then, touching the difference between them and you in that
question; and that in all other things, al antiquity and consent of al ages
were for them and nothing for you.


Rom: I doubt not, but they are very bitterly eloque^t against us, when
opportunity is offered of a fit audience, their tongues and pens are
miserably valiant. But me thinks Tuberius, you are remember, that both
Christ himself, al ages, and all Doctors and counsels do make for them
against us; ordinary ability cannot comprehend this in so short time; much
like unto a silly gentlewoman with whom of late I talked also, who being not
above one quarter of a year from her friends returned home, with arguments as
strong as yours in defense of her new obtained religion, she could talk what
a good book the Rhemists bible was, she could say the Scriptures were written
in Greek and Latin, For the Rhemists testament For Hebrew and Greek. I say
not that they did teach her so simply, but simply she remembered what they said.
Laur. Vaux bachelot of divinity, in his catechism. ca. 3. takes away the 2
comma^deme^t of graven images, and insted of that teaches them Greek Written
in latin by Gasper Loarte, doctor of divinity and translate dinto english fol.
76. would have us believe contrary to that which the gospel expresses.
and therefore people should pray in latin; naie she could distinguish between
an Idol and an Image, observing that the second commandment, was only
directed against Graven Idols, as she termed them and not against Graven
Images. And yet nether before she went, nor now can she read english; to such
a method was she brought to too quickly, to know what she said. I doubt not
but she had bin so instructed, but not by M. Vaux, for he to make sure work,
has taken that commandment wholly out of his catechism (as removing a block
as belike stands not in their way, which noe wise man will ever bestow any
labor about) recompencing his brevity in that point, in telling the use of
certain Greek words, Latria, Hyperdulia and Dulia: where a learner is taught
to worshipp any creature in heaven or earth, and commit (as he thinks) noe I
dolatry but noe otherwise then if a grand theife should teach a puny to steal
by precept, and when he had committed the fact (that is, had stolen in deed)
say it were not the deed, and so leave him to the gallows. Or if it had bin
her luck to have bin schooled by him that composed the instructions and
advertisements how to meditate the mysteries of the Rosary, he would have
taught her a more compendious way to have defended it by, or any other point,
then by a distinction, which is, although the commandment forbid us the
worshipping of any Image, yet well for our parts may believe and do
otherwise. For so he says plainly in an other question, though not of that
weight, yet of that clearnes, where speaking al in honor of our blessed Virgin
Mary, does not stick to sale, that our Lord and redeemer did presently after
he was risen up visit his most holy mother, whom we may well believe to
have bin the first, albeit in the Gospel, there be noe mention made thereof;
For, says he, if (as the Evangelist reports) our Lord did, Luc. 24.
after he was risen up appear to S. Peter that had erst denied him, why
should not we believe that he appeared first to his blessed mother that never
denied him? Here is a plain lesson, a grant that the Scripture teaches so
and so, and yet we may believe otherwise. Thus as their affections lead
them, either to the things or persons whereof they speak, so do they in their
conceits bend the course of their arguments; Other amongst them, ad those of
the greatest do refer this appearing of our Lord to Saint Peter, De romans
pont. lib. 1. c. 20. fine. for S. Peter, above all the disciples.
reckoning it amongst his prerogatives, as Bellarmine, who affirms that
Christ rising, appeared to S. Peter first of al his disciples, confirming it by
S. Lukes Gospel, and the witness of S Ambrose, who says that of the men
Christ appeared to Peter, for before (says he) Christ had appeared to Mary
Magdalene, and that he further confirms out of S. Paul, how that Christ
rising the third day, was seen of Cephas and then of the Eleven, 1. Cor. 15.
Abdias Apost. hist. l. 6. fol. 188. Hard. cont. Iuell art. 1. fo 25. Ei primum
omnium. vt and Mariae Magdalenae and Petro apparere voluit. Reyn. confer. with
Heart c. 8. diu. 2. Sutc. cont. Bell. de romans pont. l. 2. c. 6. Rhem. Marc. 16.
v. 1. Mat. c. 28.1.
afterward of more then 500. brethren, and after to S James. On the other side
Abdias (described to be an ancient writer, first Bishop of Babylon, who was the
Apostles scholar, and saw our savior in flesh, and was present at the passion
and martyrdom of S. Andrewe, and S. Mathewe) speaking in the honor of S.
James, does say that our Lord would appear to him first of all, as he did to
Mary Magdalene, and to Peter; which indignity of these men against the
Gospel, and graclesse exposing it unto the world as virtue, is not only taxed
by our learned writers, as being dealt injuriously withal, but their own
Rhemists both confess according to the truth of the text, that Christ appeared
to Mary Magdalene and Mary of James and Salome, called by S. Matthew the other
Mary, and acknowledge it by their note, That she first before al other and they
next, saw him after his resurrection. But the Rhemists seeing the Scripture
has given this prerogative of appearing from Peter to the women, will stretch
hard, but even touching that, some what in it, shall be his prerogative; for
when the weomen are bidden to telis to the Disciples and to Peter they say
Peter is named in special (as often elsewhere) for prerogative. It is said of
Midas, that he wished every thing he did touch, might be gold, I think they
are as so many Midasses, every thing they deal in makes for Peter's
prerogative; a simple prerogative I think it is for him to be named after all
the Disciples.


Tub. Here be shrewd accusations indeed, they accuse you, and you accuse them,
on whom shall I and such other that stand in doubt between you, rely? They are
very famous for their learning and pains taken in defense and justification of
their cause, their volumes and books are many, and it may be your replies and
answers are as large, but here is the doubt who says true.


Romans Iuell to the reader in the def. of the Apology
Indeed it cannot choose but pity every good man in behalf of his unlearned
brother, to see his conscience thus assalted this day, with so contrary
doctrines of religion, especially when there is a zeal to follow, and men
know not what, and would feign please God, and cannot tell how, or if they
find not themselves armed with Gods holy spirit, not are able to discern
their meat from poison, nor to wind themselves out of the snares, for Satan
transformeth himself into an Angel of light; 2. Cor. 11.
the wicked are more watchful and vehement then the Godly, and falsehood is
oftentimes pointed and beautified, and shines more glorious then the truth.
These be the things which as S. Paul says works the subversion of the
hearers, and by mean whereof, 2. Tim. 2. Mat, 24
as Christ says if it were possible, the very elect of God should be
deceived. Notwithstanding, God in these days has so amazed the adversaries of
his Gospel, and has caused them so openly and so grossly, to lay abroad their
follies to the sight and face of all the world, that noe man now be he never
so ignorant, can think he may be justly excused; it is but toll, lego. take
up and read, read and understand by Gods assistance. But the indiscretion of
many in the world that do stand doubtful of the truth between them and us,
is equivalent and semblable to that answer which I once hard a Master give to
on that had bin his Factor, (or rather indeed his fractor) in a case not unlike
to this, about some difference between them of accou^ts, the Factor pleaded his
innocence and truth, by the plainness of his proceedings, in delivering his
bills and reckonings to his Master from time to time to be examined; his M.
replied, you have so done indeed, but you know that I neither did nor would
look on them, It is noe baseness for the greatest to de scend and look into
their own estate. Bacon sE. of expe^ce.
nor examine the^, I found by that answer, that the reason why the Master
would not nor had any liking to veiw them, was, because he would have
liberty at any time as occasion served to say he could not tell whether his
man deceived him or not. Whereas if he had but taken the pains to have
examined his man's dealings, he might have bin assured, to have found how he
had behaved himself toward him, whether true or false: so fares it in these
days with us, painful works there are enough, some of great volume, some
slighter, al concerning the truth of our cause, which all men may see and
read, but that which galeth us, and most tieth our adversaries to themselves
and their errors is, that they who condemn us, know us not, whether we be
white or black they never observe, Albi an atri simus, nesciunt.
who say we are heretics and dispisers of the Church, and yet never read what
we hold, nor examine us in any thing that we do, as publicly complains a
great scholar of our side, D. Dove of Recusancy. c. 2,
and I my self have often had experience. And therefore in few words between them
and us, I can say as the ancient father Arnobius said against the Gentiles;
when they accused the christians of those things, whereof themselves were
guilty; even in the very entrance of his conference he testifies roundly to
the world, Arnob. contra Gentes lib. 1. in princip.
in these words Efficietur enim profecto rationum consequentium copulatu, vt
non impij nos magis, sed illi ipsi reperiantur criminis estius rei, qui
renuminum profitentur esse cultores atque inveteratis religionibus deditos. It
shall be proved (says he) by the ioining of our reasons to gether, that we are
not so wicked, as they lay to our charge, but that themselves are found
guilty of that whereof they accuse us, who do profess themselves worship pers
of the Gods, and only retainers of the ancient religions. But if you or any
other will be amated with any stream of words to believe that part, without
looking into the matter, reasons proofs, drifts and arguments of al sides,
whereby you may rightly judge indeed, the same Father tells you again Quid
est enim quod humana ingenia tabefactare studio contradictionis non audeant?
Arnob. Ibid. l. ^ fol. 102.
what is it says he that the wits of some me^ dare not ruinate with the
study of co^tradictio^? yea although that which they study to overthrow, be
pure and clear and hedged with truth on every side, and who cannot (says he)
dispute with arguments of great liklihood, yea although he defend a manifest
untruth and lie? The root of this error and vain consequence he touches in
the next words following Cum enim sibipersuaserit quis esse quid aut non esse,
amat quod opinatur asserere. When a man has perswaided himself, that any
thing is so, or not so, he then loves what he apprehends, and desires to
excel others in sharpness of wit, especialliy if the matter which is dealt in
be remote, hid, or dark. But God be thanked those learned divines and reverend
prelates before mentioned, and a number other in this age, with their infinite
toil and pain have threshed and winnowed for us the doctrine and differences
of the Church of Rome, and this of England, they have performed the first part
of the Apostles speech which wills to try all things, 1 Thessalonians. 5.^1.
the latter part rests upon us to follow, that that which is good be kept;
nether can there be a keeping of that which is good, without a trial of all
things do go before; so that I dare pronounce there is none who may not if
he will, see on which side the truth is, Epist. 105. M.
and to this purpose I do remember a sentence of the Godly and learned father
S. Augustine, which is Ignorantia in cis qui intelligere noluernut, sine
dubitatione peccatum est. Ignorance in them which are notwillng to learn,
without doubt it is sin, in them which cannot learn, a punishment of sin; in
both there is noe just excuse, but just damnation.


Tub. It sinketh not into my head, that men otherwise learned and very
religious, should so wilfully hood wincke themselves against the truth; as in
this last declaration it seems you mean they do; for besides their own
words (and few of their books have I yet seen) in justification of
themselves; I see a famous Catholic Church of theires I mean Rome, who has
bin and yet is renowned for succession of Bishops, This has bin and yet is,
makes all the error. Julius Caesar was once faithful to the Romans: but
affecting Soue ranitie he continued not so: so the Church of Rome was agreat
church amongst the rest: But now it bears witness of it self, as Simon Magus
said That he was some great man Act 8.9. Their usual tables in writing which
they give to their friends containing a Catalogue of the Bish. of Rome.
and continuance of Apostolic doctrine, whose governor and head is the Pope,
who keeps it in the same integrity, and soundness of doctrine, that S.
Peter our Lords chief Apostle whose successor he is, did, when he sat,
and ruled there as he does now. I tell you I have a table of the Bishops of
Rome from S. Peter to Climens the eight, who latly deceased as the speech was.
You cannot show me the like of any Church in the world, but of that. Al
churches save a few of late yeeares, have ever acknowledged that Church for
the mother and head of them al, and whatsoever was amiss was thither referred
and determined, and therefore if you will oppose your self against them or
their religion, you had need bring sound arguments, or else they wilbee
quickly confuted.


Romans See now, you require that of me already, which you cannot perform your
self. To enterinto the discussing of the points of doctrine which concern
either side, you have nether ability nor judgment, by reason you are but newly
begun to be tutered by them; And then if I should of my self discourse of
them unto you, you would in the end say of my labor therein, as a merry
fellow in Wilteshire said of an hare in a course with his dog: when my dog
was let slip at the hare (quoth he) she went forth right, and was before my
dog some four acres breadth; But my dog fetched her and gave her a turn,
and away she goes again, and then he gave her another, and did beat her, so
that she had many turns and wrenches; but in the end (quoth he) the hare went
away, and had nether turn nor wrench: so if I should show unto you the
vnsou^dnes of the doctrine of the church of Rome from scriptures, Fathers,
Counsels, and Doctors, yea and of the intrusions of Bishops into that sea,
which you (from them) call succession, you would give me the hearing, and how
soever I did beat the hare, in giving her many wrentches and turns, yet you
would say she went from me in the end, and had nether turn nor wrentch. I am
not ignorant in what painted Ciphers, In the 1. petition to his Majesty Add
fidem dictis. Ovid. Medea. Ias
the Catholics did of late a greable to your report of them, set forth their
religion, calling it venerable for antiquity, maiesticall for amplitude,
constant for continuance, irreprehensible for doctrine; inducing to all kind of
virtue and piety, dissuading from all sin and wickedness; A religion beloved
by all pri^tiue Pastors, established by all Oecumenicall counsels, vpheld by all ancio^ doctors, maintained by the first and most Christian Emperors,
recorded almost alone in all Ecclesiastical histories, sealed with the blood
of millions of Martyrs, adorned with the virtues of so many confessors,
beautified with the paritie of thousands of Virgins so conformable to natural
sense and reason, and finally so agreeable to be sacred text of Gods word and
Gospel. Of which speech of theirs I will say noe otherwise now, Cor. Tac.
hist. l. 2. c. 27.
then Tacitus does of Vitellius the Emperor of Rome in these words. The day
following (says he) as though he had spoken, before the Senate and people of a
strange City, he made a glorious speech of himself, extolling his own
industriousnesse and temperancie; when as they which hard him, of their own
knowledge, were witnesses of his lewd actions, and al Italy besides, through
which he marched for drowsinesse and riot notoriously infamous. Two pillars
whereof the Papists must rest. Whitak. cont. Dureum l 9. de Sophia.
There are two notable pillars which uphold the Church of Rome in all her
buildings, unknown to you yet, (but herafter better may be) against which if
you lean, they will surely deceive you; on is. The Church of Rome cannot err
whatsoever it teaches, the other The Bishop of Rome ought not to be accused
what soever he do. Upon such pillars as these they may reate what work they
will; and so they do, but it fares with the^ as it was wont to the false
Prophets, One builds up an muddy wall, Exech. 13.10.
and others dawbe it over with a rotten plaster. But because it has pleased
God to bring us again thus luckely to gether, I will bend our conference for
this time to some good purpose, that you go not altogether away without
profit. Will you grant me but so much, as common humanity will afford any
man, or the meanest courtesy of freindes allow?


Tub. I will allow you any reasonable grant, whereof if you doubt, you do me
wrong; it may be you deem me so affectioned, that I will neither hear nor
read any thing aganst my humor. I would not have you so think of me, that
were more beast like to follow the first of the heard, then according to any
Christian course; and if any should wish me to it. I should the sooner
mistract them, and grow the wearier of them.


Romans You say well, and my request shall be yet more reasonable then you would
deem it to be, you are you say unable to dispute of the points of doctrine
between them and us, until you be further instructed in them.


Tub. I confess it, I have only hitherto heard their our report, without
either their proofs, or your acceptions.


Romans Why then this I say (which you or any man being never so unlearned may
understand) if all their points of their religion be good and sound. Catholic
and according to Scriptures, Fathers, Counsels, Doctors. and histories, viz.
their Mass, their sacrifice, their real presence, their meritinge of heaven;
their free will in good and holy things; their praying to Saints their service
in an unknown tongue; The points in con rouersie between us.
the forbidding of the lave people to read the Scriptures in their vulgar
tongue. The Bishop of Romes authority, worshipping of Images: and a number of
questions else; What need then is there, for the Doctors of that side, such as
have written in defense and proof of their cause, Harding, Dorman, Saunders,
Stapleton, Allen, Cope. Bellarmine, Rhemists, Dureus, and many others, to
misaleadg any, Doctor, Counsel, History, or Father either by corrupting of
the text, The Doctors that defend the^ The manner of handling them.
or quoting of places not to be found; to use any vain and foolish shifts in
answer, such as any may perceive to be feeble and weak to deliver their
minds so doubtfully, that an English man in the English tongue shall not
understand what they mean; to be so contrary and opposite on to an other;
and many times each from himself, to dispute for that which they confess, is
not so ancient nor so good, as the contrary. It is an old saying, a rich man
need not be a theife, and a good cause at their hands cannot be lost for
lack of pleading, only that which wants is the truth of the cause, they have
bin fashio^ing of it these many years, and ever and anon there comme some
experter masters than formerly, with some fresher vernish, but noe better
prose; some taste of this dealing I gave the readers be-but a more larger
evidence and veiw shall follow after, in diverse of the points mentioned, that
all the world shall see and confess, that the popish religion, at this day
taught and professed, by the very confused handling of it, is nothing less
then accient, catholic, and true, which shall be so faithfully collected, that
they shall not be denied, to be their own, and so plain for understanding,
Peruium cunctis iter Sense in Oct. art. 2.
that although you conc^aue little or nothing of the questions themselves, yet
you shall perceive the weakness of their side, by the manner of laying down
their proofs and defenses.


Tub. When I shall see that performed substa^tially, which you have here
promised confidently, I will surly stay my hand from subscribing, and my heart
from consenting to any such doctrine, as shall stand upon such proofs.


Romans By the grace of God I will not fail to show it you you shall not take any
thing upon report, you shall see and read their own books and discourses
themselves, and since now you are the man unto whose conscience I appeal for
your consent to our side; let me show you the duty of a reader in a case of
controversy between two, noe otherwise then D. Harding in his Reioynder
against B. Iuell touching them both does lay it down to you and me, and al men
else. To the reader
The duty of a reader.
Consider I require thee (says he) what is thy duty. Remember thou be not
partial toward either of our persons. Let all affection be laid aside. Let
your conscience be the rule of both love and hatred. Let neither hope nor fear
have place in your heart, to win or loose by either of our fortunes, yea if you
can so conceive let our books represent unto thee, not Iuell and Harding, but
two men John and Thomas departed this world, to noe man living known to have
lived. And when you have left of all affection touching our persons, then study
to discharge thy mind of all blind parciality toward both our doctrines
abandoning all humane likings and carnal fantasies and with a single eye, and
simple heart, behold and embrace what is good and true, only for love of God,
and for the truths sake. Being thus desposed, commend your self unto God with
prayer, beseeching him to lighten your understanding and by his holy spirit to
lead you unto the truth. This done with an humble heart, read both our Treatises
and judge: yet this much I say in case of necessity, not to all in general,
but to certain, such as by other means will not be induced to consider of
the truth; The reply, is that which B. Iuell wrote against him.
for otherwise I acknowledge, that both the REPLY, and all other heretical
books by order of the Church, without special license, be unlawful to be
read, and are utter he forbidden to be read or kept, under pain of
exco^municatio^. Remember I say the part of a judge is, to judge (as the
Lawyers speak) secundum allegata and probata, that is to say, as things be
alleged and proved: Beware every thing is not proved for which authorities
be alleged, Nota been.
neither is all made good, which by probable arguments seems to be concluded.
Allegations must be true, plain and simple, neither weakened by taking away,
nor strengthened by putting to of words, nor wrested from the sense they bear
in the writer; else they bewraie the feebleness of the cause for proof
whereof they be alleged, and also the great untruth of the^ that for
furtherance of their purpose abuses them: if they have corrupted their
witnesses, or brought in false witnesses, if they have untruly reported their
Doctors, and shamfully falsified their sayings, the^ ought you to give sentence
against them, then is their honesty stained, then is their credit defaced, and
then is their challenge quiet dashed. Thus far D. Harding. Mat. 27.24.
And Pilate took water and washed his hands before the multitude, saying, I
am innocent of the blood of this just man: even so clear is M. Hardinge and
his fellows from misreporting the Doctors, or falsifying their sayings, or in
not committing any thing whereof they would seem to be most free, as anon shall
appear.


Tub. Me thinks, by these words of D. Harding and by your request made before
unto me, that both parties on both sides, require nothing more then that al
their readers should ponder and waighe the allegations, and proofs both of the
one side, and other, and then judge of the truth accordingly, but I fear he
means nothing less, because he says that both the REPLY, and al other
heretical books, by order of the church without special license, be
unlawful to be read or kept, By heretical books he means the protestants
writings.
which inference abridgeth the liberty of reading, and consequently of judging
by any indifferent way or mean, to come to the knowledge of the truth: For the
heathen Poet could deliver a good speech to that purpose, by the very light of
natural discourse Qui statuit aliquid part inaudita altera
Aequum licet statuerit, haud aquus fuit. Senec in Med Act. 2.

He that not hearing either part, ponounceth his decree, Unrighteous man
accounted is, though right his sentence be.


Romans I did includ so much in mine own speech unto you before, but that
perhaps you will sooner approve of your own observation, then my collection.
And to tell you truly which you shall certainty find by conuersing more with
the^, they do not suffer the common laity amongst them to see or read or
hear any thing without special license, and so much and such parcells, as it
shall please them* But those that they know are so stiff and obstinate that
nothing will a waken their understanding, perhapps they will give some small
liberty of reading, the better to color their denial to others: And this do
they not only touching the use or reading either of the holy scriptures, or of
the protestants books, Hard cont. Iuell art. 2. fol. 56. In the counsel of
Basil the use of the cup was granted to the Bohemia^s: because that custom was
then amongst them Geneb Chronic. l. 4. f. 1067 Hard. art 15 read the whole but
especially fol. 195. Ibid. fol. 198. b Freder. Staph. In Apol Mat. 7.6. Swine
and Dogs. Hard. Reioind fol. 63. Diuis 7. fol. 14.
but they forbid the use of part of the sacraments without their leave; For the
same Doctor in other places of his works avoucheth the Church, has liberty
to take away the use of wine in the administration of the Lords supper from you
of the Laity, and to restore it again, upon their liking and considerations.
And in an other Article, he limitteth you so that you shall not read the holy
bible, without license and leave obtained; because as he says God by
special providence kept the vulgar people of the Jews from reading the old
testament That precious stones should not be cast before swire, that is to say,
such as be not called thereto, as being for their vnreuerent curiosity and
impure life, unworthy.

Staphilus an other of that side commended by D, Harding for a man of execllent
learning, and on of the Emperors counsel that then was, did not stick
likewise to abuse a place of scripture to that purpose Give not that which is
holy unto dogs. so by D. Harding the Laity are accounted Swine, and by
Staphilus Dogs. In which respect D. Hardinge needed not in his Reioynder, to
have charged the reverend Bishop his adversary for reporting his words falsely
and dishonestly, as he says he does, when in the first article of the reply,
the Bishop having said that by some of them (that is of that side) the common
people are said to be Dogs, and Swine (quoting the 15. article. fol. 155. of.
D. Hardings book, means not that M. Harding did use both those terms of
Dogs and Swine, but that he used one of them; and some others of his fellows
the other; M. Hardinge not content so to understand him, makes an indiscreet
noise, and bids read the place who will, and he shall find M: Iuell an
vtrue reporter, and himself clear of that odious saying: (as if it were so
capital a crime; to put both them words on him that shall use but one of
them) For in that place (says he) is not so much as the name of Dogs. but
there is of Swine say I: and so you have from M. Harding the same answer in
effect, that a simple fellow gave to those that asked him, how he had sped
against those that would have begged him, because of his insufficiency to
govern himself and his affairs: I have done well enough with them (quoth he)
for where they thought to have proved me a fool, the best was, they could
find me but an Idiot.

Neither are Staphilus and Harding the first who have made such account of the
people of God as to account the^ Dogs and Swine; their masters before them
Peter Lumbard and Thomas of Aquine, has refered that text of Job Bones
arabant, Lumb. sent. l. 3 did 25 b. Tho. Aq. 2. 2. quaefl 2. art. 6. sed.
co^tra. Job. 1.14. Minores signi ficabantur per asinos, debent in
crede^discoherere mai^l bus qui per boues significabantur vt Gregor exponit. 2.
moraliu^
and asinae pascebantur iuxta eos, The Oxen were ploughing, and the Asses were
feeding in their places, to the Priests and people; taking the Oxen ploughing
to signify the Priests reading of the scripture, and the Asses feeding, to be
the people not trobling their heads with such matters, Credunt enim quae
ignorant, habentes fidem velatam in mysterio, For they believe they know not
what (says Lumbard) hauiug their faith foulded up in generalities. Thus do
some of the^ call the Laity Dogs, some others Swine, and others compare them to
Asses. O that they would wipe their faces from these spots, before they call us
black or ill favored!


Tub. If we that be of the Laity, be noe more accounted of by them, then you
have laid down out of their own books, our knowledge and judgment shall be
less then they are, if they can tell how to keep us under: And I perceive
they can tell well enough if they may deter us from reading the word of God
by such collections, as those which you have recited.


Romans Hic fige pedem. Do but here stay your footing, and I will show you far
more abominations the^ these. Ez^c. 8.6.15.
The wresting and rocking of such places of scriptures as these, some to one
purpose, and some to an other, Polid. Virgil. deinvent. reru^ l 4 c. 9. f. 337.
338:
did make Polydorus Virgilius a very great papist who lived here in England in
the reign of Henry 7. to give but an homly censure of them. For entreating of
the antiquity of Cardinals at Rome (he says) there be some who have deduced
the original of them from the Hebrews more little qui cum obscuri sint inani
nobilitatis nomine sibi blandientes, The original of Cardinals.
alius ad Achillem, alius ad Aeneam, alius ad Namam Pompilium suum genus
referunt; as those are wont who being base of themselves derive their
pedigree some from Achilles, some from Aenas, and others from Numa Pompilius.
And so did one Siculus Andreas Barbatius, who to get in favor with Bessarius
the Cardinal, put forth a Commentary to that purpose, But says Polidore
because I will not weary my self any further with quoting of the man, you
shall hear how he begins himself, Ipse iam incipi at suum narrare
commentu^. According to our english translations. 1. Sam. c. 2. v. 8 Hostiensis
a most famous popish doctor.
writing of that matter. Occurrit inquit illud quod 1 Regum cap. 2. pulcherrime
scriptum est. Domini enim sunt cardines terrae and posuit eos super orbem. That
says Siculus is further to be remembered which is excellently written, in the 1
book of the Kings, and 2 chap, The pillars of the earth are the Lords, and he
has set the world upon the^: which text of scripture Hostiensis the great
Doctor does refer to be meant of Cardinals. For as the door is turned upon
the heng, so is the Church of Rome governed by the College of Cardinals. Thus
far Barbatius. Now follows the mislike of Polidore, Polydore misliketh the
papists for racking the scriptures in that manner.
for their handling of holy scriptures so profanely vide non secus isti
Iurisconsulti aliquoties detorquent sacras literas quo volunt, acsutor^t
sordidas solent dentibus extendere pelles. See (says he) these same Canonists
or Lawiers do diverse times wrest the holy scriptures whether they list, as
shomakers do wrest and retch their leather with their teeth.


Tub. Surely the comparison of Polidore is more cleanly, then their dealing
with the scriptures is tolerable; Be these they that pretend such holiness and
zeal to the holy scriptures? It appears not by their dealing they do so;
Lay me^ would carry a more religious and more reverend regard of those sacred
Oracles the^ such church men do for ought that I see. But I perceive they keep
the Laity from reading, because they should not understand, their
interpretatio^s if such wrestings may be termed interpretations.


Rom Now judge you, how ca^ their questions be testified and proved out of the
holy scripture, when the sentences of holy scripture are so far of from them,
Qui pote est habere idonca^ id, quod sequitur causam, cu^ ipsum illud primum a
quo defluit se^cundum inanissimum esse repe riatur and vacuum, and nulla so
liditate firmatum? Arnob. cont Gent. l. 7 fol. 268 Arn. ib. fol. 278 Sed quid
face. repossumus co^siderare nole^tibus penitus res ipsas secu^que ipsos loqui?
from which they would draw the truth of their assertions? If the foundation
be not settled, the building will ever totter. I doubt not but many amongst
them, see the confusion of their cause even at hand nay I dare apply that
speech of Arnobius against the^ which he did against the Gentiles, Non nobis
est sermo cum hominibus rationis expertibus, neque quibus non sit communis
intelligentiae veritas. We spend not our talk with men who are void of reason,
nor with those who have not a common simplicity of under standing; you have
wisdom, you have sense verumque nos dicere apud vos ipsi inter iore iudicio
scitis and you know in your most innermost thoughts thet we say true. But
what can we do to those, that will not sift the truth themselves to the quick,
and dispute eue^ with themselves; you do that which you see done, not that
which you judge ought to be done, verily because Custom having noe reason with
it, does more sway with you quam rerum inspecta natura veritatis examinatione
po^derata, then substance of matter examined according to the weight of truth.
Now to go a little further, touching that sentence of Polidors mislike of
their racking of the scripture to show that they would make sure work, if they
could tell how; and since I cannot lay too much to their charg that they deal
against us, as against their own consciences; I will tell you how they will deal
with their own Polidore: They reading that sentence in his book, to make
against them, Corrigenda: sunt atque delenda.
do command that it be corrected and put out, as by their Index
expurgatorius appears.


Tub. To be corrected and put out, as by their Index expurgatorius appears,
what mean you by that? I understand you not, is it a book, or what is it?


Rom It is a little book gathered together in manner of a table or index, with
warrant enough by the decree of the Tridentine counsel, by the authority and
commandment of the Catholic King Phillip the second; and by the advice and
furtherance of the Duke of Alba. The drift of it is this, Iuxta sacri co^cilij
Tridentini decretum; Philippi 2. regis catholici iussu and authoritate, atque
Albani ducis co^silio a ministerio in Belgia concinnatus. anno. 1571.
Where there are diverse volumes and books (for the use of scholars both
Protestants and Papists) as Fathers and doctors divine and humane, because they
will have nothing come to their scholars sight, that shall make against the
Church of Romes doctrine, by the pains of diverse men, they have run over a
number of writers Divines, Lawiers, Physicians, Philosophers, Mathematicians,
and humanists, and have quoted the places that offended them in this Index, and
told their scholars that they must either correct them in the books, or wipe
the^ out, if they do chance to study any of those books there named, dash
them out with a pen; do any thing with them, so they rise not up in judgment
against them. Amongst all which authors, Polidore Virgil is one, in whose poor
book they have willed to be mangled and blotted out above an hundred several
places, of all which it seems they are fowly ashamed. Insta^ces I could
produce many, but that it is not material in a case so clear, one or two may
suffice. In an other place, speaking of the chief heads of the Commandments
he reckons this for the second, Nullius animalis effigiem colito. Thou shall
not worship the liknesse of any living creature. Po^. Vir. de inurer l 5. c 9.
fol. 435.
The collectors of the Index, do command that sentence to be wiped out: and
not to be read at any hand. If they be not afraid that the second
commandment against graven Images is directly against them, why do they
takeit out of their Catechismes as Vaux, and wipe it out as they do here?
Their index does yet more miserably bewray them, Vt Liber Bertrami Pre. byt.
de corp and sa^g domini tolera riemendatus queat fol. 11. 12. in Indice.
for in showing how the ancient Treatises of on Bertrame a priest which
teaches as we do, of the sacrament of the altar, may be suffered to pass for
good, if it be amended, do testify to the world. That they can by some
desised shift, deny whatsoever errors they find in the ancient fathers, and
extenuate them, and devise an apt sense to any of their testimonies, when they
shall be urged by the adversaries in disputations and conferences; Non videmus
cur non eande^ aequitatem and diligentem recognitionem mereatur Bertramus Ind.
ib. Senec. in Herc Oeti. Act, 3. Geneb. Chron l. 4. fol. 790. Nonnulla tacit
corrigens quae de ea quaestione Bertramus Presb. paulo ante minus site and
co^mode ad Carolu^ Calvum rescripserat.
and they see noe reason, why they should not use that equity and diligence
toward Bertrame, as toward the rest of the Fathers, Scelera quae quisque
ausus est, hoc vicit malum. This dealing passes all that ca^ be imagined. They
that gather the Index confess that this Bertrame was very famous and beloved
of two Emperors; Charles the great and Charles the Bald, And Genebrard
incerteth, that about the year of our Lord 877. a question being made in the
sacrament whether the eating be corporallor spiritu al, Paschasius the Abbot
wrote thereof learnedly; And covertly corrected many things, which Bertrame the
priest had written thereof a little before unto Charles the Bald, not so fitly
and so skilfully as he should: so we may perceive by Geuebrard as well as by
the gatherers of the Index, that Bertrams book is a great block in their way,


Tub. If this book do so manifestly discover their treachery, as by your
report it appears it does; would they suffer it, to come in sight to be
known of you, who they knew would accept against it, and also make a great
history of it?


Romans Noe I warrant you, they never meant it should be seen of any Protestant,
they were sending it to their own Universities and schools of learning beyond
the seas, Ex officina Christophori Plant. an 1571 Iun. in epist ad
illustrissimum principem Ioannem Casimi rum. Hunc foetum genuerunt illi sed
nascentem inter genua sua presserunt
and as it was a going was intercepted; The very Authentical book of their
own impression singulari numinis prouidentia by gods providence was brought to
a great Protestant, who took the pains for the^ to send it by copies, unto al
Protestant Churches in Christendom, so that that birth of theirs, which like
another monster they were diverse days and nights in bringing forth, and
thought when they had brought it forth, to have stifled it between their knees,
does now live in good liking, through good cherishing, but to the perpetual in
famie of the parents. An other help like unto that before in effect, they do
also use to make their scholars to think that the ancient Doctors of the
Church do all make for them. The elder scholars and those that read unto the
rest, take pains most in the controversies, and having found what likes the^
to confirm their doctrine do write it in breife and deliver it in notes to
their scholars, out of their written sheets, never suffering them to look
into the doctors originalls themselves; so that whenever it please the
Masters to coggorly either by adding or abating the text which they find, the
scholars are deceived and abused, thinking such and such authorities do make
for them, when if the grounds be looked into, they show nothing less, then
they quote them for: which dealing of the Masters with their own scholars,
caused a faithful teacher of this land, Reinolds conference with Heart. c. 1.
diuis. 1. fol. 4.
to wish his Concumbata^t for his own good, to look into the original books
themselves for proof of that which he was to dispute of, because he knew he
would otherwise be deceived, if he trusted those on whom he meant to rely,
which was the greatest and freest liberty, that could be granted to any man.

Thus much have I bin willing to show by the way at first, Sic. habent
principia sese Ter. in. Phor. Act. 3. scen. 1.
touching their politic (but not religious) courses, in astonishing the world,
with that religion, which only is boulstred out, by many indirect courses,
perceived every day more and more. I will now according to my first intent go
forward to set before your eyes, the many differences and implications, which
they use in expressing their minds in that question of the sacrament, between
them and us, remembering here noe other thing then that which themselves do
ever give in charge, In the explication of the true catholic faith in the
sacrament. f 4. b Then is the doctrine of the Church of Rome not the truth, as
shall manifestly appear hereafter.
to be regarded and advised upon, and to be joined with that good counsel of D.
Hardinge set down before. Amongst many other proofs (says Gardener) whereby
truth after much travail in contention at the last prevails and has
victory, there is none more notable then when the very adversaries of truth,
(who pretend never the less to be truths friends) do by some evident untruth
bewraie themselves. For on that part ever is the truth where al sayings and
doings appear uniformly, consona^t to the truth pretended; And on what side a
notable lie appears, the rest may be judged after the same sort, for truth
needs noe aid of lies, craft or slight, NOTE WELL
wherewith to be supported and maintained. So that in the entreating of the
truth of this high and ineffable mystery of the sacrament, on what part thou
see craft, shift, slight, or obliquitie, or in any one point an open
manifest lie, there thou may consider whatsoever pretense be made of truth,
yet the victory of truth not to be there intended, which loves simplicity,
plain nesse, direct speech, without admixture of shift or color. Thus far
Gardener.

To this purpose also speaks D. Saunders, Protestantium inter se dissensiones
certissimam fidem faciuat doctrinae veritatem non penes illos, verum penes
ecclesiam Romanamesse. Devisibili monar. l. 7. f. 627.
The dissentions amongst the Protestants (says he) do make evident proof,
that the truth is not on their sides, but altogether on the Church of Romes,
wherein amongst the beleiuers, there is one heart, one soul, and on tongue,
under one Pastor the Pope Now, if (notwithstanding their braggs of truth, and
evidence of truth, and nothing but truth on their side) there do fall out in
searching of their books that they do nothing less the^ further that, which
they most extol, I hope you will not lay the fault and blame on me, that do
but show that so they do but rather on them, who deliver such matter. Si
illum obiurges vitae qui auxilium tulit, Terenc in. Andr. act. 1. scen. 1
quid facias illi qui dederit damnum aut malum? says the Poet, If you blame
him that shall further your health by his best endeavor, what will you do to an
other, that shall seek to bring you into danger? But indeed all their clamours
against us or petite glozes in defense of themselves, or fair admonitions to
their readers, Actor. P Clodius aedilis Reus, sui que patronus Cice to acta in
sen. anno. Ciceronis 51. vrbis. 697. de haruspicu^ respo^sis.
to beware of us, are but as that accusation of Publius Clodius against Tully,
who having himself sacrilegiously abused certain holy things appertaining to
the Temple; and fearing least Tuily would accuse him in the senate, first
complained of him that all religion, was profaned in his house.


Tub. I both perceive what you would say, as also what you are willing I
should conceive touching their dealing in these matters: Go to the question of
the sacrament I pray you, because in that they pretend most perspicuitie and
clearness.


Romans I know they do, In confidence whereof, on that was great amongst them
once said, Camp. rat 2.
Adhuc durissimae parts Caluini su^t, nostrae faciles and explicatae. Moreover
the Protestants are very harsh in this question, but our arguments are clear
and expedite, which whether it be so or not judge you. The counsel of Trent
(which they al follow; Conc: Trid. less. 13. can. 1.
and on whom they al depend in this and all other points) has thus defined
thereof Si quis negauerit etc. If any man shall deny that in the sacrament of
the holy Eucharist, there is not contained vere, realiter and substantialiter,
truly, really, and substantially, the body and blood together with the soul,
and divinity of our Lord and savior Jesus Christ, and in that respect whole
Christ, let him be accursed negaueritque mirabilem illam, and singularem
conuersionem totius substantiae panis in corpus or shall deny that marvelous
and only conversion of the whole substance of the bread, Can. 2.
into the body, and of the whole substance of the wine into his blood, the
shows of bread and wine only remaining, which conversion the catholic Church
does aptly call Transubstantiation; let him be accursed* Can. 8.
gain, if any man say, That Christ is exhibited or set forth in the
Eucharist, to the intent to be eaten spiritually, and not also sacramentally,
and really, let him be accursed. Not to speak hear, how blasphemous and
contrary this their doctrine is to the holy institution of Christ at his last
supper, the very manner of their handling, and seting down their opinions is
by their leaves erroneous, and yet not under stood by their own Doctors.

For first, it must follow of their words, if the whole substance of the bread
be turned into Christ's body, then is the body of Christ made of bread; as is
verified in the decrees, which says The body of Christ and his blood by the
power of the holy ghost is made of the substance, De Cons. did. 2. can. vtrum
sub figura.
of bread and wine. Then will it follow, that it is not that body which was
made of the flesh and blood of the virgin Mary. Hard. cont. Iu. art. 12. fol.
168
D. Harding seeing this impiety of making our savior Christ have two contrary
bodies, both avoideth his own authorities, and overthrows his
Transubstantiation: for thus he says, Where the body and blood of Christ is
said to be made of bread and wine, beware thou unlearned man, thou think not
them thereof to be made, as though they were newly created of the matter of
bread and wine, nether that they be made of bread and wine as of a matter: but
that where bread and wine were before, This is noe tra^substantiation
after consecration there is the very body and blood of Christ borne of the
very substance of the Virgin Mary: To say where bread was before, there is the
body of Christ, as M. Harding says: is a departing, or annibilation of the
bread, a coming of it as it were to nothing, and not a transubstantiation, a
turning of the substance of the bread into the substance of the body of
Christ, as the Trent fathers define. Again, if bread be made the body of
Christ, or is the body of Christ, as they are willing to grant; why should it
not be said, to be made of bread as of a matter? If it be made of the
substance of bread, why not made of bread, as of a matter? Again, They
themselves teach us, Lumb. l. 4. dis. 1. b. Alan. de sac. in gener. l. 1. c. 2.
Dureus cont Whit. rat. 2 fol 103. Hard. cont Iuell art. 8. f. 144. b. Tonstal.
l. 1. fol 33. Allen de Euch sacra l. 1. c. 3. fol 217 Bellar. de euch sac. l.
2. c. 9. fol. 151. ex Iren l. 4 cont. haer c. 34
that a sacrament is a sign of an holy thing, or a visible sign of an
invisible grace; so that on two things does a sacrament consist by both our
co^sents: Now least there should be any, strife what those two things are,
they teach moreover, that the on is earthly, and the other heavenly, so they al
teach our of Ireneus that ancient father; who says this being not common
bread, but the Eucharist after consecration, consisting of two things, earthly,
and heavenly, what that earthly thing is, al men may understand that well, to be
very bread, the substance of bread, except he be driven to say as al they do
in those places quoted, that by the earthly thing named by Ireneus is meant not
the substance of bread but the accidents, that is, the taste, color, weight,
show, savor, and fashion, of bread. What earthly thing the taste. color,
show, weight, and savor of bread can be, I appeal to any indifferent judge.
So that to say as the Trent fathers say, that noe substance remains after
consecration, Transubstantiation overthrows the nature of a sacrament. They
keep it in the one and destroy it in the other. Tons l. 1. f. 30. and 48. b.
ex. ca^ conc. Nicen. considera divina^ vim quae in aquis latet. Step. Gardin.
fol. 8 b.
but the real and substantial body of Christ is to overthrow the nature of a
sacrament; and to take away the earthly part of it, and instead of exhibiting
the Grace of Christ; puts the Person of Christ God and man in the roomth.

But see how they retain the true nature and definition of a sacrament in the
one, and destroy it in the other. They say there remains the nature and
substance of water, and the invisible grace of the spirit; the holy Ghost
comes down and halloweth the water; there we consider the divine spirit which
lies hid in the water, there we consider our baptism, not with the eyes of
our flesh, but with the eyes of our souls. And as in the sacrament of Christ's
most precious body and blood we receive Christ's very flesh and drink his
very blood to continue and augme^t the life received; so in baptism we
receive the spirit of Christ for the renewing of our life's And therefore in the
same form of words Christ spoke to Nichodemus of baptism, In both sacraments
Christ is exhibiteth himself unto us. Andra. Ortho. expl. l. 3. f. 239.
that he spoke of the eating of his body and drinking of his blood, and in both
sacraments gives, dispenses, and exhibiteth indeed those celestial gifts in
sensible elements. In both sacraments the blood of Christ is included; the
sprinkling of our bodies with the water of Baptism, is nothing but that the
soul be washed and rinced with the blood of Christ. If all this be verified
of the sacrament of Baptism, if Christ can give and exhibit himself (as he
does indeed) unto us, without any transubstantiation retaining the substance
of the element of water, we cannot but say so of the sacrament of the supper,
Lumb. l. 4. did. 9. a Torren. l. 3. c. 6. parag. 3. fine vide tale a liquid
apud Aug. tom 7. de peccat. merit. and remiss. l. 3. c. 4
that there we may feed on Christ's flesh, and drink his blood, without any
transubstantiation of the bread, and wine; Nay in more plainer manner they tell
us that, Saint Augustine doubts not to say of infants, and other faithful
people Nulli est aliquatenus ambigendum, Noe man may in any wise doubt but
that every faithful man is then made partaker of the body and blood of Christ,
when in baptism he is made a member of Christ, and that he is not without the
fellowship of that bread and the cup, although before he eat of that bread
and drink of that cup, he depart this world being in the unity of Christ's
body, for he is not made frustrate of the communion and benefit of that
sacrament, whiles he finds that thing which is signified by the sacrament.
If infants and other faithful people may be made partakers of the body and
blood of Christ in the sacrament of Baptism: I demand of our Trent fathers why
we may not be made partakers of his flesh and blood of the sacrament of the
altar, without any transubstantiation of the bread into the body of Christ? Vt
ante can. 8. sacramentally and really; are a terms contrary and yet
confounded.
More over they hold that Christ is eaten there sacramentally and really; which
two terms (as they utter them) are very opposite; for if there be nothing to
be eaten but the real and substa^tiall body of Christ, what is eaten
sacramentally? We affirm that Christ is there sacramentally, and is eaten
sacramentally, by his spirit present, and by his grace, as he is in the
sacrament of baptism, and that is properly sacramental.

Again speaking of the use and profit of that sacrament, Cap. 8. de vsu
admirabilis hu ius sacramenti 1. Sacramentally.
they say there be three sorts of Receivers: some that receive it only
sacramentally as sinners; others spiritually in desire by a lively faith,
thirdly those that receive it sacramentally and spiritually both together.
Which three ways may be taken for sound and Orthodoxall, 2. Spiritually. who
cannot for the time communicate.
if we could cause them to tell us what they mean by sacramentally. If by
sacramentally they mean really, fleshly, and substantially, as at the first
they treated of his presence there, 3. Sacramentally and spiritually who do
communicate as they ought. Ioh. 6.54.56. Sacramentally and Spiritually so say
the Protestants
how do they make good that sinners and wicked persons, do eat his very
flesh, and drink his very blood, as they say they do; since the word of
life it self, that mouth which never spoke guile has said, He that eats my
flesh, and drinks my blood, has eternal life, and I will raise him up at
the last day: And he that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, dwells in
me and I in him? And by the third way described, that those eat him
sacramentally, and spiritually, who do duly prepare themselves, and putting on
the wedding garment, do come unto that holy table, does breed an other scruple
how sacramentally can stand with spiritually, understanding by sacramentally,
Really and substantially may stand to gether but spiritually cannot
as they did before really, fleshly and substa^tially, those two terms being
also used of the Protestants, who say the wicked do eat sacrame^tally only,
that is the sacrament of his body and blood, and the godly sacramentally and
spiritually, that is bread and wine with the hand and mouth and the body and
blood by faith, and noe otherwise, which are the right use of the words
sacramentally and spiritually; Again, I may demand of them, why they do not
describe the presence of Christ to be spiritual and sacramental, as well as
describe him so to be eaten? they say he is eaten by on of those three ways
of al men in general good and bad: and to al men good and bad they describe
him present really, truly and substantially body and soul divinity and al,
and yet eaten only sacrementally and spiritually: now it is not possible to be
thought, but that the spiritual eating of Christ in the sacrament* excludes
the corporal; as his spiritual presence will his corporal or substantial;
nether can noe one meat be fit both for the body and soul, as al men know;
And therefore if they will dissent from us and not from themselves also, they
must dispute either of a corporal eating of the flesh of Christ, De manducati
one corporis domini, sit ne illa vera, antropica, sensibilis an insensibilis,
modo corporeo an spirituali. l. 4. chron. fol. 790 Fallacia alia alia^ trudit.
Ter. in And. act. 4. scen 4. De sac. euc. l. 1 c. 11. fol. 92. c. 14. fol. 117.
and l. 2. c. 8. fol. 163
or of a spiritual only (as Genebrard confesses was brought in about Bertrams
time almost 800. years since) and not to a corporal to add a spiritual, of
one and the same thing; nor confound the terms of sacramental, spiritual,
and real. Again (it is always seen, one absurdity draws on an other) I
demand how their term of receiving spiritually does agree with Bellarmine
who says that the body of Christ is verily and properly eaten in the
Eucharist by our body, and sent from the mouth into the stomach; that the body
of Christ enters in at the mouth of the communicants, and is verily received
by the mouth of the body; small spiritual receiving is there by the
instruments of the mouth and belly; Faith must have other food; if it were so,
it should not be said Creed and manducasti, believe and thou have eaten: but
lay hold with thy hand, and thou art safe.

The next in authority to the Trent Fathers is the Romish Cathechisme,
gathered by their decree, Catec. Romans p. 1. art. 6. c. 7. fol 57. The right
se^ce of the article, overthrows Transubstantiation.
and published by Pius quintus the Pope. The catechism entreating of that
article of our belief He ascended into heaven, and suteth one the right hand
of god the father almighty, do say the right sense of that article is, that
the faithful without al doubt ought to be leiue, that Christ, the mystery of
our redemption being perfected and finished, vt homo est, in coelum corpore and
anima ascendisse, as he is man; is ascended in body and soul into heaven. For
as he is God he was never from thence, Vt qui diuinitate, sua loca ominia
co^pleat The causes why he ascended. ib. fol. 59. The benefits of his
ascension. ibid. fol. 61
filling al places with his divinity. And speaking of the causes why Christ
our savior would ascend up into heaven, one is because by ascending (say
they) he would bring to pass that we should mount up thither in mind and
affection: and amongst many benefits which come unto men by his ascension into
heaven, they reckon this a great one quod amorem nostrum ad coelum rapuit ac
diuino spiritu inflammauit. that it draws our minds and love to heaven, and
inflameth them with a divine spirit, for it is truly said, There our heart is,
Marc. 6.
where our treasure is, and surly if Christ our Lord were conversant in earth
omnis nostra cogitation in ipso hominis aspectu and consuetudine defixa esset
al our cogitations, would be placed in the looking and manner of him, and we
should behold him only as man, because he had don so great things for us; But
ascending into heaven, it makes our love heavenly, and causes that whom we
think of being absent, him we worship and love as God; which doctrine of theirs
being very sound and Catholic cannot choose but overthrow their own opinion
of Transubstantiation, Catec. p. 2. c. 4. fol. 181.
which brings the same body of Christ; that same that was borne of the Virgin
and which is ascended, and sitetth now (and ever shall) at the right hand of his
father in heaven, to be transubstantiated into bread, and to be contained in
the sacrament, Ibid. fol. 187.
and this to be done without mutation or change of place, or any strange
creation, which they do so much abjure. If since the mystery of our
redemption wrought and finished, Christ as man be ascended into heaven, and
thither in soul and mind we ought to mount and go after, and that it be good
for us that he ascended, and be there; as agreeing to the scripture which
says seek those things which are abous, where Christ sits one the right
hand of his father they do teach; Is it not earthly and gross to seek him in
the earth, and substantially and fleshly to have him? And is it not a great
hinderance to the spirits of our minds, and brings it us not into earthly
cogitations which are ever to be shunned? If they say true in the one
assertion, Omnis contradictio est ad idem.
they err in the other, for both cannot be true. At one and the same time,
they make the same Christ sitting in heaven at the right hand of his father
according to the dimensions, parts, and proportions of a true body, and the
same Christ at the same time in the sacrament without dime^sions, parts, or
proportions of a true body, which is wholly to overthrow the truth of his body,
and utterly to disanull our belief thereof, a part whereof is, that he is in
heaven with those dimensions, and distinction of parts wherewith he lived on
earth, and wherewith he was crucified, and so died, was buried and ascended.

The Rhemists in their testament follow the same stepps. They say it is plain
by the scripture, Rhem. Heb. 9. v. 20. and 10. v. 11
that the blessed chalice of the altar (at their Mass) has the very
sacrifical blood in it that was shed upon the Cross: the like they affirm in
other places of the body. Now as the Trent fathers Catechism, and Rhemists,
are found to speak impieties and contradictions in this first question of the
presence of Christ in the Eucharists using some terms, As. 1. Really 2.
Substa^tially. 3. Sacrame^tally. 4. Spiritually. Of the Sacrifice of the Mass.
as may be easily yielded unto, as be fore is showed; And some others which
repunge their own grounds, and be altogether different from them; so before I
go to others of them, I will show how these go about (and indeed it is about)
to make their Mass a sacrifice, that is to say to offer the real, fleshly,
and substantial body of Christ to god his father; the same which he offered on
the Cross for the sins of the world. They cannot tell in this what terms
to use but veil their meanings with such words that furthereth neither their
cause, nor hinders ours. Conc. Trid. sess. 22. in pref. de sac. missae. On the
Cross on sacrifice that was bloody. Cap. 1.
The counsel pretends to entreat of the sacrifice of the Mass quatenus
verum and singular sacrificium est: so far forth as it is a true and
sovereign sacrifice; Christ therefore our Lord although he was to offer
himself once on the altar of the Cross, and that with death to work there
our eternal redemption, yet because the pre^sthood by his death was not to be
extinguished, he did leave to the Church his most beloved spouse, at his last
supper the very night he was betrayed a visible sacrifice, where in that
bloody sacrifice, which was to be done but once on the Cross, might be
represented, and that the memory of him should be continued to the worlds end:
and therefore he being a Priest after the order of Melchisedech, offered his
body and blood, under the forms of bread and wine, to God his Father. And
further they say, because in this holy sacrifice which is performed in the
Mass idem ille Christus continetur and incruente immolatur, the same Christ is
contained, Cap. 2. The sa^e Christ offered vnbloodily. Apropitiatory sacrifice.
Can. 1.
and offered vnbloodily, who did offer himself once one the altar of the
Cross bloodily, the holy synod teaches that this sacrifice is truly
propitious, and that whosoever shall say that in the Mass is not offered to God
verum and proprium sacrificium a true and proper sacrifice, let him be accursed.

So by the Trent Fathers we must believe the Mass to be a true sovereign and
propitiatory sacrifice, and the same which Christ offered on the Cross. But
mark their terms; In the sacrifice of their Mass is represented the
sacrifice of Christ on the Cross and there is he offered vnbloodily; these
terms they shall have of us; we say the Lords supper is a sacrifice, as it is
the passion of Christ, that is, a thankful rememberance of Christ's passion, and
that Christ's blood is shed in a mystery. But with them, how is Christ's
sacrifice represented, if the same Christ be really offered, who offered
himself on the Cross? What need the same thing to be a remembrance of it
self, and in the one to offer himself painfully and bloodily, and in the
other-same-sacrifice, to be offered nether painfully nor bloodily If he be
offered but vnbloodily in the Mass, Nec cruente nec paenali mo do Alle^ de
euc. sac. l. 2. c 10. fol. 541 Rhem. annot. heb. 9. v, 20. The very blud in the
Chalice Allen de sac. euch. l. 2 c. 11. realis imm ola tio. Rhem. annot. heb.
9.1. v. 25: Christ offered vnboodily. The. Mat. 26. v, 28.2. mystically. ^. In
a sacrament annot. Luc. 22.19. fol 205. Camp. 2. rat. Sacramentalis mactatio c.
14. fine how agrees it with a real offering and real presence.
how say the Rhemists that the very blood which Christ shed on the altar of
the cross is in the Challice, at the time of the Mass? Or D. Allen that there
i^ a real offering of the body of Christ, as there is a real presence; so that
I see not, if they mean as they speak, why they mince the word vnbloodily as
they do. Would they say that blood is shed? let it be shed; let not blood be
shed vnbloodily, they know not how.

If the Trent Fathers and Rhemists, by their term vnbloodily do mean
mystically, as they say in an other place, we agree with them they shall have
us reasonable. It is shed in a mystery, not executed indeed, and that is
rightly termed a mystery; and not as they say in a mystery, that is really:
Or he is now immolated or offered (as they are driven to say) in a sacrament,
which we say also; but not in a sacrament, that is really and substantially;
Omne aenigmaticum, omne offusum caligine loquendi. All this is dark and covered
with mists. D. Allen still overthrows himself and them too; for he says
again, that in their Mass there is only a sacramental killing or sheding of
blood; which we also will never deny; for in the Lords supper we have the death
of Christ in a mystery, in a figure, or sacrament. Christ is there killed
sacramentally, for there we see the death of the son of God, there we see
that he took our heaviness, and bare our sorrows, was wounded for our
^ffe^ces, and was rent and tormented for our wickedness, and in this respect
the ministration of the holy communion is of the learned fathers called a
sacrifice, because therein we offer up unto God the father thanks and praise,
for that great sacrifice once made upon the Cross. But for the same sacrifice
that Christ offered with blood, that same to be offered daily in the mass
without blood, or how blood should be shed there vnbloodily as they infer,
noe age of the Church never yet knew, since Christ's time, but the petite
deuisers of late:

Saint Augustine that ancient learned Father could in few and plain words
describe unto us the perfect signification of the sacrifices of the old law,
Tom. 6. cont^ Faustu^ Mani. l. 20. c. 21. fine. Camp. rat 9. de Sophis. eccum
quos gyros, quasrota^ fabricat Rhem. Annot. heb 9. v. 25. Mark S. Aug. words
before he uses none of these opposite ill favored terms to express the
sacrifice of the Church after his ascension his sacrifice on the Cross is
frequented by a sacrament of remembra^c says he. Praeter hoc igitur and ante
hoc sacrificiu^ mortis, aliud pridie instituit and fecit ipse idque nec
crue^te, nec paenali modo, Allen l. 2. c. 10. fol. 541 Rhem. annot. heb. 9. v.
12.
and of our sacrament now, and what relation they both have to the sacrifice of
Christ, without any such obscure or obtuse terms as these men use. Huius
sacrificij caro and sangnis ante aduentum Christ's per victimas similitudinum
promittebatur. The flesh and blood of this sacrifice before the coming of
Christ was promised by sacrifices of Resemblance, the same was performed indeed
in the time of Christ's passion, post ascensionem Christi per sacramentum
memoriae celebratur, but after Christ's ascension, it is frequented by a
sacrament of remembrance. And to this of Augustine they shall have the whole
Church of England subscribe, and therefore let them take home the slander they
lay upon us, in that we use circular turnings or windings, in our disputs and
aunsweres with them. That the Rhemists are as dark and obscureas any other of
them in this question, it will appear to any that will read their notes, which
more at large I will now show. As Christ never died but once, nor never shall
die again, so in that violent, painful, and bloody sort, he cannot be
offered again, nether needs he so to be offered any more, having by that one
action of sacrifice upon the Cross made the full ransom, redemption, and
remedy for the sins of the whole world, Nevertheless as Christ died and was
offered after a sort in all the sacrifices of the law and nature, since the
beginning of the world, al which were figures of this one oblation upon the
Cross; so he is much rather offered in the sacrifice of the altar of the new
Testament incomparably more near, diuinly and truly expressing his death, his
body broken, his blood shed, then any figure of the old law, or other sacrifice
that ever was, as being indeed (though in hidden sacramental and mystical and
unbloody manner) the very self same blessed body and blood, the self same
host, oblation and sacrifice that was don upon the cross. Again they say,
noe one of the sacrifices; nor all the sacrifices of the old law, could make
that one general price, ransom and redemption of al mankind and of al sins,
saving this one highest Priest Christ, and the one sacrifice of his blood once
offered upon the Cross, which sacrifice of redemption cannot be often done,
One only sacrifice on the cross the redemption of the world, and on only
priest Christ the redeemer thereof The Mass a commemotatio^ of Christ's
sacrifice. This sort.
because Christ could not die but once, though the figures also thereof in the
law of nature and of Moses were truly called sacrifices, as especially this hie
and marvelous commemoration of the same in the holy sacrament of the altar,
according to the rite of the new Testament is most truly and singularly (as S.
Augustine says) a sacrifice; But neither this sort. nor the other of the old
law, being often repeated and done by many Priests could be the general
redeeming and consummating sacrifice etc.

You would think that in these two verses of their annotations, they had
handled that text as though they had me^t, that Christ dying but once, had need
never to have died again. Noe more shall he say they; for in that violent,
painful and bloody sort (as he died on the cross) he can never be offered
again; here they exclude his dying again, or often; but not his offering
again, or often: It is marvel they did not devise how he might die again,
so it were not in that violent, painful, and bloody sort as his death was on
the cross; as well as devise such an offering, as shall be neither violent,
painful, nor bloody: so where they should lay their reasons, to prove either a
real offering or not; a real dying or not, they leave it in the half and
come in with manners and respects, altering clean the nature of the thing;
For nether could Christ himself (much less any mortal man) offer himself
often without dying often, as is most plain by the Apostle in the 4 last
verses of that 9. chapter, so their fumbling here, is with as ill success as
D. Allens before cited, who makes a real offering (which they stick at,
unless they will have it neither violent, painful, nor bloody, and then
wherein is it real) and a sacramental shedding of blood. Again they say that
that one action on the Cross made the full ransom for the sins of the world;
what need any more sacrifice for sins then, as their is? But being the same
that his was, why does it not redeem as his did, even as a general price and
ransom, or let them show wherein the defect is, that being the same Christ,
Heb. 10.12.
it should not have the same effect? Christ says S. Paul after he had
offered one sacrifice for sin, sits for ever at the right hand of God.

Furthermore, that real immolation which D. Allen speaks of, foundeth more
then this hidden, sacramental, and mystical offering or immolation, which they
speak of here, otherwise they may speak of a real betraying, a real
crucifying, a real sheding of his blood, and pouring out of it on the ground
now, and then qualify them with a hidden, sacramental, and mystical manner.
But what caused them in this 12. verse as before set down, to call their Mass
a commemoration of Christ's sacrifice, and when they have spoken of the Jews
sacrifices, and of Christ's, But neither this sort nor the other of the law. etc.
to call their mass by an other name This sort? Do they take their mass to
be a different sacrifice from that of the cross? a commemoration of it, as
they call it, and not the same, but of an other sort? D. Allen has manifest
words to that purpose, making that which Christ did at his last supper, and
that of the mass now, to be of an other sort, and of a different kind from
that of the Cross; Cap. 8. 9. and. 10. Allen de euch. sacrif. l. 2. c. 22.
fol. 594. 596. Illa ^sse diuersi generis. The oblation of him in the supper,
and ours in the Mass (...) but one oblation, the same ^acrifice Hard art. 17.
f. 206. ^ the fountain referred to the fountain: or the same to the same.
For aunswering to our objections, that the same exceptions which serve S. Paul
to the Hebrews, against the Jewish sacrifices, will also serve against their
sacrifice of the mass, says, It is to be noted, that it cannot be denied,
that the same opposition may be almost set between the oblation of the
supper, and the oblation of the Cross, since it is certain they are of a
diverse sore, the one being an absolute, and indepe^de^t sacrifice, the other
commemoratiue, and significatine, as were the Jewish sacrifices; So again
faith he, if any christian should be in such an error, as to think that the
sacrifice of the Mass were an absolute and independent sacrifice, and that it
need not to be referred to the fountain of al sacrifices the death of Christ,
he might be almost confuted by the same arguments of S. Paul, how soever ours
do far exceed theirs. This is plain both against that of the supper, and
theirs in the Mass; nether must the Rhemists any more in culcate that they
offer the very self same body in number, Annot. Heb. 10. v. 11.
even Christ's own body that was crucified, except they will make Christ
inferior to himself.

The Next unto these before which I mean to bring in, Locor theol. l. 11.
fol. 427. a.
is Melchior Canus, a great scholar, and an acute disputant; He reproves us
mightily, because we gather si cucharistia exemplar and image est, non esse
illam ver^ and proprie sacrificium, That if the Eucharist be a samplat, and
image, it cannot properly and truly be a sacrifice; the collection, says he,
is very ridiculous, for what can be more foolish then to say that the hosts of
the old law were noe sacrifices, because they were samplers of the true? Cap.
cum Mar de celeb. miss.
And thereupon he tells us, that Inuocentius the 3. Pope of that name does
laughed at us for such infere^ces. First touching Innocentius, his authority
cannot be much in this case, because we know not that his definitive sentence
passed out of his chair against us in this point; but only that he so wrote as
a private man: L. 6. c. 8. f. 205.
because Canus himself tells us that Innocentius the 4. did make
commentaries upon the books called Decretalls, and if in them he wrote an error,
it is to be imputed unto him that he erred as a man, and not as a Pope. And D.
Harding by name refuses this same Innocentius 3, Reioynder. fo ^0.
in the matter of al weighty matters the waightiest, even in the question of
Consecration, when it should be done, saying, what if Scotus and Innocentius
tertius do think consecration to be done, by other then our Lords words, is
not the catholic church agreed herein? Thus we see a good matter if we will;
The Catholic Church may be resolved, with the Pope a good hearing.
in any point I hope as well as in Consecration: and therefore I hope they will
not press the Popes authority, though he be against us in this, to have the
Eucharist the image and the thing, and so make one thing, both an image and the
truth. Indeed we say with S, Angustine, Epist. 23. ad. Bonif. Epise.
If sacraments had not a liknesse and similitude of the things whereof they are
sacraments, properly and rightly, they should not be called sacraments; But if
any thing become the same, it has not any liknesse to it any more, but passes
wholly into that whereof it should be a liknesse: Alioquin si eadem essent om
nia, iam non exemplaria di cerentur, sed ipsae potius res de quib us agitur
viderentur Cyp. in. Symb.
as says S. Cyprian.

To come to the argument which he says is foolishly gathered, will it please
their wisdoms as well to hear what fools can say further in defense of their
folly, as to control without cause what they have well said; we tell him that
his example from the Jewish sacrifice comes not near, where he would have it
reach: For will he compare his sacrifice in this point, with those of the law?
Theirs of the law did prefigure Christ's sacrifice, and were true sacrifices in
that kind, because they were truly and really done upon slain beasts, whose
blood was shed. But were they so far forth true sacrifices, that they were the
same too, unto which they had relation? Did the Priests in the law, offer the
same body, that Christ offered, as they say they do in their Mass? If they
did not, then for those to be granted to be very true sacrifices will profit
him nothing at al for his. The Jewish sacrifices were also samplers for the
perfect and absolute sacrifice, was not the^ come; but whereof should their
Mass be a sampler or remembrance, since they sacrifice Christ present; for
that which is sacrificed must be present, that which is represe^ted and
remembered is abse^t: Christ's body being therefore represented in the Eucharist,
cannot be then and there really offered. And by this answer also the
Rhemists are discharged who borrow Canus his argument, who say that this. Luc.
for a commemoration. cap. 22. v. 19.
Mass of theirs is noe less a true sacrifice, because it is commemoratiue of
Christ's passion then those of the old testament were the less true, because
they were prefiguratiue of the same. For those sacrifices were not the same
sacrifice, or thing whereof they were prefiguratiue, noe more can their Mass
being commemoratiue (and though it were a sacrifice as they would have it) it
could not be the same thing, whereof it is commemoratiue.

But come to Canus, as to the rest for the manner of offering, he goes back
to a mystery and to a figure. In the Cross (says he) it is plain the host
was bloody, and done without mystery; but in the altar it is hid darkly and
mystically, yet the same host is on the Cross and on the A^. On the Cross
suffering, In altari occulte and mystice obscondita. Ibid fol. 436. b
on the altar hid in a mystery ^ce concludes in the sacrifice of the
Eucharist Christ is offered mystically, and vnbloodily, and therefore there is
an host, where in other sacraments there is none. I speak properly, says he,
for by a kind of speech Baptism also is sometime called an host. Ibid. fol.
438. b
And who ever called the Eucharist a sacrifice properly, as the nature of the
word sounds? or said it was the thing it self, and not a figure sampler and
similitude, since Gregory Nazianzene, as D. Tonstall quoteth him unto us, In
sanctu^ pase l. 2. fol 66. Figura figurae.
speaking of things done in the old law The arc, or the Pascall Lamb, says
Pascha legale, audenter dic^, figurae figura erat obscurior, the Easter Lamb in
the law I speak boldly was an obscure figure of a figure, that is a figure of
the Eucharist. So that touching any substance of matter, the Eucharist is noe
more the body, then the sacrifices and sacraments in the law; all, both theirs
and ours being referred to Christ on the Cross. To proceed to the objection
made our of Saint Paul Heb. 9.16.25. That the host which is sacrificed by
offering must of necessity be real offered and slain, Canus ibid. ob. fol.
404. ex Call ui: Instit. l. 4. c. 18. par. 5. f. 475
if then in every of their Masses Christ be offered in sacrifice, in every
of, their Masses he is also slain; therefore either S. Paul's argument is
frustrat where he says Otherwise he ought to suffer often from the beginning
of the world; or if Christ be offered in sacrifice he dies verily and indeed:
but they al confess they offer Christ's living body and impassible; Can us
ibid. fo 421. he does. well to set the objection and answer so far a sunder.
At corpus viuu^ and spirans non offerimus ide^ enim in Eucharistia est at que
in coelo.
so at the most they find an oblation, they cannot find a sacrifice. To this
objection he seoffingly says, that we have found out wherewith to maintain
our counterfeit opinion; but he cannot find how to overthrow so weak an
argumer. We will grant (says he) to those that argue against us, that to the
perfect offering of the eye ature, there must be the death and end of it, if it
be truly sacrificed. But we offer not a lively and breathing body; such a
body is in the Euch^rist and in heaven; yet although the body of Christ in the
Eucharist be a living body, and the blood be in the body, yet we do uether
offer the body, because it is alive, or the blood because it is in the body;
but the body in regard it is slain, the blood because it was shed on the
Cross.

Thus by this answer of his, where before the distinction stood with them of
offering the same body which was offered on the cross, (and that that body was
in the Eucharist) but after an other manner, then on the Cross, vnbloodily, or
in a mystery now he confesses they offer not a living body but because it is
slain; then there must needs follow death* nor the blood as it is in the
body, but because it was shed on the cross, why then are they afraid to call
their sacrifice bloody, but unbloody, if the host be slain? and this argument
of Canus have the Rhemists borrowed as they did the former, for in their first
conflict about this sacrament they profess That they consecrate the several
elements, Rhem. 26. mat. v. 26. show the sense or mea^ing of this note in any
writer ancient and take the whole. Dicth in a sacrament, and i^ present indeed.
not into Christ's whole person as it was borne of the Virgin or is now in
heaven, but the br^ad into his body a part, as betrayed, broken and given for
us, the wine into his blood apart, as shed out of his body for remission of
sins, in which mystical and unspeakable manner he would have the Church to
offer and sacrifice him daily, and he in mystery and sacrament dies, though
now not only in heaven, but also in the sacrament he be indeed (by sequel of
al his parts to each other) whole, alive, and immortal:

Thus monstrously do they teach, now they think, they have gotten a sacrifice
into their hands, But how they offer, without blood or with blood, whether
alive or dead; whether there same that Christ did, either at his supper, or on
the Cross, that they cannot tell, nor with any words explain? Their
descriptions in these, are like that of Syrus in the Poet, when he sent one
brother to find an other, Teren in Adel. act. 4. Scen. 2. Perplexa descriptio
but by the derection taken, he never knew where to find him. Pr^terito ha^c
recta platea sursum, vbs eo veneris, cliuus de^rsum, vorsum est. Pass right
through this street to the over part, when you come there, there is a steep
place toward the lower end thereof, run down this way; after that there i^ on
this hand a Chapel, and there fast by in a narrow corner. A speech full of
perplexity. That they should violate or alter the holy ordinance of God
touching Christ's sacrifice which was as they say themselves violent, The
sacrifice of Christ on the Cross. The sacrifice of their Mass.
painful, and bloody; into a sacrifice real, true, yea and propitiatory,
which shall be neither violent, painful, nor bloody, and yet sacrifice his
body, as betrayed, broken and given for us; and the blood as shed out of his
body; and that very blood which was in the veins of his body, and yet for him
to die in a mystery, and in a sacrament. and all to be done vnbloodily, and so
change the nature and substance of that sacrifice which was the purchase and
redemption of the whole world, as it is blasphemous for them to teach; so have
they brought such phrases and words as none can understand, vpheld by none but
themselves. God never intended that his son should offer himself any more
but once, and that was with shedding of blood and death, and so must he be
offered, or not at all offered. Re^d 7. 8. 9. 10 cap. to the Hebrews.
if we will speak of a real offering and areal sacrifice; a real presence,
and a real offering, and a real death cannot be severed.

If the ancient Church of God had delivered their doctrine and opinions, Aug.
Epist. 23. fere fine. Christ is now offered not in substance, but in
asacrament or representatio^ of his death D. Allen is out with his own
Catholics, be cause they cannot bring this place of Aug: handsomely to Ierue
their turn. de sac. Euch. l. 2. ca. 11
in such confused terms as these men do, we had bin as much to seek what
had bin their minds in this case, as we are of these men now; But they were
expedite and clear, as by their discourses appears. Nonne semelimmolatus est
Christus in scipso? Was not Christ (says S. Augustine) once offered in
himself? And yet in a sacrament he is offered for the benefit of the people,
not every Easter only, but every day; Nether does he lie when the question is
asked, answers Christ is offered daily unto the people. For if sacraments had
not a certain similitude of the things whereof they be sacraments, they should
be noe sacraments at al, ex hac autem similitudine plerumque etiam ipsarum
rerum nomina accipiunt. And by reason of this similitude, they usually take the
names of the things themselves. This is without gloss or ambiguitie Christ
(says S. Augustine) was once offered in himself. And is offered daily in a
sacrament: and for that the speech should be understood, how once and how
daily, it is added in a sacrament, and in himself. And why, when it is done
now but in a sacrament, may it yet be truly said Christ is offered? because
sacraments have the names of the things them selves, for a certain
resemblance that is between the^. This does the words immediately following
show. Sieut ergo secundum quendam medum, Therefore after a certain manner of
speech the sacrament of Christ's body, is Christ's body, and the sacrament of
Christ's blood, is Christ's blood, and the sacrament of faith is faith. and this
he illustrateth afteriby the sacrament of Baptism out of S. Paul, Romans 6.
who says by Baptism we be buried with Christ into death, he says not we
signify burial, but he says plainly we be buried: so that the sacrament of
so great a thing, is not called but by the name of the thing it self. Cip.
tom. 2. de vnct. Chris mat. fere fine.
Thus far Augustine. S. Cyprian was before S. Augustine certain hu^dreds of
years; he tells us without any scruple, or bone cast in of doubt, both what
Christ did at his last supper and what on the cross, in sound words and few:
Dedit dominus noster in mensa. Our Lord at the table whereat he received his
last supper with his disciples, with his* own hands gave bread and wine; But
upon the cross, he gave his own body with the soldiers hands to be wounded.
This is by S. Cyprian the sacrifice of the table, and the sacrifice of the
cross; at the one he gave bread and wine; upon the other he gave his body;
Here is noe vailing of him under forms and shows of bread and wine,
nospeaking of quantitie^ and qualities without substance, nor offering up of
him to God his father. In an other place he says in most plain words. Tom. 2.
de bap tism. Christi and manif. trinit. fine.
Nec sacerdotij eius paenituit deu^ It never repented God (says he) of Christ's
preisthood; For the sacrifice that he offered upon the cross, is so acceptable
in the goodwil of God, and so stands in continual strength and virtue, that
the same oblatio^ is noe less acceptable this day in the sight of God the
Father, then it was that day when blood and water ran out of his wounded
side, and semper reseruatae in corpore plaga salutis humana exigant pretium and
obedieutiae donatiuum requirant. And the skarrs teserued still in his body do
suffice for the redemption of man and do require a favor because of the
obedience. This is plain according to the scriptures, Heb 7.23.27. and. 10. v.
12. and 9 v. 28.
that once Priest, by one sacrifice once offered, that is our savior by giving
himself to death upon the Cross has reconciled us to God, and sanctified us
for ever; and cuteth of their many Priests, to offer often, as though there
were left now after the death of Christ an offering for sin, or his precious
blood were of noe greater value then the blood of Bull: and Goats which were
offered often, because they could not purge sin.

There is a Master amongst them called the Master of the esnte^ces, Vide
Genebr. Chron l. 4. an. 1159. fol. 932.
P. Lumbard. or Longobardus (who collected a breife of doctrine out of the
Greek and latin Fathers) ancienter by far then the counsel of Trent, Allen,
Canus, or the Rhemists, and before any Protestant (if they say true that are
accustomed to lie) who lived in the year of our Lord Bishop of Paris anno.
Paris.
1160. upon whose books, survey has bin made, and although they have gathered
noe Index upon him, as they have done upon others, yet they have noted him in
many places where they misl^ke him with a non tenetur, the master is not
allowed here. Magister hic non tenetur.
This Catholic Doctor much renowned amongst them taught even as the
Protestants do, in this quae^stio^ of the sacrifice of Christ in the Mass,
and yet has escaped from amongst them, without so much as an item for it,
which manifestly shows that though they have us offenders in that matter they
have their chief Master also a ringleader therein and themselves or brethren
accessory thereto, because they have not taxed him therefore. And howsoever we
may be faulty, (the case standing as it does) our answer is the same with
the woman's in the poet Nam si ego digna hac contumelia sum maxim, Terenc. in
Eunueh. act 5. scen. 2. Senec. in Medea* act. 3.
at tu indignus qui faceres tamen. For although I be never so well worthy to be
so spitfully handled, yet were you no meet man to do it (says she) And as
Medea says to Iaso^ Omnes coniugem infamem arguant, solus tuere, solus
insontem voca. Tibi innocens sit, quisquis est pro te nocens. Let others defame
me with infamy, yet do thou only take my part; do thou call me just and
undefiled, let him be an innocent to thee, who for thee does transgresie. The
words of Lumbard are these, Sent l. 4. dis. 12 parag. 7. Christ is not now
really offered, but the memory of his sacrifice is celebrated.
Post heac quaeritur, si quod gerit sacerdos proprie dicatur sacrificium, vel
immolatio, and si Christus quotidie immolatur, vel semel tantum immolatus sit.
I demand (says he) whether that which the priest does be properly called a
sacrifice, and an oblation or not; and whether Christ be daily offered, or
else were offered only once. To this (says he) our answer in brief is, that
that which is offered, and consecrated by the Priest, is called a sacrifice and
oblation, because it is a memory and representation of the true sacrifice, and
holy oblation which was made on the altar of the cross. Et semel Christus
mortuus in cruce est, ibique immolatus est in semetipse Christ also died once
on the Cross, and there was he offered himself, quotidie autem immolatur in
sacramento, but he is offered daily in a sacrament, because in the sacrament
there is a remembrance of that which was once don on the Cross. And this is
not Peter Lumbardes opinion only, but his strong proof and collection out of
all the Fathers Greek and Latin, noe one of the^ ever dreaming of sacrificing
the son of God to his father, or of making the same sacrifice unbloody, which
Christ made bloody, or to have the sacrament, both the thing it self, and a
remembrance of it self, and al at one time.

Wherefore although the sacrifice be a true, and proper, and sovereign
propitiatory sacrifice, as it is defined by the Trent Fathers, yet that
sacrifice which the ancient Church of God 1400. years before those of Trent
spoke of, was not so caled properly, and according to the rigor of the word:
with them the celebration of the Lords supper is called an oblation, for that
it is a representatio^ of Christ's death, and sacraments have names of the
things which they signify, and because the merits and fruits of Christ's
passion are by the power of his spirit divided and bestowed on the faithful
receauers of these mysteries. Thomas of Aquine was in his time of greater
credit with them then the Master of the sentences, Acute diuus Thomas vt omnia*
Cam^. rat. 9. argutissime. Canus. l. 12: to 408. Melius diuus Thomas vt omnia
dixit, Allen, fol. 419. p. 3. q 83. art. I resp. dicendum ex Aug. ad sim pl.
quest. 3. If Thom. had thought that Christ had bin killed and sacrificed to God
his father (as D. Allen disputes l. 2. c 11) he needed not to have hand led it
as here he does Camp. rat. 5. Duraeus ea^ fol. 265. Art. 17 cont luel. fol 206.
b. and 207. a.
though in time later, the Master is not ever allowed by them, but Thomas, they
say has done all things acutly and well: and yet he says as we say in this.
In two respects (says he) celebratio butus sacraements dicitur immolatio
Christi; the celebratio^ of this sacrament may be called the sacraficing of
Christ; First because as S. Augustine says resemblances are wont to be called
by the name of those things, whereof they are resemblances and therefore the
celebration of this sacrament is a certain representative Image of the passion
of Christ, which is his true sacrificing; Secondly touching the effect of
Christ's passion, quia scilicet per hoc sacramentum participes efficimur fructus
dominicae passionis, because by this sacrament we are made partakers of the
fruit of the Lords passion. This of Thomas were ceaue against their real,
external, and corporal kind of offering the live flesh of Christ to God the
Father by the Priests hands under the forms of bread and wine, as now they
teach they do. With what facility of language D. Harding and D. Stephan
Gardener proceeded in this question I will now also show you: and the rather
because Campian, and Dur^us both, do highly comme^d D. Harding and his work;
he having spoken something of the sacrifice of Christ on the Cross, done with
shedding of blood in his own person, as the scripture witnesses; comes to
show how he is handled in their Mass, says; Sacramentally or in a mystery
Christ is offered up to his Father in the daily sacrifice of the Church, under
the form of bread and wine, truly, and indead, not in respect of the manner of
offering, but in respect of his very body and blood really present. And after
recitinge the words of the Evangelists ( Luc. 22
how that Christ at his last supper took bread gave thanks brake it, and said
take eat this is my body which is given for you, and this is my blood which is
shed for you in remission of sins) out of which he would prove his sacrifice,
says they are words of sacrificing and offering, they show and set forth an
oblation in act and deed, though the term it self of oblatio^ or sacrifice
be not expressed; and therefore belike seeing nether any terms nor words to
make for it there; afterward upon more deliberation, he peeceth out the
Evangelists and S Paul, for Christ said, Do yes this in my remembrance, he
reads do ye or make ye this in my remembrance. Reioynder. f. 283. and 305.
Tully de nature. deotum. l. 1. fe^e fine.
Elephanto belluarum nullaprudentior, at figura^ quae vastior? Of beasts says
Tully none is more wiser then the Elephant, in shape none more deformed. M.
Harding was thought for that time, to have dealt substantially against his
adversary; in substance of matter none more weak. Who can explain how Christ
is offered really in their Mass, and yet not in respect of the manner of
offering? what manner and what respect is this? Or what words of sacrificing
and offering did Christ use at his last supper, without any term of oblatio^
and sacrificing, Hoc non est considerare, sed quasi sortiri quid loquare. Tull.
ibid.
This is not to speak with discretion but as it were by lot and hap-hazard.

But the truth is Christ used noe word, term or act of sacrificing, at his
last supper. we marvel not then though M. Harding say he expressed it not by
any term. Yet the farthest of from al truth is, Hard. Ibid. fol 209. A
necessary point of Christian doctrine and yet without al manner of Religion.
that which in the prosecution of this article he delivers, which is, that
Christ at the very same instant of time that he offered himself on the Cross
with shedding of blood, we must understand (for a necessary point of Christian
doctrine) that he offered himself invisibly (as concerning man) in the sight
of his heavenly father bearing the marks of his wounds and there appears
before the face of God; with that thorn pricked, nail boared, spear perced
and other wounded, rent and torn body for us. Here are 4 sacrifices made of
one. The same Christ sacrificed at his last supper, the same Christ on the
Cross, the same Christ at the same time sacrificed in heaven, and the same
Christ sacrificed in the Mass. How M. Harding can bring Christ's sacrificed
into heaven without his tormentors is hard to conceive. A^as Caiphas, Judas,
Pilate, and the rest of that damned crew indeed for without those wretches,
Christ's blood was not shed, and without shedding of blood there is noe
remission of sin: Where M. Harding should ever findany such doctrine delivered
before him I cannot judge, Heb. 9. l. 12. fol. 421. a incruentam oblationem
Christus in cae lis fecit. In his explication and assertion of the true
catholic faith. l. 5. fol. 144 b. Noe iteration of Christ's sacrifice,
except he did allight upon it in Melchior Canus, who amongst other idle and
vain discourses of their Mass insinuates such a thing, speaking of an
unbloody sacrifice in heaven, offered there by Christ.

Stephan Gardener sometime Bishop of Winchester, a sure card to the posters at
Rome writing purposly of the sacrifice of the Mass, begins well, says it is
agreed and by the scriptures plainly taught, that the oblation and sacrifice of
our savior Christ, was and is a perfect work, once consummate in perfection
without necessity of iteratio^, as it was never taught to be iterate but a
mere blasphemy to presuppose it. This is sound and Catholic, if he would
abide by it, but within two leaves after, he says we must believe the very
presence of Christ's body and blood on Gods board, and that the Priests do
their sacrifice, and be therefore called sacrificers. If the Priests do there
sacrifice, Ibid. fol. 146. b very sacrificers.
the^ do they either iterate Christ's sacrifice or have an other. An other they
will not say they have and then must they needs iterate Christ's, which indeed
(as he says) is blasphemous to think on. And again he would infer out of
Lumbard, Ibid. 148. b.
that the same most precious body and blood is offered daily, that once
suffered, and was once shed. And yet in the next page he says. Ibid. 149. b.
The Catholic doctrine teaches not the daily sacrifice of Christ's most
precious body and blood to be an iteration of the once perfected sacrifice on
the Cross, Ibid. 149. b. Of the virtue of the sacrifice of the Mass and of
Christ's on the Cross Guard. Ibid fol. 149. b. Christ's sacrifice on the Cross
was and is propitiatory
but a sacrifice that represents that sacrifice, and shows it also before
the e^es of the faithful, and refreshes the effectual memory of it. What
should any cockle do amongst this corn? why should he presently insert that
the catholic doctrine teaches the daily sacrifice to be the same in Esse^c
that was offered on the Cross once. Come to the comparison between the
sacrifice of the Mass, and that of the Cross, of the strenght virtue and
force of the one and of the other, they know not what to say. The offering on
the cross (says he) was and is propitiatory and satisfactory for our
redemption and remission of sins, Note well. Ibid, 150. a. The mass is
propitiatory, also, so they make 2. propitiatory sacrifices, which can noe more
stand together, the^ if they should make 2 almighties.
whereby to destroy the tyranny of sin, the effect whereof is given and
dispensed in the sacrament of Baptism.

The daily offering (meaning the Mass) is propitiatory also but that it is not
in that degree of propitiation, for to call the daily offering a sacrifice
satisfactory, must have an understanding that signifies not the action of the
Priest, but the presence of Christ's most precious body and blood, the very
sacrifice of the world once perfectly offered being propitiatory and
satisfactory for all the world. And yet not ten lines after in the same page,
he says that the act of the Priest done according to Gods commandment must
needs be propitiatory and provoke Gods favor, and ought to be trusted on to
have a propitiatory effect with God.

Tantae molis er at Romana^ co^dere gente^.
Here any man may see what a business and hard work it is, to patch these
popish doctrines together, what absurdities they fall into thereby. One while he
says that the act of the Priest must needs be a sacrifice propitiatory. And
now to have an understanding for the same, he is driven to a very shamfull
shift, that he must either say clean contrary, that it is not the action of
the Priest, but the presence of Christ: or else that the action of the Priest
is noe otherwise satisfactory, then al other Christian men's works be, for so
he averreth that all good works, good thoughts, and good me ditations, may be
called sacrifices, and the same be called sacrifices propitiatory also. D.
Allen having showed by some reasons that both the sacrifice of Christ at his
last supper, and that on the cross stand well together, De euch. sacrif l, 2.
c. 10. f. 544 Quam hodie cuiuslibet sacerdotis sacru^ in ecclesia.
and are in their natures very commodious, adds (but it is saluo meliori
indicio) according to his own opinion; that that sacrifice which Christ
himself offered at his last supper, had not any other effect or greater
strength, then the Mass of every Priest performed in the Church now has,
whereby without quesion is confirmed the action of the Priest, or else Gardiners
staggering is in vain.

And yet me thinks, Ibid. post c. 23. fol. 596.
Allen himself stumbleth at this again, when he would have the sacrifice of
the mass to be held, not an absolute and independent sacrifice, but to be
referred as all the Jewish sacrifices were, to the only fountain of sacrifices
the death of Christ, why should it not be absolute and independent? since you
say that Christ's sacrifice at his last supper had noe greater effect then that
of your mass done by the Priest: and that of your mass being the same in
essence with that of the Cross, what blasphemy is it in Allen to compare it
with those sacrifices of the Jews; and r^ferre it to the fountain, that is to
it self? Again is it any marvel if Gardener show himself unconstant in
these kind of questions? Mirum vero, impudenter mulier, si facit meretrix.
Ter. in And. act. 4. seen. 4 Guard. ib. 151. b 152. a.
The pure sacrifice of the Church (says he) is there offered for the effect of
the increase of life in us as it was offered on the cross to atcheiue life
unto us. And yet in the very next page out of Cyrill, he would have the
sacrifice of the Church to be vinificum, a sacrifice giving life. And yet he
adds which is more wou^derful, that that ca^ be only said of the very body
and blood of Christ so that one where he deuideth our redemption between the
Priests sacrifice and Christ's, Intolerable blasphemy.
the one to give life, and the other to increase our life, and that is noe
less then flat blasphemy; For all Christians do believe, that the sacrifice
made on the cross does both give us life and also increase and continue the
same, and the Priests oblation does neither of both, for our redemption and
eternal salvation stands not only in giueing us life, but in continuing the
same for ever, as Christ said that he came not only to give us life, but also
to make us increase and abound therein: John 10. Gal. 2.
And S. Paul says the life which I now live in flesh, I live by the faith of
the son of God, who loved me and gave himself for me. And therefore if we
have the one by the oblation of Christ, and the other by the oblation of the
Priest, then divide we our salvation between Christ and the Priest, and shall
have our salvation and redemption, as much by the sacrifice made by the Priest,
as we have by that of the Cross done by Christ himself.

If any man rescue him by saying he refers vinificu^ that sacrifice gyuing
life to the body and blood of Christ, whether on the Cross or sacrificed in
the mass, then overthrows he his own distinction made before of giving and
increasing life, and makes the mass an independent and absolute sacrifice,
which Allen will none of. Thus have you a breife of what Gardener has said
touching the sacrifice of the mass, where you see he runs too and fro so
astonished and amassed as if he were at his wits end, and knew not what to say.
For one while the Priest makes a sacrifice propitiatory, an other while he
does not; now he gives life, now he gives none; now is Christ the full
savior and satisfaction, now the Priest has half part with him, and again
the Priest does all.

Bellarmine treating of this same question, De missa, l. 2. ^. 4. fol. 776.
of the sufficiency of the sacrifice of the mass* delivers according to his
manner certain propositions and distinctions of his own only making, without
confirming them either by the holy scriptures, ancient Fathers or doctors, and
having that liberty he were very simple if he could not make a bad cause show
well, Hooker prae^, ad lib eccles. pol. fol. 24. The mass is of value finite If
this reason of Bellarmine be good, against the value of the mass in the
behalf of the sacrifice of the Cross: it overthrows the whole mass and
establishes that of the Cross. The sacrifice of the Cross is of infinite valu^
especially to those that will take any thing for good at their hands unto whom
they bear strong affection. For commonly such is our forestalled minds, that
whom in great things we mightily admire, in them we are not willingly
persuaded that any thing is amiss. His fourth proposition therefore is valor
sacrificij Missae finitu^ est. The value of the mass is finite, that is, the
mass is not of infinite worth or price. And this says he is the common
opinion of the divines, and is proved most plainly by the use of the Church.
Mark his reasons For if the value of the mass were infinite it were needless
to have many masses, especially for the obtaining of one thing For if one mass
were of infinite value, it would suffice to obtain al things, and therefore why
should we have other? And this is confirmed by the sacrifice of the Cross,
which for noe other cause was one, nor never is repeated, but only because it
is of infinite value, and obtained a ransom for all sins past and to come:
But says he, although the mass be of value finite; which is verje true in it
self, yet the reason how it comes to be so is not so sure; For it may seem
strange, C^r valor sacrificij huius fit finitus cum idem sit hoc sacrificium
cum sacrificio crucis, A great marvel.
why the worth of this sacrifice should be finite, since it is the same, with
that on the cross which was infinite, and when there is the same host, The
offeringe and the offerer, is one in both
and the same Christ offering himself, which are infinitely accept^ble to God.

Bellarmine might add further of his own, if it pleased him A marvel it is,
how the sacrifice of the mass should be inferior to that of the cross, since
that of the mass is a most true sacrifice, even one of the terms he gave
before to the sacrifice of the cross. And marvel it is, that the sacrifice
of the mass should not be of the same value with that of the cross; seeing
as he says one where there is the the same offering and offerer Christ in
both, Ibid. l. c. 25. fol. 749. etc. 3. in principio.
infinitely accounted of by God; and otherwher that the sacrifice of the mass
is a most true sacrifice so in a third place, he gra^teth that in the sacrifice
of the mass it may most truly be said that the blood of Christ is shed there.
Take into these, Ibid. fol. 49 in fine paginae.
the word propitiatory which the Tre^t fathers give to the mass to, and then
if al these to gether serve not the turn, Iuel cont. Hard art. 1 druis. 33.
touching Amphilochius fo highly renowned by M. Hardinge.
to make a great marvel, why the sacrifice of the Mass should be of value
finite, and that of the cross infinite, we may say as one said in an other
case, nothing I trow will serve the turn: For grant those things of the
mass, and it cannot but be of infinite value and price, as well as that on the
Cross: but they know that none of those things are true of the mass, and
therefore Bellarmine plays a desperate man's part in giving such reasons as
cannot prove the mass inferior to Christ's sacrifice, Virg. Aeneid. l. 8. inde
repe^te impulit, impulso quo max imus insonat ether prima exparte hostiae quae
offertur.
except he in euitably overthrow the mass it self, as Hercules in the Poet
overthrew Cacus his den, when heaven rebounded with the noise.

His reasons (salve moliore iudicio) are 3. The first is drawn from the host
which is offered. For in the sacrifice of the cross Christ in his natural
being was there sacrificed and destroyed in the form of a man, but in the
sacrifice of the mass he is destroyed in his sacramental being, In his
sacrame^tall being? you say that Christ has there a real and substa^tiall
being. the Protestants say he is slain and his blood shed in a sacrament.
Ipsa hostia and offerens Christus.
but his natural being is more noble and more precious then his sacramental.
This reason thus drawn from the nature of the host or thing offered is very
frivolous and absurd, especially seeing Bellarmine delivered before that the
host in both was one, where can he find a defect in that? In flying from his
natural being on the cross to his sacramental being in the mass, he
joins with us, for we acknowledge he died sacramentally in his last supper
because a sacrament of his death and passion was iustituted; and so when the
Lords supper is now administered we say he is sacrificed, because the memory of
his sacrifice is celebrated. 2. ratio sumitur ex part of ferentis Ipsa hostia
and offerens Christus.
The second reason is drawn stronger (as he says) from the party that
offers; for in the sacrifice of the Cross, the party offering is the person
of the son of God; but in the sacrifice of the mass the offerer is the son
of God by a minister. did he not lay it for a ground in the same page of the
leaf (to take away an objection) that Christ is the offerer as well in the
Mass, as on the Cross? 3. Ratio sumitur ex ipsa Christi voluntate, nam
etia^si posset Christus per vnam oblationem sacrificij inc^ue^ti, sieve per se,
sieve per minist^u^ oblati, quae libet deo and pro quibuscu^que impetrare, tame^
noluit perere nec impetrare, nisi vt pro singulis oblationibus applicaretur
certa mensura f^uctus passionis suae, sieve ad peccatorum remissionem, sive ad
alia b^ne f^cia, quibus in hac vita indigemus.
And has he not disabled him self, and his fellows of a great excuse, which
they were wont to make in that behalf? for when we object the person of the
Priest, taking upon him contrary to the scripture, so great an office, not
called thereunto, as to offer up the son of God to his Father, they had to say
that it was not the Priest that did it, but Christ that offered himself by the
mynistery of the Priest: end yet now Bellarmine would disable the whole mass as
though it were less worth that Christ should offer himself, were it but by
the hand of a minister. The third of Bellarmines reasons is drawn from the
will of Christ. For says he, although Christ could obtain by one oblation of
this unbloody sacrifice, offered either by himself, or by his minister,
whatsoever he would for whomsoever, yet would he nether ask nor obtain of God
any thing but that by every oblation in the mass there should be applied a
certain fruit of his passion, All the application in the Gospel now of
Christ's sacrifice common both to Priest and people is that of the Apostle. Let
us draw near with a true heart in assurance of faith. Heb. 10. v. 22. Bellar.
de miss. l. 1. c. 25. f 748. H 9.17,20. The Lord, supper or Eucharist is this
testament or seal of Gods promise exhibited to us. The matter testamentary, or
which is testified, is the sac^ifice of Christ's death as Christ says this cup
is the new testament, in my blood. Missa non est noua testame^ti Christi
institutio sed est repetitio illius eius them. Ib: c 25. f. 740. Neque vnquam
repetitur. ib. c. 4. l. 2. fol. 776.
either for remission of sins, or obtaining other benefits which in this life
we want.

Thus have we the full of Bellarmines reasons to prove that the value, and
strength of the sacrifice of the mass is finite, whereas he confesses the
sacrifice of the Cross was infinite, so that by his own grant, the difference
between them is, as between finite and infinite, which is disproportio^
enough, whereupon we may safly conclude, the Mass is not the sacrifice of
Christ. And thus has Bellarmine like an other Hercules cle^sed Augeus stable
of a number of filth. For would he would bring, not three but three skore
reasons to prove that the sacrifice of the Mass is inferior to that on the
Cross, he should willingly be heard. I will follow Bellarmine in on note more
about his mass, and so give an end to this part: We object the confirmation
of a Testament depends on the death of the Testator, therefore the confirming
of Christ's testament depends on his death; Or thus, Where a sacrifice is, the
testament is confirmed, but where a testament is, there is death, therefore the
mass is a new testament, yea there are so many testaments as there be masses,
and Christ must so often die as there be masses to ratify and establish them.
Bellarmine answers, that the mass is not a new feting forth of the testament
of Christ, or is not a new testament, but a repetition of his own, which he
did and confirmed by his death, so a little before he called the mass an
iteration of the oblation of Christ.

Thus is Bellarmine content to make his mass a repetition and iteration of
Christ's sacrifice, which a while after he will not allow. For (as before is
rehearsed out of him) speaking of the sacrifice of the cross, he says it is
only one and cannot be repeated. So says Gardener very confidently. That
Christ's sacrifice was and is perfect without necessity of iteration. If
Bellarmine will stand to this that his mass is but a repetition and iteration
of Christ's testament, it may very well be demanded where the Rhemists will find
their mass or sacrifice done daily vnbloodily, Annot. Heb. c. 10. v. 11.
that was once down bloodily made by the same Priest Christ Jesus, though by
his ministers hands, and not many hosts as those of the old law were, but the
very self same in number, even Christ's own body that was crucified.


Tub. I have observed you with attention in your discourse, wherein you have
showed the diversities of handlinge one and the same thing. It seems they
cannot tell themselves what they would say, if you have laid down their
words rightly without falsification. For in this of the mass they teach the
offering up of the son of God to his father, which assertion had need
(because it is a matter of the greatest weight) to be strongly confirmed by
holy scripture; They teach a true sacrifice a perfect and real, but when they
come to confirm, that which first they lay down, they speak of the forms of
bread and wine, destroying the truth of Christ's natural body. They make it
bloody and unbloody. They know not how far the Priest works in it, nor
whether they were best to say it is the same that Christ did. Articles
subscribed unto by the Church of England. art 31. Redemption. act. 20.28. Romans
5.6, Gal. 3.13. 1. Cor. 6.28. 1. Pet 1,18. Propitiation. Act. 10.43. Ro^. 3.25
Heb. 9.12.28. 1. John. 2.2. 1. Ioh 4.10 Satisfaction Io. 1.29. 1 Pet. 3.18. 1
Io. 1.7. Gardener. Saunders. Hardinge.
Their discourses herein are me thinks unprofitable and uncomfortable.


Romans Unprofitable and uncomfortable said you? you never judged righter in all
your life. For where the offeringe of Christ once made on the cross is that
perfect redemption, propitiation and satisfaction for all the sins of the
whole world both original and actual, there being noe other sacrifice for sin
but that alone, they in stead of that brought in sacrifices of Masses wherein
they offer Christ for the quick and dead to have remission of pain and guilt,
and have handled the proof as before is set down: whereby you may observe the
boldness and impudency of them in defense, and liking of their cause; who are
not any whit a hashed to bid the readers sift, try, and examine, and weigh
without partiallity their reasons and arguments, and then to judge, which who
soever does, shall assuredly find noe sincere dealing, on their parts, but
shifts, cauills, and base trigiuersations, a sufficient proof whereof is gone
before and more shall now presently follow, in continuing their several
declarations of the manner of the real presence of Christ in the sacrament
(which I hindered before in discoursing so largly of their sacrifice) which I
did reserve to this place because we are to examine the force of every word in
the institution of the Lords supper, and their manner of contriuing them for
their purpose.

The sentence of holy scripture, by which they would prove both their sacrifices
and real presence in this. The real presence of Christ in the sacrament. Mat.
26.26,27 Marc. 14.22. Luc. 22.19. 1. Cor. 11.23.24
When they were eating, Jesus, when he had taken the bread, and given thanks,
he brake it, and gave it to the disciples, and said take ye, eat ye, this
is my body. And when he had taken the cup and given thanks he gave it them,
saying, drink ye all of it, for this is my blood of the new testament, that
is shed for many for the remission of sins. By this narration of the
Evangelist you see both what Christ did and said at his last supper, He took,
he blessed, he brake, he gave, and said Take eat this is my body, Do this in
remembrance of me. Now I ask you this question, what thing was it which
Christ took? all men agree, The words of the institution examined. This bread
is my body.
it was bread. What blessed he? bread. What brake he? bread. What gave he?
bread: and then said, take, eat this (what? bread) is my body. We say by this
it is clear, that when Christ said, Take eat this is my body, he spoke of the
bread as if he had said, Take eat this bread is my body. One the other side
they expound it, Take eat this (nothing) is my body, we know not what. Or
this invisible thing, Or this thing I have in my hands; but in noe case this
bread is my body. For you must understand, that in the trial of this one word,
stands all our whole controversy both of the real presence,
Transubstantiation, and the sacrifice of the Mass; if Christ spoke of the
bread when he said, Take, eat this is my body, This reason has his force in
nature confessed by all me^
both they and we are agreed that the substance of bread remains, and so
nothing on their side will fall out right, the reason is, one contrary thing
(as bread and body) cannot be spoken of, or be said to be an other thing, but
in and by a figure so that to say of the bread this is my body must needs
intend a figure. And because they would avoid the figure, they do violate the
eternal law of Reason, which intends that if a man say take this, he must
mean somthinge, which he gives or has in his hand;

The evidence of this is so clear, that I could confute the^ diverse ways, but
according to my first institution, I will openly show, by their own dark and
perplexed speeches, that did they not strive to uphold a thing once
apprehended, they might more easier yield then defend their errors. Iuell. art.
24.
The Reverend Bishop of Sarum made this one of his questions at Paul's Cross
publikly enough, whether the people were ever taught to believe that when
Christ said This is my body, the word this, pointed not the bread, but
somthinge in general, they knew not what. M. Harding who seemed to say
somthinge to every of those articles denied by the Bishopp, said least of all
to this, which argues he had not what to answer, least he should have runn
himself upon on shelfe or other, there is so many diversities of opinions
amongst them in this. How this word Hoc in that saying of Christ is to be
taken and what it points, Hard cont Iuel. art. 24. f. 2 28
we know (says M. Hardinge) who have more learnedly, more certainly and more
truly treated thereof, then Luther, Zuinglius, Calvin, Cranmer, P. Martyr, We
know.
or any their ofspringe. We know says he. But what he knew touching this
point, nether he whilst he lived, Guard. in his explication. fol. 39. b.
refers the word this to the invisible substance. In his detectio^ of the
devils sophistry fol. 29. b. Now it demonstrateth the bread.
nor his friends since he died, would never let us know, unkind as they are
Freindlier yet has D. Gardener dealt with us in this same case, who has yet
given us words, though we know not his meaning. When Christ said this is my
body, there is noe necessity says he that the demonstration this should be
refered to the outward visible matter, but may be referred to the invisible
substance. what outward visible matter, and what invisible substance is there?
Is Christ's body that invisible substance? Then the speech will be This body is
my body: yet was not the same man always of the same opinion (though he would
be called Marcus Constantius. Allen de euch sacrif. l. 1. c. 34. fol. 420.
Disparata su^t opposita quorum vnu^ multis pariter op ponitur sic homo, arbor,
lapis and ciu smo di res infinite, disparantur, nec eadem res potest esse homo
arbor lapis. Ra mus de disparatis. Ib fol. 419, 421 Hoc demo^strat corpus. vt
sit se^sus, hoc corpus meum est corpus meum. This is it indeed that moves us.
Bread and wine are there indeed. Vage and indefinite nec per sehocaut illud
exact demo^strare donec compleatur oration, AEneid. l. 4. Staplet return of
untruths against M. Iuell. art. 1. fol. 16. b.
For before he had thus written: Christ spoke plainly making a demonstration of
the bread, when he said, this is my body. If it be plain, why are they so
obscure. For they dare not say what it means neither one thing nor other. A
third of theirs, and a country man of ours reproving the Protestants for
referring the word this to the bread, says it is absurd, both in philosophy
and divinity that two things different and distinct in nature and substance
should be affirmed and spoken the one of the other.

It is true it cannot be without a figure So Dureus Quid obsecro, stultius,
quam disparatorum, vt dialectici appellant, alterum dies de altero? ac si
lignum esse lapidem, aut murem Elephantum deceret. What is more foolish I pray
you says he, then as the Logitians use to speak, that one contrary should be
spoken of an other, as if a man should saya piece of wood were a stone or an
mouse an Elephant. These men (to avoid the figure) rectifying what is amiss in
us, have made that crooked which before was straight. Allen says the word this
demonstrateth the body. But says he, if there be any man whom it does
trouble how the word This can demonstrate the body and blood which are not
there present, when the word This is spoken: Or that they should not show the
bread and wine, which are there indeed, let him read not the scriptures, (for
those overthrow you) Guimu^dus and Thomas, who have largly, elegantly, and
subtly treated of these things. To amend al he says, the safest and best way
is to take the word THIS in the beginning of the sentence wandringly, and
without any certainty, and nether to signify this thing or that, exactly
until the speech be ended.

Stapleton is as variable as the best; we need not so much remember the Poet,
varium and mutabile semper foemina, a woman is an unconstant and changable
creature, as marvel at these Doctors in their uncertain speches. Now M.
Iuell (says he) do you think it an untruth to say, that in Tertullians time
Christian folk or the old Fathers called that bread, the body of Christ, and
so consequently our maker and re deemer? By Stapleton here, Christ spoke of the
bread when he said this is my body.
But what says our savior himself in the Gospel? Does not he say of that
bread which he took into his hands which he brake and blessed This is my
body: Does not he in these words call it his body? To this we agree, we desire
noe more, let him stand to this and the controversy is ended. We say as
Stapleto^ says, that Christ did say of that bread which he took in his hands,
which he brake and blessed This is my body. Staptlet: ibid. art. 2. fol. 41. b.
Now he will not have it sig nify the bread
But he will not abide by this, he goes from it in the examination of the
second article, for there he reasons after this manner. The scripture says
Hoc ost corpus meum, this is my body which this M. Iuell? Can you say, this
bread is my body? you know Hoe this, is the neuter gender, panis bread, is the
masculine. Was it not bread which he blessed.
Then what this? This forsooth which Christ had blessed, and made saying This
is my body. Thus far Stapleton. Does not his second affirmation frustrat his
first, and his first the second? In the first he is plain, Christ spoke of the
bread which he brake and blese sed^n the second he wrangleth about the genders,
and makes interrogations, when he knows well enough what it is as he in the
Poet, that said Sed quid hoc? pner hercle est, Ter. Andr. act. 4. scen. 4. 1.
Reioyn. fol. 304. 2. Tonstall. fol. 58. 3. Bellar. de sac. euch. l. 2.^.6. fol
155. 4. Dureus consur resp. Whirrat 9. fol. 657. 5. Hard cont. Iuel. art. 17.
fol 210. b. 6. Bell. de missa. l 1. c 10. fol. 687. Hard Reioynd page 305. a.
in noe case he will not have this to point to the bread.

M. Hardinge coming as near the truth as 4. and 4. is to 8. dare not yet
stand unto it, he tells us out of Ireneus, that Christ took the creature of
bread (or that which by creation it bread) and gave thanks saying this is my
body. Can any man in his right wits imagine that Ireueus: did not think
writing so plainly as he does, that Christ spoke of the bread when he said this
is my body. And says himself in the next page that for signification of
mystery, they brake and distribute also unto others that heavenly bread in the
form of common bread. I hope to salve this they will not say that they break
the real and fleshly body of Christ; and break bread they do though
heavenly. and heavenly bread we do not deny but the bread of the holy
communion may be called, when it is sanctified and made holy by the word of
God and prayer, put apart for that holy use; Dureus cont. whit. rat 2. f. 114
Stapl. reto. art. 1. fol. 12. Reioyn. fol. 149. b.
but yet bread and such bread, as of which the substance of our flesh is
increased and consists, as they all teach with one joint consent out of
Ireneus also. I hope they are not come to that degree of blasphemy, as to say
that our substantial and natural bodies are augmented and do consist of the
real and natural body of Christ. Therefore he must needs mean by their own
trauises out of him that Christ both spoke and meant the bread when he said
this is my body; Quam vterque est similis sui Teren. in Phor act. 3. scen. 2
and act 1. scen. 5.
and such bread as is in use amongst us. You shall see further, how like they
are in this one to an other, Ecce autem similia omnia, omwes congruuni, Vuum
cognoris, omnes noris, all feathers of one winge, know one and know al,
Tradunt mutu as operas. They help one an other, but bring their causes to noe
good pass.

Lib. 1 fol. 18. Saunders says Christ spoke of the bread. Gratiaru^ actio
Fractio panis been dicti. This conuinceth plainly he spoke of the bread. L. 7.
fol 629. Now he cannot tell what to make of it. Nec ad visibile^ corporis
Christi forma^ nec ad hunc pane^ velut qui maneat panisnec simul ad hune panem
and hoc corpus necetc
D. Saunders in his visible monarchy, treating of the sacrament, says very
plainly Christus de pane quem Apostols nondu^ acceperant dixit. Christ said of
the bread which the Apostles had not yet received This is my body: and then he
handles his giving of thanks, and after comes to the breaking of the
consecrated bread. which I hope they will not verify of Christ's real body. And
a little after the words of our Lord (says he) in the Eucharist are referred
to the Elements, for that saying This is my body is referred to the bread. This
is my blood to the Cup. But after (yet a great while after so that well he might
forget himself) in the same work treating of the same matter, he has these
words. Disparata sunt panis triticens and Corpus Christi. Bread and the body of
Christ are (says he) two separate and diverse things; so that we justly say
that the pronoune hoc this cannot be referred to the visible body of Christ
nether to the bread, as it should remain bread, nether to the bread to gether
with the body, nor to the whole action of the supper, but only to the body of
our Lord, iam tum de substantia panto factum, even then made of the substance
of bread, and exhibited under the form of bread.

Thus does Saunders here make Christ have two several bodies, one visible
their present, and the other made of bread and to that body there made of
substance of bread he refers the word this, in the sentence this is my
body: so he makes the sense thus, This body made of the substance of bread is
my body, which is a very vain speech and to noe purpose, For by that
exposition Christ's body should be there before the words of consecration were
pronounced, and so there should be noe force and virtue in consecration, or
rather there should be consecration before consecration, and so consecration
without consecration. And a little after he says At nunc pronome^ hoc. But now
the pronowne hoc this, which she weth the whole substance rei proposita of the
thing that is proposed or showed, What thing? you are afraid to call it any
thing.
does demonstrate noe other thing then the body of Christ, not remembering what
he said in the first book, as I even now recited; that Christ spoke of the
bread which the A postles had not yet received, when he said This is my body.
If he spoke of the bread, he spoke not of his body, if he spoke of his body,
he spoke not of the bread, and yet Saunders avoucheth both. Saunders ibid l.
7. fol. 633. Mark this that he cofesseth the blessing came before the break
ing.
In an other place going about to prove that the word this cannot be referred
to the visible body of Christ says thus Cum Christus post acceptum panem, and
benedictionem interpositam, Seeing Christ after the taking of the bread and the
blessing coming between, did break and give to his disciples saying, take
and eat this is my body, it is clear by the order and course of the sentence,
that he called that thing his body which he gave, and which he commanded his
disciples to eat; in so much that in the delivery of the cup he said Drink
ye all of this for this is my body, In vain therefore after the commandment
of drinking, had he added the word for, Two bloods one in the veins of his
body, and the other in the chalice.
if the blood which he then showed; had bin believed to have bin then only in
the veins of his body, and not exhibited and given to have bin drunk.

In this last sentence of the 4. things in the supper which Christ did that is
his taking, blessing, breaking, and giving, Saunders seems to allow 3. of
them to appertain to the bread taking, blessiag, Deinde cum Christus subiunxit
hoc facite: non solu^ praecepit, vt id ageremus, quod illepane^ accipiendo, be
nedicendo, fra^ gendo and distribuendo egit, vetum etiam vt opus quoddam
relinque. remus in mensa domini post nostras actiones finitas. fol. 634.
Saunders com meth to the distributing of bread, and then must they needs eat
bread Ibid fol. 637. The substance which I show? what substance. This is my
body that is behold my body where are the words which make the chang? Ibid
fol. 639. This is my body works the Change. Note.
and breaking, but not his giving, and their cating: yet in the next leaf he
comes some what nearer, for he confeseth that Christ did not only command
that we should do that which he did by taking the bread, by blessing the
bread, by breaking the bread, and by distributing the bread, but that we
should leave a certain work done at the table of the Lord after we have
finished all. So comes he now to the distributing or giving of bread, and
what should they eat, but what he distributed, which was even bread. After
this, findinge the ill conclusions of some of his own speeches, where he
refers the word this to the body there presently made he does deny that they
resolve the sentence thus hoc corpus meum ost corpus meum, this body is my
body, but thus, the substance which I show is the substance of my body; as if
it should be said, Behold the substance of my body, or Behold my body under
these accidents of this bread. Why mince you so finely with substantia quam
demonstro the substance which I show, what substance is that? if the bread,
the^ Christ spoke of the bread, which once you affirmed; if the body, then the
speech must needs be (maugre al gain saiers) This body is my body: which
now you deny. Take your foot out of which fetter you will, our of both you
cannot.

Again, where he resolves or expounds the words of Christ, this is my body,
as if he should have said, behold the substance of my body, or behold my body
under these accidents. I demand where are the words of Transubstantiation, or
that turned or made the bread, the body of Christ? For according to Saunders
opinion here, these words this is my body, are but demonstratiue, as if he
should have said. Behold the substance of my body: and then of necessity the
words that made it so must go before. But where? nether they nor he can tell.
But to my seeming he falls upon his old Bias again which he did before,
where he says Itaque olla verba Hoc est corpus meum, therefore those word;
this is my body being directed to the bread taken and blessed, doc change the
substance of bread into the body of Christ, If they be directed to the bread,
the speech must be, this bread is my body, This bread is my body.
how can they be directed to the bread else. And if it remain bread till
those words of this is my body, come, what need they fear to say he gave
bread, for those words come last of al yea after giving and eating. He took
(says he) at first, Ibid fol. 645. Accepit eni^ ab initio, non quide^ corpus
suum sed pane^ velut materia^ and elementum etc. Saunders Ibid. fol 658. 659.
He breaks bread, the^ the real body is not there.
not his body, but bread as it were a matter and element, whereunto his word
was to be joined, that it might be made a sacrament: did he not speak of the
bread then, when he said this is my body? Furthermore going about to prove,
that the body and blood of Christ are in the eucharist, although it be neither
eaten nor drunken, he begins with S. Paul, who says. 1. Cor. 10. The cup
of blessing which we bless, is it not a partaking of the blood of Christ: and
the bread which we break, is it not the participation of the body of Christ?
and infers, we break the bread before we deliver it, or give it to be eaten
For the breaking is both to revive the memory of the passion (wherein the flesh
of Christ was rent and torn with whipps, nails, and spears) as also that to
every communicant a part and morcell.

He distributeth the bread in pieces, the real body of Christ is not yet there
the^. Prius ergo qua^ iste panis* frangatur* etc.
At the first then when the bread is broken, it is the partaking of the body of
Christ; for the blessing causes that the bread be the partaking of the body
of Christ, the blessing I say of the Lord, whereby he giving thanks said This
is my body, and commanded us to do it, in his remembrance. Here is a
gallimaufery of fustia^ terms, wouen Lincy-wolsy fashion. He speaks of
breaking, and distributing of bread, and yet the real body must be there
according to his account, before the breaking come, for that is his drift
here: and then will he say, it is the real body of Christ? Noe by his own
confession, it is but the breaking panis benedicti, of the consecrated bread as
he calls it before. Again he says, the blessing is don by sayrng this is my
body, but the order of the Evangelists is contrary, they place that blessing
last of al. The words are, He took bread and blessed it, and after the
blessing comes the breaking, He took. 1. He blessed. 2. He brake 3. He gave
4.
and after that, the distributing; and then this is my body. So that except he
will interrupt the narration of the Eva^gelists and confound those terms
which are distinct, and refuse that for a blessing, which the Gospel points
and calls a blessing, and on the other side, call that a blessing which the
Gospel does not, Instit. l. 5. c, 3.
he can never justify his report. Haec est mendaciorum naturae, vt cobaerere
uon possint. This is says Lacta^tius the nature of lies that they cannot agree
to gether. and cap. 6.
Valet enim visua veritas,, but the truth does prevail of her own force
whosoever resists.

If one or two of them did thus dote or dream in their discourses it might be
excused by the insufficiency of the me^ but since amongst the^ al, there is noe
one that stands sure either to himself or to his fellows, it must needs
be judged the weakness of the cause which they maintain, Con^ut, resp.
Whitak. rat 9. sol. 601.
that cause them thus to stumble. Dureus the Jesuit coming to handle this
matter against D Whitakers says, If Christ testified that which he gave to
his disciples was his body, assuredly it could not be bread, from whence it
necessarily comes to pass, that the bread which Christ took into his hands
was changed into his body by the force and virtue of his divine words? ^oc
(totam nimirum quam manicus tenebat substantia^ demonstrans) est corpus meum.
Accipit^ (inquit Christus) and comedite. Take says Christ and eat. Quid
tandem? what then? This (showing all that substance which he had in his hands)
is my body. Why how now Dureus,? why walk you in these clouds? why do you
not tell us what substance that was which Christ had in his hands. Bread, or not bread, the body or not body. That which Christ took, he gave, although
you deny it, saying panem in manus accepisse fatcor, Dureus rat. 2. fol. 94.
dedissenego. That Christ took bread in his hands I confess, that he gave
bread I deny: but was not the bread which he took, that substance which you
say he showed, having it in his hands, it cannot be otherwise for the words of
chang as you say, this is my body not come yet. If Dureus answer (as he
will) that he spoke not of the bread which he took; let him yet resolve us
what inbstance that was which he had in his han des and showed his disciples
when he said Take eat this is my body. Fecistis probei incertior sum mul^o
qua^ dudum. Teren in Phor. act. 2. scen. 3. Si vero quenquam illud ad. huc
moueat quomodo pro. nomina in sacramentalibus verbis possint demonstra re
corpns and sanguinem, quae adhuc non su^t cum ca efferu^tur: aut quomodono^
plane in dicent pane^ and vinum, quae reuera tum ex istunt-Legat. etc. Alle^ de
sac Euch. l. 1. f. 42^ Bellar. de sacr. Euc. l i c. ii f. 83 This, does not
demonstrate the bread; nor the body. according to Thomas. It does not
demonstrate the bread precisly Sic tamen vt demonstratio proprie ad species
pertineat. Sed in obliquo, hoc modo. Ibid fol. 85. Ibid. fol. 88 This Ens this
thing, or this substance.
If he resolve not this, he resolves not our doubt, but leaves us more
uncertain the^ before; for this is it that troubles us, how the word this can
demonstrate the body and blood, which are not there when the word is spoken;
and not demonstrate and point the bread and wine, which certainly are there
then; as says D. Allen: And if the bread and wine be there then, even when the
words this is my body are spoken; then are they there both at the breaking and
giving, as they utterly would deny. S^ll Bellarmine the mouth of their senate
conclude the controversy? yes say they we al agree: Hear him the^, a man of a
polished wit. Although (says he) the Catholics do agree in the thing, yet
do they not agree in the manner of explaining what the word this should
demonstrate.

Two famous opinions there are amongst them, one that the pronoune this should
demonstrate the body, which opinion he refuses as not consonant to the truth,
howsoever Allen and Saunders as you heard before, did so teach. The other is of
Thomas Aquinas, and others very many who have followed him that the pronoune
this, does not demonstrate the bread precisely, nor the body, but a substance
in common which is under those forms; yet so that the demonstration
appertains properly to the forms, but not that the fence be This, that is
these forms are my body; but thus, on this sort this is my body, that is under
these forms is my body. So that the word This does not demonstrate the bread,
nor the body of Christ, but that which is contained under those forms Therefore
we do not say (says he) this, that is this substance or as Scotus this Ens:
but This, that is the substance contained under these forms. Here in
Bellarmine you have all that art or falsehood can devise, to darken the truth
with all. Does any man yet conceive by them what the word This, poiuteth unto?
but for very shame he would say it pointed to the bread he denies it but in
part, he says it does not preciselie point the bread, and therefore I say he
does not precisely deny it. His fellows before him will in noe sort have it
so: But he utterly denies that it points to the body, yet is he more out
then they, when he says the demonstration this does properly belong to the
forms, and yet the sense must not be These forms are my body. But not
withstanding his denial it must be so, if he sai^ true, For if you refer the
word this to the bread the sense will be, This bread is my body. This body is my
body. The^ forms are my body.
(...) bread it my body, and therefore they deny it. If it be referred to the
body, the sense must be, this body is my body which Bellarmine denies; And
what should let, but if he say it points to the forms, it should be These
forms are my body. But he will have it thus; That which is contained under
these forms is my body; And what with him and them too is contained under
those forms, but the body of Christ? Bread they say there is none: so
according to Bellarmine, the sense will be This body under these forms is my
body; or otherwise to tell us directly what it was, that was contained under
those forms. In the chapter next before, reciting out of S. Bellar de euch
sacra. l. 1. c. 10. fol. 69. and Allen de Euc. sac. l. 1. c. 15. Rhem an not.
Mat. 26 v. 26. parag. 7. Refertur ad materiam, quae erat in manibus. Luc. 9.
Marc. 8 Luc. vlt. Resolve me in this and I will yield the whole
Marks Gospel the order of the Eva^gelists he says it cannot be doubred, but
Christ having taken the bread, blessed it, brake it, and gave it to his
disciples: but as the breaking and giving is referred to the matter which was
in his hands, so his blessing too, should be referred thither which was to
the bread.

We grant him (if so that will pleasure him) that Christ blessed the bread; and
that Christ never used to bless or give thanks, but at some notable memorable
work, as at the multiplying of the loaves in the Gospel, and blessing of his
disciples is read, and here in the institution of the supper. But did
Bellarmine ever read, that the blessing of any creature, sensible or insensible
was the changing and transubstantiation of the substance of it, so that it was
not the same substance after, that it was before; if he cannot prove this, he
comes short of his purpose, to take needless pains to prove a thing not
denied: For both he and al others of his side, when they speak of blessing of
the bread, mean only a turning and change of one substance into an other, such
a change as blessing nether can, or ever did work, and yet Bellarmine must
remember, that in the institution of the supper, the breaking follows after
the blessing, so that here is a doubt what is broken, bread there is none, and
the Body of Christ I say must not be broken, which consideration makes
Bellarmine salve himself an other way by saying To be broken agrees not to
the body of Christ but in the form of bread, Bellar. de mis. l. 1. c. 12. f.
699. To be broken a. greeth not to the body of Christ, but in the form of
bread. Allen de Euch. sacra l. 1. c. 15. etc 16. and Bell. de sac. euch. l. 1
c. 10. Rhem. annot Mat. 26 v. 26. parag. 7.
what need he say, in the form of bread? why the body of Christ is not
there, but under the form of bread therefore by him there is as very a breaking
of the body of Christ, as there is a very presence; a presence under the form
of bread, and a breaking in the form of bread.

D. Allen in two several chapters goes about to prove; First that Christ did
bless or Eucharishze the bread and wine and that with certain words; next
that those words Hoc est corpus meum, this is my body, are the words of
Consecration, and that those two are both one; first from the nature of the
word benedicere to bless, he discourses wonderfully both in Greek and
Latin: of the strength and virtue of it, Fol. 291 Quanquam totam ceremo niam
ordinem non narrent nec plura verba quibus ea seu ^ucharisti^ seu Eulogia facta
est. Ver bone an sola voluntat^ aut impositione manuum fol. 294. Luc. vlt.
and the use it has in holy scripture, and in the Doctors, and yet has not
brought any one example near his purpose. For how can he say, that that
blessing used by our savior was the blessing of the creatures and elements, an
active blessing, a powerful blessing, seeing he confesses himself, that the
Evangelists do not recite any order of the blessing, nor express any more
words, that belongs thereto, but only the words blessing, and giving thaukes:
and also doubts whether Christ did bless by auie words, or by his intent and
will, or by laying on of hands, For we read not (says he) what Christ did or
said in the blessing of the things: Notwithstanding this, he is so far in love
with his own conceit of blessing by certain words, that he bring eth the
bread for an example, which Christ blessed at Emaus, when the two disciples
knew him, (which says he, is taken of many of the ancients to be the
Eucharist) although the Evangelist recite no words in form how it was done:
No words of consecration, mentioned.
so that we may see whatsoever he is disposed to prove, be there scripture or
be there none, all is one with him, he will adventure to persuade what likes
him best. Allen eodem lib post. c. 45. fol. 480.
And yet the same man a far of, in an other part of the same book speaking
of the same matter, as having forgotten himself, says, That the text of S.
Luke cap. vlt. and all the order of the narration does show that the whole
action was like to the consecrating of the Eucharist, Now it is the Eucharist.
he took (says the Evangelist) bread, he blessed it, he brake the bread and
reached it unto them. If this action here done, be like to the order of
consecration used at the Eucharist, then there may be consecration without
addition of This is my body: which he professes to prove to be al one, or to
be the words of blessing it self, yea and without receiving at al for there is
no command of eating.

Allen trauerseth here this example to prove the communion in one kind lawful
for the lay people.
But I would not wish D. Allen or any papist of them al, to live by the loss,
for although they think to gain by the practice of Christ there in drawing it
to confirm their defaulking of one part of the sacrament, from the lay people,
because there is no mention made of the wine, yet will they lose by it (if the
example were strong enough for one kind) because there is no mention of any
consecration, and where no consecration is, there is no real presence, and so
they shall lose Transubstantiation and all: And can it be the Eucharist
without these? But howsoever D. Allen would have us believe that it is the
opinion of many of the ancients, and of great druines, that that is to be
understood of the Eucharist; yet Bellarmine who is more freer of his report
says, De sacra^ ieuc. l. 4. c. 24. f. 563.
that touching that place there be two opinions amongst the Catholics
themselves. The one is of John of Louaine and others, that it was the
Eucharist, the other of Iansenius, that it was not the Eucharist, and both
these great men with that side.

But to return to D. Allen (from whom I have a little digressed) and to follow
him in his Blessing and Consecration. Allen vt ante de euch. c. 15. fol. 294.
Qua re crede^. dum est, Christum benedicendo panem verbo aliquo vsum fuisse,
and non solo tactu aut virtute eu^ sanctificasse. Et cum eode^ verbo quo
benedixit, consecrasse putetur ab antiquitate and pene ab om nibus theologis
licet pauci quidam nege^t cumque hic, vt saepe docuimus co^secrare materiam sit
conficere sacramentum sequi tur idem illud verbum benedictionis esse formam
huius sacramenti vt idem sit beney dicere and vti verbis consecrationis, seu
applicare verba consecrationis ad eleme^ ta proposita. To bless and to
consecrate is al one. He commends this opinion with great reasons and yet he
refuses it. Ibid. 295. 1. He took bread. 2. He blessed. 3. He brake and gave.
4. This in my body. Tho. Aquin. p. 3. q. 78. says the order should be.
Wherefore (says he) it is to be believed that Christ by blessing the bread,
used some word, and that he did not sanctify it, only by touching it, or by
his power. And since it is judged by antiquity and almost by all divines
(although some few deny it) that Christ consecrated by the same word whereby he
blessed, and that to consecrate the matter, is to make the sacrament, it
follows that that same word that is the blessing, is the form of this
sacrament, insomuch that it is al one to bless, and to use the words of
consecration, or to apply the words of consecration to the elements set before
us: Notwithstanding this (says he) it must not be dissembled, that there are
some divines amongst whom is Bonauenture, Caietane, and Dominicus Soto who
affirm that Christ did not bless by the words of Consecration, and therefore
to bless the bread, and to consecrate the bread was two diverse things in the
action of Christ, and so the change was not made by the blessing, but after by
the sacramental words. Which opinion (says he) although it may probably be
defended, and may seem to be agreeable to the use of the Church, which now
blesses the bread by the sign of the Cross, before it use the word of
Consecration, and may less trouble the order of the Evangelists, who after the
mention of blessing do put the breaking and distributing, and then in the
fourth place the word of the sacrament; it brings also some reverence to the
sacrament, for if bread should be broken by Christ after it were consecrate
some small mites, of the consecrated host, might by likely hood have fallen
away.

These reasons (says he) although they be weighty yet the safer opinion and
more agreeable to antiquity, and in every Church almost allowed, and which
the Tridentine counsel does in their catechism follow, is, that when Christ
blessed, he consecrated the things set before him. That we ought so understand,
that Christ blessed by saying This is my body, 1. He took bread. 2. Blessed
it said. 4. This is my body 3. He brake and gave. Cicer. offic. l. 2.
although the Eua^gelists by an inverted order of the speech, or seting that
after which should go before, do put the distributing, and the breaking
between the blessing, and the form of the sacrament, which as it is very
likly was done after the consecration or else even as Christ did speak the
words, Facta omnia celeriter tanquam floscule decidunt. This treachery and
deceit cannot any longer be hid, it is apparent to all me^; Neither is it any
marvel, that they who make of the Gospel as a thing made, to be handled as
they think good, should lose themselves in the labarinth of their own
druises, as if reason had even purposly forsaken them, who of purpose forsake
God the author thereof, For have they these 1605. years been mounted on the
stage of arrogancy, out brauing a better cause then their own, and crying the
Gospel, the Gospel, and you Protestants heretics both deny and deprave it;
and now does D. Allen tell us, freely and vnconstrianedly, that the Gospel
will not serve their turns, as the Evangelists have delivered the order of the
Lords supper? What shall now become of Campians brag Agedum pagella scripta
superiores sumus, ac sententia scripticontenditur, Camp. 2. ratio.
Go to says he, we have the better of it by the written word, now we must
debate the meaning: No says Allen the Gospel is not for us; And I say, nether
the writing nor the meaning of the writing, is any for you. And therefore
Christo proprior, ab hac lite remotior, that age or antiquity which is nearest
to Christ, is farthest of from the^ in this controversy And for that one hand
washes an other, and they both wash the face, and often one foot strengthens
an other, and they both stay the body; so the testimony of Cardinal Caietane
in this case shall stay D Allen that he be not utterly ruinated because of his
large grant which they both have yielded in confirming the truth. Caiet
comme^t super Tho p. 3 q. 75. art. 1.


Caietane in his Commentary on Thomas Aquinas upon this question, whether in
the sacrament there be the body of Christace cording to the truth of it, says,
that touching that present demand and the rest following for the more manifest
and clear vnd erstanding of the difficulties in them, it is to be considered,
that touching the being of the body of Christ in the sacrament of the
Eucharist, there is nothing written in the holy scripture but the words of our
savior This is my body, and those words must be true. And because (says he)
the words of the scripture are expounded two ways either properly or
figuratively, Vel proprie vel metaphorice.
the first error about those words, is, of them that did interpret them
figuratively, which both the M. of the sentences, and Thomas do prove in this
article, Ft consistit vis reprobationis in hoc.
and the strength of the reproof rests in this, that the words of the
Gospel are understood of the Church properly. I say of the Church, because
there is not any constraint in the Golpell to cause us to take them properly,
ex subiunctis siquidem verbis, There is nothing in the Gospel to co^straine
us to take these words properly and without a figure. De lapsis ser. 5. Cont.
haeres. l. 3. c. 11. fol. 237 Parisijs anno. 1545. Allen vt ante. l. 1. c. 16
Recites 4. several opinions amongst them, touching the words of
consecreation. The judgment of that Pope is refused, who determined
transubstantiation for the^.
for truly by the words following which shall be given for you in remission of
sins it cannot be concluded evidently, that the former words This is my
body are to be understood properly.

So here be two cardinals Allen and Catetaine, who say that not the Gospel but
the Church makes for them. Is there a Church where the Gospel is not? Non
iungitur Ecclesia qui ab Evangelio separatur, he is not joined to the Church
(says S. Cypriam) who is separated from the Gospel. S. Ireneus says, Columna
and firmametum ecclesie est Eva^gelium and spiritus vitae. The Pillar and
stability of the Church is the Gospel, and the spirit of life. But the truth
is, there is on their side in this question, neither the Church nor the gospel,
nor any antiquity, at all. To proceed with D. Allen, in the other Chapter
specified before by me (wherein he labors to prove that the words of Christ
This is my body, are the words of Consecration,) he is further willing to let
us know, what differences there has bin amongst their school divines (who
ever have bin the vpholders of popery) about the words of Consecration which
they should be.

The first opinion is of Innocentius(the third who called the great council of
Lateran and decreed Transubstantiation) who said that Christ did consecrate by
his divine power when he blessed, and used therein the power of his might,
doing that without form of words, which we cannot do without a prescript
order, so that after he had consecrated he delivered to us these words, This is
my body, by which words the Church should ever after consecrate. This opinion
of the Pope is reproved by Thomas Aquinas, as being directly against the words
of the scripture, and by Allen as being untrue. The second opinion is of some,
who thought that Christ when he blessed did consecrate, 2.
but with other words, tha^ those where with he taught us to consecrate. But
that opinion (says he) ca^ scarsely be excused from heresy now. 3.
The third opinion is of some who thought, that Christ did consecrate twice,
once secretly whereby he did consecrate, and then openly for the Churches
instruction. But this says he is most absurd of all. 4.
The fourth and last opinion (says he) is the common opinion, The 4. and last
opinion, is their own now, and How many amongst them, have denied, that Christ
did either break bread or gave bread? Quanquam propter narra tionem Marci
adducor in ea^ sententiam vt putem potius priorem commentarium esseveru^ and
Prothusteron esse. Multo melius D. Thomas (vt omnia) dixit. Allen. fol. 419.
and without question Catholic, which, although in the explaining it be two
fould, yet this in general, it teaches, That Christ did then consecrate when
he blessed, and with the same words once spoken before the breaking and giving,
or which (as Aquinas thinks) were spoken either before the breaking and
giving, or (which he thinks) to be more agreeable to the text) at the very
breaking and distributing, that so blessing, breaking and giving bread, he
said, This is my body. Although (says Allen) by reason of the order of S.
Mark, I am brought into the mind to think rather, the former exposition to
be true, and that it is not in order. For S. Mark says, and when he had
blessed, that is, after he had blessed, he brake; and so it seems not, that
he did break and consecrate at once, or altogether.

Thus have you seen in brief the discourse of D. Allen proving against his
fellows their consecration; But with such difficulty and hardness, that in the
conclusion, he leaves the chiefest of his pillars Thomas Aquinas of whom
afterward he gives a definitive censure; that he says althings better than
his fellows. Bonaventure, Caietane, and Dominicus a So^o, thought that Christ
did not bless by the words of consecration, and that therefore with Christ it
was two things to bless the bread, and to consecrate the bread, and that there
was no change made by the blessing, but after by the sacramental words. This
opinion of his fellows, he confesses, has good matter in it, insomuch that it
seems to be agreeable to their own use, and does not disturb the order of
the Eva^gelists, and does bring revence to the sacrament, and that these be
weighty reasons for them so to think; And yet as being Lord of himself, he
chooses such an opinion, as is most absurd in it self, and overthrows the
order and whole narration of the Evangelists: For thus says the Evangelists, 1
Christ took bread. 2 He blessed it. 3 He brake it and gave it saying. 4 Take
eat, this is my body. Tho. Aquin. 3. p. 78. q. art. 1. ad. 1.

They pervert the order, and say, 1 Christ took bread. 2,3. He blessed it,
said Take eat This is my body. 4 He brake it and gave it.
And yet to see the miserable straights that these me^ bring themselves into,
they are feign to cleave to the former opinion against themselves, for so in
effect they say the breaking was eve^ as he did consecrate it: as who should
say the breaking, blessing, and cansecration were done at once, because indeed
they cannot tell what he brake whether his body, or the bread. So says
Gardener, Gardinerve. ante. fol. 97.2.
Though the words sake eat, go before the words, This is my body, we may not
argue, that they took it and eat it, before Christ told them, what he gave
them, and al these rehersals of bread, with, he took bread, he brake bread,
and blessed bread, and if you will held bread: all these induce no consequence,
He brake bread.
he gave bread, why? They do manifestly argue that he gave bread, and not his
real body.

If we may examine the Master in this point, we shall find him as unready as
the scholars, Sent. Lumb. l. 4. did. 12. b. Diversities of opinions touching
the breaking.
I mean in this matter, of what is broken in the sacrament. It was wont (says
he) to be inquired touching the breaking and partition which seems to be
there, whether it be a true breaking or no, and if there be a true breaking
indeed, then wherein it is, and in what thing it is made; 1.
And seeing there is no other substance there, than the substance of Christ, it
seems to be made in the body of Christ, but that cannot be, since the body of
Christ is incorruptible, (because it is immortal and impass^ble. Therefore it
pleases some to think, 2.
that there is no breaking, as it seems to be, but it is said to be broken,
because it seems to be broken: 3.
some others say, That as the form of bread is there, and there is not that
thing there, wherein the form remains, so there is a breaking, which is in
nothing, because nothing is there broken, which they say is by the mighty power
of God, that there should be a breaking where nothing is broken: 4.
Others deliver that the body of Christ is essentially broken, and yet
remains whole and incorruptible which opinion they gathered from the
confession of Beringarius, who confessed before Pope Nicholas and others, that
the bread and wine which are set on the Altar, after consecration, are not
only the sacrament, but also the very body and blood of Christ, and that they
are sensually touched and broken with the hands of the Priests and torn with
the teeth of the faithful, not only in a sacrament, but also indeed and truth.

But the more probable opinion (says he) is, that because the body of Christ
is incotruptible, ^.
it cannot be said, that the breaking and partition is in the substance of the
body, The breaking is in the form of bread sacramentally.
but in a sacrament that is in show; in the form of bread sacramentally:
Neither may we insult or marvel that the accidents of bread seem to be
broken, seeing they are there without a subject, Accidents of bread broken.
although some say they be in the air. There is a true breaking and division
which is made in the bread, that is in the show of bread: As the Apostle says,
the bread which we break, because the show of bread is broken and divided,
Thus far Lumbard.

If any thing were ever dreamed and not done, this doctrine is only devised in
show without substance what a breaking is here, and no breaking? bread broken
in show, and the show of bread broken, and this to be a communion of his flesh
that was crucified for us, for so S. Paul says, 1. Cor. 16.16.
Is not the bread which we break, a communion of the body of Christ, and if
nothing be broken but in show, let them show me what is the communion of the
body of Christ. Again, were it not strange if witness should be broken, and
yet nothing broken that is white, yet so it must be if they say true. Steph.
Guard. vt ante f. 13^. b
Stephen Gardener will not have the accide^ts to be broken, I would (says he)
in other terms answer thus, That thou see is broken, and then if any ask
further, what that is, I would (says he) tell him, the visible matter of the
sacrament. O marvailous matter! you said plainly before, that the bread was
broken: Gardener, dark and contrary to himself. Detection. fo. 15. b. Answer
to M. Iuell. art. 23. f. 227. Allen de euch. sacra l. 1. c. 37. fol 435. will
have somewhat broken besid^ the body of Christ. Christ's glorious body mingled
with our sinful flesh.
And in the detection of the Devils sophistry you confess contrary to your
self in both these places That the form of bread only is said to be broken,
which doctrine D. Hardinge taking to be the sounder relieth upon, and says,
The form only of the sacrament is broken and chewed of the receaner.

D. Allen forceably and as it were against the hair, erecting a new opinion
touching this breaking whereof we now speak faulting many Catholics, for
saying that the accidents only are chewed, broken and seen; affirms
himself, that not only those things do properly and truly agree and
appertain to the body of Christ (which did before agree unto the bread)
although by mean of the forms: But also by the mean and service of those
forms and accidents, we handle the body and blood of Christ truly, eat him,
carry him about with us, and mingle his body and blood with our flesh, tear
him with our teeth, and can place him in this or that vessel, and can show by
the small pieces where he is, here, or now: and can sacrifice him sensibly in
the accidents, and can propose him visibly to the eye to be adored, etc. All
which things whether they fall out (says he) to the body of Christ in the
sacrament in respect of it self or by means of the accidents it skilleth not;
so we firmly believe that these things are truly and properly done to the body
of Christ, no less then if he were in his own shape, and form, and no less,
then they might be done to the very bread indeed. Although says he I am not
ignorant, that Thomas Aquina^ follows an other opinion (especially touching
the very sight of Christ's body in the Eucharist) granting that the very body
may be touched and not the accidents only, P. 3. q. 80. art. 4 ad 4. Allen
leaves Aquinas.
but that the accidents and forms are only seen, and not the body of Christ,
But as this man's opinion is not clear, and by no means agreeable to reason,
for it is most certain that the body of Christ is no more obuious, and
comprehended by means of the accidents of one of our senses then of an other:
so is the doctrine and teaching, of other some schoolmen, touching the moving,
sight, place, breaking, and eating of the body of Christ, full of curiosity and
danger. De motu, tactu, vi^u, loco fractione, and comestione.


Here you have from D. Alten, that what the rest of his fellows have fearfully
doubted to affirm, he does not stick positiuely to deliver, affirming every
action and thing to be done verily and really to the body and blood of Christ,
under the show of bread and wine after consecration, as could be verised of
the bread it self before consecration, yea that the body of Christ should be
mingled most groslie with our flesh. Corpus and sanguis Christi carninostrae
immiscentur. L. W^nton. dialo. against the lesuits p. 4 fol. 770. 771.
A position, as void of all religion, so without all warrant, save theirs that
deliver it, and not to sink into a wise man's head, that ever they would
deliver such doctrine. A positio^ which makes our bodies to be fed and
nourished, with the natural and substantial body of Christ, as we are with
other meats. A position that ioineth the body of Christ with our bodies, in
one and the same substance, For food does go into the substance of that thing
which it nourishes; and besides D. Allen, Hard. Reioyn. fol. 150. Rhem. annot.
1. cor. 10. v. 16.
Harding averreth, That the flesh of man, is fed and nourished with the body
and blood of Christ, and what more Caparnaitical? So the Rhemists say, That we
are made a piece of Christ's body and blood. But denied utterly and expressly by
the fathers. Nostra and Christi coniunctio nec miscet personas, nec unit
substantias: Cypr. de cae^ domini.
sed affectus consociat, and confoederat voluntates. The conjunction (says
Cyprian,) that is between us and Christ, neither wingleth persons, nor unites
substances: but ioineth affections, and knitteth wills. The mixture of his
bodily substance with ours, Hooker. l. 5. pa. rag. 56. ecclespolit.
is a thing which the ancients disclaim. Yet the mixture of his flesh with
ours, they speak of, to signify what our very bodies through mistical
conjunction receive, from that vital efficacy which we know to be in his, and
from bodyly mixtures they borrow diverse similitudes rather to declare the
truth, than the manner of coherence between his sacred and the sanctified
bodies of Saints: but this is sundry other ways performed besides than by the
Eucharist, as by his taking our flesh on him in his nativity, and by our
regeneration in the water of baptism, by faith, and the word preached; so that
you see when Allen wrote as before is set down, he thought to outbid those
former schoolmen, whose doctrine he taxes with curiosity and danger;
verifying that of the Poet, O^llo scelus credibile in avo, quodque posterit as
noget, That no age, Senec. in Thyest: act. i. and 4. ia^ nostra sub it stirpe
turba quae suum vincat genus ac me innocente^ faciat, and in ausa audeat. De
sacra. euch l. 1. c. 2. fol. 28. contrarieth D Allen.
ever saw the like, and whereof posterity will be ashamed, making those that have
gone him even innocent, as Tautalus said of his nephews.

But see how it happens to those, that so peremptorily and by their only
authority abate the credit of others, even their credits will be again abated.
Bellarmine handling the same matter, affirms that it is a doubt of certain
amongst themselves, whether those things that are verified of Christ by reason
of the accidents, may be spoken of him truly and properly, or by a trope. Some
there be (says he) (and it may be secretly he means Allen, though he name
him not) that will have all those things verified of Christ truly and
properly in the same manner, as they might of the bread, if it were present:
For the bread is verily and properly seen, handled and broken by means of
the accidents: so will they have Christ's body in the Eucharist, to be verily
and properly seen and handled by mean of the accidents, Then those that Alle^
checketh did teach well. Peraliquem tropam.
But the common opinion of the divines does teach the contrary, that is, that
those things cannot be spoken of the body of Christ, though by mean of the
accidents but by a trope. Now if by a Trope, Bellarmine mean a figure, a sign
or toke^, as the Eucharist is, we willingly agree with him, and with Allen too,
that whatsoever may be verified of the bread and wine before consecration, may
be said also of the body of Christ: that we see it, feel it, break it, cate
it, and that it increases the substance of our bodies, Chrisost. de sacerd. l.
3. quoted by the Rhem Heb. 9.20 Hard. art. 6. fol. 137. Toastall l. 1. f. 71.
Dureus 2. rat. fol. 118 Bellar. de eve. sacra. l 1. c. 2. fol. 27. 29. and l 2
c. 22. fol 220. tu^ vero turbam circumfusam precioso sanguine in ting^ ac
rubefieri. They borrow each others names.
and feeds them, and that Christ is seen there, by all the faithful, and
handled with their hands, as the Rhemists, Harding, Tonstall, Dureus, and
Bellarmine do quote S. Chrysostom, and the rest unto us; so as they will take
withal, that which the same Chrysostom says in the same place, that the
people standing about (to receive) are besprinkled and made red with that
precious blood: and that we are not then conversant in earth among mortal men,
but translated into heaven.

If all this be too hard and harsh to affirm of the body and blood of Christ,
let them consider it is spoken by a trope or figure, and verified actually and
really of the bread and wine, which speech and the like are used of the
fathers, only to draw their hearers from fi^ing their minds below on the
earthly elements, but to mount up to heaven, and their seek Christ. For as
the bread in the Eucharist is called the Lords body, but in plain and simple
manner of speech is not fleshly and really the Lords body: so is the body of
our Lord sometime said to nourishour bodies, and feed us, because the
sacrament of his body feeds us, and this is done in respect of the
Enterchange of names; the sacraments bearing the names of the things, whereof
they are sacraments; and the things having attributed unto them, which is due
only to the signs. If Bellarmine mean any other thing by the word Trope, than
I have expressed, he falls from the use of the word, and has not satisfied
the question, nor rectified his fellows error.

But it is a world to see into what streightes the want of consideration in
these points has driven the adverse part, proving their discourses to be
hungry and barren, and hitherto without fruit, because they proclaim war
against the general edicts of nature and reason. Bellarmine again, De sacra.
euch. l. 1. c. 14. fol. 117. 118.
to avoid the grossenes of Allens and Hardings opinion of the mingling of the
flesh of Christ with our bodies, says, That the body of Christ going into the
mouths of the communicants, passes into the stomach, and then the outward
forms being corrupted and gonne, The Eucharist is no meat for the body, and
yet goes in at the mouth, and into the stomach.
the body of Christ without any detriment to it self cease to be there, and
that the body of Christ, eaten by the faithful, is not for the nourishment of
the body, but of the soul. Here is the rule of Christ, and difference
between the body and soul of man quite antiquated and confounded. Our savior
decideth that nothing can enter both the heart and the belly, and yet Bellarmine
will have one and the same thing, enter in at the one, and yet feed the other.
If our souls be nourished, and not our bodies, as he says then must our
souls eat it and not our bodies; Can our bodies eat, and our souls be
nourished by it? What more contrary to al Religion? Eating, digesting, and
nourishing, be consequent and coherent actions, and therefore they must al
three be either corporal, or spiritual; If the soul be nourished, the soul
must eat and digest that which is eaten; If the body eat, the body must digest
and be nourished by that food. Eating is therefore in vain without
nourishing; If then Christ's flesh do enter our mouths it is utterly without
profit to us, if it nourish not our bodies. Thus are the wits of the greatest
amongst the^ even snared in their own gins. They handle therest that follow as
vngainly as those before, which lest I should consent unto by silence, I will
also set down unto you, and then judge you of all.

To the question, what it is in the sacrament that nourish^th our bodies,
(seeing generally, they deny it, One is hungry and an other is drunken. 1. con
11. 21.
of the body of Christ) and taken immoderately after consecration will make a
man drunk (as S. Paul reproved the Corinthians for their abuse that way
Thomas Aquinas the father of all popery, Comment in 1. Cor. 11. lect. 4. in
fine.
and most acute disputer amongst them, leaving the grossenes of the one, and
absurdity of the other opinion before, says; 1.
That some amongst them have said, That those things are not wrought by any
conversion, but by an alteration of the senses of a man by the accidents of
bread and wine, which remain after consecration, for men have bin accustomed
to be comforted by the only smell of meat, and to be overcome, and as it were
made drunk, by the abundant smell of wine. 2.
Some others have said, That the consecreted bread and wine, may be converted
into an other thing, and so nourish because the substance of bread and wine
remains with the substance of the body and blood of Christ: but this says he
is against the scripture; 3.
Some others have said that the substantial form of bread remains, which
works the operation, and so it norisheth, as the bread should nourish. This
he refelleth. 4.
Some have said, that the air round about is converted into the substance of
that which is nourished, or into some such thing. But this says he cannot be;
5.
And therefore some have said, that by the power of God, the substance of the
bread and wine, is restored again to the intent that the sacrament might not
be found in such like conuersions; But that is impossible. 6. The accidents and
shows of bread can nourish. De euch. sacra. l. i. c. 37. f. 432. How can you
sever the natural properties of a thing from the very thing it self. Part. 2.
q. 33. f. 189.
His own conclusion is that the accidents and forms of bread and wine can
nourish and make drunk, as well as if the substance of bread and wine were
there. So D. Allen (although he be loath so to say) The forms and accidents of
bread and wine are able to nourish, make drunk, and perform all the offices
and duties natural, that the bread and wine could when their substance was
there. So the Romish Catechism. Why is it called bread after consecration, say
they? As Well because it has the show of bread, as also the natural property of
nourishing and feeding the body, which is proper to bread. Is it called bread
because it has the show of bread? by what figure? Has it the natural
properties of bread, and yet is it not bread? say again, and say truly, it is
called bread, therefore it is bread. It has the natural properties of bread,
feeding, nourishing, as also the accidents savor, weight, taste, color and al,
and therefore it has the name and is indeed very bread.

They are so far removed from the center of truth in these points, that
rather then they will leave their wills, and shut up the stream of their own
affections, they will leave all hope of a sound belief. What eats the mouse,
if she (or he I know not whether) chance to catch of the consecrated host?
Lumb. l. 4. dis^, 13. a fine.
Ask the schoolman (it becomes their grauities to treat such questions) It
cannot be said (says Lumbard) that the body of Christ, is eaten of brute
beasts, although it seems so to be, when the mouse eats then, what eats
he? Deus nouit God knows that, and he that says otherwise, God knows
that.
is adjudged an heretic. How then escapes the Angelical Doctor. Quidam
autem dixerunt. 3. p. 80. q. art. 3 ad. 3.
Some have said faith he) that as astone as the sacrament is touched, by a
Mouse or a Dog, the body of Christ cease to be there; But this derogateth
from the truth of this sacrament: neither must we say that a bruit beast does
eat the body of Christ sacramentally but it must be said that the Mouse
eats by chance, Ibid. fol. 24. 2.
as a man that should eat the consecrated host unknown unto him. Now
Gardener says contrary, that no creature can eat the body and blood of
Christ, but only man.

I let pass the rest of Aquinas prodigious and base discourses touching some
other cautels, belonging to this sacrament, Ib. q. 83. art. 6, ad. 3.
as if a spider should fall into the consecrated wine or poison should
therewith be mingled, which although with warrant good enough I might lay the^
before you (Tuberius) because I am by all honest and direct courses, to warn
you to beware, you drink not at that fountain, The maine scope of this
treatise and discourse.
whose fairest Streams are so filthy and loath some: yet I will omit him now,
and return to some hand somer discourse, and show you that as they are found
to faulter touching the particular drift of every word in the institution of
the Lords supper as the blessing, breaking, and This is my body: so if those
were granted unto them to be as they would lay the^ down themselves, and that
we should agree and say with them that the real, and substantial body of
Christ is present in the Eucharist, yet can they not tell you neither the manner
of the presence, Art. 5. cont. Iuell. fol. 127. b. Christ gave his diciples the
same body which suffered on the cross, and the same body is there corporally,
carnally and naturally, but not after a corporal, carnal, or natural wise, but
in visibly, spiritually, diuinly, and by way to him only known. The manner of
his presence is not local; or natural, but such as God only knows Art. 6.
fol. 136. Corporally and yet spiritually Carnally and yet divinely. Naturally
and yet supernaturally, and by all these ways, and yet by none of these. God
only knows the way.
nor according to what body that presence is, as whether according to that
wherein he lived here in earth, or whether as it is now qualisfied and
glorious in heaven. Whether with parts or without parts, neither are they
agreed how he is eaten. D. Harding says it is clear by many places of holy
scripture, that Christ at his last supper gave to his disciples his very body,
even the same which the day following suffered death on the cross, which have
ministered just cause to the godly and learned fathers of the Church to say that
Christ's body is present in the sacrament really, substantially, corporally,
carnally, and naturally, by use of which adverbes, they have meant only, a truth
of being; so that we may say that in the sacrament his very body is present
really, that is to say indeed, substantially, that is in substance, and
corporally, carnally, and naturally, by which words is meant, that his very
body, his very flesh and his very humane nature is there, not after corporal,
carnal, or natural wise: But invisibly, unspeakably, miraculously,
supernaturally, spiritually, divinely, and by way to him only known.

Again, Concerning the manner of the presence (says he) and being of that
body and blood in the sacrament, they (that is the fathers) and we acknowledge
and confess that it is not local, circumscriptine, definitive, or subiectiue,
or natural, but such as is known to God only. In the next article, The body
of Christ (says he) is made present in the blessed sacrament of the Altar
under the form of bread and wine, not after a gross and carnal manner, but
spiritually and supernaturally, and yet substantially, not by local but by
substantial presence, not by manner of quantity or filling of a place or by
cha^ging of place, or by leaving his sitting on the right hand of God, but in
such a manner as God only knows, and yet does us to understand by faith, the
truth of his very presence far passing all men's capacities to comprehend the
manner how. Historia maxima nascitur do nihilo. If M. Hardinge know not how,
it was in him an idle diligence to be so copious in striving to expresle the
manner how. Has not he told us? He has expressed our belief, and his own
two: which is more then the manner how, Corporally, Carnally, naturally says
he, spiritually, dininely say we. And yet he says all, confounding
substantially and spiritually. God does us to understand (says he) by faith
the truth of the presence. What need faith sale I? It is taken into the hand,
from the hand conferred to the mouth, and there they fasten their teeth,
Bellar. de sac. euch. l. 1. c. 2. f. 28. 29.
and from thence to the stomach.

The senses of sight, and feeling have their offices here, faith has none,
nether is it hard to comprehend all, this and more two. Here is also one, and
the same Christ with proportion of body and members distinct, each from other;
and also without distinction of members and parts which overthrows the truth
of a natural body; and yet so they make him at one and the lame time: at the
table and under the show of bread, not by local but by substantial presence,
not by manner of quantity or filling of a place: and yet the same man did say
before, Art. 5. fol. 130. b. Put and laid. Fide intelligamus situm in sacra
illa me^sa, agnum illu^ dei sunt verba magni Niceni Synodi ex Cut Tonstall lib.
1. de euchar. fol. 40. and Bellarm. de sacra. euch. l. 2. c. 10. f. 183. Step.
Guard. f. 21. b.
that the real body of Christ is on that holy table put and laid the better
to signify the real presence. Put and laid (as all men know according to the
natural signification, require situation of place and bodily description. How
does he not fill a place, when he is put and laid there? Stephan Gardener is
as far at odds with his own reason in this matter as D. Harding: When we
acknowledge by faith (says he) Christ's body present, although we say it is
present truly, really, substantially, yet we say our senses be not privy to
that presence, ne the manner of it but by instruction of faith, and therefore we
say Christ's body is not locally present, nor by manner of quantity, but in
visibly, and in no sensible manner, but marueilously in a sacrament, and
mystery truly, and in such a spiritual manner, as we cannot define and
determine, and yet by faith we know his body present, the parts of which be in
themselves distinct one from an other, in their own substance, but not by
circumscription of several places to be comprehended of us. What Mr. did
Gardener follow in this? Christ's body is not locally present, and yet has
distinction of parts. Christ's body has distinction of parts, and yet not by
circumscription of several places to be comprehended of us. Thomas of Aquine
denies this, The determinate distance of parts in a natural body, P. 3. q.
76. art. 3. ad 2. Distance of parts is in the true body of Christ. but not in
that body which is in the sacrament.
is in respect of the dimensiue quantity such a distance of parts (says he)
is in the true body of Christ but according to that distance of parts, he is
not in this sacrament, but he is there according to the manner of his
substance. Here, besides the disagreeme^t of Thomas from Gardener, Thomas has
framed such a Christ, as indeed is no Christ, he has nether quantity nor
proportion, of body, nor distance of parts: yet he confesses that his true
body in heaven has so; and if his body in the sacrament have not so* then
either he overthrows the truth of Christ body, or else it will Ineuitably
follow without any qualifications, ifs, or ands, that the true body of Christ
is not in the sacrament. Gardener says The body of Christ is there in no
sensible manner as before, Alle^ says Corpus Christ's est sensibiliter in
sacrament^. The body of Christ is sensibly in the sacrament. Allen vt ante fol.
435.
Again within three pages does Gardener contradict himself twice very
directly. In the first he says Christ in the sacrament gives truly his flesh
to be eaten, Fol. 87. b.
the same which he took of the Virgin. Next we receane not in the sacrament
Christ's flesh that was crucified, being so a visible and mortal flesh, but
Christ's flesh glorious, incorruptible and impassible, a godly, and spiritual
flesh. And yet, so constant is he, in the very next page, Fol. 89. a.
he strives to prove out of S. Jerome and others, that they do not mean that
we eat the flesh of Christ as be sits in heaven reigning. Some Joseph or
Daniel must expound these dreams. First, we receive not the flesh, that was
crucified, Lastly we receive him not as he sits in heaven reigning and is
glorified. So by this reckning nether first nor last, do we receive him at al.
De Euch. sac. l. 1. c. 2, fol. 24.
How can Bellarmine say, and say truly, That the body of Christ has his
natural manner of being in heaven, but in the sacrament it has not his
natural but sacramental (which we also say) and yet that sacramental manner
to be expressed by the word substantially? And again to say That whersoeuer
the body of Christ is, Ibid. l. 3. c. 7. f. 317. 320.
there he has his form and humane shape and situation of parts and order
which he has in heaven, and that he is in the sacrament as well as in heaven,
and yet in the one to fill a place, and have distinction of parts; And in the
other to fill no place, and yet have his dimensions and distinction of parts:
which is very hard. Ibid. l. 1. c. 2. fo. 26. 27.
A gain he teaches that the body of Christ in the Eucharist is, veru^,
veale, natural, animatum, quantum, coloratum, etc. A true body, real,
natural, having life big or great, and colored; and yet we may not say
that it is sensible, visible, to be touched, stretched out, although it be so
in heaven.

Bellarmine in this controversy is like Turnus in the skirmish with Eneas
petit aequor a Tornus, he traverseth the field, Virg. in. AEnei l. 12.
as though he would do much; but incertos implicat orbs, but his turnings and
rounds fore-shewed his ill success, nam perfidus ^sis frangitur in modi^que
ardentem des^ritictu, His treacherous sword brake and left him burning in rage
in the heat of the conflict: so does Bellarmines own words confute his
cause. Has the body of Christ wheresoever it be, his form and humane shape
and situation of parts, and yet may we not say, it is extensum, extended into
place, and yet may we say, that he wants not his dimensions nor is without
shape and countenance in the Eucharist? Nos non dicimus Christi corpus in
Eucharistia dime^sionibus aut facie carere. In sermon de sancto Martino twice
cited by Bellar. l. 1. c. 2. fol. 27. and l. 2. c. 11. f. 186.
What should hold in the extensio^? Allen allows the word sensibiliter
sensibly, Bellarmine refuses it; and so does he corporally, which Harding and
some of the rest uses. Bellarmine holds the word spiritualliter spiritually,
as a man holds a wolf by the ears, where there is danger in holding him and
danger in letting of him go; He confesses that S. Bernard uses it, and
opposes it to carnaliter carnally, speaking of the sacrament, tamen non
videtur hac vox multum frequenta^da, yet that word (says he) seems not much
to be used, because there is danger in it. Thus must Bellarmines conceit be
the model, whereto our faith must be framed.

He says further, That the counsel of Trent expressed the manner of Christ's
presence in the sacrament by the word Realiter really, Really, and
substantially used by the Trent Count* and opposed against the terms used by
the Calvinists.
opposing it against the counterfeit term of Calvin, who will have him so
present, that he be apprehended by faith (and so S. Bernard says also, in the
same place Bellarmine quoteth unto us) And that they use the word
substantialiter substa^tially, against the Calvenists also, who teach that the
body of Christ according to the substance is only in heaven, but I know not
(says he) what virtue and power they derive from thence to us. Will they
stand to this? Strange it were, they should sup up their own words again,
so plainly delivered. Ibid. fol. 20 a. and 21. b and Har. vt ante. 136.
How often does Gardner tell us, that, but by faith he knows not how Christ
is present in the sacrament. God does us to understand by faith the truth of
Christ's presence. And Bellarmine himself within four hours reading after,
Athanasius uses the word spiritually.
answering to the ancient father Athanasius (who says the flesh of Christ is
our spiritual nourishment, and spirituallie distributed) is driven to say that
it is most rightly called our spiritual food, Christ's body is food for the
spirit and not for the body. Bellar de sacr. euch l. 2. c. 11. fol. 186.
because it is given for the food of the spirit, and not of the body, and
distributed spirituallie. And that Christ made mention of his ascension to show
that his flesh is not to be eaten as other meats are, which was the carnal
understanding of the Caparnaites sed spirituals quodam modo but after a
certain spiritual manner. Is not Bellarmine come to that term which he was
so much a fraide of? If the Caparnaites were gross and fleshly in thinking
that Christ's flesh was to be eaten more aliarum carnium, as other flesh is; I
am well assured Bellarmine is a Caparnaite also, and he has as gross a
conceit of Christ's flesh, Bellar vt ante l. 1. c 2. fol. 28. and 2. c. 8. f.
163. and l. 1. c. 11. fol. 92 most gross absurdity.
as they could have, for he says the flesh of Christ is transferred from the
hand to the mouth, and from the mouth to the stomach; which I understand to be
as the manner of other meat is, and this he inculcateth more than once. And if
Really be opposed and set, to exclude our term by faith, as Bellarmine says
it is, let him show why it is not opposed against spirituallie, and spirit,
and spiritual manner, which they and he use also. We say it is received by
faith, he says it is meat for the spirit, and not for the body, most absurdly
sutting that thing out, from being meat for the body which is taken into the
hand, mouth, and stomach; and making that a spiritual food and nourishment,
and which is received after a spiritual manner, and apprehended by faith, to
go into the mouth and down into the stomach, by humane and natural
instruments, as the hand, tongue, and palate. And then again he does most
strangely leave himself in ioining the hand, mouth, tongue, palate and
stomach, in the eating of the body of Christ, Attritio denti. bus facta.
Bellar. ib. f. 29.
and yet deny the chewing or grinding of the teeth which necessarily
accompanies the rest, especially having told us before, that infigimus dentes
carnichristi, we fasten our teeth in the flesh of Christ. Neither is this
Bellarmines case alone when he is pressed with any authority of the fathers, to
fly to our very terms and to use our phrases, but al others of the^ also do
the like. Vt ante ratio 2. fol. 106. A spiritual kind of eating a natural and
substantial thing. If real be used in oppositio^ to spiritual, how can
real, inter. pret spiritual, as Dureus says.
Dureus being urged with S. Augustines authority, touching the eating of Christ
in the sacrament, says that S. Augustine accounted it an horrible thing to
eat the flesh of Christ as we do other meats that are sold in the shambles,
and that therefore he calls us from that kind of eating ad spirituale^
alium, to an other kind that is spiritual, and such an one, as is agreeable to
that sacrament, but yet a true and real eating. Here he both comes to our
term spiritual, and yet confou^deth it with real, which S. Augustins whose
mind he interprets never used: and which Bellarmine says, the counsel used
in opposition to that other. A third Jesuit is mightily busied like a builder
of the tower of Babel using a contrary language to that, Torrens: conf. Au l.
3. de sacr. Euch c. 4. fol. 318. b. in gloss* Carne^ christi sacramento panis
valeta^.
with which he began his work, for being troubled as his fellow Jesuit was,
with answering to S. Augustine (a father who is most plain against them) is
fain to express that manner of eating which S. Augustine ^speaketh of to be
done, dentibus fidei, with the teeth of our faith, but the body is hid under
the show of bread, which latter clause S. Augustine never used, to show the
manner of Christ's body in the sacrament. That is only the Jesuits color to
avoid S. Augustine, With the teeth of our faith with the eyes of our faith.
Lud. Granat. de freq. commun fol. 100. vt ante f. 20. a. 21. b. 55. 40. 41. and
72. a. But in a spiritual manner. I know by faith, that I have it in my hand. A
gross and dull speech. The presence is only spiritual.
and no part of his meaning. The teeth of our body, ca^ and does as they say
eat Christ's flesh in the show of bread, what need we use the teeth of our
faith, or the eyes of our faith either, to see it there, as an other of them
says, if he be really and substantially present in the host, the same flesh
that the Virgin Marie did bear, and the Jews crucified.

Stephan Gardener as is before noted uses the same. I know by faith Christ to
be present; we acknowledge by faith Christ's body present. Christ's body there
is present but in a spiritual manner. It is called a spiritual manner of
presence. And yet in receiving that sacrament, men use their mouths and teeth,
being by faith instructed that they do not tear, consume or violate that most
precious body and blood. Only faithful men by faith can understand this
mystery of eating Christ's flesh in the sacrament. And, the manner of presence
is only spiritual. What need faith? What need spiritual manner only? What
needs faith to be the instructor, when the Council as Bellarmine says has
devised those strong and able terms of truly, reallie, and substantiallie,
and opposed the^ against our imaginary terms, of spirituallie and by faith,
which imaginary terms they use also. Tom. 2. trac. 2. c. 3. and 5. annexed to
the 1. p. of Tho. Aquin. and so^time to the 3. The body of Christ is taken
spiritually in the Eucharist.
Cardinal Caietane in excuse of those divines who drew the form of Beringarius
confession which was most gross, touching the eating of Christ in the
sacrament uses no other word but spirituallie, and says it is most false to
affirm, that they held, that the body of Christ is taken corporally, for it
is taken spirituallie in the Eucharist by beleeing, and not by receiving it.
Again he says, They eat the true body of Christ in the sacrament, not
corporally but spiritually. The corporal eating is but of the sacrame^tal
signs, but the spiritual eating, which is performed by the soul, obtains
the flesh of Christ which is in the sacrament. If Bellarmine abridge Caietane
of the word spirituallie, he leaves him never an other to express his mind
by.

Now to draw toward an end in this point, Trent counsel. Caietane.
Bellarmine. Allen. Hardinge. Gardener.
let us lay in brief what we unfolded more largly. Our Lord and savior
Jesus Christ God and man is truly, really, and substantially contained under
the form and show of bread and wine. He is transferred from the hand to the
mouth, we fasten our teeth into his flesh, and from thence he goes into the
stomach, and is mingled with our flesh, etc. And compare them with these of
the same men in the same matter. Christ is in the sacrament spiritually, the
manner of his presence is only spiritual: he is eaten after a certain
spiritual manner The flesh of Christ is meat for the spirit, and not for the
body: It is a spiritual nourishment. By faith we understand he is there. We
see him with the eyes of our faith, and eat him with the teeth of our faith by
beleening and not by receaning. If ever there were a difference between the
body and soul, heaven and hell, light and darkness, sweet and sower, joy and
pain, fire and water, North and south, and whatsoever may be imagined to be
contrary, then is there a repugnancy in those their words expressing their
meanings in the matter of the sacrament. They will have both true, and yet our
opinion must be false and heretical in using the later style to express our
meaninges. But as we and they are most opposite, in the question, so are one
sort of their terms which they use against us, unto an other, and such as can
never verify the truth of their assertion. If they can reconcile all, and
prone us heretics, I say they may undertake any thing, yea though it be to
the making of a black horse white, or a white horse black, as that cunning
Grecian Autolycus did. Of whom it is said, Ovid. Met. l. 1^.
Candida de nigris, and de candentibus atra facere assuenerat. Although it has
been a long time thought, that they could do much, y I hope they can make no
contradictorie propositions both true where evermore if one be true, the order
will be ineuitably false.


Tub. I assure my self, so much as you have said, out of their own books and
writings will make any reasonable man astonished to think, with how fair and
plausible terms, they will plead their religion, as though there were
agreement no where but amongst them; and disagreeme^t every where save with
them; where if your collections and quotations stand true and sound, I see not
but they may have leave to go aside, and pen a new form of words, whereby to
express their meanning in this point, for the old will not serve them.


Romans Yea and a new Gospel too, Allen
Caietane.
for Allen and Caietane, confesses both against themselves, the one that the
order of the Evangelists is perverted, and standing as it does will not serve
their turn. The other, that there is nothing in the Gospel that does bind us
to take those words in the proper signification as they sound, to make the
real and substantial body of Christ present under the show of bread. In
explicating of which their opinion, you may now call to mind the grossest of
the figures which they use, and let pass a many of others, Figures used by
them in the sacrament.
in those few words of Christ at his last supper.

First they say 1,2.
Christ took bread, he blessed, that is he transubstantiateth, or changes it,
he brake, not the bread, but the accidents, or show of bread, he gave not the
bread, but his own body. 3.
How they expound the word (This) in the sentence This is my body, you have
heard before. This, that is, that which is contained under these shows is my
body. 4.
5.
Again, where the words lie in the Evangelists Take eat this is my body, they
have devised an hideous figure of figures which is called Hysteron Proteron the
Cart before the horse, and say it should be This is my dody, take eat. 6.
Christ blessed (say they) by saying This is my body, although the Eua^gelists
place it not so in order. 7.
How many figures and how often are they out, in the breaking, some saying one
thing and some say an other. 8.
And in the words of consecration which and where they should be. 9.
And of the accidents being there in nothing, that is witness and nothing
white, Roundnesse and nothing round, color, and nothing colored, and an
hundred monsters and differences else amongst them, has this one monster
Transubstantiation begot. The antiquity of Transubstantiation.
But when was the monster himself begotten? It was holidaie at Rome then, he
is not so old by 1200. years and more as you have by told and made believe.

Our country man Tonstall tells us it was concluded in the counsel of
Lateran, L. 1. fol. 46. de ^rit corpor. and sang. 3 Opinions touching
tra^substantiation
held under Innocentius the third Pope of that name. Before which time (says
he) there was 3. opinions concernning that matter, some thought that the body
of Christ was there together with the bread, as fire in a piece of flint, which
way it seems Luther following held the Consubstantiation. Others thought
that the bread was gone and corrupted. Others, that the substance of bread was
changed, into the substance of Christ's body which way Innocentius followed
refusing the other two, although no fewer miracles (he should say gross
absurdities and contrarieties in nature) naie more, seem to be builded upon
the opinion which he did choose, then one the other which he refused. For
before that time it was left free to every man to think as himself liked.
Now for the antiquity and credit of this Lateran counsel, we may consult
with Andradius, Defenc. Trid. conc. l. 2. f. 427. Genebrard. Chro. l. 4. fol.
955. rekoneth in for the 12. general, so does Bellar. l. 2 c. 5. de conc. and
eccles.
the late defender of the Tride^tine counsel, and as great a Doctor in his
time as Bellarmine is now, and therefore his testimony may not be denied; In
order it was the ninth general, for place it was held in the palace Lateran
in Rome, for time it was held in the year of our Lord 1215. twelve hundred and
odd years after Christ. It was called together (says he) rather to amend the
ill manners, that then reigned, then to decree any matters of faith, nether
did they much trouble themselves, to expound any hard places of scripture or
open any mysteries, such good heed was taken to establish so high a point.
Thus having the receipt, you may distill the water, I mean having these
things brought to your hands so plainly, you may learn those two points of
wisdom, so much spoken of, Be sober and distrustful. Amicus Plato amicus
Aristoteles, magis amica veritas.
Let Plato be your friend, Let Aristotle be your friend; but the truth, let
it be more your friend; for he that betraieth the truth, betraieth his own
soul.

I crave no more of you but that you examine both doctrines before you yield
your free assent to either, if you have me any way in suspision either for my
judgment in concluding against them, that I pervert their meaning, or that I
trecherously abuse their texts, I will if you will, take the pains, to show you
every quotation, and make your self judge in both.


Tub. I thank you for your free and open offer. It were hard to suspect him
who yields such liberty, I will at my further leisure repair unto you, for
such of them as I shall think, I may most directly charge them with all.


Romans You cannot choose amiss choose where you will, they be all true and not one
of them, but makes against them, in one point or other. Al bewraying the
weakness of that cause, which that it might be quite overthrown, lacks but to
be thoroughly sifted by wise and judicious men, such as would but try and
examine, it must not be those who think it a tempting of God to read or hear
any thing, that shall make against them. And as I have given you testimony of
their dealing in this point of the sacrament, so if you will but harken to that
more, which I shall deliver I will show you, that in other things as in that,
they deal absurdly, confusedly, weakly, and do even go from their own
grounds, and although like themselves in all, yet not like such as they would
make the world believe they are. And will very clearlie and plainly prove unto
you (without sending you to their quotations when they cannot be found, as they
do in most they do (that it is only true against them, which they plead
against us, that there are with them, Iesuita Torre^sis in epistol. dedicator.
in conf. August.
no principles but those of Protagoras which was, that that should be true
which every one would allow, and that there is no rule amongst the^, but the
leaden Lesbian rule which will turn every way.

And because I will give you as little breath as I can, I will begin with the
Jesuit himself first, who so charge us, and either prove his ground false,
and his tongue too too lavish, or els^ his friends very vnfreindly toward
him, who will not let his word stand, but disanull it, and make it of no force.
In the preface of that work of his, which he has entitled S. Augustines
confessio^s (as though all that he had there laid down were indeed S. Augustines
both for the books named, Jesuit vt ante. Praises given to S. Augustine by the
Jesuit.
and the questions handled) he has wonderfully praised that ancient father
(as indeed he did deserve very much in the Church of God) even so much that
(to draw it into a breese) he says, whatsoever S. Augustine does deliver, was
not the doctrine or teaching of any one province or kingdom alone, but the
universal consent and approbation of the whole catholic Church; and which did
not continue allowed for the space of three or four hundred years, but has
bin received and stood firm in the world these thousand years. He was,
(says he) a sincere and true witness of the Catholic faith, Omni exceptione
maiorem, and qui non de sua tantum sed and de communi antiquoru^ patrum and
Apostolicae ecclesiae constanti atque stabili consessione nos bona fide reddat
certiores.
beyond al exception, and one that did not only deliver, what was his own
judgment in any thing; But what was his, was also the common consent of the
ancient fathers, and Apostolic Church; and who was free from parciallitie
touching either part in whatsoever he wrote.

The Church had a Pastor and Bishop of him, in the dexterity of whose wit
posterity did wonder, at the soundnes of his doctrine, at his knowledge in the
holy scripture, at his subtlety in disputing, at his constancy in
maintaining, at his wisdom in judging, at his holiness in living, at his
singular faith and industry in accomplishing. In the end he admonishes his
reader to repair to S. Augustines books, as to the fountain, and draw from
him the confession of the true faith and Catholic Doctrine. Be it unto
Torrensis and al those, that so love S. Augustine, as he has said; I will say
nothing now to the contrary. More you see cannot be said of the man. But what
if these very men, who so much praise him now in a generallitie in a good mood,
do when they are urged with his opinion in a particular point of doctrine,
with the same breath blow hot, and cold; are these men not like our common
slanderers in these days, that hold no man for honest, any longer then he
pleases them, when indeed the more a man does please them, the more dishonest
he is, which consists only in following their brutish and beastly affections,
no more sauouring of Christianity the^ their stables and dog kennels do of
Ciuet or perfume. An instance against the Jesuit I will give presently. S.
Paul writing unto the Corinthians, speaking of the Jews in the time of the law,
says they did eat the sa^e spiritual meat, 1. Cor. 10.1.2.3. verse. The same
spiritual meat.
and did drink of the same spiritual drink for they drank of the spiritual
rock that followed them and the rock was Christ. Now the question is, whether
S. Paul meant, they drank of it, amongst themselves, or, that they and we
had one in common between us, The Jewish sacraments and ours in substance al
one.
which is Christ. We say that the Jewish sacraments were in effect and
substance all one with ours, and that the spiritual meat of theirs, was Christ
the Messiah to be crucified, the outward signs differ they had Manna, and we
the bread of the Eucharist, which is plainly S. Paul's drift in that place; and
not to speak of what they had among themselves, but only that they and we had
one Christ in diverse different signs.

The Rhemists offended at this, Annot. 1. cor. 10. verse. 3.
yet knowing not how to amend themselves but by railing (for quotations should
not have wanted; if they could have told where to have found them) do say
that it is an impudent forgery of the Calvinists to write upon that place, that
the Jews received no less the truth and substance of Christ and his benefits
in their figures, The Jews among themselves did all eat of one spiritual meat.
or sacraments, then we do in ours: and that they and we eat, and drink of
the self same meat and drink, the Apostles saying only that they among
themselves did all feed of one bread and drink of one rock. This say they,
turning the Apostles words and meaning, to a clean contrary sense. But how
shall it be known (besides the text of S. Paul) who interpret that place
truly, they or we.

The Rhemists name not one ancient father, who interprets that text as they
do.
First you see they have not so much as named any ancient father, who may be
imagined to lean toward them; which is one manifest argument there is none,
nether undoubtedly is there any, for considering their intolerable ambition in
other parts of that book, how they tally up fathers by skores, when they can
but pretend their names, they would not now have omitted them, if they could
have told which of them, did but look that way. Now for our parts, we can
name and do daily read, in the volumes of that great Doctor so much renowned
by the Jesuit even S. Augustine, Super Joan. tract. 26.
that he does inter pret that place as we do. For after he has recited the
text of S. Paul, he says, verily the same spiritual meat, but the
corporal was other, because they did eat Manna, and we another thing: Where
are the Rhemists now, and where is Torrensis, and where are they al? Has shame
and grace so left them that they are past blushing. Periere mores, ^us, decus,
pietas, fides, and qui redire, Senec. in ^ga. act. 2.
^um perit, neseit pudor. All right religion honesty good manner, yea and that
which knows not how to return when it is once gone, shamfastnesse, are
clear cassired by them, even as though the safest way to stop one mischief
were to fall into many enormities. This is so clear out of S. Augustine, Per
celera se^. per tutum est sceleribus iter
that those divines amongst them, who gathered the book of sermons, and
homilies set out by the decree of the Trent fathers, do charg S. Augustine in
that point, with a violent interpretation. Which is both an injury to that
ancient father, Opera Laure^tij cum dij Itali, and post obitu^ eius a Francisco
Gerardo Molan^ Ludg. anno 1588. in tertio tomo f. 279. violenta interpretatio
ponitur in margin eiusdem libri.
and deeply ingrosseth the Rhemists amongst them who think that books will
not blush, whatsoever faces will; and assures us that our interpretation is
true and consonant to S. Paul's meaning, and the Papists in general are
overthrown in that whole question: For if the ancient Jews could and did eat
the same Christ that we do; and that the same substance was in the Israelits
sacraments that is in ours, and that a good Jew is a good christian; It must
needs follow, that we eat him no more really and substantially in our
sacraments, then they did in theirs, and for them to have him really and
substantially in theirs, 2000. years before he was incarnate was impossible,
therefore nether have we him so. I could show this matter more largly out of S.
Augustine, if I would stand about it. It suffices me, first to have found
Torrensis so praising S. Augustine as I have set down, then the Rhemists most
shamelesly denying our interpretation, and lastly S. Augustine charged by the^
with using a violent interpretation in the holy scripture, and that in that
interpretation he is ours: Bellarmine himself ha^dling that question gives
over S. Augustine, Bella. de effec. sacram. l. 2. c. 17. fere fine.
plainly by name, and says he will prefer Chrysostom before him in that.
Where is Torrensis now, who said, that S. Augustines judgment, is the judgment
of the whole Church, and that his witness is without exception? Does not this
plainly show that they will allow of nothing, to further then it shall make for
the^? Do not they show that they have no rule but the Leaden Leshian as
Torrensis calls it? In his discovery of our translations. c. 19.
Does not Gregory Martin chide the Protestants in general for following S.
Augustine, in reading a text of Scripture as he does, and says they follow
him against all antiquity? Why? if Torrensis say true, he is as good as al
antiquity. For his testimony is the testimony of al antiquity. De eccles.
hier. l. 3. c. 4. fol. 153 and. c. 5. fol. 163 D. Augustinus varius and
inco^stance in scriptutarum expositione. Mat. 16. Doctrine. princip. l. 6. c. 3.
Vt ante. fo. 82. 83. Allen. vt ante l. 2. c. 5. fol. 517 Mel. Can. vt ant. l.
12. c. 12. fol. 411. The prophesy of Melchy. c. 1. 11. for the calling of the
gentiles and what manner of sacrifice they should offer.


Albertus Pighius, an other great, but late procter for the Church of Rome,
imputes as much infamy to S. Augustine, as ever Torrensis did virtue and as
much in constancy, and perplexity in change of doctrine, as ever the other
did constancy. Augustine (says he) was constant in nothing, but what did
please him now, did anon displease him. And this is, because S. Augustine is
against them, in expounding Christ to be the rock upon which the Church is
builte, and not upon Peter's person as Pighius and the Papists would have him
say, Mary D. Stapleton censureth that very fault in S. Augustine somewhat
modestly, caling it lapsus humanus, an oversight proceeding of ignorance. Yea
Torrensis himself does gnaw at S. Augustine for so interpreting that place, of
Christ; and not of Peter; although he will not much defile that neast, which
he took such pains to beautify; D. Allen and Melchior Canus does both
confess S. Augustine to be ours in an high point of difference between them
and us, and namely in expou^ding the words of the Prophet Malachy (From the
rising of the sun to the going down of the same my name is great among the
Gentiles, and in every place incense shall be offered unto my name, and a pure
offering, for my name is great among the heathen says the Lord) of the
sacrifice of praise and thanks giuinge, as we do, and therefore not of the
sacrifice of the Mass, as they do. And thus does S. Augustine by their own
confession stand with us against them, in the most principal differences
be^eene us and them. Now I doubt not the later Masters will ^ther condemn the
Jesuits fraud, for commending him, whom they do not love, rather then at that
composition, give over the questions which he holds with us, wholly into our
hands: But though they do abate their Jesuits credit we will yet hold the
questions in despite of their cunnings, to wrest the verity of them from us.
But leaving them mired in these* I will proceed to other things, to see if they
be there any clenlier.

Of general counsels.
There is a great question between them and us, whether general counsels,
gathered together for the benefit of the Church to appease questions that arise
therein, touching matters not only of life, but of doctrine and faith also, may
nor can err. They affirm that touching matters of fact, ceremonies, or things
belonging to discipline or manners, that such a council may err in such
things, but not in concluding matt^s of doctrine. On the contrary side, we
hold (in few words) that they may err in all, having no more assurance from
above, for the one then for the other. For confirmation of which our position
we allege S. Augustine, who speaking both of the private writings of Bishops
and of counsels, held in particular regions, and of general counsels
gathered of the Christian world says Etipa concilia quae per singulas regiones
vel prouincias fiunt, To^. 6. de bapt. con. Donat. l. ^. c. 3.
plenariorum conciliorum authoritati quae fiunt vx vniuerso orb christiano
sine vllis ambagibus ceder^* And eue^ those counsels which are held in every
region or province, without al doubt must give place to general cou^sells,
which are gathered of all the christian world, and that even the general
counsels themselves, are often corrected the former by the later, when by any
trial of things, that is opened which was shutt up, and that is known which
was hid, without any swelling of sacrilegious pride, without any stiff neck
of arrogance, without any contention of malicious envy, with holy humility,
with catholic peace, with Christian charity. Here we have a plain place,
that only the holy scripture cannot err, that all other writers may err, that
all provincial counsel may err; and last of al, general counsels
themselves may be corrected, the former by the later, therefore without question
they may err. They agree with us in this text of S. Augustine but the meaning
of the words (not withstanding they be very plain) they do deny, framing the
text to as many fashions, as possible they may. They seem by their answers
utterly unacquainted with the occasion of S. Augustines discourse in that
place, as though it were a very hard thing either to see the original, (...)
having seen it, to judge of it. But the multiplicitie and crokednesse of their
shifts does plainly show, that the authority makes against them and for us.

Andradius the defender of the Tridentine counsel, Andr. defeal. conc. Trid.
l. 1. fol. 51. 53. They may be explaned or unfolded, is the first shift.
says, that S. Augustine seems to him to say no more but, that later
counsels may with clearness unfold those things, which the former had
overslipped. And that S. Augustine insinuates so much, where he says, when
by trial of things that is opened wh^h was shut up, and is known which was
hidden. This gloss of Andradius will soon eat out, the bowels of the text.
S. Augustine says a general council may be amended, and therefore corrected,
which is more then to be explaned or unfolded. And the opposition that S.
Augustine makes between the holy scriptures, which is not to err, and all
other authorities must needs stand firm, and that must be inferred upon
general councils which cannot (...) spoken of the scriptures; but the
scriptures may be said to be unfolded, explaned, or enlightened, but not
corrected: therefore S. Augustine means more of general councels than so,
Advers. haer. l. c. 8. fol. 17. a. leaves out the principal member.
eve^ plainly that they may err. Alphonsus a Castro, alleges this of
Augustine by the half, For where S. Augustine says, and even general
councils are often corrected, the former by the later, he breaks it of, and
says nothing of it, and alleges the former part to prove that provincial
councels may err, as though S. Augustine had gone no farther and not spoken of
general also. 3. Locor. Theol. l. 5. fol. 185. b. ad 10. Non videtur loqui de
eme^datione fidei sed legum.
Melchior Canus coming to answer this place of Austine devises a new shift.
That S. Augustine there speaks not of any amendment in a matter of Faith, but
of Laws, which are to be referred to things either done already, or to be
done. A strange kind of harmony these men make in opening one poor place in
this ancient father. But they do herein as thieves indicted for robbery, they
will confess nothing, because they know they are guilty, but must have all
things proved against the^. He speaks plainly of the question of
Rebaptization as by and by I will declare when I come to Bellarmine.

The Rhemists glau^ce at this text of Austine* in their notes on the new
testament, 4. Annot. in 15. Acts. v. 13. of accidental and changable things.
Tull. offic. l 3.
and do therein exceedingly give the world to understand, that when they
compiled that work they aimed only to uphold folsehood, and not to open any
truth. But as Tully said of falsehood in oaths, Fraus distringit non dissoluit
periurium. Deceit binds but does not discharge the oath, so let them huddle
and shuffle, cloak and hide, gloss and do what they will, the text of
Augustine is open for all men, and there may they most be discovered, He
speaks (say they) of circumstances accident all which require alteration and
not of essential points of doctrine when he says the former general or
plenary counsels, may be amended by the later: Quasi matrimonio habet dotatam
rempublicam. Cicero Octauio. 5. Bellar. de con. author. l. 2. c. 7. fol. 119.
Why cannot Bellar. mine tell. whereof S. Aug. speaks.
quasi matrimonio habent dotatum Augustinum. As though S. Augustine were given
to them in marriage, and all men else shut from him, and so they use him. The
Jesuit Bellarmine according to the manner of his aunswering comes in with
two or three fortes, peradventure he speaks of this, and peradventure he
speaks of that; and yet never hitteth the right peradventure.

To the authority I answer, first, (says he) Perhaps S. Augustine speaks
of unlawful counsels which are amended, by others after that are lawful, as
it happened to the 2 Ephesine counsel, 6. De questionibus facti non iuris.
which was amended in the Chalcedon. Secondly, it he spoke of lawful counsels,
then (says he) he speaks of matters of fact, and not of right, in such
kind of questions it is out of doubt, that a counsel may err, for the
principal question of the Catholic with the Donatists, was about one
Caecilianus whether he had delivered the scriptures into the hands of the
heretics, or not? And it may be answered by a third way (says he) if our
adversaries contend. That S. Augustine speaks generally of al questions when
he says That former counsels may be amended by later, that then he speaks
of precepts of manners, and not of questions of Faith, for precepts are changed
according to times, places and persons, and those changings are called
amendings, not that the thing was before ill, but that it began to be ill the
circumstances being changed. And both these answers are confirmed by the words
of Augustine, when he says that then Counsels are amended, when by some
experience that is opened which was hid, questions of matters of fact, or of
manners, and not al questiso^ of right are opened by experiment. Thus far
Bellarmine wherein I cannot choose but marvel at his gross and poor shifts
in a case so plain, so taken, so known of all men. What devises? What
impostures? What weakness has he showed in his ghesses? As though he had
never seen nor read the place. Does S. Augustine speak of unlawful counsels?
Does he speak of delivering over the books of holy scriptures to the
heretics? does he speak of matters of fact? Does he speak of precepts of
manners? Or does he speak of all of these? Or of any one of these? Nether of any
one of these does he speak, nor of all of these. But because it appears by
these ghessing answers of theirs, that the controversy would sone be at an
end, if the occasion which drew those words from him, were rightly and truly
delivered, because al me^ agree Intelligentia dictorum ex causi^ est assumendi
dicendi. Apolog. These. Rey. de sacra. scrip. fol, 215.
The understanding and true sense of words must be fetched, from the occasion
that gave the speech: which was this. In that ancient father S. Cyprians time a
counsel was held in Carthage, Cyprian being president thereof, wherein was
concluded an error of faith that such were to beere-baptized, as had bin
baptized by heretics. The Donatists urged that decree together with S.
Cyprians authority, against S. Augustine, S. Augustine as he refused the
opinion (holding no rebaptization although heretics had baptized) and the
authority too, answering that only the scriptures could not err, but all
other both Bishops writings, prouincial counsels, yea and general too might
err, and therefore be amended. And this is plainly to be seen both in the
first chapter of the first book, Aug. de bapt. contra Donat. l. 1. c. 1, and.
lib. 2. c. 1.
where he says he will diligently handle that question of Baptism in the
books following, which elsewhere he had omitted, and prove it too against all
those, qui non studio partium cacati iudicant, who judge not according to parts
taken. And also in the first chapter of the third book, where he recites the
very state of the question, which he was to handle against the Donatists, and
that decree which was urged, wherein was concluded that al heretics and
schismatikes, that is to say, all that are out of the fellowship of the Church,
have no baptism, and therefore whosoever being baptized came from them to the
church, were to be baptized again.

Impossible it is that either the Rhemistes, or Bellarmine, or any other writer
amongst them, should be ignorant of this. But when malice shadoweth men's minds
they do very really lay open themselves. Hardly can any of them say, that
this question of Baptism was a matter of fact, and not of faith, or of manners
and not of doctrine, when it is of so high a point as baptism by heretics,
whether we ought to baptize those again, who have by them bin baptized first.
He that mistrusteth what I have said herein, let him either read S. Augustine;
Confer. in the tower 2 day. Annot, in 15. act. v. 13. Praelect. Whitak. co^t.
Bell. de con. q 6. f. 318.
and that shall best resolve him, or the learned writers of our age, D. Fulkes
second days conference in the Tower with Cawp^an. And in his answer to the
Rhemists. 15. acts. v. 13. D. Whitakers in his tract of counsels against
Bellarmine, set out since his death, Or D. Reynolds in his Apology of his
Thesis, and Whitaker s against Dureus. Apol. these. Io. Rey. de sacra. scrip.
fol. 225. Whitak. cont. Dureum. l. 4. de conc. f. 291. Bellarm. testifies
against himself. that S. Aug. spoke against. rebaptisation, which I hope he
will not say is a matter of fact. Bellar de. co^c, auth. l. 2. c. 3. f. 111. and
de co^c, and eccles* l. 1. c. 10. fol. 46. 47
all which do mightily discover the folly of their adversaries in this point.
Compare their concord in this question with the inconstancy of those on the
other side. But see the high impudency of Bellarmine against the witness of
his own conscience, and against all the excuses, and devises before set down,
to darken the place in question. He does scarsly full four leaves before, say
plainly, in praise of general counsels, That S. Augustine did excuse Cyprian
from heresy, only because at that time there had bin no general counsel
held, quo definiri potuisset question illa de baptismo haereticorum. Wherein that
question of the baptism of heretics, might have bin defined, and quoteth Aug.
lib. 1. de baptc 18. And could Bellarmine tell that in the first book and 18.
Chapter Augustine spoke of baptism by heretics, and that that was the
Donatists case, and his; They alleging, and he excusing S. Cyprian, and could
he not tell that it was the same which Augustine spoke of, in the 2. book and
third chapter being the place in question with us: but four chapters of? But
we may thank the truth for Bellarmines confession against himself, as Tully
said of it, O magua vis veritatis, quae contra hominum ingenia, Tull. pro. M.
Coelio.
calliditatem, sollertiam, contraque fict as omnium infidias, facile se per
seipsam defendat. O the great strength of the truth, which will easily defend
it self, against the wits, craft, suttelty and all devises of men whatsoever:

As before you have seen their several observations touching that authority
of Aug. so will I yet more plainly discover their pretended right to a Cano^ of
a great and ancient counsel, Can. Nic. co^. 6, Iuell, reply to Hard* art. 4.
di. 7, fol. 240. Reyn conf. with Heart. c. 9. diuis. 2 f. 573. Defenc. of the
Apology. p. 2. c. 3. diuis* 6. fol. 214.
the first general, held at Nice in a question between the bishop of Rome and
us, we saying the Canon makes for us and they for them. The canon goes thus,
Mos antiquus perduret in Aeg^pto, Libia and Pentapoli, vt Alexandrinus
Episcopus horum omnium habeat potestate^ quandoquidem and Romano Episcopo
parilis est mos. Let the ancient custom remain throughout Egypt, Libia, and
Pentapolis that the Bishop of Alexandria have the government over al these,
because the bishop of Rome has the like order. Likewise also in Antiochia and
in other provinces, the privileges are to be kept to the churches. Which
canon of the council is acknowledged by ours, to be plain for the purpose it
was written, viz: that the Bishop of Rome, has no sovereignty over other
patriarchs, but only a fellowship and equallity with the rest, to walk
carefully within his own division, as others were bound to do within theirs;
For the council grounded themselves on the custom of the bishop of Rome: that
as he had preeminence of all the bishops about him; so Alexandria and Antioche
should have of al about them, and likewise other Churches (as the Metropolitan)
each in their own provinces, do show, that the Pope neither had preeminence
of al through the world before the Niceene council, nor ought to have greater
rule (by their judgment) than he before time had. This is the true and genuine
sense and meaning of that council and canon. The contrary part are divided in
this, and yet not divided. Divided touching the original text of the cano^,
Ekius ench. de loc. co^. f. 58. Hard. in conf. Apol. p. 2. c. 3. diuis 6. f.
114. Sau^d. de visib. monar. lib. 7. fol. 220. 228. 288. 332. Staplet. ret. of
vnt. against luell. art. 4. fol. 38. b. Andrad. defe^* Trid. conc. l. 2. fol.
234. 1. Instead of the Bishop. of Rome, he reads Metropo. litane.
some of the^ saying it is imperfect: And again not divided, in that they al
claim by it, not respecting the imperfectness of it.

A strange sentence it were, that could both extol the bishop of Romes
authority oueral churches, and yet limit him to his scantling, as well as other
bishops, and serve this turn both when it is perfect, and when it is
imperfect, and wants. Friar Ecchius in his book of common places, does read
the canon word for word as we do without any adding or diminution. So does D.
Harding in his confutation of the Apology of the church of England. Sanders in
his visible monarchy, does four times iut upon this sixth canon, eve^ as we
read it, without any addition in words, saving a sinister interpretation
sometime. Andradius confesses the canon as before it is read, and yet he
hammereth fowly about it, bringing in instead of, because the bishop of Rome
has the like order or custom, these words, because the Metropolitan has
the like custom. And so instead of the bishop of Rome, he reads the
Metropolitan. Mary this was out of an old Latin copy which he stands not
much upon, because the canon it self was written in Greek. But says he,
where the Niceene synod speaks of the like custom to the church of Rome, yet
does not make equal the church of Alexandria to the church of Rome, but
confirms the prerogative of the church of of Alexandria to the judgment of
the church of Rome, and says it is the custom of the Church of Rome, that the
Church of Alexandria should be taken for the primate of Egypt. What? by the
judgment of the church of Rome? as though the Church of Rome allotted it to be
so. To take his judgment, (...) He expounds his custom to be his judgment.
for his Custom were an hard interpretation, and flat against the text, for
both their limits are grounded upon old customs, and not one upon the others
judgment. Dureus goes more exactly to work and sets down the canon in
Greek and Latin, even as we read it without alteration: But adds that
nothing could have been spoken more plain and clear, Dureus conf. resp.
Whitak. rat. 4. fol. 170.
for establishing the authority of the church of Rome, over all charches: For
those fathers (says he), bring the custom of the church of Rome for an
argument whereby they limit the authority of the bishop of Alexandria, and
therefore the church of Alexandria depends on the Church of Rome as on (...)
mother, and receives all she has from her.

Which gloss of his, is the farthest from the text that may be imagined,
Dureus exposition.
his exposition stands thus, Let the bishop of Alexandria gonerue the
Churches of Egypt and the rest of the Metropolitanes in their provinces do the
like because the bishop of Rome has i^r^sdiction over all churches, what
coherence, has one part with an other? Panffoote. fo. 91. Antioche and
Alexandria* were chief patriarchall churches.
If the bishop of Rome had power overal, why did not those fathers express
that they bestowed his charge upon others, and that with some dependency on
him? And how is it, that they themselves tell us, that the churches founded by
S. Peter and namely Antioche and Alexandria* have bin named the chief
patriatchal churches, and did go before all the others in the counsels? Hardly
then can Dureu^ tell us, when Alexandria depended on Rome as on a mother: But
Dureus says further that we might learn the meaning of the canon, from
Paschasinus the Popes Legate in the counsel of Chalcedon, where he recited that
sixth canon thus, The Church of Rome has always had the primacy.
Tree centorum december and octo patrum sextus canon quod Ecclesia Romana semper
habuit primatum. The sixth canon of the 318. fathers, that the church of Rome
has always had the primacy. Well may this be the preface of the Popes Legate,
before he came to the Canon, but the canon it could not be in common sense and
reason; But Dureus has broken the Ise and set in his foot and Bellarmine must
finish the rest. This of Paschasinus, but the church of Rome has always had
the primacie was spoken by him 120. years after the canon was made, and yet
Bellarmine is come to this, that those words should be the beginning of the
canon, and that the canon wanted a beginning til now of late, where it is
plain that those were but the Legates words in favor of the sea of Rome and
no part of their meaning.

Four several times does Bellarmine assay this canon to make it serve his
turn. 1. Bellar. de Romans pont. l. 1. c. 24. fol. 151. 2. l. 2. c. 13. fol.
221. 3. l. 2. c. 17. fol. 250. 4. l. 2. c. 18. fol. 266.
In the first, he allows the canon only as we read it, without claiming any
addition to it. In the second he handles it roughly, but yet confesses
against himself, that as the canon is extant in the common prints, the
beginning lacks, which is, Ecclesia Romana semper habuit primatum, mos aute^
perduret. The church of Rome has always had the primacie, let the ancient
custom remain, etc. For so (says he) did Paschasinus read it in the counsel
of Chalcedo^: If it be so, then does Dureus abuse his reader, for he says, The
Church of Rome has always had the primacy. Ruffinus expounds the canon as
we^ do.
Paschasinus read it thus, The sixth canon of the 318. fathers, That the church
of Rome has, etc. why does Bollarmine suppress the word That? but to make us
Believe, the recital of the eanon, is the canon it self. But Bellarmine does
freely confess that the ancient father Ruffinus for more than 1200. years
since, expounded the canons as we do, that is; That the bishop of Alexandria
should have the care of all Egypt; as the Bishop of Rome has of the Churches
near about him. But Bellarmine says that this exposition is false, as also
that of Theodoret Balsamon a greek borne, who does also to that effect
interpret the Canon; who, howsoever he displeases them now, Cope dial 1. f.
166.
yet does Alan Cope confess him to be a learned divine. But that exposition
amongst many that pleases Bellarmine best is, That the bishop of Alexandria
should govern those provinces allotted to him, because the bishop of Ro^e is
so accustomed, that is, because the bishop of Rome before any definition of any
council did accustom, to permit the government of Egypt, Libia, and
Pentapolis to the Bishop of Alexandria, or was accustomed to govern those
provinces by the bishop of Alexandria. Oration pro Muraena.
Iacerent in tenebris omnia nisi literarum lumen accesserit says Tully;
Althings had lien buried in darkness, had not the light of good letters awaked
them. How do these men, with the knowledge of good letters involue althings
into more darkness, then if they were reduced to the first Chaos? There is
none of them al but know, that the canon about which they keep so much stir
is directly against them. The very recital of it, is a sufficient confutation
of the arguments brought to the contrary. They only desire to force their
wits to uphold their wills. If the beginning of the canon has bin wanting so
long time as Bellarmine makes account it has, how did Eckius, Hardinge,
Saunders, Andradius, and Dureus, make it serve their turn against us when it
was wanting are they so good workme^ that any tools will serve their turns,
whether they be blunt or sharp, will any thing against the Protestants serve?
But popery was never fully clothed in all her colors til the late Jesuits set
it to sale. How or by whose means that piece was wanting so long, or how it
came to be wanting* or how to be found Bellarmine does not show. What record
makes mention of it either counsel or father, or Doctor, or whoeuer said so
but he, he is taken with, manner, and until he does manfully acquit himself,
he must sla^d charged with the wrong don to those 318. fathers, whose words he
has falcified, If he bring out an other Jesuit, elder then himself to
testify with him; it may not serve, the intelligence shall be but as between
an incendiarie and a robber, the one to fire the house and the other to rifle
it There was a time when the showing of this canon (if it do make for the
bishop of Romes authority) would haun greatly pleasured the Roman bishops,
namely in their great and long conflict with the Bishops of Aphrica, even
touching superiority and command, du^ing the full time almost of three Popes
Zozoman, Bonisacius, and I^ocentius 1. presently after the Nice^e counsel, who
contended with them and denied it them. Then or never had that canon been to
be showed, had it bin at all, and fitter opportunity to have found it was
never offered* But none of the Bishops of Rome, ever hard of the making of it,
which is an undoubted argument there was none such. On the other side we have
testimony both for the Canon, ever since it was made, that it was never
altered, and beside the evidence of the truth in the very language of it, we
have Ruffinus for 1200. years ago, expounding of it, as we do.

But let us compare their new patch, with the whole cloth, Mat 9.16. Contraria
interse apposita magis elucescunt. The right canon as they al agree.
and see whether that that should fill it up, do not take from the garment, and
so the breach be worse; Let the ancient custom be kept thorough out Egypt,
Lybia, and Pentapolis, that the bishop of Alaxandria have the government of all
these, for the bishop of Rome has the like order. Likewise also in Antiochia
and in other provinces the privileges are to be kept to the churches. After
their forgery we may read it thus. The sixth canon of the 318. fathors That the
church of Rome has always had the primacie, Dureus vt ante
let the ancient enstomes remain, etc. After Bellarmine thus. The church of
Rome has always had the primacie, let the ancient customs remain thorough
out Egypt, Libia, Bellar. vt ante
and Pentapolis that the bishop of Alexandria govern those provinces, because
the bishop of Rome is accustomed so to do; that is because the bishop before
the definition of any council accustomed to permit the government of Egypt,
Libia, and Pentapolis to the bishop of Alexandria; or accustomed to govern
those provinces by the bishop of Alexandria. Having this liberty to do and say
what they list, to add or take away when they will, they were to be reckoned
as simple and childlike, as now they are found fraudulent, and base; if they
would ever yield to any authority, that is alleged against them. But yet they
shall not loose their labors, it shall be with them as with the Grecian
artificers cos aulados esse, Cicero pro L. Muraena. orat. 23. fol. 750.
qui citharaedi fieri non potuerint. Who were taken to be pipers when they
could not attain to be good plaiers on the harp; and they shall be accounted
Cobblers and botchers, for fair and good work they set up none. I could cloy
you with proof against them in this kind of dealing, but I will only add one
or two more, and so an end. Antwerpiae ex cudebat Ioannes Crinitus. anno. 1541.
Cypr. de simppraelat sieve de unit. eccles. All the Apostles were equal.


The ancient father and martyr S. Cyprian who lived above 1300. years ago
within 250. years of Christ, has this sentence, Hoc crant vtique and caeteri
Apostoli quod fuit and Petrus, pari consortio praediti and honoris and
potestatis. Verily the rest of the Apostles were the same that Peter was,
endued with like fellowship both of honor and power. From which the Protestants
argue that S. Cyprian knew no rule or dominion that S. Peter had over the rest
of the Apostles, for says he they were equal both in honor and in power: Iuel
con Hard. art. 4. diuis. 6. fol. 239. Cause. 24. q 1. loquitur dominus. Caiet.
de romans pont. instit. to^. 1. tract. 3 c. 3. and de author papae and conc. to^.
1. tract. 1. c. 2. Saund l. 7. nu^. 46. fol. 262.
and so has shut out the bishop of Rome from having that sovereignty over the
rest of the bishops of the church. Bishop Iuell in his time without any
mistrust, thought this authority of Cypria^s strong enough (amongst others) to
show the ancient fathers minds in that point. Gratian who compiled the
decrees, has recorded this sentence of Cyprian, even in this form that we lay
it down: Cardinal Caietane eiteth it twife in two several tracts writing of
the Popes authority, even as we do without any addition at al to it.

Saunders also in his visible monarchy argues upon this text of Cyprian for
Peter's supremacy over the rest of the Apostles, but quoteth the text as we do,
without the late addition added by the Jesuits; so that for our warrant we
have all the ancient texts of Cyprian. The decrees of Gratian, the testimony of
Caietane, and the allowance of Sanders. Nothwithstanding which testimony and
witness, they have of late found out a piece belonging to this text of Cyprian,
which shall not only contrary the true reading, but even palpably and groslie
cause him to confound and overthrow his own former words. They read it thus,
Hoc erant vtique and caeteri Apostoli quod fuit Petrus pariconsortio praediti,
and honoris and potestatis, Bellar. de. romans pont. l. 1. c. 12. sol. 103. lege
and lib. 4. c, 23. sol. 591. Et primatus Petro datur and the primacy is given
to Peter is added to Ciprian by the^.
sed exerdium ab vnitate proficiscitur, and Primatus Petrodatur, vi Ecclesia
vna monstretur, The rest of the Apostles were the same that Peter was, endued
with like fellowship both of honor and power, but the be ginning comes from
unity, And the primacy is given to Peter, that the Church might be showed to be
one. Et primatus Petro datur, and the primacy is given to Peter, has been
added unto Cypria^ of late becuse they saw the former words did quite overthrow
them, and so in adding them they have overthrown us and Cyprian too. Will they
have any man to think that S. Cyprian would say first. The rest of the
Apostles were the same that Peter was, endued with like fellowship both of
honor and power; and to add presently, And the primacie is given to Peter. How
were they the same? how were they endued with like fellowship both of honor and
power, if Peter had the Primacie? Unless such a primacy be meant, as
notwithstanding will leave them the same that he was, and so the same, that they
shall be like in honor and power: such a primacy I hope they have wit enough to
discard, and yet any other primacy shall contrary Cyprian, and prove them
forgers.

They are Masters of the presses beyond the seas, they compass sea and land to
make a proselite, they spare no cost, shall we think that if the ancient
manuscripts of Cyprians text, had had that clause, that the first printed
copies would have wa^ted it? Would Gratian have omitted it, in his decrees or
Caietane or Saunders, Dial. dial. i.s. 123. Rhem: annot. Ioh. c. 21. f. 280
Dureus. rat. 6. fol. 286. Fulk against the Rhem. lo lo citato. Rey. co^f. with
Heart c 5 diuis. 2. fol. 165. Whit. co^t ^ur. l. 6. fol 433.
not have seen the very words, that should point out the supremacy, it is hard
so to think, and against former experiences. And yet does Alane Cope in his
dialogues, The Rhemists in their testament. Dureus against Whitakers, in
defense of Campian, al which go along in that stringe, and hold in that
addition, but most crookedly in so straight a cause. Does not this justify the
complaint of our me^ against them, who lay it soundly to their charge, that
they from beyond the seas have twenty such devises as these, to make their
religion go current, among their novices here in England? You have seen in the
former examples of the Nicene counsel, and S. Cyprians authority, how bold
(without shame) they have bin to add unto their texts, that which the original
books had not; Now will I show you with how great show of diligence, they can
handle other authorities when they do but seem to make for them. The thing is
this. The Ecclesiastical histories of Socrates and Sozomene, Eccles. histor.
Socrat. l. 2. c. 11. and Sozom. l. 3. c. 7.
do make mention of certain troubles, that befell unto Athanasius, Paulus, and
Marcellus, Asclepas and Lucius, al Archbishops of great places in the East, who
being expulsed from their churches, fled unto Rome where Julius was bishop, who
bestirred himself as well as the time would give him leave, to see them
restored to their seas, if possible it might be. This authority and record
seeming to make for the bishop of Romes power and dominion, is garnished with
glorious titles, and often alleged with great pomp, as if the matter were
clear, and to be received without further examination, that the bishop of
Rome had supreme power on earth over all other bishops.

Bellarmine alleges it four several times, Bellar. de romans pont. l. 2. c.
15. fol. 237.
under four several titles, and in all four agrees with himself; That
Athanasius and the rest being deposed from their seas fly to Rome, where Julius
for the dignity of his place, gave them comfort and relief, and in plain
terms restored the^ to their bishoprics. 1. By the witness of Greek fathers.
First he alleges it in the Chapter of proofs for the Popes monarchy, by
the witness of Greek fathers: because the historian Sozomene who reports
it, was a Grecia^. Next, 2. Bell. vt ante. l. 2. c. 18. by his authority over
other bishops. 3. Bell vt ante l. 2 c. 21. by appeals made unto him. 4. Bell de
conc. auth. l. 2. c 17. The first reporter of this is Socrates Eccles. histor.
l. 2. c. 11. You shall read before that they fled to Constantinus the younger,
l. 2. c. 2. Loco contumeliae. Cap. 14. Constans Emperor of the West. Cap. 16.
for the authority which the bishop of Rome exercised, over other bishops,
because he wrote to the Eastern bishops about them. Then in the chapter of
appeals, because they came from the East into the West for succor. In the
fourth place, he brings it in for the Popes authority over counsels, because
the Eastern bishops had deposed the other in a counsel. It is a sign that
Bellarmine would play the good husband with the whole piece, that can do so
much with such small rags. The first reporter of this is Socrates a Greek
writer, as well as Sozomene and before him in the history; He shows how that
Athanasius, Paulus, Asclepas, Marcellus, and Lucius being deprived of their
churches came to Rome the princely city, and cettifie Julius of their
troubles; Julius by reason of the prerogative of his church vphelde their
parts, writing his letters into the East, which they trusting unto, go every
man to his own home, and send the letters according to their several
directions. But those of the East took the letters of Julius in skorne, and
will not be directed by him. After this the Emperor Constans writes to his
brother, in the behalf of them, desiring him to send those thither, who might
render a reason before him of the just causes of their deposition. His letters
took none effect, in so much that they make humble suit that an other counsel
might be called, wherein both parties might be the better known. By the
commandment of both Emperors a general counfell was proclaimed at Sardice a
city of Illirium: by the better part of the counsel is Paulus Athanasius and
Marcellus restored to their bishoprics. Notwithstanding these things, Edicitur
concilium generale, idque de sententia duoru^ Imperarorum. Constantius Emperor
of the East. Cap 18.
Constantius the Emperor of the East deferred from day to day, the execution
of his brothers request concerning the deposed biships, wherefore he gave him
in choice, either to restore Paulus and Athanasius, and so account him for his
friend, or else to hear the proclamation of open war and so find him as his
deadly foe. The letters he sent were to this effect. There remain with me
Athanasius and Paulus who as I am credibly given to understand are persecuted
for godliness sake; The letters of constance, to his brother Constantius.
If thou will promise me to restore them to their seats, and to punish
severely such as have injured them; I will send the parties themselves unto
thee; But if thou will not accomplish these things as I require; I will that
thou know, that I will come thither, and whether thou will or no, restore them
to their seats. Constantius understanding this, assembled many of the Eastern
bishops and demanded of them what were best to be done. They did not co^clud
thus up on the Bishop of Romes. letters. In fine epistolae lulij Romani
episcop. ad clerum and populum Alexandrinum.
They answer, it were far better to restore Athanasius, than to raise deadly
and mortal war. Wherefore the Emperor restored Athanasius, Paulus, Marcellus,
Asclepas and Lucius, every one to his bishopric again, so that by the
Emperors edict they all received their own seas, the cities were commanded to
entertain them, with willing and cheerful minds. Thus much briefly out of
Socrates concerning the troubles which befell on Athanasius and the rest of the
Catholic bishops.

What Sozomene reports (which is all the show that Bellarmine has) of this
matter, Sozomene of the same matter. l. 3. c. 7. His reports of this same
matter.
shall as breeflly follow as the rest is gone before. In his third book and
seventh Chap. he me^tioneth the same matter that Socrates did, in his second
book and eleventh Chap. That is the flight of Athanasias and others from
Alexandria and other places, to Rome, Julius his writing letters in their
behalf, which he calls his restoring of the^ (even as in an other place he
says they deposed Pope Julius, who yet was not deposed) Their answering of
Julius letters rethorically and ironically, telling him withal, that although
Rome from the beginning had bin famous and the Metropolies for religion and
godliness tame^ authors religionis Christianae primu^, Christian religion came
first out of the east
ex Orie^te eo veaeisse^t yet the authors and fou^ders of the christian
religion came first out of the East thither, and that Julius in doing that
which he did, had broken the laws of the church in meddling with those that they
had dealt against. In the mean time new accusations were coined unto
Constantius, which Julius understanding thought it not safe for Athanasius to
like in Egypt, but sent for him to Rome, Cap. 8. and. 9.
And wrote again to the bishops of the East, who met at Antioche replying to
the letters, and found fault with them that contrary to the faith of the Nicene
counsel they had undertaken new matters, and contrary to the laws of the
church, they had not called him to the counsel: For says he, there is a law
belonging to the honor of Priesthood, which takes those acts for void, which
are enacted without the consent of the bishop of Rome, the matter comes to
this issue, Cap. 19. He is the issue of what Julius could do. He brought the
matter into the Emperor hand.
when Julius saw that those things for which he wrote took none effect, causam
Athanasij and Pault ad Constantem retulit, he brings the cause of Athanasius
and Paulus unto the Emperor Constans, who did write unto his brother both for
the sending of Athanasius his accusers unto him, with request (in that manner
as before you did hear) to see them restored himself. The conclusion of
Sozomens history concerning Athanasius and the rest, is the same that Socrates
(before mentioned) was, Sozom. l. 3. cap. vlt.
thus: Athanasius returned from the West unto Egypt: so did Paulus Marcellus
Asclepas. and Lucius recover their Episcopal seats, for by the Emperors
letters they also had liberty to return, to their own home.

There is a third historiographer who is very plentiful in reporting the
troubles that befell on these bishops, Theod. eccles. histe l. 2. cap. 5.
and of Athanasius coming unto Constans the Western Emperor, and his putting
the Prince in mind of his fathers Acts, and of the great Council of Nice,
which his father had called; and then instantly got the Emperor to write unto
his brother Constantius, wherein he warns him to keep inviolably the
inheritance of his fathers faith. Constantius moved with these letters,
appointed a Counsel to be held at Sardice, and willed the bishops as well of the
East as the West to be their present. Whereby it is plain still, that, as the
Emperor restored them in the end; so had they power to call and summon the
councels, and to appoint any mean which they thought fit, for the due hearing
of the matter, till their own full sentence came. And this is so plain that
Sanders in his visible monarchy says Magnus Athanasius nihil dubitauit
Constantis Imperatoris Catholics sidem atque opem contra Constantij Caesaris
vim ac perfidia^ implorare. L. 2, c. 4. fol. 82. ex Theod. eccles lib. 2. c, 5.
Athanasius the great doubted not to crave and implore the trust and help, of
the catholic Emperor Constans against the force and treachery of the Emperor
Constantius.

Now let the whole world judge between our adversaries and us, which of us
twain have more right unto this question of restoring of Athanasius, and the
other Bishops. The history is plain Julius authority was to weak to perform
what he thought to have compassed, and therefore he appealed to the Emperor,
who indeed did strike the stroke. 1. 2. 3. 4.
Thus is Bellarmines Four fold proof, proved to be single sold and poor,
and yet is not this his case alone but of others before him, 5. Hard. art. 4.
cont. Iuell. fol. 111. b. and 117 b
Hardings, 6. Dorma^. co^t. Iuell. fol 64 b.
Dorman, 7. Pighius eccles. hier. lib. 4. fol. 269.
Pighius, 8. Cope, dial. 1. fol. 55.
Cope, and 9. Staplet. return of untruths against M Iuell. art. 4. fol 29.
Stapleton, all of them ioining in one to suppress the truth, and all of them
alleging the story falsely and deceiptfully, as though it had bin done by
Julius, which was only effected by the Emperor. And where, in the process of
this tragedy touching Athanasius, I have opened (indeed of purpose, because
the adversaries should not cavil) that Julius alleged a law in he honor of
Preisthood, which ordained that those acts should be void, which were made
without the consent of the bishop of Rome, which may seem at the first sight,
to make only for his authority and sovereignty, excluding all others, It may
please them that shall so think to understand withal, that over the bishops of
Christendom there were constituted and appointed four Patriarchs of Rome,
Constantinople, Antioche, and Alexandria, amongst which four the Bishop of
Rome had the first place in order and fitting, when they did meet to gether,
but no definitive sentence to undo that which they did, or to conclude without
them, and this held touching general counsels, and something for the
nominating of bishops, if need had bin, and not touching the bishop of Rome
only but also toward others of that fellowship, and thence sprange their
letters of mutual certificate each to others, touching that one faith which
they al professed, as Gregory the great, seems to insinuate when he says
Hinc est etiam quod quoties in quatuor praecipuis sedibus Antistites
ordinantur, synodales sibi epistolas viciscim mittant. Gregor. l. 7. episc. 53.
ex sa^dvis. mon. l. 7. so. 358. and Stapl. Princ. fidei doct. l. 4. c. 20. fol.
149. Greg. l. 6. epis. 37. ex Saund. visib. monar. l. 7. fol. 220. The dignity
in the 3. patriarchal seats is equal. Rome. Alexandria. Antioche. Sozo^. l. 6.
c. 23 Sanders abuses this place alleging it so, as if the consent only of
the bishop of Rome were required Declaue David. l. 4. fol 80. Socrat. eccles.
histo. l. 7. c. 28. Noe bishop. ordained without the consent of the bishop of
Constantinople.
Hence it is also that oftentimes we find that men of chelfe authority are
appointed to rule in the four chief seas, and mutually they send synodicall
Epistles each to others Cum multi sint Apostole* pro ipso tamen principatu sola
Apostolorum principis seeds in authoritate co^valuit, quae in tribus locis
vnius est. Although there be many Apostles, yet for the principality, the
seat of the prince of the Apostles was chief in authority, which authority
in 3 places is equal: For he (Peter) exalted the seat wherein he vouchsafes to
abide, and end his life: He also beautified the seat, unto which he sent the
Eva^gelist (Mark) his disciple. And he established the seat, wherein he sat
seven years although he removed from thence. And other men's consents were
established by law to be had as well as the bishop of Rome as we may read in
the same history of Sozomene that the counsel holden at Ariminum was condemned
because nether Vincentius nor the rest to whom it belonged as well as the
bishop of Rome (though his mind should have bin known before other) had not
agreed unto it. It is moreover read again in plain terms in the division
between Sisinius and those of Cyzicium, they appointing one bishop and he
nominating an other, Hoc ab illis factum est neglecta illa lege quae iubet
nequis episcopus desiguetur absque sententia and authoritate Episcopi
Constantinopolis, This they did faith the story because they neglected that
law which commands that no bishop be appointed, and ordained without the
consent of the bishop of Constantinople: so it appears if the business
concerning the whole church were handled the^ al their knowledges and minds
were had and known in it; if it concerned any particular part thereof, then the
particular bishops of the province, 1. Bellar. de Romans pont. l. 2 c. 13. fo.
223. ex Theodoret. ec. cles. his. l. 5. c. 9. is abused as well as the rest By
commandment of the Popes letters says Bellarm. 2. Bellar. de conc. and eccles
l. 1. c. 13. f. 60. By the Popes letters they came to Constantinople. A most
impudent untruth shamlesly avouched. 3. Bell. de conc. and eccles. l. 1. c. 19.
fo. 83. and 87. The bishop of Constantinople was president. If the bishopp of
Rome or his Legate, must needs be president of cou^sells; then this counsel
lacked a president, or otherwise it must appear that Nectarius was his Legate
or deputy, both which are absurd to think.
and the patriarch yielded thereunto and the Emperor above alto bridle and call
all to account.

You shall further see their sincerity in alleging the histories by an other
example about the bishop of Romes supreme power, out of the ecclesiastical
history also. The second general counsel in their Epistle to Damasus, which
is extant in Theodoret do say that they came to the city of Constantinople ex
mandato literarum pontificis by commandment of the Popes letters sent unto
them by the Emperor, And there also they confess the church of Rome to be
the head, and they the members. This says Bellarmine in his first report of
that history. In the second place, he brings it in for proof of the Popes
authority in calling of general counsels, Theoporete reports (says he)
that the Emperor Theodosius did not so much call the counsel at
Constantinople, as that he sent the letters of Damafus the Pope to the
bishops, by which letters the counsel was summoned; For so write the bishops
gathered together in the counsel, unto Damasus the Pope, mandato inquiunt
literarum supertore anno a vestra reverentia ad sanctissimum Imperatorem
Theodosium missarum. That by letters received the last year from your
holiness (meaning the Pope) sent unto the most holy Emperor Theodosius we
prepared to take our journey to Constantinople. Although therefore says
Bellarmine Theodosius called the counsel yet he called it by commandment of
the sea Apostolic. In the 3. place he brings this same example for the
presidentship, and cheifty of the bishop of Rome in counsels. In the second
counsel held at Constantinople (says he) it is certain that the Emperor fat
not chief, but only sent the letters of the bishop of Rome, to the rest, by
which they were called to the counsel. And it is certain (says he) that the
Roman bishop was not president but Nectarius the bishop of Constantinople, the
reason whereof is, because the bishop of Rome was not there, nor any Legate for
him, for Damasus the Pope had called the bishops of the East to Constantinople;
But from that place he would have had them come to Rome, that so at Rome there
might have bin a full and plenary counsel both of the East and West bishops,
How bouldly are these untruths avouched? 4. Saund. ^. fol. 41.
But if Damasus had been there without doubt he had sat chief, as appears
by their Epistle to Damasus, Vbi illi Damasum us caput suum agnoseunt, and ipse
filios cos vocat, wherein they acknowledge him for their head, and he calls
them sons; so much for Bellarmine.

Saunders in his Visible monarchy, makes a brief of this matter thus. The
fathers that were (says he) gathered together, in the second general counsel
holden at Constantinople, when they were urged by Damasus the bishop of Rome to
come thither, amongst other causes why they could not so do, brought this for
one, By the Popes letters they came to Constantinople.
That by the letters of the same Damasus written to the Emperor Theodosius,
they were appointed only to prepare themselves for a ^ourney to Constantinople;
And that they had brought the co^sents of the bishops who remained at home in
their provinces with them of the celebrating of that one council. Sanders
again in an other place. 5. Sand. declaue David. I. 4. sol. 81. The consent of
the bishop of Rome.
preambulateth from the matter before he come to it, thus. Although the
consent of the bishop of Rome always had and obtained, did confirm the
summoning of a general counsel, yet that in a great matter no error should
creep in, it was the order that the Pope should send his letters to the
Emperor touching that matter, As who should say the Pope commanded the Emperor
to summon counsels.
and then the Emperor having received those letters, did by his own letters
assemble the bishops whereupon the bishops assembled at Constantinople do write
unto Damasus in these words, you did send for us as for members of your own
body, by the letters of the most holy Emperor to come unto the counsel which
is gathered together at Rome by the will and pleasure of God. And a little
after. By the commandment of letters from your holiness, sent the last year
unto the Emperor Theodosius after the council held at Aquila, we prepared our
selves only for our journey to Constantinople. It therefore appears (says
Sanders) from this testimony. That there were two Councels holden at once, one
at Rome, the other at Constantinople, and to both of them the Pope sent for
those bishops by the letters of the Emperor. Thus much from Sanders in that
place of that matter.

6. Staplet. ret. o^ untruths art 4. fol. 139.
D. Stapleton an other of that side, maintaining the Popes soveraignety, is no
more abashed to abuse the history than those other have done in the places
going before, For says he, Those bishops of Constantinople do write-vnto
Damasus the Pope, and showing a cause of there not coming to Rome, do further
say unto him, That they had assembled themselves but lately at Constantinople
by the late letter of your honor sent after the council holden in Aquilicato
the most Godly Emperor Theodosius, Letters from your honor.
which was the reason why they could not come to Rome. Now touching this
present matter (says he) the bishops here do witness that to that counsel of
Rome the Pope called them, by the letters of the Emperor, not as a warrant
(they have no such word) but rather as a mean. For they witness he calls the^
as his proper members. Bellar. thrice. Saund. twice already. Staplet. once. 7.
8 and. de vifib. monar. l. 7. fol. 312. number. 145. 146. The whole mass of
falsehood is diseouered. The Eastern bishops write to all the bishops of the
West, and so the letters go in the plural number.
This it the sixth canvasse they have had touching this place of Theodoret: The
seventh set down by Sanders in a third place of his book, will quite
overthrow both himself and them, being inlighted a little by the history,
which they al have most shamefully abused; For in this third place of his he
has bewraied their shameful dealing. There he confesses that the Bishops of
the East, did write to other bishops of the West, and namely to Ambrose, as well
as to Damasus, and not to him alone, (as hitherto they al made us believe they
did) and there he confesses more over, that the Eastern bishops received a
letter from the Western gathered together at Rome, in which letter they were
prayed to come thither: and that in their answer back, they declare that all
the western bishops sent for them by letters from the most holy Emperor.
But (says he further) it appears from this place, that the first beginning
of a general counsel is the bishop of Rome, but the means which the Pope uses
in that matter is to call them by the Emperors letters.

This is all their report that I find of this matter. I would now but ask
them this question whether they tell us thus much, because they believe it, or
believe is because they tell it us? If they tell it us as believing it
themselves, we can say no otherwise of them, than of him that did accustom to
tell lies so fast to others, that in the end he took them for truths himself:
if they believe it because they tell it us, our incredulity in this case shall
do them good, in aduising the^ not to believe that we will any more take the
report of any such matter upon their words; so that if our denial will profit
them, I assure the^, I will not credit them in any thing without due evidence
of the justness of it: Ter. in Eunuc. act. 2. scen. 1. Nihil. aliud quam
Philumenam volo.
And therefore I give them the council in the Poet quoniam id fieri quod
volu^t, non potest, velint id quod possit, since they cannot have what they
would, that they would take what they may; But they answer they would have
nothing but the Bishop of Romes supremacy, I say again as the Poet says in
that place, it were much better for the^ to leave that fancy, rather than by
this palpable fraud to go about to persuade it. Al their inferences from that
text of Theodoret, are false and merely suggested, either of the Popes power in
calling that counsel of Constantinople; or of their writing to Damasus, and
oulie to Damasus, or that they called him their head, or that they confessed
themselves his proper members; as they have abused the history.

The writing which the bishops of the East sent to them of the West, is called,
The true report out of Theodorete. eccles. l. 5. c. ^.
Libellus Sinodicus a Concilio Constantinopolitano ad Episcopas missus. The
Council of Constantinoples declaration sent unto the Bishops. The
superscription is, Dominis honoratissimis and cum primis reverendis fratribus
ac collegis Damaso, Ambrosio, Brittoni, valeriano, Acholio, Avemio, Basilio, et
cateris sanct is Episcopis. To the most renowned, Reverend brethren and
fellows.
and most especial reverend brethren and fellows Damasus, Ambrose, Briton,
Valerian, Acholius, Avemius, Basil, and the rest of the holy bishops gathered
together in the famous city of Rome: The holy council of Catholic bishops
gathered together in the famous city of Constantinople send health in our
Lord. Number quid nam hic quod nolis, Ter in Eunuc. act. 2. scen. 2.
vides Bellarmine? Is there any thing here o Bellarmine that thou would not
see? Yes, neither me nor that which I have brought. Where do they write to
Damasus? Where do they acknowledge him the head, and they the members? Where be
the letters sens from his honor? All this, like religious and loving fathers to
the Church of God they confess each to other, because they consented in one
catholic doctrine, and were of one Catholic church, (though divided by East
and West,) whose head is Christ as S. Paul says, Ephesians. 4.5.
One Lord, one faith, one baptism. But if you will speak of what they were in
respect of themselves, and their authority over each other, Sozo^. l. 6. c. 23.
they were brethren and fellows. And this Damasus him self knew well enough
(although these men defile their consciences for him) when he and other bishops
of Italy, did write unto the bishops of Illiricum, That it was meet that all
the bishops belonging to the Roman jurisdiction should agree in one. Qui
Romani ditioni subijciuntur.
And great Marvel it were that Damasus should be so suddenly grown potent,
and masterfull over the bishops of the East, when it appears that Vrsinius
durst check with him for the Popedom; Socr. l. 4. c. 24.
as Felix did with Liberius who went next before him, Sozo^. l. 4. c. 14.
which contention the council of Syrmiun^ determined willing them to be
bishops both together.

Now touching the terms of Father and Sons which these men catch at for
Damasus behoof; It is clear in the letter that Damasus and the western
bishops with him, do say of the Niceene council, that they were their fathers,
and that their decrees had armed their faith, Patres nostri. Fidem nostra^
cinxere.
against the weapons of the Devil. If the Popes Soveraignety had bin without
limit, and over al; it had bin a very harsh phrase to have named the Roman
jurisdiction as Damasus and the rest do. Again, this same counsel held at
Rome, by Damasus, was at the same time with that other of Constantinople, and
unto which Damasus summoned and called those of the East, how came it then to
pass, that both they could shift themselves from their obedience to Damasus
and not to come; and have their council held at Constantinople, whereat neither
Damasus nor any for him was present, to be celebrated by so famous a name as
The second general council, and so remains unto this day, rather then that
other of his at Rome, if Damasus were so great at that time, as they would make
us believe he was.

Furthermore, whereas they simper so much about Damasus forsooth of Calling the
councelat Constantinople, they cannot tell whether it was done by his advise,
or by his anthoritie, or whether he did it at the Emperors request or the
Emperor at his; or whither their powers were equal; so well have they conned
their leere, yet is it plain by the Ecclesiastical history that the Emperor
called and summoned it. Theodosius caled the counsel at Constantinople, anno.
385. Socrat. eccles. hist. l. 5. c. 8.
Imperator nulla mora interposita, concilium Episcoporum, ipsius fidem
amplectentium, convocat. The Emperor admitting no delay called a council of
Bishops, embracing the same faith which he did, whereby the faith of the
Niceene council might be strengthened, and a bishop of Constantinople appointed.
Here is no sharing of authority in this point between the Emperor and the
bishop of Rome as Sanders would make us believe, The Popes deed and the
Emperors al one. Ita vt prima generalis concilij causa fit Romani episcopi,
hoc est, primi pastoris co^uocatio. Moris fuit vt Papa literas de ea re ad
imperatorem daret: is vero papae literi^, acceptis, etia^ per suas literas
Episcopo^ convocarer.
vt ita Papae atque Imperatoris convocatio vna eademque esset, that so the
Popes summoning and the Emperors might be but as one act.

Search all antiquity for these 1300. years, ever since the first famous
general council of Nice, and never hear of that practice, except in some
petite-graund councels of their own of late years, such as that was of Trent.
And where also Sanders in the process hereof would make us believe, that in
those times the bishop of Rome was the first original cause of calling
councels, but the mean whereby he effected that calling was the Emperors
greatness by his summons, (as also Stapleton bears us in hand, in the places
before cited:) is a mere abuse and absolute forgery without either sense or
favor. For he tells us presently, as if he would purposely frustrate, all that
himself had said, that Leo the great did write unto the Emperor Martianus
thus, Poposceram a gloriosissima clementia vestra, Leo epist. 44. ex Saund. de
claue David. l. 4 ^ 81. and de visib mo l. 7. f. 346. The bishop of Rome
desired the Emperor to defer the Counsel. Staplet. ad Eliza. reg. Angliae in
epist. praefixa ad Beda^. in Ang. sermon. Bellar. de co^c and eccles. l. 1. c.
19. fol. 88 89. Leo epist. 58. ex Saund. de visib. mon. l. 7. fol. 352. Vide
Stap. ret. of untruths against M. Iuell art. 4. fol. 142. 143.
vt synodum, quam pro recuperand^ Orientalis ecclesiae pace a nobis etiam
petitam necessariam indicastis, aliqua^tisper differri ad tempus opportunius
iuberetis. I desired of your most excellent Majesty; that you would command
that that synod which you thought necessary to be holden for establishing of
the peace of the East church, for which I also made suit might have bin for a
little while deferred to a more convenient time. And this was touching the
great general counsel of Chalcedon, which Martianus the Emperor summo^ed,
being often moved thereunto by Leo the Pope, and not only summoned it, but was
also present; and not only present but sat in the first place, and sat so ad
confirmanda in fidem, to confirm the faith, as before him the good Emperor
Constantine did. And when his Majesty was not disposed to sit any longer, he
left certain of his secular Princes to sit in his absence. And when the
counsel was ended he willed Leo to direct his letters to all the bishops that
were present, to signify his confent and allowance to the Articles of faith
which they had decreed, which he willingly performed least any should take
occasion to stumble through his default. If the Popes own will and purpose were
the first and original cause of counsels, and that the Emperors duty was but
to signify to the bishops, when he had received order from the Pope; Then are
they false that tell us (and it is they that tell us) that the Emperor summoned
it, and that the Pope obtained so much from him by entreaty, and when the
summons was gone out, his holiness prayed it might be deferred, and could not
obtain his request. Hardly can it be said that the Emperor and Pope were
equal in authority at this time, seeing the Pope by entreaty sought that of
the Emperor, which had the matter bin as they lay it down he might have
compassed by his own power without him. The last point touching the succession
of the Bishops of Rome.
Let this suffice for these.

Now for the last point whereof I intended to speak Tuberius, which was
touching the succession of the bishopps of Rome, for these many hundred years,
of which you said at the beginning you had a table, Examine their succession
upon these points.
because I do imagine that your table is but a bare table of names, without
any touch either of the doctrine they taught, or opinion they held, or of the
incertainty of the order of their places, or manner of coming into that sea,
whether lawfully or unlawfully; you shall therefore have a taste of the weakness
of that great pillar whero^ you must lean, if you will be a Romanist. Ex
successione incertissima incertior fides. From an uncertain succession, is no
certain trust to be drawn, and more wisdom were it for the^ to clear the
doubts of their own evidences then to call other in question for theirs. They
cry nothing but succession, succession, as though their succession were as
David's sling and their bishops had been as so many choice stones in the scrip,
which were able to coquere a mighty oppugner; but it has rather proved like
Saul's armor buckled to David, more cu^bersome then safe for David to wear or
for any to trust unto, Successores omnes cupiunt esse, imitatores pauci, Bern.
in conc. Rhem. f. 361. H.
vt inam ta^ vigiles reperirentur ad curam, quam alacres currunt ad cathedram,
says S. Bernard, They al desire to be the successors (of Peter) few to be
followers; I would they could be found to be as watchful in the charge, as
they run willingly to the chair. Grant them but to sit at Rome where S.
Peter sat, and for any belief, doctrine, ability to teach, virtue,
godliness, or almost common honesty, they care not for any. Cont. Iuell. art
4. fol. 113. 114.
We be plainly taught says D. Hardinge, that albeit the successors of Peter
Christ's Vicars in earth, be found blame worthy for evil life, yet we ought not
to dissent from them in doctrine, nor sever our selves from them in faith. For
as much as notwithstanding they be evil, by Gods providence for the surety of
his people they be compelled to say the good things that be good, The Popes be
compelled to say the good things they do say.
and to teach the truth the things they speak not being theirs but Gods, who
has put the doctrine of verity in the chair or seat of unity. Which
singular grace comes especially to the sea of Peter, either of the force of
Christ's prayer, or in respect of place and dignity which the bishops of that
sea hold from Christ, The Popes compared to Balaam and Caiphas
as Balaam could be brought by no means to curse that people whom God would
to be blessed. And Caiphas also prophesied, because he was high bishop for
that year and prophesied truly, being otherwise a man most wicked. And
therefore the evil doings of the bishops of Rome make no argument of
discrediting of their doctrine, nether ought the evil lives of the bishops of
Rome, to withdraw us from believing and following the doctrine preached and
taught in the holy church of Rome. Annot, in Luc. c. 22. v. 31. Liberius
Marcellinus Honorius. They know well that worse the^ the^e have sat in that
seat. Stapl. return of untruths art. 4. f. 111. and 116. Bitont. in ora.
Conc. Tride^t. ex Duraeo co^tra Whit. rat. 7. fol. 369.
The Rhemists will confess more of their Popes, Liberius (say they) in
persecution might yield, Marcellinus for fear (of death) might commit
Idololatrie. Honorius might fall into heresy, and more then all this some Judas
might creep into the office, yea and all this without prejudice of the office
and seat. We do say that the Pope may err (says Stapleton) and has erred
both in faith and manners touching his own private person. Let it be true
(says he again) that many Popes have for saken the faith, yea and Christ too,
because of their wicked lives and heinous deeds. Cornelius bishop of Bitonto,
in his oration to the holy council of Trent, spoke bitterly to this purpose,
Vtinam a religione ad superstitionem, a fide ad infidelitatem, a Christo ad
Antichristum, a Deo ad Epicurum velut prorsus vnanimes non declinassent. I
would to God (says he) that they had not altogether declined from religion to
superstition, from faith to infidelity, from Christ to Antichrist, and from God
to Epicurus, The penners of the late supplication to the Kings Majesty: in the
behalf of the papists could not hide this truth, Supplic. anno 1604.
that the wicked lives of several the professors, and chief rulers of their
religion, could not hitherto, Wicked lives in the chief rulers and professors
of their religion. A manifest co^tradiction in the petition.
nor shall not to the worlds end, either extirpate or darken the visibilitie of
their Church: and yet very wantonly in an other part thereof, they say clean
contrary, that the professors and spredders of their religion were always of a
known holy life and semblable death.

Here have they gained a manifest contradiction to them selves, or must
confess that by the chief vulers, and professors of their religion, they do
not mean the Popes. Thus much you see by their own confession, that in
extolling their Popes in general, they will allow the^ to be Idololaters,
heretics, or men of monstrous and beastly lives, so they get but into the
chair al is well: be they like unto Judas, Caiphas, or to whatsoever accursed
miscreant else he is in the place they care not; as though that having once
gotten thither, Quique ea vitia quae a natura habebat etia^ studio and
attificio quodam maliciea condivisset. Cic. pro Cluentio. Furtum verris amici
morbu^ appellarunt. Cic. l. 4. in verrem.
he were bound to perfect and season himself thoroughlie of al those vices
which before he had by nature. And so make murder, adultery, incest,
coniuration, rapine, theft and such like, no vice but a certain disease
incurable, to follow him that shall fit there, as Verres friends did call his
theft, his disease, as though it had bin hereditarie. And on such Popes as
these does he that gathered your table tell you, that Christ did build his
church, and to them he committed his lambs and sheep to be fed, even by
their own description to foxes and wolves, traitors, and Apostataes, for, for
these many hundred years they have bin no other. The first of those texts in
your table viz: the 16. of Matthew, where it is said, Thou art Peter and upon
this rock I will build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail
against it: The examination of the table. Mat. 16.18
And I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven, etc. is to
short to reach whether you would have it; for in the same chapter it is said by
Christ to Peter again, Get thee behind me Satan, Cap. ibid. v. 23.
thou art an offense unto me, because thou understand not the things that
are of God, but the things that are of me^. Now because this later rebuke
should nothing prejudice the former grant, but that still S. Peter should alone
be the Rock, and foundation on whom the Church was built, and also have the
keys, and consequently the Popes from him; Bellarmine bestirreth himself
earnestly and mainely, to purchase those privileges, De Romans pont. l. 1. c.
10. f. 90. S. Peter was not yet the foundation. Ob. Mat. 18.18.
and yet keep the text sound and not wronged. First therefore (he says) that
when Christ said to Peter, vade post me Satan. Get thee behind me Satan, he
was not the^ the fou^datio^, for in that place Christ did promise that, which
he gave him after his resurrection. When we object the other text of Matthew ca.
18. for all the Apostles, as well as for Peter, where Christ said to them al, Sol.
whatsoever ye bind on earth shall be bound in heaven, etc. He answers, That
nothing is there given to the Apostles, but that power only, promised,
explaned, and foretold, which the Apostles and their successors should
afterward have and exercise. We reply, Reply.
if neither in that place were the keys given to the Apostles, Ibid. c. 12
fol. 102. Whatsoever was promised to Peter in the 16. Matthew. was performed to
all in the 20. and. 21. of John.
but only promised, in what place then are they given? I answer (says he)
They are given in the twenteth and one and twentieth chapters of S. John's
Gospel. Thus has Bellarmine confessed, that whatsoever was promised in the 16.
of Matthew, as it were to Peter alone, or in the 18. of Matthew to all the
Apostles, was performed both to Peter and to them al in the 20. and 21,
chapters of John, which concession and free grant, although it overthrow both
what he would say else where, and al other his fellows in this question of
Supremacy for the Pope: yet does he afterward further enlarge it thus. That
the Apostles received al their jurisdiction and power immediately from Christ,
Bellar. de Roman pont, l. 4. c. 23. The Apostles had their authority from
Christ even* the same that he had of his father.
it appears from the words of Christ, Job. 20. As my father sent me so send I
you, which words, the ancient fathers Chrysostom and Theophilact do so expound
that they do plainly say, That the Apostles were made Christ's Vicats, yea that
they did receive the very office and authority of Christ, Cyrill adds upon
this text, That the Apostles, were properly created Apostles and teachers of
the whole world, and that we should understand that in the Apostolic authority
al ecclesiastical power was contained, therefore Christ did add, As my father
sent me, surely the father sent his son endued with full power. Where you see
that the same thing is given to the Apostles by those words I send you, which
was promised to Peter by those I will give thee the keys, and was afterward
showed by those, feed my sheep. Thus far Bellarmine, by whose testimony and
grant it appears, that the rest of the Apostles had as much power in the
Church, or over the Church, as S. Peter had, and consequently other bishops in
their several places, will have as much as the Pope even by those places of
scriptures, which they would challendge to make most for them. The order of
their succession. Stapl. return of untruths. art. 1. fol. 12. b. calls
Alexander the 5. pope after Peter. and here he is the 7. L. 7. consist Apost.
c. 46. ex Bellar. de Ro^. pont l. 2. c. 4. f. 192. 193. 195. Damasus in
Pontificiale. Tertullian. Jerome. Optatus. Augustine. Epiphanius. Ireneus l. 3.
c. 3. Eusebius. eccles. hist. l. 3. c. 4 and 2. and l. 4. c. 1. and l. 5. c. 6.
and Bell. de Romans pont. l. 2. c. 15. and. l. 1. c. 27. Vterque Apostolus
Romanam ecclesiam fu^dauit et gubernauit. Annot. 2. G^l^ v. 7. fol. 500. In
their table and notes at the end of the Acts of the Apostles. and Bellarm. de
Romans pont. l. 2. c. 4. fol. 192. Sanders de visib. mon. l. 7. 222. 223. 224.
Thus much I thought good to show you touching the glorious title of your
table. Now for the order. The first is S. Peter, Linus, Cletus, Clemens,
Anacletus, Evaristus, Alexander, Sixtus, Telesphorus, Higinus, Pius, Anicetus,
Soter, Eleutherius, which is the fourteenth in number. By the histories and
most ancient fathers, this succession is at first disordered and interrupted.
Clemens, says that S. Peter when death did draw near appointed the Roman
Bishopric unto him, Dorotheus, (as Bellarmine also tells us) does place
Linus next after S. Peter, and yet Damasus who was bishop of Rome, and wrote
thereof, says that Linus died before S. Peter. Tertullian places Clemens
after S. Peter, and so does S. Jerome. Optatus, and S. Augustine put Linus next
Peter and Clemens in the third place; S. Augustine mentions not Clerus at
all, but utterly discardeth him: so does Optatus, Epiphanius reads them thus
Peter, Linus, Cletus, Clemens, Ironeus, who is ancienter then any of those
before, both leaves out Cletus, and brings Clemens after Anacletus. It
appears further by Ireneus and Eusebius, that they took S. Peter no more for
a bishop of Rome the^ S. Paul. The church of Rome (say they) was found by the
two most glorious Apostles Peter and Paul; and so in his catalogue reckons
them; And the^ how do you reconcile your table to Ireneus, who makes
Eleutherius to be the 12. but if you take in S. Peter for one; and Cletus for
an other, you then make Eleutherius the 14. which is gain said by Ireneus, in
whose time Eleutherius lived, and whom by name he calls the twelfe. To
confirm this truth the Rhemists themselves confess, that the Church of Rome
was founded by S. Peter, and S. Paul. And further they tell us that Prudentius
the christian Poet calls them both Principes Apostolorum princes of the
Apostles, giving that title equally to them both: and they themselves call them
the two principal Apostles, and the two chief Apostles. The like appears
also from Epiphanius that ancient father, Peter and Paul founded the church at
Rome.
who says In Roma fuerunt prim^ Petrus and Paulus Apostoli, ijdem and
Episcopi. In Rome were the two Chief Apostles Peter and Paul, and they were
bishops also, Cyrillus also calls them Praesides ecclesiae, Presidents of the
church. And touching his bishoplike residence there 25. years, as they say he
sat, they are feign to extenuate the time, S. Peter often absent.
because he was seldom found there, and say he was often absent from the
city. Thus is appears that the Church of Rome was founded as well by S.
Paul as S. Peter, and that he had the title of Principal, Chief, and First
Apostle as well as Peter. Thus much from an essay of the order of the first 12.
But touching the men, The first 300. they were all martyrs.
we confess them all good and godly martyrs for 300. yeaers together, to the
number of 30. or there about, although Marcellinus in the persecution under the
Tirant Dioclesian did for fear of death offer sacrifice to Idols, yet
repenting he died a Martyr. Sone upon this, it pleased almighty God to send
ease to his Church in making her chief enemies, her dearest friends, Then
began Kings to be her nursing fathers, and Queens to be her nursing mothers.
Then first called he Constantinus surnamed the Great to the knowledge of the
truth, Esaias. 49. v. 23. After the first 300. years.
of a Pagan beco^ming a Christian, putting down Idololatry, and erecting the
true service of God. Under him and his sons there lived the Roman Bishops
Melchiades, Silvester, Marcus, Julius, Liberius, and Felix. Strife about Felix.
Eccle 1. hier. l. 4 c. 8.
There is much strife in the church of Rome at this and Felix. Strife about
Felix. Eccles. hier. l. 4. c. 8.
There is much strife in the church of Rome at this day, about this Felix, some
of them reakoning him for a Pope and some putting him out. Albertus Pighius
says, they that register him for a Pope bewray their own ignorance. Bellarmine
says, Bell. de Romans pont. li. 4. c. 9. fol. 509.
their church worshippeth him as Pope and Martyr. The strife between them two
about Felix, grows about Liberius, who was Pope next before him; This
Liberius in his banishment under Constantius the Emperor did subscribe to the
Arrian heresy, and so in his absence out of the City, Felix was Pope in his
room. Thus much does Bellarmine co^nfesse of Liberius. And because Pighius
most impude^tly denies that he subscribed, Chron. l. 3. fol. 574. Ammianus
Marcellinus Comes. So was Marcellinus martired, yet he fell before. They were
wont to tell us that Christ prayed for Peter, but now they tell us, he prayed
for the chair he sits on. Contra haer. l. 1. c. 4. Defen. Conc. Trid. li.
2. fol. 244. Fasc. Tempor. in liberio. Platina in liberio. Annot. Onuphrij.
Anast. Bibl. in Lib. and Feli. About the year of our Lord. 370. A schism at
Rome between Damasus and Vrsinus. Polid. Verg. de inven. reru^ li. 5. c. 4. f.
401. Bellar. de cleric. l. 1. c. 18. f. 92. Aug. epist. 93. and l. 2. ad Bonif.
cont. 2. epist. Pelag. c. 4.
therefore he shuts out Felix from being Pope at all. D. Genebrard cannot
tell what to say directly on this Felix part. First he tells us that Ammianus
Marcellinus in his Chronicles did pass by him as suspected of heresy, and
Onuphrius (one that wished as well to the sea of Rome, as well might be) makes
him a schismatike, and an unlawful Pope, for Liberius over lived him, and
obtained the place alone. But other more truer (says he) do report that he was
Martired in a tumult by the Arrians. And yet in the next words he says that
Felix was appointed by Acatius the disciple of Eusebius into the place of
Liberius, and held for an Arian. But such was the force of the Chair, that it
would rather hold a Martyr Pope, than an heretic Pope, or one that should
favor the heretics. Thus far Genebrard. Alphousus a Castro, makes no
question, but that Liberius was an Arrian heretic. Anaradius is content that
we should call him unconstant, faithless, or unjust, but in no case an
heretic. Fasciculus Temporu^, says he was the first infamous Pope. If you
desire more of these two Popes Liberius and Felix, read or cause to be read
unto you Platina who wrote the lives of the Popes, and Onuphrius annotations on
him; and Anastatius Bibliothecarius on the same argument, set out by themselves
not above three years since: and you shall see diversity enough.

After those followed Damasus, Siricius, Anastasius, Innocentius, Sozimus,
Bonifacius, Celestinus, Sixtus 3. and Leo the great. There was a schism then
in the Church of Rome, between Damasus and one Vrsinus or Vrcisianus, but
Damasus obtained, yet not without blood. Siricius was the first that in the
west parts forbad priests to marry, as Polidore Virgil alleges out of
Gratian, whereunto Bellarmine is now fairly come, That it is not forbidden by
the law of God that Priests should marry. Innocentius the first, held and
taught a dangerous error, that is, That it is necessary to salvation for
infants to receive the communion, contrary to Saint Paul's rule, that none
should receive, but those that are able to examine themselves, and contrary to
the doctrine of the Church of Rome under Pius quartus in the Tridentine
counsel which accurseth those that think the Eucharist is to be given to
infantes before the years of discretion; Sess. 21. can. 4. The bishops of Rome
contended with the bishops of Aphrica for superiority. Bonifacius 1. was the
son of lucundus a Priest as says Platina. so was Felix 3 who immediately
followed, son unto Felix a Priest. Leo epist. 45. Fasciculus te^p Geneb. in
Chron. l 3. fol. 600. Eulatius against Bonifacius an. 423. Gelasius was the
son of a bishop called Valerius. Plat. in vit. eius. The first 600. years.
Gelasius decreed in 2. maine points against them now. Anastasius 2. an heretic.
so that the Apostolical seat, in one of these two must needs er. In Sozimus,
Bonifacius, and Celestinus time there was much controversy between the^ and
the Aphrican bishops touching appeals to Rome. Sozimus began the claim, and
could not make it good, he graced himself with warrant from the Nicene
council, which being demanded no canon, nor decree could be showed. The
Aphrica^ bishops deny their appeals thither, and so grew much turmoile. But if
all Churches in all cases were subject to the sea of Rome iure diuino by Gods
law, as they would make us believe now, very simple was Sozimus to claim by
the Canons of the council of Nice; and very forgetful of their duties were the
Aphrican bishops who would put him to prove his authority by an humane
invention, when the high God had by his laws subjected them unto him before.
Leo the great, yet was his authority so small, that he could not remove Abbat
Eutiches from him, but was forced to entreat the Empress Pulcheria to use her
authority therein. By this time there had bin four schisms in the church of
Rome, yet Genebrard acknowledged but three. After Leo, were Hilarious,
Simplicianus, Felix 3. Gelasius, Anastasius 2. Simmachus, Hormisda, John 1.
Felix 4. Bonifacius 2. John 2. Agapetus, Silverius, Vigilius, Pelagius, John 3.
Benedictus, Pelagius, 2. Gregory the great, and these reaches down to the
first 600. years, Amongst which Gelasius decreed that to minister the holy
communion in one kind is open sacrilege and again he defined that the
substance of bread and wine remain after consecration, both which are
diametrally opposite to the doctrine of the new church of Rome. Anastasius the
second was an heretic as appears by the histories. Wernerus says he was the
2, infamous Pope he was a Nestorian heretic as before him his predecessor
Liberius was an Arrian, Vigilius used indirect means to attain to the
Popedo^e. Huius Vigilij ingressus parum legitimus suit, cum praetet
ecclesiasticas regulas praedecessore suo Silverio viuente, and Po^tificatus
administratione submoto, per vim Pontificatum Romanu^ occuparit. Onuph. annot.
on Plat. in vit. Vigilij. Agapetus and Sylverius, were both Priests sonns.
Deno^is eccles l 4. c. 8. Bell. ibide^ 303. and 304. Ibid fol. 306. Bell. de
Romans pont. l. 2. c. 26. and de conc. and eccles. l. 2. c. 18. Gregory the
Great. Bellar de Ro^. pont. l. 2. c 31. fol. 324. Stap. ret. of untruths
against M^uell. art. 4. fol. 6.
Vigilius wrought means with the Empress Theodora for the removing of his
predecessor Silverius out of the Popedom promising her, if she would help him
thereto, to call home Anthemius the heretic, whom Agapetus had banished, and so
as Bellarmine says, he played the Catholic at Rome and the heretic abroad,
for when he had obtained by most unlawful means what he sought for, he kept
no promise with her, by whose procureme^t he ca^e into the seat: and in effect
answered as the fore-sworne men in times past were wont. Iurauilingua, mentem
iniuratam gero. I swear with my tongue, but I meant otherwise. A very
Machivellian resolution. But since Vigilius came in by this indirect means, I
demand with what face Bellarmine can make succession of bishops in that sea, an
emine^t note of the true church All that come not in by lawful succession and
ordination are thieves and robbers. And succession takes no place, but either
when bishops die, or are lawfully deposed: For the pope cannot be deposed by
any coactiue power either Ecclesiastial or civil which conclusions inevitably
prove that Vigilius succeeded unlawfully; Siluerius being nether dead nor
lawfully desposed. And as Bellarmine says, the pride and ambition of Vigilius
drove him into those straights of perjury and shifts which he used; so has
Bellarmines bad cause colored with clenly words, made him gain say in one
place, what he affirms in an other, which he cannot do, since there are so
many eyes to look on, but he shall be discovered. Gregory the great being the
last of those I named last, utterly denied the name of universal bishop, and
prainly said Saint Peter was never called universal Apostle: yet Bellarmine
reackoneth it amongst the titles of his holiness, and the title universal
bishop to be the 15. in number. Howsoever D. Stapleton not so sovereign for
the Pope as Bellarmine, says plainly we call not the Pope universal bishop.
The Pope writes not himself so but servum servorum dei, the servant of Gods
servants. But what would he practice if he might? I leave that to M. Doctors
secret discussing. Thus have you Tuberius a taste of your succession and manners
of Popes for the first six hundred years. In none of the Popes of the first
three hundred years appeared any stomach toward other churches abroad save in
Victor, Victor reproved by Ireneus Eusebius eccles. history. l. 5. c. 23. 24.
who was next to Eleutherius, who showed himself earnest in excommunicating
the Churches of Asia for not keeping the feast of Easter according to the manner
of Rome: But he was sharply rebuked for attempting it, especially by Ireneus
bishop of Lions in France, in the name of the rest of the brethren there, who
would not yield unto him. After Constantines time down to Gregory the great, I
deny not, but men they were tolerable enough, saving for a little ambition
creeping in amongst them. And because men are denominated virtuous, whose good
gifts are many, and faults not too great, they may go al in the number of good
men, even till Gregory, who may be said to be the last of the good, and first
of the bad. And of all these passed I will say in respect of the^ that follow
after as noble Sr. Phillip Sidney was wont to say of Captains and learders in
the wars, when complainte had bin made to him of some of them, Sr Roger
Williams report in his brief discourse of war page 2.
Let us love him for his small virtues for a number have none at all. And so is
it with those former Popes in respect of those that followed after, only here
and there one religious amongst a number of miscreants as one R^scius now and
the^ enriching a whole rabble of counterfeits: For intrusions into the sea,
heresy, witchcraft, murder, adulteries, and such like, Rome was the Sentina a
sink of sins, a lake of all lewdness, which ever yields perpetual vapors
of pernicious and execrable villainies. God do so and more to me, if I report
them otherwise than their own histories record. After Gregory the great
followed Sabinianus, Bonifacius, Geneb. chro. l. 3 fol. 664. Fase. tempor.
Platina in vita sabi.
3. Bonifacius 4. Deus dedit. Bonifacius 5. and Honorius the first. Sabinianus
hated his predecessor Gregory, insomuch that he burned al his books, he did
not any good worthy of memory. This is the 3. infamous Pope, as the Papists
themselves confess who lived a bad life and died a fearful death. After
Sabinianus came Bonifacius, Carrion. in chro l. 4. f. 568. and l. 3. fol. 369.
The first setting of Mahumets foot in Arabia was when the Empire began to be
divided by the bishop of Ro^e means. vide Fascicu. temp. anno. 614. Honorius
amo nothelite, heretic, who held that christ had but one will. Geneb. Chro. l.
3. fol. 675. ea est vis cathedrae vt cogat bona and vera dicere, no^ bona
facientes, neque vera sentientes nec su^ docere sed aliena permittit. Apolog.
thesiu^ Joan. Reyn. de sacra. scrip. and eccles. a page 351. vsque ad finem.
Anno. 687. Geneb. Chro. l. 3. fol. 698. Genebi. ibid. fo. 708.
3. who obtained of the Emperor Phocas to be called universal bishop, and
head of all churches, about which time, when the fury of Mahumet had prevailed
against the churches in the East, the bishop of Romes authority increased in
Europe. And the mystery of iniquity having before wrought did then show it
self. And this Phocas who gave that title to the bishop of Rome, was he, that
trecherously slew his Master Mauricius, to make himself way to the Empire, and
postea multa seelera addidit, and after that, he committed many mischeifes
else. And in the end for his reward he was untimely slain according to that
saying, Omnis q^ acceperit gladiu^, gladio peribit. Whosoever slaieth with the
sword, shall perish with the sword. And the reason why Phocas gratified the
bishop of Rome with such a title was, be cause upon the slaughter of his Mr
Mauricius, he feared the fall of Italy from the Empire, and that by the Popes
means, he might keep the West in safty. Touching Honorius 1. it is notoriously
known that he was an heretic condemned by general counsels and witness of
diverse ancients both Greeks and Latins. They that are disposed to read of him
or his cause may consult with A^dradius def. Trid. conc. l. 2. fol. 244. Canus.
loc. theol. lib. 6. fol. 213. Pighius. eccles. bie. l. 4. c. 8. Bellarm. de
Romans pont. lib. 4. c. 11. And amongst us D. Reynolds in his conference with
Heart. cap. 7. diuis. 2. fol. 237. but especially his defense of his Theses in
latin where he has answered Bellarmine and Caesar Baronius, in whatsoever
they could say for the clearing of Honorius. Now from this Honorius downwards
toward us the schisms and contentions began a pace: After John 5. who was
Pope about the year 687. there grew a schism between one Peter, and one
Theodorus, who was created Pope, and yet both of them were expelled and Conon
whom your table calls Cuno, or if you will Zeno, succeeded. After these
followed Gregory 2. Gregory 3. Genebrard puts it upon Gregory 3. that it was
he who excommunicated the Emperor Leo for heresy, The Emperor Leo
excommunicated and deprived for destroying of Images. Geneb. ibid. f. 720. He
first absolved the french from their oath to Childericke. Fasc. temp an. 741.
Ipsc etiam tra^stulit imperiu^ a Graecisad francos. Geneb l. 3. fol. 729.
Wetnerus in fasc: temp. anno 764. If the devil should sit there, I think they
would say the holy ghost preserved the seat in honor and holiness. Coelu^
vndique and vndique po^tus nothing now but storms and schisms. Anno 800.
Geneb. l. 4. f. 771. ao. 824. By this time there had been 10. schisms in the
Church.
as he calls it; But Fasciculus temporum says it was Gregory 2, that
accursed the Emperor Leo for distroying of Images: and that the other Gregory
got them approved in a counsel. Next after them was Pope Zachary, who gave
the kidgdome of France from Childricke unto Pipine. And here appears the
iniquity of that time, when that most famous kingdom of France was translated
from the right heirs to strangers. Then followed Stephan 2. who brought the
Empire from the Greeks to the French: Then Stephan 3. Paulus 1. Stephan. 4.
But Fasciculus temporum and Genebrard place one Constantine 2. next after
Paul, who of a lay man became Pope, invading the sea by tyrannyl, who was
thrown out again, after he had sat above a year in the sea. And this is
the fifth infamous Pope amongst so many that had passed before, and so has the
holy ghost preserved that seat in honor and holiness says Wernerus. And even
so I heard a Ge^tleman praising his servant who was departed from him, to be an
honest man, and an honest fellow with iteration again and again, when he
knew he had lived in his service, a blasphemer, a swearer, a common drunkard,
and a most beastly lecher and one at whose mouth no truth could be hard: But as
that Gentleman, seemed not to think sufficiently what honesty was, nether in
himself nor in any other, when he would give so reverend a name, to so vicious
a person: so did not Wernerus care what he said of honor and holiness when he
confessed so monstrous a wretch to have bin Pope.

Then was there 2. schisms one between Theophilacte and Paulus, and an other
between Philip and this same bad Constantine, which Philip being chosen by the
whole church did sit one year and more, and yet your table has not that
Constantine nor Philipp, nether does Genebrard nor Saunders reckon either of
them for Popes, but pass from Paulus to Stephanus 3. or 4. they know not which
coming down to the 800. y. and upwards I find Paschalis 1. Eugenius 2,
between whom and one Sisinius there was a schism Wernerus reackoneth it for
the eight that had bin in that church and Genebrard for the tenth, Dame Ione
about the year 855.
After Eugen. were Valenttius Gregory 4. Ser gius 2. Leo 4. and Ione the woman
Pope, which your table has not, nor do your late chronologers recko^ her,
although they bestir themselves very fowly to clear their own stories. For if
they be me^ of their words, they will hold them to this, that the stories that
make me^tio^ of her, were not of our devising, for they say that our religion
came from Luther and Calvin, and was never heard of before their times, who
were certain hundreds of years after, the bringers of that matter to light
were dead, and therefore they must be Catholics at least, who write of it; but
their labor in this is like the clensing of a sink, the more they stir the
more they stink: And with wise men, the more frivolons excuses are heaped to
clear a matter in question, the more will they stick to hear the truth. But
what says Genebrard? Post leonem quartum recentiores, praesertim haeretici,
nominant quendam Ioannem, Geneb. l. 4. fol. 779.
8. etc. After Leo the 4. (says he) the later writers, especially the
heretics, do bring in one John. 8. or as Sabellicus says 7. an English woman,
or as other say of Magunce who in a counterfeit kind, sat a year and more,
some two year, nam mendacium non sibi constat, for a lie abides not by it
self. This report of his own, Is it true, mendacium non sibi constat? and it
is as true which Lactantius says valet vi sua ve^itas. truth will overcome by
right tenure^ lib. 5. c. 13. Omnis in vile caput hoc abcat procella. Senec. in
These. act. 5.
he convinces by these uncertainties. First (says he) she is said to be the
7. and of some 8. Of some an English woman, of others a Moguntine, of some she
is said to sit one year and more, of others 2. years and more. It seems by
Genebrards quarrelling about these circumstances, he is much afraid that the
matter will be proved. But all this storm will light on Genebrards own head.
Turn his book blindsold, and you shall find some variety for the time, or
country of many his own undoubted Popes, which his chronicles can never make
even. For not many pages before he brings in Gregory 4. ali. as Leo 4 and by
and by again, Leo 4. or 5. he knows not which. But Genebrardiam quic quid id
est, vel sine causa, vel sera times, whatsoever you fear in this matter either
it is without cause or too late. The beast is recorded. And where he further
accumulateth errors upon her in saying she is called Anglicus an English
woman or Moguntinus, of Magunce in Germany, malice bred that which his wit will
not prove: Admitting a doubt that stories should vary, what country woman she
was, what says he to his own Innocentius 1. was he not Albanus sive Scotus,
Geneb. l. 3. fol. 391.
one of Alba in Italy or a Scot. And Celestinus or Celestius, Campanus sive vt
alij volunt Romanus, one of Campania or a Roman. Ibid. fol. 600.
And of Bonifacius 6. whether he were a Tuscane or a Roman, he knows not;
for the time he sat, Ibid. fol. 799.
magna contentio inter scriptores, there is says he great contention amongst
the writers. After a few cavils more he comes to this vpshot which is a good
brag but no proof valiant igitur qui a niles nugas de quadam statua foeminae
and sede stercoraria iactitant. God speed them well (or let them be packing, or
let them perish and fare ill) who brag of their old wives tales, and of the
sitting stool, and of the Image of the image of the woman which they say is
yet to be seen: Read the 6. book of Laurentius valla his eliganties c. 30
and Lacta^t. de ira dei. c. 8. for the use of the wordvaleo Ter. in Andria act
4. scen. 2. Saund: de vis. monar. l. 7. fol. 412.
and so indeed valiant qui inter nos dissidium volunt (as the young man in the
Poet to which perhaps Genebrard alluded) say I. God speed them well that
would set divorce between the truth and us in this case. I will leave
Genebrard and come to Saunders, who nothing so shamlesse as the other but of a
far more ingenious and yielding nature in this point, does confess that she
is placed as Pope (by some) next after Leo the fourth. Quodita sievenisset
which if it had so happened, yet because it was an error of fact, and not of
right, which happens in the most wisest, that accident will bring no
prejudice to the sea of Rome: But all things should be so reakoned, as if that
whole two years wherein she sat, the seat had bin void. In deed we need
not care for any good they do, Nothing will prejudice the sea of Rome.
whether the sea be empty or full, it is al one; they be but painted sepulchers,
and as dumb Idols, not so good as old servitors who take their pe^sions and
leave waiting, for they did once good in their lives before their service
decayed; and the Popes spend their time before they come, how to get it, and
after they have it, how to keep it. Alane Cope another of that brood though
fully impudent in other cases, yet is he ashamed to deny the story absolutely,
Alanus Cope. dial. 1. page 47.
but makes a metamorphosed or changeable excuse, which no man I trow can
either disprove or prove (I speak only in ^korne of his so base devise) which
is, that she might be first a man, and after some time in the seat changed to
be a woman. The change is no more unlikely, tha^ that such persons after such
change should bear children unheard of, both which be impossible to al men
once to think of, saving to those servants, who are sworn to defend such
mistresses as dame Ione was. And thus has he overthrown the fable of Joan. 8.
Lact. instit. l. 1. c. 21. fine.
Quis haec ludibria non rideat, qui habeat aliquid sanitatis, cu^ videat
homines velut mente captos ea serio facere, quae si quis faciat in lusis, nimis
loscivus and ineptus esse videatur. Who would not laugh says Lactantius, at
these trifles that has any spark of wit, when he shall see men doing those
things in earnest, as if they were bereaved of their wits, whereas if any man
should but do the^ in sport or jest, he would be thought over wanton and
lascivious. But to put the matter out of doubt where Genebrard and some other
with him do make themselves sport, (as before is said) with the word Anglicus
and Moguntinus, referring them to the country, as though it should be in doubt
whether she were an English woman or a Moguntine, it is plain to any man not
prejudiced in opinion. Fascicu. temp. anno. 864. Her name was Joan English.
Fasciculus temporum, their own historian says, Iste Ioannes Anglicus
cognomine, sed natione Maguntinus. This Ione English, by birth of Magunce in
Germany is said to be about these times: and was a woman disguised in man's
apparel; she had so profited in the holy scripture, that her like was scarce
to be found, and was chosen to be Pope. But after being great with child as
she went in procession she fell in labor and died: Sabelli. Aene. 9. l. 1.
page 469 aut aliter 625 aut aliter 325.
she was plagued of God for it (says he) nor is she put in the number of the
Popes. Sabellicus an other historiographer of their own ancienter tha^ the last
recited makes mention of this Dame Lone. Nullus defunctae honor habitus. There
was no honor bestowed at her burial, the report is for the remembrance of her
filthy act says he. They that desire further testimony herin Let them read
Bishop Iuell in the defense of the Apology of the church of England part. 4. c.
1. diu. 1. fol. 380. B. Iuell.
And Willet in his Synopsis Papismi. contro 14. quaest. 10. fol. 218. Andr;
Willet.
Presently after Pope Jone followed that unhappy time in the sea of Rome so
much lamented, in so much that Wernerus in Fasciculo temporum cries out Heu
heu domine Deus quomodo obscuratum est aurum mutatus est color optimus,
Foscicu. temp. fol. 68. a dom. 884. and 904.
qualia contigisse circa haec tempora etiam in sancta sede apostolica quam
vsque huc tanto zelo custodisti legimus scandala. Oh Lord God says he, how is
thy gold made dark and unknown. Look what happened in these times to the sea
of Ro^e.
The best color is changed, what reproaches do we read of that happened in
these times even to the sea Apostolic which hitherto thou have kept with so
great watchfulness, what contentions strifes, sects, envies, ambitions,
intrusions, and persecutions has there bin. O the very worst time, wherein
holiness is wanting, and faithfulness is fled from the sonns of men. The^ was
there a monster with a dogs head, A mo^ster presented to the Emperor.
and members like a man, presented to the Emperor: And well might it (says
he) show the deformity of that time, when as men wandered here and there without
an head, Chron. l. 4. fol 794. anno 885
as dogs run a bout barking. Genebrard confesses that some historians
following Sigebert in his Chronicles, after Martin 2. (of some called Marinus
who got the Popedom by ill means) place one Agapetus who was Pope one year;
and likewise between Adrian 3. (who by ordinary account followed the said
Martin) and Stephan 6. or 5. (who succeeded Adrian) they place one Basil, who
as they say sat 4. years. But we says he follow Platina, For. 150 years to
gether to the number of 50. popes they al revolted from the faith.
and a great part of writers. This is that time, or near about wherein he also
confesses that for 150. years together to the number of about 50. Popes from
John 8. to Leo 9. they were alout of order and rather Apostatates then
Apostilicke, Amongst which infamous Popes were these especially playing their
parts as it were on a stage, Martin 2. Stephan, Formosus, John 9. Sergius 3.
John 12. Sylvester 2. A breife of their dealinges is this. Bell de Romans pont.
l. 4 c. 12.
Formosus being a Cardinal and a bishop was deposed and degraded by John 8. and
got him out of the city, swearing he would never return and become bishop
again. After the death of John 8. Martin 2. absolved Formosus of his oath,
restoring him to his former dignity, not long after Formosus was created
bishop. Stephan succeeded, and being carried with a strong hatred toward
Formosus, not knowing or not believing that Pope Martin had absolved him of his
oath, decreed publikly in a counsel of bishops that Formosus was never lawful
Pope, and therefore his acts to be frustrate. This dealing displeased many and
therefore 3. Popes in order Romanus 1. Theodorus 2. and especially John 9.
called an other counsel of bishops, declaring that Formosus was lawful Pope,
and revoked the sentence of Stephan. But Sergius the third did in all things,
as Stephan before him had done. Moreover Stephan took up the carcass of
Formosus out of the grave. and cut of 3. of his fingers and cast it into the
stream of Tiber, an inhumane and barbarous deed, yet may he be a saint in
respect of some that follow after; Plat. Fasci. Son unto Sergius the Pope.
Platin^ in vit cius. De Romans pone. l. 2. c. 29. r. 310. Polid. Vergil. de
invent reru^ l. 5. c. 8. De Romans pont l. 4. c. 12. fol. 535. ann 900. Ex
lactant. l. 5. c. 16. fine de officio viri iust^^.
John 12. was a mo^ster of monsters for pride, whoredoms, adulteries,
symonies, sacrileges, blasphemies, in cest; murders, periuries, and such
others. Bellarmine says Fuit iste Ioannes omnium pontificum fere deterrimus.
Almost the worst of all Popes, was John 12. Silvester 2. as says Polidore
Vergil gat the Popedom by no good means, in his desire to rule, he consulted
with the devil about the length of his life. He did the devil homage says
Wernerus. The age wherein he lived, was an unlearned and ungodly age says
Bellarmine. There is no way that I see, to safe the honor of these bishops in
this sea of Rome at this time, except we will adventure to say of these bad
men, in a word, as Euripides did of Good. Quae hic mala putantur, haec su^t in
caelobona. Who are here reckoned for naught, are in heaven esteemed virtuous,
D. Saunders makes a digression, from his ordinary business in hand, Saund. de
visib monar. l. 7 fol. 420. anno. 895. vsque ad 912. Romans 12.21. The corruption
and bad life of the Popes, is brought in as an argument to confirm the good
estate of the church of Rome. is the sickness in the head, a proof of the
bodies perfection? Here has Bellarmine lost 2. of his principal notes of his
church, that is, The agreement and kniting of the members with the head. And
holiness of life nether of which by their own confession was at Rome in those
times: And yet he makes them notes and marks of the catholic church: and
consequently of the church of Rome. Bell. de notis eccles. l. 4. c. 10. and 13.
Still the ill Popes are his best proof of the goodness of the church. Hereby the
chair he must mean the chair of Wood at Rome or the people living there if
the first it is ridiculous: if the later we never doubted, but the christian
people who are the church, may well stand and flourish without such an head, as
he has described many of the^ to be.
in excuse of the Popes advanced in these times; in devoureth to prove that the
church of Rome has endured al manner of Tentations and in the end obtained
victory (I trow he means such a victory, as those have had who have bin
overcome of evil, and sold themselves as slaves to iniquity) First the
persecution stood (says he) by the heathen Emperors, then by heretic
Emperors, and their adhere^ts and then by the Popes themselves, vnderminding
that sea most of all, and doing what in them lay to overthrowe the church for
ever. His words be these. Tunc enim Pontifices Romani. After (says he)
followed the Roman bishops, whose glory and ambition moving them, carried with
a desire to cross each other, gave manifest testimony, that no kind of
temptation was omitted, which did not endeavor to ruinate that sea. Nether
without these things had that promise bin so admirably performed, in the eyes
of al, when it was said, The gates of hell shall not prevail against the Rock,
set there by Christ, whether by the gates of hell we understand the tyranny of
the prince of this world, or heresies, and schisms, or sins and lewd
ma^ners, except the seat of Peter had bin assaulted by all those means, when
yet it cold not be utterly overthrown by all these But now after so many
persecutions of the Emperors, after so many domestical schisms, which even
for the sea of Rome the Popes themselves did stir up and raise; after so many
heresies abroad by which the sea of Rome has bin attempted, tamen cathedra and
successio Petrinon modo aliqua est, verum etia^ stat, yet the Chair and
succession of Peter is not only somewhat, but also stands florisheth and
hitherto reigns, when the other Patriarchal seats are fallen, Vnde iste
honor Cathedra Romana? But whence comes this honor to the Chair of Rome?
What, from the deserts of the Popes? I believe it not (says he) For they,
although for these 800. years almost they have bin very good, yet at this
present, and often afterward they deserved very ill, insomuch that if you look
unto the deeds of the men it seems that that church should have bin buried
in perpetual oblivion. An impudentlie, for he knows and they all confess
Liberius was an Arrian heretic and Honorius was a Monothelite heretic, if any
trust be to be given to general counsels, Popes, or ancient writer.
For scarce is there any sin (but heresy) which may be imagined, but that
sea has bin defiled with it. And why it has not fallen into heresy, no
reason can be given but that Gods goodness preserves it. For seeing heresy
which is accompanied with blindness of heart, is never the first offense of any
man, but a punishment of greater which had gone before; I do not think that
any more grievous sins have bin either in the seas of Alexandria, Antioche, or
Constantinople, then in the sea of Rome. And therefore (says he) seeing every
man (even the bishopp of Rome also) is by nature a liar even so touching his
own person, he shall be so accounted by me: yet God in the mean time should
be so far forth credited to be true that we should think (as the matter is
apparent indeed) that he has set the seat and succession of Peter on a most
sure rock, How agrees this conclusion with those premises. Sciant igitur
heretici. Esaias 5.20.23. Every man is a liar. Saund. Every man may er in the
faith Alp. a Castro. adv: haeres. l. 1. c. 4. Fidei catholicae propugnator.
Genebra: chr. l. 4. f. 1126. The Pope may fall into heresy.
on which no false doctrine either of Faith or manners could ever allight,
because Christ said to Peter I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not,
etc. Let the heretics therefore know, that the more and more greiuous sins
they produce against the bishops, our faith (says he) does stand the stronger.
Thus far Saunders; Where any man may plainly see, that if that curse
denounced by the Lord in the Prophet Esaias, woe unto them that speak good of
evil, and evil of good, which put darkness for light, and light for
darkness, do appertain, or was ever directed against any, it will fall on
them who build their faith one such a foundation. Again where he says Omnis
homo mendax etiam Romanus pontifex, every man is a liar, yea the Pope also, his
old fellow Alphonsus a Castro (a strong maintainer of the catholic faith as
Genebrard calls him) could write against heretics such as Luther was, and
yet say boldly Omnis homo errare potest in fide otiam si Papa sit. Every man
may err in the faith, yea though he be Pope. For it is certain says he,
Pope Liberius was an Arrian heretic and Pope Anastasius favored the
Nestoria^s, of this whosoever has read the histories, does not doubt; and
whereas some do affirm that he which erreth in the faith* obstinatly, is not
then Pope, and by that means the Pope cannot be an heretic est in re seria
verbis velle iocari, it is to trifle with words in a serious matter, for
according to that reason a man may impudently affirm, that no faithful man may
err in the faith, for when he is an heretic, he then cease to be a
faithful man. Nether do we doubt says he, whether One man may be a Pope
and an heretic both to gether, but this we seek whether a man who otherwise
is subject to err his pontificiall dignity do free him: The pontifical
dignity cannot privilege him who is othe^wise subject to err.
I do not believe that there is any so shameless a flatterer of the Pope that
he will say he cannot err or be deceived, in the interpretation of the
scripture, for seeing it is certain that many of them have bin so unlearned,
that they have not understood their Grammar, how is it then, that they should
interpret the holy scriptures. Thus far has Alphonsus gone, if not too far.
To conclude this inference against Saunders it must not be forgotten, that he
has described and confessed the Pope of Rome who with him is Christ's vicar, to
be such an one endued with such qualities, as no honest, religious, virtuous,
holy, faithful, or good man, or any child of God or member of Christ was ever
said to be furnished with. S. Paul to the Romans c. 16. 17.
S. Paul gave to the Romans, and other churches these lessons touching the
holiness of their lives. Now I beseech you brethren, mark them diligently
which cause divisions and offenses, contrary to the doctrine which he has
learned and avoid them: For they that are such serve not the Lord Jesus Christ
but their own bellies, and with fair speech and flattering deceive the hearts
of the simple. Walk wisely toward them that are without, and redeem the
time, Let your speech be gracious alwaise and powdered with salt; that you may
know how to answer every man, Colloss. 4.5.6. Cap. 3.15.
Let the peace of God rule in your hearts, to the which ye are called in one
and be ye gracious. Abstain from all appearance of evil. And of himself who
was a teacher he says. We command you brethren in the name of the Lord Jesus
Christ, 2 Thessalonians. 3.6.
that ye withdraw your selves from every brother that walks inordinatly, and
not after the instruction which he received of us; for ye your selves know,
how ye ought to follow us for we behaved not our selves inordinatly amongst
you. And to the Hebrews he writes thus, Cap. 13.17.18.
Obey them that have the oversight of you, and submit your selves, for they
watch for your souls, as they that must give accounts that they may do it
with joy and not with grief, for that is unprofitable for you, pray for us for
we are assured that we have a good conscience in all things, desiring to like
honestly. Hooker eccl. pol. l. 5. para. 1. Nullu^ ego co^silium melius
arbitror, qua^ si exemplo tuo fratrem docere studeas, qu^ oporteat, quae non
oporteat fieri, prouocans cum ad meliora, and co^sulens ci, non verbo, neque
lingua, sed opere and veritate. Bern. de adu. domini. sermon. 3.1. Peter: 2.6.8.
Esaias. 28.16 and 8.14.
Now since it is no particular conceit but a matter of sound consequence that
all duties are by so much the better performed, by how much the men are more
religious from whose abilities the same proceed, Godliness being the chiefest
top and wellspring of al true virtues, even as God is of all good things, how
is it possible that these Popes and church of Rome should hold and keep
Christ's regency here on earth, to command and appoint laws and statutes to all
Christians, and Christian churches; and be as it were, a communalty free from
all error, at least of doctrine, claiming from a text of scripture which
requires not only a not failing in faith, but a stre^gthning of their brethren
that shall slide: when they themselves in the mean while shall be a company
faithless, irreligious and unjust, yea a loathsome distressed number divorced
from al piety, religion, and godliness. Is this the stone that S. Peter meant,
when he said, recording the words of the Prophet Esaias, Behold I put in Sion a
chief corner stone, elect and precious, and he that believes therein shall not
be ashamed. A stone to stumble at, and rock of offense, even to them that
stumble at the word being desobedient, as Bellarmine implies where he says,
Bellar. in pref. in lib. de Romans pont. fo. 10. 11.
quanqua^ haec verbs in Christum praecipue convenire non ignoramus, cadem tamen
^on inepte in Christi vicarium quadrare censemus, although we are not ignorant
that those words are principally meant of Christ, About the year 1058. In
Fasc. temp. Benedict was Pope 9. mo^ths and after expulsed and thrown out.
John 10. he that enters not by the door is a theif and a robber. Gregory 7.
Benno in vita eius. If nothing be in the Chalice but the blood of Christ, how
could poiso^ be mingled with it? Geneb. Chro. l. 4. fol. 887. A schism 29.
years. For the full truth of the history of Henry 4. Emperor and Gregory 7.
Pope read the dialogues of my Lord Winton. p. 3. f. 430. etc. The counsels
accused him of all those vices that Cardinal Benno did.
yet we do not think amiss when we say that they do belong also to Christ's
vicar the Pope. A horrible blasphemy, if ever there were any. But I will leave
this and turn to their succession again. Leo. 9. being the last I mentioned,
I am come unto the year 1058. about which time I find an other troublesome
account Victor 2. Stephan 10, or 9. Benedict. 9. or 10. and Nicholas 2.
Touching which Benedict, Genebrard confesses that by some he is not reakoned
for any Pope, yet does he retain him: Wernerus says, he gate the Popedom by
force, and after 9. months gave it over. Sanders in his catalogue has him
not. Platina delivers touching this Benedict that by the mean of one
Hildebrand (who afterward came to be Pope,) he was expulsed, because he entered
not by the door (as the Gospel speaks) but by force, and bribery, so much
also does Onuphrius confess, who would not have him reakoned, yet does Platina
first, and Genebrard after, put him into the number. The table which you have
omitteth him. By this time there had bin 14. schisms, in the Church of Rome.
Within a few years after followed Gregory, 7. and Victor. 3. The former of
which two is accused by Cardinal Benno, one of the same Church and time with
him, to be an heretic, a necromoncer, a seditious person, and an adulterer.
The later of them was poisoned in the Chalice, by means of the Emperor Henry
4. as says Platina and Genebrard. Genebrard speaks of a schism in Rome
about the year 1080. which lasted 29. years, and happened thus. Rodulph the
duke of Suevia being slain, who was chosen Emperor by certain princes of
Germany at the persuasion of the Pope; Henry the Emperor in a counsel holden at
Brixia by the bishops of Italy, Lumbardie and Germany purged himself of
those matters which the Pope laid against him, and laid them to his holiness
charge and brought in Gilbert Archbishop of Ravenna to be Pope who was called
Clemens 3. who sat 17. years or as some recko^ 21. and yet is now clean left
out. And here again does Genebrard deplore the miserable estate of the Church
of Rome then. After this, about the year 1130. A great schism which lasted 7
years was taken up by S. Bernard. a^. 1138. Geneb. l. 4. fo. 918. Fasc. te^p.
The Cardinals got the sole election of the Pope into their hands anno. 1144.
Geneb. ibid. f. 932. an. 1159. Alexander 3. pontifex contra quem sedebant.
Victor 1. Calixtus 2. Pascalis 3. What faction had the Emperor. when for 1000.
years after Christ, the bishop of Rome could not be chosen without the
Princes consent. The Gibellines, were of the family of the Columes and the
Gelph^ were of the family of the Vrsines. Frederick. 2. The Empire was void by
means of his deposition 28. years. Geneb. Chro. l. 4. fol. 967. and 974.
There was one Anacletus 2. otherwise called Peter who by certain Cardinals
was chosen Pope in a schism against Innocentius 2, and obtained the place 7.
years, after his death Victor 4. was created by Cardinals of his own
faction, who when he had sat certain months gave it over to Innocentius by
the persuasion of S. Bernard, in compounding of which schism he labored
seven years. Then followed Celestinus 2. he was the first created Pope
without any voice or allowance of the people, according as the law of
Jnnocentius had ordained, by which law the people was wholly excluded from any
assembly which concerned the Popes, and the election of them was altogether in
the Cardinals, and by little and little the chief of the clergy were also
debatred, and the choice was fitted to the college of Cardinals. Little more
then 16. years after Genebrard tells us of an other great schism which
lasted 20. years between one Octauianus who was called Victor. 4. against
Alexander 3. which fell (says he) by means of a division amongst the Cardinals
who were of the Emperors faction. Here has Genebrard cast in a word, but it
is a word or untruth, for he told us a little before that the Election was
wholly brought into the Cardinals hands even where they desired it. And Victor
being dead Calixtus 3. continued the schism and sat almost 6. years, and
then after the death of Calixtus, Paschalis 3. called before Johannes was by
certain Cardinals chosen Pope, but at length he was commanded by Frederick
the Emperor to renounce the seat, and so the schism ended, after he had sat
seave^ years, by this it rather appears that the Emperor pacified the
schism, tha^ that he animated it. In these times, were the factions of the
Gibellines, and Gelphes in Italy brandishing their swords, the Gibellines
taking part with the Emperor Frederick, (who was thrice excommunicated by
Gregory 9.) and the Gelphes with the Popes. They wasted that country the space
of 260. years. They began under Alexander 3. in the year 1160. and so
continued until anno 1420. This dealing on the Popes side, may rather beseem
S. Paul's sword then S. Peter's keys; I have now no memorable thing to speak
of until I come to the rule of Boniface 8. Boniface. 8. a^. 1294. Intrauit vt
vulper, regnauit vtleo, mortuus est canis. Geneb. l 4 f. 1000 Fascicul. temp.
fol. 83. De Romans pont l. 2. c. 1. John 22. held an error. Geneb. l. 4. fol.
1045. an. dom. 1378. It was ended under Martin 5. about the year 1417.
He caled himself Lord of the whole world as well in temporal things as in
spiritual. He instituted the year of Grace or Iubile, from 100. years to an
100. and caused the first to begin in the year 1300. This is he of whom it is
said He entered like a fox, he reigned like a lion, he died like a degge. A
while after followed 7. Popes in order Clemens 5. John 21. or 22. or as
Genebrard says 23. Benedict 12, Clemens 6. Innoce^tius 6. Vrbanus 5. and
Gregory 11. which seven were al none residence and never came at Rome, but
abode in France, as says Bellarmine. This John here mentioned (whether the 21.
22. or 23.) held an absolute and gross error which is, That the souls of the
blessed see not God until the last day. A while after these began the hottest
and most greiuous schism that ever the Church of Rome endured, it continued as
some of them write 50. years, as some 40. as some 30. and as some above al
these 52. In so much that learned and quiet men could not tell to which side to
lean. It held with great slander to the Clergy, and hurt of souls, in
respect of heresies and other errors, which then began to bud, because there
was no discipline in the church against such. And therefore during the times of
Vrbarius 6. (who was next to Gregory 11.) and Bonifacius the 9. Innocentius, 7.
Gregory 12. Benedict. 13. Alexander 5. John 23. (or after some 22. or 24.) and
Martin 5. no man can tell who was the lawful and undoubted Pope as says
Wernerus. In Fasc. temp. fol. 86. a. The President of the counsel was thrown
out Geneb. l. 4. fol. 1059.
To appease the confusion of which time, the council of Constance was gathered
in Germany ( John the 23. being president at the beginning: whereat was
present the Emperor Segismundus:) against the schism of the three Popes that
then were, John 23. sat at Benonia, Gregory the 12, at Ariminum; and Benedict.
13. in Spain; The^ had christ never a vicar at that time. Lib. de Romans Pont.
l. 4 c. 14. Counsel of Constance. Camp. ratio 4. de concilijs. The counsel
undid, what the Emperor confirmed. Bellar. de co^. and ecces. l. 1. c. 5. 6.
7. Why does Bellarmine give us such a distinction of cou^sells which none of
his fellows ever did, but because he ever has one devise which they never
thought of Ter. in Phor. act. 2. scen. 2. non te horum pudet, at si talentum
re^ reliquisset dece^ primus esses memoriter progenie^ vestram vsque ab avo
atque ^tar^ preferen^.
which three were quite thrown out, and Martin. 5. elected the undoubted Pope.
John, was accused in that counsel, as denying the life everlasting and the
resurrection of the flesh. It is answered, he was not the lawful and true Pope
because there were 3. at that time, whose factions had al great favorites, and
learned advouchers. The counsel pronounced of him that he was a sink of sins,
a devil incarnate. Bellarmine confesses there were 53. articles proved
against him, and that he was of so lewd a life, as though he had believed
there should be no judgment hereafter. But see the mischief; This council of
Constance that thus condemned and threw out the Pope, condemned also John Husse
(a good Christian) for an heretic. In that, they extol and receive the
counsel; in renouncing the Pope they do not: Husse had the Emperors safe
conduct to come and go freely to the counsel; but the bishops nothing
regarding the Emperors warrant overthrew the deed and put him to death, who
put himself into their hands, Caesar obsignavit, Christianus orbis resignanit,
mayor Caesare. The Emperor signed the warrant, (says Campion) but the Counsel
disanulled it; who is greater than the Emperor. To save the credit of this
counsel for dealing against Husse and the Pope too, Bellarmine has devised a
quadruple partition of the allowing or disallowing of counsels by them. 1. he
me^tioneth general Councils which he allows. then general councils which he
disaloweth. 3. he has so^e counsels, which are partly to be allowed, and
partly to be disallowed. of which last sort of the counsel of Consta^ce with
him. For (says he) touching the first sessio^s where they did enact that a
general counsel should be above the Pope, it is to be disalowed: But in respect
of the last sessio^s, and those things which Pope Martin 5. alowd, it is
receued by all Catholics? But what says the Poet, Vide, avaritia quid facit?
see what covetousnes ca^ do: no* Vide, impudentia quiafacit, see what impude^cy
ca^ do. Are they not a sha^ed of this, now that they fle their own Pops and
their own counsels. Let us now see how the form of that Church stood after
Martin 5. to whom succeeded Eugenius 4. against who^ was chosen by the Counsel
of Bazil one Foelix 5. called before Anadaeus Duke of Savoy, The counsel of
Basil deposed Pope Eugenius.
which Felix after he had sitte^ 9. years, did freely give it over again.
Then there was a new schism began, the cause was whether the Pope were above a
general counsel; Fasc. temp. fol. 89. Conscientia. Conscience. Solum entia
sponsa^ Christi guberna^e videmus. Sand. de visib. monar. l. 7. fol. 516.
Eccles. hie^ar. l. 6. c. 2. fo. 402.
or a counsel above the Pope. These times were so miserable touching their
Popes and Church that of CONSCIENCE which before that time was somewhat, the two
first syllables were abated and only ENS stocks and blocks left to govern the
spowse of Christ, which is his church. This counsel of Bazil is reakoned by
Bellarmine amongst those which are partly allowed, and partly disallowed: And
yet Sanders absolutely condemns it as unlawful for offering to depose
Eugenius, and therefore (says he) it gave occasion of a great schism. Albertus
Pighius with one breath concludes that both those counsels of Constance and
Basil concludes both against order and nature, against the cle^re light of
the Gospel and against all antiquity, In opusc. Caiet. de author pap. and
conc. c. 8. in princ.
and against the Catholic church. Caietane is much busied also with the credit
of those two counsels, the one confirming the decrees of the other, he fears
to call that of Consta^ce a general or Occumenical counsel because it subjected
the Pope to a council, and so opened a gappe which should have bin shut.
Defenc. Trid. Conc. l. 2. fol. 428. 429.
Andradius is resolute, that the counsel was general and may be so reakoned,
and interprets it, not as if they had decreed simply that the Pope should be
subjected to a council in general, The shephard renteth and teareth the flock.
Now they praise those 2. councels. unto us. Hard. cont. Iuell twice in the 2.
artic. for the communion in on kind.
but only when they rend and tear Church by dissension, and making of parts
to get the popedom as then they did, then for a general council to be
stickler amongst them is not amiss. The testimony of these men before-prized,
what shall we say to those, who do obtrude both these Councels of Constance and
Bazil unto us not only in matters of fact, touching the co^demning of John
Husse and Jerome of Prage, but also in matters of doctrine and faith, and in no
small matters nether, but for proof of their mass, and the denying of the
Laity, the use of the cup in the Lords supper, Alien for the Mass de euch.
sacraf. l. 2. fol. 558. and l: 1. c. 21. fol. 343, Canus loc. theol. lib. 12.
fol. 416. Sand. de visib. monar. l. 8. c. 10. For the Church of Romes credit.
Andrad Orth. explic. l. 7. fol. 615. Horace epist. l. 1. ad Fuscum. Arist.
Vrbis amatorem Fuscum salvere iubemus iuris ama tores* hac in re scilicet vna
multu^ dissimiles ad caetera pene gemelli. The residue down to our time.
Alexander. 6. father unto Caesar Borgia Duke of Valence. L. 6. c. 23. L. 3.
and. 6. Geneb. chron. l. 4. fol. 1097. Bellica gloria quam pontificia clarior.
and that without any manner of scruple or doubt of the authority and credit of
them (whereof their former fellows do dispute) but as if their decrees, were
the perfect and sound oracles of Gods universal church, agreeing with the
sacred and holy scripture. They are in this like to those friends in Horace
who though they studied all one thing, yet they did choose a diverse kind of
life. And so the Poet bids the lovers of the Country life, to salut the
lovers of the city life, and though in that they were much unlike; yet in
other things they were even twins. So must Andradius, Harding, Allen, Canus,
shake hands with Pighius, Sanders, and Caietane, Bellarmine crying aim, and
fully consenting with neither. But to go forward from Eugenius 4. last
mentioned, there are none memorable until we come to Alexander 6. unto whom
these succeeded; Pius 3. Julius 2. Leo 10. Adrianus 6. Clemens 7. Paulus 3.
Julius 3. Marcellus 2. Paulus 4. Pius 4. Pius 5. Gregory 13. Sextus 5. Vrbanus
7. Gregory 14. Innocentius 9. And Clemens 8. now 2. years since dead. For
Alexander 6. I find no words aunswerable to his wickednesses; an Orator may
hold a scroule in his hand and not speak, being astonished to think what an
husband the spouse of Christ had all the while he lived, vincit officium
lingua sceleris magnitudo says Lactantius, the weight of the mischeife kept
the tongue silent. He excelled in all kind of wickedness and mischeife; he had
many bastards, one he made Duke of Valence, who was called Caesar Borgia, whom
he intended to have made Lord of al Italy. Read of him and his villainies in
their own Italian history of Guictiardin^. His son and himself died of the
same poisoned wine, which was prepared for certain Cardinals, such a serpent
held the seat of Peter 10. years, til his own poison killed him. Julius 2.
was a notable warrior, he moved war against the Lords of Bonony, Perusium,
and the land about, against the Venetians, Duke of Ferarra, the state of Genua,
and the French king, and therefore as his own parasite says of him, He was
more honorable in warlike prowess, than in bishoplike practice. For the rest
that follow from Julius 2. to Clemens 8. the times are yet too young for us to
know any memorable act of theirs, they who come after us, shall peradventure,
have their dealings also brought to light. Thus much at last I would have you
to remember, Read the answer unto a seditious Bull sent into England by Pyus
5. anno dom. 1569: by John Iuell late bishop of Salisbury, in the 12 year of
her Majesty's reign. Regnum Angliae proscripfit, praedaeque exposuit, Geneb.
chron. l. 4 fol. 5. Vrbanus 1169. God let Queen Elizabeth see 7. of her enemies
Popes of Rome alive and dead viz. Pius 5. Gregory 13. Sixtus. 7. Gregory 14.
Innocentius 9 Clemens 8.
That Pius the fifth, and Gregory the thirteenth, two of the last recited Popes
did mightily bend themselves against Queen Elizabeth of blessed memory, and
against the whole nobility and commons of the Realm by excommunicating of her
person, and absolving of her subjects from their oath and obedience, and
exposed the realm and state to strangers as a pray, as much as in them lay.
But the great God lehova, who her Majesty did always serve in sincerity and
truth gave her health, peace, and life, to see the decay not only of them two,
but of alitter of rowre more, whose ends she saw, and the seventh in being
when God called her highness to her blessed sleep. Thus Tuberius have I run
over many histories in brief to give you a taste both how the succession and
chair of Rome has stood, as also a touch of the faith, life, honesty and
manners of the men in the Chare, for these 1600. years; yet you must not think
that I have said the hundred part, which might be by some others followed
touching the enlarging of every thing whereof I have discoursed: And touching
the former part of our conference which was concerning some points of religion,
do but view them again, and consider their manner of handling them, by many
falshoodes and sleights, weakness in arguments, and dissentio^ one amongst an
other, and there is no question, but you will give judgment against them, and
settle your persuasion with us: because they themselves have set it down for a
ruled case, that wheresoever there is any craft, slight, shift, obliquity, or
in any one point a manifest lie, there cannot be the simplicity of truth; And
that there is such with them let him that will not believe me first view their
books, and then confute. I pray God that you may make such use of my labor
herein as I wish and I know the truth of it does deserve.


Tuberius I thank you much for your pains, but more for your so well wishing
unto me. God I hope will incline my heart to the apprehension of the truth of
your discourse herein. And so fare you well.


The names of the Bishops or Popes of Rome for these 1600. years according to
the usual account.
S. Peter. Lynus. Cletus. Clemens. Anacletus. Euaristus. Alexander. Sixtus.
Telesphorus. Higinus. Pius. Anicetus. Soter. Eleutherius. Victor. Zepherinus.
Calixtus. Vrbanus. Pontianus. Anterus. Fabianus. Cornelius. Lucius. Stephanus.
Sixtus. 2. Dionisius. Felix. Eutichianus. Caius. Marcellinus.
the first 300. years. Marcellus. Eusebius. Melchiades. Silvester. Marcus.
Julius. Liberius. Felix. 2. Damasus. Siricius. Anastasius. Innocentius.
Sozomus. Bonifacius. Celestinus. Sixtus. ^. Leo. Hilarious. Simplicius. Felix.
3. Gelacius. Anastatius. 2. Symmachus. Hormisda. Johannes. Felix. 4.
Bonifacius. 2. Johannes. 2. Agapetus. Silverius. Vigilius. Pelagius. Johannes.
3. Benedictus. Pelagius, 2. Gregorius.
the next 300. years. Sabinianus. Bonifacius, 3. Bonifacius, 4. Deus dedit.
Bonifacius, 5. Honorius. Severinus. Johannes, 4. Theodorus. Martinus. Eugenius.
Vitalianus. Adeodatus. Domnus. Agatho. Leo, 2. Benedictus, 2. Johannes, 5.
Cuno. Sergius. Johannes 6. Johannes, 7. Sisinnius. Constantinus. Gregory, 2.
Gregorius, 3. Zacharias. Stephanus, 2. Stephanus, 3: Paulus. Stephanus, 4.
Adrianus. Leo, 3. Stephanus, 5. Pascalis. Eugenius, 2. Valentinus. Gregorius,
4. Sergius, 2. Leo, 4. Benedictus, 3. Nicholaus.
in the year 858. Adrianus, 2. Ioannes, 8. Martinus, 2. Adrianus, 3. Stephanus,
6. Formosus. Bonifacius, 6. Stephanus, 7. Romanus. Theodorus 2. Ioannes 9.
Benedictus 4. Leo 5. Christophorus Sergius 3. Anastasius 3. Lando. Ioannes 10.
Leo 6. Stephanus 8. Ioannes 9. Leo 7. Stephanus. 9. Martinus 3. Agapetus 2.
Ioannes 12. Leo 8. Ioannes 13. Domnus 2. Benedictus 5. Banifacius 7. Benedictus
6. Ioannes 14. Ioannes 15. Ioannes 16. Gregory 5. Syluester 2. Ioannes 17.
now are we come to the 1000. year. Ioannes 18. Sergius 4. Bonedictus 7.
Ioannes 19. Benedictus 8. Gregorius 6. Clemens 2. Damasus 2. Leo 9. Victor 2.
Stephanus 10. Nicolaus 2. Alexander 2. Gregorius. 7. Victor, 3. Vrbanus, 2.
Paschalis, 2. Gelasius, 2. Calixtus, 2. Honorius, 2. Innocentius, 2.
Celestinus, 2. Lucius, 2. Eugenius, 3. Anastasius, 4. Adrianus, 4. Alexander,
3. Lucius, 3. Vibanus, 3. Gregorius, 8. Clemens, 3. Celestinus, 3. Innocentius,
3. Honorius, 3. Gregorius, 9. Celestinus, 4. Innocentius, 4. Alexander, 4.
Clemens, 4. Gregory, 10. Innocentius, 5. Adrianus, 5. Ioannes, 20. Nicolaus, 3.
Martinus, 4. Honorius, 4. Nicolaus, 4. Celestinus. Bonifacius, 8. Benedictus,
9. Clemens, 5. Ioannes, 22. Benedictus, 10. Clemens, 6. Inno^entius, 6.
Vrbanus. 5. Gregorius, 11. Vrbanus, 6. Bonifacius, 9. Innocentius, 7.
Gregorius, 12. Alexander, 5. Ioannes, 23. Martinus, 5. Eugenius, 4. Nicholaus,
5. Calixtus, 3. Pius, 2. Paulus, 2. Sixtus, 4. Innocentius, ^. Alexander, 6.
here we are come well near to the 1500. year. Pius, 3. Julius, 2. Leo, 10.
Adrianus, 6. Clemens, 7. Paulus, 3. Julius, 3. Marcellus, ^. Paulus, 4. Pius,
4. Pius, 5. Gregory, 13. Sixtus, 5. Vrbanus, 7. Gregory, 14. Innocentius, 9.
Clemens. 8.


FINIS.

