To the right Worshipful, Si^ Paul Pinder,
Knight, and late Lord Ambassador
At Constantinople, that City so renowned
Whose like on earth is scarcely to be found.
William Painter wishes all increase of grace
In this life, and in heaven a Mansion place.
RIght worshipful Sir, for many favors show^
To me, that never yet deserved One.
Some from your self: your brother many More
Your Sister, and their Children also.
And though I no way can requite the same,
If I forget them should, I were to blame;
For mere humanity all men incite,
Unto their power all kindness to requite.
I have of late some little labor took,
The English proverbs to write in a book;
Though (...), yet the best that I could do,
And (...) Worship Dedicate it to:
Yet c^ thereby shall declare,
The love which I do unto learning bear:
And I have hope as the old proverb spoke,
That barking curs often times great mastifs wake,
That this my book some scholar may incite,
Ere it be long some better for to write.
If this I shall by any see amended,
I shall be pleased and no whit offended.
If you vouchsafe but pleased herewithall,
I double paid account my labor shall,
If I could but in a full measure show,
The love and service which to you I owe,
Although it came by labor and much pain,
Or with some loss, I should account it gain.
But as the proverb says, Few words suffice,
When they are spoke to those men that be wise:
So I had rather too abruptly end,
Then with long protestations to offend.
I thus conclude, beseeching mighty Jove,
Hourly to send you blessings from above.
Your Worships Orator, wholly devoted,
Till death in sunder cut the vital threea.
W. P.

TO THE READER.
GOod courteous Reader, be thou young or old,
Here give me leave to make a little bold.
To show to thee my want of learning here,
Which after will in every verse appear,
I am well known no Scholar for to be,
Therefore marks well what I shall say to thee,
A footman may more easilier go a mile,
Then a lame cripple may over a style.
A Scholar might a thing of far more worth,
With much less labor very well set forth,
For had this by a Scholar been set forth,
It surely would have been of lesser worth,
For he that wealthy is must liberally
Contribute to the poores necessity.
I seeing those that wealthy were and rich.
Into the treasury did cast in much,
I my one mite, like to the widow poor,
Likewise cast in even all I had in store,
For had I wit and learning as have many,
I would as bountiful have been as any,
Though learning ever did prohibit me,
One of her Scholars in her school to be.
Yet common reason does to m^e declare,
All they that work, not master builders are,
For some must carry water and some stones,
And some fill up the midst with shells and bones:
And some must carry mortar, and some other lime,
And some must tend the tools all dinner time,
And in the evening safely them up lay,
That in the morning naught be wanting may.
If I accounted like the worst of these
Shall be, it will me both content and please:
And I to thee will further promise make,
To quit thy love some greater pains I Will take:
I will omit no opportunity,
Until some better shall be made me by,
That what is wanting both in art and skill,
May be supplide in kindness and good will:
What Is here defective I Will no way defend it,
But he that can I Will give free leave to mend it:
I have till I the matter shall you tell,
And for this time thrice heartily farewell.
Though Poetry my lines may seem to shame,
Yet truly William Painter is my name.
YOu curious Painters and you Limmers all,
From Temple-barre along to Charing-crosse,
That your gay pictures hang out on the wall,
Go take them down, for they are all but dross:
For here are lively pictures to behold,
More worth then those that gilded are with gold.
CHAVCER new Painted.
BY WILLIAM PAINTER.
IN Christmas time I needs abroad would walk,
Desirous for to hear some merry talk:
It was my chance to meet a merry Crew,
And what their talk was I will hear tell you.
Some tales and jests they had which I Will omit,
Because they nothing to my purpose fit:
But all the ancient Proverbs that I well
Remember, I will truly to you tell.
Soon ripe soon rotten, the proverb does say:
And seldom seen, soon be forgotten may:
Yet what in youth a man has most in ure,
The same to keep till death he shall be sure.
Therefore bend thou the Plant whilst it is young,
Lest it in time do wax for thee too strong;
For if it once unto a tree does grow,
Thou may it break before thou shall it bow.
Subjects and servants never should withstand,
But gladly do what they have in command:
For why? the Proverb says: Better or worse,
Be always ruled by them that bear the purse.
In high affairs that does surmount thy state,
See that thou meddle not in any rate:
For he shall scarce himself from danger keep,
That does awake a Lion out of sleep.
Against thy King and Country plot none ill,
For by some means it known be surely will;
Examples hereof every day appears:
Besides that, little Pitchers all have ears.
Think twice, then speak, the old Proverb does say,
Yet Fools their bolts will quickly shoot away:
And one of these two evils comes thereby,
Their purse must pay for it; or say, tongue thou lie.
And more at large the proverb this express,
Which says, That man which in his drunkenness
Does kill a man, most commonly we see,
When he is sober, for it hanged shall be.
Look ere thou leap, the old proverb does say;
For otherwise thou fall in the ditch may:
Yea, you shall never any boulder find
To be, then is old Byard that is blind.
It Is dangerous to meddle with edged tools:
The proverb says: therefore take heed when fools
Set stools, that you thereat break not your shins,
For sure delay often times great danger brings.
The old proverb thus, long ago did say:
That time and tide for no man will not stay.
Though Solomon were wise, and Sampson strong,
They neither could their years one day prolong.
Look to the end before that thou begin,
What thou thereby may either lose or win,
For have makes wast, the old proverb does say:
And praise at night the firenesse of the day.
He that a Thief does from the gallows (...)
By him some mischief shall be sure to hau^ (...)
But I think none that any (...)
Will go and take a mad Dog (...)
We see it daily, that both great and small,
Will ever thrust the weakest to the wall:
And this by proof to speak I dare be bold,
That he that worst may shall the candle hold.
Some ever will pinch on the Parsons side,
And cut a large thong off their neighbors hide
And where the Style is trodden and made low,
There every one will soonest over go.
If some men might but in authority be,
Them cruel Tyrants ever you should see:
But God to keep poor silly beasts from harms,
Does send a cursed Cow evermore short horns.
There is one proverb that does thus allege,
Some steal may better then some look over th'hedg:
For laws may be to Spiders webs compared,
Which Great flies break, and small ones be in snared
Go not to law unless thy cause be right,
Especially against a man of might,
For why? the proverb says, As one's befrended,
He shall be sure to have his Action ended.
Some men will ever ready have at hand,
An Oliver for any other man's Rowland.
And he that such men sue shall at the law,
May in the end perhaps to get a straw.
Some e're their Chickens hatch be, count them will.
To such the proverb plainly says until,
They that the reckoning make without their host,
Most commonly their labor proves lost.
But fare and soft does ever furthest go,
And a slow fire makes sweet malt also:
And he that leaps e're he the style comes at,
A broken shin surely has often gat.
The shortest horse you soonest curry may.
Thus the old proverb long ago did say.
And they that feign would live at peace and rest,
Must hear and see and always say the best.
Let none rejoice in others grief and pain:
For why? the proverb tells to us plain:
He that his neighbors house on fire does see,
Should of the sparks take heed and careful be.
By others loss who seeks his own gain,
And storms, by any for to be gainsaine,
The proverb tells unto all such plain,
A worm that is troad on sure will come again.
He that does glory in his strength and might,
That take no wrong will, nor will do no right,
That proverb fits, which says, the P^cher long
Had to the well, at length comes broken home.
Some say, Hang sorrow, care will kill a Cat,
And sorely every Rogue has learned that,
For they will swear, e're they will carry coals,
Their feet shall fill up eight of the nine holes.
Some say, A bad scuse better then none is:
But I an honest man once heard, say this:
Find Hares at any time that no Muces have,
And Knanes no scuses, and I Will be a knave.
And one thing more I Will tell you now in brief.
That Fish is said to find but small relief,
Which to avoid a danger do desire,
Leap forth the pan and fall into the fire.
The old proverb did long ago say this:
That stopage no time any good law is:
And further also the same proverb spoke,
That even reckoning always long friends make.
Harm watch harm catch, the old proverb does say,
And that to pass comes almost every day:
For he that strikes with the sword we see,
Shall with the scabbard stricken again be.
When the Steed's stolen, they will lock the stable door,
That scarce would ever put it too before:
And Faulkners often say, had I but wist,
I would have kept my hawk still on my fist.
There is a saying, Happy is that man,
By others harms that take a warning can:
And to this purpose has the proverb said,
The burned child of fire is afraid.
^ir words the proverb says makes fools too feign
^d further says, which I think is certain,
^is far better for to have one Torush
(...) hand, then two that sits in the bush.
For any kindness thou have done thy friend,
Vpbraid him not although he thee offend:
For why? the proverb says, It is not fit,
To give one roast, and beat him with the spit.
The greatest wonder, the old proverb says,
Did never yet endure above nine days;
I would that wrath and envy were like it,
That men in ten days could them quite forget.
But wrath and envy now is grown so rise,
It dwell in house will with a man and wife:
And one said, That does deadliest hatred prove,
That comes from the quenched coals of love.
One that offended was I did hear say,
The Offender in his Pater noster may
Perhaps to come; but did protest indeed,
That he should never come into his Creed.
I Will tell you what I heard say of malice,
That he a very good Informer is,
But no way fitting for to make a Judge.
Whereat I crow he did no little grudge.
Some will be angry ere they have a touch,
Yet the old Proverb plainly teaches such,
He that is angry when none offends,
Again must pleased be without amends.
And some do think how ever he offends,
If he do pardon crave he makes amends:
But the old Proverb says it small relieve,
To break ones head, and then a plaster give.
When for offenses any sorrowful be,
Add not a torment to a misery,
But comfort yield the penitent and humble,
For men say that is a good horse that nere did stumble.
The old Proverb this long ago did tell,
To halt before a cripple it is not well:
For those that use to mock we daily see,
Shall for their mocking flowted again be.
A Liar is counted in a commonwealth,
Worse then a thief that lives upon stealth:
And he whose tongue does cogge and lie apace,
Men will with Bolton pray him bate an ace.
Truth seeks no corners, the old Proverbs say,
But dares meet Falsehood either night or day,
Though she by some may wrongfully be blamed.
She never shall by any be ashamed.
And this our swaggering gallants verify,
For whosoever shall give them the lie,
Shall with a whole head scarcely go his way,
For it deserves a stab they all do say.
The old Proverb does say as I do find,
It Is best to sail with current and with wind,
But these of all men ought to be controld,
That run with Hair and with the Hound will hold.
Young men that godly are all men delight,
But some so close have played the hypocrite,
Which caused this Proverb I dare undertake,
A young Saint always an old Devil does make
Young men think old men very fools to be,
When old men young men very fools do see,
And some will other men rebuke and blame,
When they themselves are guilty of the same.
They that be naught the old Proverb does tell,
Will measure others by their own bushel,
The mother never sought the daughter in
The place where she her self had never bin.
Ill may the Oven speak, and say v^ill
In spiteful sort, a burnd a^ce is the Kill,
Yet you shall hear when women chide and brawle,
She that is a whore will the other whore first call.
When thriftlesse prodigals the covetous blame,
And drunkards do on usurers cry shame,
It Is more then time for justice to come in,
When vice thus openly rebukes sin.
He that a Lions heart has, and a Ladies hand,
May a fit Surgeon make in any land,
But these two me thinks bettter do agree,
Hands that be hard, and hearts that bended be.
The conetous Viurer whom never yet
A penny from him any one could get,
Except it were upon a pawn or bill,
For he the pan hold by the steal fast will.
Like him be greedy Cormorants, which have,
A conscience more insatiate then the grave,
Which rake and scrape whateuer they can get,
And all is good fish that comes within the net.
These will of no man any kindness take,
For fear thereof they should requital make,
But like the Hog that Acornes feed upon,
And never look up from what tree they come.
And if their neighbors any thing would borrow,
They Will always pray them come again to morrow,
But the old proverb plainly tells thee,
While grass does grow the Steed may starued be,
And on the morrow if they come again,
He will not stick to tell them flat and plain,
That charity always does at home begin,
And none by lending any good does win.
Or in plain words will utterly denay,
And in short terms these words to them will say;
Good neighbor, if you would but such things buy,
You should have of your own as well as I.
When at his door the poor and lame do cry,
Ere he will relieve them they shall statue and dye,
And he will say if his friend be in the goal,
They that a cold be, let them blow the coal.
They say that conscience seven years ago,
Was hanged, and after buried also,
And therefore God help rich men they all say,
If poor men want they go abegging may.
The Crocodile never weeps, I have heard say,
But when he is hungry, and does want a prey,
Yet though the covetous has much riches got,
Still wants what he has as what he has not.
The old proverb did tell this long agone,
The cou^ o^s man does seldom ought bring home,
The fable shows you how the dog was crossed,
Which catching at the shadow the bone lost.
Make trial of thy friend ere thou have need,
Lest thou do fail when thou would speed,
And he that friendship shows thee at thy need,
Forget him not for he is a friend indeed.
Deceitful ever will mistrustfull be,
But no mistrust is found in honesty.
For honest men think all men would as they,
What they do owe be careful for to pay.
What one does promise may performed be,
When two do promise we it seldom see,
For daily by experience it is found,
Betwixt two stools the tail falls to the ground
Some borrow will of Peter to pay Paul,
And some will neither lend nor pay at all,
And yet this Proverb every one does know,
That debt before a deadly sin does go.
The old Proverb did long ago say this,
He that an ill name has half hanged is,
Wherefore I wish that all men should for shame,
Such courses take they may have a good name.
For wealth has wings, and it may fly away,
And flatterers get friends, the Proverb say,
But I know this, and so I think do you,
The christened child may God^ers have enough.
Parents ought honest courses for take,
If no cause else were but posterity sake.
For why the Proverb says all men until,
If horse and mare both trot, the foale scarce amble will.
And to this purpose is that Proverb sure,
Which at this day is most of all in ure,
And I have heard it often where I have gone,
That will nere out o'th flesh that is bred in the bone.
Their tongues at no time should accustomed be
To idle talk, much less to ribaldry,
For all men know that any thing discern,
That as the old Cock does crow the young does learn.
Some parents in their children so delight,
They scarce be well when they are out of sight,
But one may love his house in it to abide,
Though never he upon the ridge do ride.
The Proverb says, Give children while they crave,
And Dogs so long as they their tails will wave,
And in the morning you shall plainly she,
Your dogs will cleaner then your children be.
As parents should not too indulgent be,
So they abandon should all cruelty,
I Will tell you what I heard one say last week,
That Is a near collop that is cut off the fleeke.
What thou may secret keep never disclose,
Although it be against thy utter foes,
But not against thy kin of all the rest,
Men say that is an ill bird befiles the nest.
Though some both idle and lewd courses take,
Their friends should suddenly not them forsake,
For why? the proverb te'leth all men plain,
That he goes far that never turns again.
The proverb says, That wind blows ever ill,
When no man profit it does blow until:
For fools often times prouidge good store of meat,
But wise men ever most of it does eat.
Cooks at all times should look most carefully,
There may no fault be in their cookery,
For every ass will say that thereon look,
God sent the meat, but the Devil sent the Cook.
Some men will vainly spend more at one meal
Then would suffice for two by a great deal.
Yet the old Proverb says, Who wealth will win,
Must ever at the tables end begin.
The old Proverb says thus of Gluttony,
The belly is sooner filled then the eye,
And that he is no kinder then a Kite,
For what he cannot eat he will always hide.
The shameless Glutton you shall ever see
Unbidden will at every banquet be.
And yet there is a saying in all Schools,
Unbidden guests should with them carry stools.
The Glutton and the Drunkard surely,
One's always hungry, and the other dry:
And surely he deserves double blame,
That shall add fuel to increase a flame.
Some will find fault even with the fattest Ox,
And some are fed like Apes with bits and knockes,
But the old proverb long ago said this,
What thing is plenty never dainty is.
The proverb says, The more the merrier are,
But fewest always do the better fair,
Yet one said it is merriest in the hall,
When tongues lie still and beards are wagging all.
Wishers and woulders I think none have known
Two good householders, nor yet scarcely one,
For one said he at no time worse did fare,
Then when he sat and wished for his dinner.
There is one proverb which says on this wise,
Enough as well may as a feast suffice,
Yet one said, but I think he did but jest,
Far fetched and dear bought pleases Ladies best.
When one that is hungry you at meat do see,
He may eat-much, and yet no glutton be,
For the old proverb long ago thus spoke,
Three bad meals will the fourth a glutton make.
The proverb says, The fat Sow in the stye,
Nere thinks what ails the hungry that does cry:
Yet too much pity the same proverb say,
Bring unto ruin a great City may.
He that accustomed is to swear and curse,
If one rebuke him he will but be the worse,
For the old proverb says, It is the trick,
A gauld horse being rubbed to wince and kick.
Some spends every day in the whole year
In gaming, drinking, and making good cheer,
And never do themselves for death prepare,
Till he them napping catch, as Moss did's mare.
And then it will be too late, the proverb say,
When night is come, back to recall the day,
For he that will not wait at dinner time,
Must fast unless he with Duke Humfrey dine,
Though some long time have lived poor and bare,
The proverb bids such should not despair,
For God did never make a mouth as yet,
But he likewise provided meat for it.
Yet none should on Gods providence so rely,
But they must use their chiefest industry,
For from the bridge who in the ditch shall swerve,
And shall lie still, may lie until he starve.
For that old proverb that does say to thee,
As thou beleeuest thou shall saved be,
Is but a mock I tell thee plain and brief,
For that is ever meant of unbelief.
Some any kindness for their friends would do,
If they were but requested thereunto.
And the old proverb plainly tells this,
That Is a bad dog that not worth whistling is.
I Will tell you what I heard one lately say,
As he and I were walking on the way,
That he surely shall never be relieved,
That does conceal the thing wherewith he is grieved.
Faint heart men say nere win fair Ladies love,
Nor coward did a valiant champion prove,
And Robin Red-breast loses God knows what,
Because that he afraid is of the Cat.
When Cannons rore, and bullets thick do fly,
Who aims at honor must not fear to dye.
I Will tell you what I heard one say of late,
That Is a hard battle where no man escape.
The proverb says, The Cat feign fish would eat,
But that she is very loath her feet to wet:
But the same proverb says, Who ventures not,
Has seldom time great store of riches got.
Men say that barking Curres will seldom bite,
And brauling Knaves will even as seldom fight,
Yet you shall ever see the bragging Jack,
Will a great dagger carry at his back.
Some men there are that bitterly will curse
The cony-catching cheater and picke-purse,
But there is a saying, Foxes never fare
More better then when they most cursed are.
He that is borne to neither goods nor lands,
Must not think scorn to labor with his hands,
For the old father said, Yea by Saint Marry,
That Is a proud horse will not his prouander carry.
It Is best hay making when the Sun has shined,
And winnowing when in'th barn door sits the wind,
The proverb says, The Ant that nothing get
In Summer, shall in winter nothing eat.
He that thrasht in his cloak, being contrould,
Said that he did as much as ere he could:
Yet the old proverb plainly tells this,
That idleness the mother of mischief is.
But this proverb I very well did mark,
The Priest forgotten has that he was Clearke:
And Fire and Water, as we daily see,
Good servants both, but cruel masters be.
The proverb says, Nothing agrees worse,
Then does a proud heart and a beggars purse,
Yet beggars set on horse back, all men say,
Will to the gallows ride before they stay.
There is one proverb says, That through envy
Idioes and fools untimely deaths do dye,
Yet the same proverb says, That begger's woe
That sees another by the door to go.
Some men that neither learned be nor wise,
We daily see to great promotion rise,
Sure it was of such one said the other day,
Give a man luck and cast him in the Sea.
And some promoted are we daily see,
Out of the hall into the kitchen be,
And such have evermore been said to come
Out of Gods blessing into the warm Sun.
A ragged colt often times a good horse make,
Thus the old proverb long ago has spoke,
An Ass may go that laden is with gold,
Through Princes Courts, and never be controld.
Let none neglect what he may lawfully
By gift or bargain either ways come by:
For why, the proverb long ago this told,
Though Summer's hot yet Winter's always cold.
What Is freely given thee never do forsake,
Nor of the goodness never question make:
For it has always folly counted been,
To look a given horses mouth within.
With them that freely give make not too bold,
Lest they grow weary and their hands withhold,
For why the proverb plainly tells thee,
The freest horse may soonest tired be.
Thy goods nor money at no time mispend.
Nor carelessly the same to any lend:
For the wise father to the son did say,
Keep something till there comes a rainy day.
For if a man to poverty do come,
His friends and kindred will his company shun:
And in such state as any one does meet you,
He with like salutations sure will greet you.
One that much time and money had misspent,
And being asked what he thereby meant:
Answered he cared not, he had Boot on beam,
If that his naunt did die before his neame.
But the wise proverb wish all men to save
Their foul water until they fayrer have,
For they that hope by dead men to have boot,
We often see go ragged and barefoot.
The thriftles and the prodigal naught set by
No little thing nor little quantity:
Yet many a little the old proverb said,
Does make a mickle when together laid.
Things of small value the old proverb say,
Wise men seven years will carefully up lay,
If in that time it will for nothing fit,
Then any way they may dispose of it.
Though wicked weeds apace grow many say,
Untoward boys may good men make one day;
Yet the old proverb said e're I was borne,
That Is early sharp, that after proves a thorn.
In trust is treason, the old proverb say,
For he that trusts, soon deceived be may:
Yet some will trust those that as sure will fail,
As he that has a quick Eele by the tail.
Try e're thou trust, the old proverb does say,
Fast bind fast find shall surely always:
And he that hides never doubts in mind,
But he the same at any time shall find.
Though some may one Thief from the gallows save
And one known liar may some credit have.
Yet the old proverb long ago thus spoke,
One swallow yet did never summer make.
Examples always no good reasons be,
Which makes a many say though foolishly,
What Is meat for one, another poison may,
When'ts meant of swords that both defend and slay.
Who cares for no man, none for him will care,
And want with many men is a good spare,
And the old proverb says, that poverty
Has oftentimes parted good company.
Ill gotten goods are seldom times well spent:
And one said lately whatsoever he meant:
That sweet meat always sower sauce must have,
As he came from the whipping of a knave.
Change is no robbery thought the Fox in mind,
When he the Goose stole leaving the feathers behind
To chop and change hard need constrains many
For needs must taken be the needy penny.
The old proverb did long ago tell this,
That no fool like unto the old fool is:
Yet all men say, that horse is naught for sail,
That neither whinny can, nor wag his tail.
What men do love they hardly will forsake
This the old proverb long ago has spoke,
The fool sure will not from his babble part,
If he might have the Tower of London for it.
The wilful man has never wanted woe.
Thus the old proverb said full long ago.
And further also the same proverb say,
The swiftest course is that beside the way.
The old proverb this long ago has told,
That wares well bought are evermore half sold:
And one must learn to creep e're go or run,
A match well made is evermore half won.
Some will buy wares of any kind of rate,
And then repent themselves when it is too late:
But there is a saying bad ware's always dear:
And what was good that n'ere yet loved the Friar.
He that good wares have wheresoever he dwell,
Once in a year he shall be sure to sell:
For the old proverb says as much indeed,
That good wine never of a bush has need.
Buy not for time those wares that are too dear,
For many lose thereby as I do hear:
And some do buy and sell and live by 'th loss.
And so at length come home by weeping cross.
Chapmen no great care need to take, nor pains,
To sell their ware unless it be for gains:
The proverb says, he is never chapman bare.
That either ready money has, or ware.
Some praise and dispraise will the self same wares,
And prate and talk of every man's affairs,
When they know neither what is said nor done
No more then does the man that is in the Moon.
Some will make gain of any wares they buy,
Their tongues are so inured to cog and lie;
And the old proverb says as much indeed,
A crafty knave does never broker need.
Take heed thou never keep no company,
But such as honest men are known to be:
For why? the proverb says, a man at Rome,
Must be inforst to do as there is done.
If here against, any should make reply,
The proverb further tells them plainly,
It Is daily seen, fowls that be of a feather,
Will fly in troops and company together.
Another proverb there is like to it,
Which for some cause I will not here omit,
That like will to his like by night and day,
As once the Devil did to the Colliar say.
Whose foot is always his friends table under,
If he grow provident it is a wonder:
And to give counsel it does seldom boot,
Where the black Ox never trod upon the foot.
He that has left him goods and money much,
The proverb plainly says of all such,
It is no mastery for them to swim,
Whom others always holds up by the chinne.
Some will be proud of any thing done well,
To such the old proverb does plainly tell,
It was by fortune more then by good wit,
A blind man shooting chanced a Crow to hit.
Against the stream it is in vain to strive,
But they must needs go whom the devil does drive
And this old proverb is too true God wot,
That hard need always makes the old wife trot.
The proverb say, Love is a pleasant thing,
When like the Snake it once has lost the Sting.
Sure, it is not meant the love of charity,
For that lies sick, pray God it may not dye.
I know not whether it is meant of love or lust,
But love with love repaid again be must:
And by experience this I ever found,
That he that loved me also loved my hound.
There is one proverb that says on this wise,
Reason and love looks through two pair of eyes,
But all the Poets do agree I find,
It never saw ought, for it was borne blind.
I heard one once say thus of Jealousy,
It Is pity love should keep it company:
Of all kind natures I may say as much,
It Is pity wit should wanting be in such.
This the old proverb long ago has spoke,
Bare walls does ever giddy huswiues make:
And he that marries before he is wise,
Most commonly shall dye before he thriues,
The old proverb did tell this long agone,
That forward Children seldom time live long,
We forward wedlock may compare thereto,
For that unto a night cap bring a man will do.
Although a woman smile, yet thou must not
Straight way conclude that thou a wife have got,
For the old proverb plainly this does show,
That two words always to a bargain go.
Many in chosing wives deceived be,
But most in too much praising their beauty:
For this most true the old proverb does say,
All is not gold that glisters and shows gay.
One cannot wiue and thrive both in one year,
Some say, and yet to marry none need fear:
For why? the proverb says all men until,
A good Jack always makes a good Gyll.
The proverb says, That man that means to thrive,
Must first ask leave and counsel of his wife,
For as the good man says, so say all we,
But as the good wife says, so all must be.
If maidens any young men do entice
To marry them, or to do otherwise,
The old proverb still stands in full force,
Which says, The gray mare was the better horse.
When a bad couple married be, I fear
Men say of them you presently shall hear,
It is the wisest way a man can do,
To fill one house, rather then trouble two.
Where nere a barrel better Herring is,
A man in choosing cannot choose amiss:
The man that foxes sold, said use your skill,
The baddest is best, therefore take which you will.
He that a widow marries with children three,
The proverb say of four thieves sure shall be,
Who may go on the ground, and will go on the ice,
Is sure a fool, and the other is scarce wise.
When simple swains fine wives will needsly take,
I doubt they will their heads like Acteous make,
If I them wrong, their pardons I beseech,
But sure I am most master wears no breech.
But all men count it folly for to be,
For any one to meddle twixt the bark and tree.
I Will say no more, but wish all men good wives,
As dearly love should as they love their lives.
Many kind heart we hear and see daily,
Does make them smart, the more is the pity,
And that none should by knaves deceived be,
I Will tell them what one once did say to me.
They that deceive me once I them beshrow,
They that deceive me twice I say the same also,
But if they shall deceive me any more,
For that my self not them I will beshrow.
Another saying there is like to it,
Which for some cause I will not here omit,
If that by one I once deceived be,
For that pray God forgive both him and me.
But if I twice shall be deceived him by,
Sure every man will say the more fool I.
But if I thrice by him deceived be,
No man that is wise for that will pity me.
But this I often times have heard men say,
Him that deceiues him well deceive you may,
But true religion does no more allow,
But deal with all as they should deal with you.
But this last proverb I like worst of all,
That men a jewel should plain dealing call,
Saying, he that use it dye a beggar shall.
And I had almost quite forgotten this,
Too much of one thing good for nothing is.
Now give me leave to make a little bold,
To tell what one in private to me told,
If you shall judge it not worth hearing is,
Then surely I did take my aim amiss.
There Is time to eat, and time to drink,
And time to speak, and time to think,
And time to work, and time to play,
And time to sing, and time pray,
And time to sit, and time to go,
And time to reap, and time to sow,
And time to wake, and time to sleep,
And time to laugh, and time to weep.
Of all things else that is underneath the Sun,
There is a time when it may best be done.
Except to sin, and for that no time is,
Wherefore the workers shall be sure of this,
A double punishment shall inflicted be,
For abusing time, and breaking Gods decree.
Some men do think howsoever they do live,
God is so merciful he will them forgive,
But common reason unto all men show,
That none shall better reap then he does sow.
And some men out of mere simplicity,
Will add a torment to a misery,
Even like to oil which foolishly was cast
To quench the fire, which caused it burn more fast.
Some flatter will and humor every man,
To get them friendship and what else they can,
Which gotten they will not one good word afford,
Such yet was never good neither egg nor bird.
Some make no end whatsoever they begin,
And some will bargain whether lose or win,
Yet common reason shows unto all,
It Is better sitting still then rise and fall.
Some will both kindness and friendship profess,
When they indeed do intend nothing less
But seek their own turns for to fit and serve,
And never care though others pine and starve.
Some men say there have been sweet flowers nigh,
A Serpent foul seen for to lurk and lie,
And vice has never done more hurt indeed,
Then when he came clothed in virtues weed.
He that his bed keeps when the weather is cold,
It Is pity but he be a hungry should:
And those that haunt Theaters certainly,
Shall dance the beggars galliard ere they dye.
Some to get money will take any pain,
And presently will spend the same in vain.
Even like the cow that gives milk great store,
And with her foot straight throw it on the flower.
When things are gone it is very hard to say
Who have them, or which way they went away.
For men in judging often judge amiss,
But they that see may always say as it is.
No man can surely of a wife be sped,
Until such time as he to her be wed,
For chances often betwixt the lip and cup;
Do come before a man thereof can sup.
And though a man in imminent danger were,
Of help he should not utterly despair,
For twixt the bridge and water some hauefound
Such succor, that they escaped and were not drowned.
To err and sin is given to man by kind,
But to persevere does show a beastlike mind.
A wise man may walk nigh a rivers brim,
Where fools and idiots often times have fallen in.
Some men that beastlike drunken you shall see,
When they be sober for it grieved will be
Yet like the dog that vomits up his meat,
And presently the same again will eat.
Where many paths meet, one may lose his way,
And some that many trades have I dare say,
The worst of them will find them bread I think,
And all the rest will scarcely find them drink.
Some beat the bush and others catch the bird,
And some will blows give sooner then a word.
And some do yet and did ere I was borne,
Make a long harvest of a little corn.
And some there be that has got an ill guise,
They are loath to bed, and lother for to rise.
I Will say no more lest some should be offended,
When little's said it soon may be amended.
There was no more that I remember can,
Worth writing that was spoke of any man.
But some there was that would Tobacco take,
Which as it seemed did one offended make.
One once, said he, Tobacco seed did sow,
I think it is the smallest seed that grow,
And would to God that it as small leaves bore,
Then in this land there would not be such store,
For many are so bewitched it to,
That they thereby will quite themselves undo.
It makes them daily to mispend much time,
And never have enough of bear and wine.
And never any good that I did hear
It one man did this five and thirty year.
Beside the charge it puts men unto,
There is about it such a deal of do,
First one must cut it, and then must it dry,
And then a while acooling let it lie.
Then pipe and stopper both must be ready,
And then a coal to light it presently,
Which they hold in a little pair of tongs,
A pipe case also hereunto belongs,
And then a box you always ready see,
To put up that that shall untaken be,
Which made of leather is, and gilt bravely,
And so there are be made of iuory,
And some of silver are, and some of tin,
And some of horn, which are not worth a pin.
And some of plate are made, and some of brass,
For those of paper good for nothing was,
And some affect it so as many say,
That they will take it riding on the way,
And such must ever have in readiness
A tinder box, or else a burning glass.
This charge and trouble daily does proceed,
By taking of that stinking Indian weed.
Would all men's like mine from it were turned,
Then ere they take it would it should be burned.
When I saw none would, I did undertake
Before them all this answer for to make:
Saying, Sir if you spoke had by advice,
These speeches might have well been spoke at twice,
For I my self some good have had thereby,
Which I Will conceal lest you should think I lie.
And for the charge you say thereby arise,
^t is not great to those men that be wise.
(...) things abused should be used no more,
Tobacco then should company have store,
^or bread is daily given to dogs and bears,
Which serve for naught but h^nder men's affairs:
And if that corn to malt converted be,
That Is so abused it would pity one to see,
For many will more like to beasts then men,
Drink more in one day then would serve for ten,
And some in one month spend more in good cheer
Then would suffice the best part of the year.
And some will have a gay suit on his back,
Though he and all his household victuals lack:
And yet I think for all this great abuse,
You Will say there is of these a lawful use.
So worldly wealth who so too much desire,
Shall find it of the nature of the fire,
Whereof a little does at no time harm,
But often times good cold bodies for to warm.
When as great flames the body scorch and burn,
So too much wealth often times to woe does turn,
But time, and place, and quantities required,
Before that any thing should be desired:
For if there dung should in your Chimnye lie,
You out of doors would throw it presently:
And if there fire should on the dunghill be,
You soon would fetch it into your chimney.
Yet both of these are good in places fit,
And this is all that I will say of it:
Who good finds by it may sometimes it use,
And whom it hurts, from taking I Will excuse.
Then store of Apples in the fire was laid,
And Ale was gone for as the good wife said.
Then one that was there in the company,
Said masters, if you will be ruled me by,
Who will not sing, read riddle, nor tell tale,
Shall neither taste of Apples nor of Ale.
Whereto the company agreed all,
And to begin the lot thus out did fall,
They at the rows end would their Riddles tell,
Which I must read that never well could spell.
There was a coal whereon one ashes cast,
Which if he had with bellows given one blast,
It quickly would have burned into a flame,
That one might well have warmed them by the same
The second said, now mark what I shall tell,
There be three men in town where I do dwell,
The one has been my neighbor dwelling long,
Who when he was in'th wright was the^ in'th wrong
The other dwells right over me again,
Whose joy was greatest when he was in pain.
The third, of long time I know certainly,
Has wished that both his wife and he might dye.
Now, since the reading you have put to me,
I Will tell you what I think these for to be.
The first does mean a poor man's Son I know,
Which half a year to school did never go,
For had he had but learning to his wit,
Sure many should have profited by it.
And you that last spoke of your towns men three,
I Will tell you what I think them for to be.
I doubt your neighbor takes too much delight,
In some lewd lover that is named Wright.
And he that dwells right over you again,
Does love another that is named Pain.
And for the third, a fool may well know this,
That he a Dyar by profession is.
They that sat next did not much time prolong,
But presently each of them sung a song:
To tell the tunes I think it me behoue,
The first is, Live with me and be my love.
The second is if I be not deceived,
Mad Tom of Bedlam, of his wits bereaved.
Who does these days of ours not see
Most lamentable for to be,
When great offenses sore do rage,
Whom justice can no whit assuage:
From evil temptations night and day,
Deliver us Lord we thee pray.
It endless were to go about,
With colors for to paint them out:
But I wish all men should abstain,
From those which chiefest now do reign.
From evil temptations, etc.
The poor man's faults compare I may,
To spots in Images made of clay:
But faults in great men to behold,
Like stains in statues are of gold.
From evil temptations etc.
But as no man can safely ride,
Too near unto a rivers side,
So they that with bad men converse,
Often times cannot but be the worse.
From evil temptations etc.
For as the Sirens pleasant song,
The hearers death does hasten on
So he that envy entertaines,
Can have no joy unmixed with pains.
From evil temptations, etc.
When as the Crocodile most does weep,
Does most desire the silly sheep.
So does the flatterers double tongue
His dearest friend the deadhest wrong.
From evil temptations, etc.
The strange Camelion that by kind,
Can change her color with her mind
The Liar can as readily,
Of one lie make you two or three.
From evil temptations, etc.
As Boreas rough breaks Ships in twain
And causes flames to burn amain:
So does the Talebearer hatred sow,
Where love and friendship else would grow.
From evil temptations, etc.
From Wolves the worst of all ill beasts,
A man in house may safely rest:
But from backe-byters deadly sting,
No house can safe secure him.
From evil temptations, etc.
As oftentimes sweet flowers nie,
Have Serpents foul been seen to lie,
So in a coat full gay has been,
A treacherous heart full often seen.
From evil temptations, etc.
But as we read, once Balaams Ass,
More wiser then his Master was:
Even so are they that dangers shun,
More wise then they that to them run.
From evil temptations, etc.
As Elephants strong in waters deep,
The weak ones do from danger keep,
I would all men would learn of them,
To pity their poor brethren.
From evil temptations, etc.
What christian heart can think upon,
The wicked lives of many a one,
And not with Christ our Savior dear
For them shed many a mournful tear.
From evil temptations, etc.
But such as purposely entend,
Their sinful courses to amend,
God with his Spirit assist them so,
That they from grace to grace may grow.
From evil temptations, etc.
Now as a friend I all men will,
Good men no harm to do until:
And when to speak you are inforst,
Of bad men never speak the worst.
Like to our selves Lord grant we may,
Our neighbors love both night and day.
THE pleasant life of Shepherds, has ever yet been deemed,
Amongst all Swains to take least pains and yet the best esteemed.
But now may they wail, both in mountain and dale, where last their flocks
were feeding,
For now dead they be, scarce one of twenty is left that is worth the heeding.
And if the lives of Shepherds, considered be aright,
All men must say both night and day, they live in blisfull plight.
But now may they wail, etc.
Fair Flora in the Spring time, first offers unto them,
The earths sweet flowers through Aprills showers, before all other men.
But now may they wail, etc.
When Phoebus in his highest, with hottest beams does thine,
He soon will hie, him down to lie, in shade under the Pine.
But now may they wail, etc.
And if Apollo chances, with rain to cool the heat,
His Pine will serve for to preserve, him likewise from the wet.
But now may they wail, etc.
Whilst he rests thus defenced, both from the rain and heat,
His pretty Lambs upon the lands, do sweetly eat their meat.
But now may they wail, etc.
If any go astray, in it meadow or in it grain:
His little Dog will at first word, Soon fetch them forth again.
But now may they wail, etc.
When Autumn's fully ended, and hay and corn in barn,
His flocks may go both to and fro, and never commit harm.
But now may they wail, etc.
Then he with his fair Phillida, under a willow tree,
May sport and play each day by day with mirth and melody.
But now may they wail, etc.
And when that hoary Hyems. begins his reign to hold.
A fur bush tree provide will he, to keep him from the cold.
But now may they wail, etc.
Thus have you heard recited, the blisfull Shepherds plight:
But I advise no man to praise, a fair day before night.
But now may they wail, etc.
For many Shepherds now, are forced hereunto,
In rain and heat their bread to get, or else a begging go.
Therefore may they wail, both in mountain and dale, where late their flocks
went feeding,
For now dead they be, scarce one of twenty is left that is worth the heeding.
The next of all it came to me by lot,
To pay my penny to make up the shot:
I neither sung had, riddle, nor good tale,
Yet feign I would the apples taste and ale.
Then presently into my mind it came,
That I before had made an Annagram,
Which I them told in the stead of a tale.
And by that means I tasted of the ale.
There be nine Letters in the Alphabet,
Which until death I never will forget,
They to my mind do give so much delight:
And which they be I briefly will recite.
The I, always some joyful thing presage:
The O, bids youth provide against old age:
The N, good news does ever to us tell:
The E, bids none let envy with him dwell:
The C, to all men charity does show:
The L, to all is loving where it go.
The A, is always amiable to behold:
The R, said he by reason ruld be would:
The K, does keep the key of knowledge so,
That no evil thing into the house can go.
If I the reason hereof should not tell,
I seem to mar should what I have made well,
But I may boldly tell it without shame,
It was the Anagram of my mothers name.
The last man whom by lot it unto came,
Said he also would tell an Anagram,
Which here I Will briefly show unto your view,
I liked it not, no more I think will you.
The w presageth double woe,
The y naught else but yealousy does show,
The f is flattering false unto his friend,
The e thinks evil whatsoever it pretend,
Thus you may see that w, y, f, e,
Does bring a man from wealth to misery.
If every man were minded like to me,
Then surely they would married never be,
Then said I, Sir, if you will not be offended,
Your Anagram you shall hear soon amended.
The w does worth and wealth presage,
The y bids youth provide against old age,
The f is faithful and does friendship show,
The e from evil bids all make have to go.
Thus you may see that w, y, f, e,
^ild wench may a good wife make one day.
(...)
