A PARAPHRASE upon the Epistle of the holy Apostle S. Paul to the Romaanes,
(...) to the Church of God (...).

When(...) also added certain other (...)

^

IMPRINTED AT LONDON BY Henry Bynneman for William Norton.

To the right worshipful, and his dearly beloved in Christ, the Officers of
the Queens majesty's Robes T. Paulfreyman, one of her highness honorable
Chap^^, wishes the increase of Gods mercy and grace, both to them and all
theirs.
R. H. H. A. C. S.
AT what time (dearly beloved) it pleased the just and great of heaven, to
change by his justice (for many sins) his cherefull countenance over this his
Church of England, and to buckle his brows very heavily upon it, to give
therevppon the fearful frovvnes of his insufferable and fierce furies: to
shy^^e the most Chrystian state thereof, to alter therein the most holy and
true Religion, to afflicte within it the professoure of his name, to hold
them in most cruel and bitter bondage, to suffer the burning of his sacred
Scriptures (as also other works very notable and infinite, the travels
doubtless of the ^oste godly, famous, and great learned men, both of this
Country and elsewhere, to the edifying mightily of Christ's holy Church)
with other like horrible plagues, svviftely and fast ensuing: even to the
very hazarding and putting to confusion, the whole state of this most
Christian Kingdom, highly renoumed, and noble Region aforesaid: so clearly
before lightened with the bright light of life, so highly of God extolled, so
tenderly of him beloved, so diversely blessed, so graciously governed, so
mercifully preserved, most plenteously enriched, adorned and beautified, with
the singular good graces, gifts, and great benefits of God, most bountifully
and freely of him bestovved, and as unthankfully of us received, and therefore
the more sharp punishments therein by his justice did fall, to the piteous
amasing, terrifying, turmoyling, vexing, and most grievous afflicting both of
the bodies and souls of men, of all ages, sexes, estates and degrees as their
raging cruelties then diversely attempted and most vvofully felt (vvelnigh
universally) witnesses the same: which before was truly prophesied by the
good men of God: through whose divine grace as by his trumpe of eternity,
sounded most shirly forth his fatherly admonishments, as forerunners unto us
for the avoiding of dangers, if our hearts then had been vvarely and thankfully
prepared: who also them selves (with most constante says and patience)
felt in that rage the judgments of God by true trial to the death, and
confirmed their holy and sound doctrine, even with the effusion of their long
desired and greedily thirsted blood. In those doleful days I say, it was my
hap to attain at a friends hand, certain written copies of diverse and
sundry matters, that were, among many others in great number, fastened in
their bands, prepared before to the spoil, and had their judgment to burn,
although by Gods providence prevented to the contrary, and are now by his
grace framed in their time, I trust to good purpose, as shall aptely to good
men appear, and that not affectionately labored I protest, or corruptly,
but as best beseemed a Christian friend sincerely and truly by good
direction, according to the analogy and true sense of the holy scriptures or
word of God, and to further therevvith (as small power has offered) his
most vvoorthie praise and glory. Unto which most happy end, when I had
once passed them through, well vievved them, esteemed the effect of their
matter, and perceived yet with deliberation, their apparante rudeness and
great imperfection: especially, the Paraphrase upon the Epistle of Saint
Paul to the Romans: how vnansvvereably to the good ground thereof it was
left (by whom, or by what means I know not) very barely and confusedly
handled, in no point perfected, no order observed, void of good style, evil
Englished, and without the true rule or apt form of writing: I therefore
finding good occasion, and presuming (with reverence) upon the virtue and
patience, of the learned and Christen reader (unto whom I most gladly submit
my self, and whose good favor herein I most humbly crave and desire)
thought it not amiss (at times convenient, and as God would permit) for mine
own recreation, and for the avoiding also of other more unprofitable
exercises, to bestow freely upon them my diligence and simple travel, and
with earnest zeal so to pulishe them, as by their amiablenesse, inward
beauty, and most pearcing clerenes, they might dravv fast unto them, the
lovely and most Christian delights of others. And when I had (by the grace
of God) accomplished therein my glad desire, and afterward (as of duty)
commended them to the examination and judgment of the most godly learned, and
so by order to pass from them unto the Church of God: I then devised with my
self, where, or to whom (among many my friends,) I might dispose these
works, to their well lyking and friendely acceptance. And as (by the good
will of God) I had you (right dearly beloved) first in memory, with whom
also I thought I might be bold, and vvayed therevvith your vnfaygned
profession to GOD, your constant zeal, and good conversation in Christ: and
how also by your means, worthy estimation, and christian good credit, it
might prosperously and very well pass forth to the imbracement of others,
and to further thereby the glory of God, I refused then to revoke, or to give
you unkindly the slip: but yielded to the first motion with most glad
consent, and do now as gladly with humbleness, commend them together unto
all your loving hands. Beseeching you all so to take in good par^e, this my
poor and slender gift (in this wise ordered and a^ot^e^ unto you) as you
shall occasion me hereafter, the more to rejoice in your friendship, and to pray
most heartily for you, that God may still grant you the good continuance of his
grace, for your health, wealth, and prosperity both of body and soul in this
life, and thence forth (in Christ) the reward of eternal felicity.

Youres to command, T. Paulfreyman.

To the Christian Reader.
BEfore that you enter (beloved Christian) into the reading of Saint Paul's
Epistle to the Romans, which (by the common consent and opinion of the
ancient and holy fathers) is the very sum and perfection of all the other
scriptures: thou ought diligently call to thy remembrance, the first and
original sin, of our old father Adam in Paradis^ through which, he there felt
the justice of God, and was of him accordingly banished from infinite
pleasures, of that most seemly and beautiful place, of all places and
pleasure upon the earth. In which notable case and high mystery, when thou
shall once perceive the uprightness, great goodness and the mercy of God on
the one side: and the slippernesse, disobedience and unfaithfulness of Adam on
the other side: thou shall then the more easily come to the true meaning and
understanding of the said Epistle: the effect of which is, most principally to
declare unto all men, the foresaid high and notable mystery. For after
almighty God of his great goodness had created Adam, far passing all other
his creatures, in the excellency of his creation: and had also (but of very
base and vile matter) made him unto his own godly im^^^ and similitude:
resembling therein his divine majesty in heaven, and most godly perfection of
all innocence, wherewith he was highly endued at his first original and
beginning: he then placed him in a most pleasant Paradise of all ^oy and
singular comfort: and gave free choice and liberty unto him, to use all things
there at pleasure, and to his own hearts desire: save only he forbad him to
eat of the fruit of the knowledge of good and evil, which was of most amiable
apearance, beautiful to behold, and most pleasantly placed in the midst of
Paradise. The commandment hereof, was not burdenous or unreasonable for man
to bear: but only requested therein due obedience and love toward his loving
God and maker: unto whom only, that noble creature man (above all other
creatures) should have had most special regard, considering most deeply in
him self the excellency of his majesty, that so graciously formed him,
blessed him, and most pleasantly placed him: and there to look for all
goodness only at his holy hand: and not to take as it were upon him self by
his own woorthynesse, the form of goodness and evil: but should only have
holden that for evil and forbidden, which God restrained as evil, and to count
that only for good and rightuous, which of God is allowed, and granted. God
therefore took Adam, and to put him out of all doutes, brought him to the same
place, and showed him the very tree and the fruit thereof, standing in the
midst of the Garden of pleasure, and forbad him the eating thereof with an
earnest charge and threatening, saying on this wise unto him: In what so ever
hour thou shall eat the fruit of that tree, thou shall surely die, and be
subject to eternal death. Yet notwithstanding this straighte restrainte of
God, Adam stackered, and dealt but slipperly, untruly, and carelessly, with his
faithful God and maker, transgressing his holy commandment: and gave more
credit to the persuasion of the woman and of the wicked serpent, than to the
truth of Gods word and his holy commandment. Which was nothing else but
eue^ so much as in them did lie, to take unto themselves the form of good and
evil as out of them selves, or by some other mean, rather than of God their
maker: unto whose only will and pleasure they should most humbly have yielded
their obedience: as unto him, who always most graciously wishes all goodness
unto every man. For he being by the woman and the serpent deceived, thought
that God was not indifferent toward him, but that be had rather of set
purpose, withdrawn from him, some parcel of his divine and godly wisdom.
Therefore, for as much as in mind he was thus deceived, suddenly changed, and
departed now from God, declaring thereby his vnstayednesse, infidelity, and
unfaithfulness: and looked not for all good things only at his gracious hands,
as of duty he should, but yielded to the Devil, received that was offered,
and tasted to his condemnation of that strayt forbidden fruit, to advance and
set forwards him self, to the presence and secret highness of Gods mighty
majesty: and that rather by some bye way with his own will and consent, then
contenting him self with the only will of God: and so to recover thereby as
he thought, the fullness of his necessity and lack of perfection: which he
then imagined to be much wanting in him self. And thus with his
forgetfulness, haughtiness of heart, infidelity, slipperines, disobedience
and unthankfulness against his God and Maker (and deserved thereby his just
vengeance, and to be for ever the fyrebrande of hell, ever burning, ever dying,
and never to dye the second death) he yet fastened upon life, which he most
happily received, through the only compassion and great mercy of God: who
notwithstanding, offense so grievously committed against him, whereby eternal
damnation was due to the offendour, and to become a bondeslaue unto the Devil
for ever, to whom he so willingly yielded, so diligently obeyed believed,
followed, and served: yet (as is said) so great and unspeakable was the mercy
of God toward man, so infinitely his love abounded, and so tender he was over
him, and so sorrowful for his grievous fall from bliss, into perdurable
tormente and pain, and to redeem him again from it, and from the devil:
that he most certaynely decreed with him self to curse his own dear son,
and to pushe him as it were forwards by the shoulders, to most cruel death for
the recovering again of man: And so through his sons most paynefull death
and passion, to save mankind from everlasting ^^ath and damnation, which Adam
himself and his whole posterity fell into, through the infection of his
pride, disobedience, and looseness of heart against God. Even here verily (as
ye perceive) had the just God just occasion by justice, justly to expel man,
to confound him, to damn him, and to leave him utterly destitute of his
grace, and to yield him to the Devil for ever: for so did his righteousness
and truth require. Consider, these were the words that God spoke unto him: I
tell thee Adam, in what soever hour thou eatest of the fruit, thou shall
surely dye the death. How beit, the great goodness and mercy that was in God,
called him back from most severe justice, and required not utter
reuengemente, and thereby to suppress man, a very frail, poor, and naked
creature. In the mean time therefore, God found out the very true and ready
way, whereby his righteousness and truth might fully to effect be satisfied,
and wherein also the sweetness of his mercy should specially be exercised,
and declare forth the mightiness of it self: that is truly to say, the
only Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: which (as I said before) was willingly
pushed unto death, to deliver Adam and his whole posterity from their sin
and damnation, through the only favor and mercies sake of God the eternal
father. Therefore because mankind could in no wise be saved and delivered
freely from sin, death, and the Devil, and so made again at one with his so
loving and faithful a God, as he showed him self unto Adam his first
creature, but only by Christ Jesus his own and only Son: Christ did most
willingly join in consent with his father, and so took upon him self the
rigor of his fathers terrible sentence, pronounced justly against Adam, and
the curse of the whole law upon his own back, and dyed Adams due death, for
him and for us all, that were by him in the like state of damnation. For even
so says the Prophet: Cursed is he that hangs on tree. We be now therefore
redeemed again by Christ's death, from our bondage, and from the service and
slavery of the Devil, and from that most bitter curse, that was proper unto
Adam and to all his offspring. We are also by Christ, taken out of the kingdom
of darkness, and placed through his only deserte in the clear light, and in
the most gloriouse kingdom of our eternal and loving God. In this manner
passing now further on my purpose, the gentle Reader shall take the special
meaning of the holy Apostle in his Epistle on this wise: which is, that all
true Christian men must wholly depend upon the mercy of God, through his
dear Son Jesus Christ, for the fullness of their eternal redemption, and by
his only merits to attain their eternal salvation. And that all such, as
look to come unto it by their own merits, deseruings, and woorkinges, are in
that point like unto their father Adam: which, in his pride and disobedience,
went about to come to the Majesty of God, through his own devises, vain
byewayes, and very fond attemptes, at what time he most vnlawefully yielded
to eat the fruit, that was most lawfully of God forbidden him. All which
proud attempters, may be well assured to abide also the like curse that was
given to Adam, but not a blessing, or the salvation that of God was mercyfully
promised, and that only by the merytes of Jesus Christ: unless they will
begin to repent of their pride, blindness and disobedience, and only
refer it to our merciful God him self, through the only faith and
belief due from them to our Lord Jesus Christ: who only satisfies the
truth and justice of GOD in this point, which said unto Adam: In what so
ever hour thou eatest of the fruit, thou shalt surely dye the death. By
which only satisfaction of Christ, all men (even as Adam) be reconciled
again unto God the father, their sins freely remytted, and come boldly
again to the presence of his majesty, and not by our own devises and
foolish inventions, as (the more pity it is) many men most blindly do, that
bears at this day the names of Chrystians. Wherefore, in as much as it was
then concluded, that Christ was the very perfect way to restore man again to
his perfect joy and felicity, which before he had lost: It was thought of God
almighty meet and necessary to send unto him a law before the coming of
the savior Christ: which might put him daily in mind of his fall from the
joys, wherein God had once most happily placed him, as also to lay plain
open before his face his abominable pride, disobedience and wretched living.
For which cause, many hundredth years after the fall of Adam, was this Law
proclaimed by the Patriarch Moses, written and set forth in Tables and
Books: to the end that by the straytenesse thereof, all men might know, not
only the great mercy of God over them, but also their own naughty nature,
weakness, blyndenesse, and miserable state through their disobedience and
sin: which before the Law came, had welnighe forgotten their deadly fall,
and knew not in effect what sin was, they were so wretchedly blinded in the
vanity of their pride and false imaginations. To the end therefore, that all
creatures should know their own case and imperfection, their damnable state
and condition, the laws was proclaimed: which, besides that it manyfested unto
us the wonderful mercy of God toward us, as also the state of Adam our first
parent, and the filthynesse of all our sinful and abominable living, and the
giving furthermore unto us such precepts and commandments of virtuous
conversation and living, as always is seemly for godly men to use: by the
which, all men at all times should have rectified and amended their ungodly
lives. It also prescribed certain Ceremonies, which men daily exercise among
them selves: taking the same, and stedfastely also believing, that they did but
prefigurate the death of the same Christ, which was promised to dye the
death, in the behalf of Adam and his whole pasteritie: wherein, if men in
times passed did use among them selves, according to this sense and meaning,
they were found righteous before God: not for doing the Ceremonies, but only
for their beleefes sake, which they conceived in Christ to come: whom only the
Ceremonies did but barely prefigurate.

Al which ceremonies (says S. Paul) should utterly now cease, and stand no
more in effect amongste christen men: Inasmuch as now the very truth and
thing it self is already come and shines amongste us, which they before only
prefigured. And even thus did God most lovingly, see to the repairing again of
his decayed Creatures, that so much had offended him, in their looseness and
falling from him. And for which only cause, his own and only dear son was
promised, took vp^^ him therefore ou^ flesh, and died therein the most sharp and
^^uel death. Wherefore, God now at this time, requires nothing else at our
hands, but to have always respect unto his mercy through Jesus Christ, and to
behold also his wonderful love toward us: to the end we should be ashamed
of our own sinful acts, how often so ever we turn our minds from him,
through the committing of vice, which is displeasant, abominable, and always
damnable in his sight. Also, how that we should meekely acknowledge and
confess daily unto him, our own sinful lives, the miserableness of our
nature, and how of our selves we are not able, to think, speak, nor do any
good thing: and not stubbernly to do as Adam did, run from the face of God,
hide our sins from him, or else cover them from his presence with our own vain
inventions. For Adam, at what time he knew that he had offended and broken his
commandment, he perceived immediately what state he stood in, and by the
accusation of his own conscience, he felt in him self the prick of sin,
he began then to be trudging, and to hide him self from him, and sought
means to cover him self, although with most simple and very slender
clothing, which he then accordingly but little trusted unto like as it is all
unprofitable that man of his own brain will devise to cloak his sin with
all, although both he and his make fly never so fast from the face of the
Lord, and seek means to hide them selves. But yet notwithstanding all this
said disobedience, hautie, and proud stubbernesse of Adam: which after he had
most wretchedly offended, chose rather to hide him self from God, than meekely
to acknowledge his fault before him: the loving Lord was stricken so full of
compassion and mercy toward man, his simple, naked, and poor creature, that
he quickly followed, and hastened him self after that fugitive and runnagate
found him quickly but, conferred most mildly with him, put him in mind of his
decay, great myserie, and the happy life that he miserably had fallen from, and
said on this wise to him: Adam where art thou? which should signify unto
him: O Adam, know thou what thou have done? have thou considered well with
thy self of thy present state, and what misery thou art now fallen into from
thine innocence, blissful state and felicity, by contempt of my will and
commandment? At these words now should Adam have been abashed, quickened to
memory, stirred to trembling, earnestly moved to meekness and obedience, and
reverently at the foot of his maker, to acknowledge and confess his fault, to
cry peccaui, and to ask for mercy. But he contrariwise showed him self stout
and stiff necked. And the loving Lord yet still applied him, and moved him
with these words following, which should have pierced even through the very
heart of man, if he would have showed him self tractable and gentle, rather
than proud and stubburn, and said unto him: O Adam, who told thee now that thou
art naked? In which few words, privy and mighty check, although it were most
mildely and gently vttred of the Lord (because he would not utterly discorage
the pore creature, in whose face he only beheld his own similitude:) yet the
indiscreet and very forgetful Adam of the great benefits of God, and his own
happy state, should forthwith have called to his remembrance, the great
goodness of his merciful maker, and the miserable estate that he was then
presently come unto. But Adam would yet mind no such thing at all, but stood
(as he thought in his own fight,) very well and in good plighte, although yet
naked, or most slenderly shrouded with a few tender leaves, to cover his
misery and filthy apparent nakedness. Then the Lord to help him yet further
in this matter, and to prick him forwards to the confession of his sin,
said on this wise: Tell me Adam: Haste thou not in deed eaten of the tree,
whereof I earnestly forbad thee, and charged thee upon a sharp penalty that
thou should not eat thereof? But yet this notwithstanding, man was loath to
acknowledge his sin, and for a further excuse or delay therein, he put the
blame in his companion the woman. And the same did he with unadvised and
froward words: whereby, every man may easily see, that secretly in his
corrupted heart, he laid the fault most wickedly upon the majesty of God him
self. For he said not thus simply unto the Lord: The woman gave me of the
tree to eat: but proudly he added thereunto: The woman which thou gave unto
me. As though he would have said: thou thy self art faulty of this evil: for
if thou had not given unto me this woman, I had not been thus deceived, nor
broken in this wise thy foresaid commandment. And yet (understand ye) the
rightuous God gave him not the woman to deceive him, but to be unto him an
helper. Wherefore, it is now so much the more plain and evident, that the sin of
man was the more heinous, apparently wilful and grievous. By which this notable
history of the fall of man, is evidently taught unto al christen men, how
mighty, great and infinite the mercy of god was toward us of his part, as also
what loving instructions he gives hereby unto us: that we should therefore the
more meekely and humbly thank him, and always acknowledge before him, our
most sinful and abominable state of life. And even so shall all we receive in
time, the just reward of meekness and true obedience toward God, through his
son Jesus Christ: by whose only death, merits and deseruings, we be al
brought to true health and salvation, and not by any goodness that comes of
our selves: for the power of our own works can no more further us unto our
heavenly felicity to come, than did the works of Adam, when he proudly did eat
the apple, to the end he might thereby have brought him self unto the high
majesty and presence of God: but they do rather make our case damnable in his
sight, if we have any confidence either in the^, or in any thing else, save
only in our Lord Jesus Christ: from whence only comes all felicity, eternal
joy and salvation. For to speak most truly and unfeignedly in this matter:
the worthiness of our works can no more cover or hide our sins from the
displesure of the just God, than did ye said leaves cover Adam from the
presence of his Deity. Therefore we must thus truly count of our selves to be
nothing else, but sinful, blind, stubburn and disobedient wretches: and for
the only mercies sake of God (in Jesus Christ, we be al ye children of
salvation, if we do truly believe in him. Furthermore, to help the Reader in
this said Epistle, I will touch yet one thing most worthy of him to be noted:
that is, like as the stubbornness of Adam in Paradise, would have laid the
ground of his offense upon god himself. because he gave him the woman which
did dec^i^ed him: ^^^n so many men in the weakness of their consciences, by
reason of their blindness in this place of the Epistle, do so far entangle
them selves in the misconstruing the article of Predestination, yt many of them
are blasphemously moved to lay the fault in God, that man is damned. But as
Paul says him self, even so do I also say: God forbid, that any man
should have any such thought in him. For although, God by his most high,
heavenly and profound wisdom, knew from the beginning how all things would
come to pass: yet we cannot therefore say, that he was the occasion of any
evil: even as Adam could not justly lay it to his charge, that he was the
occasion of his fall, because he gave him the woman which did so deceive him:
for God gave her unto Adam, only to be his helper, companion and succorer, and
not to be an instrument of evil, wilfully for his destruction: but the fault
was in Adam him self, because he abused the holy precept and high gift of God.
Also, we may say, that God foreknewe the fall of Angels out of heaven: yet was
he not thereby noted to be guilty of that crime: for he had given unto them
all free choice, as well to follow the good, and to eschew the doing of evil:
as to do evil of themselves, and to die from good. But they, through the
accu^sednesse of their own pride, because they atte^ted to clim^ to the
majesty of God through their own imaginations, were utterly deprived of
their state, utterly expelled and cast down from heaven, from the presence of
God, and from the brightness of his glorious majesty. Even so likewise, he
foreknew the fall of Adam, and also the fall of the Jews from everlasting: yet
for all that, God did not create them to that only end and purpose* but they
of themselves (...) will, ^el most wretchedly into that deadly ^^ate, and
declined thereby from their (...) and strength of sin in themselves, and the
blind imagination of their (...) ha^^^s. For God, notwitstanding the thousand^
millions of his graces and benefits which he did dispose toward them from
time to time, gave them yet also a law and certain commandments to bridle
their affections, ^o restrain them from their sins, and to draw them from
the stubbornness of their evil inclined natures, that they should not (if it
were possible) fall from him at any time. God truly, as a God of mercy, did for
his part that which was well seeming to the vttermoste point, but they would
not so take it at his merciful hands. Therefore, in their sin of contempt
they still slipped from grace, they fell far from their God, and denied also
his son Jesus Christ, that came to redeem both them and all mankind, as you
have heard before. And the effect of this matter shall the Reader have more
perfectly discussed in his place following of this said Epistle, which I
thought here sufficient inoughe only to touch, and to put him in mind
thereof against he come to the text it self. Therefore, seeing we have now
brought it unto this conclusion, that God truly is clear, and not to be
blamed for any man's fall, but saves him from it, even through his great mercy
in his only son Jesus Christ: we may not then leave so much to our selves,
nor have any confidence at all in our own works, in our own devised toys or
vain imaginations, neither yet in the keeping of any ceremonies, whether they
be of the law of Moses, or otherwise not: for Christ in his coming and by his
death, has not only taken upon his back the heavy burden or most terrible
curse of the Law from them which believe in him: but has also put clean away
all the Ceremonies thereof, inasmuche as by his coming now in our flesh all
such things are clearly finished, for whose only cause they were first
made, and had therefore by him their shorter continuance. The circumcision
therefore of the law, the feast of the new Moon, the Jewish Sabbat days,
with all the rest of such obseruances and Ceremonies, are utterly now to be
banyshed, and never henceforth any more to be exercised among christian men, in
the true Church of God and Christ. For to uphold (by any state) that those
Ceremonies should still continue amongst men and the professors of Christ, is
flatly to deny the coming of Christ into this world in our flesh, denying in
effect the virtue of his death, and therefore (...) worthy the name of
Ethnikes th^^ Christians (...) less (...) the multitude of ^^^^sh (...) and
(...) joys, ^euiled of mortal men, be used in Ch^^^^e^ (...) Church among all
other Churches, (...) that the Ceremonies which God him self appointed, are
now made frustrate, and to be clean put away from amongst us. How be it,
Moses has within the limits of his law, as it were two laws, which is thus
to be understands: one the Table of the commandments, and the other Moral
and ^^ill instructions, which Paul calls a spiritual b^^^^e, which is still
to be looked upon, daily practiced and followed also there be Ceremonies, Rites,
Vsages, and Customs, which is called a gross and carnal law, and is to be
banished from every true christian man. And even here I would that the g^^tle
Reader should diligently remember, that the whole law of Moses was proclaimed
only to the Jews, which God took at that time for his own and only
dearlings, and that the Gentiles had no part thereof, but in the ^^ede thereof
the law of nature, which is a natural aptness or inclination to follow honest
civility, to be gentle and of good behavior. This same law of nature was
grafted of God in the hearts of the Gentiles at their very beginning and fi^t^^
creati^^, which has in it a certain knowledge of God, as many of the Gentiles
had, a certain love toward him, to speak well of him, to call daily upon
him, to fear him, to love their neighbors, and not to hurt the simple or
their inferior, with many other such godly virtues of honesty or godly
qualities: but the most part of them did abuse the same civil and honest
law which was given unto them of God, to use it to his glory and honor. And
many of them also were so blinded in Idolatry, false worshipping, and leaning
many ways to their own damnable imaginations, that they could not follow the
nature of that law. Therefore S. Paul says: Though they had not the written
law of Moses amongst them, yet they were all saved or condemned according to
their law of nature, because it prescribed that in effect to the Gentile,
which the law of Moses did unto the Jews: and even so all men were found
sinful and wretched before the face of God. But it was provided through the
wonderful wisdom of God, that when the Jews did forsake their own
profession, and denied the savior Christ, that came to save them and all
mankind, according to his fathers truth, yt the^ this same law of Moses, and
the fruit of Christ's coming, should be turned unto the Gentiles, for their
conversion and salvation. How be it, this benefit of God, is not so to be
taken, as though he had now broken promise with the Jews, or that they should
utterly be deprived of his mercy and goodness: but that they may all have,
the profitte and commodity thereof as well as the Gentiles, if they will forsake
in time their pride, malice and stoutnesse, and submit humbly them selves to
the true faith in Jesus Christ. And whereas Paul speaks against the trust
that the Jews have in their law and circumcision: he means under the same,
all kinds of Ceremonies and customs of religion, as yet be now used among
Christen men. Thus, for the better declaration of all the premises, I do
entend to refer the Reader, unto Saint Paul him self, in his Epistle to the
Romans: which I have according to the grace and gift given me of God, written
more plainly out, than appears in the very bare text it self: which is no
commentary or gloss upon the said text: but as it were altogether one uniform
Epistle (or Paraphrase like) and in such order so drawn out, near to the
nakedness of the text it self, even as though the Apostle him self did
wholely write the same, a^^ even so the Reader must consider thereof and take
it. Whom, I beseech God almighty to assist and further after such a sort in
the reading thereof, that he may thereby take no less advantage and profit,
than it should not repent him to receive the free mercy of God and his
eternal salvation, through the only merits, death and Passion, of his son
Jesus Christ. Amen.

The Contents of this Book.
A Paraphrase upon the Epistle of Saint Paul to the Romans. Fol. 1.
Huldricke Zuinglius, in his friendly exposition to Luther, touching the
Eucharist, confesses what he acknowledges of Jesus Christ. Fol. 68 A fevve
words touching the Covenant, that God made unto his Church in Christ,
translated out of Huldrick Zuinglius, in his Subsidy, annexed to the work
aforesaid. Fol. 69 Of Vanity, by Martinus Cellarius. Fol. 72 Of Vows, by
Martinus Cellarius. Fol. 75 Of the Old man and the Nevve, which be compared
together, by Martinus Cellarius, upon the seventh of the Preacher. 78 An
Exhortation, sent from a stranger, a vvorthie and famous learned man of God,
to the right high and mighty Prince, Edward Duke of Somerset, for the
seeking and quiet establishing of peace and righteousness in the Church of
England: immediately upon the commotions, suddenly raised up in the West
parts, as also in Suffolk and N^^^olke, in the year of our Lord Christ.
1549. 86
A Paraphrase upon the Epistle of the holy Apostle S. Paul to the Romans.
The first Chapter.
I Paul, whom men heretofore have called Saul, Act. 8.9.26.
that is to say, one which is now become of a busy and troublesome fellow, or
of a very tyrant and persecuter, a well stayed, peaceable, and quiet man: and
was bound many years agone under the law of Moses, strayghtly to serve and
obey him: Act. 13.
but now at this time ^n made free from him, set at liberty, and pref^rred to
the high freedom, service, and dignity of the great God our Lord Jesus
Christ: yet notwithstanding, I am not thereby fallen into the corrupt state of
Apostacy, or a clean forsaker of Moses institutions: but am called to be
Christ's true messanger, and therefore now more highly advanced, than when I
was one of the stout and mighty d^^^^ders of the Pharisees sect against
Moses. For the cause thereof was, that being then not truly godly, nor led
by the spirit of truth: and although learned, yet not rightly learned, but a
wanderer in darkness and error, I missed very far from the verity, and
from the true understanding of the holy law of God. But now I may rightly be
called a true Pharisie, that is, one which by grace am chosen, separated, and
put aparte by the Lord Jesus Christ him self, who has endued me with the
spirit of truth, Act. 13.
to preach and teach the Gospel of his eternal father, which is not any new
Gospel, of lately invented, but the same that was promised long before by the
holy Prophets upon the son of man, Deuteronomy. 18. Act. 3.
which at his time appointed, was borne of the stock of David, as touching the
flesh, and was also declared of the holy Ghost to be the eternal Son of
the everlasting God, Math. 1. 2. Timo. 3.
as most truly appears: because after his bodily death and burial in the
Sepulcher, he triumphantly rose again, Act. 9.
even with the same very flesh. In which mighty and notable mystery, he did
not only teach us the resurrection also to come of our flesh: but also him
self to be the beginner and only author of the same. By whom I am appointed
to the function and high office of an Apostle, that like as the Gospel of God
has been promulgate and taught among the nation of the Jews, so it might also
by me be declared unto the Gentiles. Not to any such intent that they should
be burdened with the mightiness and charges of the law: but rather that they
should submit them selves to the only true faith in Jesus Christ, and to
be brought hereunto not by the vain gloses of Philosophers (of the which sort
all you be that are Gentiles) but by receiving the name of Christ in holy
baptism, and so made the children of God by adoption, to refrain your selves
from al vain and fantastical persuasions, painted, and damnable opinions as
be now, and long has been amongst you: inasmuche as the adoption it self is
through grace in Christ Jesus generally offered to all men. Therefore I say to
al you that be at Rome, (the faithful lovers of God, and forsakers of your
old iniquities) I wish the grace, 1. Cor. 1. Gala. 1.
mercy and peace of God: not such peace verily as the world gives, but the
very true, perfect and new peace, which only proceeds from the father and
almighty God of heaven. And first of all things I thank the same father of
heaven for you, that it has pleased him (by his son Jesus Christ) to give
this inestimable benefit unto you. Which, although you have been heretofore al
infidels, miscreants and idolaters, and deserved by Gods justice to be
eternally damned: yet now, he will that your faith and profession should in such
sort be changed, made (...) strong in him, that it may most happily redounde to
your ^^^noume and special commendation throughout all the whole world. The
which thing, (considering my dear and tender love toward you) can not be but
most joyful and comfortable to me, for God the father is my record, whom I
now serve, not in vain and dead Ceremonies, 2. Tit. 1.
but in the power of his spirit, preaching the glad tidings of his dear
son, that always (from time to time) I have you in my thought and
remembrance, The cause whi Paul desires to be at Rome
praying continually to God (that if it be possible) I might once come unto
you, and see you at Rome, for I think very long there to see you, and to be
made joyful of your godly companies. Not seeking thereby mine own profit or
singular advantage, but most heartily desirous to bestow upon you some
healthsome fruit of my Apostleship, and to exhibit unto you, not the gross
service or dead Ceremonies of Moses, but the very delectable, yea most sweet
and spiritual good taste of the savior Jesus Christ, and to speak unto you
after mine affection and familiarity together, to the end that one of us may
comfort another in the only true faith, which we now have in our Lord Jesus,
and to the confirmation and establishing one another in the same heavenly
gift. All which, though they be not yet hitherto done as most rightly
behooves, surely for my part I am in no fault thereof: Paul excuses
himself and shewith the cause of his going to Rome.
for I have most earnestly wished to have been among you, but alas I have had
many impediments and lets to the contrary. And for this cause specially I have
desired to see you, that it might be my lotte and good hap, as well to
profit you and to do you good, as I have done unto other Nations. For as God
him self is an universal God, and Lord of mercy to all men: even so (by his
mercy) is the Gospel universal, and in time to be uttered to all nations. The
gospel of Christ is offered unto al me^ without exception.
Wherefore in deed I confess it my duty, not only to declare the holy
Gospel to the Jew, but also to the Gentile not only to the wise and learned,
but also to the most barbarous, rude and unlearned: yea to every man whatsoever
he be without exception, unless he most wickedly, and with fixed will
withstand and resist the same. For which consideration (in the zeal of my
Lord Christ, and to do you good) mine heart melts within me, until I preach
the Gospel also unto you that be at Rome. Paul's boldness in preaching the
gospel.
And you shall understand, that as I fear not at all the state of your great,
mighty, famous and pompouse Empire: so am I not ashamed of the humble and base
state or appearaunce of Chrysts kingdom, nor of the preaching of his holy
Gospel, in the simplicity and plainness thereof: which although it be to
the unfaithful but a scoff, a mock or scorn: yet is the same to all the
faithful the most high, mighty, and puissaunt virtue of GOD, through which
only they be brought to the haven of felicity, and to eternal salvation.
The excellency of which precious and inestimable treasure, neither the laws
of the Jews, neither the precepts of your Philosophy or fantastical
imaginations, could once possibly attain or bring to pass. Ignorance of the
souls sickness.
Howbeit it was first preached to the Jew, and after to the Gentile. In mine
opinion he is very far from healthful state, which in sickness neither
knows what his disease is, neither woteth where to seek redress for ye
same. Many heretofore (in the blindness of their hearts) have thought that
their justification or state to salvation, did stand in the superstitious
worshipping of vain images, or else in the outward obseruaunce of Moses
law: From whence our sure justification flows.
but the only true and sure justification flows merely and simply out of
the faith which we have in our Lord Jesus Christ. For if men will confess
that God has already truly performed unto us (through his dear son) all
such things as was before promised of him in the Books of the Prophets:
undoubtedly the certayntie of that faith and true trust, sufficiently
justifies all men unto eternal salvation. Abac. 2. Hebr. 10.
The just man (says Abacuc) shall live by his faith. But whereas in times
passed God has seemed to wink, or rather in deed to sleep at the sins and
iniquities of men: now he earnestly shows him self to be broad waking, and
declares to the world the issue of his just fury and anger, as well against
the Jew and all them that be under the law, The just cause of Gods fury after
the known light of the Gospel.
as against the Gentile and them that have not the law. And specially because
they now knowing the truth of God, do not truly apply it to piety and godly
living, but still do continue in the beastlynesse of their former iniquity,
to heap justly upon them selves the fierce wrath of God. And further, because
they now perceiving and knowing more and more the secrets and high mysteries of
the kingdom and grace of God, Act. 18.
than the multitude of the common people does, yet they do no less
unthankfully receive it, and give it their careless and negligent flippe, than
though they knew nothing thereof at all. And though it be impossible wholly and
thoroughly to know the high majesty of the immortal God, yet as much as is
possible and sufficient for man to know, the Jews of all other nations have
had the grace offered of true instructions, for the which they should most
highly have thanked and praised their God: In as much as it was his own
teaching in the Books of the Prophets, wherein he spoke only to the Jews, to
the great admiration of all the whole world besides: yea and although God him
self be an invisible God, and not to be rightly comprehended of flesh and
blood, One way how to know almighty God. The works of God.
yet he is not altogether above our godly imagination and understanding, but
does appear wonderfully unto us by the same understanding, as it were by a
figure or in a glass, and that by the mighty, strange, and marvelous
workmanshippe of this present work, and by the government of the same: The
world has his beginning and ending.
of the which, although there were a beginning, and shall also have an ending,
yet notwithstanding the wonderful making and direction thereof declares most
plainly the virtue and great majesty of the Maker, not to be as his
creatures, but shows him self thereby neither to have had beginning, neither
yet to have any ending. God without beginning or ending.
In all which God has opened the state of his eternal deity unto them, to
the end they should (of all others) have nothing to lay for their excuse
against him: but they knowing him, and being well assured thereby that he was
God, yet they would not take him as God, Psalm. 106. Iere. 2.
neither give him therefore their due and hearty thanks, but wholly abandoning
them selves, and given over to pride and vanity, were deceived in their blind
imaginations of their hearts, and brought thereby into utter forgetfulness of
God, ignorance and damnable darkness. And where they so much boasted
themselves of their own wisdom, they plainly became before him stark
idiotes, or very fools. Behold (I pray you) and see into what blindness and
mad foolishness they fell into. They forsook the very Majesty of the true
God, that is only almighty, immortal and merciful, Eze. 14.
and gave his glory unto the images of most frail, mortal, and wicked men:
and not only of men, but also of brute beasts and fowls, and that more
abominable is, of venomous Serpents, creeping and noisome vermin of the
earth. In such sort of prodigiouse and most monstruouse idolatry, God giving
them over, suffered them to fall, and to wallow like most filthy Swine, in all
such vnclenlinesse, Great abomination.
and most abominable filthiness, that they in continuance of time, defiled
their own bodies with the most unclean sin and horrible filthe of the
Sodomites, and most beastly doings against nature. 2. Reg. 11. Ezechi. 14.
Certaynely God did suffer them to fall into these abominations, not without
great cause, which for their pride sake, stoutnesse, and vayne-glorie, A gross
sin yet remaining among the professors of Christ.
made of the almighty, true, and everliving God, a counterfeted, most
miserable and dead Idol, wrought with the hand of wretched man, and all that
they did was utterly against the hear, perverse, most monstruouse, and clean
out of all order. For they honored (I say) the creatures in steed of the
creator him self, which is only to be exalted, blessed, and worshipped for
ever and ever, Amen. Also God did not suffer the men of the Jews, Leuit. 18.
thus against nature, and most wretchedly to abuse their own flesh, but also
their wives (in the uncleanness of their hearts) to relinquish the natural
use of their husbands, and to become most miserable and filthy sinners against
nature: that is, as the men did, so they also did most filthely accomplish
(like monsters) their stinking lust one with an other. All which they
committed, because they having the light and truth of God shyning unto them
before their eyes, Proverb. 1. Act. 7.
would not receive the light, but chose rather vaynely to live in the
darkness of their dreams, in superstition, and in most damnable idolatry.
And the common enormities that were daily amongst them (besides other
abominable wickednesses, Great are the abominations of man where the grace
of God is withdravve^.
which are not here named) were these: they were full of unrighteous doing,
given to fornication, wickedness, covetousness, maliciousness, full of
envy, murder, debate, deceit, evil conditioned, whisperers, backebiters,
haters of God, dooers of wrong, proud, boasters, bringers up of evil things,
disobedient to father and mother, without understanding, covenant breakers,
unloving, truce breakers, and mercylesse. They therefore which know that there
is a God, God terribly plageth after his grace once offered and unthankfully
taken or wilfully neglected
and have the light of his grace offered unto them, and will not thankefully
recoyue it and practice it in conversation, but turn their hearts to
wickedness and abomination. Let them also assuredly know, that the same God
is also most just, and will suffer all those to fall into such like accursed
and semblable myseries, that forsake his holy doctrine, for their own foolish
imaginations or deuyses of men, Ose. 7.
not only all the workers thereof themselves, but also all the whole filthy
hand of all the like sinful consenters.

The.ij. Chapter. The rebuking of the Jews, which as touching sin, are like
or worse than the heathen.
HOw be it, notwithstanding all this, it behooves a godly and true Chrystian
man, to take heed and be fearful how he judge his neighbor and condemn
his brother in all his faults, or in such as he thinks him self blame
worthy, least he judge that naught which God accepts and takes for good, or
that for good which of it self is stark naught. Math 7. 2. Reg. 12.
Therefore O thou vain man what soever thou be, ye bostest thy self in the
acts and holiness of thine own life, and condemnest another man in his
doings, thou verily art to rash in judgment, and in great danger of Gods
indignation. For in that thou condemnest another man, thou justly also
condemnest thy self, because thou do even the same which thou condemnest in
the other. And thus thou being guilty with him whom thou iudgest of the same
crime, thou give sentence utterly against thine own self. Some one man may
soon be beguyled, and another may peradventure easily anoyde his condemnation
among men, which give their judgment only upon conjectures, but no man may
anoyde the just judgments of God, who sees in secret all things, whose
judgment is true, and whose sentence is pronounced, not upon conjectures or
doubtful cases, but according to truth and most certain knowledge, as he is
almighty, and a God of truth. Therefore O thou Gentile (for even thee do^ I
mean all this while, An exhortation to avoid rash condemnation and judgment.
and speak unto thee even in the vowels of Christ) that thou diligently take
heed, least through pride in thy self thou over rashly condemnest the poor
and unhappy Jew, which is now fallen into the aforesaid abominable vices.
For assure thy self, in condemning the Jew thou do not only give sentence
against thine own self, because thou comittest even the same faults, but
shalt be sure also to abide the judgment of God against thee, as it was
against the Jews. For think thou to avoid the punishment of God which
finnest against him, and can not avoid the displeasure of him in this world,
and in the world to come (who respects no persons) and whom thou haste to
grievously offended? Or do thou think it convenient to avoid the just
judgment of God, seeing thou will suffer no man to avoid thy judgment which
offends thee? Or does the softness of our Lord (in leaving thee unpunished
for a time) give thee occasion to contemn and despise him, as though he did
wink at thy sins, or favor thee in the doings of them? Thou should
rather reuolue with thy self, that his softness, merciful lenity, long
suffering, and great gentleness does not put away from thee his justice,
sharp judgment and punishment. Esaias. 30. Act. 17.
But meekely and gentlely allureth thee unto himself, and draws thee thereby
to hearty and true repentance: and uses unto thee first his gentleness, to
the end, that for his sake again with like virtue, thou should begin to
hate and reform thy self. But thou do all to the contrary: for thou make
of his gentleness toward thy self, The lenity of God abused.
an occasion of thine own damnation: because thou would not by gentleness
and meekness, be orderly brought into the right service of God. Wherefore, the
more that God stirs thee hereby, to perfect piety and true godliness, the
more thou heapest upon thy self, the treasure of condemnation and the ire of
God, if thou do not as a Christian, conform thine acts thereunto. Which,
although he do not now hastily appear^ unto thee with the swiftness of his
fury: yet has he his time of judgment over thee, Psalm. 61.
and will most justly be revenged upon thee, at the terrible and most dreadful
day of dome, God by his love and long suffering, stirs man to repentance.
and to fly thereby the terror of his ve^gea^ce.
when he shall put apart his clemency and softness, and give more sharp and
bitter punishment, both unto thee, and to all such, as before were more
stirred to repentance, by his great mildness, unspeakable love and
gentleness. At which great and terrible day, he will give his judgment, not
according to the manner and custom of men, sometime favoring one party more
than another: or like such a one which is often deceived in the truth of his
judgment: but as a God almighty, Psalm 61.
most uprightly and truly knowing all things, will reward every man most
uprightly, according to his due deserts. To some, he will give everlasting
life: that is, to all those, which perseuering in godly life and conversation,
do not hunte after the corrupt, frail, and vain pleasures of this world, but
do seek after the true glory, honor of God, and immortality. And to some,
which (in their pride and stateliness) had rather obey to injustice, than to
true righteousness, to lying, untruth and superstition, Thessa. 1.
than to the truth and holiness of Gods commandments, shall be given the
reward of indignation, the ire of God, the affliction and tormenting of the
devil, and of a gnawing and damned conscience: which punishment, abides
indifferently all men, that carelessly live to offend. But first of all the Jew,
and then the Gentile: that the Jew may have the first plages and punishment,
which (first of all other) had the goodness of God offered unto him.
Contrariwise, glory, honor, peace and immortality, shall be given
indifferently unto all men, that embrace Gods will and live well: but first
unto Abraham and to the Jew, Act. 10. Ephe. 6. Gala 2.
and after to the Gentile: for God has no respect to persons, as other
judges of the world have: but he is perfectly just, upright, and truly
indifferent to all men. Therefore, what so ever they be that offend, having no
law, shall so perish without law. And who so ever have received the law and
offend therein, shall also be condemned by the law. Math. 7. Luc. 6. Iac. 1.
Neither shall it be inoughe for the Jew to have heard the law, and so to
think himself the rather just before God: but they which (in Christ) do the
acts and deeds of the law, shall be before him justified and imputed
rightuous. God only him self is all goodness, and therefore he most allows
and approves the good works of men, though there be among them, Gods law
known and practiced requires sharp punishment.
no law at all written. And the displeasure of God is so much the more over
them which have a law, because they frame not their lives according to the
law. How be it, it cannot be truly said, that there be men, which live to
them selves without law: for all nations that be, though they have not the
written law of Moses: yet they do in effect the works of Moses law, because
they have the law of nature grafted in their hearts. And what so ever thing is
commanded and done under the law, by them that have it written in books and
tables, the same do they also, which have the law of nature grafted in their
hearts. For all such, their own conscience does secretly save or condemn
them: they having cogitations and thoughts within them selves, Math. 25.
that daily does both accuse and excuse them. God shall judge all these,
according to the same secret law of nature: which though it be not now
openly known to men, yet God which knows all things, and sees all things in
secreate, shall give his judgment thereafter. But this judgment shall be done
of God by his dear son, which is now our Lord and most rightuous savior,
and shall be at the judgment day, the judge of all the world: which thing, is
the true saying of the Gospel, least it be taken of some for a fable or
dream, whereof I now most reverently speak. Therefore, O thou Jew, yt
stand so much in thine own conceit, and art proud that art called a Jew,
John. 8.
making thy reckening upon the privilege of the law, which was given of God
only unto thee, and do vaunt and boaste God to be the author of thy
religion: whose mind and pleasure thou know by the Scriptures that came
from him, and art brought up and taught in the mysteries of the law, whereby
thou do not only know what things are to be avoided, and what to be
followed, and of all good things what be the best: but also think thy self
able, to be a guide unto the blind, and to shine before them which be in
darkness: that is, to be a teacher of them that be rude, and to be an
instructor of them which have no knowledge: all which things, though God have
showed them unto thee, in giving the law only unto thee, shall thou therefore
think thy self better than the Gentile? No verily: The law what it works.
but the law which God has given thee for good, makes thy cause and matter
worse, before the judgment seat of God, except thou directest thy life and
conversation according to the law, in which thou do so much glory and
make thy boaste: else, the knowledge of the law, whereof thou so greatly
make thine account, To trust to the law is daungerouse.
shall be a very snare to take thee withal, to thine utter overthrow and
confusion. Therefore O thou vain man, which bostest of the law, why do thou
advance thy self on this manner? why teach thou another, and leauest thy
self untaught? Math. 7.
why do thou preach that theft should not be committed, and yet thou thy
self art a thief? why do thou command other to forsake adultry, and thou
thy self art defiled therewith? why do thou banish idolatry in another, and
art thy self polluted with worshipping of images? And in conclusion, why do
thou glory amongs men, in that thou have received the law at Gods hands, and in
transgressing the fame, do dishonor God? For in that thou seek praise
and honor of men (by reason of the law) thou art become a vessel of much
dishonor to God, which should by thee only, have all the honor and glory. And
although no man's iniquity can in deed dishonor God: yet thou do as much
as in thee lies, to dishonor him. Of the like sort of men, Esaias 52. Ezechi 36.
the holy Prophets heertofore have spoken, as it is written in Esaias and
Ezechiel: The name of the Lord (say they) is slaundered by you, and has
through your fault an evil report among the nations, that are inclined to
idolatry: in as much, as you proudly glory in the only title of the law, and
yet among your selves, do live most sinnefully and wretchedly against the law.
Neither is it sufficient for thee to be a Jews borne, or to be of the Jews
religion; for then shall Circumcision only profit thee, so far forth as
thou performest the things, for whose cause Circumcision was first given: and
also accomplishing such things in thy life, which thou professest in thy
Ceremonies. Otherwise, if thou transgress the law, it shall no more profit
thee to be Circumcised, before the face of the just God, than though thou werte
never Circumcised. Wherefore, like as Circumcision is turned to uncircumcision,
unless thou also perform the other deeds of the law (which appertains to
good manners and upright conversation:) even so, uncircumcision shall not hurt
the Gentile, but shall be accepted for circumcision, if be leave and forsake
the Ceremonies of the law, and perform those things, that be in deed the
whole sum of the law: which is, a pure and a clean life, and shall also obey
Christ, which is the end of all laws. Therefore thou Jewe, the Gentile shall
be made equal with thee in this behalf: yea, he shall be preferred before
thee, and be better taken than thou, because he knows no Circumcision; and
his innocence and clean life, shall make thine iniquity more damnable,
because he not professing the law, does yet declare the end of the law, in
the acts of his good and godly life: where thou glorying in the words and
sillables of the law, and professing Circumcision, do violate that, which
is the chief of the law. God, which judges not after the outward appearance
of the body, but after the godliness of the spirit, takes no man for a Jewe,
except he perform in deed, the profession of a Jew. And him name not I a
Jewe, John. 8.
that has the manifest note and mark of the Jewe, neither is he Circumcised,
that has his privy skin cut: but he is a very Jewe that is rightly a Jewe,
Roma. 9. Collos. 2.
and circumcised in his heart: which God only beholds, and thereafter judges
all men. To conclude therefore, he is Circumcised, which rather has his heart
circumcised, than he which has his privy membre circumcised: which also does
not rejoice in the marks and notes made with a stone, as the circumcision of
the Jews was: but rejoices in the spirit and mind of the law: for he that
has only his flesh Circumcised, may go for a Jew amongst men: but him
worthily God takes for a Jew, whose heart is purged and cleansed from the
filthe of vice and sin, and is pressed and ready to the love of Jesus Christ:
of whom only to be allowed, is the most high and chief felicity.

The third Chapter. Paul shows what preferment the Jews have, and that
both the Jews and Gentiles are under sin, and are only justified by the
grace of God in Christ.
But here will some men say: seeing the sum of the law, depends upon
godliness and innocence of life, and upon the only faith in Jesus Christ:
what pre-eminence then has the Jew more than the Gentile? Or what prevailed
it the Jew to be circumcised, seeing that godliness and faith, makes the
uncircumcised as good with God, as the circumcised? ^ea, and that also more is,
seeing the circumcision of a Jew that offends, makes his cause worse? yes
verily, the Jew has great pre-eminence. First, he may rejoice, in that he is
by nature called a Jew, to whom properly the word of God is committed: Romans
2. 2. Timo.
or else because that only the law and the Prophets were caught to that
nation: either for this cause, that God vouchsaued to be their instructor and
teacher him self. Surely, it is an honorable thing, to be of that nation,
which God so highly esteemed. And further, the Jew has pre-eminence, because
the same, by reason of the said instructors goodness, may be the readier to
the true faith in Jesus Christ. For as he is more near the truth, that
knows some part thereof, so may the Jews be, which have Moses and the
Prophets amongste them, who were the proper traders and directors of them, to
come to ye light in Jesus Christ. Neither shall it be any doutfulnesse to the
faithful, for them to be pertakers of the goodness of God, that the Jews
notwithstanding their law, believed not in Christ: for shall their
unfaithfulness make the promise of God frustrate and of none effect. Or
think you that God (in inconstancy) will break his fidelity and promise as
me^ do, and not perform that in deed, which he has universally promised to
all men? God forbid: but rather he will keep his fidelity to all men, unless
it be to such, as will not take it at his hands. Verily, men shall have none
occasion to reprove God, John. 3.
of his fidelity and promise, which shall appear always true, and will pay
that which he promised, because he is Faithful and true. All lies come of men,
which through their own corruption, are most deceitful and false in their
promises. But as God him self cannot be deceived: so is it also far from
him, to be a deceiuer of other: although every man may be a deceiuer, and he
him self also deceived. The Prophet David does assure all men, in the
certitude of Gods promises, which says: Thou Lord shall appear just and
true, Psalm. 115. Psalm. 50.
and with verity stop the mouths of them, that will judge thee a breaker of
thy promise: either of such as will furmise that thou will not keep thy
promise, made to the stock of thy servant David, for the ungodly demenors
sake of others. Undoubtedly, many in their blindness, do not discern the true
keeping of Gods promises with them: nevertheless, through their own very
fault and corruption, Gods verity and truth is made much more manifest and
commendable amongst men. All which, shall (in time) well see, that God,
notwithstanding the great offenses done daily against him, will not alter nor
change the constancy and sure determination of his full fixed mind and
sentence. And here I am now sure, that some buste headed body, will step
forth his foot, and say: If the justice then and truth of God, be made more
manifest and commendable, through the injustice and faulty doings of men:
then God is unjust him self, which will that sin should be amongst men, to
the end his justice should be the better apparent and known to men. But God
forbid that any such thought should enter into any man's heart. Also
ungodly they will say: how should God be the righfull judge of this world,
if he be unjust him self? For if it be provided of God that I be a lier, to
the end, that through my lie, his verity should be made more renoumed, and
my shame redounde to his honor and glory: then, why should I have my sin
laid to my charge? Or why should not all men think rather within them
selves, and interpretate this place (as some certain slanderous fellows say:)
Let us do things that be evil, that the rather by their evil appearance,
good things may happily come, in as much as by our sin and unrighteousness,
the righteousness of God is made more excellent? But God defend all men from
such curious Questions, vain cogitations and wicked thoughts. For all these
by the justice of God, in their own pride and vanity, be woorthily damned,
for such their contempt, hatred, incredulity and unfaithfulness: all which,
as they can not lay to Gods charge, the cause that they thus do sin, (which
in deed comes only of them selves) even so they shall have no mercy nor
grace showed unto them, although their naughtiness and sin, be openly
turned into the public show of his only praise and glory.

But to come to our purpose, what shall we say? Are not the Jews better than
the Gentiles? No verily as touching the grace of the gospel: although they
seem to be better, by the prerogative of the law of Moses: for I proved it
before, that both the Jew and the Gentile, be offenders against God. Wherein,
as touching the Gentile, the case is more euidente than any man can deny.
Psalm. 14. Psalm 53.
And as touching the Jews, their own Psalms do declare what they are. For
thus it is written in the. 14. and. 3. Psalms against them: There is none
rightuous, no not one: there is none that understands: there is none that
seeks after God: they are all gone out of the way: they are all
unprofitable: there is none that does good, no not one. Aspis is a small serpent
and greatly venemouse bredd in Affricke.
Their throat is an open sepulcher: with their tongues they have deceived: the
poysone of Aspis is under their lips: whose mouths are full of curssing and
bitterness: their feet are swift to shed blood: destruction and
wretchedness are in their ways, and the way of peace have they not known:
there is no fear of God before their eyes. Neither can the Jews say, Psalm.
35.
but that all this is spoken of the^. For this is evident and true, what so
ever the law says, it touches most principally them that be under it, and
are subject unto it. But to this end chanced these i^nconueniences amongst
the Jews, that all men's mouths might be stopped, and that it be evidently
known, that every man's salvation depends only upon the grace of God in
Jesus Christ: and that the law of Moses though it be observed and kept, yet
it justifies no man before God. Then one will say unto me: Gala. 3.
what profits the law, if it do not justify: yes verily: for by means of
the law, every man knows his sin. It is a ready way and degree unto
health, Hebr. 7.
for a man to know his disease. Furthermore, as the office of the law was to
declare men's offenses, that before were unknown to them: so does now the
Gospel declare unto man his justification, which was before unknown, or
impertinent to the law. Therefore man's justification comes not of the law,
but of God only. Esaias. 53.
And that not for the circumcisions sake, or Judicial Ceremonies, but by the
only faith in Jesus Christ: by whom the true justification is wrought, not
only to the Jew, to this or that nation: but without partiality, universally
to all men, which believe in him. For, in so much as all men were brought into
sin, and fallen into such kind of iniquity, that they could not be
justified before God: it was necessary, that al men's justification should he
had from God, which is only clear and without all imperfection. Which
justification is not given to man, as a reward for the due keeping of the law
of Moses, or of the law of Nature: but it is freely given of Gods own good
will toward us: Exodus 25.
and not by Moses, but by Jesus Christ, by whose only blood we are redeemed
from the tyranny and tormente of the devil, from sin, and from
troublesomnesse of conscience. The Jews had in times paste their mercy seat,
which was the shadow and figure of Christ to come. But it is now evidently
known, Hebr. 5.
that the true mercy seat and substance it self is come amongst us: through
which, though before we were worthily hated of God for our sins, yet now we
be reconciled again unto him, Our reconciliation unto god the father comes
not by ceremonies by figures or by works of the law, but only by the innocent
blood of christ shed upon the cross.
not by the blood of beasts (as the fashion was among the Jews) but by the
only and most pure innocente blood of the Lamb Jesus Christ, washing away
therewithal the sins of all men: and thereby declares truly unto them
their saving health, preciouse redemption, justification and eternal
salvation: which forgiueth (in such sort) the offenses of the former life,
that in any wise he will not have them fall again into the like sinful and
most damnable state. Neither has he hitherto suffered men to offend, as
though he were ignorant of their offense: or else in knowing their
sinnefulnesse, has at any time allowed the same, but only to this end,
because at his time appointed he shall then manyfestly and truly declare unto
men the virtue of their justification, to the end it should appear, that he
is of him self naturally true and righteous, and the only Author of
righteousness to every such as constantly will believe in the Gospel of our
Lord Jesus Christ. Therefore O thou Jew, where is now thy glory become? Verily
it is taken from thee, seeing that Gods pleasure is to make all nations equal
with thee in the faith of the Gospel. The Gentiles have their health and
salvation given unto them: but by what law I pray you? Is it by the old law
of Moses, which appoynteth unto us Ceremonies? No forsooth, Gala ^.
but by a new law, which requires nothing but faith. For we suppose (as the
truth is) that every man may obtain his justification, although the
prescriptes of the law of Moses be not observed. The Law was only
appropriate unto the Jews, but this benefit comes only from God the
father, in and by Jesus Christ, to all men. And is God the God of the Jews
only? is not he God also as well to the Gentiles as to the Jews? Verily he is
God even unto them both. Wherefore seeing he is God unto all men, it is
expedient that his benefit also be common to all men. He is therefore none
other that justifies the Circumcised (drawyng men from the confidence of the
Law, unto the faith of the Gospel) than he that justifies the uncircumcised,
calling them from the worshipping of Idolles, unto the same true service and
perfect faith in Christ. But here will one of the Jews say unto me: what
say thou Paul? if it be true that thou say, that all things must be
done by faith, then thou make the Law of Moses to be vain and unprofitable
unto the Jews. God forbid that, for we do not only not disalowe nor
despise the law, but we do also confirm and establish the Law: declaring
now that thing truly and justly to be done and fulfilled, which the Law
heretofore has promised to come to pass: showing forth also him, in whom
only the sum of the Law is wholly and altogether comprehended. Neither can
a man say, that to be clean abolyshed and put away, which is rather repaired
and brought into a better state: but it chances in this behalf, as in a Tree
that bears fruit, which when the blossoms thereof do vanishe and fall away,
then (in their stead) does follow the pleasant fruit it self: or as in the
steed of the vanishing shadow, does follow the very perfect and lively body.

The.iiij. Chapter. He declares by the example of Abraham, that faith only
justifies, and not the Law, nor the works thereof.
ANd if there be any amongs the Jews, that so stiffly will hold the ceremonies
of Moses law (which are gross and carnal) and by confidence in them, promise
unto others hope of salvation: to him will I object and lay against, not one of
the least of the Jews, Esaias. 51.
but Abraham him self the author of their circumcision: of whose stock to have
descended they greatly vaunt and boast them selves throughout all Iewry. Which,
although that he be the father of all the Jews (as touching his flesh) yet
notwithstanding the same is father to al men, which do represent him in the
similitude of faith: Gene. 15. Gala. 3. Iaco. 2.
and do declare him in the image of his mind, and not of his body: for
circumcision, which (as I said before) was first given unto Abraham, as an
earnest and a seal, and (as one would say) a privy badge or token of the law
of Moses, by which only badge the Jews were called Jews: yet let us
consider with our selves what this mighty father did obtein: for the
scriptures do greatly praise and commend him, which commendation and praise, if
it came unto him by circumcision, or else by the observance of other things
appointed in Moses law, I can not deny but he has occasion to glory, but ye
glory is not with god, but with men. And why with men? verily because he has
the bodily sign and note, whereby he was only known to be a Jew. And why
not with God? because the praise comes not through the excellency of faith,
Whether they be Jews or Gentiles they be all only the children of Abraham that
have the faith of Abraham.
which is the very only thing that commends all men to the perfect
clerenesse of the face of God. But Abraham (to speak more of him) obtained the
praise of justification with God him self. Therefore it came not to him by the
observation of the law, but only by the true faith, which all the Jews, and
also all Gentiles should diligently search for, as the loving children of
faithful Abraham. And let this which I now say be taken to none effect,
unless the holy Scriptures do truly approve the same. For thus ye shall read
in the Book of Genesis the.xv. Chapter. Abraham believed in God, Gene. 15.
Gala. 3. Iaco. 2.
and his belief was imputed unto him for his justification. God promised him,
that his posterity should be in number equal to the stars of heaven, at
such time as his wife was barren and had no child. Yet for all that he
doubting nothing at all, trusted to the promise of almighty God. Neither
marked he what it was that was promised unto him, but who was the promiser
thereof; and so forthwith he was reputed righteous, not by Circumcision (at
which time he had not received it) but by his only faith, which was not
testified of men, but of God him self, with whom only Abraham wrought this
mystery at that time: and God did impute unto him his justification, when he
had not performed the prescriptes of the law of Moses. Wherefore if Abraham
the holy Patriarche did not obtain his justification by the merit of
Circumcision, but before Circumcision, by the commendation and dignity of
faith: I wonder how it chances that the Jews trust so much in the
Ceremonies of Moses law, unto whom it was given but for a time. Also I
greatly marvel why the Gentiles use so many supersticiouse Ceremonies, seeing
they had no law at all given unto them. And if the Jew receive any reward for
keeping of the law, it seems to be of duty (upon the couenaunts that God
made with them) and not of the savor of him who gives rewards. Again, if
they have any punishment for not keeping of the law, they duly suffer it for
their just deserts. In which things they be likened to a daily workman, which
if he work and make an end of his charge and appointed task, he has his
wages therefore: but if he loyter, and ^^outhfully drive the day away with
idleness, he is then duly punished for it. But the Gentiles, which know not
the Ceremonies of the law, and the Jews that forsake the said Ceremonies,
turning to the faith in Christ, and work not according to the couenaunts of
the law, but ^^^^ly and wholly believe in him, which gives justification of
his own free motion and favor: in all such the faith of Abraham is an
occasion that they be justified. Which proceeds not of the dignity of the
law, but of only faith: to the which no man is enforced or constrained, but
is gently desired and allured thereunto, through the joyful and sweet
promises of God, and the deseruings of his dear son Jesus Christ, to the
end that the said faith should be voluntary, and not servile or bond, by
which we believe in Christ. And that it may come of the grace of God, and not
of any covenant, that we be numbered among the just by him, the kingly
Prophet David (the highest glory among all the Jews after Abraham, in whom
was promised unto us Christ, the only fountain of our justification) makes
much for our part in this point. For he describes unto us in the.xxxij.
Psalm, our justification not to come of the works of the Law (as due unto us)
but only of the goodness of God, as it is declared in the Gospel: Psalm. 32.
Blessed are they (says he) whose offenses be forgiven, and whose sins are
covered. And blessed is that man unto whom the Lord imputes no sin. Here
you perceive that the sins be forgiven, which are done against the law of
Moses. Also you perceive those offenses to be forgiven, that are done against
the law of Nature. And you perceive also, that no kind of sin is imputed
unto him, that has obtained his blessedness by Christ, and that without any
mention making of keeping the law. Therefore the Jews have no good ground to
say that the blessedness described of David, and the praise of justification
that was imputed to Abraham, appertains only to them, and not also unto the
Gentiles: let them answer me, and tell me, whether this blessedness that is
here promised, Gene. 15.
does only appertain to them that be circumcised and keep the custom of the
law, and not also to the uncircumcised, which know not the ceremonies thereof:
I doubt not but they will say, that justification was imputed to Abraham
before circumcision: which considering he was the head and the beginning of all
the Jewish nation, it is necessary that all the (...) be so ordered. For the
children can challenge none other right than their fathers had before. It is
openly known that Abraham was called righteous, but they can not say that it
was for circumcision sake, but only for his faith, without any mention of
circumcision. And al ye Jews do know, that his justification could not come to
him through his circumcision, seeing that at the present time when he was called
righteous, he was neither circumcised nor commanded to be circumcised. And yet
he believed long before, that Christ should be borne of his posterity, by who^
they should al obtain this blessedness, and all nations else: and for this
cause Abraham was pronounced righteous. Then after that he was circumcised, not
to the end it should justify him, but that it should be a certain badge or
note amongst men, Gene. 17.
and not with God: by which all men should be known to be his children and of
his posterity, as well they that were circumcised as not circumcised, so that
they only believed in Jesus Christ. If the circumcised had believed, and had been only called righteous, it might peradventure have been thought, that
salvation perteined only unto the Jews. Abraham was counted righteouse before
the deeds of the law through the only dignity of his faith.
But before Abraham was commanded to be circumcised, he was called righteous
through the dignity of his faith: for which cause ye Gentiles (through their
faith in christ) are become the children of Abraham. Yet notwithstanding it was
necessary for him to be circumcised, not for that it should justify him
(which was already fulfilled) but that it should be a certain figure of the
true circumcision to come: that is, of an innocent and chaste life to be in all
such as should believe in Jesus Christ. Which manner of circumcision is not
wrought with a flint stone, Circumcision what it means.
to cut therewith the privy members, but with the spirit to cut away all ye
vain thoughts of the heart. And further, circumcision was given to Abraham,
that it might be a sure testimony unto him, that the promise of god for his
posterity should not immediately be performed in his son Isaac, but at the
time appointed to be accomplished in the son of God. And after this sort
being the example of faith, Abraham the father of all the faithful.
be is understood the father of al nations, which imitating and following him,
believe in Jesus Christ without al carnal circumcision: and therefore like as
justification was imputed to Abraham without circu^cisio^, As Abraham was
justified without the deeds of the law, so shall al nations that have the
faith of Abraham.
so it shall be imputed to al other nations for their justification ye believe in
christ, as the true begotten children of Abraham. Howbeit, Abraham is the
father of all nations after such a sort, that the Jews be not secluded from
him, so that they glory not in their circumcision, and proudly boast that they
come only of the stock of Abraham, being his kinsmen by lyneall descente: but
rather do express his faith, by which he was pronounced just before
circumcision. How to know the true child of the father from a bastard
Neither is there any stronger argument to prove that a child is no bastard,
than by following the very steps of his fathers virtues. And whereas it is a
custom amongst men, not to take the^ for their children, which do not only not
resemble their complexions and conditions, but also do degenerate from them in
their conversation of life: much rather will God make a difference betwixt his
lawful child, and a bastard. Furthermore Abraham deserved not to be pronounced
righteous by keeping of the law of Moses, which was not at that time
declared: neither by the merit of circumcision, neither yet had he deserved any
such thing of God, that he should promise to him so noble a gift, as was to
be the father of all Nations, and that the Lord of all the world should
descend from him unto his posterity, as by inheritance: but it was only
through the dignity of his faith, by virtue whereof he was called just: Even
so the Jews should suppose, that the goodness and fruit of his promise,
comes not to them for their circumcision, or for the names sake of their law,
but that it comes to the posterity in such sort, as it began first in the
head. Gala. 3.
For if all which be borne under the Law of Moses, should have the promise
of god pertain only unto the^ as their inheritance, then it should seem that
the promise of God were vain and of none effect. Forasmuchas it is evidently
known, that the benefit of God comes to no man for the laws sake: yea, so
far the law is from justification, and the giving of this so high a
benefyte, that it rather threateneth us with the ire and indignation of god:
whereas contrariwise faith makes the ungodly righteous. Neither can there be
any inheritance of peace and rest for the children to have, The law what it
works.
where as nothing else is ministered but sin and indignation. And if you
demand of me how it chances, that the law rather ministers ire than
righteousness, I will declare thus unto you: you can make no man gyltie of any
crime, unless in laying the law against him you open his fault unto him: the
knowledge of which fault the law ministers and declares. Also the law of
Moses prescribes many things, of circumcision, of the Saboth days, of the
feast of the new Moon, of the difference of meats, of mortuaries, of the
strangled, of blood, of washing: all which be of that condition, that though
they be observed, yet they do not make a man righteouse, but he that
transgresses them is gyltie and subject to punishment by means of the law.
But the law of Moses, seeing it charge no body but only the Jews: and
again, seeing the inheritance of all nations is given of God unto Abraham to
be their father, it is impossible that the promise of God should appertain
unto all Nations, through the benefit of the Law, which is only given to the
Nation of the Jews. It concludes therefore, that the inheritance comes by
faith, that our justification may be seen to proceed of the only grace and
favor of God, and not of any covenant or observation of the law. And thus it
is known how the goodness of Gods promise descends to Abraham's posterity.
And I do not mean all them only to be of Abraham's posterity, which be
either of his kindred, or else joined with him in the law: but much rather all
such as expresses Abraham's faith. For it is much more expedient, that the
alliance and similitude of faith should be of more efficacy, by which he
deserves to receive the promise of God, than the alliance and conjunction of
the law, which engenders offenses, and makes men gyltie of them. Therefore the
Jews are deceived to boast so much of Abraham, The Jews deceived.
as of their only and proper father, seeing he is the father of al such
Nations, and of all men (of what country so ever they be) that believe in our
Lord Jesus Christ: Esaias. 51.
which thing appears by God him self in the.xvij. Chapter of Genesis, when
God changed Abraham's name, and said: Gene. 17.
I have appointed thee to be the father of many nations: surely, it must needs
be true that God him salfe says. But how (I pray you) shall he be the father
of many nations, if he only belong unto the Jews? wherefore, Luc. 13.^^. John.
2. Gala. 17. Gene. 17.
as the Lord is universal to all men that believe in him: so he will, that
Abraham, which is a figure of God, and as Isaac is also of Christ, should be
the universal father of all men, that do represent him in the affinity of his
faith. The acceptable faith of Abraham and the sure trust in him of the
promise of God.
And Abraham could not be deceived of his belief, which trusted to the
promise of him, that did not only give fertility to the barraine, but also
life to the dead. Which, being commanded to kill his only sweet and dear
son Isaac, in whom was all his joy and comfort, did without any tarying or
once questioning at all, believe the words of the promiser, and knew that he
could revive him again, and make them that be not, to be again at his will
and pleasure. The Jews do glory in them selves, and account them selves
worthy men, and abhor the Gentiles as nothing worth at all: but yet the
goodness of God stands in better stead to the Gentiles, than Abraham's
kindred does to the Jews. Truly, the faith of Abraham was notable, and
therefore God favored him, which doubted not in him, neither mistrusted his
truth, in such things as (by nature) were to be dispaired of a in which, be
did not only declare the surety and constancy of the promiser, but also his
mightiness and omnipotency. Neither did he mistrust, though he him self was
past the strength and power to beget a child, and his wife also barraine, to
be (for all that) the father of many nations? and to be the aucthor and beginner
of so great a multitude of people, as God showed him the same time, stars in
the firmament. For God brought him into the field, and let him see an
innumerable multitude of stars round about the whole world, and said: Gene.
15.
As it is impossible for thee to number those stars that thou see: so it
shall be impossible for thee to number them that shall come of thy seed. Which
thing, though it seemed not of reason to be true (partly for the debilitie of
his body being an hundredth years of age: and partly for that his wife was very
old, and past the bearing of children:) yet all this notwithstanding; he asked
no question, how, or what way it might come to pass, but constantly believed
the truth of God. Abraham as strong in faith as weak in body.
And thus Abraham mistrusted nothing, neither was doutfull in any thing, but
with all his heart believed the promise of God, and was made as strong in his
faith, as he was weak in his body: which though he dispaired in his own
virtue and strength: yet he took most sure hold through hope in the only
virtue of the promiser. And thus usurping nothing in this point to his own
renoume, he referred all to the glory and laud of God: whom he testified by
this his great faith, to be both true (which will deceive no man: Psalm. 114.
) and also almighty, which can perform what so ever he promises, though it
passes never so much the strength of men. With this sort of Sacrifice, is God
pleased, which stands in need of no man's help, neither of his cunning or
handie wor^e. And for this cause the scriptures says, that Abraham was
imputed rightuous. Roman. 15.
Yet this thing was not written only for Abraham's sake, that his faith was
imputed unto him for his justification: neither does scripture affirm, that it
was done only for Abraham's praise and commendation: but that it might be an
example unto us that be Abraham's nephews, to do and have the like: and that it
might be known to all men, that like as Abraham obtained to be called of God
rightuous, without the help of the law: so should we also obtain of God to
be called rightuous for our only faith, with out keeping of the law. We see
here that Abraham was called rightuous, only because he believed God.
Wherefore, we see none other way to come to justification and to be saved, 1.
Tim. 1. Gala. 1.
but to believe in the same God: through which, what so ever he promised unto
Abraham in his posterity he has performed it unto us, Christ only is to be
thanked for our justification, and not the law of Moses.
in Jesus Christ our Lord, whom he restored again from death to life: declaring
thereby, that Abraham did not believe amiss, which trusted that he could give
life to the dead, and to make the things that were not, for to be. We ought
not therefore to give our thanks unto the law of Moses for our justification,
but wholely and altogether to Christ: which ^^^ly yielded himself to death to
put away our sins without our deserts: and the same rose again from death,
to the end we should abstain from deadly things, and never after commyt such
enormities and sins as Christ dyed for. I say therefore, that Christ died to
kill our sins in us: and the same rose again from death, that we by means of
him (being made dead to our sins) should also rise again with him unto
newness of life, and to live according to righteousness; which, by the
benefit of his death, we have most amply received.

The fifth Chapter. The power of faith, hope, and love, and how death reigned
from Adam unto Christ: by whom only we have forgeeuenesse of our sins.
THerefore, Esaias. 26.
we be made rightuous from our sins, not by the law of Moses (which
augmenteth rather our offenses:) neither by the merit of our good works: but
even as Abraham was: so be we also reconciled unto God, John. 6.
through the only dignity of our faith. Unto whom also Abraham was counted
righteous for his faith, and that not by the law of Moses; but by the only
son of God, our Lord Jesus Christ: which washing away our sins in his
blood, and by his death reconciling us again unto God (which before was
offended with our sins) opened unto us the way: whereby, we (through our
faith without the help of our Circumcision) might be drought into the gra^e of
the Gospel: In which Gospel, Hebr. 3.
all that be the children of God, stand steadfastly in faith. Neither stand
they all only with light and mercy hearts, but also rejoice and glory, as well
for that they be atone with God, as also to have sure hope showed unto them, yt
for ye continuance of their faith, they shall once come to the eternal glory of
God. And as we envy not ye Jews, though they glory in their circumcision: so
it repe^teth us not of our faith, which brings to us so great fruit: neither
yet ^^e we for think our rejoicing: by hope whereof, we be most happily
comforted and set at a sure stay. The which though it do not yet appear, but
most suffer many things before we come unto it: A man may not think that the
troubles which we here suffer will bring us to salvation or else be helpers
thereunto, for the thing belongs only unto Christ's death. But they secretly
witness unto every man that he which suffers any such troubles for Christ's
sake and the truth of the Gospel is one of the beloved children of God which
says he chastises every child that he receives, and even for the same
cause, suffering our troubles patiently here in this world the same ministers
unto us, a certain inward taste of our acceptatio^ to God and further to declare
unto us all, as it were the way to come unto the following of the Gospel.
yet we account our afflictions and troubles of great glory and praise, which
we suffer in the mean time, and shall open the way for us into immortality:
for we have received this example and mighty doctrine of Christ himself:
that in suffering afflictions, patiente is made strong: and by patience we are
rendered unto God, and proved daily amongst men. Again, the more that we be
proved by perplexities and troubles: so much the more strong is our hope of
reward. Neither shall we doubt or fear that our hope will deceive us and
forsake us: or be once ashamed that we have believed: in as much as we have a
sure earnest or gage, that it is his wonderful love toward us: which is not
showed only without forth: but also most abundantly it is imprinted in our
hearts, which also works our love toward him. It God had not wonderfully
loved us, his only dear son should not have been suffered to descend into
this miserable world, and to receive mortal flesh upon him, and therein to
suffer death, yea, the most cruel and shameful death for us: which were
abandoned and given over, to all filthy and dissolute living. This
notwithstanding, he loved us in such manner, that he willingly and freely
suffered such cruelty for us. Amongst men, one man cannot be found so
friendly, yt will suffer death for his fellow. And though peradventure there be
some men that will die for some of their special friends, which have deserved
it by benefits or giving of gifts: yet the friendship and love of God,
exceeds all kind of love, which delivered his only dear Son, (...) be
most ^^e (...) tormented and cruelly wounded to the death; for most accursed
and wretched sinners: which benefit and love, seeing he has showed to the
very wicked and most graceless offenders: how much more wi^^ he show it to
the penitent hearted, and his dear lovers? Christ died for us for a while, and
^^ase again from death to live for evermore. By whose only puissant and
triumphant death, seeing we be now reconciled unto God, which before was
grievously offended with us, to the end we should afterward have him
beneuolent and merciful: then much rather shall his life perform this:
foreseeing that we fall not again into our old filthy iniquities. His death
took away our offenses, and his life shall guide our innocence. His death
bought us from the bondage of the devil, and his life shall maintain the
lovely freedom of his father toward us. These be such evident tokens of
Gods almighty love toward us, that we may not only us sure, with firm hope
and confidence, that we be safe from his ire to come: but also they lively
encourage us to rejoice in the same: not vaunting or extolling our good
works, but wholly giving thanks to God, to whose only goodness, we may ever
refer all our perfect felicity which he has prepared for us, not by the
law, nor by Circumcision or other Ceremonies, but only by his son Jesus
Christ. And it was most secretly provided by the high Council of God, that
the way to restore us again to health, should agree in fashion, unto the way
that brought us to destruction. Gene. ^.
For like as by one (the first Adam which gave the first onset to the
tra^sgressing of Gods law) sin came into the world, and death also by the
means of sin, which death is the end and reward of sin, and the
forcible venom and poison of the soul: also, as it chanced that sin began
at the head of ma^kinde, through whom it also came unto all his posterity:
Even so, by Christ the second Adam (in whom we be newborn by faith)
innocence was brought amongste us, and life followed innocence. And so this
felicity which proceeds of the new beginner of mankind, is derived unto
all men, which by faith appertain unto Christ, and lead an innocent and
clean life. Further, after that sin was brought into this world, and
invaded all men, it would not be put away, neither by the law of Moses, nor
yet by the law of nature, but only the law testified, that they which
offended, did only deserve punishment. How beit, the Gentiles had no
punishment appointed unto them for their offenses: but (...) infantes, which by
season of their tender youth, have not the use of the law of nature, neither
yet can rightly discern the good from the bad, are not (amongste men) coumpted
sinners, as men are sinful, neither so corrected for their offenses: even so it
chanced unto the Gentiles, which did sin contrary to the law of Moses,
having no knowledge thereof. Yet sin was not absent from the Gentile, before
that the law was given, as does witness against him the law of nature. But
they did favor and pardon them selves in their sins, and still offended God
(as though they had been privileged persons) because they had not amongst the^
the law of Moses. Therefore; at ye tune he was not come, yt should take away the
sins of the world, and put away the tirannie of death and sin, which
through Adam entered into the world, and reigned amongst men unpunished: as in
Adam, which brake the commandment of God. Notwithstanding the same did long
before prefigure the coming of Christ, which should be after him. Not that Adam
was like in all things unto Christ: but that in some special things, he
represented ye image of him. And in this point was Adam like unto Christ,
because that both of them were ye first beginners of the generations. But Adam
of the earthie generation, and Christ of the heavenly. Furthermore, because
that from either of them (as from a beginning) came certain proceedings unto
all men: But from the earthie Adam, came the original and beginning of
unrighteousness and death: And from Christ the heavenly Adam, came the
beginning of innocence and everlasting life. Which both, though in some part
they be like: John. 4.
yet in equality they very much differ. For as in this special point, to
save, is a thing of more might and puissance, than to kill: so is Christ much
more mighty, which saves, than Adam that kills. And the obedience of Christ
was of greater efficacy, with god his heavenly father (to bring unto men their
life) than was the tra^sgression of Adam, to bring unto them their death.
Wherefore the goodness of Christ, does much exceed the offense of Adam, least
a man should fall into despair of his health, when he remembers the sin of
his first father. For if it be reason, that the sin of our first father
Adam, John. 1.
should condemn such an infinite number of men: by greater reason, the
benefit of Christ should restore them unto life again, whom God has
appointed the author of our innocence: and has granted unto him, that his
death, should not only take away the spot and tirannie of our sin and
death: but has given to the hands of the same, to dispose unto all men the
power of righteousness, in stead of their sins: and the heavenly kingdom,
for the tirannie of their death. Therefore, as the fall of Adam, was no great
hurt to the faithful: so the goodness of our Lord Christ, makes us at one
with his heavenly and merciful father. Also, as Adam through his offense, was
the occasion, that all his posterity do stand, as in the state of damnation:
so the mighty benefit of Jesus Christ toward us, has put away all our
offenses: In witness whereof, he has sealed it with his most precious body
upon the cross, as ^ most ^u^e testimony of the same. But to come again
unto that, whereof we have spoken before: If it were so provided of God from the
beginning, What commodity we do receive by the law.
to take away from man his sin, and to restore again unto him his life after
this sort: what did it then prevail to make a law, which did profit nothing
at all to salvation? yes verily, the law did profit much, that by the
knowledge thereof, the benefit of Christ, might the more clearly and
evidently appear unto us. For the more that our sins menaced and cruelly
threatened us: so much the more manifest was the benefit of Christ which
always cheareth us, land delivers us from sin. The law plainly laid open
unto all men, the death of sin: Galat. 5.
which though some went about with striving to overcome it: yet, the tirannie
thereof was so sharp, so stout and valiant, that it was impossible to be
vanquished But the goodness of Christ was much ^^nightie than it, and put all
t^ra^^^e of death to slight, from al such, as would believe only in him. This
pro^^t therefore we g^^ by the law; that we perceive truly thereby, the
magnitude and greatness of Christ's benefit toward all men: Gene. 17.
by which it comes to pass, that like as the devil (through ye tirannie of
sin) brought death unto all meniso the goodness of almighty God gives life
unto all men, through his own dea^e son Jesus in which our only lord and
Prince I rejoice, being now made free from the bondage of death: under which
not long heretofore, I have most woefully lived.

The sixth Chapter. For so much as we be delivered thorovve Christ from
sin, we must fashion our selves to live as the servants of God: and not
after our own lusts. The unlike revvard of righteousness and sin.
AND whereas I have said before, that sin by the law was manifest, and made
much more abundant, and did greatly profit, to the end that the goodness
and mercy of God, should be more evident unto us: yet let as man hereby take
occasion to continue in his sin, and say in this manner within him self:
Seeing that sin sets forth the goodness of God toward men, it shall be
expedient always to sin: to the end the goodness of God may be always the
more evident and known. But God defend from the hearts of Christen men, all
such wicked thoughts. For I do here mean the sins of the old and former
life, which God (by his mercy) turned unto our profit and commodity. And
God forbid also, that after we be once made free from sin, and converted into
the state of innocence, we should forsake our deliverer from thence, and fall
headlong again into our old noisome trade. Death and life be so far at
odds, that they can never agree the one with the other. Wherefore, as soon as we
begin to live unto Christ, we be then dead to sin and to the Devil. But if
we live to sin and to the Devil, ^e are damnablie dead, even in that we
live. And in living to Christ, we always live, and are dead to sin: which he
only put away, Gala. 3. Collos 2. 1. Pet 5.
through his most precious and bitter death. And in receiving the baptism of
Christ, we exercise the same mystery continually amongste us. For when we be
Baptized in the name of Christ, we do ^is with him to our old sins, which
by virtue of his Passion were put away. And we do not only die with him,
but also be buried with him, and that through the same Baptism. That like as
he which never lived to sin, yet dyed for our offenses, and was restored
again to everlasting life (not by the strength of any man, but by the power of
God his almighty father: Ephe. 4. Collos. 2. 1. Pet 3.
) even so we being stirred up by him from the death of sin and filth of our
old offenses, do now live a new life in pietic and godliness, daily
profiting and increasing therein: not through our own power, but through the
everlasting power of the mighty spirit of God. For seeing by Baptism we be
grafted into the body of Christ, and the manner transfourmed in him, whatsoever
we see done in him which is our head: the same by all congruitie we ought to
express, and to avoid in us all things to the contrary, which are before him
his sanctified members. He rose from death to life, he ascended into heaven,
and sits on the right hand of his almighty father. All these are done and
fulfilled in Christ. 1. Pet. 4. 2 Timo. 2.
Wherefore we must also endeuer our selves to accomplish the same. Then being
dead to our old sins through Baptism, if we represente thereby the death
of Christ: it shall be necessary, Revels. 6.
that in avoiding all kind of sin and filthy living, and continually
exercising our selves in godly operations, A man must imagine to be in him
self, two sorts of men, the one old and earthy, the other new and heavenly.

Our old man must be slain and crucified with christ according to the
mystery of holy baptism.


to pretend also his resurrection. Howbeit we shall represente Christ's death
in such manner (not that we should destroy our bodies and dye in deed) but in
that we shall so much quake and shrink at our sins and filthy life, that
we may be thought to dye to them. Inasmuche therefore as all men have in them
(as it were) a double original and beginning of them selves, as is declared
before, we must also imagine to be in us, as it were, two men, the one of them
to be old and gross, and to bear the similitude of Adam: and the other to be
new and amiable, and desirous always of heavenly things, representing Christ.
Our old man therefore, by the mystery of baptism, must be slain and
crucified with Christ upon the cross: with which also must be exiled and
utterly banished all concupiscence and worldly delectation, which is the very
body of sin: and it dies truly in all men, when they have their sensual
lusts in detestation, and obey no longer unto them. Who soever then dies with
Christ in this manner, is grafted into the number of the righteous, and cease
any more to be thrall and subject to sin: from the tyranny whereof he is
delivered by Christ's passion. The true trust of the mortified christian.
Being therefore dead in Christ to our old sins by baptism, we trust by his
only benefit and deseruings (leading a Christian life) to reign also with
him alive. And so we ought to lead our lives, that we do not fall again into
our old iniquities: but always to have before our eyes the virtue of Christ's
death, The example of Christ.
which he suffered for the sins of the world, giving us example to follow,
and to dye daily unto the same. For Christ did not so rise again from death to
life, that he would afterward give any place to death or corruption: but he
rose to be immortal, and never to give place again to corruption. Therefore
all men must think, that by the mystery of baptism, they be once dead to
their sins, and from thencefoorth to be made new creatures, and (to be truly
said) revived again unto an immortal life, What it is to live unto God.
leading it in all innocence and godly conversation. For he lives to God,
that lives to godliness, to righteousness, and to all other virtues. And
inasmuche as we be incorporate into the body of Jesus Christ, and made one with
him. It is therefore most convenient, that we do confourme our selves to him in
all godly exercise. Which we shall easily bring to pass, if we shall not
consent to our old loathsome impurities, wherewith the devil (by watchful
opportunity) laboreth and searches to defile us. John. 8.2. Pet. 2.
Neither shall we suffer our members, beyn^ once consecrate into the body of
Christ, serve the devil any more: whose hellie stoutness, and haught
arrogancy, Christ our head has spurned under his feet for our sakes. But
such we must exhibit our selves before his heavenly presence, that it may
appear unto him throughout our whole life and conversation, that we with him
have clearly relinquished and forsaken all the deserts of death, and to be
transposed (as new men) into new kind of living. All which, we may easily
attain and compass, if we gladly intend to direct our members, and the
thoughts of our hearts, not to vice to serve the devil, but to righteousness
to serve the immortal God. And we must think it our bounden duty, and a
case of straight charge, The due consideration of a godly christian.
wholly and altogether without exception to serve God: inasmuche as we have
bound our selves so to do, by our promise made unto him at our first entering
to him by baptism. Neither shall we fear the mighty temptation of sin,
that it shall bring us again into the bondage of the devil (which at this
time are not bound to the law, that always did cast sin in our teeth,
rather than qualify his rage against us,) but all we be now under the grace
of God: which, as it was able to deliver us from the burden of sin: The power
of gods grace under which only all godly christians are stayed.
even so it can defend us from the falling into it again. How be it I would
not so be taken here, because I say: we be not bound to the Law, that
therefore we may freely sin without offense: or because the grace of God
has pardoned our old enormities, that therefore it gives us license to sin
again unpunished: no verily, but we ought much rather to flee from vice and
sin at this time, because we be not driven to do it by force of the Law,
but only by the deseruings, most vehemente love, and gentle prouocations of
GOD toward us in his Son. The manner and fashion of our service is changed,
The law forsaken and why.
but not utterly abolyshed and put away. We have so forsaken the service of
the law, that we do serve christ and his gospel: whom if we do serve, we serve
not in bondage, but reign in his most glorious liberty and freedom. Both
Christ and the law together cannot be served.
Wherefore it is partly in our arbitremente to serve which we lust, but both
of them we can not serve. Neither the law, nor yet the Gospel will enforce us
to yield our service unto the^: but if we promise our service either to the one
or to the other, we ought of al co^gruitie to obey the same, with who^ we
covenant our service. Wherefore he that couenaunteth with sin to serve it, The
fruit of our obedience what comes thereof
must receive the reward of sin which is death. Contrariwise, he that serves
Christ, must obey him, and shall receive the reward of life and salvation. For
the fruit of our obedience purchases nothing to the augmentation of Chrysts
advantage: but it redoundeth unto our own proper acceptance in him. And in
this point I gratify you, and thank Christ for you: which although heretofore
you have led a most miserable life, in serving dead Idolles, and in filthy
concupiscence: yet now being set at liberty from them, ye wholly yield your
selves constante to the faith of the Gospel, willing to live hereafter, not as
constrained by the commandment of the Law, but according to the heavenly
freedom, and the new doctrine of the Gospel of Christ. Into the which you be
insinuate and engraffed after such a sort, as though ye were wholly
transformed and changed into an other nature, redeemed from the prison of
sin, to the end you should obey unto righteousness, Of sin and
innocence.
and do the prescriptes thereof. And surely it is not an impossibility, or
else a thing hard for you to obey unto virtue. And as the nature of sin does
greatly differ from the nature of innocence: even so the rewards also of them
both be much unlike. By means whereof, waying the thing as it is, we have much
more occasion to serve God than the devil. Yet whosoever obeys unto vice,
serves the devil: but he that serves God obeys unto innocence. Howbeit I
think it best to temper my communication in this case, according to the
infirmity and weakness of some of you: in whom the spirit of God is not yet
perfectly settled. But this thing I earnestly require of you all, that
righteousness may have (at the least wise) as good entertaynement among you,
as sin. And whereas before you have exhibited your members to serve unto vice
and filthynesse (continually falling from one vice unto another, to your own
confusions) even so it is now required, that you exhibit your members unto
righteousness and for your profits, and to ascend from one virtue to
another, unto your most worthy and high commendation. The great shame of a
christian what it is.
Surely it shall be a great shame for you, if christ have not as great room and
place in you now at this time, as had the devil in times paste: or else that
you do not as well obey unto righteousness, as you have heretofore done unto
sin. And to say, as the matter partly occasioneth, ye may peradventure have
somewhat to lay for your excuse, for that in times past, being then but
Paynims, ye did obey unto sin, and thought your selves not subject to this
new righteousness of the Gospel to obey unto it, inasmuche as ye knew not
the Law. But now ye have no manner of thing to lay for your defense. Therefore,
if that the nature of virtue shall not be sufficient of it self to move you to
this obedience: yet at the least wise ye should reuolue with your selves the
great diversity of the reward for the services: both the which ye have
already sufficiently put in practice. Call to remembrance (I pray you) what
reward ye received at such time as ye became bound to serve unto the filthe
of sin and vnclenlynesse. Verily your vices which ye then exercised, brought
you unto such abomination and beastly filthynesse, that after the putting
away thereof, ye worthily became ashamed, and lothesome unto your own selves.
And not this only chanced unto you through the working of vice and
wickedness: Gene. 2. Roma. 5.
but also the devil was always ready at hand with death, to pay it unto you
for your reward, which he duly ought unto you, for your service done unto
him. Wherefore, considering the life that ye led before, was not rightly to
be called life, but rather very death it self: ye have now great occasion to
say, that the exchange of your service is worthy all acceptance: by which
being made free from the power of sin, ye are become servant of Jesus
Christ. I do not doubt, but ye well perceive the diversity of these two
masters: the wages and rewards of whom also, if ye well consider with your
selves, I fear not but ye will confess, that of very wretched sinners, ye are
become and made the pure and clean servant of the almighty God. All which,
after you have finished the few years of your service, ye shall receive at the
hands of your master, immortality, for your salarie and wages. Two masters.
The rewards of them bo^^.
I would wish therefore, ye should compare together the two masters, the one
with the other, God and the devil: godliness and filthynesse: and life
everlasting, to the eternal death of hell: and ye shall evidently discern the
profit and fruit that proceeds from them all. For as I said before, the
reward of sin is death (which the devil pays for all such service as is
done in fylthinesse and sin:) so contrariwise, he that serves God, has
paid unto him everlasting life: not as due unto him for his service, but it
proceeds only unto him from the special mercy and goodness of God, and
that not by Moses, but through Jesus Christ our Lord: unto whom God the
father would we should render our thanks for all such graces, blessings, and
benefits, as we receive of him, and not unto the Law or Circumcision: that
is, not through keeping of the Law, or through the dignity of our works.

The.vij. Chapter. Christ has delivered us from the Law and death. Paul
shows what the flesh and outward man is, and calls it the law of the
members.
Because Christ has not only redeemed us from the tyranny of sin, but also
from the bondage of the law: and that, not the Gentiles only (which were not
obediente to the Law) but also the Jews them selves, that were all under the
prescriptes and appoyntments thereof: unto whom, even now at this present do I
speak. For all you know well enough, who soever he be that is bound under a
Law (as you were not long since under the Law of Moses) that so long time
ye were bound to serve and keep it, until it be fully expired and lose the
strength thereof: the which, after it be once abrogate and dissolved, they be
set at liberty, and become free from the further observing of it. For as the
manner of the Law is, betwixt the married wife and her husband: even such
also it is touching the Law of Moses. For the married woman is no longer
bound unto the commandment of her husband, 2. Corin. 7.
but so long as he lives with her: which when he is dead, she is set
free, and at liberty from him, and is then made her own woman, to do what
she lysteth. But the same woman, if she would disorderly seek her freedom
from him, Math. 5.
and become wife to an other man, during the life of her first husband, she
ought to be taken for an harlotte, and a committer of adultery in her dooyng.
Notwithstanding, if she continue just to him, through all his life time, and
willingly bear her self in subjection until he dye from her, then she may
well marry with an other man. You must know, that the state of marriage is not
like to the state of Inheritance, which descends from one to another of the
same line and kindred. Neither is it like the case of a bondeman, which when
his master dies, does not then change his state and condition, but only his
master. But the state of marriage alters as soon as the husband dies. Even
so it fares with the Law of Moses, which was given to the Jews for a while,
and did with her Rites and Ceremonies prefigure Christ to come, and to that
only respect. But when the true light of Christ's presence was come, then all
the shadows and ceremonies ceased, and stood no longer in effect. For in
steed of the shadow, we then received the body it self. This is then to be
considered, in as much as the Law of Moses was mortal, as is the husband to
the wife: it can be no wonder to the true christian man, to hear that it is
dead: which so long as it was alive had full strength and power over them, that
were in subjection to it. How be it at this time (you Jews) you have no matter
to do with the Law, in as much as it is now dead to you, By the coming of
christ the law touching the ceremonies thereof was of no effect.
or (at the least wise) you dead to it, though it were still alive. For after
that Christ (which is the only truth) came amongst us, all the Law of
Moses was abrogate, frustrate, and of none effect, as touching the Letter and
Ceremonies thereof. Considering therefore, you be all now incorporate into the
body of Christ, and married unto him, as a wife unto her husband, being set at
liberty from her old husband, by the death of the law: and further, The
duty of the Church toward Christ.
seeing your husband now at these days is living and immortal, because he
dyed for your sakes, and rose again from death to life, and so evermore
afterward to continue alive: it shall be now your part to compose and
confourme your selves a loving and a continual wife, to such an immortal
husband, and never afterward to cast any one title or jot of your love, to
the remembrance of your old good man: for so doing it can not be chosen, but
offense must be committed, to the great sorrow and grefe of this your so loving
Espouse. But always have in your minds, that like as heretofore you showed
your selves seruiseable unto your first husband, and to accomplish with good
will al his commandments: even so now you ought to enforce your selves to
yield such obedience and service at this time, that it may be acceptable to
God your father, and pleasant to Christ, What the discommodity is to be in
bondage to the law.
your most dear and sweet spouse. For so long as we were under the law (as
under our husband) it had government over us: which by reason of the many
requests that it made, (ever charging us with disobedience and lack of good
service) was an occasion that we found our selves always distressed, always
in displeasure against him, and never to satisfy and fulfill his
commandment: by occasion whereof, our service was ever imperfect, grievous,
and subject to correction and punishment. Therefore now at this time being set
at liberty from his jurisdiction: under which because we lived always in
sin and displeasure, we did not live, but were rather all dead under the
same, until our time appointed: it shall therefore now well become us, to be
no longer obedient to our old husband, which was carnal and mortal: but
wholly unto our new spouse, which is heavenly and spiritual. And from
henceforth to yield our service, not to the law, in the letter and
ceremonies, but unto Jesus Christ in the spirit of God: which spirit we have
received from the hand of our spouse for a wedding ring: to put us alwais in
remembrance, of our hearty duty and good will toward him. But I stand in dout,
least some man here will obiecte against me and say: Seeing then, that in
serving the law, we were ever found in sin of the same, and also subject
to death, it shall seem to conclude, that the law was sin, and brought us
to death: for as it is the property of righteousness to bring men to life:
even so is it the property of sin to bring men to death. Wherefore,
considering the law brought us to death, it may be called sin, or (at the
least wise) joined patente to sin. But God forbid that any man should think
so: for verily, the law is not the author of sin, The law is not sinful
but it is the heraulde and messenger of him.
but the Herald and messenger of sin: which was unknown to us, before the
law was proclaimed: at which time, every man following his own sensuality and
lust, thought that he might lawfully do, what so ever his heart corruptly
desired: and thought it also lawful to desire that, which seemed pleasant in
his own conceit. For which cause, pardoning and flatering my self in this
behalf, I thought it none offense at all, to covet that, which did belong to
another man: Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 5.
if the law had not said unto me: Thou shall not lust. And no man can deny
but that the law was declared, for the coercion and restraint of sin, though
the thing it self happened all contrary unto us, through our own vice and
imperfection. For, at what time the law did open unto us our sins, The law
opens sin but it geeueth no power to resist sin.
and gave us not thereto might and strength to resist them: it came to pass
that our lust to sin, was made the more quick and ready to it: because the
nature of man is such, that it most lusts after that thing, which is most
forbidden it. How be it, before the knowledge of the law came many of our
sins we knew not: and some of them we knew after such a sort, that we
persuaded our selves, they were not forbidden us. Through which reason, all we
had the less regard to consider what was lust to sin: in as much, as all
we by nature, set small store by such things, as we think we may have at our
will and commandment. Wherefore, after the law had once set forth the
multitude of sins to our faces, and did forbid them to us: then we were the
more greedy, to spot and defile our selves with the committing of them. By
which occasion, sin took to himself strength and encoragement in us: which
before the coming of the law, lay and slept, and was as dead. At which time,
I my self, when I knew not the law, I led my life like an outlawe: Through
the law sin and the true record of conscience, man feels in him self no
life but death.
and thought within my self, that I might sin, without the committing of
any offense to God. But when I perceived the law, that did forbid me to sin:
the^ my sin began to wax stout and to abou^d in me, and to take the bridle
in his teethe. Which, faring thus foul with me, whereas before I thought I
lived, I became in mine own conscience stark dead: because (by the law) I
perceived my deadly wound, and yet could not abstain from sinning. Whereby it
came to pass, that the thing which was provided me of God for my health, was
made to me an occasion of my death. Which thing, was not through any injury of
the law, but it was only through mine own vice, weakness and imperfection.
For having in me a certain promptness and readiness to sin, and my lust
also taking some occasion by the law it self, because (as I said before) men
do most commonly lust after that which is forbidden them, I was then even full
of all greediness to sin. And thus the devil using that wickedly, which of
it self was good, enticed me unto sin, by occasion of the law: and by
occasion of sin, unto death: to the end I should acknowledge my self guilty
thereof, and to be thrall unto him for the same. Therefore thus you see then,
that there is no cause why any man should contemn or deprave the law: which
as it was given of God, who is always perfectely good of him self: so it
proponed and set forth unto al men, good and wholesome ensignements. Esaias. 48.
1. Tim. 2.
For it cannot be chosen, but that the thing must needs be good and godly,
that hates and forbids sin and naughtiness. And here another will say
unto me: then, seeing the law which is good, brings with him that which is
also good, why then should I say that it brought death unto men, which is very
naught, and has alwais his beginning of sin and wretchedness? Certesse a
man might safely say thus unto me. If in case the law should engender sin,
but the truth is not so: for the law truly is not the author of death, but the
cause of our death is sin, which is in us: who of it self is so wicked, that
it turns that thing which is very good, into naught and destruction. Yet
notwithstanding, that thing which is good and pure of his own nature, opens
unto us how filthy and unseemly a thing it is, which is naught and vicious:
for that verily the law wrought, and declared unto us the abomination of our
sins, and was not the author and cause of them: for all men know that the
law is spiritual, and always stirs men to honest things and spiritual
actions: the which, because the law does not bring to effect that, which so
much it desires to do: surely, to speak of my self, I am in the fault thereof,
and not the law. For in as much, as I am carnal and prone to sin, and by
occasion of the long continuance in it, Esaias. 5 21.
am made as bond thereunto, as a bond man unto his master: and am so blind and
drouned in vice and filthiness, that I cannot tell what I ought to do: for I
do not that thing, which knowledge and reason declares unto me to be honest
(though I my self do covet the same:) but I rather commit that thing, which is
unreasonable and dishonest: the which though I hate and detest it: yet I do
commit the same, The power of sin in our earthly bodies.
because the vice and power of concupiscence that is in me, violently
compels and draws me thereunto: by which reason, the offenders them selves,
will in no case that any fault should be imputed unto the law, but to our own
fragilitie, weakness and great imperfection. For in as much, as we in our
weakness, being so compelled to do that thing (through concupiscence) which
knowledge and reason detesteth, escheweth and damneth. I do therefore consent to
the law, that it is holy and good, because it does of it self forbid the same
thing, which the inward and spiritual part of my body grudgeth at, disaloweth
and utterly da^neth. Wherefore, the law which so straightly forbids all things
that be evil, must needs be counted holy, precious and good. Which,
although I commit such evil, in obeying the motions of my frail and
corrupted flesh,) the outward part and most gross substance of man,) yet I
well perceive them to be wicked and abominable, and that also in mine inward
man, I hate and abhor them. Here will one then say unto me: why do thou
not then obey to thy spirit and inward man, which so consents to the law that
is good, and also stirs thee to honesty and godly operations. I answer:
For this same cause, we must imagine to be in each one of us two men: Two men
are possessed of every man, and how they are called according to the scripture.
the one of them gross and carnal, and the other more pure and of less
corruption. The first may be called the outward man, and the second, the
inward man. The first is procliue and ready to sin: the second, having in
him, as it were certain seeds of honesty, is more appliant to embrace virtue:
And according to his possibility and power, he gladly shunneth and strives
against all corrupted motions and the filthy desires of sin. How be it,
that part of us is most properly called the man, which of it self is most
pure and clean, and best inclined. Therefore, as often as mine inward man
consenting to the goodness of the law, is stirred, and so consents to
honesty, and yet does the contrary: it seems then, that it is not I that
does it: For what is he, which does the thing that he hates, and wants will
to do it? But here is adjoined to mine outward man, a certain promptness
and readiness to sin: by means whereof, it chances often, that when I
desire to do the thing which is honest and good, I am constrained to do that,
which is hurtful and naught. In which gross part of me, Gene. 6.
I confess to be no goodness at al. For although I desire to do that thing,
which (according to reason and knowledge) is honest: yet I find in me no power
or strength to work that, which I most gladly esteem and commend. But, in as
much as this corrupted and carnal concupiscence, is in me of much more strength
and force, to drive me to offend, than is reason, which calls me to the
estimation of virtue: I am forcibly drawn from the good use thereof, which I
most specially desire, and do daily commit the sin and iniquity, which I
inwardly hate and most justly condemn. Considering therefore, that a man in
doing evil, does it not voluntarily or with glad consent, but by enforcement
and against his will: then, when that thing is committed, which mine inward
man most gladly repugneth and strives against: it is not truly and properly
said, that I am the committer of the evil: but rather more aptly to be
applied, to the gross desire, promptness and readiness of the outward man:
Sin always resident in the outward man.
in whom always sin is resident, and bears most deadly sway. Which
promptness to evil, the law cannot take away from me: but so often as I
yield and obey to evil, then the law opens and lays plainly before me,
by the testimony of my conscience, the just judgment of God over me, and
perpetual condemnation to my soul. The good nature of reason and honesty
(through the grace of God in the inward man) draws me to the estimation of
love and virtue: whereunto, I am truly taught by the law: but I find also an
other law in the members of mine outward man, which is clean contrary to the
law of my inward man, and violently stirs me to the greedy embracement of
evil. Therefore, The conflicte betwixt reason and concupiscence.
abiding thus always in this case of conflict, that reason draws me one way,
and concupiscence an other way: it commonly thus fortuneth, that the worse
part prevails, and reason over mastred and laid on the ground. For the
promptness (I say) and readiness to sin, so much abounds in me, as also
the accustomed use thereof, through the usual familiarity and great fellowship
which it ever has with my weak and frail nature, that I am still haled by
constrainte like a bond slave or prisoner, unto filthiness and sin, whether
I will or will not. O miserable wretch that I am, which am thus in thraldom
to such filthy slavery and most bitter state of bondage: who shall deliver
me, and make me free from this flesh, The complaint of the holy apostle and why?
or from this body of death, which is thus subject to so many miseries, to so
many prouocations, enticementes to naughtiness, encombred with so many vices,
and well nigh confounded with these daily conflictes, that always haleth me,
pulls me down, and draws me forcibly to destruction and death. Think not
you, that he has just cause, thus to bewail his state and to cry out, that
in this manner is daily beseeged, assaulted and troubled with so many
mischeeues, cruel and deadly adversaries? But the remedy hereof considered,
and the most happy means remembered for our deliverance: The cause of the
apostles reioicing.
O what cause of great thankfulness, by bounden duty and all humbleness,
have we to give unto our God, which mercifully has set us in most happy
state and safety, and delivered us from these noysom miseries, even for the
only loves sake he bare unto us: not through the law of Moses or
Circumcision, but by his only and most dear son our Lord Jesus Christ:
the which, if by him it had not so ben ended and done, I my self, being but
one man among others, should have been a runner but in an unconstant race, and
drawn in such sort hither and thither, with the impious cords of
inconstancy and vanity: that happily now and then, I should with ioyfulnesse
have served the law of my God with my spirit, in desiring the things that be
honest and godly, but with my faulty flesh, the law of sin in coveting
corruptly the things that be dishonest: and by the deadly force thereof, my
pore spirit always prevailed against, and turmoiled with misery.

The eight Chapter. The law of the spirit gives life. The spirit of God
makes us Gods children and heirs with Christ, The abundant love of God can
not be separated.
But now, although there be yet many blots and stumbling blocks of the old
bondage, still remaining among christen men, there is yet no dout, but through
their godly study and christen endeuer, they may easily pass by them, and not
be so violently drawn unto such horrible sins: for they are now entered into
the heavenly freedom of Christ, united and made one with him through their
lively faith and true promise made at baptism. All which by this change, have
now cessed to live again, after the illectation or wanton enticing of the
sensual lusts of their flesh: in as much as the law of Christ, which is
heavenly, spiritual, and the author of life (being also strong and full of
might) has freely delivered them all from the bondage and law of sin, John.
8. Gala. 4.
from death, the famyliar companion of sin, and the just reward of the same.
Which thing, because the law of Moses was carnal, and in consideration
thereof, very weak of it self, Hebr. 7.
God did foresee and provide for the salvation of man, after an other sort and
fashion. And like as I have said before, that in one man there was two men,
(one carnal, and an other spiritual) even so within the precinct of Moses
law, there are two laws: the one gross and carnal, Two laws.
and the other holy and spiritual. The first of these two laws, have Moses
for his auctour and beginner: which as it was not perpetual, even so it was
not of virtue to give any salvation to man. The second law is spiritual,
strange, full of efficacy, and immortal: which Christ himself has
consummate and fulfilled, to all such as believe in him. Howbeit, it was very
expedient, that one flesh should abolishe and put away an other: one
sacrifice to prevail before an other: and one death most mightily to
suppress an other. The great mercy of God.
Therefore God the father hungring and thirsting (in his mercy) after man's
salvation, sent his only dear son: which though he were free from all
contagion of sin: yet he took upon him the same flesh that all other sinners
had, and became conversant amongst the wicked (as one of them himself) for the
most precious redemption of man, unto the same salvation. And yet verily, so
unkindly he was entreated amongst the sinners, so despitefully and cruelly
handled, that they put him to the most shameful death, and crucified him
among the sinful, most vile and false thieves. Which for man's sake took
upon him our very body of sin, that he might under the same form and
similitude of sin, 2. Corin. 5.
overcome sin, and after that abolishe it, and put it clean away. He was
made a sacrifise for our trespasses, and so dying in the flesh which he
took amongst us, brought death to subjection and bondage, which before bare
rule over us thorough the law, and the corrupt affections of our bodies:
which also brought all things to such a pass, that considering the putting
away of the gross and fleshely part of the Ceremonial law, we should
thencefoorthe embrace the second part of the law, which is heavenly and
spiritual. And that ministers not ire and threatenings, as does the old part
of the law: but very righteousness to all such, as do not lead their lives
after the letter and Ceremonies of the Jews, but after the spirit and inward
mind of the law, as men regenerate and new borne again in Jesus Christ. The
Jews in their Ceremonies had (as it were) but the dead picture and image of
righteousness: but we have the ver^^^e, living and quick righteousness it
self, and the very perfect rule of all godliness: which Christ by his spirit
has wrought in us. Wherefore, the true change of our state, conditions and
fashions of religion, declares the manner of a new life in us. And we
perceive very evidently, that all such of the Jews, which still continue in
the rottenness of their old form of religion, Esaias. 55.
and in the flesh or grosenesse of the law, are delighted and pleased with
all such things, as are gross, carnal and fleshly. Contrariwise, all such as
are engrafted into Christ, are become spiritual and precise in righteousness,
utterly banishing from them all such old things, as appertain to the flesh,
and are constantly rapte in their minds, to all such things as are
spiritual: For truly, even such as the state, condition and nature of the
man is: such is his desire and common inclination to work. As touching our
flesh, we be all mortal: but Christ that is immortal, has now called us
to a life in him, which is immortal. Again, the carnal law of the Jews, is
always against Christ, and calls us from him: which (for the same cause)
brings death with it: in as much, as it contendeth and strives against him
which is the only author of life. By reason whereof, the Jews being stricken
with the zeal and love of the same law, did put to death the author of their
life and justification. But contrariwise, they that set the grosenesse of the
law at naught, and follow the spirit, do find most plentuous life in
Christ Jesus. Neither do they argue upon the barren and hungry obseruances
of the law: but having in their hearts the pleasant savor and taste of
charity, Superstition contentious against God.
be well stayed in them selves, live joyfully, and be at peace with all
creatures. Superstition of it self is contentious and full of debate, but the
true worshipping of God is full of tranquillity, peace, and quietness.
Neither can it be any marvel at all, to see so much contention amongst men,
for keeping of such superstition of the Law, considering the same is never at
one with God him self: for it is none other thing, but to adhere and stick
fast to the carnal and gross law: which God rather would to be made
adnichilate and of none effect amongst men, and that by his son Jesus
Christ (to the end, that in the place thereof should succeed the law
Spiritual) than to be by such contention at defiance with God. What it is to
be affectionate by the law.
For he that is affectionate to the law (which so much dissenteth from the
mind and will of God) can not be but clean repugnaunt and contrary to him:
for so much as his only will and pleasure is, we should altogether follow the
contrary. Wherefore let no chrystian man think it a tryfle or small fault, to
wedde him self, or to be besotted to the keeping of the law, and to continue
in the same. It shall be found to be but a fryuolous and unfruitful thing
to please the will of man, and to displease the good will of God. The
observation of the carnal and ceremonial law of Moses, may well please the
affections of carnal men: but truly the God of all holiness and truth, will
take it in evil part and very displeasauntly, unless the same shall
ouerpasse the letter of the gross Law, and become the follower of the Law
that is spiritual. Therefore let the Jews, to the vttermoste of their might
and power, hold up and maintain if they may, their Ceremonies (as in example)
the Ceremonies of the Book of Moses called Leuiticus, their feasts of the
new Moon, their washings, with all such like: of whose sort also be now the
garments of the Priests and their fleshly Sacrifices, expiations, or pourgings,
consecrations, their halowings and cursings, the difference of meats, holydays,
vows, creepings, kneelings, knockings, kyssings, crossings, with all the rest
that they do extremely use in their temples: Ceremonies carries with the^ no
righteousenesse.
) yet for all that, through the observation of all these, or any of them, they
shall never be made righteouse, although they glory never so much among them
selves over them. All which things therefore appertain nothing unto you, that
are now become spiritual, and such manner of men as Christ does vouchsafe to
dwell in, even in the temples of your hearts: for he that is but externely or
only baptized in the flesh, remains yet still in the flesh, unless the
same be inwardly washed, moysted, and tempered with the sweet taste and
moisture of the spirit of God. We be not made meet temp^^s for Christ
through our ceremonies, We are not made the temples of Christ by ceremones, but
by Gods spirit.
but by virtue and power of the spirit: which whosoever has not within him,
is yet carnal and very far from Christ. And if it so be that Christ dwell in
our hearts, then inasmuche as Christ is nothing else but charity, truth,
temperaunce, and all other virtues: how should there then be any place left
in a Christian man, He that possesses Christ expresses him in his works.
for the receiving of any vice into him? It best becomes him to express
Christ in his works, that has him inhabiting within his heart. Christ did once
dye in his flesh (as is before said) but now he lives everlastingly: whom we
ought to express in our selves in such manner, that our earthly body, that
is, our carnal and outward man, which always provoke us to disobedience and
sinfulness, be dead in us, and to forsake all vain pleasure that offends
God: that the spirit, that is, our spiritual and inward man may live in us,
which always stirs us to all honesty, The spirit of God what it works in
the godly, that possesses it.
to just and godly things. Furthermore, if the spirit of God be within us,
which restored Christ from death unto life, it is so friendly and fruitful unto
us, that it will not be idle and unoccupied in us: for the spirit is lovely,
lively, quick, full of efficacy and virtue. Wherefore the same spirit,
according to our godly natures and inclination, will work with mercy that
thing in us, which did most mightily work in the Lord and savior Jesus
Christ. It restored him again from death unto life, and will suffer him to dye
no more: even so it will call us back again from our sins (which be the
ground of our death) and give us light to avoid all wickedness, and to live
henceforth a devout and most godly life. Therefore all we living to this
spirit, are bound to this spirit, and owe due obedience thereunto, and not
to our flesh, unto which we are already dead. If we live to Gods spirit, we
are in all things bound to obey it.
For after we became to be made one with Jesus Christ, we became to be no
more debtors to the flesh. God forbid therefore, that we should
henceforth lead our lives after the corrupt desire of our flesh: which, with
all duty should obey and serve it self unto the spirit, and become (with
all constancy) bound unto it. Moreover, al you be called unto the state of
life: but if you shall frame your conversation according to your flesh, you
shall surely dye. And contrariwise, if through the strength of the spirit, you
shall quench the desires of your fleshly lusts, The will of the spirit is
easy to be obeyed.
then without doubt ye shall be blessed and live. Neither is the commandment
of the spirit hards to be kept: which, although it call men unto mighty,
high, and heavenly things, yet it calls all such as be willing and desirous
to serve and obey it. And it breaths such lively force of love into all
their hearts, The grace of Gods spirit and what it works in the elect.
that it causes them to think, there is nothing hard nor unpleasant to
them, which have in them selves that heavenly trust and ready will to serve
GOD and his holy Gospel. And as the body lives by his spirit: even so does
the soul live by her spirit. And again, if the spirit of the body be weak
and faynte, then is also all the body weak and sick. But if it be
healthful, lively, and strong, then is all the body lively, strong, and
lusty. Therefore they that frame their lives after the spirit of GOD, be the
dearly beloved and true children of God. And they that be truly the children
of God, The godly property of the true child toward his father.
will represente and most joyfully show the natural conditions of their
father, and will frankely and freely do all such things as they shall think
will please their father. But servant for as much as they be not joined to
their masters by nature, but by law, do their service unto them for fear, or
else for the avoiding of displeasure and punishment, and not for only
obedience, love and duty: which thing is proper unto the Jews, who do obey
the law, and keep externely the co^mandeme^ts thereof with all preciseness, lest
they should fall into bodily punishment. But al you are made free from the law,
to ye end you should serve it no more in fear of any punishment: but should
desire (like natural children) most gladly to accomplish your fathers
commandments, even for the loves sake that ye naturally bear unto him,
Gala. 4. 2. Timo. 1.
because ye have now received the spirit of God, through which you are adopted
and numbered his loving children, and not servant. And the same spirit also
gives such an audacitie and boldness unto us all, that when soever we have
any necessity (whether for soul or body) we shall not fear to call upon God
himself, and say unto him, father father. At which calling every loving and
natural parent do glory and rejoice. Surely if we have in consideration the
glory and high majesty of God, his mightiness and heavenly power, we should
not once dare nor be so bold to call him father, unless we were most
perfectly assured (through the goodness of his holy spirit) that we be his
very children, 2. Cor. 1.5. Ephe. 1.
and he our loving and merciful father. For to this same only purpose he
sent unto us his most holy spirit, that it should be a very sure and earnest
gage unto our spirit, that we are the undoubted children of him, that gave us
that heavenly gage. Wherefore seeing we be now made the children of God, and
fully persuaded that he is our father, we are no more to be counted servant,
but rather his very heirs. For all men that believe in Jesus Christ are the
true heirs of God, and fellow heirs with Christ him self, into whose body
being engraffed through our Christian profession, we have one father with him,
and through his only deseruings we take participation with him of the heavenly
inheritance. By what means we come to the inheritance o God.
The possession of which inheritance shall come unto us none other ways than
it came unto Christ him self. For he through the afflictions and sufferings of
miserable calamities in this life, came duly to the possession of this high
inheritance. Through his obedience he came to a kingdom: through the
ignominy and slander of the cross, he came to glory, and through the
pacient suffering of his death he came to the state of immortality. Therefore
all we must suffer with him, that we may have the fruition of the inheritance
with him, we must obey that we may reign with him, we must patiently bear
the slanders of this world, that with him we may have praise and glory: and
we must also dye with him to our sins, that we may for evermore live with
him. After this manner do we come to our inheritance with Christ, which
because it is everlasting and of most high felicity, I think, that if one
only man him self could possibly suffer all the calamities and miseries of
this wretched world, Math. 5. 2 Cor. 4. 1. John 3.
yet they all should be esteemed but unworthy, light, and of no comparison to
the great benefit of the glory to come, though (through the said myseries and
painful afflictions) he do seem dearly to buy the same glory. Yea, and
though we have received the gage of this felicity and glory, to the end we
should not mistruste any thing at all: yet for all that our glory can not be
consummate and made perfect in us (although our bodies be subject to such
sort of miseries and wretched calamities as be in this present life) without
we have our faith stayed in the only merits, death, and passion of our
savior Jesus Christ. How be it in the mean time, through the help and
comfort of the spirit, they are a certain inward taste of the same glory in
us. Which glory, at the resurrection of the flesh, and after the putting away
from us all our mortality, shall be fully declared and given unto us. At which
time we shall all live immortal with Christ, that is, always immortal and
everlasting, for our only faythes sake in his blood. And that is the time, the
which all the godly universally look continually for, as desirous to behold
the coming of the same. 2. Cor. 5.
At that time also shall the full number of the children of God be made and
fulfilled: and the glory of all these shall be opened unto them, which in this
life have been afflicted with persecution and imprisonment, with thirste,
hunger, sorrows, greefes, and other calamities for Christ's sake. And so
greatly in subjection are the creatures of this world to myseries, that the
very circuit and compass of the world it self seems to continue
altogether in misery, as in example: the air, the earth, the water, with all
other celestial bodies: yea, the very angels them selves, are created to none
other end, but to set forth Gods glory, and to show their service for the
necessities of men. For which cause the very buylding of the world it self,
shall not be free from trouble and disquietnesse, until such time as perfect
freedom shall be given to the children of God. Howbeit the world it self,
though it be insensible, neither feels disquietnesse: yet there is in it a
certain natural taste and desire to come to perfection. And in the mean time
it obeys willingly to him: for whose pleasure it was to make it in such
wise, subject to disquietousnesse. Which so much the more patiently abides
his sorrow, because his natural inclination does record to him him self,
that his sorrow shall not be perpetual: but until such time as the children
of God shall fully and plenarily be delivered from all their grief and
carfulness. At which time shall the whole Cope thereof cease from his great
unrest and disquietousnesse. Also, forasmuch as we see that all the elements
and planets of this world, do vary at so many and sundry times: and do see
likewise, the Sun and the Moon to have so many Eclipses and Chaunges: as
also perceiving by daily experience, what labors are taken in vain, for the
repair of things in this life, which do not continue, but fall again to their
corruption. And beholding also the Stars, to alter and strive one with
another: and in conclusion, nothing to be in perpetual rest: It can not be
chosen, but even the very Angels also of heaven looking down by the power of
God from an high upon our infinite miseries and wretchedness are greatly
dismayed of them, moved at them, and sorrow for them, as much as their
creation can suffer them to do. John. 16.
Wherefore all the whole number of creatures and things made by the hands of God,
do even groan and sigh with us in our misfortunes. All which, after the manner
of women laboring with child, wish and long for the end of their great travel
and sorrows. And herein is no marvel though it chance to others, considering
the same happens to us also, that first before all men have received the
spirit of Christ, which he gave most abundantly unto us. Yet that
notwithstanding, we are entangled with thousands of cares and myseries: partly
for the sustentation of our lives, and partly by the occasion of wicked
persons, always troubling and conspiring against us. Yea our cares are so many
and variable, so grievous, terrible, and insufferable, that we oftentimes do
sorrow and lamente our own woeful causes, most heartily wishing for that happy
day, when all the true members of Jesus Christ shall be set at liberty from all
accidents, and shall be then made of very lumpish, gross and carnal men,
most lively, spiritual and immortal men. How be it we patiently suffer all
affliction in the mean time, for the hopes sake of that felicity, which was
promised us of our Lord Christ. For the certayntie of which felicity,
although he have given us a sure gage thereof, (even the full certifying of his
spirit:) yet he has not given it unto us wholly and fully at this time: but
would that it should with patience be hoped upon, tarried for, and looked for in
time to come unto us. For our perfect health, expected rest, and true
felicity, are in those things that be yet for to come: the use whereof, Hebr
1.
we verily trust and hope upon. For hope is not in things that be present
and at hand amongst us, but only in all such things as do not yet appear
unto us. For how can a man say, that we have hope in that thing, which is
before our eyes. Again there should be no place nor commendation left for
faith and hope, if those things should be now in our sight and feelyng,
which Christ has promised unto us. Wherefore, considering we conceive in
Faith such things as be not apparaunte to our bodyly eyes, we do patiently
continue in our greefes and sorrows, most steadfastly hoping for the promise
made of Christ. Nevertheless it is paynfull in the mean while, to be in
trouble and sorrow: howbeit, the same does no harm, but rather works the
thing that is good: For the spirit takes al things in good worth, and
strives against the weakness of the flesh as much as may be: and the spirit
of God always helps the debilitie of our mortal bodies, and does happily
feed it with the good food of hope, to suffer strongly all offered
inconveniences: declaring further unto us what we should desire to have, hold
and retain, and what we should always shun and put away from us. For all
we (as touching our flesh) can not tell what to crave, nor how to desire any
thing that belongs unto us: by means whereof it chances that we oftentimes
do desire of God vain and wicked things, in steed of needful, honest, and
wholesome things. Which self same thing happened unto me, at what time (not
taking well in worth mine afflictions) I desired God three times, that Satan
should be banished from me, who at that time very sharply punished me. Howbeit
I was denied my request, and in steed of pleasant things, or things contenting
the flesh, were given unto me healthful things. Yet verily, God hears the
petitions of his people, so that they make them not after the will of the
flesh, but after the will and healthful motion of the spirit: which though we
our selves say nothing at all, Esaias. 26.
yet it ceasseth not to call upon God for us: not as men use to make their
suits and petitions, but with unspeakable feruencie, most deep sighings and
inward gronings. A man must demand of others in way of communication, and
so to attain such requests as he desires to be accomplished for him: which
men know not what is demanded, except he advertise them of it: neither can
they judge what is most expedients for his necessity. But God that knows
the most secret parts of men's hearts, Iere. 17.
foreseeth in such manner our necessity, that he knows what the spirit
requires, and what we have need of, though we our selves (as God forbid)
should hold our peace, In what manner the spirit prays for us unto God.
and make no suit. For the spirit, as oftentimes as it demands for holy
things, and sigheth for our miseries, it prays unto God, not after the
affections of flesh and blood, but according to the only will and pleasure of
almyghtie God. For it requires nothing but healthful things, and things
appertayning to the glory of God. Which things whosoever heartily desires
(though he lack in his requests order and form in the making of them:) yet
undoubtedly he fails not in the end to attain his purpose. The feite
miseries of this life are not to be feared not to withdraw our hearts from
prayer.
God therefore grants us, not that which is always required of him: but
rather that which most aptly touches our commodities. Neither ought we to
fear, or to cease our prayers unto God, though we see our selves tossed in the
miseries of this wretched world, in such wise as though we were forsaken or
utterly forgotten of God: In as much, as we all are certainly persuaded, that
all kind of trouble (what so ever it be that happens unto good men:) the
same chances unto them, for their great health and welfare: for such is the
favor of God toward those, which he (of his most godly will and pleasure)
has chosen and called unto felicity. The purpose is youres, but the
disposition lies in the hands of God him self: which has not without most
high consideration, chosen to him self his most dearly beloved people. All
those that appertains properly unto him, he right well knew them, long
before he called them. And he did not only before know them, whom he so
called, but most secretly with him self he did predestinate them, to be
incorporate into the body of his dear son our Lord Jesus Christ: and to be
transformed into the resemblaunce and similitude of him. Which, as he has
overcome the power of the flesh, death, hell, and the devil, and is triumphantly
ascended into immortality: so likewise should his members hope to do, because
they see the same already don in their head. Thus God, by this means (through
his only son) has provided him self of many sons: amongst whom, Christ
is the chief captain, and is the first begotten and principal heir of his
eternal kingdom, which notwithstanding, makes us partakers of his
inheritance with him. Furthermore, all those whom God knew before, and did
choose them to himself before all times, of whom he declared his godly
pleasure by his holy Prophets: the same he has now at length called by his
eternal gospel: through which calling, they are most highly blessed and
profited. For of wretched and sinful livers, he (through the abundance of
his mercy) has made them godly: and of wicked, disobedient and stubborn
servants, his own most dear and loving children. Unto whom there now lacks
nothing, but only their glory, and the most pleasant peace and quietness of
their consciences in ye sight of god, yet the same (at this time) want not all
kinds of this glory: inasmuche as it is a most pleasant satisfaction and
comfort to their minds, that they (in this mean while) may live free from the
threatenings of the law, from the danger of the sting of sin and death, and
that so they may conform them selves to innocence and honest affections of
the soul, that they may become one with Christ, and to have always his spirit
that shall satisfy them with this most certain persuasion, to be the heirs
of God, and fellow heirs with his son Christ, which also so confirm them, that
they do not distruste any thing of the fulfilling of this their everlasting
glory and joy, in his appointed time. Wherefore, considering the matter goes on
this wise with us: what need have we then to disquiet our selves about the
troubles and miseries that daily happens unto? Either why should we not take
them with all patience: We bear our troubles the more patiently in this life,
because we see before hand the favor of God for our deliverance.
seeing that such is the grace and favor of God, that he most mercifully
minds our speedy deliverance from thence? Surely God has in so many things
declared already his most high love and goodness toward us, that we may be
well assured he will still stand unto us, and be on our side a most stable pillar
against al ye assaults of our deadly adversary. Which always being most true:
what cause have we to care, or what can his malice prevail against us, seeing
the most mighty God him self takes our part? Nume. 14. Esaias 50. Gene. 22.
Esaias 53.
Either why should we doubt at all of the favor of God to be with us, which
did not spare his only dear son, and his most high treasure of heaven, but
did (as it were) put him forwards to death for us, that were most wretched
sinners against him, and altogether in his fathers indignation. He did embase
his own and only son, and made him vile, to the end that thereby he would
extol and advance us: he made him a sacrifice to deliver us from our
offenses: he delivered him to his death, that by the means of it we might
have life. Wherefore, seeing he thus gave his own dear son for us (in whom
dwells the fullness of al things) shall it not then follow, that he will also
help us with all things, as he does his son: In as much as he has made us
fellow heirs with him of the kingdom of his heavenly joy? what will God stick
to give unto us (what soever it be) which has already freely given that
thing for us, which is much more preciouse than all the creatures in heaven and
in earth? And all we may be well assured, that God will not change his mind
with us, but (in the constancy of his mercy) will at all times be our buckler,
our shield, and mighty defense, Our hope in the constancy of Gods mercy for
our sheelde and buckler.
against the outrage and force of all our adversaries. What is he therefore,
that will or once dare take upon him to bring any accusation, or lay any
condemnation against the elect of God: whom he has now (by his most high
wisdom) chosen and taken for his own dear sons? Think you that God will
hear the adversary of our soul, against those whom his only son has so
preciously redeemed, and for his sake has so freely pardoned and forgiven their
offenses against him? God that is the judge of all creatures has delivered us
from the gyltinesse of our former life, and now accounts us righteous in his
sight. Therefore who dare be so bold to condemn those that he pronounces
righteous? A godly admonition.
But yet hereof we must in any wise carefully take heed, that we fall not
again into the lothsomnesse of our old sins and wickedness. Christ him self
has ever had such an heart burning love toward us, that for our redemption
sake, and to save us from damnation, he willingly suffered (gushing out of his
side) the flowing streams of his blood: which also after his death rose
again, only to foresee all things necessary both for the rejoicing of his
loving brethren, as also in all things to comfort and strengthen them. The same
christ now being made our only advocate and judge is ascended into the heue^s,
and there sits with majesty on ye right hand of his heavenly father in all
things equal with him: and there daily (with the open appearance of his bloody
wounds) pledeth our cause with him, and craves the continuance of his great mercy
toward us in this life, and to have for us after this life, in full reward of
his most precious purchase, even everlasting joy and felicity. The people that
are blessed of God, fear neither the deuell nor any of his ministers.
For which consideration, since the father of heaven, has thus pronounced us
(for the deaths sake of his dear son) guiltless, blessed and just, (which
proceeds of the only tenderness of his unspeakable love:) what man is he
the^, that from henceforth will fear the devil, dread tirants, or any one that
is his minister: or else any slaunderer, privy conspirator, curssed speaker,
or wicked co^demner of him. Therefore, for as much as we be al so many ways
bound unto God and his dear son Christ: what thing is that, what thing is
it, that is once able, to withdraw us from the love of them both: or else shall
not suffer us to love them again, for their most wonderful and great mercies
toward us? Shall the tempestuous storms and troubles of men withdraw us from
them? Shall the slipperie chaunges and chances of this wretched world pluck
us back? Shall anguishes, shall persecutions, shall hunger, shall nakedness,
shall peril, either shall the sword? Psalm 43.
All which, the holy Prophet David, has prophesied to chance unto the elect
of God: which speaks in the spirit of God on this manner: we are for thy sake
(O Lord) daily delivered unto death, and are esteemed as sheep appointed to
the slaughter. Well may afflictions diversely happen to the godly, that they
shall sooner confirm them in the love of God, the overcome them from the same.
These same things, although they seem to be importable and grievous to ye
weak flesh: yet, they are not able to pluck us from the love of God, and his
dear son Christ. Well may they diversely and sundry ways happen unto us, but
surely they cannot overcome us: yea, the more that they fortune unto us, so
much the more do they confirm the love of us toward Christ, and his love
also toward us: in as much, as we always depart from the same afflictions, as
lively victorers and ouercommers of them. Not through our own powers: but
through the protection and defense of him: unto who^, we owe all things that we
have. Neither will God that loves us so heartily, suffer us to be overthrown:
neither can we (having in remembrance his wonderful goodness toward us) cease
to love him again, for any kind of misery, that ca^ happen in this wretched
life, unto our earthie and frail bodies. How he it al those things, of ye
which I did even now speak, are but light and of small effect, to pluck our
hearts from the love of God: but I am well assured, that (bisides al those)
neither death, neither life, neither the Angels of heaven, neither might nor
power, neither things present, (though they bring al kinds of misery with
them) neither things to come (whether they shall bring good or bad unto us)
neither high nor low, neither visible, nor invisible, neither any other
creature, shall at any time once be able, to separate us from the love of God,
which he has showed unto all us, in giving his only dear son our Lord Jesus
Christ to be our redemption, and to pay our ransom to his and our father, for all such offenses, as we most horribly committed daily against him.

The ninth Chapter. Paul complains upon the hard heart of the Jews, that
would not receive Christ: and how the heathen are chosen in their stead.
TO the which Christ, I would to the almighty God, that all the Jews (now
turning themselves,) would forsake their old Moses: which, at this time
conceiueth this opinion amongste them selves, that it is sufficient inoughe for
their salvation, to be the children of Abraham by descente, or to keep the
law which by Moses was given unto them. Whereas (in very deed) nothing of all
this does any thing at all profit them, except they show themselves faithful in
Christ: and after this sort conform themselves to him, that they may be
beloved of God his heavenly father. But to their great shame it is doutlesse,
that Christ is thus cast out from amongste them, which was so promised unto
them in their own law, and by whose unfaithfulness, the Gentiles do now
receive him. Notwithstanding this, I do not speak any thing here in despite
of the Jews, which be my natural country men, and whom in Christ I dearly
love at the heart root, though they cannot abide me, nor yet once further me
their friendly good word. Verily, I speak as the thing it self is (Christ is
my record) which knows al men's secrets. Neither do I make any lie (I take
witness of my conscience which the holy ghost perfectly knows) that I am very
sorry, and that with continual dolor and thought in my heart, for their fall and
mischance, which most apparently comes through their own wilful fault and
folly. For so little do I hate the Jews, ye I (with all my heart) would wish to be
made their safety and health, Exodus 32.
yea even through mine own destruction. Neither would I refuse to be rejected
from Christ, so yt I might have al those that be of my stock and kindred,
adjoined as I now am, in the true faith of Jesus Christ. And that as they be al
Israelites by birth: so they might be also very Israelites in the truth and
verity. For whom, it was convenient above all other creatures to have embraced
him, which the law had promised before unto them: considering they be of ye
only nation, which God the father (from all others) did separate, and did choose
it only to himself, to be his only peculiare and proper people: and did put
away from him all other nations, cou^ting them but reiects, and as misbegotten
bastards: and took only the Israelites, for his true and natural children,
which only had the glory and dignity of the world, when they did forsake
idolatry, and gave themselves to the only worshipping of the true god which
only had then the pre-eminence of the law and his prerogative: Exodus 19. Deuteronomy.
7.
which only had the couenantes and promises of God made unto them: which had
only declared unto the^ the rites and ceremonies of religion: which only had
the prophets sent unto the^, that promised the coming of Messiah many years
before he came: and which only had also made unto them, the promise of the
heavenly glory, which we receive through the same only Messiah the great God
and savior of the world. Al which Jews do come of the stock of the most noble
and high personages, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: and of many other notable and
worthy men: of whose most noble and famous lignage, Christ him self comes as
touching the flesh: for which cause sake they came not to choose, but whether
they will or will not, they be of kindred unto Christ: which is much more
mighty and of higher majesty, than were those old and ancient good fathers,
whom they so highly extol, and upon whom they bost themselves so much. For the
old fathers, though they were godly creatures, and worthy great estimation, yet
amongst men they were but men. But Christ himself is a man in such sort and
manner, that he is also very God: and that not of this or that nation only, but
of al nations where so ever they be, foreseing in himself all their
saluations: unto whom only be al laud, praise and honor now and for evermore.
Amen. Neither shall we think that the iniquity of the Jews did so abou^d,
that through the great desert of vengeance for the same, God will not for all
that, perform al such things, as he promised before in his Prophets. I cannot
deny but our felicity was promised unto Abraham, and to the children of
Israel: how be it, not properly to each of them, or to the^ only, but specially
unto all those that should be of his true posterity, and possessors of the like
faith: For we cannot say, that they which come of Israel, are all Israelites:
Roma. 2.
but only those same that be strong in faith, and vnvanquished against the
inco^ueniences of this world: in which, God tries and proves our religion and
godliness: and in all such verily rightly agrees the name of an Israelite
Further, Gala 4.
they that come of Abraha^s stock are not all the true children of Abraham, and
have to themselves the possession of the promise of God: but al they that
represent the faith of Abraham: by virtue whereof, he deserved that ye promise
should be made unto al his seed. And mark (I pray you) diligently, if the
words of the promiser do not sound eue^ the same thing, Gene. 22.
which says: In Isaac shall be named unto thee, they seed. And it was promised
unto ye sede of Abraham, ye through it al nations should be renoumed and
blessed. But God will not yt al which come of Abraham, should be called the sede
of Abraham, except they be in Isaac, which is the son of faith, and bears
truly the figure of Christ. Isaac was not begotten and borne into this world,
as is the common birth of children, but was begotten of an old man, worn and
withered with age, and which also was past bodily lust, yet had always good faith
in the promise and power of God, and born of an old woman yt was also past
bearing of children: wherefore, the virtue of God, and good faith of the father,
did rather beget him than the power and work of yt flesh. What means God
therefore when he says: In Isaac shall be named unto thee thy seed? but only
that he would manifestly declare: that they which be borne of Abraham after the
flesh, are not all the sons of Abraham, and so forth the heirs of the
promise, but all such only as have faith: Who be the children of Abraham.
through which Abraham deserved to have the promise made unto him: and those
in deed be they, that are of ye seed of Abraham. But otherwise, if God should
have made his promise after this form and sort, who so ever he be that shall
be borne of thee, to them shall appertain my promise: then without all doubt,
they might challenge his promise by inheritance and for their duty, what
soever he be that comes of Abraham's descents. Therefore, seeing then that he
spoke after this manner, Gene. 18.
as the Scriptures do show: About this time will I come, and Sara shall have a
son: God men^e Isaac, to be one only son, and that the son of faith:
whom he elected and chose out to him self for the same purpose, not for the
deseruings of his circumcision, which at that time was not yet borne, but
rather for the only merits sake of his fathers faith. Howbeit Abraham begatte
other children after that time, of other wives, yet the promise was only made
in the name of Isaac. And as the thing went with Isaac and the other children
of Abraham: even so it also chanced in Jacob and Esau. Which, if they should
receive the blessing of God only for alyaunce and kinreds sake: the promise
should rather have appertayned unto Esau, than unto Jacob, in as much as he was
the eldest son of the two. Gene. 25.
Isaac was only father to them both, and one only mother at one time bare
them both, which conceived them both at once, carried them both together in
her body, and at one time also delivered them both: yet all this
notwithstanding God did acknowledge but one of them for a lawful child, and
the other he took (as it were) but for a bastard, saying these words: Jacob
have I loved, and Esau have I hated. What thing is it then that did thus make
separation betwixt these two twins? Mala. 1.
Verily, not the proximitie or nearenesse of birthe, nor the observation of the
law, neither yet Circumcision for before either of them was borne, or else had
done any thing at all, either against the law or with the law, it was said of
them both: The elder shall serve the younger. And why did God thus I pray you?
Or what would he declare unto us hereby? Certesse, none other thing at all,
but that no creature, through his confidence in the law or circumcision, should
challenge to him self the promise of felicity: but only all such as have
faith, to come to the society of the elect of God, through his dear son
Christ: and to be all such in their exercitations, as was Isaac and Jacob. For
the election of God makes the children of Abraham, The election of God, makes
the children of Abraham, but not the neerenesse of birth.
and not the propinquitie of birth. Wherefore, if in case God shall reiecte and
cast away the Jews at this time, as he in times paste did Esau: it shall
profit them nothing at all, to have descended of his lynage. Again, if God do
call the Gentiles unto his promise by virtue of their faith, it shall not hurt
them one whit to be of no fleshly kindred with Abraham: in as much as God
through grace does adopte and make them his children. And here no man shall
take occasion to wreste the Scriptures, and say peruersely, that men are not in
fault them selves of their own damnation, but rather God him self: because he
receives at his will and pleasure those that do no good, and put away from him
such as may seem to do no hurt. God defend therefore, that in reading this
saying of Moses in the Book of Exodus: Exodus 33.
I will show mercy upon whom I show mercy: and will have compassion, upon whom
I have compassion: should think thereby that God does any wrong unto us, in
taking away from us all our own power and strength, to obtain health and
salvation: because that both our wills and labors are but vain and to no
purpose, except the willing God draws us: which draws only all such as
best lyketh him, though they had don no good at al.

We must well consider this place of Scripture in Exodus, that God of his
own abundant mercy, has made every man to his own similitude, and given
him in his creation, vvitte, reason and discretion, with many other beginnings
of virtue and godliness. All which, if man for his part will apply to the
will of God, and call upon him for the increase of his strength, and to make
in him these virtues fruitful, and to be alvvayes fortified by the spirit of
Christ to godly perfection and true piety: then God for his love and mercies
sake will perform the same to his salvation: which otherwise his own
strength can not bring to pass by any possibility. Again if he do abuse the
same gifts of God, by any means to the committing of sin and filthynesse:
and so choke up his talent in the dirte of the earth to no good use: then will
God forsake him, and suffer him to run headlong to the devil. The scripture
therefore says: god has mercy upon whom he has mercy: and vvil have
compassion upon whom he has compassion: that is, upon every such person as
vvil him self call for Gods mercy and compassion, and receives it tha^kfully:
and not as though he were parcial in the bestovving of his love and mercy: for
he is universal unto all creatures, and would that all men should be saved,
and come to the truth in him. But (the more pity) many of them will not way
this saying, nor apply their gifts to this end, and therefore they are
vvorthily condemned, and go to the devil for their own fault and
wickedness sake. For which cause no creature can lay the fault or occasion
of his condemnation in God: but must needs grant to proceed only from him
all his goodness and salvation.

It is therefore impossible to come to the salvation of God through our own
endeavor and working: but it is only for the abundaunt mercy of God toward us,
and that for his sons sake. But contrary, al we through the filth of original
sin, and weakness of our nature, which happened through Adam: and further
through the custom to sin in this world, and the devils setting on by
temptation, are brought to destruction: which thing first happens unto us
from our own selves. Therefore whosoever is damned, it comes unto him from
him self: and he that is saved, by the only benefit and goodness of God,
the which he does vouchsafe upon such as likes him best to bestow. And this
he does not to that end, that a man should complain or quarrel with him, but
with all humbleness to submit him self, and most heartily to thank him for it.
For it is not God that hardneth men's hearts, that they should not believe ye
gospel of Christ: but it is their own rusty or cancred stubbornness and
stifnecked crokednesse, which causes them so maliciously to refuse it, and to
have it in contempt: which stubbornness god orders to this purpose, that he
will thereby make manifest the mightiness of his benefit toward us, and to
declare the glory of his power and might. And even so it is to be understood,
whereas it is said to Pharao in Exodus. ca. 9. For this purpose have I stirred
thee up, that I might by thee show my puissaunce and might, and that my name
should be renoumed throughout the whole world. Therefore peradventure here in
this place, some perverse fellow will wickedly quarrel and say: If it so be,
that God shows mercy to whom he likes, and whom he will he hardens: what
matter is it then that he can justly lay to our charge? Again, in as much as
his will and pleasure can not of any be restrained, nor his intent put by or
prevented, if he purpose to have his will in any thing: It is therefore meet
that he take our faults to him self, and not lay them to our charge, when it
shall chance us at any time to do amiss. But I beseech thee mark
diligently, and that with reverence, the truth in this case. For albeit that
no man is of power, nor can once resist the holy will of God: yet for all that
his will is never so mercilesly bente against us, that he is found the cause of
our perdition: neither did he harden the heart of the proud Egyptian Pharao, to
that end he would in deed make him stubborn and stifnecked, and thereby
wilfully damn him: but well foreseeing and knowing by his omnipotency and
godly wisdom, that his heart was already hardened, and that through his own
wilful malice and great pride: which, though at that time it deserved at the
hand of God by his justice, short and sudden destruction: yet he for a space
did suffer it to continue in him, and in the mean time through gentleness, by
little and little did punish and correct it: both that Pharao should the
better perceive and know in him self his own wylfull wickedness, through
his malice, pride, and stoutness: and also for the more plain manyfestation
unto all generations, of his own omnipotency, gentleness and great
clemency, throughout the whole world. The which, because he did so abuse the
great gentleness then offered him of GOD, and thereby the rather took
proudely upon him further occasion, to be a wylfull repugner of his Godly
will, then ryghtely obedient or subject to his service: God therefore most
worthil^ made of his fixed mischief, pride and malice, great glory an^
immortal fame toward him self. And so that, which in one case was of it
self utterly naught, and so known of God, proceeding from a contemptuouse,
proud, and maliciouse heart: he most aptely turned in an other respect to
his own perpetual renown and glory. Thus (if I would) I could here
answer other things most truly, in the behalf of the righteous God: but
shortly to conclude, God has (in any creature) all pride and contempt, in
utter detestation. And I pray you, what thing in all this world can be more
proud or reprochefull before God, than for a man, which is of him self but a
very vile creature, to take any matter in hand against God and his maker, or
to contend and strive with him, as one equal unto a god of such majesty. For
what potter or other ye like artificer would take it well at his pottes hand
(at the hand of his creature) to be checked and reasoned withal, saying: Why
made thou me thus? why have thou formed me on this wise for such a purpose?
Truly it behooves all creatures of mankind to consider most reverently with
the^ selves, that as the earth and clay is in the hands of the potter, and to
work it for his own praise to what use he will: even so are men in the hands
of the almighty God our creator, to be turned and dealt withal at his own
pleasure. The potter tempereth the clay, and makes thereof such kind of vessels
as shall best like him: some for service at the table, and for the like clenly
uses: and some again he makes to serve for such purposes as be more unclean
and filthy (for both must be, and are to be used of necessity) as it always
lies in the potters arbitriment, to make of clay what vessels he will without
the controlement of the pot. And much more vile is a man in relation to God,
than the clay in comparison to the potter. Wherefore, if it be an argument of
great stubbornness and pride, for the clay to endente with his potter and maker,
for this fashion or that use: much more monstrous shall be the pride of man,
irreverently to argue and descant upon the secret counsels of God the creator
toward him: which be so much above the capacity of us wretched creatures,
that scarsly we be able to attain to a shadow, or once to dream of them.

Here is to be noted, that the potter makes not his pottes, to the end he
would forthwith have them broken, or cast away from him again after he has
once made them: but to serve him rather at his commandment, in such offices
as he first appoynteth them: with whose service he holds him self well
contented, if so be they do it unto him as he has taken order and placed them:
even so God does not create man to any such entente, that he should after his
creation fall into sin and be damned: but clean contrary he makes all men,
and puts them in sundry degrees and orders, and will that they serve and
obey unto him, each of them in his vocation, accordingly as he has showed unto
them his godly will and pleasure, and not to fall from him, and to serve the
devil: for that comes only of their own stubborn malice, and not of his
will and appointment.

Therefore (O thou man, thou creature, thou dust and ashes) be stayed in thy
self toward thy maker: apply and enforce thy self with humbleness and
prayer, that the spirit of grace may work a lively and true faith in thee
toward him, yield to his will, think none evil of him, and in any wise not
to dispute in thy self against him: and so shall thou best know him, find him
always thy loving God, rejoice only in him, and extol from thine heart the
holy name of thy maker. Yet further, way with thy self, that the potter in his
faculty may chance to err and do amiss, but God can not possibly so do. Let
this then be a sufficient persuasion for thee to believe, that as God, even thy
God in his almightinesse and omnipotency, can do and may do al things at his
own good will and pleasure: even so likewise the same God, forasmuch as he is
most good, most gentle, just, and bountiful, he will do nothing but that
which is best, most expedient and profitable unto mankind, his most dear and
well-beloved creature: neither can we blame god, or justly reprove him, though he
use and convert our evils to a special good end and purpose: yea we should
rather worthily count it, for an high token of his great love and benignity
toward us: in that he makes the missehap or falling of some men, to turn to
the good and fortunate end of others. Also reason thus with thy self: if thou
be deformed and filthy in the fight of God through thine inclination to sin,
O miserable creature that I am, I must duly acknowledge and confess, that god
of his only great mercy and goodness, has miraculously wrought his good
work upon me, and beautified me both in soul and body, with innumerable of
his good graces, blessings and benefits: and not made me a deformed creature,
or vessel of dishonor unto filthiness and uncleanness: but I my self through
the devil and mine own consent, have made my self filthy and unclean, and
defiled most lothsomly the beautiful work of God, with the dirte and stinch
of sin and mine own uncleanness. Wherefore I say, if God (through his own
infinite wisdom) do use thy wickedness and sinful state to the healthful
state of the godly, and to the high renoume of his own name: what just
occasion then of quarelling, or to think evil of God haste thou? In which
case thou art worthily delte withal and justly punished (thine own conscience
bearing thee witness) for thy forgetfulness, pride, carelessness, wilful
contempt and stubbornness. And the good and godly me^, through the example of
thee in thy wretched state, are made the more ware and circumspect to them
selves, how they fall into sin, to have gods fear before their eyes, and to
thank him with more alacrity and frank courage, when they do well learn and
perceive by thy wilful blindness and destruction, how much they be bound unto
the great goodness and mercy of God toward them. Pharao which was brought to
naught through his own sin and malice, had none occasion at al to reprove god,
though ye same his malice and wilful stubbornes did greatly advance and set
forth the glory of god amongst his people ye Hebrews: even so, what occasion
have the Jews at this time to repine against god, Gods great mercy toward the
stubborn Jews.
which now in like manner (as he did in times past with Pharao) does gently
suffer and bear with their stubbornness? Al which, though they be in deed
vessels worthy the just reproach of god, and to be cast by him against the
walls and broken: yet this notwithstanding, God (in mercy) did pause with him
self toward them, to the end it might be well perceived and known unto all
creatures, that most justly they have deserved their own destruction. And all
which, though they have been allured to the gospel, by a thousand benefits
of God, and many sundry occasions of gentleness toward them: yet they would
not correct and amend them selves. By which means all other men may take unto
them good and special occasion, to dread and fear the omnipotency of God,
and most heartily yield them selves bound unto him for his unspeakable love
toward them, whom they ought not to provoke to anger through the continuance
of sin: but utterly to be at defiaunce therewith, and to detest it from their
hearts, for his holiness and great gentleness sake. All which things have been
thus wonderfully wrought of God, to the end that he would the mightiness and
excellency of his glory, should be the more copiously and abundantly
manyfested unto all the godly: whom he (of filthy and most vile vessels) has
happily cleansed them, and made them lovely, fair and preciouse: and has
appointed the same to a most honest use: that is, even to have the fruition of
the inexplicable joys of heaven, which he brings to pass in us, not for the
love of our circumcision, but only for the merit of faith: through which
only all creatures do come to this prepared joy: not only the Jews, but
also all other nations, which give their full confidence and trust, to the only
shedding of Chrysts most innocent blood, for their purgation or most perfect
clensing, for it is not the birth or posterity by Abraham, that makes the
heirs of heaven, but the only election of god the father, in and by his son
Jesus Christ. And the Jews should not marvel, that the Gentiles, which all
were once profane and strangers from Christ, are now adopted and become the
children of God, considering themselves, that once were before this time
through their own malice, despised and cast out of Gods favor: yet the same
taking repentance, and amending their lives, came again unto grace, and that
by the meekness and gentleness of God. The which very thing, their own
prophet Ozee witnesses, saying in this manner: Osee. 2. 1. Pet. 2.
I will call them my people, which are not my people: and my beloved, which are
not my beloved: and to dispose my mercy, where I had no mercy. And so it came
to pass, that whereas before they were not the people of God, they were called
again the children of God. Therefore, why should they condemn that in others,
of which they them selves, have had sufficient experience? They should rather
have taken diligent heed, that through their own fall, they stood in greater
danger, not to come again into the same case, that they were in before. And
what cause have they to hate the Gentiles so much as they do: whom they
ought to imitate and follow, in their conversation and ma^ners: if they had not
rather delight to despise, than gently to obey? And although that the most part
of them (through their own stubburnnesse) did perish: yet, he will nevertheless
perform the promise to the remnaunt that do believe: which promise, he made
unto all such as would receive it by faith. And although the same be but a
few in number: Esaias. 10. Osee. 1. Zacha. 13. Amos. 9.
yet they shall be continual successors to receive the same promise. The same
thing does Esayas testify, which says: Though the children of Israel be in
number equal to the sands of the sea, and that numbers and multitudes of
them, do perish by their own vice and naughtiness: yet for all that, there
shall always be some of them that shall be saved through their faith. And
also the number of them that fall from God, though it be great: yet, the vice
and malice of them cannot cause God to break his promise with the faithful.
To deceive in the performance of their promises, it is the property of men:
but God most assuredly performs in deed, all such things as he does
promise, and that without any delay or daliance: neither yet deceitfully, but
most truly and justly, Esaias. 1.
fulfilleth all his beheastes. The which thing, the Prophet Esaias affirms and
says: God will make a brief and short reckening upon the earth. And the same
also says: Except the Lord of hosts had left unto us some seed, we should
have been made like unto Sodom: and should have been none otherwise esteemed
than Gomor. By all which things are understood, that though numbers of the
Jews did forsake Christ: yet notwithstanding, he will not suffer all the true
and lawful seed of Abraham to fall and come to naught. Which thing, The mercy
of God toward the Gentiles.
considering it went after this sort with the Jews, it pleased almighty god
that the Gentiles, which seemed once to be far from his righteousness, and
without all the ceremonies of the law, should now attain to the same
righteousness (which is not the righteousness of the Jews, that had only
but the shadow of true righteousness) but it was in deed the very
righteousness of God him self: and that not through the ceremonies of the
law, but by their only faith: through which they submit them selves to the
goodness and mercy of God. But contrariwise, the Jews, following the law of
righteousness carnally, The cause of the Jews fall.
and promising righteousness to them selves by the same law (through their
ceremonies and obseruaunces) could not attain unto this true righteousness in
God, because they did forsake Christ: in whom, and for whom, were all the
sayings of the holy Prophets spoken, and the law declared. And here
peradventure some man will ask me: How did it chance then that the Jews did
so suddenly forsake and shake off Christ? Verily, The hatred of God against
proud men.
even because God can not abide the stubborn and proud men: but gives him
self wholly unto the meek, gentle, and lowely hearted. And because the Jews
were stubborn, proud, and wilful, and would not believe the Gospel of
Christ and his promises, The cause of the Gentiles submission unto God, and to
the faith in Christ.
he did renounce and forsake them. For which cause the Gentiles acknowledging
their wretchedness, and submitting them selves to the faith in Christ, God
received them to his grace: whereas the Jews he rejected and cast off,
because they gloried in a false righteousness, in their holy days, in their
washing, in their circumcision, and in such their like obseruca^es, which
refused to submit them selves to the faith of Christ, and denied him, and put
him the author of their life unto death: the which self thing, Esaias did
prophecy should come to pass: that is, that Christ, whom the law before had
promised to be a savior, should be unto them (for their unfaithfulness sake)
an occasion of their fall: and he should also be a stone, Esaias. 28.
whereupon the faithful should repose them selves: and unto the Jews it
should be turned to their destruction, inasmuche as they rather did chose to
stumble at it, and to be at variaunce among them selves against it, than to
take their rest upon it, through the virtue of their belief. For even so does
the father of Christ him self, speak by the prophet, and says: Behold, I
put in Syon a stone to stumble at, and a rock to fall upon. But who soever
shall believe on it, shall not be ashamed of his belief.

The.x. Chapter. The unfaithfulness of the Jews: Two manner of righteousnesses.
Dear brethren, verily I say this unto you, not without great sorrow and
heaviness of heart, because I inwardly wish with the same, the happy state
and prosperity of the Jews. And if it were in mine ability and power, I
would most gladly relieve them, and ease them of their fall and most wretched
mischaunce. But of this thing they be all assured and out of doubt, that I pray
to God daily and heartily for them, that they may yet once again turn to
repentance, and not thus always to continue in their damnable blyndnesse.
Surely I can not excuse them of their unbelief: howbeit, somewhat may yet be
said in that behalf for their comforts: for they be not so far from Christ,
as the Gentiles were: for as much as he is somewhat nearer the truth, that
knows some part thereof, than he that knows yet nothing at all. For which
cause I would the rather wish, that the same thing may now be brought to good
effect in them, which they heretofore went about: and that they may now
obtain the very truth it self, whereof long since they have had but the tipe
and shadow. And although they did fall into a most horrible and lamentable
vice, in that they so maliciously crucified the Lord, which was the fountain
of al glory: yet notwithstanding the same, I must needs confess, Esaias. 28.
Roma. 9.
that they did it for some love which they bare toward God, though it were
done, neither with wisdom nor judgment. For their intent was, to call himself
the son of God: which in their opinions, was a detestable blasphemy to the
Father of heaven: but in this point, their carnal reason was deceived.
Wherefore, they did not altogether miss in the affection of godliness,
though the same did miss in the ordering, and in the right applying thereof:
and better it is to have some one kind of religion, tha^ to have none at all.
Also, they did deserve (though they had but little godliness in them) to have
had more given unto them, if they had not been so stiff necked in their first
rules of godliness, having in contempt the true godliness it self, when it
was once offered unto them: and also if they had not maintained, and so stoutly
fortified their shadows and only similitudes of truth: and in stead thereof,
to deride and mock the verity and perfect truth it self. And every of them,
though they should not then, have cast of from them their law of Moses: yet
they did strius for the fortification thereof, without all knowledge or godly
judgment. In the doing of which, they contended against him, for whom the
whole law was first made and proclaimed. For their holy days, their
Circumcision, their differences of meats, the avoiding from dead carcases,
their Fastings, their Festival days, were all appointed for this intent, that
they should pass forth for their time in these sorts of beginning: and to
pretend by the outward or worldly righteousness thereof, a coming (at the
time appointed) to the true righteousness of almighty God.

How be it, it was not convenient for them, that for the loves sake and
affection they then had to their Ceremonial righteousness, to despise and
cast him away from them, for whose only cause al their law and Ceremonies were
ordained: but the more pity it is, that ye Jews, though they had (in most
large and godly manner) declared truly unto them all the righteousness of God:
yet they would not forsake the worldly righteousness of their Ceremonies, but
most peruersly and without all good order sought to uphold the continuance
of them. For they so stiffely defended their old righteousness (which in
deed was made of none effect, and is now rather become to all men which trust
therein, their deadly wound and sting) that they would not once know the true
righteousness of God, but still wasting their lives in Ceremonies, they
resisted the Gospel of Christ, whereunto they should have submitted them
selves with all humbleness and thanksgiving, if in very deed they had been
mindful to be righteous. For we must imagine thus with our selves, as though
there were before us two kind of righteousnesses: Two kinds of righteousness
the one has Moses for their author, the other has Christ. The first
stands in the fulfilling of Ceremonies, the second consists in the faith
of Jesus Christ, and in the obedience to his Gospel. The first of these two
was but the preamble and first beginning of the second: even as a stock or
rough piece of wood is the beginning of the Image that is made thereof: or
else as the crudding together of the blood is the beginning of the issue that
comes thereof. Therefore it shall be but extreme foolishness to stick to the
beginning, and to be settled with delight therein, Christ the end of the law.
when we have once received the perfect issue and true thing it self. And
even thus is Christ the very perfect issue or end of Moses law: which was in
deed but a very weak and imperfect beginning of our righteousness. And this
same issue is fed and nourished, to be our help and comfort in time to
come, with the most delicate, deyntie, and sweet milk of faith: and not with
the da lying toys of Circumcision, or other the like trifling Ceremonies. The
coming unto which righteousness is not only granted unto the Jews, but
also to the Gentiles: and finally to all them that believe in Christ Jesus.
Both which righteousnesses Moses did set forth, and makes mention of them in
his law. Of the which two, the worldly righteousnesses, he mentioned in the
Book of Leuiticus: and it stood in Ceremonies, Gala. 3. Leuit. 18.
that were but for a time appointed, and said: keep my laws and judgments:
which, who soever shall do them, shall live in the same. And he likewise
declared the second righteousness, which is everlasting, and is obtained by
the only merit of our lively faith in Jesus Christ, Deutero. 30.
as in the Book of Deuteronomij, where he says: Thou shalt not say in thine
heart, who ascends into heaven? for that is to pluck Christ out of heaven.
Again, let no man say: who descends into the depth of the earth? for that is
to call Christ again from death. And herein is a likelyhoode, that the same
man believes neither of them both, which demands the practice or
experience of them. But who soever believes truly and sincerely knows this
for a more surety, than to seek for any further advertisement thereof: that
is, that Christ did once descend from heaven, and ascended thither again, and
now sits on the right hand of his father: both which are most true, though
we do not now see them with our bodily eyes. Also, that he descended into the
hels, and from thence returned again, and still lives, though the same be
unknown to our outward senses: yet it shall be sufficient for us to believe,
that all this was once done and fulfilled. Therefore nothing else now remains
to us, and to al those that did see these things brought to pass with their
own eyes, but only to believe his holy Gospel. And we need not seek very
far to here the truth of all this: for the Jews themselves did behold and
see it fulfilled, and yet did not believe it. Howbeit, there were many that
heard of it, and did not see it, and yet they believed it. Neither is there
concealed or hidden from us among the whole scriptures, any one part of this
point, but they do witness the same: and bids us to have recourse unto
the Gospel, for the very certayntie thereof, and says thus to us: The word is
near unto thee: even in thy mouth and in thy heart. And what word is this,
that the Scripture here speaks of? verily, even the only word of the
Gospel, which brings with it perfect health, and is now preached of us, whom
Christ has appointed for the same purpose. How the word of God is in our
mouth and in our heart.
But how is it in thy mouth, and in thine heart? It is verily in thy mouth, if
thou do confess with thy mouth, and acknowledge unto al men, that our lord
Jesus Christ is already come, and has suffered for us. And it is in thine
heart, if thou do believe unfeignedly with all thine heart, that God has
restored him again unto everlasting life: that we hereafter may dye with him
to our sins, and evermore to live with him for the deserts sake of his
passion, death and resurrection. For in our hearts is our right belief: which
belief is the true and vncounterfeited key, to open the door unto
righteousness. Notwithstanding, because we be bound to glorify God, it shall
not be sufficient for us to conceive this faith in our hearts: but also to
acknowledge and confess Christ amongst men with our mouths, if we will come to
our perfect health and salvation. But in all these you clearly see, that the
sum of this matter depends not upon the Law and Ceremonies, but only
upon true faith in Christ: the which Esaias the prophet witnesses, where he
speaks of Christ, Esaias. 28.
who soever (says he) shall believe in him, shall not be ashamed. In which
words we must diligently mark, that whereas the Prophet says: who soever
shall believe: he plainly makes no difference between the Jews and the
Gentiles, but means them all indifferently. Also whereas he says: shall
believe: he means not Circumcision, or any other such like thing: but
utterly excluding all the Ceremonies, he only requires our faith: which is
unto all Nations an universal gift and virtue. Further, God is such a one,
that he is not Lord to the Jews only, but generally to all nations, kinreds,
and people: whose large benefit, is not so straytely pinched in and shut
into an only angle or corner of the world, or that it should only appertain
to them of Iewry: and so peradventure of them to be so clean supped up, that
nothing thereof shall remain unto others: but his bountyfulnesse is without
all measure, and ouerfloweth not to one only Nation or twain: but stretches
forth without exception to all kinreds and people: so that the same call
only upon him for his help and succor, Miche. 2. Act. 2.22.
with an earnest and vndoubting faith. And even thus testifies the Prophet
Micheas: Every man (says he) that shall call upon the name of the Lord, shall
be saved. Here you well see, that the Prophet excepteth no man. Therefore
whosoever with a faithful heart, shall call upon the name of God (whether he
be Jew, Gentile or stranger) shall come unto his salvation. Contrariwise,
whosoever shall not call upon the name of him, shall not be saved. How beit, no
man calls upon him, or demands his help and succor, in whom he does not
believe: And how shall men believe on him, of whom they have not heard? Again,
how can men here of him except there be some to preach of him? And how can
men preach him, if there be none sent to do it: namely of him to whom the
Gospel appertains. Of which preachers Esaias speaks and says: O how
beautiful and precyo^^e are the feet of them that preach peace, Esaias. 52.
and of them that tell good things? Here you perceive by the Prophet, that
all the Preachers of Christ are commanded to Preach, not Circumcision and
holy days, but the peace that coupleth us together in perfect charity: and
such other good things as be always good, and good of their own nature. And
there is nothing now left behind vnpreached, that touches the calling of
mortal men to their salvation: in as much as the Gospel of Christ is
preached unto all Nations, though they do not all believe it, and give their
only trust thereunto. For even so the Prophet Esaias said that it should so
come to pass (speaking in the name of the Apostles) Lord (said he) who did
believe our sermons and preachings? Esaias. 53. John. 12.
For among the Nations, there be very few that believe the Gospel of Christ,
if they be compared to them that do not believe it. Let us therefore gather
together in a sum those things that we have spoken of before: which is, if
the calling upon God, do bring health unto men: and again, if they that do
not trust in him, do not call upon him, then is faith specially of a
Christian man, required before all things, and not Circumcision or the customs
of the Law. Further, faith is conceived in the heart of man, not by the
experience of outward things, but only by godly Sermons and preachings of the
true Apostles of Christ: that is, faith is not conceived by the eyes, but by
the ears: the office of which conueyeth the preachings and godly exhortations
into the obedient and lowly heart of man. Now therefore, since the light of the
Gospel is declared throughout all the world, and the name of Christ preached
to every body: what means it then, that so few of the Jews do believe in
him? Can they excuse them selves and say, that they have not heard of Christ?
Psalm. 18.
yea verily, the same thing is now already fulfilled, which the Prophet David
did Prophecy. Throughout the whole earth went forth the sound of them, and
their words unto the ends of the earth. Wherefore, in as much as Christ has
been promised before times by the mouth of so many Prophets, and now preached
also of the Apostles (his very true witnesses) in all nations and regions of
the world: can the Jews then excuse them selves, and say that they heard not
of him? No verily, for they have seen the light of the world, yet their
malice has blinded their eyes. They have heard the Gospel, but their envy
has stopped their ears. For they had rather be enuiers of the Gentiles, which
are called to salvation, than to follow their faith. And of both these two
things did Moses and Esaias heretofore prophecy: that, is, that the Jews
would cast the Gospel away from them, and that the Gentiles would receive
it. And Moses in Deuteronomij prophesied of the same, whereas he speaks of
the person of God (as offended with the unbelief of the Jews) and says:
Deutero. 3 2.
I will provoke you to envy, and by a foolish nation I will anger you: which
hitherto, in comparison of you, was not taken nor counted for any nation. And
you, which do seem in your selves to be wise, I will anger you through the
same foolish and beastly nation, and cause your anger to be a great deal the
more hot in you. And Esaias following Moses, doubted not to testify that ye
obedience of the Gentiles, was much more acceptable to God, than the pertinacie
and stubbornness of the Jews: for thus he speaks in the person of Christ:
Esaias. 52.65.
I am found of them that sought me not, and have appeared unto them that asked
not after me. Lo, what a worthy witness Christ him self here records of the
Gentiles faith. But again the children of Israel, whom it did specially
become to embrace Christ and his Gospel, hearken here what Esaias says: Esaias.
65.
All the day long (says he) have I stretched forth mine hand unto a people
that believes not, but speaks against me. For which cause (Christ says by
the same) I have sent prophets unto the Jews, which they have all slain and
put to death: and by the multitude of miracles done amongst them, I have
stirred and provoked them: but in steed of the thanks, which they should have
given me for them, they say that I had the devil within me: and that with the
help and power of Beelzebub (the prince of the Devils) I wrought all the said
miracles. And even thus they despised all humility and obedience, and
misconstrued to evil part, the great virtue and power of almighty God.

The.xj. Chapter. All the Jews are not cast away: therefore Paul warns the
Gentiles that be called, not to be high minded, nor to despise the Jews: for
the judgments of God are deep and secret.
But what of all this that we have here spoken? or for what purpose is it thus
uttered? It is to declare, that the Gentiles are adopted and taken to God for
their faythes sake, though before they were all strangers from him? and that
all the chosen and peculiar people of God, Iere. 31.
are now cast off, and utterly put away from him, for their vnbeleefes sake? No
surely, it were not convenient that the same people should be utterly rejected
and cast away from God, which hitherto he has always taken and made an
account of them to be his own dear dearlings and creatures: Certesse, if God
had cast all his own people away from him, then should not I now have
preached Christ: for as much as I am by birthe a very Jew, descending from the
stock of Abraham, which appertains to the Trybe of Benjamin. Which also,
though I did most cruelly persecute the godly and well dysposed people
toward God: yet for all that I am now called to preach the Gospel of his
dear Son Christ. Also I do not doubt but ye very well remember what is
written in the third Book of Kings, where Helias the Prophet speaks unto
GOD, by accusation and complaynte unto him of the Jews ungodliness, 3 Reg 19.
and says: Lord, they have slain thy Prophets: they have ouerturned thine
Altares: and I am left alone behind, and they lay also in wait for me, to
take my life from me. Wherein also me thinks, that God might justly (upon
this great unkindness and incredulity of the Jews) have cast them utterly
from him, and never afterward have looked toward them. But yet for all this,
3. Reg. 19.
mark what answer was made of God unto Helias: I have reserved (says he)
unto my self seven thousand men, which have not bowed their knees unto Baal.
Which thing, as it did chance in the days of Helias, that God would not then
altogether renounce his people, but of an infinite number of sinners, reserved
some (a few of them to him self,) even so doothe the same thing chance unto
them at this time. For God has not suffered all the whole Nation to perish
and to cast them selves away: neither suffers he all men of any other Nation
to continue always in their sins and to dye in them. Of both which, though
there be but a few that do believe, in comparison of them that do not believe:
yet God for his benignities sake, reserved some of his own people to him
self: not because they were Jews borne, or because they observed the Law of
Moses: Deutere. 9.
but only because he chose them out from all the rest, to bestow upon them
his good graces, blessings and benefits: in as much as it came by the
election and the benefit of God, and not of any their deseruings, least they
should extol the largeness of their own will and power, or glory in the
beauty of their own works: for the goodness that is bestowed upon men for
their well doing, is properly to be called a reward, and not a benefit. That
is truly to be called a benefit: which of good will is employed unto them
that do not deserve it. But if a man should heap up all his good works and
service together, and lay them against the benefit, and for their sakes to
challenge the same: then the benefit loses the name of a benefit, and
becomes plainly a just reward. And why did it thus happen unto the Jews?
verily because they attained not to that thing, which they expected by the law,
and that for their vnbeleefes sake. What they be that atteine unto the
salvation of God.
But they only attain to their salvation, which look not for it by
Circumcision or keeping of the law: but only of free mercy, and for the
election sake of God. For all other ways profits not: neither Circumcision,
nor keeping of the Law, except they yield them selves unto the faith of
Christ. But they, in the stubbornenesse of their hearts, are all blinded (after
such a sort) with their own pride and malice: that though they had daily
showed amongst them numbers of miracles by Christ, yet they believed not in
him, whom they looked for by the promise of the law. And all they, though they
did see Christ with their bodily eyes: Esaias. 9. Act. 7.
yet with the eyes of their hearts and minds they saw him not. And this same
did Esaias prophecy should come upon them: which at this day as I truly see
it come to pass, so with mine unfeigned heart, I do lamente and sorrow it. For
the which, because they so wretchedly cast from them the most gracious and
good spirit of Christ: God has sent unto them the spirit of unquietness: a
spirit that is hard, full of pricks, and very rough to be handled. For
though they see with their bodily eyes: yet notwithstanding, they are so
inwardly blinded and amassed, that they say, and so show them selves, to see
nothing at all. And though they also hear with their outward ears, yet they
are therewith no more moved than though they herd nothing at all. Such manner of
people were there in the time of the Prophets: the like also was with Christ
him self: and such people are there until this present day, among the
preachers of the Gospel. David therefore foreseeing in the spirits, that these
things should come to pass, does prophecy the destruction of them, for their
disobedience against God, and says: Let their table be made a snare to take
them selves withal, Psalm. 68.
an occasion to fall, and a punishment meet for their acts. Let their eyes
be blinded, that they see not, and bow thou down their backs: even for this
special cause, that they would not thankefully receive the great benefit of
God being offered unto them: and would not yield them selves contented with
the sight of Christ, and the hearing of his Gospel: but in their
disdaynfulnesse were puffed up, The contempt of the Jews against the Go^pell
of God and Christ.
holding proudly up their heads into the air, and set at naught the
benignity of their maker toward them. And cleaving fast unto the rude letter
of the Law, they had in utter contempt those things that were heavenly and
spiritual, and scorning the things that were everlasting: they chose to
continue their lives in momentayne and worldely vanities: which now bear about
with them the books of Moses, but they do not understand them: which also
read the Prophets, but they yet deny him, whom they prophesied of, should come.
But here peradventure a man will demand of me, for what purpose I discourse
so much against the Jews. The cause whi Paul discourses against the Jews.
Verily even for this cause: they are so manyfestly blinded, they are berefte
of their senses, they be twofolde crooked, and are utterly dubled and amassed in
their brains. But are they in this wise so deep fallen into the mire, or
sonke into the tough clay of blindness, that there is yet no hope left of
recovery, and to raise them up again? God forbid, for their fall happened
unto them but for a certain season. And their fall was not unprofitable to
you, because thereby you were occasioned to be called unto the Gospel. The
Gentiles commodity by the fall of the Jews.
And that, as the fall of the Jews opened the way unto you, to take hold of
your salvation: even so you again by your virtuous example (before the end of
the world) draw them again to godliness: and stir them up by your fruitful
faith to the true belief in Christ: from which they fell, through their own
hateful and most cankred malice. Wherefore, if the fall of the Jews did in
such sort profit you, that it was nothing at all prejudicial or hurtefull,
but rather occasioned, that faith in many other was much more quick and
lively: forasmuch as in the steed of a few that fell, the Gospel of Christ
was the more largely spredde amongst all men: and the loss of one nation was
the cause that so many nations were won and brought in to Christ: How much
more then should the world be enriched with the Christian flock, if by the
virtuous example of your godly religion, and faith in Jesus Christ, that same
nation again should be won, and so joined to all the other in the same most
holy profession? O ye Gentiles, it is even to you that I now speak, which I
take as mine own, Roma. 1. 1. Timo. 2. 2. Timo. 1.
because by appointment I am your most glad Apostle. For whose sake, though I
can find in mine heart to labor and to do al things (be they never so hard)
yet that notwithstanding, I am a great deal more bound to execute my office,
which with strayte charge is committd unto me: that is, to lucrifie and win
you unto the Gospel of Christ: and to profit you in such godliness of life,
that (if it be possible) I may by that means convert and turn again my
native countrymen unto the same godliness: which peradventure they will not
do freely and with a frank courage (taking example of you) yet that it may be
done, although (at the least) for envy and hatred sake. For as the Country it
self is enuiouse against the Gentiles: even so, to see you do better than
themselves, they would be loathe: or that you should with God be in better case
than they. Paul exhorts the Gentiles to godli^nesse of life exodus to be an
ample to the Jews.
Likewise also in this manner, though I am not able to save them all: yet I
most heartily pray you, that by your good example of faith and holy life, which
you have promised to perform before God, I may seem to bring some of them to
goodness again: and I do not doubt of you, but you will all wish and desire
the same thing with me. For if the reiection now of the Jews has been the
occasion, that the rest of the world is reconciled unto God (because their
falling from his grace, was the cause of the Gentiles admission to it:) how
much better shall it then be, that all they which be now fallen from Christ,
do repent and return unto grace again, and to become as new born men, or
restored again from death: taking example of you, to acco^plishe the same with
gladness. Which thing done, there remains then nothing else to be looked
after, but the resurrection of all flesh. Neither should we despair of all
the whole nation, for the impious state or ungodliness of a few of them: for,
seeing the Gentiles being once very far from all kind of godly religion,
were yet at ye calling of God, brought unto the true worshipping of him: why
should not (in like manner) the Jews be called again to the grace and favors
of God, considering they proceeded of so godly parents, which also were
beginners of their religion? yea verily, yea verily, it seems unto me more
agreeable unto reason, that of such godly parents, should spring forth godly
children: because they naturally rather savor of their beginnings, than of
reason to ye contrary: For if the leaven it self be holy and sweet, it is
necessary that all the whole dough besides, be holy and sweet, which is
seasoned with the same leaven. Esaias. 65.
Again, if the root of the tree be holy, it must needs follow, that the
branches which come of the same tree be holy also. The Jews (for their
beginning and first stock) had the Patriarch Abraham: whose faith, God did
wonderfully allow and approve. And what should then let, but that his posterity
should also represent, the faith of their beginner? Which, if they do not,
they cease to be his nephews, even as the branch cease to be nourished with
the juice of the tree, being once broken off and cast aside. Furthermore, mark
well and consider, if it be no marvel to see, that the branches be broken off
from their own tree, in which they had their natural root and beginning:
much less marvel shall it then be, to see the branches broken, and again
rejected, that were grafted in a strange stock. For which cause, if we see
the Jews cut off from the root of their true and natural Olive (as the
natural branches of the same) for their vnbelee^es sake, so that now the root
does nothing at all profit them: It shall be then expedient for all you Gentiles,
which are but branches of the wild Olive, and no natural branches of one
natural root and stock, but translated from an unfruitful stock, and
emplanted into a stock of much fruit and goodness, to take diligent heed,
that you be not proud, nor glory in your selves for your good luckie and happy
chance, and so despise the pore Jews that were cut of from their natural
stock, to the end that you should be grafted in their places. And if in
consideration hereof, it should fortune any of you to be proud and arrogant:
or that if you wax insolent, hautie, and swel in your lusty courage: then, I
would you should take this lesson with you: which is, to have effectually in
your remembrance, that you bear not the root of the tree (wherinto you are
now emplanted) but the root bears you. Do not in this sort proudly boast
among your selves, railing upon the Jews and say: They are cut off from their
stock, which were natural branches thereof, and are now whorled away from it,
that all we should be grafted into the same stock, and nourished even with the
same juice and lovely moisture. For I say unto you, they were not of purpose
cut off for your sakes: notwithstanding, it so pleased God that you should be
planted in their places, to drink, to suck up, and to feed frankely upon the
sweet licor of the same stock. And you do also say truly, that they are
cut off, which were the true and natural branches: but you must also further
debate with your selves, wherefore, or for what cause they were so cut off:
Verily, even for their vnbeleefes sake, and so must you truly be persuaded.
And for the same only cause, do they now lie, and are scattered abroad as
dead branches from their root, and be here and there spurned at without
pity and regard. And you (for your faithes sake) are planted into their
natural places, and do fructify with grace in their stock and root.

I gladly would, To rejoice at another fall it is not good, but it is great
godliness to beware by the punishment of another to fear and amend that which
is amiss.
that none of you should rejoice in the misfortunes of an other man: but I
rather wish with all mine heart, that the mischaunces or evil haps of an other
man, may teach you true obedience, softness and soberness: and to learn by
their known infelicities, godliness to beware by the punishment of another to
fear and amend that which is amiste.
what always you should dread and fear, if you also commit such like
iniquity. For in as much, as all you do well perceive, that God spared not
his own natural branches, and that it does nothing at all profit them, to
have sprung of so good and faithful stocks, after they had once forsaken him:
then, much more you ought with all diligence beware and take heed to your
selves, that you also do not offend God with your stubbornness, pride or
unkindness (which are none of his natural branches) least he also spare not
you, but cast you of in like manner, as he did those graceless and unhappy
Jews. Therefore, by their fall, learn (I say) what you should always shun
and avoid: For your felicity and happy chance, does not give occasion unto
you, of pride and to be vainly glorious: but it rather admonishes you, and
puts you in remembrance of the great goodness and mercies of God toward
you. All you hereby have good cause, to take comfort unto your selves, that
you be the elect children of God: and to yield therefore unto him, condign
and most hearty thanks: and not to mock or rail upon them, which are now out
of his grace and favor. They were al woorthely cut of and cast from their
stock, The Jews justly cut of from their stock, and the Gentiles planted
therein without desert.
upon just and good occasion: and you are emplanted thereinto, without one jot
of your deseruings. Both which things, I exhort you to consider among your
selves: that is, both the goodness of God toward you, and his severity and
sharpness toward the Jews. Of the which, the first may teach you all, to
be loving and kind to him again: and the second may instruct you, to
forsake all hautinesse, pride, and stubbornness. The sharpness of God is
showed against the Jews, which sunk so deep in their darkness and
error, that they made a mock of our savior Christ, who was promised unto
them, so many hundredth years before. And as for the goodness of God, you your
selves have had thereof, most joyful and large experience: In as much, as
you are now called into the worthy fellowship of so great and high felicity,
and that freely without your deseruings: which were once of your selves a kind
of men, both utterly ungodly, of no estimation with God, and fell before him
to the state of damnation. Once in your lives, you have the sins of your
former life pardoned, and freely forgiven you of God: And once also in your
lives, you are numbered amongst the children of God, through his only favor,
and wonderful love toward you. How be it, you are in such sort numbered
among his children, that it comes to you only of favor without desert:
neither stand you in your estate so sure, but that through offense, ye may
fall from the same again. God will justly take yt from the gratelesse and
unkind man, which before he has freely given unto him: unless he will
confess, and thankfully acknowledge the same: or otherwise, not using the
goodness of God, as he ought to do: your unkindness shall destroy and bring
that to naught in you, which God of his own goodness has freely given unto
you. Your pride shall banishe that quite from you, which your obedience has
brought unto you. For which cause, unless ye shall earnestly take heed to
your selves, you shall be cut again from the Olive, 2. Cor. 3.
wherein you be now engrafted. And in like manner, the Jews, if they will
change and put away from them, their incredulity and stubbernesse, (which
has banished them from the grace and favor of God) and take unto them true
faith and obedience to the gospel of Christ, they shall be planted again
into their own stock, from whence (with woe) they were once broken of. For
faith has power to restore and rear that up again into his good state and
former perfection, which unbelief destroys and soon overthrows to
naught. For if it be reason, that you which are but Gentiles, ungodly
creatures and common idolaters, be cut off (as it were) from a wild Olive,
and grafted into the true Olive it self, which appertained nothing to your
nature: then of much more reason it shall seem to be, that the Jews being
borne and descended of godly parents, do show the natural liuelynesse and
condition of their parents, and to be emplanted again into their own
natural Olive, from whence they were cut off, by the axe of their unbelief.

Brethren, I will open one mystery unto you in this place, which I should
rather keep secret, but that the knowledge thereof is greatly for your
purposes: which is, exhorting you all: An exhortation to the Gentiles to beware
of pride.
that in no case you be proud or vain glorious among your selves, that you
seem at this time to be thus preferred before the Jews. Which vice, is most
reprocheful before the face of God: and the self same evil it was, that so
greatly blinded the unhappy Jews. Pride the fall of the Jews.
How be it, it did not blind them al, and that for ever: for many of them do
confess Christ: and the other shall continue in their blindness, until such
time, as the perfect number of the Gentiles shall be fulfilled: unto whom, the
fall of the Jews has thus occasioned them to be called to the gospel. The
time of the Jews conversion unto Christ.
Wherefore, the Jews when they shall see and perceive, that all the world does
flourish in the true profession of Christ: then shall they confess their own
blindness: that is, that they look, and have looked for their Messiah in
vain, their City, their temple, and their sacrifices: and that the very true
Messiah is come already, which is Jesus Christ our Lord. And thus in time,
Luke 21.
shall all those people of Israel be restored again to their true health and
salvation, though the same (at this time) be yet partly gone away from them.
And then shall the same people be worthy of their own name, when they shall
begin to behold Christ with the eyes of their faith, and look upon him which
is the son of God, and God him self. Which thing, to the end you should the
better believe it, it was prophesied before of the Prophet Esaias, that is: that
the Jews should both fall away from Christ, and that they should afterward
come again to him by repentance. The one, we have already seen to have
chanced, whereof the thing it self bears witness, yt the Prophet said not
amiss: And the other we ought to look for, which is yet most certainly to
come. For thus says the Prophet: There shall come out of Sion, he that does
deliver, and shall turn away the ungodliness of Jacob: Psalm. 13. Esaias. 59.
And this is my covenant with them, when I shall take away their sins. God
made once a covenant with the same nation: which, because he has in deed
made it, he will not suffer it to be done in vain, or for no purpose: but
assuredly to take effect, even through the occasion of some men's faults,
which do show themselves unworthy the good promises of God. Howebeit, there
shall always be some, which shall supply the room of the whole nation.
Neither can we say, that they have gonne so far from the grace of God, that
they cannot return again. Al they which clean and stick fast to the letter
and ceremonies of the law, and have cast from them the gospel of Christ, be
very enemies unto God. But to the end therefore, you should not taunt or rail
upon them, God would that the thing which is so done, should be to all your
commodities: in as much, as they casting away the gospel of Christ, the same
the sooner took place with you. But all they, for as much as they be borne of
holy parents, and do also appertain unto that nation, which God from all
others chose to him self for his own proper people: The Jews dearly beloved
of God for their parents sake.
by virtue of whose parents, they be yet dearly beloved of God: It shall
follow, that the same shall the sooner be received unto grace again, if they
shall happily fall to repentance: and shall also the sooner be made partakers
of ye promises of God (made heretofore to their fathers) which at this
present time, all we do preach. For verily, God does not make his promises
after such a sort (either does entende any thing) that he may afterward
repent himself thereof, and thereuppon to change his mind and purpose, as
the common custom of men is to do: but he is always immutable: which, as he
cannot err and do amiss: even so he cannot repent himself of any thing yt he
does. God will remember his promise unto the Jews, Gods rememberaunce toward
the Jews.
when so ever he shall see them turn to him again, and cast him no more away
from them. Al things have their change and alteration: therefore ye ought not to
jest upon the miserable Jews that be fallen from God: specially, because the
same was commodious and profitable unto you. Again, Gods mercy toward the
Gentiles.
if they do repent and come unto goodness, you should gratify them in their
so doing. For notwithstanding that all you were once unfaithful (as many of
the Jews be in these days:) yet did not God forsake you for ever fith it is
brought to pass at this time, through his great mercy and goodness, that in
their stead (because they did reiecte their faith in Christ) you were
thereunto received.

And thus God suffered the Jews to fall from the faith for a space, until
such time as the Gentiles might have their prepared paths to come unto it.
So that, after their repentance and coming again to God (at his appointed
time when he shall call them) they shall obtain the like mercy with you: The
Jews and the Gentiles joined in one faith to Christ.
and neither of you shall cast the other in the teethe with the others
enormities, but both of you shall gratefie one an other, that you have all
received semblable mercy at the hands of almighty God: which does order and
dispose all things with such an unspeakable wisdom and council: that all
men (what so ever they be) are found subject to sin, God not being the author
of sin why he suffers men to fall into sin
and lack of belief. Not that he him self is the author and causer thereof,
but that he suffers them to fall into it through their own fault and
malice, and to continue in the same for a space: to the end, that thereby
perceiving the goodness of God in others, and their own unkindness and
fault also in themselves, they may be occasioned to confess at the last with
open mouth, that they be not saved and brought to salvation by their own
deseruings, but by the gratuitie and only mercy of God, through his son
Christ: least they (in their pride) should blindely boast them selves, and
glory in their own strength and virtue. God being clear of man's fall turns
the same to good.
And though God, in this manner works these things amongst men: yet he him
self is so far from the causing or consenting of any man's fall into sin
or vice, that he in most miraculous manner, and far passing the capacities
of men, turns that thing which is naught in some, unto others great weal and
commodity. But peradventure, I speak further in this secret mystery of God,
than is seemly for one man to commune with another. For waying most reverently
with my self, the omnipotency of God and his secret counsel in this behalf,
such a stunnage and amasement possesses my spirit, that I am not able to
declare and make it manifest unto men: but only may marvel and cry out thereat,
saying: O the deepenesse of Gods wisdom, Sapi. 17.
and of his abundante knowledge: whose judgment, no man's reason can
comprehend: and whose secret councelles and ways, no creature did yet ever
understand. For what man, (ever since the world began) knew at any time the
mind of the Lord?

Or what man was ever (with him) of his privy council? Sapi. 6. Esaias. 4 9. 1.
Cor. 2.
Either who has first given unto him any such benefit, that his goodness
toward us may be called a reward for our deseruings, and not only rather the
mere grace and kyndenesse of him? God has so seen unto the profit of
mankind, that though it surmounteth the knowledge and wisdom of men: yet
verily it is after such a sort, that it can in no wise be amended or made
more profitable. Which would that all we (in such manner) should acknowledge
his bountyfulnesse toward us, God would we should acknowledge his goodness,
depend, only upon his providence and not put any confidence in our own
merits.
that we should all wholly and only depend upon the goodness thereof,
without any vain trust or confidence of our own merits: forasmuch as all
our evils and infelicities that be in us, we may justly impute them unto our
own selves: but all the goodness and the joys to come, do only proceed
from the mercy and love of God: which does bestow them upon us, as the only
author and procurer of the same: and whose continuance also lies in his hands,
as the only tutor and most gracious preserver of them. So that no man what
soever he be, can challenge to him self any part of the due commendation
thereof: considering both the beginning, the midst, Esaias. 44.
and the ending of all these appertains unto God, and be properly in his own
hands. Unto whom be all honor, Roma. 16.
laud and glory for ever. Amen.

The.xij. Chapter. The conversation, love, and works, of such as believe in
Christ.
WHerefore, seeing ye all be now through the benefit of God, called from your
old superstition, and brought unto the true worshipping of God, and set at
liberty from the bondage of Moses law: I beseech you all, and most heartily
require you, even for the mercies sake of God (whereunto you be bound for your
joys and felicities to come) that you will from henceforth offer unto him
such kind of sacrifices, as be worthy and meet for your profession: Philip. 4.
which are not Goats, Sheep, nor Oxen, that are chosen of the Jews from all
other beasts, as are pure and meet for their godly affairs: but now at this
time God requires at your hands other manner of sacrifices than were all
these: that is, you must now sacrifice unto him, your own bodies: not that you
should slay them, as the Jews did their beasts: but in slaying and putting to
death, all your evil lusts and most filthy affections that reign in your
members. Which is not any dead beast, but a lively offering, Philip. 4.
very pure of it self and holy, reasonable, pleasant, and acceptable to God:
a sacrifice of the spirit, and an invocation of the mind, and not of a dead
beast. All those times passed, that the carnal Law of Moses stood in
effect, God took it in good part to have beasts sacrificed unto him: but
now, seeing the spiritual law is come, and proclaimed to all men that they
should obey it, and put away the other: What sacrifices the true christians
offer to God.
it is requisite then in deed, that we offer spiritual sacrifices unto him:
that is, in the steed of killing a Calfe, we must kill and slay within us the
raging heat of pride: in the steed of killing a sheep, we must put to death
our boiling and fretting anger. In steed of killing a Goat, we must
suppress and choke up our sensual lusts: And in steed of Pigeons and
Turtles, we must sacrifice unto God all the wanton motions and infected
thoughts of our minds. For these be the worthy and acceptable offerings to
God: and these be the pleasant and joyful sacrifices to Christ. God is a
spirit, and is reconciled unto us with the offices of the spirit: and he
requires not to be honored with the Ceremonies or Traditions of men, but with
the pure and undefiled works of the mind. Therefore in steed of your
uncircumcision, cut away from you all superfluous and unseemly affections of
your hearts. The Saboth day.
Let your Saboth day be unto you a mind which is utterly vacant and without
all hurly burlies of worldly perturbations. Christ did offer up him self upon
the cross to suffer death for us: it is therefore reason, Sapi. 6. Esaias. 4 9.
1. Cor. 2.
that we should also sacrifice our selves to him: which is, in mortifying all
the motions of our fleshely concupiscences and worldly delectations, and become
spiritual creatures with him in all our actions and doings. And even so it
shall come to pass, that like as you be al exempted and put apart from these
worldly illectations and wanton allurementes, and planted into a spiritual
calling through your profession: even so it is right comely and well seeming,
that your lives now dissent in all kinds of exercitation from your old life, and
to be made again as new men, that is to say, spiritual and heavenly. Which,
though you can not be of this conformity to God, and exempt from the world by
the immortality of your natural bodies: yet verily in the newness of your
affections and good motions of the soul, you may be: yea, ye may in such sort
temper your selves, that nothing may seem to be pleasant or of any estimation
amongst you, which belongs to this ungodly world, that never remains in any
stabilitie. Also you may not desire any thing, Ephe. 5. 1. Thessa. 4. Ecclesi.
3.
but that which you are persuaded is well allowed with God. Neither to be drawn
in the following of your profession, with the prescripts and traditions of men,
but all wholly to depend upon the will and pleasure of God, both in your
thoughts and also in your deeds. Which requires no gross or imperfect
thing: but that which is truly good, acceptable, meek, and answerable to the
true worshipping of him. The manner of men in this world is, that he which is
welthy, has the vnwelthy in contempt: but I exhort you all, that what soever
he be amongst you (whether he be high, low, mighty, strong, poor or base
inferior, so that he be exempted from the manner of this world, and nu^bred
through grace among the christian flock) that he take not more upon him,
through ye pride of his heart than he ought to do: but let him be mild, pitiful,
sober and soft in all his actions. Roma. 14. 1. Corin. 8.
And first of al, let no man attribute more to him self than he lawfully has.
After that, let him well remember, that ye same thing which he has, comes not
to him by the worthiness of his works, but it is given unto him only of god,
for the excellency of his approved faith. Again, as the same is given him of
God for his faythes sake: so he would not he should therewith magnify and
extol him self: but that he should wholly employ it to the comfort and
profit of his poor and needy neighbor. Howbeit, God gives his gifts
diversely, and not singly after one sort, least one man should disdain
another, or think him self sufficient enough of him self. True charity.
But the true charity of Christian men, should make the gifts given of God to
every particular person, to be common, even unto all men. And in mine opinion
it should be a great shame for us men, that the grace of God which is given
unto us, should not be made so universal among us, to every man's help and
succor: as the gift of nature is made universal amongst brute beasts (from
one of them to another) as we by experience do daily see for our learning. 1.
Cor. 15. Ephe. 4.
And look also what the society and universal help of the members belonging
to the outward body, is to the body it self: even so the same society should
be amongst all them (in their hearts and minds) which be called and gathered
together from many and diverse Nations, and adjoined to the most holy fellowship
and flock of Christ. For our visible body, The visible body of man with the
whole members thereof.
though it be one self same thing and substance: yet notwithstanding, it is
compacte and made of diverse and sundry members. And those same members have not
al one only function or office appointed to them selves: but the eye has one
office, the feet have another, the belly and hands have another: yet for all
that, the eye does not only guide and look to it self, but generally to the
whole body: and the belly does not receive and digest our refection unto it
self only, but to the rest of all the members belonging to the body. A
similitude.
Therefore now, as there is a mutual society and relieuing of diverse members
one to another in our sensible bodies: even so the diverse gifts of God amongst
men, should be employed, the one to an others commodity and profit.
Furthermore, as the most excellent members of the body (as these before named)
do not despise their inferiors, as the feet and such like, but one of them
lovingly (by the gift of nature) helps one another, otherwise in process of
time the whole substance of the body it self should perish and come to
naught: even so, let every man (whether he have received an excellent gift at
the hands of God, or otherwise a gift of less estimation) employ the same by
all means possible, to the use and commodity of the whole body, which is the
faithful congregation of Jesus Christ. For after we be once called and
gathered together by faith in the Gospel, and incorporate into the mystical
body of Christ, which is our head: then are we all made as one spiritual body
with him: Neither should a true Christian man be any other thing else, than
one member to another in one body. Notwithstanding, as I spoke before, the
gifts of every person be variable and sundry: not after their merits and
deserts of working, but according to the merciful goodness of God: which
employeth his grace to every creature, as his divine majesty knows to be
most expedient Wherefore let no man magnify him self with the gift that God
has lent unto him, How to use the gifts of God.
but let the same use it soberly and with christian discretion, to the comfort
and commodity of all men. Then, whether the gift of God be to interpret
sincerely the secrets of the holy Scriptures, according to the quantity of
his faith (which only thing, God looks for, and not for other our merits
and deseruings) let him communicate it to the advantage of others, with all
simplicity and humbleness, 1. Cor. 14: Acts. 2.
and without all vaynglory or statelynesse of pride. Or whether it be, that he
may help to sustain his poor and needy neighbors with his goods and
riches: let him employ the same to their necessities, with all gladness,
meekness, and soberness. If he have the gift of knowledge and learning, let
him not be scornful toward the unlearned: but without all kind of
arrogancy, let him use it unto them, to their godly instruction and edifying.
If he have the gift of exhortation, or to persuade men to lead an honest and
a godly life, according to the Scriptures, let him execute the same with all
diligence and godly love. Either, whether he have the gift of worldly wealth,
let him therewith succor all mankind: and let him show him self friendly and
beneficial unto all such as have need of his help: and let not this be
done, to get thereby to him self vaynegloriously the praise of men: neither
to that end he should hope thereby afterward to get advantage or lucre,
but let it only be done to the praise of God, Eccle. 32.
and that with a bountyfull and glad courage. Further, wherein so ever he be
called, to have rule and gouernemente over others, let not the honor and
dignity of the office make him insolent and haute: but let it rather put him
always in remembrance to be circumspecte in the same, and not execute his
office to his own singular advantage: Deuteronomy. 15.
but wholly for their sakes and causes, over whom he is appointed to be in
authority. Also, whether he be moved to help and succor the miserable and
careful people, let him not do it with any sad or sullen countenance (which
may be an occasion that the man whom he so helps, be the rather dashed out of
countenance, and thereby his care much more increased, because he shall think
that ye help comes not to him voluntarily and of glad good will) but from an
heart not perfectly charitable, and so rather has his help for manner sake, or
for an outward countenance to the world, than for godly duty, or by the
freedom of charity. Again let him not in any case cast the good deed that he
has done in the teth of the poor, when he is so relieved: for surely that
vice is far passing either al godly or manlike nature. We are not of god cast
in the teeth with his innumerable benefits bestowed daily upon us, but he
always and continually allureth us to innocence, by renewing his blessings
bountifully upon us, though we be altogether most unworthy of them. Even so,
let every christian man always seek opportunity to help and profit others,
but in any wise not to cast the^ in the teeth of their well doing: and that
every his benefit be disposed to his neighbor, as though he had yet never given
him any thing at all: and that also to be done with a most loving heart, and
godly charity. Surely dear brethren, the goodness of men is now diversely and
many ways corrupted with such kind of enormities, although they have appearance,
outward countenance and show of fre^dly benevolence, great benignity and
fredome. But god defend this from al you, and make your charity to be such,
that ye may be free from the comfortless spirit of roughness, contempt,
forgetfulness, simulatio^, hypocrisy, vainglory, or immoderate streitnesse.
You shall never do that thing which your corrupted lusts stirs you to do,
Amos. 5.
and as is the common trade for the most part amongst men: but you shall only do
that which virtue and perfect charity motioneth or commands you to do, and
in hating all corruption and evil, you shall only adhere and cleue fast unto al
honest and godly things. Furthermore, considering you be al brethren and heirs
together with Christ, it is convenient yt you altogether call upon one father
for your inheritance: to the which you be most happily appointed and
predestinat of him: and to be always benign and loving one of you to another
in brotherly kindness and charity. Among those yt be of this world, and seek
the glory thereof, there is great contention and strife, 2. Pet. 2. Eccle 31,
which of the^ should be preferred and have the upper hand one of another: but
do al you to ye contrary. Let no man amongst you live to himself in loytring,
in idleness, or in any ungodly exercise: but let every one enforce him self to
work accordingly for good, as in his honest vocation he is called, and shall
seem best unto him. Neither be you made heavy and sluggish, through ye
weakness and infirmity of your flesh: but be lively, quick, and full of
agilitie in ye spirit of god: for you have now left of to dwell any more in ye
earthy and lumpish affects of ye flesh, and have already begun to take hold of
ye spirit, The flesh. The Spirit.
and to become newborn men, holy, divine and spiritual. The flesh is
earthly, and has his property to be heavy and unlusty: but the spirit is
properly inclined to be lusty, quick, and lively. Do not contend and
unlawfully strive against the temptations and chanced evils of this life: but
holily obey to the time, and conform your selves to those things yt be
present: that is to say, if there happen by any means any hurt or
disco^moditie unto you: either do you put it away if you can without any
further displeasure: or else waying the good will of god (in such behalf)
toward you, ye patiently bear and suffer it, and that not disconte^tedly in
your selves, for that is the property of faithles me^, very weaklings in
christ, unstaid in spirit, and of a desperate mind distrusting god, but in
all your adversities, hope for your commodities to come, and take your
afflictions merrily, patiently, with all godly modesty and good will. And
although some wretched creatures shall therefore the sorer vex you: yet
notwithstanding seek not to aduenge your selves, neither yet run to the
help of men, as though ye were reiectes, forsaken of God, forgotten of him, or
else that he were void of power to help your case: but continually pray unto
him, and trust in his fatherly providence for your happy deliverance. Also if
any Christian men stand in need of your godly relieuement, help them
lovingly, cherefully, quickly, and with all christian towardness of heart:
not as men do give their wages to workmen and deseruers of the same (what
soever it be that you have and do dispose) but as counting that to be common
for all men's necessities. And let not this same benignity be only used among
your selves, but unto all such also as be far from you, Hebr. 13.
and dispearsed in diverse Regions. Harbor and entertayne al such as shall come
from far unto you, and travelers (through necessity) from country to
country, least they shall (being Gods people) either miserably lack the
thing, that he has by you provided for them: either that they being enforced,
through want of your godly hospitality and comfort, do wander abroad for
succor, and so join them selves to the unbelievers, and become all one with
them in their wicked profession and manners. Moreover as it is most convenient
for you to have good and well occupied hands: so it shall also be convenient
for you to have a well tempered and disposed tongue. All such as shall hate
and persecute you for Christ's sake and his word: it shall be most comely for
you, not to hate them again, or to revenge your selves of them: but heartily to
wish them well, to say well of them, to pray unfeignedly for them, and daily to
bless them, but in no wise to curse them. Again, all such as you can not
profit, either with your counsel, good word, power, or substance: yet
possess toward them a pityfull and tender heart, wish them always well,
Philip. 2.
and zealously pray for them. Let the friendship that is amongst you, be so
sure, so unfeigned and perfect, that it may even so generally have force amongst
you, and make all your chances (as well the sorrowful as joyful) indifferent
and common unto you all, although in the woorst part, and that with tears. Let
one consent of the heart and mind, and one mutual affection, so be amongst you,
that there may be made of you all, but only one together: that the same which
happens unto you (whether it be prosperous or to the contrary) may be seen
to chance as well unto all of you, as unto one. Proverb. 3. Esaias. 5.
Be not elated and puffed up one of you against an other: but he that in
worldly estimation is most high amongste you: let the same meekely and
gentlely exhibit him self unto all those, that be his inferioures or of baser
state. Let none of you all stand in your own conceits, or be vainly glorious
in his own sight: for he can never (as a godly man) patiently suffer nor abide
another man, that is of him self so corruptly given and affected. Also,
Proverb. 20. 1. Pet. 3.
if any man shall chance to speak evil of you, or give you evil words to
your face: do not then heap check upon check, ne taunt for taunt, slander
for slander, wrong for wrong, either stroke for stroke (though the same be
counted justice among the Jews:) but among the prefessors of Christ, let it
be a most wicked thing, to do one mischief for an other. And that all such
evil things which you worthily disalow in an other man, fly from them, and
utterly avoid them in your self. Strive to go one before an other in well
doing: and at al times so frame your contention (if there be any) that the
godliness which shines from you, may not only be pleasant unto God himself,
and peaceable to your own consciences: but that the same may also of all men
be approved for good, and that without the appearance of any offense to the
weak, in that peradventure they may bear some similitude with them of evil.
Also, 2. Cor 8.
so far of let your lives and conversation be, from all corruption and
bondage of sin, that not only in Gods sight ye may be all free from the same:
but also as much as in you shall lie, to avoid all suspicion thereof from
others: that the very evil men them selves, may have none occasion to reprove
you, or to speak evil against you. Which thing you shall easily perform and
bring to pass, if you shall be at peace with all men, as well with them that be
strangers from Christ, as with them also that be already christen, and
profess presently the rules of Christ. And here must you also consider,
that perfect peace can not truly appear, nor be well kept amongst men, whereas
every man for every trifle, seeks occasion to be aduenged of his neighbors.
It is a Iewishe property to be revenged one of an other: To revenge is the
property of Jews.
but all you, though at any time, you be injuriously provoked or stirred
thereunto justly to revenge: yet notwithstanding ye may not therefore swel nor
pursue by just cause, to work your own revenge: The way to true peace as best
becomes a christian.
but you must bear with offenses, and qualify with temperance, the affectes of
your fury, so shall you that ways best quiet your selves, show forth from
you the duty of christen patience, and thereby the better please both God and
man, then by revenge to offend them both. For if at any time through your
godly patience, you shall qualify the outrage or fury of men, you shall
stir them thereby to have some remorse, to feel in them selves the true
touch of repentance, they will the more gladly join with you, you shall happily
win them unto you, and that by the grace of God, in your good example, best
approved and most excellent work. But if the same thus mildly dealt withal,
shall yet still continue in his fury, without due regard of your heavenly
virtue: then doubt you not, but the just God, which beholds his uncharitable
and stubburne heart, will (at time convenient) most sharply chastsie him for
it. Wherefore, refrain you your anger against him, and commit him conte^tedly
unto the same judge, which has authority, will and power, sharply to revenge
and punish every man's fault: for he has the terror of vengeance in his own
hand, and reserueth the use thereof to be disposed in time to the wicked, as
appears in the Book of Deuteronomie, Deuteronomy. 32.
where he says: Vengeance is mine, and I will reward Yea verily, so much
you should abstain from doing hurt to an other man, yt though you have already
received displeasure at his hands: yet you should charitably requite the same,
with some friendly benefit and good turn. If your enemy shall hunger, relieve
him charitably with some meat. Proverb. 25.
If he shall thirste, give him also some drink. Neither is there any man's
nature so stubborn, so rustical and rude, or so far of from all kind of
humanity, but that in time it may easily be mollified through pacient
sufferance, meekness and gentleness. And for as much as we see, that all
kinds of unreasonable and wild beasts, are made tame and gentle, through the
softness, gentle entreaty and mild handling of reasonable men: then how
much more may the reasonable man him self be made tame, cold, tractable and
gentle, with the wisdom, charity, patience, Charity, temperaunce, and
modesty, noble virtues in a christian for the conversion of others unto Christ.
temperance and modesty of an other man.

The which, after he shall once find by proof, and be touched with the
experience of such excellent graces and rare gifts of godliness, then will
he begin to examine him self, to repent him, to show him self ashamed, and to
be greatly agreeued with such his forgetfulness, very rudeness,
barbarousnesse, impaciencie, or most wilful madness. And being thus overcome,
with your loving, tractable, and charitable demeanor: he shall virtuously be
inflamed, maruellously changed, made a new man, and mightily stirred through
grace, even with the same christen love, to love again most heartily. And by
this good and godly mean, may al disorders, contentions, controversies and
uncharitable strifes, be brought to godly unity and peace: whereas
contrariwise, in revenging euel for euel, and doing one mischief for an other,
there can never be christen concord, nor the continuance of Gods grace among
such, but the continuance of his fury to vex them, and the terror always of
his justice to their condemnation. Christian contention.
As it is a right noble and virtuous thing, to be a forerunner in strife and
contention, for the exercise of Christian charity, and other godly things: so,
of all other it is most noble and honorable, to be a preuailer and ouercommer
of all others therein. But to enter into contention about things that be
naught, vain and vicious, it is of all other things, most reproachful: Vain
co^tentio^
loathsome, and filthy, for the use of any faithful and true christian man.
Yea, so far off it is from humanity, or from the use of virtue and honesty,
that the very heathen which know not God, do grant and confess the same.

The christian in the excellency of calling ought to excel all others in virtue
But unto al you (in the excellency of your state and profession above others)
it shall properly appertain, to excel in your virtue, the wicked conversation of
others: with your soft, gentle, and amiable speech, to counteruaile them in
their backbitings, deprauations and slaunderings: with your mildness and
christen patience, their outrage, impaciencie and madness: and with your
gentle forbearing and suffering, their cruel and shameless injuries. The
christians warned to beware least they be compassed and trained from the truth
by the crafty wilines of the wicked.
And all this notwithstanding, you must diligently beware, least the wicked in
their crafty wiliness compass you not about, with the sugared sleightes and
suttleties, of their inward and secret malice, and so trade you from the true
trade of righteousness, and to be folowers of them in their wickedness: but
be watchful over your selves, and labor diligently, not only to uphold your
own state, and to stand therein, but to compass also such in their
wickedness, and to travail by all means possible, to overcome them and draw
them unto you, through the ouerflowing of godliness in you.

The.xiij. Chapter. The obedience of men unto their rulers. Love fulfilleth the
law. It is now no time to follow the works of darkness.
FVrthermore considering the public weal and state of all this world, is
always vpholden by common order and authority, without which the state of
mankind should be most miserable: I would not that the same should be of you at
any time, or by any means disturbed: but that you should most willingly way
your own commodity thereby, and yield most wisely to the ordinance thereof.
Wherefore, let every one of you without exception, of what estate, degree or
calling so ever he be, submit him self with all humbleness, to the law and
authority of the higher powers, which bear in them the figure and similitude
of God: and also to all other rulers and magistrates sent of them: Sapi. 6. 1.
Pet. 2.
who in the excellency of their authority, have in their hands the sword of
justice (the virtue and power of God) both for the praise or punishment, of
honest and evil doers. Wherefore, he that disobediently, in the error of
contempt or wilful ignorance, resists the power of the Prince or magistrate
(whether he be believer or infidel) the same resists God himself, which
appointed them to that most high dignity and office: and whose person (here on
earth) they most truly represent. For, like as the shadow of Moses law came of
God him self, and to be embraced of all the Jews, that professed the law,
which at any time might not of them for any certain space be rejected, but to
be then obeyed with all reverent submissi^n: even so, every legal justice and
princely authority amongst men, is given of God himself, 1. Pet. 2.
that we being called to the state of subjection, should all for a time most
humbly and in Gods fear obey the same: In as much, as it is the conservation
of our public order: which should of all men most worthily be esteemed,
beloved, tendered, and by all possible menes provided for. For even as God, would
there should be in our natural bodies (as is before said) an order observed
amongst the members thereof: even so he would that the public weal which
stands of diverse members, of some better, some worse, some mighty and high
in power, and some more base and inferior, should be always preserved of
those same members, even by a mutual order and most lovely consent amongst
them selves. And truly, this same order of it self, besides the appointment
of God, is a very perfect, natural, and godly order, although of the wicked
it be oftentimes shaken against nature, and spurned at by most curssed
rebellion. For which cause sake, To rebel against authority, is also to
rebel against God him self by whose justice they shall be confounded.
all they that in such wise do so unkindly against God and nature, vex, and
disturb it, they disturb not only the high state or royal dignity of man
here on earth, but the magnificent power and great majesty of the most high
and mighty God of heaven. And surely, as the offense therein, so committed
against God and nature, is most grievous, horrible, and insufferable in his
sight: so the terror of his justice hangs worthily over them, and hastneth
unto them the shortning of their days, the curse of the people, and the
judgment of God to their just damnation. But if you wilt be free from such
displeasure of God, laid justly upon thee by the hand of his magistrate, and
not be made subject to his correction: the^ do not think (through stubbernes
and disobedience) to come unto it: but rather with the heart of innoce^cie, true
obedience and a godly life to eschew it. For persuade with thy self, that ye
magistrate in the mightiness of his princely power and majesty, has no such
force over well doers, but upon the wicked, The sword of the magistrate is due
only unto rebels and wicked offenders.
rebellious and disobedient sinners, his justice is duly to be exercised. Live
thou well therefore in the vocation wherein God has called thee, and persuade thy
self of assurance, that the law shall not crave sharp justice against thee,
nether shall thou feel just cause in thy self, to fear the sword of the
magistrate, but to rejoice in his power, and to live under him as a loving
subject, with godly reverence, and peace of conscience: For thy known
conversation in righteousness, enforces the law to esteem well of thee, and
to further unto authority thy due commendation and praise: in as much as it
truly pronou^ceth thee not to be any offender, but a right honest, obedient,
quiet, and civil subject. Therefore, as the magistrate is appointed of God, and
the instrument of his mighty hand to punish the offender: eue^ so of him he is
ordained to give commendation to the godly and virtuous liver. Thus you hear
how free that man is from the law, and how freendly it deals for him, that is
of good behauior, and leads an upright and godly life. Now for as much then,
as the public order in a common wealth, cannot remain in his uprightness and
integrity, unless the magistrates thereof that are in authority, be had in
due estimation and honor. It follows therefore, that every of you do submit
your selves unto them for necessities sake: and not only for that, but also for
very conscience sake: The necessity of obedience toward the magistrate by
the testimonye of the true conscience.
yea though none occasion at al be given to stand in fear of them. Which
conscience secretly witnesses unto every man, that the thing which amongst
men, is of god appointed to be observed and kept, ought to be honored, and had
in all estimation and reverence with them. And the magistrates them selves,
because they bear ye charge of the public weal (which equally appertains
unto al men:) it is convenient, even for the same cause, yt they have duly paid
unto them, their custom and tribute. Math. 17.22.
Of which, though peradventure some of them be wicked and ungodly: yet
notwtstanding, because they are ministers of the public justice (which is God
him self) they must be counted gods ministers: for they only do execute his
office, in that they be ministers of such things as they be appointed of God
him self to do. Wherefore, if the magistrates shall forbid any thing to be don,
that is not lawful and right, obey most gladly unto them: Obedience to
christian duties.
namely, seeing you should of your selves do the same, not by co^pulsion or
fear, but most willingly for conscience sake. Howbeit, if the same to the
contrary shall prescribe such things to their subjects, In the schewing of
evil, God before man is to be obeyed
as be ungodly and disagreeable to the scriptures: then also, by the bond of
your consciences, you ought rather yield your obedience unto god, than unto
them. Again, if at any time they shall be occasioned, to demand any payment of
your worldly substance (the paiing of which, if it be not prejudicial to the
law of God and religion) there is no reason, why ye should stay or wthold your
liberalities from them, or by such and the like stubbernesse, to bring their
just rigor upon your necks. The obedience of Christ him self unto authority.
Pay therefore to each of them what they do demand, even as their special
duty or due det. Christ him self, that was not subject, nor at
commandment to any magestrate, paid unto Caesar his custom: not that he
ought it unto him, but only because he would not offend him, or else seem
to give occasion of any co^tradiction in the public weals, foreseeing always
in such wise to be done, as thereby the proceedings of the gospel be not
hindered. Do not you therefore commit that thing, whereby the magistrates should
be defrauded of their duties: but if they demand tribute, pay it unto them:
and if they demand custom, pay also unto them: further, if they demand
reverence of you (which if you shall deny, you shall drive them to think evil of
you, and that you have their authority in contempt:) yield the same also unto
them: and if they desire to be honored of you (considering their great power
and dignity) honor them with all humble submission and lowliness. All which,
if they (through the grace of God) do uprightly deal in their holy
functions, worthy their laud and commendation: then the honor that is done
unto them, In giving honor to the prince God himself is honored.
is done woorthily unto God him self.

But contrariwise, if they shall abuse the excellency of their state (as men
corruptly following their own sinful lusts, and regard not the utility of
the people:) then the honor that is done, is done only to the magistrate,
eschuing all vprores, breaking no peace, but to keep an order with humbleness
in all their public weals. To conclude therefore, conform your selves, as
well to the common tranquillity of the public affairs, as also to serve the
expectation of the magistrates: that herein (in any wise) there may not be
once found in you any offense at all. Also, among your selves have this in
remembrance, that ye make neither challenge nor payment of any custom, tribute
or other earthy taxing, one of an other: but only of mutual and brotherly
charity, and to lead your lives in unity. Which also, that of right and by
order is to be done amongst you, let it be of that perfection and Christen
vehemency, that there be no delay toward any person, which should lawfully
require it, and to avoid an extremity of his condition, that after often
demands may chance to fall. To the magistrates, when you have paid that, which
they have taxed upon you, then are you free for the time, and no longer detters
in that behalf unto them. But although, through your godly charity, you have
thus fully satisfied all men to their lawful requests: yet it does never
satisfy it self, but always laboreth and studieth to heap benefit upon
benefit unto every man. Gala 6. 1 Timo. 1.
Therefore, before all other things, embrace and keep still amongste you, that
noble virtue charity: which in it self fulfilleth most amply, all the whole
law. For whatsoever he be, that in pure and christen charity loves his
neighbor, has in him self the very sum of Moses law, and pleases God most
singularly. But if charity be away, the observation of many laws suffiseth
not, though the number of them be infinite. Again, if it bear sway and
reign amongst you, there need none other laws at all: in as much as this
only virtue of charity, sets forth unto our perfect knowledge, Exodus 20.
Deuteronomy. 5.
the full effect, that the whole commandments requires of us. The law of
Moses forbids adultry, manslaughter, theft, false witness, coveting of
another man's goods, usury, with many such like: but the whole sum of all
these, is breefely comprehended in this commandment of charity. Leuit. 19.
Math. 22.
Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. Charity to her power seeks for
the profit of all men, whether they be good or evil, and not to hurt any
man. Therefore, to what purpose does it serve to prohibit that you do no
hurt, 1. Corin. 13.
this way or that way, sith the nature of charity is to hurt no man,
whatsoever he be? Can he that loves kill? will he that loves his neighbor as
him self, seek to defile his neighbors wife? Charity what it woorketh.
will he rob and spoil his neighbor of his goods, that is ready to help
and succor him with his own g^^d ^^e will he bear false witness to the
hurt of his neighbor, that upon his own peril will save and defend him?
will he set forth his riches unto usury, which thinks the whole sum of
his goods to be common for others necessity? will he covet another man's loss
or misfortune, to whom he wishes as well as to him self? Or can he with will
vex any man, for who^ Christ dyed, if he unfeignedly love Christ and him? It is
very true therefore, that charity it self is the sum of the whole law. By
charity we all learn what to follow, and what to eschew and put away from us.
To the love of which, To the love of charity the condition of the time
present should mightily enforce us
even the very nature and condition of the time enforces us: that is to say,
that in taking upon us true repentance and amendment of our lives, we awake
even from the sleep of darkness and death, the error of our old lives. The
night season (in the darkness thereof) seems to give liberty of offense,
because of his own condition it is shameless and dark: for in the darkness
of the night all such as in the uncleanness of their hearts are inclined to
whordome and wantonness, give them selves then to fulfill their filthy lust:
yet notwithstanding, as soon as daylighte appears, Collos. 3.
they leave off their sinful works of darkness, and do deck or fashion
them selves again to the open show and face of the world. Wherein, being
thus in the brightness of the day, made again as new men, they show them
selves abroad, and are become of filthy wantons, chaste and clean persons: of
dronkards, sober men: of sediciouse fellows, quiet men: and of slothful and
lumpish lubbors, lively, quick, and cherefull men. For which cause, according
to the time, we must holily apply and frame our lives: which, if we in deed
shall rightly use, we shall then the more joyfully account upon our salvation,
and to be now nearer at hand unto us, than in the days of Moses: although we
then believed it to be very nigh unto us. The night of our old life is gone
and past, and the clear day is even at hand, which shall make open and
manifest all the most deep and dark secrets that lie most covertly hid.
Let us now therefore in the bright day of Gods grace shining presently upon us,
most happily embrace it, and conform our selves to the clerenesse of that
heavenly light, casting away from us al our deadly, dark and nightly manners:
whereof in the fair light of the day we may be all ashamed. And if it be a
godly manner, that as soon as the light of the day appears, we gladly yield to
the time, and every of us deck our bodies with more comely apparel, that in
the sight of men we may appear more decent and seemly: then much rather at
the coming of the clear light of the Gospel, we should adourne and garnish
our souls with the most seemly and beautiful vesture of virtue. And he that
thus worthily walks in this true light of life, let him not dread at any time
the sight of God, who ever and in all places beholds our doings. And so let
us altogether in this world dispose our lives, that it may evidently appear
before the face of God, before all his holy angels, and unto all other his
creatures, that we have clearly cast from us the obscurity and darkness of
our lives, and to walk honestly in the clear light it self: not abusing the
time in eating and drinking, Luc. 21.
in chambering and wantonness, neither in strife and envying, or vnchristenly
contending among your selves: 1. Corin. 6. Ephe. 5. Iaco. 3
with all which vices and such like, you have heretofore ben most filthily
spotted and foiled, walking in the darkness of your old lives. But now at
this time, seeing you be altogether united unto christ by baptime, take him
upon your backs, garnish your selves with him: yea, let him shine in you,
through your holy conversation all your life long: whose name already you have
almost holily professed, and vowed to sanctify in the ways of righteousness.
Express him therefore in the beauty of holiness, How we be aparelled in
putting on christ.
who^ you have digested into your hearts by faith. He is chastity, he is peace,
he is faithful, he is meke, he is charity, and so forth. And this is the very
vesture of al comlynes that best beseems you to wear in the clear light of
the Gospel. Again all such things which heretofore you have abused in
voluptuositie and pleasure, superfluously, chargeably, very vainly and most
unseemly with great deformity to your shames: the same use you now, only
according to the necessity of your bodies (remembering always the virtue of
temperance) and to be bountifully liberal unto the poor. Those things also
which heretofore you have dispended corruptly and filthily in your se^sualities
and wicked lusts: the same from henceforth use you, Gala. 5. 1. Pet. 2.
according to the moderate proportion of nature. The body is to be fed and only
norished up, to the end it should live: and not to be pampred and pricked up, to
the provocation of sin and wantonness. And so let your apparel, your meats and
drinks, be thankfully received at the hands of god: that as they may be a
mean (with comeliness) to cover your bodies, and to qualify your hunger and
thirst: so they may also be none occasion of prouokement to lasciviousness,
pride and vain filthy pleasure.

The.xiiij. Chapter. The weak ought not to be despised. Indifferent that is to
say, neither good nor bad of themselves: neither yet furthering nor hindering
any man to his salvation of theit own proper nature: but only there maibe
wrought by them either good or bad, according to the intent and purpose of the
vser and occupier of them.
No man should offend another conscience. Again, for outward things no man
should condemn his brother.
Moreover, although the use and occupying of all such necessaries as
appertain to man's body be indifferent, and without scrupulositie of question,
with all those that be earnestly stayed in their faith toward Jesus Christ, so
that they use the same (as I said before) for the only use of necessity, and
not for lust and pleasure: yet this notwithstanding, if there be any man in
your meetings together or companies, that is a Jew borne, which by reason of
long custom, old traditions and form of life, is given the more to
superstition, neither has as yet such perfect faith grounded in him, that he
dare put away from him all the obseruances of the old law: the same is not
forthwith to be rejected and had in despite among you: but he is rather mildly
to be allured and drawn forwards of you, until such time as he may increase
in Christ, and come with ioyfulnesse to the perfection of his faith. Which
thing shall be done much more easily and profitably, through your frendely
benevolence and gentle entreatie, than by roughness, contentious and brawling
disputations. For you may not (in such manner of men) take all things in the
worst part: if it may possibly be done with more easiness, and without the
committing of a greater vice. What charity wills for the upholding of peace.
And to the end, that peace and concord may be always continued amongst you,
many things are to be dissimuled, and (as though it were) not to be espied.
Many things are to be borne withal, and many things again to be lovingly
interpretate, though they be not yet worthy thereof. Verily, this same order of
leuitie and mildness of heart, makes much to the obtaining of mutual
peace, and semblable living amongst men. The let to christian peace.
Christian peace and unity can never be stable and of continuance amongst
men, and many in company, except that of many, one of them will
interchaungeably submit him self to the verdite and sentence of another: and
so to suffer, that there may be a mutual consent and unity of mind among
them. For he that is free and void of all superstition, thinks that it is
lawful for him to eat indifferently and without choice of all kind of meat:
Freedom from supersticion.
inasmuche as he respects herein nothing else, but only the necessity of
his body. But he that is more weak in his conscience, Bondage in supersticion.
and not yet free from superstition, contenteth him self with herbs and
roots, because he dare not attempt the eating of flesh or fysh: either for
that it is forbidden by the law of the Jews, or else because the same (at
some time) was offered unto Idolles. For it was forbidden that any such thing
should be eaten, that was offered unto them. Howbeit you should not in such
wise be affectionate to these things, Strong in Christ.
that for the love of them you do break at any time such concord and
christian unity as ought to be always amongst you. And he that is strong in
Christ, and eats of all things that comes to hand, as the same ought in
such sort to use his gift and strength, that by reason thereof he do not
despise him that is more inferior and weak than him self: even so he also
that is weak in Christ, and uses abstinence from certain kinds of meats,
ought in no wise to judge and condemn him that eats indifferently of all
things. And in this case the strong man in Christ ought to bear with the
weak, and not descante to much upon his fault, but most gently after this
manner to consider of it, saying: A Godly consideration of those that be strong
in christ toward such as are yet but weak in him.
This error yet remains in this our brother, from the ancient custom of
the old life, which at the first time will not be rooted out of his heart: but
by little and little, through Gods grace and our good usage toward him, it
will most happily vanish away. And always the more also that the truth is
showed unto him, the more will his superstition decrease and vanish to naught.
Even so likewise, let the scrupulous fellow, when he shall see another man, to
eat of all sorts of meat, The consideration of the scrupulouse and weak
toward such as be strong in Christ.
according to the strength of his faith, let him consider the matter on this
fashion, saying to him self: It skilleth me nothing at all what this man does,
but reason also would, that I be of an honest judgment toward him: in as much
as God him self has made him one of his own children, by whose only
providence he lives, and whom only he offends, if he do amiss in all such
things as be not evil of them selves: for seeing it is a great pride to
disdain the superstition of the weak, and of him that ignorantly erreth: how
much more pride shall it then be, for the weak man in his faith, and for him
which lacks the use of perfect knowledge, to judge and condemn the man, that
(in Gods sight) is more perfect than him self? May not a man say well unto
such a fellow: Sir, what meanest thou to judge and condemn another man's
servant? that nothing appertains unto thee: Iaco. 4.
for all men has belonging unto them one only lord, which is Jesus Christ:
to whom every man stands, if in his faith he be strong: and to whom also he
falls, if he offend in these things, as thou suspectest him to do. Yet he
shall not fall, by occasion of these tryfling things, but shall be rather
established and made stronger by them, in the perfection of his faith: for his
Lord and only savior is of sufficient might and power, to fortify and
uphold his own servant from stumbling. Neither will his Lord take it for
any stumbling at all to mysse herein, because he sees that his faith and
conscience do keep him quiet and safe from all the dangers thereof. And
even thus, as it is here spoken of the choice of meats, that enter into a
man's body: so likewise it is to be understood, of the observation of Holy
days, and feasts of the new Moon, with all other such Ceremonies: which
are only to be suffered for the weaklings sake, or else for no cause at all.
For to observe them amongst men that are perfect, it is greatly repugning the
will of God and the holy Gospel. Also the weak man in his faith, makes
difference betwixt day and day, The weak in faith.
as though one day were holy, and another unholy: and that it is lawful to
eat that thing upon one day, which may not be eaten upon another day. But
contrary, he that is strong and sound in his faith, Strong in faith
takes unto him self all days indifferently, and judges the whole time of
his life, to be consecrate and appointed altogether to godliness and true
Religion. For the disputation or questioning about these matters, let not the
Christian concord be broken amongst you in any case: but let every man (for
the time) follow his own judgment, and not condemn any other man's opinion:
inasmuche as either of the parties may be without offense: and in either of
them a time of perfection may be seen, to grow to true understanding and
godliness. But that man which judges to him self, Colloss. 2.
that all days alike be holy, and are dedicate to all godly uses, he judges
aright unto the Lord: neither is it material unto thee, how much it is that he
judges. Also he that makes difference of days, if he do err therein, he
erreth unto his Lord, and it makes no matter at all unto thee. Further, he
that without scrupulositie eats of all kinds of meats, the same also eats
for the Lords pleasure: inasmuche as he therefore gives thanks unto him,
thorough whose only benefit he eats, and through whose gracious benignity
al things are created for the use of mankind. Again, he that abstaineth from
sundry meats by reason of his weakness, he abstaineth for the lords pleasure,
and this is nothing material unto thee, considering, that though he eat but
herbs and roots, yet notwithstanding, he yeldeth his hearty thanks unto ye
lord, even as thou thy self also do unto him. Wherein, if God shall allow and
accept his thanks, what have thou then to do with him for it? The cause of this
matter is not one, but the matter it self is one, and the mind is one, and
the Lord also is one. This man is thankful to God for his bountiful
goodness, having liberty by him to eat what him list, and that because the
law of the Gospel makes rather a difference and choice of our minds, than it
does of meats. And another man thanketh him for his frugality and temperaunce
in meats: considering that by occasion of his weakness in this behalf,
eschueth surfeiting and unnatural contagion, and by reason hereof, keeps also
him self within the limits of chastity. In such things we be all of like
affecte: neither ought we for the upholding of our fantastical opinions in
these points, be therefore at variaunce with our brother, or one christian man
with another. It shall be sufficient unto either party to be contented, if god
him self do allow the thing, unto whom only appertains the most true and
just judgment. For the thing it self is indifferente and to be borne
withal, according to the condition of time. One Christian man has no further
to do with another, but only to profit one another. The whole duty of
christian men one toward another.
Neither does any man live his own servant, or properly to him self,
considering we be all servants to the Lord, which has boughte us from
vice to godliness, and from death unto life. Therefore, there is no man, that
either lives or dies his own servant, but the servant of another
master, which has power over him, even both for life and death. Thus then,
if the servant live, he lives not for his own pleasure and honor, but only
for the Lords honor, or otherwise for his dishonor. Which, if he dye, he does
it also to fulfill the will of the Lord. Wherefore, whether he live or dye, if
the Lords will therein be done, it comes of him self, and not of thee,
neither will he therefore challenge any thing at thy hand. How shameful a thing
then shall it be, for one servant to be comptroller of another servant,
which is fellow servant with him in the service of God: if he to whom the
service is done, be sufficiently therewith contented? And there is no
bondeman amongst men, so much bond unto his master, as we being all
servants, are bound to our master Christ: which has bought us and
redeemed us, not with silver nor gold, but only with his most precious blood.
Therefore, if we fall, we fall unto him: and if we stand, we stand unto him.
Again, if we live, we live to him: and if we dye, we dye unto him. All other
bond men do cease to be any more bound to their Lord and Master, after
they be once dead: but all we that have Christ to our Lord, be in such case
with him, that whether we live, or whether we dye, we be always his: for whose
sake all things do^ live and have their being. For Christ has authority,
not only upon them that be alive, but also upon them that be dead:
inasmuche as he employeth both his life and death for our salvation. For thy
sake he was made man, and for thy love he once dyed: and the same rose again
from his death unto life, to the end he should be Lord, both of the quick
and of the dead. If we live unto godliness, we may thank him for it: Acts.
2. Philip. 2.
if we be dead to our vices, we may refer it to his only goodness: he is
the Lord, and he is the Judge. And why then should one servant take
authority upon him against another, forasmuch as the thing only appertains
unto the lord. Thou that art superstitious, how dare thou be so bold to judge
him that is stronger than thou thy self? which eats without any question of
al kind of meats and uses al days alike in the service of god? or else, thou
that art strong, why dare thou have thy brother in contempt that is weaker
than thou thy self? as though a man would say, that thou show thy self
rather his Lord, than fellow servant with him? To what end does either this or
that man take upon him the room of the Lord, and preuenteth the judgments of
God, which shall be only at the last day, at the glorious appeasaunce of Jesus
Christ. Wherefore, one man may not judge another, but one must help and
instruct an other, in the most holy and perfect state of religion. For Christ,
that is Lord unto us all, will give judgment upon all, at what time we
shall all stand before his Tribunal seat: Gala. 6.
By whose sentence, either we shall be saved or else condemned: which only
knows the most deep secrets of all our hearts. Therefore, in all the mean
time, let not one man condemn an other, Esaias. 46. Philip. 2.
for God has reserved that only point unto him self: as he testifies by the
Prophet Esayas: I live (says he) and unto me shall every knee be bowed, and
every tongue shall then confess and acknowledge God. For which cause, let every
man (I say) in the mean season (during this present life) reckon with him
self, Math. 25. 2. Corin. 5.
how to make an accountes for the state of his own life, and not one man to
judge an other at naught. But if we shall judge any thing at all, let us then
rather judge how one of us may help and succoure an other: and how we may
here live in this transitory life, that we may give none occasion of evil or
filthy living, and so one to offend an other. Let us help to lift up the
weak, and not altogether to throw him down. And let us touse up the smokie
flare, and not utterly quench it out. The manner of authority and dignity
requires, that the learned man do obey unto the ignorant: not to the end he
should consent unto his error or offense, but that he might by little and
little amend him, or else at the least wise he should not much offend him by
the roughness or boysteousnesse of his language. For taking example of my
self: Moses in time passed, appointed out certain kind of meats as unclean,
which he properly called common: the which to eat, it was not lawful to any
man. And some he appointed out as clean, which all men might lawefully eat.
Howebeit, I am now well assured, through the spirit of God (which will that
the carnal law of Moses be utterly abolished) that there is nothing unclean
of his own nature, neither is there respects of meats among the faithful. 1.
Corin. 8.
Therefore, if there be any thing unclean, the same is unclean only unto him,
which thinks it so to be: that is to say, to the weak and superstitious it
is unclean: but to the strong and perfect in Christ, there is nothing
unclean, but all things be clean, yet for all that, it shall be very expedient,
sometime to abstain from that thing, which of his own nature is clean: not
because the law of Moses so commands it, but because brotherly charity so
requires it: which only thing, is among christen men cheefely to be respected.
Wherefore, if thy brothers heart be perplexed and hurt through the occasion of
thy meat (wh^ thou should as well love as thine own self:) then thou live
only for thine own pleasure, and not also to help an other. Neither have thou
regard to any christen charity, if thou disdain to bear with thy brother, in
so small a matter as thy meat is, what great matter is it I pray thee, if for a
little space, thou abstainest from thy meat, that is lawful to be eaten: to the
end you may thereby help to reform thy brother in his weakness: which
otherwise through thy meat, he is most like in deed to stu^ble? Let not thy
brother be of so small estimation with thee (though he be but weak and
ignorant) that thou will suffer him to die, or else stumble by means of thy
meat, for whose sake, Christ him self vouchedsafe to suffer his death and
passion? Which, seeing he was of so great estimation with Christ him self
(whom also thou most dearly love) then should thou for his sake, not so
lightly regard him, but love him again, for thou art his brother: neither
may thou think it sufficient enough, if the thing be right which thou do:
but thou must also have good respect, that the same thing which is right of it
self, be not in such manner ordered, that it carry therewith any suspection of
evil: neither the thing which is good to thee, be turned to the prejudice of
another man. But specially I exhort you, that there be not perceived amongst
you, any fantastical or contentious opinions: namely about meats and drinks, or
for other the like trifling things: for like as in the world to come (in the
kingdom of God) there shall be neither meat nor drink (which both at this
present time, we have by the appointment of God, to the relieuement and
succoring of al mankind:) even so likewise the doctrine of the gospel, and a
perfect life in Christ, stands not in the choice of meats, neither yet in
the difference of drinks: which (to say the truth) are of none effect to a
godly living: but such things, are rather to be had in consideration here
amongst us, which from hence may be carried to the celestial world. And what
things be they? verily, righteousness, peace, and joy. Which come not unto us
by the observation of meats and drinks, but by the holy ghost him self. The
disceptation or disputing about meats, engenders hatred and dissension: it
engenders sorrow: it enge^dreth offense, and occasioneth much quarelling. But
the virtue of the holy ghost, in stead of dissension, engenders peace: for
sorrow, ioyfulnesse: and for offense and injury, charity and Christen
meekness. For as it is the office of justice, Justice. Peace.
not to will hurt to any body: even so, it is the office also of peace, not to
contend with any man: and such is also the office of charity, not to disquiet
by any means, any one creature: These be in deed spiritual and heavenly
actions: wherewith, as God at all times is most highly pleased: so are they
amongst good men commended, and daily practiced: as also avoiding through
obsequie and such godly disposition, both the suspection and al occasions of
euel. They serve vainly the flesh, which wonder and braule about meats and
days, and lead fondly their lives in the disputation of them. But they serve
Christ in spirit, which do not defend their own opinions and deeds for the
best: but through charity meekely obey unto others, and are made for all
things to al men, that unto godliness they may win al men: and do also in such
manner temper them selves, that they may please and agree with all men. All we
therefore that are spiritual, To be spiritually minded is to seek peace.
setting apart al vain disputations, let us follow those things that make for
peace, concord, mutual love and charity: that thereby we may the better be
framed, one of us to succor an other, and in no wise to give occasion of
offense: for such is our calling, and the very perfect rule of our Christen
profession. Thou therefore, unto whom God has given strength and the lively
gift of faith, do not you so offend, yt for thy meat sake, the work of God be
destroyed: but let rather thy meat be destroyed and turned to naught, than by
occasion thereof yt thing should perish and be turned to the devil, that God so
preciously bought by the blud of his dear son. Meat is a thing that belongs
to man: but charity belongs unto God, and it is the special gift of God
unto man. Therefore, let the least of these two obey to the biggest: not because
meat of it self is evil, or because that one kind is clean and an other
unclean, after the manner of the Jews: or otherwise noting it a fault, if
thou eatest what thou lust: but only, because the abuse thereof is greatly to
be reproved, and to be eschued of all men, for avoiding of offense to the
brethren: or least the meat (which of the own nature is clean) be made
unclean, Tit. 1.
in that thou do not therein regard the weakness and stumbling of them.
Whereunto, we ought in such wise have respect, that we should think it much
better, altogether to abstain from flesh, and only to eat herbs and roots,
and also utterly to refrain our selves from wine: 1. Corin. ^.
than by either eating or drinking of them, we should of God be noted, the
occasion of our brethrens fall. Neither shall thou lay against me, saying on
this manner: why does he fear and dread, where there is no cause at all? My
conscience is strong enough, it is quiet and well contented, what have I then
to do with an other man's weakness? Question.
will thou that I forsake mine own perfection in this point, and apply my
self to a weakelings appetite, and account upon the choice of meats as the
Jews do. No verily, I do not mean so: neither do I here require that thou
should so follow them in their doings: Answer.
but that thou should for a space, meekely bear with them, that they might
afterward thereby the better be won and brought to perfection. Be thou well
assured, that I do right well allow thy faith and godly strength, whereby thou
set at naught the choice of meats: but yet I would have thee to keep the
same close and secret unto thy self, if it shall happen thee to epsy thy
brother in danger, or thereby to be offended: for it shall be only sufficient
unto thee (the time considered) to remember that God herein takes in good
part, thy Christen strength and assurance: yet the same is to be dissimuled
for a space considering thou should beware, least thou offend thy neighbor:
where otherwise thou ought wholely to apply thy strength to sustain and
bear with the weakness of him. And before all things thou must diligently
take heed, that in setting at naught the difference of meats, through thy
might and strength which thou in thy perfection use, that this thy strength,
be the strength rather of thy conscience, and not of fulfilling thy pleasure.
And in reprehending also an other, for his apparent superstition or abstinence
from meats: thou may not therein be doutfull of thy self, or not well
persuaded by faith: but thou must do it of perfect strength, least thou
appear rather stronger in words, than christianly strong in faith. Blessed
is he that has such strength of faith in his heart, that his own conscience
does not secretly control him for that thing, which he defends and openly
allows unto others: or that it privily condemn him not, in the closette of
his breast, for such things as he protests abroad only in his words to be
commendable. For he that eats, and yet doubts, whether it be lawful or not
to be eaten, he is certainly of his conscience pronounced a condemned man. And
why is he thereby in his conscience condemned? Verily, because that the thing
which he does, proceeds not rightly from the might of true faith and
constancy, or from an heart that of it self is clean, but of a corrupted
conscience and an unclean heart: which one way in word secretly allows, and
otherwise openly in deed reproves. For what so ever proceeds not of faith,
Tit. 1.
the same can not be without sin, but offense greatly committed before the
face of God. For when a man does a thing, that of it self is not evil, but yet
douteth thereof whether it be evil or not, then he declares plainly of him self
(if he do it in his doutfulnesse) to commit that thing (even wilfully of
malice) that is woorthily noted wicked and evil. Surely, perfect and undoubted
godliness, banisheth clean from it, all such things as have in them but only
a bare piece and similitude of evil. Thus, he that without regard, carelessly
offends through his malice, is worthy very sharply to be reprehended: And
he also that will not conform him self to be amended, is of the godly to be
refused, and as an enemy to be shaken off and avoided. But if his error come
only of weakness, and not of malice: then is he worthy the more charitably
to be taught and reformed, and not to be refused, disdained, or once laughed to
scorn.

The.xv. Chapter. The infirmity and frailenesse of the vveake, ought to be
borne, with all love and kindness, after the ensample of Christ.
Wherefore, al we, seeing we have more strength than many other, and need not
therefore in comparison any instructor: yet notwithstanding, we must always
beware, least whilst we reprehend them for their superstition, we our selves
do fall into the hateful vice of pride: which is much more worthy
detestation, tha^ the thing which we reprehende in others. But always, the
more strong we feel our selves to be, the more convenient also it shall be, yt
we charitably bear with others infirmity. For, like as they that in years be
elder than others, and more strong in their bodies, do not pushe to the ground
those that be younger or weaker (as though they would say, even for that only
purpose they had their strength given unto them:) but as all they, that in
their bodies be stronger than the others, would esteem it a reprochful thing, to
hurt such as be but weak, and of far less strength: even so all we, the more
(through grace) we exceed others in spiritual judgment and true doctrine of
the gospel, so much the more ought we to temper our selves to the weakness
of others: and not to glory therein, or to stand in our own conceits: nether
in their imbecility and weakness, to stir the^ rather into fury and rage,
than patiently to bear with them, or else gently to amend them. Let no man
therefore, in the good gift that is given unto him of God, please simply him
self therein, as though he had received it at his hand, to set forth therewith
his own pride and vanity: but rather let him trade him self herein: that
is: that he learn to abase him self, to despise his own hautie and stout
courage, to please his neighbor in humbleness, and in godly obedience to seek
his daily edifying. This godly trade to help and reform an other man's
error, Christ him self taught; which although he was the only fountain of al
virtue and wisdom, yet for all that, he would not use it to his own only
praise and glory, or therewith to satisfy his own pleasure: but altogether to
the needful succoring and mild recovering of the weak. For he only not
regarded herein his own glory (which he most duly deserved to have) but for
the relieuement and succoure of man, he took patiently unto him self, the
most vilanous and despitefull rebukes: Psalm. 68.
like as David (by the spirit of God) prophesied before of him, saying: The
rebukes of them that rebuked thee, fell upon me. And this same is written in
the Psalms, Roma. 4.
not only to our knowledge therein, but that we should also daily practice and
follow it: and should learn by his example, with what leuitie, softness and
gentleness, our neighbor is to be entertained, until he wax more strong in
Christ, and forsake the very childehoode of his imbecillitie and weakness.
Therefore, like as Christ did embase him self, to our own miserable and weak
estate, to the end that little and little he might bring us familiarly unto his
most excellent highness: even so, it shall best become us to take example by
him: to allure our neighbor with humbleness, unto the true worshipping of the
eternal and true God. And this example is in such sort declared unto us,
through ye whole scriptures, eue^ as though by painting in a table, it were
plainly set forth before our eyes, to the end, we should always have it in our
full sight, where so ever at any time we dispose our selves: which is, that as
Christ through his suffera^ce redeemed and saved us, and also by his meekness
came to everlasting glory: eue^ so, al we likewise through the using of our
softness with our ignorant and weak brethren, 1. Macha. 12.
let us trust to come unto the same benefit of God, which indifferently
abides al them that do walk in his ways, and be apt folowers of his example,
whose rule we have professed, which is love and peace. Wherefore, I pray unto
almighty God the aucthor of love, peace and patience (which exhorts you unto
sufferance by his holy scriptures, and without whose help we can do nothing
at all) that he would vouchesafe to work in you and amongst you all, one
only will and consent, and that you be conioined together in a most perfect
unity one to another, after the example of Christ: which charged us with
nothing so much in all the world, as he did with peace, with mildness, mutual
love and concord. And so verily we shall set forth amongst men the glory of
God, the very father of Jesus Christ, if we shall show one to another here in
this present life, that thing which he taught and showed before unto us. And
even so also shall al men perceive you to be the true disciples of Christ, The
true professors of christ are known, not only by agreemente in doctrine, but
also in their acts, to be of one mutual consent and mind.
if that, like as you al profess and preach Christ with one mouth, you shall
also declare your selves together in your acts, to be of one mutual consent
and mind. Wherefore, I beseech you (even in the bowels of Christ) that ye
occasion not the Gentiles to be doubtful of your most holy profession, or to
stir them to dissension and variaunce among themselves, which are now but
newly called from idols unto Christ: neither yet the Jews, which be appointed
from their old tipes and shadows, to the true worshipping of the true God
himself: but rather do you entreat one another, with all obsequie and
obedience, and in faithful shaking one another by the hands, do you profit
together in all goodness: that like as Christ entertained all you, neither
did impute unto you the errors of your old life, but by brotherly charity
embraced you all, to declare thereby his love, and the glory of his eternal
father, both toward you and to all men: even so, you should in following and
performing of the same one toward another, declare also in your deeds the
love and glory of Christ: which obeyed unto both sorts of men: that is, as
well unto the Jews as unto the Gentiles. Unto the Jews he showed his
obedience, to the end, he would in all his acts set forth the truth of his
father, which said before that he would truly perform that thing to the
posterity, which he promised to their elders, by the holy oracles and saying
of the Prophets that among themselves they might be joyful and glad, seeing
they have now received the truth it self, which Moses before declared,
should come in his figures and similitudes. The mercy of God in Christ
toward the Gentiles.
And to the Gentiles which had nothing at al promised unto them, he became
also obedient and kind, to the end that all they through the only mercy of
God, and his own most painful deserts, were brought from their miserable
death unto the most pleasant life, joy and salvation. Let the Jews therefore
now rejoice in them selves, because they have already received the thing which
by promise they have long wished and looked for. And let the Gentiles also
rejoice for their parts, because they have received that thing which they never
thought to have attained unto. For even so God himself ordained the thing to
come to pass, as Christ by his spirit speaks in the Psalms, saying: 2.
Reg. 22. Psalm. 17. Deu. 32. Psalm. 126. Esaye. 11.
For this cause will I praise thee among the Gentiles, and sing in thy name.
Again he says: Rejoice ye Gentiles, and laud him al ye nations. Also Esaias
prophesying the same thing, says: There shall be the root of Iesse, and he
that shall rise to reign over the Gentiles, in him shall the Gentiles trust.
Therefore unto God almighty I pray with mine heart for you, which has thus by
his Prophets given you occasion to have hope in him: that he will now
perform that thing in deed unto you, which he has heretofore promised: and
that in the taking away from you all dissension and variaunce, he will
replenish you with joy, concord, and peace, by the means of your stayed faith
in his son Christ: to the end that your hope which you have already conceived
of God, may daily increase more and more in you, through the strength of the
same faith, and the working in you of the holy ghost. These things I speak
unto you, not as one that doubts of you, fears you to be faynte, or cold
in the right use of virtue: for I am well assured, that (among many virtues) ye
are all specially endued with the noble virtue of charity, and with the gift
of perfect knowledge among your selves: whereby you are all able, one of you
sufficiently to instruct another herein, without needful travel of any
other teacher. Notwithstanding, I did the more boldly write this same unto
you, not respecting herein any just cause of your ignorance, or as though my
service were now offered unto you as unto unwilling receivers: but only to
admonish you, what thing most principally you ought to do, according to your
knowledge, as virtuous and well doers, and that voluntarily, and of your own
free motions: yet that ye might the rather from henceforth, much more
copiously work the same, at mine earnest desire and exhortation. In the
behalf whereof, I do extend mine office which is appointed unto me (although
thereof I be unworthy) obeying gladly unto the will of Christ Jesus, whose
cause I do now entreat: endeavoring my self to the vttermoste of my power, to
set forth his most holy Gospel amongst you that be Gentiles: and in this
manner of exercise, to offer a pure sacrifice unto him, of my faithful and
diligente labors. And I think verily, that this kind of sacrifice shall be
most acceptable to him, if I shall offer all you, as a sacrifice worthy of
him: not such as are pourged and cleansed by carnal Ceremonies, but by the
spirit of God, which is the only author of perfect sanctimonie, and the
furtherer of holy Religion. The which thing, inasmuche as I see it already come
to pass in you, I may of good right be glad, yet not in boasting my self
therefore among men, but to rejoice only in God, for the good and prosperous
success which I have of my preaching: and not imputing the same unto mine own
industry and travel, Acts. 3: 2. Pet. 1.
but unto the only goodness of Christ Jesus, whose only matter I now treat
upon, and through whose strength and consolation, I do with diligence execute
my holy office. And herein I dare not rehearse at all the acts of any other
man, least peradventure I should seem therein to apply to my self the
commendation of their deeds. I will therefore only rehearse those things that
Christ wrought by me in mine own mynistery, to the end that the Gentiles
which heretofore were miserably given to the most gross sin of idolatry and
superstition, may now obey to the time in truth, and apply them selves to the
holy gospel of Christ, whereunto they are well moved, partly by my doctrine and
deeds of charity, and partly also (through the might and power of God,
wrought by me) in signs and wonders, to confirm amongst them the faith of my
doctrine. I say yet again, that the same are not wrought through mine own
virtue and power, The glorying of Paul in the prospering of the Gospel.
but through the only might and power of the holy Ghost: of whom I am through
grace, but only and organe, an instrumente, and poor Minister. And I, in that
I do glory in the luckie proceeding of my preaching, I do if to declare
therein, the glory of my Lord Christ, and not to set forth mine own glory.
And even so verily, I glorying in my preaching, do attribute the only praise
and commendation thereof unto almighty God. Neither will I in this behalf
become inferior to any other: for I have not preached the Gospel of Christ,
as the common sort use to do: that is, ever in one place: but until this
present hour, I have preached in those Regions (most specially) where the
name of Christ was not before spoken of: yea, and for the furthering of Gods
only glory and praise, I have desired help at his holy hand, that the
foundation of the Christian Religion, might be cast into a greater compass,
and that the limits of his most worthy renoume might more amply be spredde
and stretched forth abroad upon the whole earth. For which cause, as I
thought it not best to build upon the foundation of the other Apostles:
because, even as it is a more difficill and hard thing, first to appoynte and
limitte the beginning of Religion, than well to repair and keep the same in
safety, which is already begone: even so, I thought it much better to make
for the progression of the Gospel, to preach the name of Christ in such
places only, as none of the Apostles yet came unto: namely, forasmuch as I
perceived the same thing to have been prophesied long before by the most holy
Prophet Esaias, which says: They that of him had nothing declared unto them,
they shall yet see: Esaias. 52.
and they that hard not yet of him, shall also understand. And this same
ardente desire within me, to set forth the christian faith and religion, was
the only cause that has hitherto withholde^ me from you, though no man could
more heartily have wished to be with you, than I my self have done. Therefore,
seeing I have now in such sort ranged over all ye whole countries of Achaia and
Macedonia, that I see therein no place left, which is destitute of the
knowledge of Christ, or in which I have not already laid the fundation of the
christian faith and religion: and forasmuch also as I have wyshed most gladly
many years since, for a convenient time to see you, I trust now shortly to
have occasion happily given unto me, to satisfy in this point my glad desire
toward you. Wherefore, when I shall pass on my journey toward the country of
Spain, I will take you in my way, and so remain with you until such time as
I shall somewhat have satisfied my mind amongst you, in using most joyfully
your christian and godly company. Which thing, I trust shall shortly come to
pass, if it be the good will of Christ: and that from thence I shall most
gladly desire you to accompany me on my way, and to guide me into Spain. But
at this present, I do you to wit, I am taking my journey toward the City
Jerusalem: there to distribute unto the necessity of the christian Jews and
disciples of Christ, the bountiful liberality of the Macedonians and
Achaians, which they have committed unto my charge to be done. Acts. 11. 1.
Corin. 16. 2. Corin. 8.9.
For to that end and purpose, it has so pleased their godly minds, to make
a collection of money throughoute the whole Countries: declaring thereby the
fruits of their change and perfection, to the rejoicing of the poor christian
brethren at Jerusalem: which, although they have not among them selves the use
of worldly sustentation, or want things sufficient to relieve their poor and
needy bodies: yet touching their riches and relief which they have in Christ,
through their perfection in Religion, that is otherwise wonderful, large, and
inestimable. In consideration whereof, and because they first received from
them, and by their testimonies, their entrance and beginning into chrystian
Religion: they thought them selves (of duty) greatly bound unto them, and to
bestow freely and without inforcement upon them, that which I do most worthily
allow, which is, their very bountiful and christian benevolence. Therefore,
considering I say, that they which be now at Jerusalem, did first work the
means that the doctrine of Christ descended unto the Gentiles: It is now
reason also, that the Gentiles in like manner do minister unto them again, 1.
Corin. 9. Gala. 6.
some of their temporal and worldly goods: that they may yet at the least
with that which is but earthly, recompense that thing which is most preciouse
and heavenly, freely and without all charge communicated unto them the effect
and full sum of their whole health and salvation. Wherefore, as soon as I
(according to good order and duty) shall have discharged mine hands of this
their said christian benevolence (which without commodity to my self I
freely received, and will as freely deliver it them) I will take my journey
into Spain. And although I hasten forwards my self as much as I possibly
may until I be in Spain, to preach therein the Gospel of Christ: yet for
all that it repents me not, in this manner for a while to be stayed from
thence. And when soever I shall come unto Rome to see you, I doubt not but my
coming amongst you shall greatly further the glory of Christ: In as much as
I perceive by the godly inclination of your hearts, you will all be marvelous
glad of my company: which hitherto (through the divine help of God) have
done all things for you, according to your gentle desires. Notwithstanding,
because I can not be presently with you, or so soon as I would wish to be:
I shall therefore in the mean while, heartily require you all, even for the
love of our Lord Jesus Christ, Paul earnestli requesteth the Romans to pray
for him
and for your charities sake in him, that you will pray unto God for me: that
through the contemplation of your faithful and godly prayers, I may happily
be delivered from the hands of the unhappy and faythlesse Jews, and from so
many vexations as I abide amongst them: least peradventure in preaching the
Gospel, any part of the fruits thereof should not be suffered to pass
forth according to the will of God: and that also my Commission for the
distribution of the benevolence, may so be finished and ended, that there may
be no occasion found of any man's grudging or disquietousnesse. And further,
that after the great multitude of my troubles here in Iewry, I may the more
merrily come unto you that be at Rome, there to recreate and comfort my self
amongst you. And thus to end mine exhortation unto you (as I began at the
first) I heartily pray unto God (which is the true Author and Parente of all
peace and concord, 1. Corin. 14.
and which is also the maynteiner and defender of the same) that he will
voutsafe to be always with you. Who verily, as he evermore shu^neth the
rablement of them that be contemptuous, proud, and such as will be at variance
one with another: even so, his delighte is always to be in company with such
people as be lowly, meek, and of one mutual consent together among them
selves.

The.xvj. Chapter. A Chapter of salutations. He warns them to beware of men's
doctrine, and commends unto them certain godly men, that were lovers and
brethren in the truth.
YEt all this notwithstanding, before I make an end of all together, I commend
hereby unto you, our loving sister Phebe: unto whom I gladly committed the
carriage of these my letters, and so by her to be directed unto you, because she
took her journey into those parts: who has at all times to the uttermost of
her possible power, willingly served, and most tenderly succored the
congregation of ye faithful, Cenchrea is a city in Iewry.
that are now in Cenchrea. Praying you al therefore right heartily, that you will
with good countenance receive and entertain her, as shall be seemly for godly
men to do: and that you will not suffer her to lack any thing of yours, which
shall be thought necessary for her. Aduertising you also, how expedient it shall
be for you al to requite her again with your comfort, which yet hitherto never
ceased to comfort both me and all others, that have submitted them selves to
the faith in Jesus Christ. Acts. 18. 2. Timo. 4.
Also, I pray you have me now in remembrance unto Prisca, and unto Aquila her
husband, which is a Jew borne: both which, as their being here in Iewry did
succor me, and were helpers to deliver me, from the hands of the graceless
Jews, which lay in wait to destroy me, least I should prosperously go
forwards with the preaching of the Gospel. Who also in such sort showed
their godly help toward me, that for my succor and comforts sake, they
willingly ieoparded their own lives, even as they which were ready to redeem ye
loss of my neck with the present loss of their own necks. For the which
goodness sake, I do not only my self most heartily thank them, but also the
whole congregations of the Gentiles, partly because they have deserved the
same, by occasion of some others that have ministered unto them: and partly
because that they thought the safety of my poor life should make much for their
purpose, to the daily furtherance of their christian utility and profit.
Nether do I send co^mendations unto those only, but likewise also unto their
whole family. Further, salute Epiminetes, whom I right heartily love, because
of his most godly conversation, and because also he was ye first that I
converted in Achaia unto Christ. Be mindful also of me unto Mary, which
bestowed much godly labor and friendship upon the saints. Have me commended
unto Androuicus and Iunia: which, as by consanguinitie they be allied unto me
even, so they have been also with me in captivity, and were partakers of my
trobles. Both which are well taken among the apostles, and among all the rest of
gods loving friends, and were also before me in their conversion to Christ.
Therefore, since it is right that we honor and reverence them that be our elders
by birth: much rather then should we honor and reverence them that be our
elders in Christ Jesus. Greet Amplias my beloved in the Lord, because of his
mighty and strong faith. Salute Vrbanus a companion of mine, in the trauayles
of the Gospel: and also the beloved Stachis his freende and companion. Salute
Appelles, a man tried in the afflictions that he suffered for Christ's sake.
Salute also the whole household of Aristobulus. Have me commended unto Herodian
my kinsman. Greet the household of Narcissus: but specially all those that are
new borne to the Lord. Salute the two women, Thriphena and Thriphosa: which
do maruellously labor to set forth the glory of the Gospel. Salute Persis my
loving friend, a woman verily that has much advanced the glory of Christ,
through her great travels and sorrow. Salute Rufus, a very perfect man in all
godly Religion: and unto his loving mother, whom I also esteem even as mine
own. Grief Asineritus, Phlegon, Hermon, Patrobas, and all the rest of the
brethren that be with them. Salute Philologus and Iulia his wife: Nereus and
his sister: and unto Olimpha, with all the Saints that be with them. Salute
one an other with an holy kiss in the Lord Christ: 1. Corin. 13.
which I admonish you, that ye do it in the fear of God, both chastely, with
the purity of your hearts, and singly without al dissimulation: and that it
may be amongst you no counterfected, but a very token of true peace and
continual concord. Moreover, all the congregations here with us, have them
heartily commended unto you: whose godly love and inward affection is most
certaynely rooted toward you all. But this one thing (dear brethren) I
require of you all, Collos. 2. Tit. 3.
that you will diligently take heed of them that be sowers of Sects and
dissension amongst you, and do give occasions of evil, searching all ways
they can, through their simulation and flattery, to seduce you into some other
kind of learning, than that which you have already received, and to couple
together the Jewish religion, with the holy religion of Christ. Mark well all
such I pray you heartily, and avoid them utterly from you. Neither shall it be
unto you any hard thing to know them: for they do never sincerely teach that
which is right, neither do they administer their office in the Gospel
according to the pleasure of God, Philip 3.
but do only serve their own bellies, seeking their own profits, and with
sweet preachings and flattering words, they go about to seduce rather the
Innocents and simple creatures, than holesomly to reform them. Which kind of
simple men, are surely soon turned out of the right way, through the
colorable or false precepte of such wretches ungodly Religion. Again
touching your godly obedience, I rejoice greatly therein: for I hear it much
spoken of amongst all men and commended. Obedience the first step or degree to
godliness.
And I do the rather rejoice, because your obedience is the first step or
degree, to go foreward^ unto true godliness. Yet notwithstanding this same,
you must diligently beware, unto whom you do obey. Simplicity verily, is
highly to be commended, and a goodly virtue before God: but the same, because
it thinks upon no guile ne deceit, it is oftentimes in deed deceived among
the deceivers, blinded, and most wickedly seduced from the truth. Wherefore, I
will that your simplicity be after such sort, Math. 10.
that thereby ye hurt not ne deceive any man: and again, so wise and
circumspect toward your selves and for the truth sake, that as thereby ye shall
plainly see, how to know and hold fast the truth: so to avoid the way of
unrighteousness, and all false deformers of the truth. Surely I am not so
ignorant, but that I do very well know, how amongste you there are many, that
labor what they can, to stop the proceeding of Christ's gospel. For some there
be, which in the wickedness of their hearts, do diversely labor the stopping
thereof: as through their cruelty and persecution: some through hypocrisy:
some through deceitful and sugared doctrine: some through outward show of
holiness in their superstitious and false religion: some again, very
watchful to draw us from the freedom of Christ, and to make us again bond
servants unto the traditions and ceremonies of Moses. But as for you, as I
trust well of Gods strength in you: so I admonish you, still to continue in
the obedience of the gospel: and God will at all times be ready at your hands,
to fortify your souls in the same. Whom, if you shall have for your defense,
what thing then is it, that you should stand in fear off? For he being of
most might and power, will soon forcibly spurn down and tread under foot,
your old adversary the devil and Sathanas, and will make him couche low and
fall flat before your faces, and that very shortly doubt you not. The grace of
our Lord Jesus Christ, be with you al. Ame^. Timotheus my work fellow in
preaching the holy gospel: Acts. 6. Philip. 2. Acts. 13. Acts. 20. 1. Corin. 1.
and with him Lucius and Jason, and Socipater my kinsman, have them all
commended unto you. And I Tertius, which wrote this same Epistle, have me
heartily commended unto you all. Cayus mine host, as also the host to all the
congregations, has him commended unto you. And Erastus the Chamberlain of
the city Corinthin, has been likewise commended unto you: and so has
Quartus, a brother of the congregations. And even thus once again, I pray that
the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ may be with you all: whom I most heartily
beseech, that by his holy will and power, it will now fulfill and establishe
all my desires in your hearts: for by his only might and good will it must be
brought to pass: but in no wise, by any help at all from our selves,
according to the truth of my gospel, and the preaching of Jesus Christ. By
which holy gospel, the law of Moses is not utterly abrogate: but the meaning or
secreat mystery thereof: for that which many years heretofore has been hid
from us, is now at the appointed time, according to the sayings of the
Prophets plainly opened and declared in truth unto us, for our more perfect
understanding, even the light of the gospel: and that as I said, by the only
will and commandment of almighty God: which has committed unto us the
administration of the same: to the end, that after the declaration of the
gospel: (by which, al superstition, and false woorshipping of images and
idolles be quite banished from us, as also the ceremonies of Moses ceassing now
from henceforthe for evermore:) all creatures should wholely obey unto only
Christ by their true and lively faith, Roma. 11.
and most humbly submit them selves unto God their father: which, for our
health, is the only fountain of all grace and wisdom. To whom, we all yield
our hearty thanks, through the grace of his dear son Jesus Christ: to
whom also and the holy Ghost, be eternal glory and praise, now and for
evermore. Amen.

Huldrich Zwinglius, in his friendly exposition to Luther, touching the
EVCHARIST, confesses what he acknowledges of Jesus Christ.
I Acknowledge Christ to be according to the saying of the Apostle: Wisdom
from God, ryghtuousnesse, 1. Corin. 1.
sanctification, and redemption. Wisdom, because he is by nature God: which
not only knows all things, but governs the^ also. Also wisdom from God,
for so much as the almighty father sent him unto us (not as though he had
not been in the earth before, but that we understand this word, sent, for
the taking of man's nature) that he might teach the heavenly wisdom so
perfectly and clearly, that whatsoever he had taught, that should be finally
the figure of true wisdom. Whereupon, even Paul confesses him self also, to
know nothing, but Christ Jesus, and him crucified. Which thing that most
discret man would never have said. If he had not perceived all abundance of
wisdom and knowledge to be in him, as he witnesses in the second to the
Colossians. Wisdom from God: Collos. 2.
that we might know of surety thereby, that none externe things can justify:
The which thing is manifest, both by all his life and doctrine. No
justification in any externe thing.
For what externe things be there, but he has disanulled them? Is there any
place? For when he communed with the woman, he showed that it should come to
pass, that men should neither woorshippe in the Mount Garizim, neither yet at
Jerusalem. No place.
But that the true worshippers should worship every where in spirit and truth.
And he admonished his disciples, that to what place soever they should be sent
to find Christ there, they should not come at it. No time.
Is there any time but he has disanulled it? for he says that the Sabothe
was made for man, and not man for the Sabothe: And teaches that a man must
pray at all times. No person.
Is there any person? but all they (says he) that have come before me, are
robbers and thieves. And he called ye pretense of those prayers which the
religious me^ (among ye Jews) made for the common people and idiots, for
stipends and wages, he called it (I say) nets and ways devised to catch men's
money and goods. To be short, he so taught that there is no man that has wit,
but he sees that he went about this that we should trust to the Lord, and
serve him in holiness and innocence of life. And whereas through the fault
and calamity, which destroyed our nature at the beginning, we be so tied to
affections, that we do none of those things which God requires of us,
rightly, and as we ought to do: It comes also to pass, that the justice of
God fears us on the other side. For howsoever we call him good and merciful,
yet are we compelled to acknowledge him to be just also. Neither should it be
truly good that lacked justice. Now that his justice also might continue
inuiolate, and yet man, which does nothing worthy of justice, should not ever
be deprived of his company, he found a way, by the which both his justice
should be satisfied, and the poor miser restored again to the company of God.
He sent his son therefore, which should be made our justice, sanctification
and price of Redemption, and for them only to be so made, which being chosen
of God, and taught within forth by his spirit, believed this firmly, that by
one way of the mercy of God (for that he pacyfied his justice by offering his
son, it is likewise the work of mercy) the way should be open unto eternal
blessedness: now of this mercy his son is made the pledge and surety. For
how shall he not give us all things, which has given us his son? Not being
eaten, but made the foundation our hope: Not in that he is flesh, but in that
he is the son of God, that took flesh. Thus thou have in few words, how I
knowledge Christ. Namely, that he is the light, and most high wisdom: which
has so lightened the world, that he might see God to be pleased with none
other services, than with the service of innocence. That heaven is won with
none other price, or tribute, but with the redemption of the son of God. That
a man is stirred up to the exercise of true virtue with none other spurs,
than by the inflammation of the spirit. That true comfort is brought into our
souls by no other instruments, then by the watring and influence, of the same
spirit: Thus I know Christ. Now if this be not to know Christ earnestly, I
will confess me not to have known him yet.

A few words touching the Covenant, that God has made unto his Church in
Christ, translated out of Huldrich Zuinglie, in his Subsidy, annexed to the
work aforesaid.
THEY bring the words of Paul against me. ^. Cor. 11. Where he says thus:
This cup is the new covenant in my blood. Of which words they thus withstand
me: that which is here given, is the new covenant. But the new covenant is
not any sign, but the very blood of Christ. For as much then, as this cup
is the new covenant, it must needs be the corporal blood of Christ, for the
blood is the covenant.

Zwingly.
I am glad that this place is laid against me, and specially for this cause,
that the variation of the couenaunte (which is found in many places of the
scriptures) may be a little excussed. Covenant, as in this point, is nothing
else than a condition promised of God. As when the Lord stroke a bargain or
covenant with Abraham. Gene. 17.
I am God almighty (says he) walk before me and be perfect, and I will put
my covenant between me and thee, and between thy seed after thee in their
generations, with an everlasting covenant, that I be thy god, and the God of
thy seed after thee. And I will give to thee and to thy seed after thee, the
land of thy Pilgrimage, and all the land of Canaan in possession for ever, and
I will be thy God. Here is nothing spoken but the couenaunte, which God (by
favor) vouchedsafe to make with Abraham. But what contains this couenaunte?
With what conditions is it made? These be then the conditions, I will be thy
God. Thou shall walk before me, most purely. I will make thee a father of
many Nations, I will geeue the seed of Sara.

And I will be the God of that posterity of thine also, which I promise. I will
give to thee and to thy seed, the land, in the which thou art now a stranger.
The which conditions, be even the very couenaunte self. But to the couenauntes
are added signs. Which although they be called by the names of the
couenaunts, be not the couenaunts for all that, as it is manifest in the same
place. For it follows on this wise. This is my covenant that thou shall keep
between me and thee, and thy seed after thee. Let every man child of you be
circumcised. See how he calls the circumcision the couenaunte. When for all
that it was not the covenant, but the sign of the covenant, even as the divine
saying it self teaches on this wise: And ye shall circumcise the flesh of
your foreskin, that it may be a token or sign between me and you. We see it
to be now called the sign of the covenant, which a little before was called
the covenant. It is therefore evident inoughe, that the signs of the
couenaunts, be not the covenants, although they have sometimes the names of the
couenaunts put upon them. As when circumcision is here called the covenant,
whereas it is yet but the sign of the covenant. And Baptism. 1. Pet. 3. is
taken for Christ, when he says that we are saved by baptism, yet are we
saved by only Christ. This is the text of S. Peter: When the long suffering of
God, was once looked for, in the days of Noe, while the Arc was a preparing,
wherein few, that is to say, eight souls were saved by the water, like as
Baptism now saves us: Not the putting away the filthe of the flesh, but in
that a good conscience consents to God, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ.

Zuinglie expounds this place in his subsidy or help as follows: we
thought it not necessary to repeat any further those things which we brought
in our commentary: for we trust that we have satisfied them that be godly,
and somevvhat more grown in the faith, which commit them self to Christ in
this flood that drovvneth this world, none otherwise then Noe did in the
old time commit him self and his, and the remnaunts of the whole vovrld
that forthwith should be destroyed, to that great ship, as men borne after
the death of their father.

For they that put their confidence in Christ, require Christ no more
according to the flesh, for they know that flesh profits nothing, as is
written in the sixth of Ihon, if thou eat it: but then know that it
profits much, if thou believe Christ to be slain for thee in the flesh, And
that thou put thy confidence in that. In this vvinde they svvimme safely to
land. In this ship they are saved.

But Baptism is as well the sign of the Christian people which have received
of God this covenant, that his son is ours. As the Circumcision was in the
old time the sign of this covenant, that the Lord would be their God, and
they should be his people. We will now pass over from the covenant or
testament of Abraham, to Christ's covenant or Testament. The covenant that was
made with Abraham, is so strong, and not to be abrogated, that on less a man
keep it perpetually, he shall not be a Christian or faithful man. For except
the Lord be thy God, and thou the servant of him only (for thou shall
woorship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve) there is no cause why
thou should boast thy self to be a christian man. But he whom thou so
worshippest and seruest, is so thy God, (that is to say) thy highest good, that
he gives himself freely to thee, that he casts away himself unto death for
thee, that he might reconcile thee to him self. He which has performed it,
Take this for both sacraments that is to say, Baptime and the Lords supper, for
both are but flesh touching the extern use.
promised this grace long since, when our father transgressed his law, and
after that, he ever renewed that promise to the fathers. There was none other
cause why he promised it, but because that blessedness could not happen unto
us, although we endeavored and labored for it til we swet again, till the fall
of our first father were forgiven and satisfied. But when Christ being now
offered for us, had pacified the divine justice in such sort, that by him
only a man might go unto God. Now has God made a new covenant with
mankind. Not so new a covenant, as though he had hardly or skarcely found
this remedy at the last, but because that whereas he had long a go prepared
it, he gave it when the time was come.

This new covenant then or testament, is the fre^ and undeserved forgiveness
of sins, which God has liberally given by his son. They therefore ye trust to
God by Christ, and do bring their children to that trust and faith (for we
must add that withal) as Abraham and his posterity in old time was
circumcised, so are they circumcised: but with the circumcision of Christ,
which is baptism. Collos 2.
Baptism therefore tends even to the same effect that Circumcision did in
the old time: for it is the sign of the covenant that God has made with us
by his son. Baptism then is the chief and principal sign of the new
Testament or covenant. Further, how that Covenant is made perfect, the
celebration of the Lords Supper, brings us in remembrance thereof. Not
surely that the Supper is the Covenant, but because the Covenant is brought
to memory in it, and that thanks be given to the Lord for so liberal a
benefit. What is then the new Covenant? Free remission of sins by the son
of God. Thereof it comes, that forasmuch as this free remission of sins is
obtained by the death and shedding forth of the blood of Christ, the same
death and blood may peradventure be called the Covenant. Although if a man
speak truly and properly, Christ is not the new Testament, but the mediator
of the new Testamente. As Paul speaks, for the very covenant is, Hebr. 9.
the remission of sins. Notwithstanding, we will not these things to be
spoken so far forth, as though we thought it a fault, if the death of
Christ, or his blood should be called the Covenant: but for the intent
lovingly to stir up these rash fellows (that love to strive with words) to
the clear understanding of these things.

Now let us go further. Christ would that the memory of his benefit (which
he performed with so bitter death) should ever ^ee in full strength among us.
Whereupon he not without cause, instituted the frequentation also of the
remission of sins, none otherwise then he did once institute the celebritie
of the deliverance out of the Egyptiacall bondage. Now seeing that the blood
of the Couenaunte may be called the Covenant, and that we in this celebritie
or assembly, do give thanks for the blood that is shed, by the which the
Covenant is finished up and made perfect, thereof it also comes, that we
call it the blood of Christ. By the which, we only make commemoration, that
the blood was and is shed for us. And then even as we have called the blood,
the Covenant, so we name the sign or token also of the blood shed, the
Covenant. Say all this to be but an old wives tale, except the words of the
Apostle prove it. That the remission of sins is the very covenant, Paul
teaches, Hebr. 8.
That this testament, covenant, or bargayne is obtained by the blood and death
of Christ. Peter gives warning, 1. Pet. 2.3:
And Paul to the Collos. 1. Furthermore, none of the Apostles calls ye death
or blood, the covenant, but the blood of the covenant. Notwithstanding, we
leave it to a man's liberty, for instructions sake: that they may be called the
covenant. Rehearse the Apostles words, and mark them well. If then, the blood
it self which was shed, is not called the covenant, but the blood of the
covenant (as by which the covenant of free remission is obtained and
confirmed) how much more is this Cup of the blood, not the covenant, but a
sign and token of the blood of the covenant? The sign therefore has received
the name of the thing signified, as it is above evidently showed. The Sacrament
therefore of the covenant and testament (if a man take Sacrament for the
principal and externe sign of the covenant or promise) is baptism. But of
the passion of Christ (by which this covenant or testament is performed) this
assembly is the sign, in the which the bread and wine are divided in
commemoration of Christ's death, with thanks giving of the faithful, being
all of one accord. Here we ought not to be so impotent, to braule so stiffely
about the name, whylest one will have this assembly of thanks giving to be a
Sacrament, and another denies it. For when we understand the thing it self
clearly, why strive we yet about what name we shall call it.

FINIS.
Of Vanity, by Martinus Cellarius.
Ecclesi. 1. Vanity of Vanities, said the Preacher.
Vanity of vanities, and all things are vanity.

IT IS A GENERAL proposition, which co^teineth the one part of the state of
this sermon: namely that al things under the sun are vain. But even now a
question is here offered, at the entering of this matter of vanity, what things
they be which here of Solomon are numbered among vain things: whether only
man with his cares and worldly desires, or else whether he puts other things
also under vanity, as are the elements, and things grown and concrete of
them. The definition of this word vain, shall solue easily the question, if a
man show what the scripture properly meneth by this word Habel: that is vain,
superfluous and foolish. Those men which hold only man to be here counted vain
with his counsels and life, they may allege two reasons for them selves. One
is, considering that man as the head, gives the cause of vanity to the rest
of al things, as shall hereafter more plainly appers. The other reason is, for
so much as they which taught that the inferior creatures were here of Solomon
reputed vain, mingled therewithal corrupted doctrines, as to eschew those
creatures which god had made good, for ye use and service of man. No man
therefore blames their mind which follow this sentence, for ye end to deliver
men's consciences from yt so great an error, and to restore the works of God to
their right use: so that they grant only man to be vain: that is to say,
man to be chiefly vain, but the rest to be all vain in man, and by man. For
else vain shall be taken for the vanity of sin only, and neither of
Solomon, nor in all the Scripture to be applied to only man, corrupted with
naughty desires. For Solomon in this and other his Books, reputeth all things
under the sun to be but vain: and expressly pronounces youth or
adolescencie (afterward in this same Book, and in the Proverbs) also beauty
to be but vain, Proverb. 3 1.
which are yet the good creatures of God. After the same sort the Apostle
puts the creature under vanity, Roma. 8.
in these words: For the creature lies subject under vanity. Which is an
argument, that vain is not always repugnaunt to good, but oftentimes to
firmitie and stablenesse. Hereunto agrees, that Solomon, when he would
approve all things to be vain, takes his reason, not of evil which is sin,
but of condition slipping to destruction, when he adds here this: A
generation passes away, and a generation comes. Likewise in the end, when
he had rightly expressed the image of the dying man. He here rehearses this
sentence, which he here proponeth, vanity of vanities, occasion of that
acclamation taken, not of sin, but of frail nature. Such as David took
likewise, when he says: Psalm. 3 8.
Man to be vain, for so much as he is mortal and of short life, using there
also this word Habel: and is opponed in that place, and set against the
surenesse of nature, and not against the goodness of righteousness, as
witnesses both that which goes before, and follows in the text. For it is
before: Lo, thou have made my days in a measure: and Chelidi, that is, mine
age is nothing in thy sight. In like manner also it follows: But man walks in
an image. In which vanity of slipping life, are included also al other living
things. For after in the third Chapter, it is said: Beasts have the same
chance that men have: where also it is read: So that there is one destruction
of Man and Beasts, and equal condition of them both: even as man dies, so
do they. Likewise David says: Thou shalt take their spirit from them, and
they shall decay and return into their duste. Psalm. 103.
It is therefore manifest, that Habel first and chiefly notes those things
subject to sins, that is, the nature void of God, whose thoughts and counsels
his spirit enformeth not. In that sort is Satan only vain with the wicked.
Of this vanity speaks David every where in the Psalms, and Solomon in his
book of Ecclesiastes, where the frivolous counsels and thoughts of the vain
heart of man, are taxed and reproved. This vanity is the spring head, and
beginner of vanity in the rest, as hereafter shall appear. Secondly, that is
taken for vain which perishes, and admits courses to be borne, and to dye,
holding determined spaces of their continuance. In this sort it is usurped
both in this book, and also in other: the example is above therein recited. And
so are those things vain, which are compacte together of the soluble
conjunction of elements. Thirdly, vain is it which sustaineth any manner of
change, being of his nature able to be moved, either to better or to worse. So
are all creatures partakers of their vanity, as well they that be above, as
they also that be beneath: as well the heavenly, as al they that be under heaven.
In this manner are al strange gods called Habelei generally, both in Moses and
in the books of Kings, unto which a man commits himself besides one only
god, which made both heaven and earth: because that god is void of al changing,
being the inuariable and chefest goodness: in whom only it is convenient for
man to rest with faith and love: other thing there is none at al, for all other
things for so much as they were made of nothing, they suffer some motion,
whereby they may come to better: be it of nature never so stable to eternity,
and to continue for ever. Furthermore Angels being a work created of naught,
Aungells.
have likewise their power and motion: power, able to be made perfect, motion
making them perfect: whether a man consider the power of God at the light of
nature (which light has also his degrees of perfection) or else at the light
supernatural. For them also does the vnapprocheable light of god bring from the
darkness of nature, into his wonderful light: for they are daily lightened by
those things which chance to the Church in the mystery of the cross by
Christ, Ephe. 3.
the Apostle witnesses to the Ephesians, and obtain their glory also with the
children of the kingdom, whom they serve. For as they were made of nothing: so
have they their Tohu va Vohu: that is, their rudeness and imperfection: their
darkness also which co^passeth about this imperfection, to be wiped away by the
light of god, which light shows it self among those dark mistes, by the
spirit of Christ. Which dark mistes the holy minds do also acknowledge, Esaias.
6. Reave. 4.5.
and give glory to the blessed lamb, and so are saved according to Esai and the
Revelation of John. Contrariwise satan with the wicked confesses them not,
and is damned, bosting his darkness for light, and the light of god to be
darkness: whereof both he him self with his are accursed. Esa. 5. Ioh. 9. But
darkness is a certain void and vain thing of nature created, and of the
light natural: which thing (this passing from darkness to light) that which is
above declares: which light is god him self. And further, the very heavens
are not without their vanity, neither yet those lights above, which we daily
behold: If not of nature, that must be brought to naught: yet of such as
must be renewed into a more pure state according to Esai, Peter, Esaias. 66. 2.
Pet. 3. Reave. 21. Job. 25.
and the Reave. And Job likewise confesses the very Moon and the Stars to be
unclean in Gods sight. Now if a man may find in those higher creatures their
vanity: how much more vain shall those things be, which under the Sun are
subject to perpetual chances in this nethermoste world: Reciprocis
mutacionibus.
where all things grow and decrease again with mutual chaunges, stand and
fall, rise and decay? To these things therefore, Solomon here chiefly looks,
thoroughly treating of the vanity of life, of the thoughts and studies of
mankind, as they that are next to man, which he may look upon and consider,
and which above the rest are more prove to feel sin. Wherefore, this word
under the sun, fell often from the king, being asked his advise (in this
book) of this world, things manyfestly falling to corruption, signified.
Therefore, seeing that every creature has his vanity, not only in his doing
and operation, but also of his most mere nature: we are here taught two
things very necessary to the comforting of our selves. One is, that God
prouidently appoynteth the reconcinuation and restoration of all things after
the first workmanshippe: by which, the things that were made by the space of
six days, to the perfection which then was convenient, both to their nature
and doings, should be new wrought in this recreation to the best state they
might have, and that in Christ, and through the revelation of the sons of God
by the same. Further, Roma. 8.
the condition of man is such, that with him (if he be put in a vain state)
all things lie subject to vanity. On the other side, he being restored to
integrity and sound state of the glory of God, all things are also delivered
from their vanity. For man is (as it were) the knitting together and head of
all creatures: In whom all things, as members and parts, are compact to this
perfection, which we see in them. For he has his being with all things: and
to live, he has that property with roots: he has his sense with beasts and
living worms: he has power to understand the truth and falsitie, good and
evil with Aungelles, and with God himself: whereunto pertayneth this word
Microcosmos, which is, little world, and this name of every creature, to whom
it is said to be preached, when the word of God is showed to man: so great a
work of God is man. Him the heavenly minds do serve, whose administering
spirits they be: heaven and earth, and all that is in them does service unto
him. All things therefore pertain to man, Hebr. 1.
as to their lord and prince: even so, upon his state depends both the
vanity and health of al things. And so man, with the rest of all creatures,
are in sundry wise vain. For man is vain as the whole and head, and so
chiefly vain: but the rest of creatures, as parts included in man. For he
comprehends all, and includes all things, in being, life, sense and mind.
But the whole is here taken for that which contains perfection: not for that,
either which is universal, called in latin integrale, substantial or
predicatorie. Therefore the Apostle teaches rightly: for we know that every
creature sigheth with us, Roma. 8.
and as it were traueleth together with us for child, even until this time.
And also: for the dilligent expectation of the creature, looks that the sons
of God be openly showed. For the creature is subject to vanity against his
will, but for him that brought it subject under hope: for the very creature also
shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption, into the liberty of the
glory of the sons of god. Which how it shall be brought to pass, it shall
appear hereafter. Wherefore the Scripture chiefly occupies it self about
man: it beats properly about his fall and resurrection: his sin and
medicine to heal the same: his vanity, and how his salvation should be
repaired. So that the Apostle grants to the Colloss. that when man is
reconciled by the blood of Jesus Christ the heavenly Adam, all things are
pacified by him, whether they be in heaven or in earth. And so the reparation
of man is provided: by which he and all things in him, might be reformed to the
best state. And this is it that we are here warned of, by the vanity of all
things.

The other thing that we are here taught in this place, follows of the
first: namely, that all Creatures are unprofitable for a man, to put his
confidence in any, and in which a man may ascribe his salvation. For they have
every one of them their vanity, of gooing forwards from out of nothing, into a
better condition, under a reformator Christ. And therefore, that we may safely
be committed to nothing in the world else, save only to one God, which only
is unchangeable against all chances, sin, death and Satan, in the blood of
Christ, which overcomes all Principates and Rulers. Thou therefore (O king)
with thy power, shalt be to thy self but vain. Thou also (O wise man) with
thy wisdom: and thou (O just man of this world) with thy righteousness,
which shall be as a clothe filthily arrayed in the sight of God, according to
the Prophet. Vain shalt thou be to thy self (O Philosopher) with thy light
natural, Esaias ^4.
which is mere darkness before the light of God. Submit thy self to
Christ, the wisdom and power of the father the eternal righteousness, and
to that true light, which lighteneth to true glory: for he only is stable and
subject to no vanity, whereas all that ever is thine, is not able to save
thee: for sin lies upon thee, being cruel against thee through the
testimony of the Law, if the horrible feeling of death prick thee, and that
the power of hell molest thee, as Solomon notably proves hereafter when he
says: And I saw under the Sun, that there was no running of the swifte,
nor war of the strong, nor riches of the rich that can help. What remains
therefore? the only fear of God now rests, which delivers us from vanity,
even as it is not vain it self. Esaias. 11.
For it is the power of God, the spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ, initiating
and beginning the minds of the godly, with the love of God from above, which
brings true life after vain life: namely, the life of God. Of which, it is
the perpetual well spring, Proverb. 14.
according to the Proverbs: It brings also beams of true light, after the
darkness of the light natural: namely, of the vnapprocheable light of God.
The seeds of which light, Psalm. 94.
are sown in godly in this fear, as the Psalmographe witnesses: Light is
sown to the just man: That signifies Solomon, where he so oftentimes stirs
us up in this book to the fear of God, after mention made of the Vanity of
all things.

Of Vows, by Martinus Cellarius, in the fifth of Ecclesiastes. As follows in
this Text. If thou haste vowed any thing to God, defer not to pay it.
TO note breefly of vows, it shall be meet for us to begin at the definition.
When we seek therefore what a vow is, first offers it self the gender,
which is promise. For they that make a vow, promise either them selves, or
else their goods. And for as much, as there be diverse promises, by making a
partition we shall see what a vow is in scripture. Promise is in two sorts.
One is of men, and the other of God. That which is of men, is made at the
arbitrament of men. Of which sort is that, which the Gentiles made to their
gods, without the prescription of the word of God. As are also at this day,
the promises made and vowed in monasteries, which are made without the
doctrine of the gospel. The other which is of God, is that, which is made
according to the law of God. But every such promise, is not properly called
a vow: for there be certain promises in the law, which although they were
made at will: yet could they not be omitted: as was the promise, by which
Israel took upon him, to do of his own will, all the things that the law
commanded, according to the saying of Exodus: Exodus 24.
All things which the Lord has spoken, will we do and hear. This promise did
the manner of the covenant express to Israel, as in whose conditions it was
expressly put, yt God would be the God of his people, if he would hear the
words of the covenant, Leuit. 26. Deuteronomy. 28.
and obey unto the law. Le. 26. Deu. 28. Now, a vow is a voluntary promise,
which is in a man's choice to promise or not to promise without offense,
according to this of Deutronomie: when thou vowest a vow to the Lord thy God,
thou shall not be slack to pay it, Deuteronomy. 23.
for the Lord thy God will require it. And if thou defer it, or slack the time
to pay it, it shall be reckened to thee for sin. But if thou lust not to
promise, thou shall be without sin. But the matter was otherwise touching
solemn oblations, or only commanded for a time, according as every man's
estimation was. Exodus 30. Such oblations were voluntary, Exodus 30.
yet they were no vows. Therefore, we must seek a difference, by which a vow
may be sundred* from other oblations. And that difference shall be made with a
diffinition. A vow is a voluntary promise, made after the example and form
of the law, which is put in the power to vow it or not to vow it, Numer. 6.
Leuit. 27.
as was the law of the Nazarites, and also the vow of the soul, of which we
read in Leuit. 27. But in this vow were two things regarded. One principal,
which was cheefely acceptable to God: namely, an heart prone and inclined by
fear to the glory of God: which heart, the law required before al things. The
other not principal, which is the externe oblation, being but mystical and
figurative, which was destinate to a certain end, that is to wit, to the
kingdom of Christ, in which it should be finished: that is, fulfilled
spiritually, according to this saying of the Apostle: These things are ye
shadow of things to come: Collos. 2.
but the body is in Christ. Therefore, as pertaining to this part of vows, a
distinction here offers it self again, that thou put one vow of the law,
and an other of the gospel* Nota.
This to be true, and the other mystical the first, Moses teaches the latter
Christ. And yt the apostle closely touches to the Romans when he says:
Roma. 6.
Therefore are we buried together with him by Baptism unto death, that as
Christ was raised up from the dead, by the glory of the Father: even so we
also walk in newenesse of life. This is the true Vow, this is the true
Consecration of the godly, by the which the Saints bind them selves to God,
that they will walk in a new life, laying a side the old, by the light of
the spirit of Christ, being forebrought unto them: not by their own power,
but by the power of God: by which they are new borne to the having of these
desires in them selves: and by which they are thus brought, to offer them
selves unto God. In which power of regeneration, who so be therein, it is as
free to them both to think well, and to do well, as it is to beasts to go
by the vital breath of natural life, or as it is to birds to fly abroad
under the sky. Which vow of the new law, the godly did prefigure in the
old covenant by externe oblations: as did the Nazarites by the regal bushe of
their heads, by the avoiding of dead corpses, and by abstaining from wine.
And this performed they, according to the measure of the spirit of childhoode.
So that, there is one and an especial vow, even as there is one kingdom of
God, one and principal couenante, one Priesthood, which is anointed with the
spirit (that oil of heaven) one sacrifice, and one heavenly inheritance, but
according to the time. Besides all these true and principal things, the people
that were under the law, prefigured mystical vows and sacrifices: a mystical
covenant also showed in the flesh, and deputed to an earthly inheritance:
and a mystical kingdom likewise and Priesthood, until the fullness of times.
Of which things, Hebr. 10.
the Apostle says to the Hebrews. The law obtaining the shadow of good
things to come, but not the image it self of things. Now, this image is
verity, the fulfiller of the old law, by the spirit given of the new law.
In which, even as other things: so vows also only spiritual have place, being
attempered to the nature and disposition of the law. Iere. 31. Collos. 2.
Hebr. 10. Luke 17.
Further, this law is written by the spirit in the hearts of the Saints,
being free from externe observation of time, of sacrifice, of place, of
ceremonies, and of nation, according to this saying of Christ: The kingdom of
heaven comes not with observation. Therefore, let cease such profane vowe^
of superstitious religions, which are taken in apparel, in meats, in living
unmarried, in place and to places, and to observe times for they have neither
the law nor the gospel to stand on their side. As for the law, pertaining
to mystical things: that is, externe things, (...) is abrogated. The others
kingdom, trauaileth not in the externe choice and respect of things: but
contrariwise, it stands in peace and joy of the holy ghost, as the Apostle
says to the Romans. Thou vowest a prescript manner of apparel: Roma. 14.
the gospel prescribes thee none, but makes it free. Thou segregatest a
certain kinds of meat and drink to thy self: but the Gospel segregateth
none. Thou iudgest thy self in meat and drink, contrary to that which the
Apostle bids, which says: Collos. 2.
Let no man therefore judge you in meat and drink. Thou may say: If there be
none obligation of vow, judgment has no place. But thou naughtily vowest:
and by thy vow separatest the use of meat, which Christ makes free to thee:
to whose feet, and to the feet of his members, all things are subject by the
ordinance of God, according to Genesis, and to the Psalm. The Apostle sharply
inueying against you, Gene. 1. Psalm. 8. 1. Timo. 4.
calls you false Prophets, which commands to abstain from meats, which
God has created to be received with thanks giving of the faithful. Thou
furthermore vowest to live unmarried, being uncertain with thy self of the
gift of chastity, or what success it will have with thee: which is not
man's gift, nor at our own arbitrament, but the mere gift of God: namely,
to be obtained by prayer at the will of the giver, and of none other man's
power, according to this saying: All are not able to comprehend this saying,
but they to whom it is given. Math. 19.
Therefore, if thou canste be continent or chaste, thou art continent by the
benefit of God, and not by thine own. Therefore, John. 3. Leui. 27. Numeri. 6.
be thou chaste, freely, according to the free spirit of Christ, which
inspireth heavenly gifts where he will. In which liberty also, the
consideration of vows is put. Those things that were most freely vowed in the
law, were not perpetual: but all such, as might be redeemed when they
lusted. But ye vow vows without the word of God: and not contented
therewith, ye promise the same to be perpetual, both without the law, and
without examples of Gods law. But if thou be not able to live chaste, study
that thou do no violence by thy vows to this word of creation sown in
nature: It is not good for man to be alone. And also to this: It is better to
marry than to burn. Gene. 2. 2. Corin. 7.
But thou shall not bring it to pass: the imbecillitie and weakness of the
flesh declares that plainly, which thou always ouercommest not, endeavor thy
self thereunto never so much by the fear of God: which fear we deny not to be
in some of them, whom this lack of knowledge detaineth and holds captive to
make vows: partly by the obstinate desire of some men, which can by no color
be defended, or that I speak not of more grievous things: for my mind is
(before God) to covet the winning of many to Christ by writing this, and not
to hurt by my will any man. Therefore, as in the law were vowed mystical vows,
after the rule of Gods law, and not rashly all things what so ever they were,
and after every sort, and in every place, according to Deutronomie and
Leuiticus: Deuteronomy. 12. Leui. 27.
even so, in the state of the gospel, vows ought to be informed after the
example and disposition of the heavenly word, free from al externe habit or
shape of things under the sun: which vows, the faith of regeneration may
inwardly govern, and not thine own presumption, guided without the word of
God. And let them be such vows, as may change the affections, which may guide
consciences (and not bring an externe visure) well answering before God, but
not apparel, not meat, not shauing of heads, not oils, halles, gold, and
stones. Al which, by the very abuse of an evil handled conscience, and with
this vain world, wax old, vanishe away and come to naught. Therefore, as
Solomon says, a man must vow and pay his vow: But in such order, that thou
both vow and pay, after the prescript of Gods word heard in the Temple,
and not after the doctrines of men: which doctrines, God speaks not by his
Prophets: for such in deed is the condition and state of man, that he only
depend upon the word of the living God his maker: that he neither add nor
take away from it, Deuteronomy. 12.
according to Deutronomie. For, as in this visible world, that heavenly moving
is a constante and firm rule into all times, of all mutations, which chance
in these low things: and as some known and certain quantity, measures the
other quantities of uncertain greatness: and as in the very minds that are
made the general anticipations and principal guides, measure (like faithful
rules) the other cogitations: even so, the only word of God, is far the
most constant measure, rule, and sure knowledge, by which, thou may direct
thine own conscience in those things, which pertain to eternal life. So that,
as men (from rules) neither add nor diminishe, least they may deceive a man
like Lesbies rules: even so, by Moses, ought nothing to be either added or
diminished, from the inflexible word of God: which thing let them likewise
observe, whom men's decrees hold yet as captive. If therefore thou make a
vow, and have not the word of God to lead thee to the same, binding thy
conscience where it ought to be free: making a law to thy self, where as is
no law of God: appointing an observation of creatures, where as the kingdom of
Christ admits none: (who is that king of heaven, ye judge sitting upon the
throne of God the father, before whom, men ought to be well ware and do
reverently:) that vow of thine, which thou thus make, dwelling sinnefully
upon the earth, shall be none: void is it therefore, and frivolous, and ought
not in any wise to be fulfilled, but to be broken of thee. Thus far of the
vows of religious men and priests, touching their diversity of apparel, and
the shauing of their heads, with such other vain vows and obseruances.

Of the Old man and the New: which be compared together, by Martinus
Cellarius, upon the seventh of the Preacher, otherwise called Ecclesiastes. OF
THE OLD MAN.
THe Old man is made of the earth, and fashioned into a living soul,
according to this text: And man was made to be a living soul, In animam
viuentem.

2 This strength is it, which does the works of nature: as are to engender, to
nourishe up, to feel, and to judge of things, agreeing or repugning to nature,
as we read in the first of Genesis: Increase ye and be ye multiplied.

3 In this part, the living soul, which the Greeks call Psichin, of wind or
breathe, is common to man with other beasts, and with all things that live, as
it is also written of them: Let the earth bring forth Animam viuentem, living
soul in his kind. Reading in both places, both about the making of man and
beasts, one self same word in the Hebrew, which is, Naphshekeijah, and
signifies wind or breath.

4 So that, this soul is the breath of life: by which the natural body, and
not the spiritual, the earthly, and not the heavenly, is animated and lives.
By which the gross body has life, but not that body, which is transformed to
be glorified, according to the Apostle in the first to the Corinthes, the
fiftienth Chapter.

5 In which conferment, it must be diligently seen what it is, that the first
man was made of the earth: and what also the second, which comes from
heaven. Further, what it is that the first was made into a natural soul or
life, and the second into a quickening spirit: and what the soul of the first
Adam is, and what the quickening spirit is, and what his function is in the
second.

6 But above the degree of living soul, the vital strength of man aduaunceth
it self by the means of the mind, to things invisible, and to principles
universal: by which part he is far discrepant from the rest of living things,
both by nature and operation.

7 In which part also, the first Adam was dipped with the fear of God, above
and besides the nature created: by which fear, he might have his Creator in
reverence. To which fear, all other things that were in him obeyed, both
body, sense, and mind, for he was soundly and rightly created: In whom
rightnesse was put: of which rightnesse Solomon speaks when he says: Only
this I found, that God made man right. etc.

8 Therefore, when we call the first Adam, old and earthly: old and earthly is
not here put to contrary that which is just: that is, innocente: but against
that which is to be renewed into a better condition: In which sort, scripture
speaks of the old creature, when it treats that al things are to be
renewed. In Esai. 66. and in the Apostle.2. Corinth. 2.

9 But yet this rightnesse in the first man, was not a rightnesse of the
revelations of the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, although these things
were put in him to be brought forth in their time: but of innocence, which
was joined with the ignorance of the counsels of God, touching his salvation
and glory.

10 And so the expression of the divine Image was set in innocence, and not in
the manyfestation of the fathers wisdom that then should be made: which being
hid from time out of mind in a mystery, the Apostle says that he speaks
to the Corinthes, in the.1. Epist. 2.

11 Which wisdom is revealed only in Christ, who has the keys to lock
and unlock the gates of the kingdom of heaven.

12 But this Christ was neither promised, nor began to be reveled, till Adam
had fallen. Gene. 3. This very seed shall break thine head.

13 Whereof comes this notable saying of the Apostle: God has shut up all
things under sin, that he might have mercy upon all. Therefore as the first
man lacked experimentes of grace and wrath, of falling, and rising again, of
ignomie and glory whylest he stood: even so the mystery also of Christ, in
whom only the treasures of gods wisdom were laid up, were then unknown,
sin opening the cross, and the cross opening glory. Romans 5.11. 1. Cor. 4.

14 So that, as the first man, of the body made of clay, by the maker of all
things, was by nature a weak and frail work (although that if he had not
sinned, he should have been immortal by the justice of God, who punishes no
man with death without sin, according to this: For the reward of sin is
death:) even so, there lay open unto him an occasion soon to catch a fall.
For being vnexperte in things (although while he was yet innocente) he might
soon be brought to eat of the fruit that should be his bane, by the subtle
Serpente, at the enteraunce of concupiscence into him, which by viciating the
body, should bring death, and raise up war to the inner man, whom the spirit
of fear had put in him, whereof the Apostle treats in the seventh to the
Romans.

15 And that is brought to pass by the engines of Satan, who is a murderer
from the beginning, a spirit of dissension, and not of peace, as the heavenly
man Christ witnesses of him in John. 8. Chapter. By whom it happened that Adam
being tempted, began to have experience by the infection of sin, what the
wrath of God was, what grace was, what the power of sin was, and what
medicine was for the same, Christ Jesus, that blessed seed, that should be
borne of him, being showed unto him.

16 Where it must be wayed, what it is that Adam had his eyes opened after
his fall, and likewise what is the Tree of the knowledge of good and evil, and
why it was so called, and what occasion was offered, and whence it was taken to
promise Christ, Gene. 3.
what Gods counsel was about the fall, and after it, about the cross, and
what the mystery of the cross is, to glory, out of the undoubted Scriptures.

17 But Satan meditated this fall by a difference. First castyng his bayte (by
the craft that was in him) at the woman being the weaker kind, to the
tasting of that cruel apple.

18 Whereof also the curse fell upon him, which was the author of so great
destruction: whom Christ Jesus the second Adam would destroy with his
adherentes: and would save the earthy Adam with his posterity, which were
written in heaven, and had not fallen, as did the reprobate serpente.

19 And so it chanced, that the first man enduced by satan to transgressio^,
began to have a delight in erthly things, putting upon him the evil
affections of the corrupted flesh. Where the nature of the earth, out of which
he was taken, uttered first it self under Satan the mother of the matter.

20 For the earth is an element, sluggish, slothful, cold, dull, and full of
darkness: lacking every act and motion, Gene. 1^
except it be new changed from above with spirit and light. In this sort
is the old and earthy man. And therefore these terms, old and earthy, have
no praise in scriptures.

21 And such fruit also came of him by propagation and increase of the flesh
corrupted: fruit of darkness, not of light: of death, not of life: of wrath,
not of grace: of malediction, and not of benediction, by his own nature.

22 For the order of right state lost, by which the lively body was obedient
to the judgment of the mind, and the mind obediente to the spirit: what
other might needs reign, than injustice, in steed of life: wrath in steed
of grace: and darkness in the stead of light?

33 Which justice properly is nothing else, What justice is
than a conformity of all things in the reasonable creature, to the law of
Gods mind: by which it is commanded, that God be loved above al things, and a
man to love his neighbor as him self.

24 Of injustice, the matter is clean contrary. By which, Adams posterity
depraved and corrupted, follow the disposition of Satan, the author of
injustice.

25 For he proudly boasting him self of the gifts of nature created,
glorifieth not God, the true life and light as he is worthy: and hates the
reasonable creature, whom it behooved him to love, as being next creature unto
God. And specially, he set upon the innocent Lamb by guyle and deceyte, whom
he slew in heaven, by purpose and counsel from the beginning, and driven down
from thence into these lower parts, when he had no more power in heavenly
things: he likewise deceitfully set upon man (being a weak piece of work
made of earth) and brought into this world under the sun, these evils which
we see.

26 In consideration whereof, he is called the principate and chief ruler of
darkness, and the father of lies, according to this of John. 8. when he
speaks a lie, he speaks properly of his own: for a liar he is, and the
father of lying.

27 Contrariwise, God is the author of Justice, not of injustice: of that which
is right, not of naughtiness: of truth, not of lies: as Christ also is
coming from above, who says of him self: But because I say the truth unto
you, you believe me not. Which of you will reprove me of sin? Except a man
would say, God to be the author of evil privately, for that he gives not his
spirit, which only makes rightnesse of Justice. But of that spirit (I pray
thee) to whom is God detter?

29 Forasmuch therefore, as sin is the privation of rightnesse which ought
to be in man, the same in Scripture is worthily called vanity: that is, a
frivolous thing, and a thing of naught. And they which follow sin, are
counted to follow and go about vanity and a thing of naught. The Psalm
says: Psalm. 5.
Their heart is vain. But how is it vain? because they lack the spirit of
God. Which spirit, if a man have, he has life and light. If he have him not,
there is darkness and death. And what is more frivolous or vain than these
things, wherefore God is in all points the sa^^^^ that h^ commands. For he is
the highest god, which ought to be loved above all things. He commands love,
1. John: 4.
which love he is, according to this: God is love. He commands truth,
justice and clemency, all these things he is. Ergo, he commands him self
to all creatures endued with reason: as to them, who are only able to receive
him. And again, he only forbids that, which he is not: namely the love of
our self and of creatures, that a man rest not, nor put his trust in them,
and that of the inevitable order of his wisdom: In which order, only the
perfecter things have power to bring another thing to pass. And that which is
not perfect, to do that which is worse, and not that which is perfecter. And
as the bodies of men living, having life of the soul, hold their state
right: even so the reasonable creaturs governed by the spirit of Christ,
defends the degree of justice and integrity. But being destitute of this
spirit, all things are contrary. Romans 8. Iere. 31. Deuteronomy. 30.

30 So that the old man was called man after his fall by contempt, being
void of this spirit of rightnesse: that they may know that they be but men,
that is vanity. Psalm. 9. Esaias. 31.
Esaias likewise, when he would show Egypt to be of no weight, he says: Egypt is
a man, and no God. And Pylate said of Christ: Behold the man: having respect
to the contented forms of Christ, drawn out of our sin: which forms he
bare in his flesh. Likewise the Psalm has: What is man? Psalm. 8.
And before Solomon says: I said in mine heart of the children of men, why
should God chose them?

31 All men through vain desires, embracing earth, not heaven: carnal things,
not spiritual things: the love of them selves, and not the love of God.

32 And when we be such, a worthy sentence is given upon the earthly man: Of
earth thou art, and into earth thou shalt return. Gene. 3. as before in the
same Chapter. and after in the.13.

33 Being of equal condition with all men, least any man should boast him
self, forasmuch as we be all the dust of the earth, all flesh a like, all
alike in danger to sin, and to the wrath of God, as parteyning to the old
birth.

34 Which thing Christ's finger writing upon the ground noted, signifies the
earthy stock of which we come, which should infect all men without exception,
and clears no man of sin.

35 Not only the body corrupted with earthy concupiscence (being counted in
the tale for flesh) but also the best part of man: namely the mind, which they
call the principal part.

36 Not that it is not a good creature, a natural light, that sees the truth
and falsitie: good and badde: which argues the consciences of sin, and
gives testimony of the righteousness of God: but for that, that this light
also being infected with original sin, is darkened to many things, and not
of efficacy to transform the minds of them, in whom it shines.

37 Whose senses, the Scripture adioyneth to the old man and to the flesh,
when the mind is not yet borne a new by the spirit of God, as parteyning to
motions and incitations corrupted.

38 Taking for flesh, what soever is not of the holy ghost, and borne a new
from above: that is, the whole man with body and mind, not yet being borne a
new by the spirit of God John. 3. Romans 8.

39 Examples are all the wysest of the Gentiles, in the light natural, and the
Phariseis, most righteous in the law: whose sin the Lord witnesses to
remain, John. 9.
because they said them selves to see, when in deed they were yet blind.

40 But they saw with that part, which was the best part in them: namely with
the mind: yet by which they should here this: who so is without fault among
you, cast the first stone at her. And this of the Apostle: Knowledge makes a
man proud.

41 not that the mind of her substance is flesh and of earthly nature, for
she is a spirit. 1. Corinthians. 1. and to the Romans 8. approaching next to the
Deity, no better work created coming between. Genesis. 1. but she is
flesh, for so much as she is viciated with contagion of the affections of the
corrupted body of sin.

42 In the reprobate, besides this contagion and infection, the mind being
void of the grace of Election, adds of her own, the neglect of the verity
known: that is, she nourishes the sin against the holy ghost: Math. 12.
which she carries with her into the other world, never to be forgiven.

43 And so Abel and Cayne, David and Judas: that is, that they be accursed with
the serpent: and the blessed elect by the grace of predestination in Christ,
before the foundations of the world were laid, are both by nature the old
man (as well the one as the other) the children of wrath and of darkness: The
difference is in the election. But forasmuch as it pertayneth to the grace of
the new man, and not to the nature of the old man, it pertains not to this
place, which treats here of the disposition and nature, of the corrupted and
earthly man.

44 Now, such is the first Adam with all his posterity, sprung of the seed
of the corrupted flesh. And such also is the world with his desires, made of
naught, and gooing to naught.

45 He therefore is damned with his wisdom and foolishness: with his
righteousness and unrighteousness: in his children with their father Satan,
which has invented al these evils: bringing in (that which Solomon so often
abhors in this book) the vanity of sin and death.

Of the new Man.
NOw, the matter is otherwise of the new man and second Adam: Christ Jesus the
blessed son of God is he, not taken out of the earth, but sent down from
heaven.

47 And so not made into a living soul, (which thing pertains to conception)
but made of his father into a quickening spirit, as the Apostle witnesses in
the.1. to the Corinth. 15.

48 This spirit viuifieth: that is to say, makes us alive, not with life
natural, but spiritual. And therefore he does not the natural functions:
which are, to engender and to beget children of the flesh etc. for such work
has no place in heaven, as he being man, declares in Mark.12. when he
says: But they are like the Angels which be in heaven, by their Resurrection.

49 It is therefore the breath of life from above, which God first blows
into the second Adam, and by him into his members, John. 20.
whereof is this: Take ye the holy Ghost. etc. and that with a spiritual
breath, not with an earthly: By which the body is transfigured into an heavenly
habit after this earthly, according to this saying: It is sow a natural
body, it rises a spiritual body. So that the spirit vi^ifying is not here
taken, as which should be oppo^ed and laid against that which is innocente
and right: but against that which animateth with earthly life. Whereupon the
first Adam, although he were just with the spirit of innocence: yet lacked
he this viuifying spirit (as the Apostle takes him to the Corinth) whose body
was natural, not spiritual: earthly, not heavenly. Neither could it be
transformed into a heavenly body, without either the death of it, or immutation
very like unto death: as he clearly signifies, when he proves by the mutual
conversion, that the resurrection consists not without death: alleging a
similitude of the seed, of which Christ had mentioned before in John. So that
Christ received the name of the New man then specially, when he was raised up
by resurrection from the dead, to the right hand of the glory of God: and not
before, when he had put of mortality, and the ignomie of the cross of his
flesh, to the which, he was borne for us of the virgin: he namely then being
declared to be truly the son of God by the spirit of power, Roma. ^*
according to this: which was begotten of the seed of David after the flesh,
which was declared to be the son of God with power, according to the spirit
of sanctification, of this, that Jesus Christ our Lord rose again from death.
To which time also, this properly pertains in the second Psalm: Thou art my
son, I have this day begotten thee: the Apostle Paul reciting it for that
time in the Acts. Acts. 13.


50 For as much therefore, as the new man is such, he gives the nature of
heaven from whence he came: which heaven, is agile, full of virtue and light.
After this sort is the heavenly man, and all the children that come of him.

51 And for that, there was no way for this Adam to fall: namely he, which was
conceived by the spirit of God, not able to be brought to sliding, as he
witnesses of himself when he says: The Prince of this world comes, John.
14.
and in me he has nothing at all.

52 And the same returned to heaven, from whence he came down: even as the
earthly returns to the earth, of which he was made: al things returning to
their beginnings by divine disposition, as he says of him self in the third
of John. And no man ascends into heaven, but he which came down from heaven,
even the son of man, which is in heaven.

53 Seeing then, that the old man and the now are so far distante, in
beginning and ending, in nature and affections: the old shall not become new,
except he lay away from him his affections and desires, and put on him the new
affections of the new man.

54 Which can not be done, without a new birth and death, that the old man die
to him self, that is, to the love of him self, and to the contempt of God:
and that the new man be borne a new to heavenly desires, that is, to love God
above al things, and our neighbors as our selves: for this love is the end of
the law, and the sum of all the rightnesse of divine justice, unto which we
are to be reformed: which the very order of creation clearly teaches: in
which he ought to be loved with equal love, which has taken equal degree of
perfection with thee. But such is man made to the similitude of God.

55 For as much therefore, as we must be borne again, it is a question, whereof,
or by what we be regenerated, or what set to the helping hand to the renewing of
us? Is it the light of nature which contains the law written in all men's
hearts and minds? No not that: for that light being corrupted with original
sin, how should it wipe away the spot, and place innoce^cie in stead thereof?
Further, the light of nature is darkness, if it be compared to the light of
God, which brings eternal life, as above it is showed. Now, what communion
may be between vice and integrity, between darkness and light? By
regeneration we are begotten the children of light. But how shall darkness
proceed to so great light?

56 Much less shall the works of the law perform so great a work: which
(if they be done) are too weak in cause, as done by the light of nature, and
by the righteousness of the law: so that all natural things in man and
created strengths, take a fall.

57 What remains then unto regeneration? Only the spirit of Jesus Christ,
purchased for us by his blood: which may repurge the child of old Adam into a
new man. Other thing there is none, neither in heaven nor in earth, as I have
above proved in the rule of justification.

58 And that witnesses the new man him self, being the aucthor of this
nativity, when he says in John: Except a man be new born of water and of the
spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God.

59 Where, look what the natural wind is in this visible work of the world,
in this air next unto us, through the light of heaven, and waters from above
to make the earth bring forth fruit: the same the spirit of God the father in
Christ his son, to this Tohu and Vehu: that is, to this unformed and rule
^arthe of the godly: that is to say, to their minds, by the light that no man
can come at, and spiritual waters to renew their stomachs, to bring forth
fruits worthy of heaven.

60 And for that cause (in the mention made of regeneration) is joined water to
the spirit: In which, and by which, the new birth may be wrought. And in an
other place, Math. 3.
fire is also taken to company to work so great a work, when we read: He
shall baptize you with the spirit and fire.

61 In which part, respect is had to the figures of the created work. For as
in it, the spirit or wind was coupled with the waters which he should move,
preparing the earth by the light brought unto it, to ye increase of that,
which come of her: even so, the work of regeneration offreth it self her earth,
first empty and void: her water of the spirit, and of light: which is ye
fire, that new regenerateth heaven: which in John we spoke of a little before:
hither also are those things to be called, which we read of Helias, of the
spirit, commotion and fire.3. Reg. 19.

62 Whereof it is, that the old and new Testamentes speak so often of the
spirit of Messiah: by which he testifies, all salvation that pertains to
man. Esaias. 32.44.61. Ezechiell 36.39. Joel. 2. etc.

63 Notwithstanding this spiritual power of God the father, is poured in by a
certain order, and by an order of certentie* For first, it is fully resident in
Christ, as in the head: and from thence it flows into the Church of the
elect, as into the body and is imparted to his members, to every man, according
to the measure of the giving of Christ the head, agreeing to this: For God
gives not the spirit to him by measure. John. 3. John. 16.
And as pertaining to the donation, we read this: For he shall receive of mine,
and shall declare it unto you. In like sort to the Ephesians. 4. But grace is
given to every one of us, according to the measure of the gift of Christ.

64 And so only the saints are partakers of spiritual perfection, of part,
and from member to member: of which Christ is fully in possession: whom, the
kingly annoynting of the fathers power, glory and majesty, annoynteth without
measure, to all perfection of God the father. Whereunto also, this of the
Apostle pertains: you are Christ's, and Christ is Gods. You I say are
Christ's, as the members of the head: but Christ is Gods, as the head of the
universal divinity. For that perfection of the body, which is poured out
throughout all the members: the same rests whole in Christ the head. Esaias.
11.

Collos. 1. Ephe. 1.
65 This is it, which the Apostle calls corporally: and heereunto also
pertains that word, the fullness or complement: whereupon the Psalm says
of Christ: The Lord said unto my Lord. And an other Psalm says of the
Saints: I have said, ye are Gods. And Peter says: ye are partakers of the
divine nature.

66 Which places are truly to be understood, as the newborn are truly
called the children of god. For as there is a true regeneration: even so, there
is a true participation and possession of the divine nature, and of the divine
light, wisdom, and righteousness. This is our hope and vocation in Christ
the head, of the participation of the substance of God, and of the nature of
the father, by that we be borne a new of the spirit of Christ. John. 3. 1.
Pet. 1. Romans 8. Gal. 4.

67 But we speak here of Christ, as the treating of him pertains to the
cause of regeneration, which comes of the spirit. For what the scripture
speaks of the eternal word, we holily woorship, and will speak thereof in
an other place.

68 Therefore we be not called the sons of God, and new men after the same
sort that Christ is: For he is the natural son of God, and the new man
both within and without. But we be the sons of God by adoption, and new men
only inwardly in this world. Psalm. 50.
He is borne the son of God, and the new man. We are begotten the children
of death and of sin by the first Adam: and we are borne the sons of God and
a new creature by the second Adam. For of the earth we be earthie: and in
Christ the heavenly man, we are taken to grace, and to the enheritance of
sons, by new birth, which shall in the day of resurrection put on new
flesh upon us, even of the flesh of Christ.

69 So that, here being renewed while we live in this world we consist of two
men: of an outward and inward man, of a body corrupted with concupiscence:
and of a mind repaired with the spirit of the new covenant.

70 The body once corrupted, is not restored in this world: for it is all
earthie, tending to the earth of his own will and weight. And therefore he
also returns unto it, because of the sentence once given upon it, Gene. 3.
Collos. 3. 2. Corin. 4. Mala 3.
when the temprament of this worlds elements is dissolved, of which it is
made, as Solomon often teaches in this sermon: And is now and then mortified,
that it follow not the desires to which he is inclined, that fiery spirit of
the heavenly new birth, quite burning them up.

71 The inner man therefore, that is, the mind, Collos. 3.
which is put into this body to rule it, is only renewed in this life, to the
fellowship of the divine light.

72 Wherefore, they that be regenerate in this frail life, carry men about with
them, as contrary the one to the other, as are light and darkness, death and
life: and as far dissident, as heaven and earth. The outward and old man is
visible: the inward and new man is invisible. The outward man is earthly, and
the inward man is heavenly. The outward man is conceived of carnal seed, and
the inward man is strengthened with the spiritual seed of the word of the
living god. The outward man is fed with meats yt will perish: but the inward
man grows with eternal food. 1. Pet. 1.
The one is made flesh of the flesh of man: the other is made a spirit of the
spirit of God.

73 The outward man is ever polluted and sins: but the inward and new man
never: neither cannot it sin, John. 11. 1. John. 3.
as it cannot die.

74 And no marvel, for as much as thou shall find contrary laws in them. The
one of sin, which holds us down to the ground, persuading earthy and
carnal desires: the other calls us upward, burning in desires of heavenly
things: where, a man may see the marvelous conjunction of both men, set
together for experience of so great things, not without the marvelous councels
of the divine providence.

75 Further, the old man is created of God, and therefore made of nothing: the
new man is borne of God, and so of something: namely, of his spirit. Whereof
he never dies, he never waxes old. And these are the things, which Christ
disputes of the life eternal: which, true faith brings: that is to say, the
spirit of Gods light. Upon this point, stands the hope and consolation of
Saints.

76 By this faith, the outward man obtains pardone, if the spirit of the
inward man remurmur against him, while we dwell in this life. Esaias. 53. Roma. 5.
For faith staide up with the righteousness of an other, that is, with
Christ, which being innocent died for offenders, delivers the faithful from
dampnatorie sentence of death and sin: Collos. 1. Hebr. 1
and draws back the desires of the old man, that he do them not (the bridle
of the spirit cast in his teethe.) For it is not obtained, that they have no
being in us, and that they wholely be destroyed in this world, as long as this
flesh lives: the resurrection gives that: in which both the body it self
shall be also raised up out of the duste of the earth, from death unto life,
to fulfill the body of Christ: which, as the head to the body went before,
being the first begotten son of the new creature, and the unspotted first
fruits of the kingdom of the fathers majesty.

77 For what life shall the head have without the body, or the body without the
members?

78 And the fall of the first man so repaired and amended, we shall be restored
to that from whence we fell: that is to wit, to righteousness and innocence:
but in a far better state and condition: for in this innocence, the earthy
life shall be changed for an heavenly: mortality for immortality: and after
sin, fall shall be changed for resurrection: and the ignomie of the cross,
for glory. So great is the goodness and wisdom of God, which thus far and
this way must be revealed.

79 Not only the old man, but also every other creature shall be redeemed and
delivered from vanity, under the revelation of so great a kingdom, the Apostle
witnesses. Romans 8.

80 But how? Shall the plants revive again and florishe a new? And shall the
beasts and living things put immortality upon them? yea verily: but not by
themselves and in their subsistences or beings, but in the whole, that is, in
the head Christ, and in the saints his body: whilst in them, their bodies,
life, sense and mind, be restored to newness and glory: which degrees
conclude the universal perfection, both of the work created, and also of
that which is to be renewed, and the same in the new and blessed man Christ
Jesus the true God, and very eternal son of god the father. Where is
diligently to be marked, that we distinct these three diligently in Christ:
namely, a true flesh, and very bones, a very soul and mind in deed, and the
very spirit of his father: In such sort, that of every one of these, the
nature be seperately and distinctly kept, and reserved to it self in the
kingdom of glory: not one mixed with an other, even as Christ himself did
distinct them: The distinct nature in Christ reserved after he was glorified.
when after the resurrection he proved and verified to be in him the nature of
very flesh and bones. In which order, the holy ghost obtains the highest
place, as the kingly unction of the Fathers majesty. The second is the mind,
the third are bones and flesh. Which thing, if it shall be marked, we shall
overcome great difficulties, and shall escape most grievous errors, that are
now in these days of the flesh of Christ. Therefore, as by this Christ, all
things were made, both visible and invisible: even so, by the same, and in the
same, all things shall be renewed to glory, the work of restoration, so far
passing the first work of creation, as mutable is excelled of immutable: and
as that which is renuable, is excelled and surmounted of that, which already is
renewed to better, and into the best state it may have.

82 This is the merit of the pure blood of Christ Jesus the heavenly man:
which being sprinkled abroad upon all things, mundifieth, that is, makes
clean al things in heaven and in earth, the oldnesse of corruption dissolved,
and the newness of incorruptibilitie brought in that shall abide for ever:
when this shall be spoken: Stabilitie of stablenesse, and al things are stable,
as hitherto has been said: vanity of vanities, and all things are vanity,
while the vanity of the old creature reigned. Thanks therefore and glory, be
to God the father who has given us this victory by our Lord Jesus Christ the
new man: Who repair in us, integrity and nevvnesse of life, after this old
corrupt disposition, of the old and first Adam. Amen. Amen.

An exhortation sent from a stranger, a worthy and famous learned man of God,
to the right high and mighty Prince, Edward Duke of Somerset, for the
seeking and quiet establishing of peace and righteousness, in the Church of
England: Immediately upon the commotions, suddenly raised up in the west
parts, as also in Suffolk and Norfolk. In the year of our Lord Christ. 1549.
MY Lord, although God has given unto your grace, a singular prudence,
magnanimity, and other godly virtues, requisite to the place where he has
ordained you, and for the affairs that he has put into your hand:
nevertheless, for as much, as ye do esteem me for a servant of his son
Christ, whom you (above all) desire to obey: I am certain, that for the loves
sake of him, you will receive gently that, which I now write unto you in his
name. As in deed I pretend none other end, but in following still that, which
you have already begun: you might therein continue, and seek the advancement
of his glory more and more, until the time ye have established his kingdom
and reign in such perfection, as it may rightly be known unto the world. And
also ye shall know, that without aduauncing any thing of mine own fantasy, all
that I now purpose to write, shall be drawn out of his most pure and
wholesome doctrine. And for as much, as you refuse not to be taught of the
same master whom I serve, but that you rather prefer (to all the rest) the
grace that he has given unto you, to be one of his Disciples: I think that I
have no need to make unto you any long excuse or preface: because I find you
sufficiently disposed to receive all such things as shall proceed of him. We
have all great cause to render thanks unto our Lord God and father, for that he
has thus willed, Occasions of great thankefulnes of God.
to be so reverently obeyed and served of you, in so excellent and high a
work, as in setting forth again (I mean) the pure and true rule of his
service in England, and in causing the sincere doctrine of health to have
place, and to be there faithfully published to all them that will hear: and
for that, that he has given unto you such virtue and constancy, to continue
unto this time, against so many temptations and difficulties: and for that he
has also strengthened you, in blessing all your counsels and labors, for the
prospering of them: for they be things that stir all true and faithful men,
to magnify and praise his name. But in the mean time, because that Satan
ceasseth not to raise up (by all means possible) new combats: Satan's
diligence.
and that it is a thing of it self so hard, that there can be nothing more
hard, than to cause, that the word of God may peaceably rule amongst the
people: which, through the corruption of their own natures, be given to lies
and fantasies: And forasmuch as there are so many circumstances, which
impecheth (in these days) the straight course of the same: and above all, that
the superstitions of Antichryst, having taken root so long time, Antechristes
supersticions.
may not easily be taken away from their hearts. It seems unto me, ye have
great need to be confirmed and strengthened, by some holy exhortations: and I
doubt not, but the experience thereof teaches you to feel the same, which
shall be the cause to make me proceed more frankly, considering that my
purpose (as I believe) shall be conformable to your desire. And albeit that
mine exhortations shall be superfluous, yet I am sure, that you will bear with
that good zeal and affection of mine, which (undoubtedly) stirs me to do
it. Wherefore, I think (according to reason) that the necessity which ye
feel, shall cause mine exhortations a great deal the sonner and the better to
be received, whatsoever they shall be. I beseech your Lordship, that it may
please you to give me hearing in some aduertisements, that I entende shortly
to declare unto you: hoping that when ye shall understand them, ye shall (at
the least) find some savor to be recomforted, and to take a great deal the
better courage to continue the holy and most noble enterprise: unto which, God
has appointed you at this present to be employed.

I doubt not, but that the great troubles, which (not long since) happened
unto you, has been very hard and noisome: and most of all, for that many
might have taken occasion of slander, forasmuch as they were moved, in some
part under the shadow of changing the Religion. Wherefore it can not be, but
it has been unto you a very troublesome and hard assault: as well for the
cares which might come unto you, as for the mutinies of the malign and
wicked ignorant people, and also for the fear, great danger, and trouble,
specially of the Prince, and of all the whole company of the honest and godly.
Truly the brute that I have heard a far off, has caused me to have in
mine heart no small grief, until such time as I had after knowledge, that
God had begun to put forth some remedy. Nevertheless, considering that
they be not yet all pacifyed and quiet, and that the Devil may yet renew them
again: ye shall remember that which the holy History recites of the good
king Ezechias: Troubles ensuing the reformation of wicked religion.
that is to say, when he had abolyshed the superstitions in Iewry, and
reformed the state of the Church, according to the law of God: that then he
was so oppressed of his enemies, that he was lykely to be a very lost and
desperate man.

It is not without great cause (O noble Prince) that the holy spirit of God so
notably expresses, that such affliction happened unto him, immediately after
he had established the true Religion in his perfect and due order: for it was
very likely, that as soon as he went about to set forth the glory of God, he
should not have his Realm long quiet: so all faithful Rulers, Princes, and
governors of Countries and common wealths, be advertised truly by this
example, that the more they shall employ and endeavor their labors to cleanse
their Countries, and to put out all Idolatries, humayne fantasies, and vain
superstitions, Princes, and all christian magistrates, that seek truly the
worshipping of God, shall have their faith tried with diverse temptations for
the trial of their truth and constancy.
and procure that God be truly worshipped (in deed) as he ought: the more
shall their faith then be proved and tried, with the fire of diverse
temptations, even as gold is tried in the furnace. It is Gods good pleasure so
to suffer it, and so will he have it, to declare the truth and constancy of
all those that be his, and by such means to exercise them, that they should
have regard to a more high and excellent thing, than to any transitorious or
corruptible thing in this world. In the mean time the Devil does also his
office, entending by all covert and hidden mean, to destroy the good and
wholesome doctrine, because he can not openly attain to his most cursed and
loathsome purpose. But following the admonishments of S. James, which says unto
us, that in considering the patience of Job, we must take heed to the end.
The end of al troubles for the causes of God is joyful peace and quietness.
We must also cast our eyes directly upon the end which was given to the
foresaid good king: that as God succored him in all his adversities and great
troubles: so in the end he remained all quiet and victorious. This thing
considered, and forasmuch as the hand of God is not shorter than it was, and
that he has at this day in so great recommendation the defense of his people,
his truth and verity as ever he had, God ioineth with princes to help them in
his own cause at all times and in all temptations.
doubt not (my Lord) but that he will help you: and not only for one time, or
for one quarrel, but at all times, and in as many temptations as he shall send
unto you: yea if the most part of the world shall resist the Gospel, and
enforce them selves with all rage and violence, to impech and hinder the
setting forth thereof. It is the just quarrel of God, and he will defend and
maintain his right. Neither ought we to think this kind of wickedness a new
and strange thing, To repugne the gospel of Christ is no new thing.
for it is the very corruption of man's nature and his ingratefulnesse, which
ever has been, and have therein felt the violence of the wrath of God, and shall
be henceforth enforced to requoyle, when God approaches them. And also to
stumble against him, when he will charge them with his yoke. Moreover,
forasmuch as of their nature they be given to feigned holiness, The natural
inclination of the blind and wicked of this world.
to hypocrisy, and blindness, they may not endure to be brought to that most
clear and true light of the word of God, which plainly discovers their
infamy and shame, nor to be drawn out of those lewd superstitions: which
serves unto them as hyding places, or to give them shadow and darkness. It
is then no new thing, if there be contradiction, when the godly Rulers and
ministers goes about to bring them to the pure and perfect obedience of God.
And also we have advertisement of our Lord Jesus, which says unto us, The
sword of adversity, and the profession of the gospel are joined together.
that he has brought the sword of adversity with his Gospel: but yet this
may not make us astonished, and the worse willing or fearful: for in the end,
when men shall have largely and sufficiently maintained and put forth their
rancour and malice, they shall be confounded in a momente, and shall overthrow
them selves with their own violence, as experience in all rebellions has well
approved. It is true which is said in the second Psalm, that God shall but
laugh at their raging and vain stirring, that is to say, that in dissimuling,
God for a while suffers the wicked, but in the end he sharply reuengeth.
he shall leave them a while untroubled, as though the thing touched him not:
but yet in the end, they shall be utterly driven back by his violent force
and power, even with the breath of his own mouth: with the which, if we be
armed, we have right good, perfect, and invincible Munition against all
conspiracies, what soever the devil may procure or stir up against us: and
in the end we shall know by experience, that as the Gospel is the messanger
of peace, God at his pleasure pacifieth the breakers of peace.
and the reconciliation between God and us: so he can as well pacify for us
the breakers of peace: and by this means also, we shall feel that Esai has
not said in vain: that when Jesus Christ shall reign amongst us by his
doctrine: that then swords shall be converted into Ploughe shares, and the
Spears into Sithes. In the mean time, albeit that the malice and rebellion of
men, be the occasion of sedition and mutinies, which rises against the true
Gospel of God: nevertheless, it behooves us to take heed to our selves, and
to know, that God chasteneth our faults by them: which otherwise can not
serve, but to Satan.

It has been an ancient complaynt, that the Gospel of Christ has been
the mean and worker of all such evil and calamities, An ancient complaint
of the blind and folish.
as has (in times) happened amongst men. In deed, we read in Hystories,
that not long after Christianity was spredde in all places, there was not
(almost) a corner in the world, which was not horribly afflicted. The motion
of the wars, The judgments of God against sin, after the entrance of the
Gospel.
was an universal fire lightened in all Countries: the Floudes on the one
side, the Pestilences and Famines on the other side: and an horrible confusion
of all good orders and policies: In such wise, that it seemed as though the
whole world should have been utterly ouerturned and altered. We have also
seen in our time, many and great myseries, since the Gospel of Christ (by his
will) first began to be spread abroad, even unto this day: so that every man
complayneth now, and say that we be in a world most miserable and
unhappy. And to say the truth, there are now very few, which feels not
the sharp strokes and weighty burdens thereof. Nevertheless, The cause of
Gods punishments, ought to be considered.
in feeling now such pinchings and paynefull blows, we ought to consider
and well regard the hand of him that thus strikes us: and to think also
wherefore it is, that he in such wise is moved, and to make us feel his
sharp scourge of correction, is not very dark or hard to be understood of
us: for we know that his heavenly word, by the which he will keep us in
health, is an inestimable treasure. And we also know, by our good embracing
thereof, what manner of recompense is duly to be received of us. I would
disobedience and contempt were not in our consciences to condemn us.
Wherefore, seeing then that we esteem not much that thing, which is so
necessary, and a Jewel so precious to be spoken of: It is reason also, that
he then take vengeance of our ingratitude. We also here that Jesus Christ
said: the servant knowing the will of his master, and does it not, is worthy
of double chastisement, for that he shows himself to be but slothful and a
sluggish servant, in obeying the will of our Lord God: which has been
declared unto us more than thousands of times heretofore. And if we consider
our case well, we ought not to count it strange, The cause whi God in these
days more sharply punishes.
if he be now more sharply angry with us, seeing we be the more inexcusable,
inasmuch as we cause not the good seed to increase and profit in us. Is it
not reason then, that the thistles (I say) and thorns of Satan, do rise up
to prick and tormente us, because we give not to our only God and creator,
the obedience that is due unto him. It is no marvel in deed, that men thus
ryseth against us. As I understand (my Lord) you have in England two kinds
of mutenies, Two kinds of mutinies.
which be risen against the king and the state of the Realm. The one sort are
fantastical men, which under the color of the Gospel would put all into
confusion. The other be wilful and obstinate people in the vain superstitions
of the Romish Antechryst. Altogether deserves (with Gods good consent) to be
well punished by the sword that is committed unto you: seeing that they
quarrel not only against the king, but also against God, which has placed him
in the seat Royal, Rebels rise not only against their prince, but also
against god*
and has committed unto you as well the protection of his person, as also the
state of his majesty. But the principal mean is, in considering the great
charge and duty of your grace, for the praise of God and quietness of the
Realm, to do as much as in you shall lie possible, to cause them which savor
the sweet doctrine of the Gospel, to stick and rleaue unfeignedly to it, with
upright and holy conversation, The duty of a perfect christian.
and at all times to receive it with such reverence and fear, that they
forsaking themselves and flying from all human affectes, may encorage other
to receive the Gospel of Christ, freely, and with glad good will and desire,
and to forsake also them selves with satan's whole pack of collusions, for the
true and most pure service of God. And all men ought to think, that God (for
the tender loves sake that he bears to his people in Christ) have and will
reveal all: to the end that they shall without fayning profit more now in his
holy word, than they have commonly done long time before. These mad folks,
which would that ye world should return into a confuse and disordinate
liberty, be suborned by Satan, for to slander and hinder the true state of
the Gospel, as that it should not (being published) but engender strife and
rebellion against the princes, and al disorder among the people. Wherefore, all the faithful servants of God ought greatly to lament and be sorrowful. The
hateful abomination of Papists.
The Papists willing to maintain the filthiness and abominations of their
Roman Idol, show them selves open enemies of the grace of Jesus Christ, and
of all his holy ordinances. The same also ought (not a little) to grieve the
hearts of all them which have possessed the seed of grace, who ought to think
this truly of them, that they be altogether the scourges of God, Papists the
scourges of God.
that (for unthankfulness sake) he has justly sent unto them: and because
that they make not due account of the doctrine of health and salvation, as they
ought to do.

In consideration whereof, the principal remedy for the appeasement of such
seditions, is, that they which do profess the Gospel, do truly repair to
the image of God, for to show that our christianity causes not dissension in
the humayne life, and to give God proof and trial by their soberness and
temperancie, that we being governed by the word of god, be not men unruled and
without a bridle, and by their good and holy life to stop the mouths of al
evil and slanderous persons. For by this mean God (in his wrath) being
appeased, shall retire his hand: and in the place that this day he punishes
the slaunderers for the contemning of his word, he shall bless their
obedience in all prosperity. Noble men. L^wiers.
Likewise, that all the Nobility and Lawiers of this Realm govern them selves
rightely, and in all humility, to the obedience of this great and mighty
King Jesus Christ, making holy homage unto him, without fayning, of soul and
body, and all that they have, to the end that he may refourme and abate the
arrogancy and folly of them, which would rise up against them.

Lo noble Prince, this is the mean how kings and princes of the earth ought to
reign in serving Jesus Christ, to the end that he may have sovereign
authority, and quietly to rule by his word among all estates, both great and
small. Wherefore (my Lord) seeing ye be raised up (I say) of God to so high
princely trust and dignity, and to have the state of the kings Majesty (your
dear Nephew) in high price and great recommendation, A Christian exhortation,
meet for all princes and men.
as appears very well: I pray you in the name of God here to employ your
principal care and vigilancie, that the doctrine of God may be preached with
strength and virtue, for to bring forth his fruit: and leave not for any
respect to follow a full and an entire reformatition of the Church of Christ.

And to declare better my mind unto you, I will divide the whole into three
points. Three special points to be noted and considered.
The first mean shall be, that the people be universally well instructed. The
second shall be, in taking away the loathsome abuses, that has crepte into the
Church of Christ, and has long continued in the same. The third mean shall
be, to be diligent in correcting vices: and to keep such good order, by
reformation among the people, that the slanderous persons, rebellions, and
seekers of disorder, may not have place through sufferaunce, whereby the name
of God should be blasphemed. And as touching the first, I mind not to declare
unto you, what doctrine ought to have place: but rather giving thanks unto
almighty God, for that he has not only given unto you, the light of his
pure knowledge: but that he has also given unto you good counsel and
discretion, to cause his pure verity to be preached. So that (God be thanked)
you be not to teach what is the true faith of Christian men, and the doctrine
which they ought to receive, seeing that by your means the purity and truth of
the christen faith is again restored: that is, that we believe God to be the
only governor of our souls, that we keep his law for the only rule and
spiritual governance of our consciences: not to serve him after the
fantastical and foolish inventions of men: Also that according to his divine
nature, he will be accordingly served in spirit, ^an what he not him self.
and in all purity of heart. Of the other part, acknowledging that there is
in us nothing but all evil and wickedness, and that we be in all our
knowledge and affections in such wise corrupted, that our souls being
dispayred in our selves, be like unto a bottomless pit, or a world of all
abomination and iniquity: And all the presumption of our wisdom, dignity or
power to do well, be taken away, we may have free recourse to the fountain of
all goodness, which is Jesus Christ, receiving that which he gives unto us:
that is to say, the only merits of his death and passion: to the end, that by
the same mean, we may be reconciled unto the Lord our God: that being washed
with his blood, we should not fear that our faults should impeeche us, but
to find grace before his celestial throne: that being assured our sins be
freely forgiven us, and pardoned, by the virtue of his most blessed sacrifice:
we shall put therein our whole trust, and assurance, and not to dout (at any
time) of our heavenly comfort and health: and that we be sanctified by his
spirit, in giving our selves to the obedience of the justice of God: that
being fortified by his power and grace, we shall be valyant conquerors of
Satan, the world, and the flesh: and finally, that being members of his body,
we fear not, but that God will take us for his children: and that we may have
confidence to call unto him, as unto our father. And that we be advertised, to
bring to this end, all that is said and done in the church: that is: being
retired from this sinful world, and other our deadly adversaries, we may be
lifted up to heaven with Christ our head, our Lord, and savior. Wherefore
then, seeing that God has wrought in you and given you the grace, to restore
again the knowledge of this most sound and holy doctrine, which has been so
long time buried by curssed Antichriste: I leave to keep you with longer
purpose: and that which I have touched of the manner of teaching, is only, for
that the people may be rightly instructed, and to feel that which the Apostle
says, that is that the word of God is a sword, cutting with two edges,
piercing the thoughts and affections, A fault most happily now reformed,
through the mighty power and great mercy of God.
even unto the marowe of the bone. I say this (my Lord) for that I think there
is very few lively preachings in the realm: but rather that the most part
recites them, as it were by lector. I well perceive the necessity that
constrains your Lordship thereunto: for ^^rst ye have not commonly (as I
think) your Pastors so good and apt, as you would lawfully wish and desire:
wherefore, it is needful for you, to seek diligently, and to supply that
lack. Secondly, there might chance to be many light spirits, which would
(peradventure) leap beyond their bounds: sowing corrupted and foolish
fantasies, as oftentimes they do in new things. But all these considerations
impeecheth not, but that the ordinance of Jesus Christ ought to have his
course, as in preaching the gospel. Now this preaching ought not to be
dead, but quick and lively, both for to teach, exhort, and to reprehende
(as S. Paul says to Timothe) in such sort, as if any infidel do enter, he
may be wounded, overcome, and taken (as he says in another place) to give
glory and praise to God. You know also (my Lord) how that he speaks of the
liuelynesse ye ought to be in the mouths of them, which would approve them
selves, good and faithful ministers of the Gospel of Christ: that they ought
not to have or use words of Rethoricke or much curiosity, entending thereby
to be in the greater estimation: but that the spirit of God ought to sound
in their voices, Curiosity unseemly in the doctrine of the gospel.
for to work in power and virtue. All the dangers that are to be feared of
men, ought not (with human policies) so appear, at any time or in any place,
that thereby the spirit of God be impeached or let to have his liberty and
due course in them: in whom he has so plentifully distributed of his graces,
for the edifying of the church of God. It is true, that in the mean time,
nothing were better nor more expedient, than to stop the lightness of
fantastical spirits, which takes over much license. Also to shut and close
fast, the gates of all curiosities and new wicked doctrines.

But the best and most convenient mean shall be, such as God him self has
appointed and showed unto us: that first, because there be some resolute of the
doctrine, An oath motioned and to be offered to the ministers of Gods word and
why.
that all ought to preach: the which all Prelates and Curates should swear
to follow: that none be received into any Ecclesiastical charge, unless he
promise to observe the same true concord and union.

After that, to have a formal and common instruction, for to instruct the
young children and the ignorante people, which should make them acquainted with
the true Doctrine, in such wise, that they may discern it from lies and
corruptions, which else might be brought in.

To the contrary, believe me (my Lord) that the Church of God shall be never
well conserved without Cathechisme: Cathechisme.
For it is as the seed to be kept, that the good grain perishes not, but
that it may grow and increase from age to age.

Wherefore, if your grace desire to build a work long to endure, which
should not shortly be in decaie: cause that the children in their young age,
be instructed with a good Cathechisme, that may learn them breefely, and
according to their small capacity, to know wherein consists the true
christianity or most perfect religion of Christ.

This Cathechisme shall serve for two purposes: that is to say: for an
introduction to all people, to profitte well in that, Cathechism for two
p^rposes.
which shall be preached unto them: and also the rather to descerne, if the
wicked shall at any time presumptuously set forth any unsound or strange kinds
of Doctrine.

In the mean time, I say not, but that it is good and also necessary, to
bind and restrain the Pastoures and Curates, Necessity to bind pastors and
curats.
to a certain order and form written, for to supply the ignorance and
simpleness of some of them: and for to show the better conformity and
concord with all Churches.

Thirdly, for to bridle and overthrow, all vain curiosity and new
inventions of such, as desires nothing but to run riotte, the said
Cathechisme (as I have before rehearsed) shall serve and be a good bridell for
such folks: And also in such sort and order, are the ministering of the holy
Sacraments, to be given, and in like manner the public Prayers.

And in the mean season, your grace must take heed to avoid such
policies, as may destroy the strength and virtue, that ought to be in the
preaching of the Gospel: and that you employ your labor and diligence, as
much as ye can possible, that there be lively and good Trumpettes, whose
sound may enter into the deepenesse of their hearts.

For there is danger and great doutfulnesse, that ye shall not see great
profit of such reformation (how great and holy so ever it be) unless, even at
once with it, the power and virtue of good preaching, be displayed and set
forth together. It is not without cause which is said, that Jesus Christ
shall strike the earth by the scepter of his mouth, and shall destroy the evil
by the spirit of his lips. It is Gods disposed good way, whereby he will
overthrow us, in destroying all that which is against him. And for that
cause, the gospel is also called, the power, Princes and pastors both
mainteiners of the christian state.
the reign, or kingdom of God. And notwithstanding that the ordinances and
statues of Princes, be good helps to advance and maintain the state of
christianity: yet will God have his sovereign virtue declared, in the
spiritual swoorde of his word, which is set forth by his appointed
pastoures. And to the end, I will not long trouble your Lordship, I will come
to the second point, that I have purposed to show unto you. Which is, to
abolishe and take clean away, the abuses and corruptions, that Satan
heretofore has mingled with the ordinance of God. We know, that under the
Pope, there is a bastard christianity, A Bastard christianity.
that God shall disalowe at the last day: for as much, as at this day, he
has condemned it by his word. If we desire to flee back and retire from the
world, and from such approved perdition, there is nothing better, than to
follow the example of S. Paul: the which, willing to correct the evil that
the Corrinthians had joined to the supper of the Lord, said unto them: I have
received of the Lord, that, which I have given unto you. Of that we must al
gather one general instruction: that is: to return to the right and natural
commandment of God, The cause of the Gospells infection.
if we will have a good and an approved reformation of him. For as many
minglings as men has advanced of their own wicked inventions: so many
infections be there, Half cropping of rotten abuses* makes christianity mixed
and countersect.
through the which we are turned from the holy usage of that, which God has
given unto us for our saving health. Therefore to fall to cropping, or cutting
off but only half the branches of such rotten abuses, it cannot bring again the
good things into their perfect and pure estate, because that we shall then have
amongst us, a christianity continually mixed and counterfayte. I say this,
because that some (under the color of moderation) be of opinion to suffer many
abuses in the Church, Moderation.
without taking them clean away: and they think that it is enough to have
taken out the root only of the principal abuses. But to the contrary,
Lothsom seeds of hypocrisy and lies are fruitful.
we see how much the lothesome seeds of Hypocrisy and lies are fertile,
and that one grain thereof is sufficient to fill and annoy all the world
within three days, as men be aptely inclined and given thereunto. Our Lord
God (who is all goodness and truth, and unto whom we ought only enclyne)
gives us other instruction. For when David speaks of Idolles, he says,
that their names shall not pass by his mouth: to the entente to declare unto
us in what detestation and contempt we ought always to have them. And if in
such wickedness we ought to consider well how greatly we have offended
GOD in the time of our ignorance: Satan's inue^tions to be ^schewed.
how much rather ought we now to remember the eschewing of Satan's
inventions, that has and does yet still provoke us to commit such
euilles, as are allurementes, which serves not but only to seduce the poor
simple souls. On the other side we see, that although men be sufficiently
warned of their faults and erroures, and be advertised of them as much as is
possible, yet nevertheless they be so hardened, that no man can attain to
their good and perfect end. Then, if there shall be left unto them some
Relics or fond fantasies to remain, The hurt that ensues by the remnaunt
of Popish relics left in the church.
it shall be a nourishemente in deed of much more contempt and greater
obstinacy, and a couerture to darken and hyde all doctrine that may be
proponed unto them.

I confess, that as it is convenient to observe some moderation, and that too
great extremity is not good nor profitable: Ceremonies.
so likewise it is not unseemly to use the Ceremonies according to the time
and grosnesse of the people: but it may not be, that any thing which is of
Satan and of Antechryst, should once pass under any such color. For that
cause the holy Scripture commends those good kings, which did destroy the
Idolatries: nevertheless, in not plucking away altogether, gave yet unto them
a mark, for that they had not destroyed the Chapels and places of vain and
foolish devotion. Wherefore, my Lord, seeing that God has hitherto preserved
you, raised you up to honor, and has brought you now so far forwards in
his works, I pray you go on, and continue your doing without any exception,
to the end he may approve you his diligente ouerseer and setter forth of his
temple, in such wise that the time of the king your Nephew may be compared
unto the time of Josias: and that you shall put all things in such good estate,
as there shall remain nothing to him but to maintain the good established
order which God shall have prepared unto him by your gracious mean. Dregs of
papistrie.
I will allege unto you an example of such dregs, that may peradventure
rest to be a little leaven, which in the end will make the paaste sour. They
use in your Country of England some kind of prayer for the dead when the
Communion is received. I know well that it is not to aduouch the Purgatory of
the Pope: I know also that it may be alleged by ancient custom to do some
remembrance for the dead, to the end to join together all the members of the
body. But there is an apparentorie argument to the contrary, that the Supper
of Jesus Christ is so holy a thing, that it ought not to be defiled by no
invention of man. Prayer according to the scripture.
Moreover, that in praying to God we ought not let slip the bridle to our
own fantastical devotions, but to keep the rule that S. Paul did give unto
us: that is, that we take our foundation of the word of God. Wherefore such
remembrance of recommendation is not convenient to the order of the good and
due prayer, and it is an evil addition to the holy Supper of our Lord.

There are other things also which peradventure should be less blamed which
notwithstanding are not to be excused: as the ceremony of the Cream and
Unction. The Cream has been invented of a foolish fantasy, Cream and unction.
by them that contented not them selves with the administration of Jesus
Christ, and that they would counterfayte the holy spirit by a new dream,
as though the water were ne^ (...) that. And that which is called Vnctio^ (...)
by a foolish affection of them that ha^ (...) Apostles, not having the same
gift tha^ (...) the Apostles did use the Oil upon the (...) heal them by
Miracle. When the Miracle (...) Figure ought no more to be used. Wherefore it
should ^ a great deal better that the things should be so pared off again,
as they may be most agreeing to the pure word of God, and may serve to the
edifying of the Church. It is true that we ought to bear with the weak,
but that is for to strengthen and to bring them to greater perfection: (...)
that is not to say, that in the mean time we ought to please fools, which
desire now this and now that, and know not why nor wherefore. I know the
consideration wherefore many are troubled, the cause is, The cause whi
weaklings are troubled.
they fear that too much alteration can not be borne with. Principally, when
one will have regard to his neighbors, with whom he desires to nourish
friendship and amity: a man would gladly gratify them in dissimuling many
things, which partly may be borne with in worldly affairs, where it is
lawefull to yield one to another, and to give some of our own right for to
bye peace: But it is not all one of the Spiritual governance of the Church:
which ought to be ordered according to the word of GOD, in that it is not
at our liberty to yield in any thing to men, One special cause of Gods
great displeasure.
in respect of their favor. Likewise, there is nothing that more displeases
God than when we will by our own humayne prudence or policy refourme, set
forth, or draw back any thing that is against his will. Therefore, if we
will not dysplease him, we must close our eyes in respect of men, and avoid
the maynteynaunce of forbidden fantasies. As touching dangers that may happen,
we ought to eschew as much as we may, but not in declining from the true and
right way: for we have his promise, that he will assiste us in walking the
right way, not using any delay, but with forewarde diligence to set forth his
glory in righteousness: (...) in us but to do our office, in recommen^ (...)
^s that which shall happily follow. And (...) ^ise of this world be many times
boyde (...) ^e that God is not with them, when they (...) and in his help, the
which he utterly repro^ (...) ^demneth. If we then will have the virtue and
^^ength of God on our side, let us follow simply that which he says unto us.
And above all we ought to keep this general rule in mind: that the
reformation of the Church is the only work of his hand. Wherefore it is
necessary, that in this matter men suffer themselves to be governed by him:
the which, (...) of (...) ^urch, and that otherwhiles miraculously through true
obedience of the people.
whether it be in restoring or in keeping his church, will most commonly
proceed by a marvelous and strange means unknown unto men. Wherefore, to
restrain this reformation that ought to be divine, by the measure of our
wit, and make that which is celestial, subject to the earth and world, is
against all reason. I do not thereby exclude man's wisdom, which is very
requisite to be observed, so that the use thereof be duly and uprightly
applied, neither exceeding on the one side nor on the other in any extremity,
for the winning (if it were possible) of all the whole world to God: The
church ruled by the spirit of God.
but it is needful that the wisdom of the spirit of God should always
rule, and not the wisdom of the flesh: and that having also examined the
mouth of the Lord, we require humbly of him, that he will be our merciful
guide and conductour, sooner than to follow our own wits.

When we shall require it in that sort, it shall be easy for to exclude many
temptations that else may stay us in the myddest of the way. Wherefore as your
Grace has begone to reduce Chrystendome in his estate in England, and not in
trusting to your self, but to be mayntayned by the hand of God (as unto this
day you have felt his mighty hand) doubt ye not, but (if ye so continue)
that he will be with you, and help you unto the end.

If God do maintain the kingdoms and lordeships of Infidels that he his very
enemies, by how much more reason will he take into his guard the (...) seek his
glory, and take hi^ (...) their loving lord and superior? (...) that is, to
punish vice, and to rep^ (...) but there are good Laws, and la^ (...) Realm,
for to keep the people in ho^ (...) but the great disorders and enormities the
(...) constrayneth me to desire you to take also the (...) people be kept in
good honest discipline. And (...) ye have the honor of God in good reputation,
to the (...) those crimes may be punished, of the which men accusto^^bly make
none accounts. I say it, (...) ordina^^ (...) raining in (...) church.
because that sometime theftes, robberies, fightinges, manslaughter,
conspiracies, treasons, extortions, oppressions, briberie, usury, and such
like, shall be sharply and worthily punished, for that in those offenses men
do most offend. And in the mean time, rapes, filthy whordomes, incest,
adulteries, Sodometrie, excess, pride, idleness, drunkenness, and horrible
blasphemies of the holy name of God, be suffered almost as things sufferable
and lawful, of small reputation, or of none importance. And of the contrary
part, we all see in what order and estimation, and also in how great
detestation (in their kinds) God has them in: for he plainly declares unto
us, how much his name is precious and dear unto us, and yet is it by us (as
it were) most wickedly torn in pieces, and trodden under our feet. Wherefore
out of all doubts he will not (by his justice) leave unpunished such notorious
wickedness, such injuries, and such vnreuerent dishonor and blasphemies.
Yea, the Scripture signifies unto us, that through blasphemies, whole
countries and kingdoms are infected, Gods fury against blasphemy.
and by Gods ire overthrown and confounded. And as touching Adulteries, it is
a great shame unto us which profess the name of Christ, that the Paynims have
observed greater rigor in punishing that offense than we: of the which many
times we make but laughing games. Holy matrimony defiled.
When ye holy marriage that ought to be a lively image of the holy union that
we have with the son of God is defiled, and that the alyaunce (...)
^dissoluble, is most cor^ (...) ^e take not these things to (...) it is a
plain sign that we (...) ^o God. Touching also whore^ (...) ^s, that S.
Paul does compare it to (...) as by the same the temples of God (...) ^es) be
profaned and defiled. Also that (...) ^eration of whormongers, of what estate
or (...) they be in the world, or how holy soever they (...) ^o the world,
God who sees the fylthinesse of their ^s, does banish them from his eternal
region and kingdom, as also drunkardes: and are plainly forbidden, not to use
any company or familiarity with them. God also threatens to plague (among all
the rest) those cursed vices of pride and excess, which now so horribly
ouerrunneth the earth. Pride and excess.
Wherefore it follows, that such evils ought not to be suffered in the
Church of God without sharp punishment, for the avoiding of the wrath of
God. And these things are the cause that so many and great tribulations be at
this day upon the earth: for insomuche as men do pardon and wink at such
enormities and great abuses, it must undoubtedly follow, that God by his
justice will take vengeance upon us. Wherefore my Lord, to the intent that his
great ire and wrath may be prevented, I pray you hold short the bridle, to
cause them the rather that be the hearers and favorers of the doctrine of
Christ's holy Gospel, do also prove them selves to be Christian men, by the
holiness of their lives. As Christ's gospel is the soul of the church to
give life, so discipline in the Church is as sinews to strengthen the whole
body of the same.
For as Christ's holy doctrine is the soul of the Church to give life: so the
discipline of the Church and correction of vices, be as the sinowes, to
mainteyne the body of the same in his clean force and strength. It is the
office of Bishops and Curates (diligent and faithful Pastors) to take good
heed to so great a charge, to the intent that the Supper of our Lord be not
polluted and defiled by folks of slanderous and dishonest life. But
considering the authority which God has committed unto you, the high and
principal charge returns unto you, to see that the Christian favorers of the
Gospel of truth man (...) end, that every one (...) ^cause with godly (...)
order which is most go^ (...) ^ly reverenced and obserue^.

Now (my Lord) following the (...) here made before, I will not excuse my
(...) ^ther of the prolixitie or largeness of my Le^ (...) which I have
liberally declared according to m^ (...) I trust that mine affection is known
unto your gr^ (...) I humbly refer to the judgment of your wisdom (...) as
you be exercised in the holy scriptures, you see out of wh^ fountain I have
drawn all that which is herein contained. Wherefore, I do not fear that I
have been importune and tedious unto your Lordeshippe, in declaring the best
of my power, through the good desire which I have, that the name of God be
daily (by you) more largely glorified: for the which I daily call upon him,
praying that it may please his divine Majesty to pour abundauntly his grace
upon you, and to confirm you by his holy spirit, in a perfect and invincible
constancy, mayntayning you against your enemies, always having you (with your
whole household) in his holy protection: and that you may also administer
happily the charge which is committed unto you: so that the King (that godly
young Prince) may hereafter have occasion to give thanks to his Lord God, for
that he has had such a governor in his tender and young age, as well of his
person, as also of his Realm. Thus I make an end, and have me most heartily
commended unto your good Grace. The.xxij. of October. In the year of our Lord.
1549.

Imprinted at London by Henry Bynneman for William Norton.


